
1. Soc Sci Med. 2016 Mar 8;156:142-153. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2016.02.042. [Epub 
ahead of print]

Increasing public support for food-industry related, obesity prevention policies:
The role of a taste-engineering frame and contextualized values.

Ortiz SE(1), Zimmerman FJ(2), Adler GJ Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Policy and Administration, College of Health and Human
Development, The Pennsylvania State University, 601L Ford Building, University
Park, PA 16802, USA. Electronic address: seortiz@psu.edu. (2)Department of Health
Policy and Management, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, UCLA, BOX 951772,
31-236B CHS, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address:
fredzimmerman@ucla.edu. (3)Department of Sociology and Criminology, College of
the Liberal Arts, The Pennsylvania State University, 514 Oswald Tower, University
Park, PA 16802, USA. Electronic address: gary.adler@psu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Support for policies to combat obesity is often undermined by a
public sense that obesity is largely a matter of personal responsibility.
Industry rhetoric is a major contributor to this perception, as the soda/fast
food/big food companies emphasize choice and individual agency in their efforts
to neutralize policies that are burdensome. Yet obesity experts recognize that
environmental forces play a major role in obesity. We investigate whether
exposure to a taste-engineering frame increases support for food and beverage
policies that address obesity. A taste-engineering frame details strategies used 
by the food industry to engineer preferences and increase the over-consumption of
processed foods and sugary beverages. We also examine the effects of exposure to 
two contextualized values that have recently been promoted in expert
discourse-consumer knowledge and consumer safety - on public support of policies.
Our research shows how causal frames and contextualized values may effectively
produce support for new obesity policies.
METHODS: We use an online survey experiment to test the effects of exposure to a 
taste-engineering frame (TEF), the value of consumer knowledge (CK), or the value
of consumer safety (CS), on level of support for a range of policies. A random
sample of adults, age 18 + living in the United States was included in the study 
(N = 2580). Ordered logistic regression was used to measure the effects of
treatment exposure. The primary outcome was level-of-support for four (4)
food-industry related, obesity prevention policies (aka food and beverage
policies): 1) require food-manufacturers to disclose the amount of additives in
food products on food packaging; 2) require food-manufacturers to advertise food 
products in accordance with their actual nutritional value; 3) prohibit all
high-fat, high-sugar food advertising on television programming watched primarily
by children; and 4) increase healthy food availability in work sites, schools,
and hospitals.
FINDINGS: These data suggest that a taste-engineering frame and contextualized
values significantly increase public support for many of the food and beverage
policies tested.
CONCLUSIONS: Applying a taste-engineering frame and/or contextualized values to
address obesity advances a population-based policy agenda to counteract the
effects of food-industry strategies.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27038322  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Pediatr Surg. 2016 Mar 14. pii: S0022-3468(16)00200-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.02.089. [Epub ahead of print]

Fluoroscopic balloon dilatation for anastomotic strictures in patients with
esophageal atresia: A fifteen-year single centre UK experience.

Raitio A(1), Cresner R(1), Smith R(1), Jones MO(1), Losty PD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Alder Hey Children's Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Eaton Road, Liverpool L12 2AP, UK. (2)Department of Paediatric Surgery,
Alder Hey Children's Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Eaton Road, Liverpool L12
2AP, UK; Academic Paediatric Surgery Unit, Institute of Child Health, University 
of Liverpool, UK. Electronic address: paul.losty@liverpool.ac.uk.

AIM OF THE STUDY: To assess the safety and effectiveness of fluoroscopic balloon 
dilatation (FBD) in children with esophageal anastomotic stricture after surgical
repair of esophageal atresia.
METHODS: All patients undergoing surgery for esophageal atresia and requiring
dilatation(s) during a consecutive 15-year period [April 2000-September 2014]
were analyzed. Dilatations were performed as day case procedures under general
anesthesia using a radial force generating balloon device (Boston Scientific
Corporation) by surgeons. Outcomes assessed included - (1) the number of
dilatations/patient, (2) effectiveness and (3) need for surgery and (4)
complications.
RESULTS: One hundred thirty seven patients underwent 625 FBD sessions (median 3
dilations per patient; range 1-24 dilatations). Median age at 1st FBD was
0.74years (range 0.05-16.1years). Balloon catheter sizes ranged from 6mm to 20mm.
FBD yielded excellent results in 99 patients (74%), while 17 cases (13%) had mild
ongoing dysphagia/dysmotility. Ten patients (7%) required further dilatation(s)
to control symptoms. No patient(s) required esophageal stenting. Five cases
required G-tube feeds as a result of oral aversion behavior - all of these cases 
were complex/VACTERL patients. Only 1 minor radiological leak occurred after a
dilatation session and this did not require surgical intervention. A single
patient (long gap EA TEF) with severe neurological impairment having multiple
dilatations and stricture resection ultimately required esophageal replacement.
Anti-reflux surgery was performed in 36 patients (26%) for medical therapy
resistant GER.
CONCLUSION: FBD for anastomotic stricture(s) following esophageal atresia repair 
achieved very good outcomes for the majority of EA TEF patients. The procedure
can be accomplished safely as indicated by the low complication rate herein
reported. Although some children may require more than one dilatation session
prompt relief of symptoms can be achieved with a vigilant care program
co-ordinated by a multidisciplinary specialist EA TEF team.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27032608  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2016 Mar 29. doi: 10.1002/etc.3437. [Epub ahead of print]

Internal concentration as a better predictor of metal toxicity than the
fractional coverage of metals on biotic ligand: Comparison of three modeling
approaches.

Gao Y(1), Feng J(1,)(2), Zhu L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Pollution process and Environmental Criteria of Ministry of 
Education Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Environmental
Remediation and Pollution Control, College of Environmental Science and
Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin, China.

Modeling toxicity of metal mixtures poses unique challenges to incorporate
bioavailability and metal speciation in metal exposures. Three models (models I, 
II, and III) were compared in the present study to predict and interpret the
toxicity exerted by binary-metal mixtures to zebrafish larvae, with the
assumptions of competitions between metals based on BLM and toxic potencies of
individual metals. In addition, three models had been developed through
substituting binding constants (fMBL ) for internal metal concentrations (CM,int 
) to directly delineating single metal and mixture effects on mortality of
zebrafish larvae. Results indicated that three developed models appeared to be
much better (p < 0.01) than three previous models in assessing toxicity of
different metal mixtures and showed 10-20% predictive improvement for each metal 
combination, with toxic equivalency factor (TEF)-based model II showing the best 
performance in quantifying metal mixture toxicity. The three developed models
generally provided reasonable framework and descriptions of bioavailability and
additive (or nearly additive) toxicity for a number of binary metal mixtures.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27028101  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Trop Life Sci Res. 2016 Feb;27(1):153-62.

Molecular Characterisation of Endophytic Fungi from Roots of Wild Banana (Musa
acuminata).

Zakaria L, Jamil MI, Anuar IS.

Endophytic fungi inhabit apparently healthy plant tissues and are prevalent in
terrestrial plants, especially root tissues, which harbour a wide assemblage of
fungal endophytes. Therefore, this study focused on the isolation and
characterisation of endophytic fungi from the roots of wild banana (Musa
acuminata). A total of 31 isolates of endophytic fungi were isolated from 80 root
fragments. The endophytic fungi were initially sorted according to morphological 
characteristics and identified using the sequences of the translation elongation 
factor-1a (TEF-1a) gene of Fusarium spp. and the Internal Transcribed Spacer
(ITS) regions of other fungi. The most common fungal isolates were species of the
genus Fusarium, which were identified as F. proliferatum, Fusarium sp., F. solani
species complex, and F. oxysporum. Other isolated endophytic fungi included
Curvularia lunata, Trichoderma atroviride, Calonectria gracilis, Rhizoctonia
solani, Bionectria ochroleuca, and Stromatoneurospora phoenix (Xylariceae).
Several of the fungal genera, such as Fusarium, Trichoderma, Rhizoctonia, and
Xylariceae, are among the common fungal endophytes reported in plants. This study
showed that the roots of wild banana harbour a diverse group of endophytic fungi.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC4807960
PMID: 27019688  [PubMed]


5. Trop Life Sci Res. 2016 Feb;27(1):1-20.

Saprophytic and Potentially Pathogenic Fusarium Species from Peat Soil in Perak
and Pahang.

Karim NF, Mohd M, Nor NM, Zakaria L.

Isolates of Fusarium were discovered in peat soil samples collected from peat
swamp forest, waterlogged peat soil, and peat soil from oil palm plantations.
Morphological characteristics were used to tentatively identify the isolates, and
species confirmation was based on the sequence of translation elongation
factor-1a (TEF-1a) and phylogenetic analysis. Based on the closest match of Basic
Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) searches against the GenBank and Fusarium-ID 
databases, five Fusarium species were identified, namely F. oxysporum (60%), F.
solani (23%), F. proliferatum (14%), F. semitectum (1%), and F. verticillioides
(1%). From a neighbour-joining tree of combined TEF-1a and ß-tubulin sequences,
isolates from the same species were clustered in the same clade, though
intraspecies variations were observed from the phylogenetic analysis. The
Fusarium species isolated in the present study are soil inhabitants and are
widely distributed worldwide. These species can act as saprophytes and
decomposers as well as plant pathogens. The presence of Fusarium species in peat 
soils suggested that peat soils could be a reservoir of plant pathogens, as
well-known plant pathogenic species such F. oxysporum, F. solani, F.
proliferatum, and F. verticillioides were identified. The results of the present 
study provide knowledge on the survival and distribution of Fusarium species.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC4807956
PMID: 27019679  [PubMed]


6. J Invertebr Pathol. 2016 Mar 23;136:109-116. doi: 10.1016/j.jip.2016.03.012.
[Epub ahead of print]

First report of Leptolegnia chapmanii (Peronosporomycetes: Saprolegniales)
affecting mosquitoes in central Brazil.

Montalva C(1), Dos Santos K(1), Collier K(2), Rocha LF(3), Fernandes ÉK(1),
Castrillo LA(4), Luz C(1), Humber RA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Patologia de Invertebrados, Instituto de Patologia Tropical e
Saúde Pública, Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil. (2)Centro
Universitário de Gurupí (UnirG), Gurupí, Tocantins, Brazil. (3)Laboratório de
Patologia de Invertebrados, Instituto de Patologia Tropical e Saúde Pública,
Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, Goiás, Brazil; Instituto Federal de
Educação, Ciência e Tecnologia de Goiás (IFG), Aparecida de Goiânia, Goiás,
Brazil. (4)Department of Entomology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(5)USDA-ARS Emerging Pests and Pathogens Research Unit, Robert W. Holley Center
for Agriculture and Health, Ithaca, NY, USA. Electronic address:
richard.humber@ars.usda.gov.

Numerous isolates of an oomycete 'fungus', Leptolegnia chapmanii, are reported
from Brazil for the first time. This aquatic pathogen was baited with Aedes
aegypti sentinel larvae from stagnant, temporary bodies of water in selected
locations under secondary tropical forest in and near the central Brazilian city 
of Goiânia and from more distant sites in the western and northern regions of the
state of Goiás. Isolates were identified based on their morphological and
developmental characters, comparative sequence data for the ITS and TEF loci, as 
well as their rapid activity against A. aegypti larvae. Taxonomic issues
affecting the application of the name L. chapmanii and its typification are
rectified. This study contributes to a better understanding of the presence and
distribution of this oomycete in Brazil, its sequence-based identification, and
of its potential as a biological agent against mosquito vectors.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 27018147  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Ann Pediatr Cardiol. 2016 Jan-Apr;9(1):94-5. doi: 10.4103/0974-2069.171387.

Pneumopericardium due to ingestion of button battery.

Soni JP(1), Choudhary S(1), Sharma P(1), Makwana M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dr. S. N. Medical College, Jodhpur, Rajasthan,
India.

Mostly ingested button batteries passed through the gastrointestinal tract
without any adverse effects. But button battery can lead to hazardous
complications including tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), especially when the
battery is impacted in the esophagus. Urgent esophagoscopic removal of the
battery is essential in all cases. Once the TEF is identified, conservative
management is the initial treatment of choice. Delayed primary repair can be
tried if spontaneous closure does not occur. Here in we want to report a rare
case of air leak syndrome, pneumo-pericardium secondary to the corrosive effect
of a button battery and child recovered completely with conservative management.

PMCID: PMC4782482
PMID: 27011705  [PubMed]


8. F1000Res. 2016 Mar 4;5:280. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.7695.1. eCollection 2016.

Communities of practice in life sciences and the need for brokering.

Tierney A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Learning and Teaching, Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh,
UK.

Etienne Wenger's work on communities of practice is influential in teaching and
learning in higher education. A core work of many postgraduate certificate in
teaching and learning (PGCert) courses for new lecturers, it is studied, in the
main, as a means to understand how to support and encourage students to achieve
more effective learning. Communities of practice can also be applied to
academics. In the context of the Research Excellence Framework (REF) and its
predecessors, the gulf between research-focused and teaching-Focused academics in
life sciences has widened, so that in many institutions, these two groups have
evolved into two distinct communities of practice; one whose priority is
disciplinary research, the other's learning and teaching. However, in 2015, the
UK government announced that a Teaching Excellence Framework (TEF) would be
introduced into higher education in England, as early as 2017. While the exact
details of TEF remain unclear, it is certain that "excellence" and "student
satisfaction" will be high on the agenda. It is vital, therefore, that the two
communities of practice, research-focused and teaching-focused, find ways to come
together in order to ensure high quality teaching and learning. Wenger proposes
that this can be done through the process of "brokering", which allows expertise 
from both communities of practice to cross from one to the other, strengthening
both. This should be encouraged at departmental and institutional level, but
another vital origin of brokering can be forged at a(n) (inter)national level at 
meetings such as the SEB Annual Conference, where teaching-focused academics have
the opportunity to mix with research-active colleagues. While this paper is
informed by recent and current events in the UK Higher Education sector, it is of
interest to academics who work in an environment where research and teaching have
become separate to any extent.

PMCID: PMC4792202
PMID: 26998239  [PubMed]


9. Mar Pollut Bull. 2016 Mar 17. pii: S0025-326X(16)30142-4. doi:
10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.03.012. [Epub ahead of print]

FTIR spectroscopy supported by statistical techniques for the structural
characterization of plastic debris in the marine environment: Application to
monitoring studies.

Mecozzi M(1), Pietroletti M(2), Monakhova YB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemometrics and Environmental Applications, ISPRA, Via di
Castel Romano 100, 00128 Rome, Italy. Electronic address:
mauro.mecozzi@isprambiente.it. (2)Laboratory of Chemometrics and Environmental
Applications, ISPRA, Via di Castel Romano 100, 00128 Rome, Italy. (3)Spectral
Service AG, Emil-Hoffmann-Straße 33, 50996 Cologne, Germany; Institute of
Chemistry, Saratov State University, Astrakhanskaya Street 83, 410012 Saratov,
Russia.

We inserted 190 FTIR spectra of plastic samples in a digital database and
submitted it to Independent Component Analysis (ICA) to extract the "pure"
plastic polymers present. These identified plastics were polypropylene (PP), high
density polyethylene (HDPE), low density polyethylene (LDPE), high density
polyethylene terephthalate (HDPET), low density polyethylene terephthalate
(LDPET), polystyrene (PS), Nylon (NL), polyethylene oxide (OPE), and Teflon (TEF)
and they were used to establish the similarity with unknown plastics using the
correlation coefficient (r), and the crosscorrelation function (CC). For samples 
with r<0.8 we determined the Mahalanobis Distance (MD) as additional tool of
identification. For instance, for the four plastic fragments found in the
Carretta carretta, one plastic sample was assigned to OPE due to its r=0.87; for 
all the other three plastic samples, due to the r values ranging between 0.83
and0.70, the support of MD suggested LDPET and OPE as co-polymer constituents.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997255  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Thorac Dis. 2016 Mar;8(Suppl 2):S160-7. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2016.01.86.

Complications after tracheal resection and reconstruction: prevention and
treatment.

Auchincloss HG(1), Wright CD(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, 2 Division of Thoracic Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Tracheal resection and reconstruction (TRR) and laryngotracheal resection and
reconstruction (LTRR) is commonly performed for post-intubation tracheal
stenosis, tracheal tumor, idiopathic laryngotracheal stenosis (ILTS), and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Ninety-five percent of patients have a good
result from surgery. Complications occur in ~20% of patients, of which half are
anastomotic complications. Complications include granulation tissue formation,
restenosis of the trachea, anastomotic separation, TEF and tracheoinnominate
fistula (TIF), wound infection, laryngeal edema, and glottic dysfunction. Risk
factors for anastomotic complication include diabetes, reoperation, previous
tracheal appliance, and long-segment tracheal resection. Bronchoscopy should be
part of the diagnostic workup when a complication is suspected. Anastomotic
separation-the most feared complication of tracheal surgery-may present subtly
with stridor and wound infection, or with respiratory distress and extremis.
Prompt management is required to prevent devastating consequences. The airway
should be secured, bronchoscopy should be performed to address the degree of
separation, and the anastomosis should be revised if needed, usually with the
addition of t-tube or tracheostomy. Anastomotic complications that are managed
aggressively typically yield good results. More than half of such patients will
eventually have a satisfactory airway. However, an anastomotic complication is
associated with a thirteen-fold increase in the risk of death following tracheal 
resection.

PMCID: PMC4775259
PMID: 26981267  [PubMed]


11. Mycorrhiza. 2016 Mar 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Revisiting phylogenetic diversity and cryptic species of Cenococcum geophilum
sensu lato.

Obase K(1,)(2), Douhan GW(3,)(4), Matsuda Y(5), Smith ME(6).

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Ecology Laboratory, Department of Forest Microbiology, Forestry and 
Forest Products Research Institute, 1 Matsunosato, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8687,
Japan. obasek@affrc.go.jp. (2)Department of Plant Pathology, University of
Florida, 2517 Fifield Hall, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0680, USA. obasek@affrc.go.jp.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California,
Riverside, CA, 92521, USA. (4)Cooperative Extension Advisor, Tulare Co.,
University of California, Tulare, CA, 93274, USA. (5)Laboratory of Forest
Pathology and Mycology, Graduate School of Bioresources, Mie University,
Kurimamachiya 1577, Tsu, Mie, 514-8507, Japan. (6)Department of Plant Pathology, 
University of Florida, 2517 Fifield Hall, Gainesville, FL, 32611-0680, USA.

The fungus Cenococcum geophilum Fr. (Dothideomycetes, Ascomycota) is one of the
most common ectomycorrhizal fungi in boreal to temperate regions. A series of
molecular studies has demonstrated that C. geophilum is monophyletic but a
heterogeneous species or a species complex. Here, we revisit the phylogenetic
diversity of C. geophilum sensu lato from a regional to intercontinental scale by
using new data from Florida (USA) along with existing data in GenBank from Japan,
Europe, and North America. The combination of internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
ribosomal DNA and the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) gene
resolved six well-supported lineages (87-100 % bootstrap values) that are closely
related to each other and a seventh lineage that is phylogenetically distinct. A 
multi-locus analysis (small subunit (SSU), large subunit (LSU), translational
elongation factor (TEF), and the largest and second-largest subunits of RNA
polymerase II (RPB1 and RPB2)) revealed that the divergent lineage is the sister 
group to all other known Cenococcum isolates. Isolates of the divergent lineage
grow fast on nutrient media and do not form ectomycorrhizas on seedlings of
several pine and oak species. Our results indicate that C. geophilum sensu lato
includes more phylogenetically distinct cryptic species than have previously been
reported. Furthermore, the divergent lineage appears to be a non-mycorrhizal
sister group. We discuss the phylogenetic diversity of C. geophilum sensu lato
and argue in favor of species recognition based on phylogenetic and ecological
information in addition to morphological characteristics. A new genus and species
(Pseudocenococcum floridanum gen. et sp. nov.) is proposed to accommodate a
divergent and putatively non-mycorrhizal lineage.

PMID: 26968743  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. J Pediatr Surg. 2016 Feb 11. pii: S0022-3468(16)00078-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.02.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Neurodevelopmental outcomes of tracheoesophageal fistulas.

Newton LE(1), Abdessalam SF(1), Raynor SC(1), Lyden ER(2), Rush ET(3), Needelman 
H(4), Cusick RA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA; Children's Hospital and Medical Center,
Omaha, NE 68114, USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (3)Children's
Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68114, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (4)Children's
Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68114, USA; Munroe Meyer Institute for
Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (5)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA; Children's Hospital 
and Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68114, USA. Electronic address:
rcusick@childrensomaha.org.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to perform a retrospective review of
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) patients who followed up in a state-sponsored
program to assess neurodevelopmental outcomes.
METHODS: Records were reviewed retrospectively of children who underwent TEF
repair between August 2001 and June 2014. Children discharged from the neonatal
intensive care unit were referred to the state-sponsored Developmental Tracking
Infant Progress Statewide (TIPS) program. We reviewed TIPS assessments performed 
before age 24months and noted referral for early school intervention services.
Poor outcomes were defined as scores of "failure" on the screening assessment or 
referral for enrollment in early intervention services by 24months. Children with
TEF were compared with case-matched nonsyndromic children of similar gestational 
age and birth weight.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight children underwent TEF repair. Thirty-eight followed up
with TIPS. Survival was 93.6%. Predictors of hospital survival were Waterston
classification (p=0.001), birth weight (p=0.027), and ventilator days (p=0.013). 
LOS was the only significant predictor of referral for early intervention
services (p=0.0092) in multivariate analysis. There was a borderline significant 
difference in referral rate between children with TEF and controls. 52.6% of TEF 
patients were referred, while 34.2% of controls were referred (p=0.071).
CONCLUSION: More than half of TEF patients experience neurodevelopmental delays
requiring referral for early intervention (53%).

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26949142  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Mycopathologia. 2016 Apr;181(3-4):165-74. doi: 10.1007/s11046-016-9983-9. Epub
2016 Mar 4.

Genotyping of Fusarium Isolates from Onychomycoses in Colombia: Detection of Two 
New Species Within the Fusarium solani Species Complex and In Vitro Antifungal
Susceptibility Testing.

Guevara-Suarez M(1,)(2), Cano-Lira JF(2), Cepero de García MC(1), Sopo L(3), De
Bedout C(4), Cano LE(5), García AM(6), Motta A(7,)(8), Amézquita A(9), Cárdenas
M(1), Espinel-Ingroff A(10), Guarro J(2), Restrepo S(1), Celis A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Micología y Fitopatología, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas,
Universidad de Los Andes, Carrera 1 No 18A-10, Bogotá, Colombia. (2)Unitat de
Micología, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la Salut and IISPV, Universitat
Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Tarragona, Spain. (3)Laboratorio Especializado de
Micología Médica (LEMM), Bogotá, Colombia. (4)Grupo de Micología Médica y
Experimental, Corporación para Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB), Medellín,
Colombia. (5)Escuela de Microbiología, Universidad de Antioquia (UdeA), Medellín,
Colombia. (6)Unidad de Biología Celular y Molecular, Corporación para
Investigaciones Biológicas (CIB), Medellín, Colombia. (7)Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad El Bosque, Bogotá, Colombia. (8)Hospital Simón Bolívar, Bogotá,
Colombia. (9)Grupo de Ecofisiología, Comportamiento y Herpetología (GECOH),
Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia. 
(10)VCU Medical Center, Richmond, VA, USA. (11)Laboratorio de Micología y
Fitopatología, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad de Los Andes,
Carrera 1 No 18A-10, Bogotá, Colombia. acelis@uniandes.edu.co.

Fusariosis have been increasing in Colombia in recent years, but its epidemiology
is poorly known. We have morphologically and molecularly characterized 89
isolates of Fusarium obtained between 2010 and 2012 in the cities of Bogotá and
Medellín. Using a multi-locus sequence analysis of rDNA internal transcribed
spacer, a fragment of the translation elongation factor 1-alpha (Tef-1a) and of
the RNA-dependent polymerase subunit II (Rpb2) genes, we identified the
phylogenetic species and circulating haplotypes. Since most of the isolates
studied were from onychomycoses (nearly 90 %), we carried out an epidemiological 
study to determine the risk factors associated with such infections. Five
phylogenetic species of the Fusarium solani species complex (FSSC), i.e., F.
falciforme, F. keratoplasticum, F. lichenicola, F. petroliphilum, and FSSC 6 as
well as two of the Fusarium oxysporum species complex (FOSC), i.e., FOSC 3 and
FOSC 4, were identified. The most prevalent species were FOSC 3 (38.2 %) followed
by F. keratoplasticum (33.7 %). In addition, our isolates were distributed into
23 haplotypes (14 into FOSC and nine into FSSC). Two of the FSSC phylogenetic
species and two haplotypes of FSSC were not described before. Our results
demonstrate that recipients of pedicure treatments have a lower probability of
acquiring onychomycosis than those not receiving such treatments. The antifungal 
susceptibility of all the isolates to five clinically available agents showed
that amphotericin B was the most active drug, while the azoles exhibited lower in
vitro activity.

PMID: 26943726  [PubMed - in process]


14. Rev Environ Health. 2016 Mar 1;31(1):115-9. doi: 10.1515/reveh-2015-0054.

Diabetes in Native Americans: elevated risk as a result of exposure to
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

Aminov Z, Haase R, Carpenter DO.

We have studied rates of diabetes in 601 members of the Mohawk Nation at
Akwesasne, ages 18-84 years, in relation to serum concentrations of 101
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) congeners and three chlorinated pesticides
[dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), hexachlorobenzene (HCB) and mirex].
Diabetes was determined from either a diagnosis by a physician or by having a
fasting glucose concentration of >125 mg/dL. Rates of diabetes are high in this
community. Three models were used. In the first model rate ratios (RR) were
determined for quartiles of total PCBs after adjustment for age, sex, body mass
index (BMI) and total serum lipids. For total PCBs RR=2.21 (1.2-4.2), while for
total pesticides RR=3.75 (1.3-10.7). When the total PCB results were also
adjusted for total pesticides and the total pesticide results were also adjusted 
for total PCBs (Model 2) the RRs were somewhat reduced. In Model 3 we considered 
subgroups of PCBs based on numbers of chlorines on the molecule (tri-/tetra,
penta-/hexa, hepta plus) and numbers of ortho chlorines (non-/mono; di-,
tri-/tetra-), and considered each of the pesticides individually after adjustment
for all other contaminants as well as age, sex, BMI and serum lipids. We found a 
highly significant association between diabetes and PCBs with only three or four 
chlorines (RR=5.02), but no significant association with those with greater
chlorination. When evaluating PCBs based on numbers of ortho chlorines only,
those with no or one ortho chlorine showed significant associations. As
mono-ortho PCBs include some with dioxin-like activity, we compared those with
and without a TEF, and found that the association with diabetes was exclusively
with the non-dioxin-like congeners. Of the pesticides only hexachlorobenzene
showed a small but significant association with diabetes. Because lower
chlorinated PCBs are more volatile and do not greatly accumulate in fish, these
results suggest that inhalation is the major route of exposure to those PCBs that
increase risk of diabetes.

PMID: 26943594  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Pediatr Surg. 2016 Feb 11. pii: S0022-3468(16)00077-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2016.02.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Weekday vs. weekend repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Sayari AJ(1), Tashiro J(1), Wang B(1), Perez EA(1), Lasko DS(2), Sola JE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, DeWitt-Daughtry Department of Surgery, Leonard 
M. Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL. (2)South Florida
Pediatric Surgeons, P.A., Plantation, FL. (3)Division of Pediatric Surgery,
DeWitt-Daughtry Department of Surgery, Leonard M. Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL. Electronic address: JSola@med.miami.edu.

PURPOSE: We hypothesize that weekend esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA/TEF) repair has worse outcomes compared to procedures performed on
weekdays.
METHODS: Kids' Inpatient Database (1997-2009) was searched for EA/TEF in infants 
admitted at <8days of life. Cases were limited to patients who underwent repair
during their hospitalization. Risk-adjusted multivariate analysis (MVA) compared 
complications, mortality, and resource utilization (length of stay [LOS] total
charges [TC]) between weekday and weekend procedures.
RESULTS: Overall, 861 EA/TEF cases with known day of repair were identified.
Cohort survival was 96%. On risk-adjusted MVA, complication rates were higher
with EA/TEF repair on a weekend (OR: 2.2) compared to a weekday. Additionally,
complications (OR: 6.5) and LOS (OR: 9.3) were found to be higher among African
American children compared to Caucasians. LOS was higher in patients with
Medicaid (OR: 2.4) and repairs performed at non-teaching hospitals (OR: 3.2).
Weekend vs. weekday procedure had no significant effect on mortality or resource 
utilization.
CONCLUSION: By risk-adjusted MVA, increased complication rates for EA/TEF are
seen in patients undergoing repair on weekends compared to weekdays.
Additionally, African American children experienced higher complication rates
compared to Caucasians. LOS after repair varies according to race, payer status, 
and hospital characteristics.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26932247  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Environ Microbiol. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.13233. [Epub ahead of
print]

Detection of human pathogenic Fusarium species in hospital and communal sink
biofilms by using a highly specific monoclonal antibody.

Al-Maqtoofi M(1,)(2), Thornton CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biosciences, Geoffrey Pope Building, University of Exeter, Stocker Road,
Exeter, EX4 4QD, UK. (2)Biology Department, University of Basrah, College of
Science, Basrah, Iraq.

The fungus Fusarium is well known as a plant pathogen, but has recently emerged
as an opportunistic pathogen of humans. Habitats providing direct human exposure 
to infectious propagules are largely unknown, but there is growing evidence that 
plumbing systems are sources of human pathogenic strains in the Fusarium solani
species complex (FSSC) and Fusarium oxysporum species complex (FOSC), the most
common groups infecting humans. Here, we use a newly developed Fusarium-specific 
monoclonal antibody (mAb ED7) to track FSSC and FOSC strains in sink drain
biofilms by detecting its target antigen, an extracellular 200kDa carbohydrate,
in saline swabs. The antigen was detectable in 52% of swab samples collected from
sinks across a University campus and a tertiary care hospital. The mAb was 100%
accurate in detecting FSSC, FOSC and F. dimerum species complex (FDSC) strains
that were present, as mixed fungal communities, in 83% of sink drain biofilms.
Specificity of the ELISA was confirmed by sequencing of the internally
transcribed spacer 1 (ITS1)-5.8S-ITS2 rRNA-encoding regions of culturable yeasts 
and molds that were recovered using mycological culture, while translation
elongation factor (TEF)-1a analysis of Fusarium isolates included FSSC 1-a, FOSC 
33 and FDSC ET-gr, the most common clinical pathotypes in each group. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Society for Applied Microbiology and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26914362  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Physiol Rep. 2016 Feb;4(4). pii: e12717. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12717.

A novel approach to calculating the thermic effect of food in a metabolic
chamber.

Ogata H(1), Kobayashi F(2), Hibi M(3), Tanaka S(4), Tokuyama K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health and Sport Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan Research Fellow of the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo,
Japan. (2)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Science, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. (3)Health Care Food Research Laboratories, Kao
Corporation, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Nutritional Science, National
Institute of Health and Nutrition, Tokyo, Japan. (5)Faculty of Health and Sport
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
tokuyama@taiiku.tsukuba.ac.jp.

The thermic effect of food (TEF) is the well-known concept in spite of its
difficulty for measuring. The gold standard for evaluating the TEF is the
difference in energy expenditure between fed and fasting states (<U+0394>EE).
Alternatively, energy expenditure at 0 activity (EE0) is estimated from the
intercept of the linear relationship between energy expenditure and physical
activity to eliminate activity thermogenesis from the measurement, and the TEF is
calculated as the difference between EE0 and postabsorptive resting metabolic
rate (RMR) or sleeping metabolic rate (SMR). However, the accuracy of the
alternative methods has been questioned. To improve TEF estimation, we propose a 
novel method as our original TEF calculation method to calculate EE0 using
integrated physical activity over a specific time interval. We aimed to identify 
which alternative methods of TEF calculation returns reasonable estimates, that
is, positive value as well as estimates close to <U+0394>EE. Seven men participated in
two sessions (with and without breakfast) of whole-body indirect calorimetry, and
physical activity was monitored with a triaxial accelerometer. Estimates of TEF
by three simplified methods were compared to <U+0394>EE. <U+0394>EE, EE0 above SMR, and our
original method returned positive values for the TEF after breakfast in all
measurements. TEF estimates of our original method was indistinguishable from
those based on the <U+0394>EE, whereas those as EE0 above RMR and EE0 above SMR were
slightly lower and higher, respectively. Our original method was the best among
the three simplified TEF methods as it provided positive estimates in all the
measurements that were close to the value derived from gold standard for all
measurements.

© 2016 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMID: 26908716  [PubMed]


18. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2016 Feb 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Risk Factors for Stricture Formation After Esophageal Atresia Repair.

Nice T(1), Tuanama Diaz B(1), Shroyer M(1), Rogers D(1), Chen M(1), Martin C(1), 
Beierle E(1), Chaignaud B(1), Anderson S(1), Russell R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, University of Alabama at Birmingham ,
Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama.

PURPOSE: Esophageal stricture remains a common morbidity of esophageal atresia
(EA) repair. The purpose of this study was to examine the association of multiple
pre- and postoperative variables with stricture formation after EA repair.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all patients who underwent EA repair was
performed from June 1999 to January 2014, excluding patients who died prior to
discharge. Data were collected on patient demographics, disease specifics,
treatment, and outcomes. A clinically significant esophageal stricture was
defined as those requiring more than three esophageal dilations. Univariate
analysis and multivariate analysis was performed to determine associations with
stricture formation.
RESULTS: The study included 121 infants. On univariate analysis,
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) Gross classification (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.046), method of repair
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0099), surgery staging (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0211), and development of leak (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0479) had
a statistically significant association with stricture formation. Most (81%)
underwent open repair with a stricture rate of 16.3%, while 20 patients underwent
thoracoscopic repair with a 40% stricture rate. Multivariate analysis showed that
patients undergoing a staged repair had increased risk of stricture formation
over primary repair (odd ratio [OR] 6.360; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0008). Thoracoscopic surgery also
increased the risk of stricture (OR 7.409; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0014). Cardiovascular anomalies
were found to be associated with decreased stricture formation (OR 0.251;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>.0083).
CONCLUSION: Thoracoscopic repair and staged repair were both associated with
increased risk of clinically significant stricture formation after TEF repair.
However, the presence of cardiovascular anomalies was associated with decreased
stricture formation. TEF Gross classification also affects stricture risk.

PMID: 26895295  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2016;35(2):133-41. doi: 10.3109/15513815.2016.1139019. Epub
2016 Feb 16.

VATER/VACTERL Association and Caudal Regression with Xq25-q27.3 Microdeletion: A 
Case Report.

Puvabanditsin S(1), Van Gurp J(2), February M(1), Khalil M(1), Mayne J(1), Ai
McConnell J(1), Mehta R(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Pediatrics, Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick , New 
Jersey , USA. (2)b Pathology, Rutgers-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick , New Jersey , USA.

We report a term female neonate with vertebral anomalies, anal and urethral
atresia, esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), renal agenesis,
pulmonary hypoplasia, genital and sacral appendages, and a single umbilical
artery. Genetic studies revealed a 20.91 Mb interstitial deletion of the long arm
of X chromosome: Xq25-q27.3. This is a new case of VATER/VACTERL association with
Xq25 microdeletion.

PMID: 26881326  [PubMed - in process]


20. Sci Total Environ. 2016 May 1;551-552:304-16. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.02.019. Epub 2016 Feb 12.

The metabolite 3,4,3',4'-tetrachloroazobenzene (TCAB) exerts a higher ecotoxicity
than the parent compounds 3,4-dichloroaniline (3,4-DCA) and propanil.

Xiao H(1), Kuckelkorn J(2), Nüßer LK(3), Floehr T(4), Hennig MP(5), Roß-Nickoll
M(6), Schäffer A(7), Hollert H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: xiao.hongxia@bio5.rwth-aachen.de.
(2)Institute for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: jochen.kuckelkorn@bio5.rwth-aachen.de.
(3)Institute for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: leonie.nuesser@rwth-aachen.de.
(4)Institute for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: floehr@bio5.rwth-aachen.de.
(5)Institute for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074 Aachen, Germany. Electronic address: michael.hennig@rwth-aachen.de.
(6)Institute for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 
52074 Aachen, Germany; College of Resources and Environmental Science, Chongqing 
University, Tiansheng Road Beibei 1, Chongqing 400715, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: ross@bio5.rwth-aachen.de. (7)Institute for
Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 52074 Aachen,
Germany; State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control & Resource Reuse, School of
the Environment, Nanjing University, Xianlin Avenue 163, Nanjing 210023, People's
Republic of China; College of Resources and Environmental Science, Chongqing
University, Tiansheng Road Beibei 1, Chongqing 400715, People's Republic of
China. Electronic address: andreas.schaeffer@bio5.rwth-aachen.de. (8)Institute
for Environmental Research, RWTH Aachen University, Worringerweg 1, 52074 Aachen,
Germany; State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control & Resource Reuse, School of
the Environment, Nanjing University, Xianlin Avenue 163, Nanjing 210023, People's
Republic of China; College of Resources and Environmental Science, Chongqing
University, Tiansheng Road Beibei 1, Chongqing 400715, People's Republic of
China; Key Laboratory of Yangtze Water Environment, Ministry of Education, Tongji
University, Siping Road 1239, Shanghai 200092, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: henner.hollert@bio5.rwth-aachen.de.

3,4,3',4'-tetrachloroazobenzene (TCAB) is not commercially manufactured but
formed as an unwanted by-product in the manufacturing of 3,4-dichloroaniline
(3,4-DCA) or metabolized from the degradation of chloranilide herbicides, like
propanil. While a considerable amount of research has been done concerning the
toxicological and ecotoxicological effects of propanil and 3,4-DCA, limited
information is available on TCAB. Our study examined the toxicity of TCAB in
comparison to its parent compounds propanil and 3,4-DCA, using a battery of
bioassays including in vitro with aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) mediated
activity by the 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) assay and micro-EROD,
endocrine-disrupting activity with chemically activated luciferase gene
expression (CALUX) as well as in vivo with fish embryo toxicity (FET) assays with
Danio rerio. Moreover, the quantitative structure activity response (QSAR)
concepts were applied to simulate the binding affinity of TCAB to certain human
receptors. It was shown that TCAB has a strong binding affinity to the AhR in
EROD and micro-EROD induction assay, with the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) of
8.7×10(-4) and 1.2×10(-5), respectively. TCAB presented to be a weak endocrine
disrupting compound with a value of estradiol equivalence factor (EEF) of
6.4×10(-9) and dihydrotestosterone equivalency factor (DEF) of 1.1×10(-10). No
acute lethal effects of TCAB were discovered in FET test after 96h of exposure.
Major sub-lethal effects detected were heart oedema, yolk malformation, as well
as absence of blood flow and tail deformation. QSAR modelling suggested an
elevated risk to environment, particularly with respect to binding to the AhR. An
adverse effect potentially triggering ERß, mineralocorticoid, glucocorticoid and 
progesterone receptor activities might be expected. Altogether, the results
obtained suggest that TCAB exerts a higher toxicity than both propanil and
3,4-DCA. This should be considered when assessing the impact of these compounds
for the environment and also for regulatory decisions.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26878642  [PubMed - in process]


21. Environ Pollut. 2016 Feb 11;213:16-29. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.01.073. [Epub
ahead of print]

Application of biotic ligand and toxicokinetic-toxicodynamic modeling to predict 
the accumulation and toxicity of metal mixtures to zebrafish larvae.

Gao Y(1), Feng J(2), Han F(3), Zhu L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pollution Process and Environmental Criteria of Ministry of 
Education and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental Remediation and Pollution
Control, College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Nankai University,
Tianjin 300071, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Pollution Process and Environmental
Criteria of Ministry of Education and Tianjin Key Laboratory of Environmental
Remediation and Pollution Control, College of Environmental Science and
Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. Electronic address:
fengjf@nankai.edu.cn. (3)Bureau of Hydrology and Water Resources of Henan
Province, Zhenzhou, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Pollution Process and
Environmental Criteria of Ministry of Education and Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Environmental Remediation and Pollution Control, College of Environmental Science
and Engineering, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. Electronic address:
zhulin@nankai.edu.cn.

Predicting the accumulation and toxicity of mixtures of metals to aquatic
organisms is a key challenge in ecotoxicological studies. In this study, the
accumulation and toxicity of mixed essential (Cu) and nonessential (Cd and Pb)
metals in zebrafish larvae exposed to a binary mixture of these elements at
environmentally relevant concentrations were predicted using a refined
toxicokinetic (TK)-toxicodynamic (TD) model aided with biotic ligand model (BLM) 
and toxic equivalent factor (TEF) approach. Competitive inhibition and
non-competitive interaction/inhibition were observed in bio-uptake. Both Pb and
Cd behaved as competitive inhibitors of Cu uptake at high Cu concentrations
(>0.1 µM). By contrast, Cu uptake was independent of Cd or Pb when the Cu
concentrations were below 10(-7) M. Furthermore, low concentrations of Cu had an 
adiaphorous effect on Cd or Pb uptake. Cd uptake was inhibited by Pb, and the Pb 
uptake rates consistently decreased in the presence of Cd. The accumulation
processes of Cd-Pb, Cu-Cd, and Cu-Pb were accurately predicted by the BLM-aided
TK models. The traditional TD model could successfully predict the toxicity of
Cd-Pb mixtures, but not those of Cu-Cd or Cu-Pb mixtures. The revised TD model,
which considered the possible different killing rates (Kk) above or below the
threshold, offered better prediction for the toxicity of Cu-Cd or Cu-Pb mixtures.
The overall findings may be of key significance in understanding and predicting
metal uptake, accumulation, and toxicity in binary or multiple metal exposure
scenarios.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26874871  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Med Mycol. 2016 Feb 11. pii: myw004. [Epub ahead of print]

Phylogenetic analysis of dermatophyte species using DNA sequence polymorphism in 
calmodulin gene.

Ahmadi B(1), Mirhendi H(2), Makimura K(3), de Hoog GS(4), Shidfar MR(5),
Nouripour-Sisakht S(6), Jalalizand N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Para-Medicine, Bushehr 
University of Medical Sciences, Bushehr, Iran Departments of Medical Parasitology
& Mycology, School of Public Health; National Institute of Health Research,
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Departments of Medical
Parasitology & Mycology, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran mirhendi@tums.ac.ir. (3)Teikyo University Institute of
Medical Mycology and Genome Research Center, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Fungal Biodiversity
Center, Institute of the Royal Netherlands, Academy of Arts and Sciences,
Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures-KNAW, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)Departments of Medical Parasitology & Mycology, School of Public Health;
National Institute of Health Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (6)Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Yasuj University of
Medical Sciences, Yasuj, Iran.

Use of phylogenetic species concepts based on rDNA internal transcribe spacer
(ITS) regions have improved the taxonomy of dermatophyte species; however,
confirmation and refinement using other genes are needed. Since the calmodulin
gene has not been systematically used in dermatophyte taxonomy, we evaluated its 
intra- and interspecies sequence variation as well as its application in
identification, phylogenetic analysis, and taxonomy of 202 strains of 29
dermatophyte species. A set of primers was designed and optimized to amplify the 
target followed by bilateral sequencing. Using pairwise nucleotide comparisons, a
mean similarity of 81% was observed among 29 dermatophyte species, with
inter-species diversity ranging from 0 to 200 nucleotides (nt). Intraspecies nt
differences were found within strains of Trichophyton interdigitale, Arthroderma 
simii, T. rubrum and A. vanbreuseghemii, while T. tonsurans, T. violaceum,
Epidermophyton floccosum, Microsporum canis, M. audouinii, M. cookei, M.
racemosum, M. gypseum, T. mentagrophytes, T schoenleinii, and A. benhamiae were
conserved. Strains of E. floccosum/M. racemosum/M. cookei, A. obtosum/A.
gertleri, T. tonsurans/T. equinum and a genotype of T. interdigitale had
identical calmodulin sequences. For the majority of the species, tree topology
obtained for calmodulin gene showed a congruence with coding and non-coding
regions including ITS, BT2, and Tef-1a. Compared with the phylogenetic tree
derived from ITS, BT2, and Tef-1a genes, some species such as E. floccosum and A.
gertleri took relatively remote positions. Here, characterization and obtained
dendrogram of calmodulin gene on a broad range of dermatophyte species provide a 
basis for further discovery of relationships between species. Studies of other
loci are necessary to confirm the results.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
International Society for Human and Animal Mycology. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26868901  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. PeerJ. 2016 Jan 26;4:e1632. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1632. eCollection 2016.

The Tibetan medicine Zuotai influences clock gene expression in the liver of
mice.

Li H(1), Li WK(1), Lu YF(1), Wei LX(2), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab for Basic Pharmacology of Ministry of Education, Zunyi Medical College
, Zunyi , China. (2)Northwest Plateau Institute of Bology, Chinese Academia of
Sciences , Xining, Qinghai , China.

Background. The circadian clock is involved in drug metabolism, efficacy and
toxicity. Drugs could in turn affect the biological clock as a mechanism of their
actions. Zuotai is an essential component of many popular Tibetan medicines for
sedation, tranquil and "detoxification," and is mainly composed of metacinnabar
(ß-HgS). The pharmacological and/or toxicological basis of its action is unknown.
This study aimed to examine the effect of Zuotai on biological clock gene
expression in the liver of mice. Materials and methods. Mice were orally given
Zuotai (10 mg/kg, 1.5-fold of clinical dose) daily for 7 days, and livers were
collected every 4 h during the 24 h period. Total RNA was extracted and subjected
to real-time RT-PCR analysis of circadian clock gene expression. Results. Zuotai 
decreased the oscillation amplitude of the clock core gene Clock, neuronal PAS
domain protein 2 (Npas2), Brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1) at 10:00. 
For the clock feedback negative control genes, Zuotai had no effect on the
oscillation of the clock gene Cryptochrome (Cry1) and Period genes (Per1-3). For 
the clock-driven target genes, Zuotai increased the oscillation amplitude of the 
PAR-bZip family member D-box-binding protein (Dbp), decreased nuclear factor
interleukin 3 (Nfil3) at 10:00, but had no effect on thyrotroph embryonic factor 
(Tef); Zuotai increased the expression of nuclear receptor Rev-Erba (Nr1d1) at
18:00, but had little influence on the nuclear receptor Rev-Erbß (Nr1d2) and
RORa. Conclusion. The Tibetan medicine Zuotai could influence the expression of
clock genes, which could contribute to pharmacological and/or toxicological
effects of Zuotai.

PMCID: PMC4741069
PMID: 26855871  [PubMed]


24. Pediatr Surg Int. 2016 Feb 6. [Epub ahead of print]

Congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistula: a national multicenter study.

Al-Salem AH(1), Mohaidly MA(2), Al-Buainain HM(3), Al-Jadaan S(4), Raboei E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Maternity and Children Hospital, Qatif, P. O.
Box 61015, Dammam, 31911, Saudi Arabia. ahsaalsalem@hotmail.com. (2)Department of
Pediatric Surgery, Military Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. motrahib@hotmail.com.
(3)Division of Pediatric Surgery, King Fahad Hospital of the University,
Alkhobar, Saudi Arabia. halbuoanun@uod.edu.sa. (4)National Guard Hospital,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. sjadaan@yahoo.com. (5)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Military Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. enaamraboei@yahoo.fr.

BACKGROUND: Congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is very rare and
represents <5 % of all congenital tracheoesophageal malformations. This is a
national, multicenter review of our experience with isolated H-type TEF outlining
clinical presentation, methods of diagnosis, associated anomalies, treatment and 
outcome PATIENTS AND METHODS: The medical records of all patients with the
diagnosis of congenital H-type TEF treated at four pediatric surgery units in
Saudi Arabia were retrospectively reviewed for: age at diagnosis, sex, presenting
symptoms, associated anomalies, method of diagnosis, treatment and outcome.
RESULTS: During the study period (January 1998-December 2013), 435 infants and
children with the diagnosis of esophageal atresia with or without TEF were
treated. Among these, 23 (5.3 %) had isolated TEF. There were 11 males and 12
females. Their age at presentation ranged from 5 days to 3 years and 7 months but
the majority (90 %) were diagnosed during their first year of life. Their
clinical presentation included: chocking and coughing during feeds in 12
(52.2 %), recurrent chest infection in 16 (69.6 %) and cyanosis in 10 (43.5 %).
One presented with abdominal distension also. The diagnosis was made using
esophagogram. In 11 (47.8 %), a single study confirmed the diagnosis, 8 (34.8 %) 
required two studies while 4 (17.4 %) required three studies. Nineteen (82.6 %)
had preoperative bronchoscopy and in 13 (56.5 %), a catheter was used to
cannulate the fistula. All were operated through a right cervical incision except
one who underwent thoracoscopic ligation and division of the fistula. In one, the
fistula was only transfixed and tied without being divided. This patient
developed a recurrent fistula. Two patients developed postoperative stridor
secondary to recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy. In both of them, there was complete
recovery.
CONCLUSIONS: H-type TEF is very rare and commonly presents with recurrent chest
infection, chocking and coughing during feeds and cyanosis. Physicians caring for
these patients should be aware of this and a high index of suspicion is of
paramount importance to avoid delay in diagnosis with its associated morbidity. A
contrast esophagogram is valuable in confirming the diagnosis. The study however 
may need to be repeated. Preoperative bronchoscopy is valuable to localize and
cannulate the fistula for easier access during surgery. Surgical repair is the
treatment of choice and this should be performed through a right cervical
incision or thoracotomy for low fistulae. Thoracoscopic ligation and division of 
a low H-type fistula is an alternative and less invasive approach when compared
to thoracotomy.

PMID: 26852298  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. J Dent. 2016 Jan 30. pii: S0300-5712(16)30013-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jdent.2016.01.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Protective effects of resin sealant and flowable composite coatings against
erosive and abrasive wear of dental hard tissues.

Zhao X(1), Pan J(2), Malmstrom HS(3), Ren YF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Dentistry, Peking University School of Stomatology,
Beijing, China; Department of General Dentistry, University of Rochester Eastman 
Institute for Oral Health, Rochester, New York, USA. (2)Department of General
Dentistry, Peking University School of Stomatology, Beijing, China. (3)Department
of General Dentistry, University of Rochester Eastman Institute for Oral Health, 
Rochester, New York, USA. (4)Department of General Dentistry, University of
Rochester Eastman Institute for Oral Health, Rochester, New York, USA. Electronic
address: Yanfang_ren@urmc.rochester.

OBJECTIVES: To test the effectiveness of sealant and flowable composite coating
on eroded enamel, dentin and cementum under erosive/abrasive challenges in vitro.
METHODS: A total of 108 tissue sections (36 each for enamel, dentin and cementum)
from third molars were assigned to three groups: Seal & Protect sealant (S&P),
Tetric EvoFlow composite (TEF) and control. Erosive/abrasive lesions were created
on each specimen by citric acid and brushing with toothpaste. S&P and TEF were
applied to the lesions and subjected to erosive/abrasive cycling included 24
cycles of immersion in citric acid (pH 3.6) for 60min, followed by
remineralization for 120min and brushing with toothpastes for 600 strokes at
150g. Erosive wear of materials or dental tissues were measured with 3D scanning 
microscopy and data were analyzed using ANOVA.
RESULTS: Treatments with S&P and TEF created a protective material coating of
42.7±17.8µm and 150.8±9.9µm in thickness, respectively. After 24 cycles of
erosive/abrasive challenges, tissue losses were -346.9±37.3µm for enamel,
-166.5±26.3µm for dentin and -164.7±18.2µm for cementum in untreated controls, as
compared to material losses of -24.4±3.3µm for S&P, and -10.8±4.4µm for TEF,
respectively. Both S&P and TEF were effective in protecting enamel, dentin and
cementum against erosive tooth wear (p<0.01). S&P exhibited faster wear than TEF 
(p<0.01) and showed spotted peeling in a third of the specimens. TEF remained
intact on all three types of dental tissues at the end of the 24 cycles of
erosive/abrasive challenges.
CONCLUSIONS: A thin coating of flowable composite resin 150µm in thickness may
provide long-term protection against erosive/abrasive tooth wear. Resin sealant
may provide adequate protection for dental hard tissues in short-term and may
require repeated applications if long-term protection is desired.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26836703  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. BMC Plant Biol. 2016 Feb 1;16(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s12870-016-0725-4.

Identification and characterization of abundant repetitive sequences in
Eragrostis tef cv. Enatite genome.

Gebre YG(1,)(2), Bertolini E(3), Pè ME(4), Zuccolo A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Piazza Martiri della
Libertà, 33-56127, Pisa, Italy. y.gebre@sssup.it. (2)Department of Dryland Crop
and Horticultural Sciences, College of Dryland Agriculture and Natural Resources,
Mekelle University, P.O.Box 231, Mekelle, Ethiopia. y.gebre@sssup.it.
(3)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Piazza Martiri della
Libertà, 33-56127, Pisa, Italy. e.bertolini@sssup.it. (4)Institute of Life
Sciences, Scuola Superiore Sant'Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà, 33-56127,
Pisa, Italy. m.pe@sssup.it. (5)Institute of Life Sciences, Scuola Superiore
Sant'Anna, Piazza Martiri della Libertà, 33-56127, Pisa, Italy.
a.zuccolo@sssup.it.

BACKGROUND: Eragrostis tef is an allotetraploid (2n<U+2009>=<U+2009>4<U+2009>×<U+2009>=<U+2009>40) annual, C4 grass 
with an estimated nuclear genome size of 730 Mbp. It is widely grown in Ethiopia,
where it provides basic nutrition for more than half of the population. Although 
a draft assembly of the E. tef genome was made available in 2014,
characterization of the repetitive portion of the E. tef genome has not been a
subject of a detailed analysis. Repetitive sequences constitute most of the DNA
in eukaryotic genomes. Transposable elements are usually the most abundant
repetitive component in plant genomes. They contribute to genome size variation, 
cause mutations, can result in chromosomal rearrangements, and influence gene
regulation. An extensive and in depth characterization of the repetitive
component is essential in understanding the evolution and function of the genome.
RESULTS: Using new paired-end sequence data and a de novo repeat identification
strategy, we identified the most repetitive elements in the E. tef genome.
Putative repeat sequences were annotated based on similarity to known repeat
groups in other grasses. Altogether we identified 1,389 medium/highly repetitive 
sequences that collectively represent about 27 % of the teff genome. Phylogenetic
analyses of the most important classes of TEs were carried out in a comparative
framework including paralog elements from rice and maize. Finally, an abundant
tandem repeat accounting for more than 4 % of the whole genome was identified and
partially characterized.
CONCLUSIONS: Analyzing a large sample of randomly sheared reads we obtained a
library of the repetitive sequences of E. tef. The approach we used was designed 
to avoid underestimation of repeat contribution; such underestimation is
characteristic of whole genome assembly projects. The data collected represent a 
valuable resource for further analysis of the genome of this important orphan
crop.

PMCID: PMC4736629
PMID: 26833063  [PubMed - in process]


27. Nutrients. 2016 Jan 26;8(2). pii: E63. doi: 10.3390/nu8020063.

Effects of Dietary Protein Source and Quantity during Weight Loss on Appetite,
Energy Expenditure, and Cardio-Metabolic Responses.

Li J(1), Armstrong CL(2), Campbell WW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 
USA. li1201@purdue.edu. (2)Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. carmstro@iupui.edu. (3)Department of Nutrition
Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. campbellw@purdue.edu.

Higher protein meals increase satiety and the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) in 
acute settings, but it is unclear whether these effects remain after a person
becomes acclimated to energy restriction or a given protein intake. This study
assessed the effects of predominant protein source (omnivorous, beef/pork vs.
lacto-ovo vegetarian, soy/legume) and quantity (10%, 20%, or 30% of energy from
protein) on appetite, energy expenditure, and cardio-metabolic indices during
energy restriction (ER) in overweight and obese adults. Subjects were randomly
assigned to one protein source and then consumed diets with different quantities 
of protein (4 weeks each) in a randomized crossover manner. Perceived appetite
ratings (free-living and in-lab), TEF, and fasting cardio-metabolic indices were 
assessed at the end of each 4-week period. Protein source and quantity did not
affect TEF, hunger, or desire to eat, other than a modestly higher daily
composite fullness rating with 30% vs. 10% protein diet (p = 0.03). While the 20%
and 30% protein diets reduced cholesterol, triacylglycerol, and APO-B vs. 10%
protein (p < 0.05), protein source did not affect cardio-metabolic indices. In
conclusion, diets varying in protein quantity with either beef/pork or soy/legume
as the predominant source have minimal effects on appetite control, energy
expenditure and cardio-metabolic risk factors during ER-induced weight loss.

PMCID: PMC4772027
PMID: 26821042  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Thorac Dis. 2015 Dec;7(Suppl 4):S389-97. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.12.11.

The treatment strategy for tracheoesophageal fistula.

Ke M(1), Wu X(1), Zeng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Centre, No. 2 Hospital Xiamen, Xiamen 361000, China.

With the development of endoscopic techniques, the treatment of tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) has made marked progress. As surgical intervention is often not an 
advisable option due to advanced malignancy and poor performance status of the
patients, bronchoscopic intervention provides a good choice to palliate symptoms 
and reconstruct the airway and esophagus. In this review, we focus on the
application of interventional therapy of TEF, especially the application of
airway stenting, and highlight some representative cases referred to our
department for treatment.

PMCID: PMC4700364
PMID: 26807286  [PubMed]


29. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 19;6:19558. doi: 10.1038/srep19558.

A Nanoplasmonic Strategy for Precision in-situ Measurements of Tip-enhanced Raman
and Fluorescence Spectroscopy.

Meng L(1,)(2), Sun M(2,)(1), Chen J(2,)(3), Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China. (2)Beijing
National Laboratory for Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China. (3)Collaborative Innovation Center
of Quantum Matter, Beijing 100871, China.

We theoretically investigate an optimized tip-film system that supports in-situ
measurement of tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS) and tip-enhanced
fluorescence (TEF) of dye molecules. A scanning tunneling microscope (STM) is
proposed to precisely control the tip-film distance, and thus in-situ measurement
of TERS and TEF can be realized utilizing the specific surface plasmon resonance 
(SPR) properties of the tip-film system. Our calculations show that the optimized
tip-film distance of 2<U+2009>nm suggests a possibility of efficient acquisition of TERS
and TEF in-situ. The calculated spatial resolution of TERS and spectral
resolution of TEF can be down to 6.5<U+2009>nm and 10<U+2009>nm, respectively. Our theoretical 
results may find promising application in developing multiple functional
nano-spectroscopy through which Raman and fluorescence can be measured in-situ at
the nanoscale level.

PMCID: PMC4726084
PMID: 26780882  [PubMed - in process]


30. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2015 Dec 4. pii: S1526-0542(15)00142-6. doi:
10.1016/j.prrv.2015.11.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Motility, digestive and nutritional problems in Esophageal Atresia.

Gottrand M(1), Michaud L(2), Sfeir R(3), Gottrand F(4).

Author information: 
(1)CHU Lille, University Lille, National reference center for congenital
malformation of the esophagus, Department of Pediatrics, F-59000 Lille, France.
Electronic address: madgotte@hotmail.com. (2)CHU Lille, University Lille,
National reference center for congenital malformation of the esophagus,
Department of Pediatrics, F-59000 Lille, France. Electronic address:
laurent.michaud@chru-lille.fr. (3)CHU Lille, University Lille, National reference
center for congenital malformation of the esophagus, Department of Pediatrics,
F-59000 Lille, France. Electronic address: rony.sfeir@chru-lille.fr. (4)CHU
Lille, University Lille, National reference center for congenital malformation of
the esophagus, Department of Pediatrics, F-59000 Lille, France. Electronic
address: frederic.gottrand@chru-lille.fr.

Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare
congenital malformation. Digestive and nutritional problems remain frequent in
children with EA both in early infancy and at long-term follow-up. These patients
are at major risk of presenting with gastroesophageal reflux and its
complications, such as anastomotic strictures. Esophageal dysmotility is
constant, and can have important consequences on feeding and nutritional status. 
Patients with EA need a systematic follow-up with a multidisciplinary team.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26752295  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


31. Nanoscale. 2016 Jan 21;8(4):1886-91. doi: 10.1039/c5nr07281f.

Fast water channeling across carbon nanotubes in far infrared terahertz electric 
fields.

Zhang QL(1), Yang RY(2), Jiang WZ(2), Huang ZQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, China.
wzjiang@seu.edu.cn and Department of Mathematics and Physics, Anhui Polytechnic
University, Anhui 241000, China. (2)Department of Physics, Southeast University, 
Nanjing 211189, China. wzjiang@seu.edu.cn.

Using molecular dynamics simulations, we investigate systematically the water
permeation properties across single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) in the
presence of the terahertz electric field (TEF). With the TEF normal to the
nanotube, the fracture of the hydrogen bonds results in the giant peak of net
fluxes across the SWCNT with a three-fold enhancement centered around 14 THz. The
phenomenon is attributed to the resonant mechanisms, characterized by
librational, rotational, and rotation-induced responses of in-tube polar water
molecules to the TEF. For the TEF along the symmetry axis of the nanotube, the
vortical modes for resonances and consequently the enhancement of net fluxes are 
greatly suppressed by the alignment of polar water along the symmetry axis, which
characterizes the quasi one-dimensional feature of the SWCNT nicely. The
resonances of water molecules in the TEF can have potential applications in the
high-flux device designs used for various purposes.

PMID: 26739628  [PubMed - in process]


32. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2015 Nov;44(6):928-32, 938.

[Levels of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in fish from
Shenzhen over the past decade].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen X, Zhang J, Jiang Y, Zhou Jian, Li S.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the contamination levels and profiles of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) in fish samples in Shenzhen areas
of China, and to reveal the status of PCDD/Fs pollution for fish samples in a
decade.
METHODS: The fish samples including freshwater and saltwater fishes, were
collected and analyzed from 2004 to 2013, and PCDD/Fs were detected by isotope
dilution HRGC/HRMS using multiple ion detection mode (MID), which was an advanced
and authority technique referenced US EPA1613 method.
RESULTS: The average concentration of PCDD/Fs in fish was 0.90 pg/(g wet weight),
and the average total toxicity equivalency factor (TEQ) calculated on the basis
of the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) published by the World Health Organization 
(WHO) in 2005 was 0.088 pg WHO-TEQ/(g, wet weight). PCDD/Fs levels in fishes
varied widely depending on the species. The PCDD/Fs average contamination levels 
of fish in 10 years did not exceeded the limit standards of European Commission. 
The evaluation dietary intake of PCDD/Fs from fish for local residents was 4.80
pg WHO-TEQ/(kg · BW · m).
CONCLUSION: The PCDD/Fs levels in fish in a decade was less than the maximum
limit standards set by European Commission 2011.

PMID: 26738385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. ACS Synth Biol. 2016 Jan 7. [Epub ahead of print]

Synthetic RNA Polymerase III Promoters Facilitate High-Efficiency
CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Genome Editing in Yarrowia lipolytica.

Schwartz CM(1), Hussain MS(2), Blenner M(2), Wheeldon I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Environmental Engineering, University of California , Riverside, 
California 92521, United States. (2)Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering,
Clemson University , Clemson, South Carolina 29634, United States.

The oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica is a valuable microbial host for
chemical production because it has a high capacity to synthesize, modify, and
store intracellular lipids; however, rapid strain development has been hampered
by the limited availability of genome engineering tools. We address this
limitation by adapting the CRISPR-Cas9 system from Streptococcus pyogenes for
markerless gene disruption and integration in Y. lipolytica. Single gene
disruption efficiencies of 92% and higher were achieved when single guide RNAs
(sgRNA) were transcribed with synthetic hybrid promoters that combine native RNA 
polymerase III (Pol III) promoters with tRNA. The Pol III-tRNA hybrid promoters
exploit endogenous tRNA processing to produce mature sgRNA for Cas9 targeting.
The highest efficiencies were achieved with a SCR1'-tRNA(Gly) promoter and Y.
lipolytica codon-optimized Cas9 expressed from a UAS1B8-TEF promoter.
Cotransformation of the Cas9 and sgRNA expressing plasmid with a homologous
recombination donor plasmid resulted in markerless homologous recombination
efficiency of over 64%. Homologous recombination was observed in 100% of
transformants when nonhomologous end joining was disrupted. The end result of
these studies was the development of pCRISPRyl, a modular tool for markerless
gene disruption and integration in Y. lipolytica.

PMID: 26714206  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. Radiat Oncol. 2015 Dec 23;10:261. doi: 10.1186/s13014-015-0556-8.

Fast Helical Tomotherapy in a head and neck cancer planning study: is time
priceless?

Van Gestel D(1,)(2), De Kerf G(3,)(4), Wouters K(5), Crijns W(6), Vermorken
JB(7,)(8), Gregoire V(9), Verellen D(10).

Author information: 
(1)University Radiotherapy department Antwerp (URA), Antwerp, Belgium.
dirk.vangestel@bordet.be. (2)Department of Radiotherapy, Institut Jules Bordet,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Rue Héger Bordet 1, 1000, Brussels, Belgium.
dirk.vangestel@bordet.be. (3)University Radiotherapy department Antwerp (URA),
Antwerp, Belgium. dekerfgeert@gmail.com. (4)Iridium Cancer Network GZA, Wilrijk, 
Belgium. dekerfgeert@gmail.com. (5)Scientific Coordination and Biostatistics,
Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. kristien.wouters@uza.be.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Leuvens Kankerinstituut, Leuven, Belgium.
wouter.crijns@uz.kuleuven.be. (7)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. jan.b.vermorken@uza.be. (8)Department of
Medical Oncology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium.
jan.b.vermorken@uza.be. (9)Radiation Oncology Department & Centre for Molecular
Imaging and Experimental Radiotherapy, St-Luc University Hospital, Brussels,
Belgium. vincent.gregoire@uclouvain.be. (10)Radiotherapy UZ Brussel, Faculty of
Medicine and Pharmacy Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
dirk.verellen@uzbrussel.be.

BACKGROUND: The last few years, in radiotherapy there has been a growing focus on
speed of treatment delivery (largely driven by economical and commercial
interests). This study investigates the influence of treatment time on plan
quality for helical tomotherapy (HT), using delivery times with Volumetric
Modulated Arc Therapy (VMAT; Rapid Arc [RA]) as reference.
METHODS: In a previous study, double arc RA (Eclipse) and standard HT plans
(TomoHD) were created for five oropharyngeal cancer patients and reported
according to ICRU 83 guidelines. By modifying the beam width from 2.5 to 5.0 cm, 
elevating the pitch and lowering the modulation factor, "TomoFast" (TF) plans
were generated with treatment times equal to RA plans. To quantify the impact of 
TF's craniocaudal gradient, similar plans were generated on TomoEdge(TM)
(TomoEdgeFast;TEF). The homogeneity index (HI), conformity index (CI), mean dose,
Dnear-max (D2) and Dnear-min (D98) of the PTVs were analyzed as well as the mean 
dose, specific critical doses and volumes of 26 organs at risk (OARs). Data were 
analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA.
RESULTS: With a mean treatment time of 3.05 min (RA), 2.89 min (TF) and 2.95 min 
(TEF), PTVtherapeutic coverage was more homogeneous with TF (HI.07;SE.01) and TEF
(HI.08;SE.01) compared to RA (HI.10;SE.01), while PTVprophylactic was most
homogeneous with RA. Mean doses to parotid glands were comparable for RA, TF,
TEF: 25.62, 25.34, 23.09 Gy for contralateral and 32.02, 31.96, 30.01 Gy for
ipsilateral glands, respectively. OARs' mean doses varied between different
approaches not favoring a particular technique. TF's higher dose to OARs at the
cranial-caudal edges of the PTVs and its higher integral dose, both due to the
extended cranial-caudal gradient, seems to be solved by the new TomoEdge
software. However, all these faster techniques lose part of standard TomoHD's OAR
sparing capacity
CONCLUSION: It is possible to treat oropharyngeal cancer patients using HT
(TF/TEF) within time-frames observed for RA maintaining comparable target
coverage and sparing of OARs. This study indicates that treatment time is not
technology specific, rather an operator's decision on balancing efficiency and
quality.

PMCID: PMC4690403
PMID: 26701749  [PubMed - in process]


35. Curr Microbiol. 2016 Apr;72(4):404-9. doi: 10.1007/s00284-015-0962-z. Epub 2015
Dec 22.

A Re-examination of the Taxonomic Status of Embellisia astragali.

Liu J(1,)(2), Li Y(3,)(4), Creamer R(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Grassland Agro-ecosystems, College of Pastoral
Agriculture Science and Technology, Lanzhou University, Jiayuguan West Road No.
768, Lanzhou, 730020, China. (2)College of Biological Sciences and Engineering,
Beifang University for Nationalities, Yinchuan, 750021, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Grassland Agro-ecosystems, College of Pastoral Agriculture Science 
and Technology, Lanzhou University, Jiayuguan West Road No. 768, Lanzhou, 730020,
China. liujl12@lzu.edu.cn. (4)Institute of Grassland Research of CAAS, Hohhot,
010010, China. liujl12@lzu.edu.cn. (5)Department of Entomology, Plant Pathology, 
and Weed Science, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, 88011, USA.

The plant pathogen Embellisia astragali causes a disease termed yellow stunt and 
root rot in standing milk-vetch (Astragalus adsurgens). The genus Embellisia and 
12 allied genera were redefined as being synonymous with Alternaria in 2013.
However, that taxonomic revision did not include E. astragali. The objective of
this study was to determine the taxonomic status of this fungal species by
comparing its morphological and molecular characteristics with those of other
species. A phylogenetic tree developed based on the sequences of 3 loci (GPD,
RPB2, and TEF-1) strongly supported the placement of E. astragali in Alternaria
sect. Undifilum. The fungus also exhibited germ tubes and mycelia with a 'wavy'
appearance on potato carrot agar, which is a characteristic of sect. Undifilum.
Embellisia astragali was described here as Alternaria gansuense comb. nov.
because the species epithet "astragali" was already occupied.

PMID: 26693723  [PubMed - in process]


36. Chemosphere. 2016 Feb;145:314-21. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.11.088. Epub
2015 Dec 12.

Distribution of 2,3,7,8-substituted polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin and
polychlorinated dibenzofurans in the Jukskei and Klip/Vaal catchment areas in
South Africa.

Rimayi C(1), Chimuka L(2), Odusanya D(3), de Boer J(4), Weiss J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Water and Sanitation, Resource Quality Information Services
(RQIS), Roodeplaat, P. Bag X313, 0001, Pretoria, South Africa; University of the 
Witwatersrand, School of Chemistry, P. Bag 3, Wits, 2050, Johannesburg, South
Africa; Institute for Environmental Studies (IVM), VU University Amsterdam, De
Boelelaan, 1085, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
rimayic@dws.gov.za. (2)University of the Witwatersrand, School of Chemistry, P.
Bag 3, Wits, 2050, Johannesburg, South Africa. (3)Department of Water and
Sanitation, Resource Quality Information Services (RQIS), Roodeplaat, P. Bag
X313, 0001, Pretoria, South Africa. (4)Institute for Environmental Studies (IVM),
VU University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan, 1085, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comprehensive two dimensional gas chromatography (GCxGC)-µECD analysis was used
to determine 2,3,7,8-substituted dibenzo-p-dioxin (PCDD) and polychlorinated
dibenzofuran (PCDF) distribution in the Jukskei and Klip/Vaal catchment areas
from ten sites previously identified as persistent organic pollutant hotspots in 
major rivers in the Gauteng province of South Africa. Five sediment samples from 
the Jukskei River catchment area and five sediment samples from the Kilp/Vaal
River catchment area were collected for analysis. The extracts were screened for 
dioxin-like activity using the DR-Luc bioassay prior to GCxGC-µECD analysis. All 
sediment samples tested positive for dioxin-like activity with total activity
ranging from 16 to 37 pg toxic equivalents (TEQ) g(-1) dry weight (dw) for the
Jukskei River catchment and 1.5-22 pg TEQ g(-1) dw for the Klip/Vaal River
catchment, indicating that the Jukskei River catchment area had higher
concentrations of total dioxin-like compounds. Confirmatory tests for the
presence of the most potent seven PCDDs and ten PCDFs conducted using GCxGC-µECD 
revealed presence of 11 PCDD/Fs and 6 PCDD/Fs in the Jukskei and Klip/Vaal River 
catchments respectively. Total organic carbon (TOC) and particle size
distribution analysis were conducted to understand the distribution of PCDD/Fs
within the Jukskei and Klip/Vaal catchments.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26692507  [PubMed - in process]


37. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Dec 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-Term Outcomes of Patients with Tracheoesophageal Fistula/Esophageal Atresia:
Survey Results from Tracheoesophageal Fistula/Esophageal Atresia Online
Communities.

Acher CW(1), Ostlie DJ(1), Leys CM(1), Struckmeyer S(1), Parker M(1), Nichol
PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin,
Madison, United States.

Introduction Outcome studies of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and/or esophageal
atresia (EA) are limited to retrospective chart reviews. This study surveyed
TEF/EA patients/parents engaged in social media communities to determine
long-term outcomes. Materials and Methods A 50-point survey was designed to study
presentation, interventions, and ongoing symptoms after repair in patients with
TEF/EA. It was validated using a test population and made available on TEF/EA
online communities. Results In this study, 445 subjects completed the survey
during a 2-month period. Mean age of patients when surveyed was 8.7 years (0-61
years) and 56% were male. Eighty-nine percent of surveys were completed by the
parent of the patient. Sixty-two percent of patients underwent repair in the
first 7 days of life. Standard open repair was most common (56%), followed by
primary esophageal replacement (13%) and thoracoscopic repair (13%). Out of 405, 
106 (26%) patients had postoperative leak. Postoperative leak was least likely in
primary esophageal replacement (18%) and standard open repair (19%). Leak
occurred in 32% of patients who had thoracoscopic repair; 31% (128/413) reported 
long-gap atresia, which was significantly associated with increased risk of
postoperative leak (54/128, 42%) when compared with standard short-gap atresia
(odds ratio, 3.5; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). Out of 409, 221 (54%) patients reported dysphagia
after repair, with only 77/221 (34.8%) reporting resolution by age 5. Out of 381,
290 (76%) patients reported symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
There was no difference in dysphagia rates or GERD symptoms based on type of
initial repair. Antireflux surgery was required in 63/290, 22% of patients with
GERD (15% of all patients) and 27% of these patients who had surgery required
more than one procedure antireflux procedure. The most common was Nissen
fundoplication (73%), followed by partial wrap (14%). Reflux recurred in 32% of
patients after antireflux surgery. Conclusion TEF/EA patients have long-term
dysphagia and GERD that may be under reported. Retrospective studies of outcomes 
after TEF/EA repair may underestimate long-term esophageal dysmotility,
dysphagia, GERD, and strictures that occur regardless of the type of repair and
adversely affect quality of life. Fifteen percent of all TEF/EA patients surveyed
required an antireflux procedure during childhood, and more than one-quarter of
those required repeat surgery. These data demonstrate the need for long-term
follow-up as pediatric patients transition to adult care.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26692337  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 21;10(12):e0145415. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145415.
eCollection 2015.

Xerotolerant Cladosporium sphaerospermum Are Predominant on Indoor Surfaces
Compared to Other Cladosporium Species.

Segers FJ(1), Meijer M(1), Houbraken J(1), Samson RA(1), Wösten HA(2),
Dijksterhuis J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Applied and Industrial Mycology, CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Microbiology, Utrecht
University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Indoor fungi are a major cause of cosmetic and structural damage of buildings
worldwide and prolonged exposure of these fungi poses a health risk. Aspergillus,
Penicillium and Cladosporium species are the most predominant fungi in indoor
environments. Cladosporium species predominate under ambient conditions. A total 
of 123 Cladosporium isolates originating from indoor air and indoor surfaces of
archives, industrial factories, laboratories, and other buildings from four
continents were identified by sequencing the internal transcribed spacer (ITS),
and a part of the translation elongation factor 1a gene (TEF) and actin gene
(ACT). Species from the Cladosporium sphaerospermum species complex were most
predominant representing 44.7% of all isolates, while the Cladosporium
cladosporioides and Cladosporium herbarum species complexes represented 33.3% and
22.0%, respectively. The contribution of the C. sphaerospermum species complex
was 23.1% and 58.2% in the indoor air and isolates from indoor surfaces,
respectively. Isolates from this species complex showed growth at lower water
activity (= 0.82) when compared to species from the C. cladosporioides and C.
herbarum species complexes (= 0.85). Together, these data indicate that
xerotolerance provide the C. sphaerospermum species complex advantage in
colonizing indoor surfaces. As a consequence, C. sphaerospermum are proposed to
be the most predominant fungus at these locations under ambient conditions.
Findings are discussed in relation to the specificity of allergy test, as the
current species of Cladosporium used to develop these tests are not the
predominant indoor species.

PMCID: PMC4687004
PMID: 26690349  [PubMed - in process]


39. Zentralbl Chir. 2015 Dec 17. [Epub ahead of print]

[Esophageal Atresia Repair - Can We Influence the Schedule?]

[Article in German]

Tröbs RB(1), Barenberg K(1), Nissen M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Kinderchirurgie, Marienhospital Herne, St. Elisabeth Gruppe,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Deutschland.

The treatment of newborns with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) is associated with a great logistic effort. The aim of the
presented study was to analyse the possibility to influence the time of surgery. 
Material and Method: Data from 30 neonates with EA and TEF regarding the date and
mode of birth, biometric data and preoperative acid-base and blood gas values
were collected retrospectively. The newborns were divided into two subgroups:
birth between Monday and Thursday ("week"), and birth from Friday to Sunday
("weekend"). Results: We observed a seasonal peak of births in November/December.
The rate of prenatal ultrasound detection of polyhydramnions was 40<U+200A>%. In 14 of
16 cases with Caesarean section, maternal or foetal problems predicted the date
and mode of delivery. In both groups, most newborns had an unimpaired postnatal
adaptation. There were no significant differences regarding biometry. Delivery at
the weekend was associated with later surgical repair (second vs. first day of
life). Repeated estimations of acid-base and blood gas parameters over a median
time span of 13 hours revealed a stable situation with a trend to normalisation. 
Discussion: The time of birth is multifactorial and, in most cases, can neither
be predicted nor influenced. Stable respiratory and metabolic parameters in the
majority of patients allow a surgical intervention within a limited time frame
during the first days of life. Conclusion: As it is hardly possible to plan the
surgical procedure, an experienced team as well as neonatal intensive care
facilities and operation room access must be available throughout the week.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26679715  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Nanoscale. 2015 Dec 23;8(2):987-94. doi: 10.1039/c5nr06657c.

Nanostar probes for tip-enhanced spectroscopy.

Kim W(1), Kim N(2), Park JW(1), Kim ZH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Pohang University of Science and Technology, San 31
Hyoja-dong, Pohang, 790-784, Korea. jwpark@postech.ac.kr. (2)Department of
Chemistry, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742, Korea. zhkim@snu.ac.kr.

To overcome the current limit of tip-enhanced spectroscopy that is based on
metallic nano-probes, we developed a new scanning probe with a metallic nanostar,
a nanoparticle with sharp spikes. A Au nanoparticle of 5 nm was first attached to
the end of a tip through DNA-DNA hybridization and mechanical pick-up. The
nanoparticle was converted to a nanostar with a core diameter of ~70 nm and spike
lengths between 50 nm and 80 nm through the reduction of Au(3+) with ascorbic
acid in the presence of Ag(+). Fabrication yields of such tips exceeded 60%, and 
more than 80% of such tips showed a mechanical durability sufficient for use in
scanning microscopy. Effectiveness of the new probes for tip-enhanced Raman
scattering (TERS) and tip-enhanced fluorescence (TEF) was confirmed. The probes
exhibited the necessary enhancement for TEF, and the tip-on and tip-off ratios
varied between 5 and 100. This large tip-to-tip variability may arise from the
uncontrolled orientation of the apexes of the spike with respect to the sample
surface, which calls for further fabrication improvement. The result overall
supports a new fabrication approach for the probe that is effective for
tip-enhanced spectroscopy.

PMID: 26662059  [PubMed - in process]


41. Genet Couns. 2015;26(3):313-20.

ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA WITH RECURRENT TRACHEOESOPHAGEAL FISTULAS AND MICRODUPLICATION
22q11.23.

Puvabanditsin S, Garrow E, February M, Yen E, Mehta R.

The microduplication 22q11.2 syndrome has a wide range of clinical
manifestations. The phenotype ranges from normal to mental retardation and
congenital anomalies. Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) has
recently been linked with the Tbx1 gene mutation located on the long arm of
chromosome 22(22q11.21). We report a case with 1.4 Mb 22q11.23 duplication
detected by array-CGH. The father of this infant has the same interstitial
microduplication but with a normal phenotype. The phenotype seen in our case is
type C (3B) esophageal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula, and ventricular septal
defect. Our patient underwent primary repair of OA/TEF malformations, which was
later complicated by pneumonia and a recurrent TEF.

PMID: 26625662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Food Chem. 2016 Apr 15;197(Pt A):14-23. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.10.097. Epub
2015 Nov 11.

Effect of theanine and polyphenols enriched fractions from decaffeinated tea dust
on the formation of Maillard reaction products and sensory attributes of breads.

Culetu A(1), Fernandez-Gomez B(2), Ullate M(2), del Castillo MD(2), Andlauer
W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Life Technologies, University of Applied Sciences and Arts
Western Switzerland, Route du Rawyl 47, CH-1950 Sion, Switzerland; National
Institute of Research & Development for Food Bioresources - IBA Bucharest, Dinu
Vintila 6, 021102 Bucharest, Romania. Electronic address: alinaculetu@gmail.com. 
(2)Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC-UAM), Nicolas Cabrera 9, 28049 
Madrid, Spain. (3)Institute of Life Technologies, University of Applied Sciences 
and Arts Western Switzerland, Route du Rawyl 47, CH-1950 Sion, Switzerland.

The antiglycoxidative properties of theanine (TEF) and polyphenols enriched
fractions (PEF) prepared from tea dust were tested in a model system composed of 
bovine serum albumin (BSA) and methylglyoxal (MGO). PEF caused a decrease in
available free amino groups of BSA in presence and absence of MGO, suggesting the
simultaneous occurrence of glycoxidation reaction and phenols-protein
interaction. The presence of PEF and TEF inhibited formation of fluorescent
advanced glycation end-products (AGEs). Moreover, theanine (TB) and
polyphenol-enriched bread (PB) were formulated. A significant increase in free
amino groups was observed in TBs with a dose-response effect, while addition of
PEF in bread produced a significant decrease (p<0.05). PEF efficiently reduced
fluorescent AGE formation in breads compared with TEF. The results are in line
with the simplified model systems. PEF used as food ingredient allows obtaining a
tasty food possessing health promoting properties and lower content of potential 
harmful compounds (AGEs).

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26616919  [PubMed - in process]


43. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Oct 22. pii: S0022-3468(15)00661-2. doi:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.10.050. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional residual capacity and lung clearance index in infants treated for
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Landolfo F(1), Conforti A(2), Columbo C(1), Savignoni F(1), Bagolan P(1), Dotta
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, Bambino Gesù Research
Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy. (2)Department of Medical and Surgical
Neonatology, Bambino Gesù Research Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy. Electronic
address: andrea.conforti@opbg.net.

BACKGROUND: Newborn babies with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA/TEF) are prone to respiratory tract disorders. Functional residual capacity
(FRC) and lung clearance index (LCI) are commonly considered useful and sensitive
tools to investigate lung function and early detecting airways diseases. The aim 
of the present study is to report the first series of EA/TEF infants
prospectively evaluated for FRC and LCI.
METHODS: Prospective observational cohort study of all patients treated for
EA/TEF. Lung volume and ventilation inhomogeneity were measured by helium gas
dilution technique using an ultrasonic flow meter. Babies were studied both in
assisted controlled ventilation (sedated) and in spontaneous breathing (quiet
sleep). Three consecutive FRC and LCI measurements were collected for each test
at three different time points: before surgery (T0), 24hours after surgery (T1)
and after extubation (T2).
RESULTS: 16 EA newborns were eligible for the study between December 2011 and
July 2013. Three were excluded because of technical problems. At T0 FRC values
were in the normal range regardless the presence of TEF but worsened afterwards
at T1, with a subsequent recovering after extubation; a significant improvement
after surgery was observed concerning LCI while no differences were found in
tidal volume.
CONCLUSION: Helium gas dilution technique is a suitable method to measure the
effect of surgery on lung physiology, even in ventilated infants with EA. The
changes observed could be related to the ventilatory management and lung
compression during surgical procedure.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26607967  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Immunology. 2016 Feb;147(2):240-50. doi: 10.1111/imm.12559.

Immunosuppressive evidence of Tityus serrulatus toxins Ts6 and Ts15: insights of 
a novel K(+) channel pattern in T cells.

Pucca MB(1), Bertolini TB(2), Cerni FA(1), Bordon KC(1), Peigneur S(3), Tytgat
J(3), Bonato VL(2), Arantes EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, School of Medicine of Ribeirão
Preto, University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. (3)Toxicology and
Pharmacology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The voltage-gated potassium channel Kv1.3 is a novel target for immunomodulation 
of autoreactive effector memory T cells, which play a major role in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. In this study, the Ts6 and Ts15 toxins
isolated from Tityus serrulatus (Ts) were investigated for their
immunosuppressant roles on CD4(+) cell subsets: naive, effector (TEF ), central
memory (TCM ) and effector memory (TEM ). The electrophysiological assays
confirmed that both toxins were able to block Kv1.3 channels. Interestingly, an
extended Kv channel screening shows that Ts15 blocks Kv2.1 channels. Ts6 and Ts15
significantly inhibit the proliferation of TEM cells and interferon-<U+03B3> production;
however, Ts15 also inhibits other CD4(+) cell subsets (naive, TEF and TCM ).
Based on the Ts15 inhibitory effect of proliferation of all CD4(+) cell subsets, 
and based on its blocking effect on Kv2.1, we investigated the Kv2.1 expression
in T cells. The assays showed that CD4(+) and CD8(+) cells express the Kv2.1
channels mainly extracellularly with TCM cells expressing the highest number of
Kv2.1 channels. We also provide in vivo experimental evidence to the protective
effect of Ts6 and Ts15 on delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction. Altogether,
this study presents the immunosuppressive behaviour of Ts6 and Ts15 toxins,
indicating that these toxins could be promising candidates for autoimmune disease
therapy. Moreover, this is the first report illustrating the involvement of a
novel K(+) channel subtype, Kv2.1, and its distribution in T-cell subsets.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4717234 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26595158  [PubMed - in process]


45. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.003. Epub
2015 Feb 2.

Circadian rhythms in liver metabolism and disease.

Ferrell JM(1), Chiang JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeast Ohio Medical University,
Rootstown OH 44272, USA.

Mounting research evidence demonstrates a significant negative impact of
circadian disruption on human health. Shift work, chronic jet lag and sleep
disturbances are associated with increased incidence of metabolic syndrome, and
consequently result in obesity, type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia. Here, these
associations are reviewed with respect to liver metabolism and disease.

PMCID: PMC4629216
PMID: 26579436  [PubMed]


46. Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Nov 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-Term Prognosis of Patients with Esophageal Atresia and/or Tracheoesophageal 
Fistula.

Bakal U(1), Ersoz F(2), Eker I(3), Sarac M(2), Aydin M(4), Kazez A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Firat University School of Medicine, 23119,
Elazig, Turkey. unalbakal@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Firat 
University School of Medicine, 23119, Elazig, Turkey. (3)Department of
Psychology, Elazig Mental Health Hospital, Elazig, Turkey. (4)Department of
Pediatrics-Neonatology, Firat University School of Medicine, Elazig, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate long-term prognosis of infants with esophageal atresia 
(EA) and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: The data of patients with EA were investigated from their medical files.
For the neurodevelopmental evaluation, they were requested to come for a return
visit to authors' polyclinic. Intellectual development was assessed by Ankara
Developmental Screening Inventory (ADSI) (for 0-6 age) and Wechsler Intelligence 
Scale for Children-Revised (WISC-R) (for 6-16 age).
RESULTS: Of the 57 patients, 50 had EA+ distal TEF (87.7 %), six had isolated EA 
(10.5 %) and one had isolated TEF (1.8 %). Of the total patients, 18 cases (31 %)
died and remaining 39 cases (69 %) survived. In the surviving cases, the most
common long-term complication was dysphagia (n = 37, 94.8 %). Intellectual levels
of the 24 patients assessed by ADSI were normal and of the remaining 15 cases
evaluated by WISC-R ranged between 95 and 110 points.
CONCLUSIONS: The long-term complications and hospital visits are common in
surviving cases of EA; however, they have normal cognitive functions and physical
developmental characteristics.

PMID: 26558918  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Aug 15;8(8):14454-6. eCollection 2015.

Successful single-lung ventilation using a bronchial occluder for repair a large 
tracheoesophageal fistula: a case report.

Zhang L(1), Zhao X(1), Li Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, East hospital, Tongji University Shanghai,
China.

A 25-year-old girl was found a large tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) 20 cm away
from the incisors by gastroscope. It was a consequence of prolong intubation
after the head operation because of right temporal lobe cerebral hemorrhage
broken into ventricles. The patient was tracheotomy and retained spontaneous
breathing. Operation was planned to via cervical and thoracic abdominal
esophageal transection plus cervical esophagogastrostomy to repair the fistula
under single lung ventilation under general anesthesia. Here we report a
successful case using an endotracheal tube (EET) combine with a bronchial
occluder for single ventilation to repair a large TEF.

PMCID: PMC4613119
PMID: 26550434  [PubMed]


48. Ultrastruct Pathol. 2015;39(6):413-8. doi: 10.3109/01913123.2015.1066913. Epub
2015 Aug 17.

Ultrastructural Changes of the Smooth Muscle in Esophageal Atresia.

Al-Shraim MM(1), Eid RA(1), Musalam AO(1), Radad K(1), Ibrahim AH(2), Malki
TA(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology , College of Medicine, King Khalid University , Abha
, Saudi Arabia . (2)b Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery ,
Armed Forces Hospital Southern Region , Khamis Mushait , Saudi Arabia , and. (3)c
Department of Pediatric Surgery , College of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Taif 
University , Taif , Saudi Arabia.

Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) is a
relatively rare congenital anomaly. Despite the advances in the management
techniques and neonatal intensive care, esophageal dysmotility remains a very
common problem following EA/TEF repair. Our current study aimed to describe the
most significant ultrastructural changes of the smooth muscle cells (SMCs) trying
to highlight some of the underlying mechanisms of esophageal dysmotility
following EA/TEF repair. Twenty-three biopsies were obtained from the tip of the 
lower esophageal pouch (LEP) of 23 patients during primary repair of EA/TEF.
Light microscopic examination was performed with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), and 
Van Gieson's stains. Ultrastructural examination was done using transmission
electron microscopy (TEM). Histopathological examination showed distortion of
smooth muscle layer and deposition of an abundant amount of fibrous tissue
in-between smooth muscles. Using TEM, SMCs exhibited loss of the cell-to-cell
adhesion, mitochondrial vacuolation, formation of myelin figures, and apoptotic
fragmentation. There were also plasmalemmal projections and formation of ghost
bodies. Interestingly, SMCs were found extending pseudopodia-like projections
around adjacent collagen fibers. Engulfed collagen fibers by SMCs underwent
degradation within autophagic vacuoles. Degeneration of SMCs and deposition of
abundant extracellular collagen fibers are prominent pathological changes in LEP 
of EA/TEF. These changes might contribute to the pathogenesis of esophageal
dysmotility in patients who have survived EA/TEF.

PMID: 26548437  [PubMed - in process]


49. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Nov 6. doi: 10.1111/dote.12431. [Epub ahead of print]

Comparison of environmental risk factors for esophageal atresia, anorectal
malformations, and the combined phenotype in 263 German families.

Zwink N(1), Choinitzki V(2), Baudisch F(2), Hölscher A(3), Boemers TM(3), Turial 
S(4), Kurz R(5), Heydweiller A(5), Keppler K(2), Müller A(6), Bagci S(6), Pauly
M(7), Brokmeier U(7), Leutner A(8), Degenhardt P(9), Schmiedeke E(10), Märzheuser
S(9), Grasshoff-Derr S(11), Holland-Cunz S(12), Palta M(13), Schäfer M(14), Ure
BM(15), Lacher M(15), Nöthen MM(2,)(16), Schumacher J(2,)(16), Jenetzky
E(1,)(17,)(18), Reutter H(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Aging Research, German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, 
Bonn, Germany. (3)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, University
Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (4)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
University Hospital Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (5)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (6)Department of Neonatology and
Pediatric Intensive Care, Children's Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(7)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Asklepios Children's Hospital St. Augustin,
St. Augustin, Germany. (8)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Medical Center
Dortmund, Dortmund, Germany. (9)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Charité
University Medicine Berlin, Berlin, Germany. (10)Department of Pediatric Surgery 
and Urology, Center for Child and Youth Health, Klinikum Bremen-Mitte, Bremen,
Germany. (11)Unit of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Wurzburg, Wurzburg,
Germany. (12)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany. (13)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Evangelisches
Krankenhaus Hamm, Hamm, Germany. (14)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology,
Cnopf'sche Kinderklinik, Nürnberg, Germany. (15)Center of Pediatric Surgery
Hannover, Hannover Medical School and Bult Children's Hospital, Hannover,
Germany. (16)Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn,
Bonn, Germany. (17)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and
Psychotherapy, Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany. (18)Child Center
Maulbronn gGmbH, Hospital for Pediatric Neurology and Social Pediatrics,
Maulbronn, Germany.

Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) and
anorectal malformations (ARM) represent the severe ends of the fore- and hindgut 
malformation spectra. Previous research suggests that environmental factors are
implicated in their etiology. These risk factors might indicate the influence of 
specific etiological mechanisms on distinct developmental processes (e.g. fore-
vs. hindgut malformation). The present study compared environmental factors in
patients with isolated EA/TEF, isolated ARM, and the combined phenotype during
the periconceptional period and the first trimester of pregnancy in order to
investigate the hypothesis that fore- and hindgut malformations involve differing
environmental factors. Patients with isolated EA/TEF (n = 98), isolated ARM (n = 
123), and the combined phenotype (n = 42) were included. Families were recruited 
within the context of two German multicenter studies of the genetic and
environmental causes of EA/TEF (great consortium) and ARM (CURE-Net). Exposures
of interest were ascertained using an epidemiological questionnaire. Chi-square, 
Fisher's exact, and Mann-Whitney U-tests were used to assess differences between 
the three phenotypes. Newborns with isolated EA/TEF and the combined phenotype
had significantly lower birth weights than newborns with isolated ARM (P = 0.001 
and P < 0.0001, respectively). Mothers of isolated EA/TEF consumed more alcohol
periconceptional (80%) than mothers of isolated ARM or the combined phenotype
(each 67%). Parental smoking (P = 0.003) and artificial reproductive techniques
(P = 0.03) were associated with isolated ARM. Unexpectedly, maternal
periconceptional multivitamin supplementation was most frequent among patients
with the most severe form of disorder, i.e. the combined phenotype (19%).
Significant differences in birth weight were apparent between the three phenotype
groups. This might be attributable to the limited ability of EA/TEF fetuses to
swallow amniotic fluid, thus depriving them of its nutritive properties.
Furthermore, the present data suggest that fore- and hindgut malformations
involve differing environmental factors. Maternal periconceptional multivitamin
supplementation was highest among patients with the combined phenotype. This
latter finding is contrary to expectation, and warrants further analysis in large
prospective epidemiological studies.

© 2015 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 26541887  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


50. Mycobiology. 2015 Sep;43(3):354-9. doi: 10.5941/MYCO.2015.43.3.354. Epub 2015 Sep
30.

Cladosporium cladosporioides and C. tenuissimum Cause Blossom Blight in
Strawberry in Korea.

Nam MH(1), Park MS(2), Kim HS(1), Kim TI(1), Kim HG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Fruit and Vegetable Research Center, Chungnam ARES, Nonsan 32914, Korea.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. 
(3)Department of Applied Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon 34134,
Korea.

Blossom blight in strawberry was first observed in a green house in Nonsan,
Damyang, and Geochang areas of Korea, between early January to April of 2012.
Disease symptoms started as a grey fungus formed on the stigma, which led to the 
blossom blight and eventually to black rot and necrosis of the entire flower. We 
isolated the fungi purely from the infected pistils and maintained them on potato
dextrose agar (PDA) slants. To test Koch's postulates, we inoculated the fungi
and found that all of the isolates caused disease symptoms in the flower of
strawberry cultivars (Seolhyang, Maehyang, and Kumhyang). The isolates on PDA had
a velvet-like appearance, and their color ranged between olivaceous-brown and
smoky-grey to olive and almost black. The intercalary conidia of the isolates
were elliptical to limoniform, with sizes ranging from 5.0~10.5 × 2.5~3.0 µm to
4.0~7.5 × 2.0~3.0 µm, respectively. The secondary ramoconidia of these isolates
were 0- or 1-septate, with sizes ranging betweem 10.0~15.0 × 2.5~3.7 µm and
8.7~11.2 × 2.5~3.2 µm, respectively. A combined sequence analysis of the internal
transcribed spacer regions, partial actin (ACT), and translation elongation
factor 1-alpha (TEF) genes revealed that the strawberry isolates belonged to two 
groups of authentic strains, Cladosporium cladosporioides and C. tenuissimum.
Based on these results, we identified the pathogens causing blossom blight in
strawberries in Korea as being C. cladosporioides and C. tenuissimum.

PMCID: PMC4630446
PMID: 26539056  [PubMed]


51. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2015 Oct;25 Suppl 2:S76-7. doi: 10.2015/JCPSP.S76S77.

Acquired Tracheo-oesophageal Fistula: A Challenging Complication of Tracheostomy.

Sethi P(1), Bhatia PK(1), Biyani G(1), Paliwal B(2), Sharma V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, Jodhpur, India. (2)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Dr. 
S. N. Medical College, Jodhpur, India.

Acquired tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) after tracheostomy is a life
threatening complication and can occur in about 1% of cases of tracheostomy.
Percutaneous tracheostomy was performed in intensive care unit on a 40 years male
patient for long-term mechanical ventilation. Subsequently patient developed TEF 
as the complication of tracheostomy. He was initially managed with endoscopically
inserted self expanding plastic stent but later on required surgery for
definitive repair. The problems associated with acquired TEF and its management
are discussed hereby.

PMID: 26522209  [PubMed - in process]


52. Sci Total Environ. 2016 Jan 15;542(Pt A):22-35. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.10.065. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Assessing the implications of water harvesting intensification on
upstream-downstream ecosystem services: A case study in the Lake Tana basin.

Dile YT(1), Karlberg L(2), Daggupati P(3), Srinivasan R(3), Wiberg D(4),
Rockström J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Spatial Sciences Laboratory in the Department of Ecosystem Sciences and
Management, Texas A&M University, 1500 Research Parkway, College Station, TX
77845, USA; Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), Linnégatan 87D, Box 24218, 104
51 Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: yihundile@tamu.edu. (2)Stockholm
Environment Institute (SEI), Linnégatan 87D, Box 24218, 104 51 Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Spatial Sciences Laboratory in the Department of Ecosystem Sciences and
Management, Texas A&M University, 1500 Research Parkway, College Station, TX
77845, USA. (4)International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA),
Schlossplatz, A-2361 Laxenburg, Austria. (5)Stockholm Resilience Center,
Stockholm University, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

Water harvesting systems have improved productivity in various regions in
sub-Saharan Africa. Similarly, they can help retain water in landscapes, build
resilience against droughts and dry spells, and thereby contribute to sustainable
agricultural intensification. However, there is no strong empirical evidence that
shows the effects of intensification of water harvesting on upstream-downstream
social-ecological systems at a landscape scale. In this paper we develop a
decision support system (DSS) for locating and sizing water harvesting ponds in a
hydrological model, which enables assessments of water harvesting intensification
on upstream-downstream ecosystem services in meso-scale watersheds. The DSS was
used with the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) for a case-study area located
in the Lake Tana basin, Ethiopia. We found that supplementary irrigation in
combination with nutrient application increased simulated teff (Eragrostis tef,
staple crop in Ethiopia) production up to three times, compared to the current
practice. Moreover, after supplemental irrigation of teff, the excess water was
used for dry season onion production of 7.66 t/ha (median). Water harvesting,
therefore, can play an important role in increasing local- to regional-scale food
security through increased and more stable food production and generation of
extra income from the sale of cash crops. The annual total irrigation water
consumption was ~4%-30% of the annual water yield from the entire watershed. In
general, water harvesting resulted in a reduction in peak flows and an increase
in low flows. Water harvesting substantially reduced sediment yield leaving the
watershed. The beneficiaries of water harvesting ponds may benefit from increases
in agricultural production. The downstream social-ecological systems may benefit 
from reduced food prices, reduced flooding damages, and reduced sediment
influxes, as well as enhancements in low flows and water quality. The benefits of
water harvesting warrant economic feasibility studies and detailed analyses of
its ecological impacts.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26519564  [PubMed - in process]


53. Pediatr Surg Int. 2016 Jan;32(1):83-8. doi: 10.1007/s00383-015-3816-7. Epub 2015 
Oct 30.

Outcome of esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula in extremely low birth
weight neonates (<1000 grams).

Zani A(1), Wolinska J(1), Cobellis G(1), Chiu PP(1), Pierro A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General and Thoracic Surgery, Physiology and Experimental Medicine
Program, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 1526-555
University Ave, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada. (2)Division of General and Thoracic
Surgery, Physiology and Experimental Medicine Program, The Hospital for Sick
Children, University of Toronto, 1526-555 University Ave, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8,
Canada. agostino.pierro@sickkids.ca.

PURPOSE: To review the outcomes of extremely low birth weight (ELBW, <1000 g)
infants with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF).
METHODS: Health records of ELBW EA/TEF infants treated at our institution from
2000 to 2014 were reviewed (REB1000046653). Demographics, operative approach and 
postoperative complications were analyzed. Data are reported as median (range).
RESULTS: Of 268 EA/TEF infants, 8 (3 %, five females) were ELBW (930 g, 540-995).
Gestational age was 28 weeks (23-32). Seven had type-C EA/TEF and one type B.
OUTCOMES: One trisomy 18 infant received no treatment and died; one initially
diagnosed as type A had primary repair at 126 days of life (DOL); six underwent
TEF ligation (three trans-pleural) with primary repair in one and delayed
anastomosis in two (DOL 120 and 178). The remaining three died (gastrostomy
dehiscence and peritonitis, liver hemorrhage during peritoneal drain insertion,
severe chronic lung disease and brain hemorrhages). At a median follow-up of
3 years (range 15 months-5 years), all survivors are thriving.
CONCLUSION: ELBW infants with EA/TEF are rare and result in high morbidity and
mortality. Mortality is mainly related to complications not associated with
EA/TEF repair. Fistula ligation followed by delayed anastomosis seems to achieve 
a better outcome in ELBW infants.

PMID: 26519042  [PubMed - in process]


54. Bull Hosp Jt Dis (2013). 2015 Mar;73(1):10-7.

The Importance of Tear Edge Fixation in Modified Transosseous-Equivalent Rotator 
Cuff Repair: A Biomechanical Study.

Roghani R, Snir N, Wolfson TS, Rokito AS.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the impact of dog ear fixation
with peripheral sutures on the biomechanical properties of
transosseous-equivalent rotator cuff repair.
METHODS: Eight matched-pairs of fresh-frozen cadaveric shoulders were dissected
to create an isolated, full thickness supraspinatus tear. One shoulder in each
matched pair was randomly selected for repair with a standard
transosseous-equivalent suture-bridge technique (TOE), and the contralateral
shoulder underwent TOE repair with additional tear edge fixation (TEF).
Unidirectional tensile testing was conducted to determine cyclic displacement,
linear stiffness, yield load, ultimate load, and mode of failure for each
specimen.
RESULTS: The ultimate load and yield load were significantly higher for the TEF
group (460 ± 104 N and 455 ± 97 N) than the TOE group (409 ± 111 N and 356 ± 143 
N) (p = 0.020, p = 0.019, respectively). No statistical difference was noted in
stiffness or displacement. Seven of eight TOE specimens versus two of eight TEF
specimens failed by medial row tendon rupture, while one of eight TOE specimens
versus five of eight TEF specimens failed by lateral row anchor pullout.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of peripheral tear edge fixation to
transosseous-equivalent rotator cuff repair improves the initial load to failure 
properties of the construct. However, dog ear fixation has no significant impact 
on cyclical displacement or stiffness.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Tear edge fixation with peripheral sutures should be
considered to increase the initial strength of transosseous-equivalent rotator
cuff repair while restoring the anatomic footprint. The addition of dog ear
fixation may promote healing and minimize the risk of construct failure during
the immediate postoperative period.

PMID: 26516996  [PubMed - in process]


55. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2015 Dec;22(24):19434-50. doi:
10.1007/s11356-015-5597-x. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Dioxin risk assessment: mechanisms of action and possible toxicity in human
health.

Tavakoly Sany SB(1), Hashim R(2), Salleh A(2), Rezayi M(3), Karlen DJ(4),
Razavizadeh BB(5), Abouzari-Lotf E(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences, University of Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia. belintavakoli332@gmail.com. (2)Institute of Biological Sciences,
University of Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Chemistry Department,
Faculty of Science, University Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Environmental Protection Commission of Hillsborough County, 3629 Queen Palm
Drive, Tampa, FL, 33619-1309, USA. (5)Department of Food Chemistry, Research
Institute of Food Science and Technology, P.O. Box: 91735-147, Mashhad, Iran.
(6)Advanced Materials Research Group, Institute of Hydrogen Economy, Universiti
Teknologi Malaysia, International Campus, 54100, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(7)Malaysia-Japan International Institute of Technology, Universiti Teknologi
Malaysia, 54100, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Dioxin-like compounds (DLCs) have been classified by the World Health
Organization (WHO) as one of the most persistent toxic chemical substances in the
environment, and they are associated with several occupational activities and
industrial accidents around the world. Since the end of the 1970s, these toxic
chemicals have been banned because of their human toxicity potential, long
half-life, wide dispersion, and they bioaccumulate in the food web. This review
serves as a primer for environmental health professionals to provide guidance on 
short-term risk assessment of dioxin and to identify key findings for health and 
exposure assessment based on policies of different agencies. It also presents
possible health effects of dioxins, mechanisms of action, toxic equivalency
factors (TEFs), and dose-response characterization. Key studies related to
toxicity values of dioxin-like compounds and their possible human health risk
were identified through PubMed and supplemented with relevant studies
characterized by reviewing the reference lists in the review articles and primary
literature. Existing data decreases the scope of analyses and models in relevant 
studies to a manageable size by focusing on the set of important studies related 
to the perspective of developing toxicity values of DLCs.

PMID: 26514567  [PubMed - in process]


56. Circulation. 2015 Nov 24;132(21):1969-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.114.015023.
Epub 2015 Oct 20.

9p21.3 Coronary Artery Disease Risk Variants Disrupt TEAD Transcription
Factor-Dependent Transforming Growth Factor ß Regulation of p16 Expression in
Human Aortic Smooth Muscle Cells.

Almontashiri NA(1), Antoine D(1), Zhou X(1), Vilmundarson RO(1), Zhang SX(1), Hao
KN(1), Chen HH(2), Stewart AF(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Ruddy Canadian Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University of Ottawa Heart
Institute, Ontario, Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., S.X.Z., K.N.H., A.F.R.S.);
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., A.F.R.S.); Center for Genetics and
Inherited Diseases, Taibah University, Almadina, Saudi Arabia (N.A.M.A.); Ottawa 
Hospital Research Institute, Ontario, Canada (X.Z.); and Department of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (H.-H.C., A.F.R.S.). (2)From Ruddy Canadian
Cardiovascular Genetics Centre, University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ontario,
Canada (N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., S.X.Z., K.N.H., A.F.R.S.); Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(N.A.M.A., D.A., R.O.V., A.F.R.S.); Center for Genetics and Inherited Diseases,
Taibah University, Almadina, Saudi Arabia (N.A.M.A.); Ottawa Hospital Research
Institute, Ontario, Canada (X.Z.); and Department of Medicine, University of
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (H.-H.C., A.F.R.S.). astewart@ottawaheart.ca
hchen@uottawa.ca.

Comment in
    Circulation. 2015 Nov 24;132(21):1943-5.

BACKGROUND: The mechanism whereby the 9p21.3 locus confers risk for coronary
artery disease remains incompletely understood. Risk alleles are associated with 
reduced expression of the cell cycle suppressor genes CDKN2A (p16 and p14) and
CDKN2B (p15) and increased vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation. We asked
whether risk alleles disrupt transcription factor binding to account for this
effect.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A bioinformatic screen was used to predict which of 59
single nucleotide polymorphisms at the 9p21.3 locus disrupt (or create)
transcription factor binding sites. Electrophoretic mobility shift and luciferase
reporter assays examined the binding and functionality of the predicted
regulatory sequences. Primary human aortic smooth muscle cells (HAoSMCs) were
genotyped for 9p21.3, and HAoSMCs homozygous for the risk allele showed reduced
p15 and p16 levels and increased proliferation. rs10811656 and rs4977757
disrupted functional TEF-1 TEC1 AbaA domain (TEAD) transcription factor binding
sites. TEAD3 and TEAD4 overexpression induced p16 in HAoSMCs homozygous for the
nonrisk allele, but not for the risk allele. Transforming growth factor ß, known 
to activate p16 and also to interact with TEAD factors, failed to induce p16 or
to inhibit proliferation of HAoSMCs homozygous for the risk allele. Knockdown of 
TEAD3 blocked transforming growth factor ß-induced p16 mRNA and protein
expression, and dual knockdown of TEAD3 and TEAD4 markedly reduced p16 expression
in heterozygous HAoSMCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we identify a novel mechanism whereby sequences at the 9p21.3 
risk locus disrupt TEAD factor binding and TEAD3-dependent transforming growth
factor ß induction of p16 in HAoSMCs. This mechanism accounts, in part, for the
9p21.3 coronary artery disease risk.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26487755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Ecol Appl. 2015 Jul;25(5):1271-89.

Recovery of arctic tundra from thermal erosion disturbance is constrained by
nutrient accumulation: a modeling analysis.

Pearce AR, Rastetter EB, Kwiatkowski BL, Bowden WB, Mack MC, Jiang Y.

Abstract. We calibrated the Multiple Element Limitation (MEL) model to Alaskan
arctic tundra to simulate recovery of thermal erosion features (TEFs) caused by
permafrost thaw and mass wasting. TEFs could significantly alter regional carbon 
(C) and nutrient budgets because permafrost soils contain large stocks of soil
organic matter (SOM) and TEFs are expected to become more frequent as the climate
warms. We simulated recovery following TEF stabilization and did not address
initial, short-term losses of C and nutrients during TEF formation. To capture
the variability among and within TEFs, we modeled a range of post-stabilization
conditions by varying the initial size of SOM stocks and nutrient supply rates.
Simulations indicate that nitrogen (N) losses after the TEF stabilizes are small,
but phosphorus (P) losses continue. Vegetation biomass recovered 90% of its
undisturbed C, N, and P stocks in 100 years using nutrients mineralized from SOM.
Because of low litter inputs but continued decomposition, younger SOM continued
to be lost for 10 years after the TEF began to recover, but recovered to about
84% of its undisturbed amount in 100 years. The older recalcitrant SOM in mineral
soil continued to be lost throughout the 100-year simulation. Simulations suggest
that biomass recovery depended on the amount of SOM remaining after disturbance. 
Recovery was initially limited by the photosynthetic capacity of vegetation but
became co-limited by N and P once a plant canopy developed. Biomass and SOM
recovery was enhanced by increasing nutrient supplies, but the magnitude, source,
and controls on these supplies are poorly understood. Faster mineralization of
nutrients from SOM (e.g., by warming) enhanced vegetation recovery but delayed
recovery of SOM. Taken together, these results suggest that although vegetation
and surface SOM on TEFs recovered quickly (25 and 100 years, respectively), the
recovery of deep, mineral soil SOM took centuries and represented a major
ecosystem C loss.

PMID: 26485955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf). 2015 Oct 16. pii: gov055. [Epub ahead of print]

Long-term esophageal and respiratory outcomes in children with esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Cartabuke RH(1), Lopez R(2), Thota PN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, USA and.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland,
OH, USA thotap@ccf.org.

OBJECTIVES: Few studies have evaluated the long-term complications and outcomes
of esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) beyond
childhood. The aim of our study was to characterize the esophageal and
respiratory morbidity of EA/TEF through evaluation of clinical symptoms,
diagnostic testing and therapeutic intervention at a tertiary care center.
METHODS: Patients with congenital EA/TEF evaluated from 2011 to 2014 were
included. Demographic characteristics, type and mode of repair of EA/TEF,
clinical symptoms, radiographic, endoscopic, bronchoscopic and medication use
data were obtained.
RESULTS: A total of 43 patients were identified. The median age of this
predominantly Caucasian population was 8 years (interquartile range: 3, 20).
Twenty (62.5%) had type C (EA with distal TEF) abnormality. Twenty-one (48.8%)
patients had heartburn, 19 (44.1%) had acid regurgitation, and 31 (72.1%) had
dysphagia to solids. Barium swallow in 26 patients revealed strictures in 17
(65.4%), dysmotility in 20 (76.9%) and recurrent fistulas in four patients
(15.4%). Thirty patients underwent upper endoscopy, of which 21 (70.0%) had a
stricture, and six (20.0%) had recurrent fistula requiring surgical intervention.
Eight (18.6%) patients underwent fundoplication. Pulmonary evaluation showed
cough and choking in 31 (72.1%) patients and dyspnea and wheezing in 32 (53.4%)
patients. Recurrent respiratory infections were reported in 19 (44.2%).
PATIENTS: Other findings included tracheomalacia in 86.7% and restrictive lung
disease in 54.5% of patients.
CONCLUSION: There is a high burden of residual esophageal and pulmonary pathology
in patients with EA/TEF. Ongoing follow-up is required to monitor both the
clinical symptoms and treatment responses.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press and the Digestive
Science Publishing Co. Limited.

PMID: 26475129  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


59. J Econ Entomol. 2015 Apr;108(2):576-82. doi: 10.1093/jee/tou065. Epub 2015 Jan
30.

Sugarcane Aphid (Hemiptera: Aphididae): Host Range and Sorghum Resistance
Including Cross-Resistance From Greenbug Sources.

Armstrong JS(1), Rooney WL(2), Peterson GC(3), Villenueva RT(4), Brewer MJ(5),
Sekula-Ortiz D(4).

Author information: 
(1)U. S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Wheat, Peanut 
and Other Field Crops Research Unit, 1301 North Western Rd., Stillwater, OK
74075. Corresponding author, email: scott.armstrong@ars.usda.gov. (2)Department
of Soil and Crop Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843.
(3)Texas AgriLife Research and Extension Center, Lubbock, TX 79403. (4)Texas A&M 
AgriLife Research and Extension Center, Weslaco, TX 78596. (5)Texas A&M AgriLife 
Research and Extension Center, Corpus Christi, TX 78406.

The graminous host range and sources of sorghum [Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench.]
plant resistance, including cross-resistance from greenbug, Schizaphis graminum
(Rondani), were studied for the newly emerging sugarcane aphid, Melanaphis
sacchari (Zehntner), in greenhouse no-choice experiments and field evaluations.
The sugarcane aphid could not survive on field corn, Zea mays (L.), Teff grass,
Eragrostis tef (Zucc.), proso millet, Panicum miliaceum L., barley, Hordeum
vulgare L., and rye, Secale cereale L. Only sorghum genotypes served as hosts
including Johnsongrass, Sorghum halepense (L.), a highly suitable noncrop host
that generates high numbers of sugarcane aphid and maintains moderate phenotypic 
injury. The greenbug-resistant parental line RTx2783 that is resistant to
greenbug biotypes C and E was resistant to sugarcane aphid in both greenhouse and
field tests, while PI 55607 greenbug resistant to biotypes B, C, and E was highly
susceptible. PI 55610 that is greenbug resistant to biotypes B, C, and E
maintained moderate resistance to the sugarcane aphid, while greenbug-resistant
PI 264453 was highly susceptible to sugarcane aphid. Two lines and two hybrids
from the Texas A&M breeding program B11070, B11070, AB11055-WF1-CS1/RTx436, and
AB11055-WF1-CS1/RTx437 were highly resistant to sugarcane aphid, as were parental
types SC110, SC170, and South African lines Ent62/SADC, (Macia/TAM428)-LL9,
(SV1*Sima/IS23250)-LG15. Tam428, a parental line that previously showed moderate 
resistance in South Africa and India, also showed moderate resistance in these
evaluations. Overall, 9 of 20 parental sorghum entries tested for phenotypic
damage in the field resulted in good resistance to the sugarcane aphid and should
be utilized in breeding programs that develop agronomically acceptable sorghums
for the southern regions of the United States.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Entomological Society of
America. 2015. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the
public domain in the US.

PMID: 26470168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Prep Biochem Biotechnol. 2015 Oct 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Alleviation of toxic hexavalent chromium using indigenous aerobic bacteria
isolated from contaminated sites of tannery industry.

Pandey S(1), Singh NK(1), Bansal AK(2), Arutchelvan V(3), Sarkar S(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Civil Engineering , Indian Institute of Technology , Roorkee ,
Uttrakhand , India. (2)b Department of Civil Engineering , Moradbad Institute of 
Technology , Moradabad , Uttar Pradesh , India. (3)c Department of Civil
Engineering , Annamalai University , Annamalai Nagar , Tamil Nadu , India.

In the last decade, much attention has been paid to bioremediation of Cr(VI)
using various bacterial species. Cr(VI) remediation by indegeneous bacteria
isolated from contaminated sites of a tannery industry located in Tamil Nadu,
India was investigated in present study. A total of three Cr(VI) resistant
bacterial strains (TES-1, TEf-1, and TES-2) were isolated and selected based on
their Cr(VI) reduction ability in minimal salt medium. Among thsese three
bacterial strains, TES-1 was found to be most efficient in bioreduction while
TES-2 was only found to be Cr(VI) resistant and showed negligible bioreducton
whereas TEf-1 was observed to be most Cr(VI) tolerant. Potential for
bioremediation of TES-1 and TEf-1 was further investigated at different
concentrations of Cr(VI) in the range of 50 to 350 mgL(-1). TEf-1 showed
prominent synchronous growth throughout the experiment whereas TES-1 took longer 
acclimatization time. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of Cr(VI) for TES-1
and TEf-1 were approximated as 600 mgL(-1) and 750 mgL(-1) respectively. The
kinetic behavior of Cr(VI) reduction by TES-1 and TEf-1 exhibited zero and first 
order removal kinetics for Cr(VI) respectively. The most efficient strain TES-1
was identified as Streptomyces sp. by gene sequencing of 16S rRNA.

PMID: 26458110  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


61. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc. 2015 Oct 12. doi: 10.1111/brv.12225. [Epub ahead of
print]

Diversifying crops for food and nutrition security - a case of teff.

Cheng A(1), Mayes S(2), Dalle G(3), Demissew S(4), Massawe F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Centre, School of Biosciences, The University of
Nottingham Malaysia Campus, 43500, Semenyih, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia.
(2)Crops For the Future, The University of Nottingham Malaysia Campus, 43500,
Semenyih, Selangor Darul Ehsan, Malaysia. (3)Ethiopian Biodiversity Institute,
P.O. Box 30726, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. (4)The National Herbarium, Department of
Plant Biology and Biodiversity Management, College of Natural Sciences, Addis
Ababa University, P. O. Box 3434, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

There are more than 50000 known edible plants in the world, yet two-thirds of
global plant-derived food is provided by only three major cereals - maize (Zea
mays), wheat (Triticum aestivum) and rice (Oryza sativa). The dominance of this
triad, now considered truly global food commodities, has led to a decline in the 
number of crop species contributing to global food supplies. Our dependence on
only a few crop species limits our capability to deal with challenges posed by
the adverse effects of climate change and the consequences of dietary imbalance. 
Emerging evidence suggests that climate change will cause shifts in crop
production and yield loss due to more unpredictable and hostile weather patterns.
One solution to this problem is through the wider use of underutilised (also
called orphan or minor) crops to diversify agricultural systems and food sources.
In addition to being highly nutritious, underutilised crops are resilient in
natural and agricultural conditions, making them a suitable surrogate to the
major crops. One such crop is teff [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter], a
warm-season annual cereal with the tiniest grain in the world. Native to Ethiopia
and often the sustenance for local small farmers, teff thrives in both
moisture-stressed and waterlogged soil conditions, making it a dependable staple 
within and beyond its current centre of origin. Today, teff is deemed a healthy
wheat alternative in the West and is sought-after by health aficionados and those
with coeliac disease or gluten sensitivity. The blooming market for healthy food 
is breathing new life into this underutilised crop, which has received relatively
limited attention from mainstream research perhaps due to its 'orphan crop'
status. This review presents the past, present and future of an ancient grain
with a potential beyond its size.

© 2015 Cambridge Philosophical Society.

PMID: 26456883  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


62. Environ Int. 2015 Dec;85:292-8. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Oct 
30.

Persistent and emerging pollutants in the blood of German adults: Occurrence of
dechloranes, polychlorinated naphthalenes, and siloxanes.

Fromme H(1), Cequier E(2), Kim JT(3), Hanssen L(4), Hilger B(5), Thomsen C(2),
Chang YS(3), Völkel W(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority, Department of Chemical Safety and
Toxicology, Pfarrstrasse 3, D-80538 Munich, Germany; Institute and Outpatient
Clinic for Occupational, Social and Environmental Medicine,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Ziemssenstrasse 1, D-80336 Munich, Germany.
(2)Norwegian Institute of Public Health, P.O. Box 4404 Nydalen, N-0403 Oslo,
Norway. (3)Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Kyungbuk,
790-784, Pohang, Republic of Korea. (4)NILU - Norwegian Institute for Air
Research, NO-9296 Tromsø, Norway. (5)Bavarian Health and Food Safety Authority,
Department of Chemical Safety and Toxicology, Pfarrstrasse 3, D-80538 Munich,
Germany.

Human biomonitoring is a valid method to determine exposure, identify time
trends, and monitor the effects of restrictions and measures. To characterize the
recent exposure of Germans to persistent or emerging substances, we analyzed 4
dechloranes, 33 polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs), and 3 cyclic volatile methyl
siloxanes (cVMS) in 42 plasma samples. The samples were collected from blood
donors on a random selection. The median values of both Dechlorane Plus (DDC-CO) 
isomers were 1.23ng/gl.w. for anti- and 0.77ng/gl.w. for syn-DDC-CO. The two
other dechloranes were found at lower levels. The median level of <U+2211>-PCNs was
575pg/gl.w. (range: 101-1406pg/gl.w.). On average, the levels of PCNs in plasma
were dominated by the congeners CN73, CN66/67, and CN51, which were responsible
for approximately 71% of the total amount of PCNs. The cVMS octa-, deca-, and
dodecamethylcyclotetrasiloxane could be determined in only some samples, with
maximum values of 0.73, 0.48, and 0.79µg/l, respectively. Regarding dechloranes, 
our results are similar to those from other western countries but slightly lower 
than results from China. The levels of PCNs in German blood are similar to those 
observed in the U.S.A., but considerably lower than those reported for Korea.
Using a preliminary TEF (toxic equivalency factor), the mean TEQ of the 9
quantifiable PCNs in Germany was low (0.36pg TEQ/gl.w.). The PCN levels in our
study group are lower compared to previous studies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26453819  [PubMed - in process]


63. Environ Health Perspect. 2015 Oct 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Cross-Sectional Associations between Exposure to Persistent Organic Pollutants
and Leukocyte Telomere Length among U.S. Adults in NHANES, 2001-2002.

Mitro SD(1), Birnbaum LS, Needham BL, Zota AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Milken Institute School
of Public Health, George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as dioxins,
furans, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) may influence leukocyte telomere
length (LTL), a biomarker associated with chronic disease. In vitro research
suggests dioxins may bind to the AhR (aryl hydrocarbon receptor) and induce
telomerase activity, which elongates LTL. However, few epidemiologic studies have
investigated associations between POPs and LTL.
OBJECTIVES: We examined the association between 18 PCBs, 7 dioxins, 9 furans, and
LTL among 1,330 US adults from NHANES 2001-2002.
METHODS: We created 3 summed POP metrics based on toxic equivalency factor (TEF),
a potency measure including affinity to the AhR: 1) non-dioxin-like PCBs
(comprised of 10 non-dioxin-like PCBs; no AhR affinity and no TEF); 2) non-ortho 
PCBs (comprised of 2 non-ortho-substituted PCBs with high TEF); 3) and toxic
equivalency (TEQ) (comprised of 7 dioxins, 9 furans, 2 non-ortho-substituted
PCBs, and 6 mono-ortho-substituted PCBs; weighted by TEF). We tested the
association between each metric and LTL using linear regression, adjusting for
demographics, blood cell count and distribution, and another metric with a
different TEF (i.e., non-ortho PCBs and TEQ adjusted for non-dioxin-like PCBs;
non-dioxin-like PCBs adjusted for non-ortho PCBs).
RESULTS: In adjusted models, each doubling of serum concentrations of non-ortho
PCBs and TEQ was associated with 3.74% (95% CI: 2.10, 5.40) and 5.29% (95% CI:
1.66, 9.05) longer LTLs, respectively. Compared to the lowest quartile, the
highest quartile of exposure was associated with 9.16% (95% CI: 2.96, 15.73) and 
7.84% (95% CI: -0.53, 16.92) longer LTLs, respectively. Non-dioxin-like PCBs were
not associated with LTL.
CONCLUSIONS: POPs with high TEFs and AhR affinity were associated with longer
LTL. Because many dioxin-associated cancers are also associated with longer LTL, 
these results may provide insight into the mechanisms underlying PCB and
dioxin-related carcinogenesis.

PMID: 26452299  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


64. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2015 Sep 30. doi: 10.1002/ppul.23330. [Epub ahead of print]

Multidisciplinary care of children with repaired esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

DeBoer EM(1,)(2), Prager JD(2,)(3), Ruiz AG(3), Jensen EL(3), Deterding
RR(1,)(2), Friedlander JA(1,)(4), Soden J(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(2)Breathing Institute Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.
(4)Digestive Health Institute Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado.

OBJECTIVES: Children with congenital esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) require complex medical and surgical care, but few guidelines exist
to guide the long term care of this population. The purpose of this study is to
describe the findings and initial management of a comprehensive aerodigestive
team in order to understand the ongoing needs of children with repaired TEF.
METHODS: A retrospective chart review was performed on children with TEF who were
seen in the multidisciplinary Aerodigestive Clinic at Children's Hospital
Colorado. Diagnostic studies were ordered based on physician discretion.
RESULTS: Twenty-nine children with TEF were evaluated (mean age 3.8 years)
between 2010 and 2014. All children had symptoms attributed to breathing,
swallowing, and digestive difficulties. Less than half of the children had seen a
pulmonary or gastrointestinal specialist in the past year. Tracheomalacia was
diagnosed in all children who had a bronchoscopy (23/23), and the presence of
dysphagia was correlated with severe tracheomalacia. 7/25 children who had a
swallow study had aspiration. 7/25 children had a diagnosis of active reflux
despite current management. Four patients were diagnosed with bronchiectasis as a
result of the multidisciplinary evaluation.
CONCLUSION: Although all children had persistent aerodigestive symptoms, over 50%
had not been seen by an appropriate subspecialist in the year prior to the clinic
visit. The multidisciplinary evaluation resulted in new diagnoses of
bronchiectasis and active reflux, which can both lead to long-term morbidity and 
mortality. Children with TEF require evaluation by multiple subspecialists to
manage not only current symptoms but also long term risks. Ongoing care should be
guided by protocols based on known risks. Pediatr Pulmonol. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26422584  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


65. Fungal Biol. 2015 Oct;119(10):940-5. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2015.07.006. Epub 2015
Jul 26.

How many DNA markers are needed to reveal cryptic fungal species?

Balasundaram SV(1), Engh IB(2), Skrede I(3), Kauserud H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section for Genetics and Evolutionary Biology (EVOGENE), Department of
Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: sudhagar@ibv.uio.no. (2)Section for Genetics and Evolutionary
Biology (EVOGENE), Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066
Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address:
Ingeborg.Bjorvand.Engh@mycoteam.no. (3)Section for Genetics and Evolutionary
Biology (EVOGENE), Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066
Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: inger.skrede@ibv.uio.no.
(4)Section for Genetics and Evolutionary Biology (EVOGENE), Department of
Biosciences, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1066 Blindern, 0316 Oslo, Norway.
Electronic address: havard.kauserud@ibv.uio.no.

In the fungal kingdom there is a high prevalence of morphologically defined
species that includes closely related 'cryptic' biological species with similar
phenotypes. Due to evolutionary processes like incomplete lineage sorting and
introgression through hybridization, several independent DNA markers are
essential to resolve closely related fungal species. In this study we wanted to
analyze how many independent loci are necessary to reveal the cryptic species,
using the genus Serpula as a model system. DNA sequences from ten different DNA
loci, eight nuclear and two mitochondrial DNA markers, were obtained from various
cryptic species within Serpula. The inclusion of five loci gave a highly
confident separation of the cryptic species. Several other loci performed better 
than the standard DNA barcoding marker ITS in separating the cryptic species. The
DNA loci tub, hsp, rpb2 and tef gave, on average, best support for the different 
cryptic species in single gene trees. We conclude that the analyses of a few but 
informative independent DNA loci, such as tub, hsp, rpb2 and tef in addition to
the standard DNA barcode ITS, may give a good indication about the existence of
cryptic species in fungi.

Copyright © 2015 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 26399188  [PubMed - in process]


66. Fungal Biol. 2015 Oct;119(10):901-16. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2015.06.010. Epub
2015 Jul 8.

Five new species of entomopathogenic fungi from the Amazon and evolution of
neotropical Ophiocordyceps.

Sanjuan TI(1), Franco-Molano AE(2), Kepler RM(3), Spatafora JW(4), Tabima J(4),
Vasco-Palacios AM(5), Restrepo S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Taxonomía y Ecología de Hongos, Universidad de Antioquia, Calle
67 No. 53 - 108, A.A. 1226 Medellín, Colombia; Laboratorio de Micología y
Fitopatología, Universidad de Los Andes, Cra 1 Nº 18A- 12, Bogotá 111711,
Colombia. Electronic address: t_sanjuan@hotmail.com. (2)Laboratorio de Taxonomía 
y Ecología de Hongos, Universidad de Antioquia, Calle 67 No. 53 - 108, A.A. 1226 
Medellín, Colombia. (3)Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, USDA,
Bldg 011A Rm 212 BARC-W, Beltsville, MD 20705, USA. (4)Department of Botany and
Plant Pathology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.
(5)Laboratorio de Taxonomía y Ecología de Hongos, Universidad de Antioquia, Calle
67 No. 53 - 108, A.A. 1226 Medellín, Colombia; Fundacion Biodiversa Colombia,
Carrera 22 N° 41 - 80 Apto. 004, 111311 Bogotá D.C. Colombia. (6)Laboratorio de
Micología y Fitopatología, Universidad de Los Andes, Cra 1 Nº 18A- 12, Bogotá
111711, Colombia.

The neotropical biogeographic zone is a 'hot spot' of global biodiversity,
especially for insects. Fungal pathogens of insects appear to track this
diversity. However, the integration of this unique component of fungal diversity 
into molecular phylogenetic analyses remains sparse. The entomopathogenic fungal 
genus Ophiocordyceps is species rich in this region with the first descriptions
dating to the early nineteenth century. In this study, material from various
ecosystems throughout Colombia and Ecuador was examined. Molecular phylogenetic
analyses of five nuclear loci including SSU, LSU, TEF, RPB1, and RPB2 were
conducted alongside a morphological evaluation. Thirty-five specimens were
examined representing fifteen different species of Ophiocordyceps, and five new
species, Ophiocordyceps blattarioides, Ophiocordyceps tiputini, Ophiocordyceps
araracuarensis, Ophiocordyceps fulgoromorphila, and Ophiocordyceps evansii, were 
described. An accurate identification of the host allowed us to conclude that
host identity and host habitat are positively correlated with phylogenetic
species of Ophiocordyceps and are probably strong drivers for speciation of
neotropical entomopathogenic fungi.

Copyright © 2015 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 26399185  [PubMed - in process]


67. J Food Sci Technol. 2014 Nov;51(11):2881-95. doi: 10.1007/s13197-012-0745-5. Epub
2012 Jun 2.

Teff (Eragrostis tef) as a raw material for malting, brewing and manufacturing of
gluten-free foods and beverages: a review.

Gebremariam MM(1), Zarnkow M(2), Becker T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Brau- und Getränketechnologie, Center of Life and Food Sciences,
Technische Universität München, Weihenstephaner Steig 20, 85354 Freising, Germany
; TUM, Center of Life and Food Sciences, Weihenstephaner Steig 20, 85354
Freising, Germany. (2)Lehrstuhl für Brau- und Getränketechnologie, Center of Life
and Food Sciences, Technische Universität München, Weihenstephaner Steig 20,
85354 Freising, Germany.

The demand for gluten-free foods is certainly increasing. Interest in teff has
increased noticeably due to its very attractive nutritional profile and
gluten-free nature of the grain, making it a suitable substitute for wheat and
other cereals in their food applications as well as foods for people with celiac 
disease. The main objective of this article is to review researches on teff,
evaluate its suitability for different food applications, and give direction for 
further research on its applications for health food market. Teff is a tropical
low risk cereal that grows in a wider ecology and can tolerate harsh
environmental conditions where most other cereals are less viable. It has an
excellent balance of amino acid composition (including all 8 essential amino
acids for humans) making it an excellent material for malting and brewing.
Because of its small size, teff is made into whole-grain flour (bran and germ
included), resulting in a very high fiber content and high nutrient content in
general. Teff is useful to improve the haemoglobin level in human body and helps 
to prevent malaria, incidence of anaemia and diabetes. The nutrient composition
of teff grain indicates that it has a good potential to be used in foods and
beverages worldwide. The high levels of simple sugars and a-amino acids as a
result of breakdown of starch and protein, respectively, are essential for
fermentation and beer making.

PMCID: PMC4571201
PMID: 26396284  [PubMed]


68. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Dec;50(12):2012-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.08.015. Epub
2015 Aug 28.

Reoperation for anastomotic complications of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Zhu H(1), Shen C(1), Xiao X(1), Dong K(1), Zheng S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital of Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: szheng@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to review our experience in the 
re-operative management of anastomotic complications (ACs) following primary
repair of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and to
assess the outcomes after reoperation.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 21 EA patients who underwent reoperation
from 2005 to 2014. Clinical features, reasons for reoperation, diagnosis of ACs, 
re-operative procedures and outcomes, as well as long-term follow-up of
reoperation were analyzed.
RESULTS: Reoperation occurred in 16 recurrent TEF (RTEF) cases (76.2%), 4 severe 
anastomotic strictures (AS), and 1 anastomotic leakage (AL) cases (19% and 4.8%, 
respectively). All of AS and AL were confirmed by esophagography. RTEF were
confirmed by esophagoscopy and bronchoscopy. All of the cases underwent
reoperation successfully. The average operative time and length of post-operative
hospital stay were 2.7 ± 0.8 hours and 15.4 ± 3.3 days, respectively. The
mortality rate was 4.8%. All of the cases were followed up from 1 to 107 months
after reoperation. No patients experienced respiratory or feeding issues. No
severe postoperative complications were shown in all re-operative cases.
CONCLUSIONS: ACs including severe AS and AL as well as RTEF are the significant
indications for reoperation after EA repair. The reoperation was effective to
treat multiple anastomotic complications.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26388130  [PubMed - in process]


69. Chemosphere. 2016 Feb;144:338-45. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.08.070. Epub
2015 Sep 14.

Development of a 4-NQO toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach to enable a
preliminary risk assessment of unknown genotoxic compounds detected by the Ames
II test in UV/H2O2 water treatment samples.

Martijn BJ(1), Van Rompay AR(2), Penders EJ(3), Alharbi Y(4), Baggelaar PK(5),
Kruithof JC(6), Rietjens IM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wageningen University, Division of Toxicology, P.O. Box 8000, 6700 EA
Wageningen, The Netherlands; Wetsus European Centre of Excellence for Sustainable
Water Technology, P.O. Box 1113; 8900 CC Leeuwarden, The Netherlands; PWN Water
Supply Company North Holland, P.O. Box 2113, 1990 AC Velserbroek, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: bmartijn@pwntechnologies.nl. (2)VITO -
Environmental Risk & Health - Team ABS, Industriezone Vlasmeer 7, 2400 Mol,
Belgium. (3)Het Waterlaboratorium, P.O Box 734, 2300 RS Haarlem, The Netherlands.
(4)Wageningen University, Division of Toxicology, P.O. Box 8000, 6700 EA
Wageningen, The Netherlands. (5)Icastat, Niagara 18, 1186 JP Amstelveen, The
Netherlands. (6)Wetsus European Centre of Excellence for Sustainable Water
Technology, P.O. Box 1113; 8900 CC Leeuwarden, The Netherlands.

An approach to enable a preliminary risk assessment of unknown genotoxic
compounds formed by MP UV/H2O2 treatment of nitrate rich water, is described.
Since the identity and concentration of specific genotoxic compounds is not
established yet, a compound specific risk assessment cannot be performed. This
limitation is circumvented by introducing a toxic equivalency factor, converting 
the concentration of unknown genotoxic compounds expressed by an Ames II test
response into equivalent concentrations of 4-nitroquinoline oxide (4-NQO), to
enable a preliminary risk assessment. Based on the obtained 4-NQO equivalent
concentrations for the tested water samples and 4-NQO carcinogenicity data, an
indication of the associated risk of the by MP UV/H2O2 treatment produced
nitrated genotoxic compounds is obtained via the margin of exposure (MOE)
approach. Based on a carcinogen study by Tang et al. (2004), a body weight of
70 kg and a drinking water consumption of 2 L per day, the 4-NQO equivalent
concentration should not exceed 80 ng/L associated with a negligible risk.
Application of this approach on samples from MP UV/H2O2 treated water of a full
scale drinking water production facility, a 4-NQO equivalent concentration of
107 ng/L was established. These results indicate a safety concern in case this
water would be distributed as drinking water without further post treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26378870  [PubMed - in process]


70. Pediatr Transplant. 2015 Nov;19(7):E165-9. doi: 10.1111/petr.12584. Epub 2015 Sep
16.

Basiliximab treatment for autoimmune bowel disease in a pediatric heart
transplant patient.

Puri K(1), Kocoshis S(2), Risma K(3), Perez L(3), Hart C(4), Chin C(1), Ryan
TD(1), Jefferies JL(1), Schumacher KR(5), Castleberry C(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, USA. (2)Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (3)Allergy and
Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(4)Otolaryngology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH,
USA. (5)Pediatric Cardiology, CS Mott Children's Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Autoimmune-mediated bowel disease has been reported after pediatric heart
transplantation. Recognition and treatment of these patients has been difficult. 
We describe a patient who responded to steroids and basiliximab therapy after an 
inflammatory process secondary to abnormal T-cell activation. Our patient is a
28-month-old female who received a heart transplant at five wk of age. At 24
months post-transplant, she developed fever and bloody stools. Initial
investigations were significant for an elevated ESR (>120) and CRP (15.2).
Symptoms persisted despite bowel rest and mycophenolate discontinuation.
Endoscopic evaluation revealed discontinuous ulcerative disease involving
esophagus, terminal ileum, right and left colon, necessitating extensive bowel
resection. She had additional airway inflammation leading to a TEF at the site of
esophageal ulceration, requiring tracheostomy. Immune evaluation revealed
autoimmune dysregulation that responded to parenteral methylprednisolone. Chronic
basiliximab therapy allowed for successful weaning of steroids with sustained
remission. She has been transitioned to sirolimus and tacrolimus maintenance
immunosuppression with plans to discontinue basiliximab once off steroids. In
conclusion, bowel disease in the setting of pediatric heart transplantation can
be severe and refractory to traditional treatment methods. Tailoring immune
therapy to activated T cells can result in remission. Basiliximab therapy was
used in our patient to maintain steroid-induced remission, but long-term
complications of this disease process are unknown.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26374667  [PubMed - in process]


71. J Infect. 2015 Dec;71(6):658-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2015.08.011. Epub 2015 Sep
5.

Phylogenetic diversity of human pathogenic Fusarium and emergence of uncommon
virulent species.

Salah H(1), Al-Hatmi AM(2), Theelen B(3), Abukamar M(4), Hashim S(4), van
Diepeningen AD(3), Lass-Florl C(5), Boekhout T(6), Almaslamani M(4), Taj-Aldeen
SJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Mycology Unit, Microbiology Division, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Hamad Medical Corporation, P. O. Box 3050, Doha, Qatar; CBS-KNAW
Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)CBS-KNAW Fungal
Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Institute of Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Directorate General of Health Services, Ministry of Health, Ibri Hospital, Ibri, 
Oman. (3)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medicine, Infectious Disease Division, Hamad Medical
Corporation, P. O. Box 3050, Doha, Qatar. (5)Division of Hygiene and Medical
Microbiology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. (6)CBS-KNAW
Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands; Department of Dermatology, 
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Molecular Medical Mycology, Institute of Dermatology
and Medical Mycology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy 
of Science, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (7)Mycology Unit, Microbiology
Division, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Hamad Medical
Corporation, P. O. Box 3050, Doha, Qatar. Electronic address:
saadtaj51@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: Fusarium species cause a broad spectrum of infections. However,
little is known about the etiological agents to the species level. We identified 
Fusarium species isolated from clinical specimens including those of high risk
patients to better understand the species involved in the pathogenesis.
METHODS: A set of 44 Fusarium isolates were identified by two-locus sequence
typing using partial sequences of the second largest subunit of RNA polymerase
(RPB2) and translation elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF-1a).
RESULTS: The identified species belonged to four species complexes (SC); the most
common SC was Fusarium solani (FSSC) (75%), followed by Fusarium oxysporum (FOSC)
(4.5%), Fusarium fujikuroi (FFSC) (13.6%), and Fusarium dimerum (FDSC) (6.8%).
Sites of infections were nails (n = 19, 43.2%), skin (n = 7, 15.9%), cornea (n = 
6, 13.6%), blood (n = 3, 9%), wound (n = 4, 6.8%), burn (n = 2, 4.5%), tissue (n 
= 2, 4.5%), and urine (n = 1, 2.27%). Fusarium acutatum was rare and seem
restricted to the Middle East. Comorbidities associated with invasive infections 
were hematological malignancy and autoimmune disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: Members of the FSSC predominantly caused cornea, nail and
bloodstream infections. Less frequently encountered were the FOSC, FFSC and FDSC.
More accurate molecular identification of Fusarium species is important to
predict therapeutic outcome and the emergence of these species.

Copyright © 2015 The British Infection Association. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26348828  [PubMed - in process]


72. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2015 Nov 1;119(9):975-81. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00473.2015. Epub 2015 Sep 3.

Regulation of energy expenditure by estradiol in premenopausal women.

Melanson EL(1), Gavin KM(2), Shea KL(2), Wolfe P(3), Wierman ME(4), Schwartz
RS(2), Kohrt WM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes Division of Geriatric
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado and Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado
ed.melanson@ucdenver.edu. (2)Division of Geriatric Medicine, School of Medicine, 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado and Denver
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado. (3)Division of Geriatric
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, Colorado and. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes
Denver Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Denver, Colorado.

Suppressing sex hormones in women for 1 wk reduces resting energy expenditure
(REE). The effects of more chronic suppression on REE and other components of
total energy expenditure (TEE), and whether the reduction in REE is specifically 
due to loss of estradiol (E2), are not known. We compared the effects of 5 mo of 
sex hormone suppression (gonadotropin releasing hormone agonist therapy, GnRHAG) 
with placebo (PL) or E2 add-back therapy on REE and the components of TEE.
Premenopausal women received GnRHAG (leuprolide acetate 3.75 mg/mo) and were
randomized to receive transdermal therapy that was either E2 (0.075 mg/d; n = 24;
means ± SD, aged = 37 ± 8 yr, BMI = 27.3 ± 6.2 kg/m(2)) or placebo (n = 21; aged 
= 34 ± 9 yr, BMI = 26.8 ± 6.2 kg/m(2)). REE was measured by using a metabolic
cart, and TEE, sleep EE (SEE), exercise EE (ExEE, 2 × 30 min bench stepping),
non-Ex EE (NExEE), and the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) were measured by using
whole room indirect calorimetry. REE decreased in GnRHAG+PL [mean (95% CI), -54
(-98, -15) kcal/d], but not GnRHAG+E2 [+6 (-33, +45) kcal/d] (difference in
between-group changes, P < 0.05). TEE decreased in GnRHAG+PL [-128 (-214, -41)
kcal/d] and GnRHAG+E2 [-96 (-159, -32) kcal/d], with no significant difference in
between-group changes (P = 0.55). SEE decreased similarly in both GnRHAG+PL
[-0.07 (-0.12, -0.03) kcal/min] and GnRHAG+E2 [-0.07 (-0.12, -0.02) kcal/min].
ExEE decreased in GnRHAG+PL [-0.46 (-0.79, -0.13) kcal/min], but not GnRHAG+E2
[-0.30 (-0.65, +0.06) kcal/min]. There were no changes in TEF or NExEE in either 
group. In summary, chronic pharmacologic suppression of sex hormones reduced REE 
and this was prevented by E2 therapy.

PMCID: PMC4628992 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26338457  [PubMed - in process]


73. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2015 May;40(9):1723-6.

[Study on porous starch as solid dispersion carrier of total Epimedium
flavonoids].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan HM, Jia XB, Zhang ZH, Sun E, Xu YH.

In order to evaluate the characteristic of porous starch (PS) as the solid
dispersions carrier of the total Epimedium flavonoids (TEF), the PS was used. The
dissolution of icariin was selected as an indicator to analyze the differences of
dissolution between TEF and its solid dispersion. TEF was characterized by
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). Solid dispersion was irregular block and no
powder characteristics of TEF and PS could be seen in SEM, DSC and XRD analysis
suggested that TEF may be present in solid dispersion as amorphous substance. The
dissolution rate of icariin has been improved significantly when the proportion
of TEF and PS was 1:2. PS as a traditional solid dispersion carrier is worthy of 
further study.

PMID: 26323136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Yeast. 2015 Dec;32(12):703-10. doi: 10.1002/yea.3097. Epub 2015 Sep 17.

New cassettes for single-step drug resistance and prototrophic marker switching
in fission yeast.

Lorenz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, UK.

Construction of multiply mutated strains for genetic interaction analysis and of 
strains carrying different epitope tags at multiple open reading frames for
testing protein localization, abundance and protein-protein interactions is
hampered by the availability of a sufficient number of different selectable
markers. Moreover, strains with single gene deletions or tags often already exist
in strain collections; for historical reasons these will mostly carry the ura4(+)
gene or the G418-resistance kanMX as marker. Because it is rather cumbersome to
produce multiply deleted or tagged strains using the same marker, or to
completely reconstruct a particular strain with a different marker, single-step
exchange protocols of markers are a time-saving alternative. In recent years,
dominant drug resistance markers (DDRMs) against clonNAT, hygromycin B and
bleomycin have been adapted and successfully used in Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
The corresponding DDRM cassettes, natMX, hphMX and bleMX, carry the TEF promotor 
and terminator sequences from Ashbya gossypii as kanMX; this provides flanking
homologies to enable single-step marker swapping by homologous gene targeting. To
expand this very useful toolset for single-step marker exchange, I constructed MX
cassettes containing the nutritional markers arg3(+) , his3(+) , leu1(+) and
ura4(+) . Furthermore, a set of constructs was created to enable single-step
exchange of ura4(+) to kanMX6, natMX4 and hphMX4. The functionality of the
cassettes is demonstrated by successful single-step marker swapping at several
loci. These constructs allow straightforward and rapid remarking of existing
ura4(+) - and MX-deleted and -tagged strains. Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26305038  [PubMed - in process]


75. J Neonatal Surg. 2015 Jul 1;4(3):32.

Infantile Hypertrophic Pyloric Stenosis in Postoperative Esophageal Atresia with 
Tracheoesophageal Fistula.

R A A H(1), Y U C(2), R N(3), I R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains 
Malaysia. (2)Department of Surgery, Universiti Sains Malaysia. (3)Department of
Neonatology, Universiti Sains Malaysia. (4)Department of Pediatric, Universiti
Sains Malaysia.

Development of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis during postoperative
period in EA with TEF is rare. Postoperative vomiting or feeding intolerance in
EA is more common which is due to esophageal stricture, gastroesophageal reflux
and esophageal dysmotility. A typical case of IHPS also presents with non-bilious
projectile vomiting at around 3-4 weeks of life. The diagnosis of infantile
hypertrophic pyloric stenosis in this subset is usually delayed because of its
rarity. We report a case of IHPS in postoperative EA and emphasize on high index 
of suspicion to avoid any delay in diagnosis with its metabolic consequences.

PMCID: PMC4524207
PMID: 26290814  [PubMed]


76. J Appl Microbiol. 2015 Nov;119(5):1335-44. doi: 10.1111/jam.12931. Epub 2015 Sep 
24.

Isolation of Neofusicoccum parvum from withered grapes: strain characterization, 
pathogenicity and its detrimental effects on passito wine aroma.

Lorenzini M(1), Cappello MS(2), Zapparoli G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi di Verona, Verona,
Italy. (2)Istituto di Scienze delle Produzioni Alimentari, CNR, Lecce, Italy.

AIMS: There is scarce information on the occurrence of several fungi that infect 
withered grapes to produce passito wine. Isolation and characterization of
Neofusicoccum parvum strains and evaluation of their effects on withered grape
and wine were carried out.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nine isolates were phenotypically characterized by colony
morphology and genetically discriminated by molecular methods. Two representative
strains were identified as N. parvum according to the phylogenetic analysis of
internal transcribed spacer (ITS), and a part of translation elongation factor
1-alfa (TEF) and ß-tubulin DNA sequences. The pathogenicity of both strains on
grape berries varied according to the inoculation and incubation conditions.
Under withering conditions, infected berries showed browning and shrivelling and 
some berries showed pycnidial development on the surface. The infection affected 
laccase, esterase, ß-glucosidase and tannase on grape juice as well as the
content of several aroma molecules on resulting wines. Strain-specific effects on
wine composition were also observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Neofusicoccum parvum occurred in withered grapes and was able to
infect grapes under withering condition changing the aroma wine.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: This study reports for the first time the
N. parvum isolation in fruit-drying rooms and indicates its important role on
postharvest grape infection.

© 2015 The Society for Applied Microbiology.

PMID: 26274522  [PubMed - in process]


77. Nutr Hosp. 2015 Aug 1;32(2):691-5. doi: 10.3305/nh.2015.32.2.9078.

TRAQUEOESOPHAGEAL FISTULA PATIENTS FED THROUGH PERCUTANEOUS ENDOSCOPIC
GASTROSTOMY/GASTROJEJUNOSTOMY: NUTRITIONAL STATUS AND CLINICAL OUTCOME.

Santos CA(1), Pereira M(1), Martins VS(2), Fonseca J(3).

Author information: 
(1)GENE - Grupo de Estudo de Nutrição Entérica (Enteral Feeding Team), Bloco de
Exames Especias, Piso 3, Hospital Garcia de Orta, Avenida Torrado da Silva, 2800 
Almada.. jorgedafonseca@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Respiratory Disorders,
Hospital Garcia de Orta, Avenida Torrado da Silva, 2800 Almada..
jorgedafonseca@hotmail.com. (3)GENE - Grupo de Estudo de Nutrição Entérica
(Enteral Feeding Team), Bloco de Exames Especias, Piso 3, Hospital Garcia de
Orta, Avenida Torrado da Silva, 2800 Almada. CiiEM - Centro de Investigação
Interdisciplinar Egas Moniz, Almada (Portugal).. jorgedafonseca@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) may result from cancer or mechanical 
ventilation. Endoscopic Gastrostomy or Gastrojejunostomy (PEG/PEG-J) is used for 
nutritional support.
OBJECTIVE: in TEF-patients, evaluating nutritional status when PEG is performed, 
safety of PEG/PEG-J and clinical outcome.
METHODS: from the files of PEG/PEG-J feed TEF-patients we collected: clinical
data, Body Mass Index, albumin, transferrin and cholesterol when gastrostomy was 
performed, and clinical outcome globally and according with the TEF cause: Group 
1: complication of mechanical ventilation, Group 2: cancer.
RESULTS: twelve patients, 18-91 years (median: 53), 11 PEG, one PEG-J: six
complications of ventilation (neurological diseases), 6 cancers. Mean period from
TEF diagnosis until gastrostomy: 2 months in Group 1, 10 months in Group 2. In
the day of the gastrostomy, patients presented with malnutrition parameters, most
strikingly in the cancer group. Group 1: died a single patient, 3 closed the TEF,
resuming oral intake, 2 are still PEG-feed. All cancer patients died (7 months
after gastrostomy). One needed a jejunal extension to create a PEG-J. No more
complications.
CONCLUSION: PEG/PEG-J was safe in TEF-patients, but cancer patients underwent
gastrostomy too late. In TEF-patients, PEG/PEG-J should be considered in a
regular basis, earlier in the disease evolution, before established malnutrition.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
Copyright AULA MEDICA EDICIONES 2014. Published by AULA MEDICA. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26268100  [PubMed - in process]


78. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015 Sep;141(9):828-33. doi:
10.1001/jamaoto.2015.1419.

Laryngotracheal Cleft Repair in Children With Complex Airway Anomalies.

de Alarcón A(1), Osborn AJ(2), Tabangin ME(3), Cohen AP(2), Hart CK(1), Cotton
RT(1), Rutter MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio2Aerodigestive and Sleep
Center, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio3Department of Otolaryngology-Head a. (2)Division of Pediatric
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. (3)Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.

IMPORTANCE: This study provides clinicians with relevant information regarding
the surgical outcomes of patients with laryngotracheal cleft in the context of
additional airway anomalies.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the rates of surgical success in patients who underwent 
laryngotracheal cleft repair in the context of additional airway anomalies,
determine the revision rate for cleft repair, characterize the time to revision
among patients who underwent cleft repair, and assess the functional swallowing
outcomes after cleft repair.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A retrospective study was conducted at a
quaternary pediatric center of 81 children diagnosed as having laryngotracheal
cleft with or without concomitant airway anomalies who underwent laryngotracheal 
cleft repair between February 1, 2000, and February 28, 2013. Analysis was
conducted from October 1, 2012, through March 30, 2013.
INTERVENTIONS: Surgical repair of laryngotracheal cleft.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Surgery-specific success, overall surgical success,
and revision rate. We defined surgery-specific success as a repair not requiring 
revision and overall surgical success as absence of a cleft or TEF at the last
operative examination, regardless of the number of revisions required.
RESULTS: Of 81 patients with laryngotracheal cleft who underwent surgical repair,
48 (59%) had at least 1 additional airway finding; 24 (30%) had tracheomalacia
and 21 (26%) had subglottic stenosis. Seventeen patients required a revision of
laryngotracheal cleft repair, with a median time to revision of 8.3 months
(interquartile range, 4.3-25.1 months). Six patients required a second revision, 
with a median interval between revisions of 44.2 months (interquartile range,
28.6-53.6 months). The surgery-specific success rate was 77% (37 of 48) in
patients with additional airway anomalies and 82% (27 of 33) in those with
laryngotracheal clefts alone. The overall surgical success rate was 92% (44 of
48) in patients with additional airway anomalies and 97% (32 of 33) in those with
clefts alone. Fourteen (17%) patients demonstrated swallowing dysfunction
postoperatively despite closure of the cleft.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Although additional airway findings were common in our
cohort of patients with laryngotracheal clefts, these anomalies did not affect
surgery-specific or overall surgical success. The overall surgical success rate
for those with and without additional airway anomalies was 92% and 97%,
respectively. In view of the fact that cleft breakdown after surgical repair is
not uncommon and may occur years after the initial repair, we strongly advocate
long-term follow-up. Despite successful closure, a significant percentage of
children with laryngotracheal cleft will have persistent swallowing dysfunction.

PMID: 26248213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Aug;50(8):1251-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.06.015. Epub 
2015 Jun 25.

Lung maturity in esophageal atresia: Experimental and clinical study.

Fragoso AC(1), Martinez L(2), Estevão-Costa J(3), Tovar JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain;
Department of Congenital Malformations, INGEMM and IdiPaz Research Laboratory,
Madrid, Spain; Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
Electronic address: catarina.fragoso@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain; Department of Congenital
Malformations, INGEMM and IdiPaz Research Laboratory, Madrid, Spain. (3)Faculty
of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) survivors
suffer respiratory morbidity of unclear pathogenesis. Defective lung
morphogenesis has been described in the rat model. This study examined fetal lung
growth and maturity in rats and patients with EA-TEF.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either adriamycin or vehicle. Control and
adriamycin-exposed lungs, with and without EA-TEF, were weighed and processed for
RT-PCR, DNA quantification, immunofluorescence and immunoblot analysis of TTF1,
VEGF, Sp-B, and a-sma. Twenty human lungs were also processed for
immunofluorescence and Alcian-blue staining.
RESULTS: Lungs from fetuses with EA-TEF (E21) showed decreased total DNA; FGF7
and TTF1 mRNA expressions were upregulated at E15 and E18, respectively. Protein 
expression and immunofluorescent distribution of maturity markers were similar.
Lungs from stillborns with EA-TEF showed decreased epithelial expression of Sp-B 
and VEGF whereas those from newborns tended to have less Sp-B and more VEGF and
mucous glands.
DISCUSSION: The lungs of rats with EA-TEF were hypoplastic but achieved
near-normal maturity. Stillborns with EA-TEF exhibited an apparently disturbed
differentiation of the airway epithelium. Newborns with EA-TEF demonstrated
subtle differences in the expression of differentiation markers, and increased
number of mucous glands that could influence postnatal respiratory adaptation and
explain some respiratory symptoms of EA-TEF survivors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26220889  [PubMed - in process]


80. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Nov;50(11):1823-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.07.002. Epub
2015 Jul 3.

The evaluation of deglutition with videofluoroscopy after repair of esophageal
atresia and/or tracheoesophageal fistula.

Yalcin S(1), Demir N(2), Serel S(2), Soyer T(3), Tanyel FC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University,
Ankara, Turkey. (2)Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. (3)Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic
address: soyer.tutku@gmail.com.

AIM: A retrospective study was performed to evaluate the functional disorders of 
deglutition with videofluoroscopy (VFS), in children operated for esophageal
atresia (EA) and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: Patients with the repair of EA-TEF were evaluated in respect to the type
of malformation, operative procedure, postoperative complications, deglutitive
and respiratory symptoms, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). The
dysphagia score, VFS findings of oral, pharyngeal and esophageal phases, and
penetration-aspiration scale (PAS) score were recorded in the evaluation of the
deglutitive functions.
RESULTS: Thirty-two cases with a median age of 48months (2-120months), and male
to female ratio of 14:18 were included in the study. Most of the cases had Gross 
type C anomaly (n=26, 81.3%), and the others were type A (n=3), D (n=2) and E
(n=1). The incidence of associated anomalies was 71.8%. The patients underwent
primary (n=26, 81.3%) or delayed (n=6, 18.7%) anastomosis. Postoperative
complications including anastomotic stricture (n=12), leak (n=2) and recurrent
fistula (n=2) were managed by dilatation, conservative approach and repair of the
fistula, respectively. Recurrent pneumonia (n=13), cough with liquid intake
(n=10) and food impaction (n=7) were recorded in the history. Management of GERD 
included medical (n=11) and surgical (n=7) treatment. The median dysphagia score 
was 3.5 (min: 0-max: 27). The oral phase of VFS was normal in most of the cases
(n=29, 90.6%). Only three had mild or moderate impairment, and none had severe.
The pharyngeal phase showed no impairment in 23 of the cases (71.8%), and severe 
impairment was observed only in 3 of all, for the parameters of hyolaryngeal
elevation and airway closure. Opposite to the first two phases of the
deglutition, the esophageal phase was normal in only 2 of the cases (6.3%). Among
the other 30 cases with impairment, only two had mild, and the rest had moderate 
to severe problems. Esophageal backflow, motility and residue were the most
severely impaired parameters of this phase. The PAS evaluation revealed no
penetration and aspiration in 26 of the cases (81.3%), while 1 had penetration
and five had aspiration.
CONCLUSION: The patients with repaired EA-TEF may reveal deglutitive and
respiratory symptoms in follow-up, necessitating certain investigations. The
deglutition is functionally evaluated with VFS. While the disorders of oral and
pharyngeal phases are less frequent and prominent, the esophageal phase reveals
disorders with higher incidence and severity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210818  [PubMed - in process]


81. Chemosphere. 2015 Oct;137:178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2015.07.031. Epub
2015 Jul 24.

Assessment of dietary intake of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls from the Chinese Total
Diet Study in 2011.

Zhang L(1), Yin S(2), Wang X(3), Li J(4), Zhao Y(1), Li X(1), Shen H(5), Wu Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk Assessment, Ministry of Health (CFSA)
and China National Center for Food Safety Risk Assessment, 7 Panjiayuannanli,
Beijing 100021, China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk Assessment,
Ministry of Health (CFSA) and China National Center for Food Safety Risk
Assessment, 7 Panjiayuannanli, Beijing 100021, China; Wuhan Polytechnic
University, Wuhan 430023, China. (3)The Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk
Assessment, Ministry of Health (CFSA) and China National Center for Food Safety
Risk Assessment, 7 Panjiayuannanli, Beijing 100021, China; State Key Laboratory
of Food Science and Technology, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330047, China.
(4)The Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk Assessment, Ministry of Health (CFSA)
and China National Center for Food Safety Risk Assessment, 7 Panjiayuannanli,
Beijing 100021, China. Electronic address: lijg@cfsa.net.cn. (5)Zhejiang
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Binsheng Road 3399,
Hangzhou 310051, China. (6)The Key Laboratory of Food Safety Risk Assessment,
Ministry of Health (CFSA) and China National Center for Food Safety Risk
Assessment, 7 Panjiayuannanli, Beijing 100021, China. Electronic address:
wuyongning@cfsa.net.cn.

The concentrations of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans
(PCDD/Fs) as well as dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (dl-PCBs) were
measured in food samples from the fifth Chinese Total Diet Study (TDS) performed 
in 2011. A total of 152 composite samples from various food groups were analyzed 
by high resolution gas chromatography-high resolution mass spectrometer
(HRGC-HRMS). The dietary intakes of PCDD/Fs and dl-PCBs were subsequently
estimated for the adult from various regions in China. The mean dietary intake of
PCDD/Fs and dl-PCBs was 20.1 pg TEQ kg(-1) bw month(-1) (WHO-TEF of 1998) within 
a range of 4.2 pg TEQ kg(-1) bw month(-1) to 53.7 pg TEQ kg(-1) bw month(-1)
which were all much lower than the provisional tolerable monthly intake (PTMI)
established by Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA). By
comparing with results from previous Chinese TDS, a decline of the average
dietary intake was observed from 2000 to 2011, but a notable elevation was
observed in some regions partly stem from increasing contamination levels in
certain foods.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2016 Jan;35(1):173-81. doi: 10.1002/etc.3173.

Cross-species comparison of relative potencies and relative sensitivities of
fishes to dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and polychlorinated biphenyls in
vitro.

Eisner BK(1,)(2), Doering JA(2,)(3), Beitel SC(2,)(3), Wiseman S(2), Raine JC(2),
Hecker M(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology Undergraduate Program, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada. (2)Toxicology Centre, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. (3)Toxicology Graduate Program, University of
Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatoon, Canada. (4)School of the Environment and
Sustainability, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Dioxin-like compounds of varying toxicities are found in complex mixtures. The
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach was developed based on the potency of a
dioxin-like compound relative to the potency of
2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) to streamline risk assessment. One
limitation of the TEF approach is uncertainty regarding differences in the
relative potency of dioxin-like compounds among different species. Relative
potencies among fishes are limited, relative to relative potencies among birds
and mammals, and TEFs for fishes are based entirely on the model species, rainbow
trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). An in vitro liver explant assay was used to
characterize species-specific responses with regard to up-regulation of CYP1A
transcript after exposure to 6 dioxin-like compounds in rainbow trout, white
sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus), lake sturgeon (Acipenser fulvescens), and
northern pike (Esox lucius). Differences in sensitivities were observed among
species after exposure to dioxin-like compounds. The relative potencies developed
from liver explants of rainbow trout were comparable to relative potencies
developed from embryo toxicity assays. Differences in relative potencies between 
species with the least and greatest relative potencies were up to 40-fold. To
compare relative potencies among species, concentrations of dioxin-like compounds
in fish eggs in the Fraser River and in Lake Ontario were used to calculate toxic
equivalency quotients (TEQs) determined from TEFs or TCDD equivalents determined 
from relative potencies. The TEQs underestimated TCDD equivalents for white
sturgeon, lake sturgeon, and northern pike, indicating uncertainty in application
of TEFs to diverse fishes. Environ Toxicol Chem 2016;35:173-181. © 2015 SETAC.

© 2015 SETAC.

PMID: 26202062  [PubMed - in process]


83. Kyobu Geka. 2015 Jul;68(8):711-7.

[Congenital Esophageal Atresia].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki M(1), Kuwano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgical Science, Gunma University Graduate School of
Medicine, Maebashi, Japan.

In this report, we describe the esophageal atresia in terms of current surgical
management on the basis of our experience and literatures. Traditionally, infants
with esophageal atresia have presented shortly after birth because of an
inability to pass an orogastric tube, respiratory distress, or an inability to
tolerate feeding. And also, an isolated trachea-esophageal fistula (TEF) usually 
cases coughing, recurrent pneumonia, or choking during feedings. To ignore these 
symptoms is to risk a delayed diagnosis. The condition may be associated with
other major congenital anomalies such as those seen in the vertebral, anal,
cardiac, tracheo-esophageal, renal/radial (VACTER) association, or it may be an
isolated defect. Therapeutic strategies for esophageal atresia are a prevention
of pulmonary complication by TEF closing and an early establishment of enteral
alimentation. We promptly repair healthy infants without performing a gastrostomy
and delay repair in infants with high-risk factors such as associated severe
cardiac anomaly and respiratory insufficiency. Esophageal atresia has been
classically approached through a thoracotomy. The disadvantages of such a
thoracotomy have been recognized for a long time, for example winged scapula,
elevation of fixation of shoulder, asymmetry of the chest wall, rib fusion,
scoliosis, and breast and pectoral muscle maldevelopment. To avoid such
disadvantages, thoracoscopic repair was recently reported.

PMID: 26197921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Ecol. 2015 Sep;24(17):4460-73. doi: 10.1111/mec.13320. Epub 2015 Aug 8.

Diurnal and nocturnal transcriptomic variation in the Caribbean staghorn coral,
Acropora cervicornis.

Hemond EM(1), Vollmer SV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Northeastern University, Marine Science Center, 430 Nahant Rd., Nahant, MA,
01908, USA.

Reef-building corals experience large diel shifts in their environment, both
externally due to changes in light intensity, predator activity and prey
availability, and internally as a result of diel fluctuations in photosynthesis
by their endosymbiotic algae, Symbiodinium. Diel patterns of tentacle behaviour, 
skeletal growth and gene expression indicate reactions of the coral animal in
response to light and through circadian regulation. Some corals, such as the
Caribbean Acroporas, have strong within-colony division of labour, including
specialized fast-growing apical polyps, accompanied by large gene expression
differences. Here we use RNA-seq to evaluate how diel changes in gene expression 
vary within the branching Caribbean staghorn coral, Acropora cervicornis, between
branch tips and branch bases. Multifactor generalized linear model analysis
indicated that 6% (3005) of transcripts were differentially expressed between
branch tips and bases, while 1% (441) of transcripts were differentially
expressed between day and night. The gene expression patterns of 220 transcripts 
were affected by both time of day and location within the colony. In particular, 
photoreceptors, putative circadian genes, stress response genes and metabolic
genes were differentially expressed between day and night, and some of these,
including Amcry1, tef and hebp2, exhibited location-specific regulation within
the coral colony as well. These findings indicate that the genetic response of
the coral to day and night conditions varies within the colony. Both time of day 
and location within the colony are factors that should be considered in future
coral gene expression experiments.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26184385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Environ Sci Technol. 2015 Aug 4;49(15):9273-9. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.5b01094. Epub
2015 Jul 15.

Biofuel-Promoted Polychlorinated Dibenzodioxin/furan Formation in an
Iron-Catalyzed Diesel Particle Filter.

Heeb NV, Rey MD(1), Zennegg M, Haag R, Wichser A, Schmid P, Seiler C, Honegger P,
Zeyer K, Mohn J, Bürki S(2), Zimmerli Y(2), Czerwinski J(2), Mayer A(3).

Author information: 
(1)§Chemical Engineering Department, University of Alicante, 03080 Alicante,
Spain. (2)<U+2225>Laboratory for Exhaust Emission Control, University of Applied
Sciences Biel (UASB), Gwerdtstrasse 5, CH-2560 Nidau, Switzerland. (3)<U+22A5>Technik
Thermischer Maschinen (TTM), Fohrhölzlistrasse 14b, CH-5443 Niederrohrdorf,
Switzerland.

Iron-catalyzed diesel particle filters (DPFs) are widely used for particle
abatement. Active catalyst particles, so-called fuel-borne catalysts (FBCs), are 
formed in situ, in the engine, when combusting precursors, which were premixed
with the fuel. The obtained iron oxide particles catalyze soot oxidation in
filters. Iron-catalyzed DPFs are considered as safe with respect to their
potential to form polychlorinated dibenzodioxins/furans (PCDD/Fs). We reported
that a bimetallic potassium/iron FBC supported an intense PCDD/F formation in a
DPF. Here, we discuss the impact of fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) biofuel on
PCDD/F emissions. The iron-catalyzed DPF indeed supported a PCDD/F formation with
biofuel but remained inactive with petroleum-derived diesel fuel. PCDD/F
emissions (I-TEQ) increased 23-fold when comparing biofuel and diesel data.
Emissions of 2,3,7,8-TCDD, the most toxic congener [toxicity equivalence factor
(TEF) = 1.0], increased 90-fold, and those of 2,3,7,8-TCDF (TEF = 0.1) increased 
170-fold. Congener patterns also changed, indicating a preferential formation of 
tetra- and penta-chlorodibenzofurans. Thus, an inactive iron-catalyzed DPF
becomes active, supporting a PCDD/F formation, when operated with biofuel
containing impurities of potassium. Alkali metals are inherent constituents of
biofuels. According to the current European Union (EU) legislation, levels of 5
µg/g are accepted. We conclude that risks for a secondary PCDD/F formation in
iron-catalyzed DPFs increase when combusting potassium-containing biofuels.

PMID: 26176879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 7;5:11932. doi: 10.1038/srep11932.

Trace element fingerprinting of cockle (Cerastoderma edule) shells can reveal
harvesting location in adjacent areas.

Ricardo F(1), Génio L(1), Costa Leal M(1), Albuquerque R(1), Queiroga H(1), Rosa 
R(2), Calado R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia &CESAM, Universidade de Aveiro, Campus Universitário 
de Santiago, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal. (2)MARE - Marine and Environmental
Sciences Centre, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de Lisboa, Campo Grande,
1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal.

Determining seafood geographic origin is critical for controlling its quality and
safeguarding the interest of consumers. Here, we use trace element fingerprinting
(TEF) of bivalve shells to discriminate the geographic origin of specimens.
Barium (Ba), manganese (Mn), magnesium (Mg), strontium (Sr) and lead (Pb) were
quantified in cockle shells (Cerastoderma edule) captured with two fishing
methods (by hand and by hand-raking) and from five adjacent fishing locations
within an estuarine system (Ria de Aveiro, Portugal). Results suggest no
differences in TEF of cockle shells captured by hand or by hand-raking, thus
confirming that metal rakes do not act as a potential source of metal
contamination that could somehow bias TEF results. In contrast, significant
differences were recorded among locations for all trace elements analysed. A
Canonical Analysis of Principal Coordinates (CAP) revealed that 92% of the
samples could be successfully classified according to their fishing location
using TEF. We show that TEF can be an accurate, fast and reliable method to
determine the geographic origin of bivalves, even among locations separated less 
than 1 km apart within the same estuarine system. Nonetheless, follow up studies 
are needed to determine if TEF can reliably discriminate between bivalves
originating from different ecosystems.

PMID: 26149418  [PubMed - in process]


87. J Food Sci Technol. 2015 Jul;52(7):4572-8. doi: 10.1007/s13197-014-1467-7. Epub
2014 Aug 10.

Effect of shaddock albedo addition on the properties of frankfurters.

Shan B(1), Li X(2), Pan T(1), Zheng L(3), Zhang H(1), Guo H(1), Jiang L(1), Zhen 
S(4), Ren F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Higher Institution Engineering Research Center of Animal Product,
Beijing, 100083 China ; Beijing Key Laboratory of Nutrition, Health & Food
Safety, Beijing, 100083 China. (2)Beijing Higher Institution Engineering Research
Center of Animal Product, Beijing, 100083 China. (3)College of Information and
Electricity Engineering, China Agricultural University, Beijing, 100083 China.
(4)China Institute of Industrial Relations, Beijing, 100048 China. (5)Beijing
Higher Institution Engineering Research Center of Animal Product, Beijing, 100083
China ; Beijing Key Laboratory of Nutrition, Health & Food Safety, Beijing,
100083 China ; College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China
Agricultural University, P.O. Box 287, No. 17 Qinghua East Road, Haidian,
Beijing, 100083 China.

To explore the potential as a natural auxiliary emulsifier, shaddock albedo was
added into frankfurters at six different levels: 0.0, 2.5, 5.0, 7.5, 10 and
12.5 %. The emulsion capacity (EC) of meat batters and cooking properties of
frankfurters were evaluated. EC of meat batters was improved with the addition of
shaddock albedo and the maximum value was reached at the 5 % albedo
concentration. The addition of shaddock albedo resulted in lower cooking losses
of frankfurters, with the lowest value obtained at the 7.5 % level. The presence 
of shaddock albedo decreased the total expressible fluid (TEF) and the proportion
of fat in total expressible fluid (PF) which indicated the emulsion stability of 
frankfurters and the lowest values both occurred at the concentration of 7.5 %.
Shaddock albedo inclusion increased the lightness and yellowness of frankfurters 
and decreased redness. Texture profile analysis showed increased hardness and
decreased chewiness of frankfurters with the addition of shaddock albedo.
Consequently, shaddock albedo could be a potential source of auxiliary emulsifier
filler for emulsion-type meat products.

PMCID: PMC4486546 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26139927  [PubMed]


88. Surg Endosc. 2016 Apr;30(4):1662-6. doi: 10.1007/s00464-015-4352-1. Epub 2015 Jul
3.

Chemocauterization with trichloroacetic acid in congenital and recurrent
tracheoesophageal fistula: a minimally invasive treatment.

Lelonge Y(1), Varlet F(2), Varela P(3), Saitúa F(3), Fourcade L(4), Gutierrez
R(2), Vermesch S(2), Prades JM(1), Lopez M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University Hospital
Calvo Mackenna, Santiago, Chile. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, 
University Hospital of Saint Etienne, 42055, Saint-Etienne Cedex 2, France.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Calvo Mackenna, Santiago,
Chile. (4)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, University Hospital of
Limoges, Limoges, France. (5)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology,
University Hospital of Saint Etienne, 42055, Saint-Etienne Cedex 2, France.
manuel.lopez@chu-st-etienne.fr.

OBJECTIVE: Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (RTEF) is a serious complication
after primary repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA/TEF). Treatment of RTEF involved an open surgery by thoracotomy. Technically 
it is a challenge with a high morbidity and mortality. Congenital
tracheoesophageal fistula (CTEF) traditionally involved an open surgery by
thoracotomy or cervicotomy. Many endoscopic techniques have been developed since 
the past decades: thoracoscopic or bronchoscopic approach for the treatment of
RTEF and CTEF; nevertheless, optimal treatment is not still determined because of
few numbers of patients, short-term follow-up, and different procedures. We
report our experience and evaluated the efficacy in the chemocauterization of
CTEF and RTEF, with the use of 50 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) as a technique
minimally invasive.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 2010 to 2014, fourteen patients with TEF (twelve RTEF
and two CTEF) were selected for endoscopic management in two centers. Twelve
patients had RTEF after primary repair of EA/TEF by thoracotomy approach, and two
patients had CTEF in the upper pouch, diagnosed after EA/TEF (Type B) long gap,
treated by thoracotomy and thoracoscopy, respectively. In all cases the diagnosis
was confirmed by esophagram, bronchoscopy, and clinical evaluation. Under general
anesthesia, a rigid pediatric bronchoscope with a 0° rod lens telescope and
tele-monitoring was used to localize the TEF. Cotton soaked with 50 % TCA was
applied on the TEF during 30 s, and the procedure was repeated 3 times. The
endoscopic treatment was performed monthly until TEF closure was achieved.
RESULTS: RTEF and CTEF were closed in all patients. The mean number of procedure 
in each patient was 1.8. Closure of TEF was confirmed by esophagram,
bronchoscopy, and clinical evaluation. There were a bacterial pneumonia and
bronchospasm as postoperative complications. Median follow-up was 41 months
(8-72). All of these TEF remain completely obliterated, and all patients are
asymptomatic.
CONCLUSION: Endoscopic management of congenital and recurrent TEF with the use of
50 % TCA is as a minimally invasive, effective, simple and safe technique in
these patients and avoids the morbidity of open surgery.

PMID: 26139499  [PubMed - in process]


89. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Oct;50(10):1686-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.05.006.
Epub 2015 May 28.

Long-term burden of care and radiation exposure in survivors of esophageal
atresia.

Zamiara P(1), Thomas KE(2), Connolly BL(3), Lane H(4), Marcon MA(5), Chiu PP(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, The Hospital for Sick
Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8. Electronic
address: pzamiara2016@meds.uwo.ca. (2)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G
1X8. Electronic address: karen.thomas@sickkids.ca. (3)Department of Diagnostic
Imaging, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 1X8. Electronic address: bairbre.connolly@sickkids.ca. (4)Division of 
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555
University Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8. Electronic address:
lanehillary@gmail.com. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition,
The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G
1X8. Electronic address: peggy.marcon@sickkids.ca. (6)Division of Pediatric
General and Thoracic Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University
Ave., Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8. Electronic address:
priscilla.chiu@sickkids.ca.

BACKGROUND: Patients with esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA/TEF) historically have had a high risk of neonatal mortality but the 
majority of patients are now expected to live into adulthood. However, the
long-term burden of care among recent EA/TEF survivors has not been documented.
METHODS: A single-institution retrospective review of newborns with EA/TEF
treated from 2001-2005 was conducted, including initial and total hospitalization
length of stay, and number of clinic visits and procedures requiring general
anesthesia in the first three years of life. Exposure to and number of
radiological studies involving ionizing radiation (IR) were recorded.
RESULTS: Seventy-one of 78 (91%) patients survived to discharge and 69 were
included for analysis. Mean length of initial hospital stay was 51.3 (range
9-390) days. By age 3 years, patients required 4.5 (mean, range 1-23) procedures 
performed under general anesthesia, attended 13.5 (mean, range 3-40) outpatient
visits and were exposed to 17.4 mSv (mean, range 3.0-59.9) of IR from 40 (mean,
range 5-165) radiological studies.
CONCLUSION: Patients with EA/TEF need complex and frequent hospital-based care
from infancy to early childhood. Opportunities to critically review clinical
services and imaging needs should be explored to improve the experience of
patients and their families.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26091971  [PubMed - in process]


90. Surg Radiol Anat. 2015 Dec;37(10):1251-6. doi: 10.1007/s00276-015-1504-x. Epub
2015 Jun 16.

Communicating bronchopulmonary foregut malformation type IA: radiologic anatomy
and clinical dilemmas.

He QM(1,)(2), Xiao SJ(3), Zhu XC(3), Xiao WQ(2), Wang Z(2), Zhong W(4), Xia
HM(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Southern Medical University, No. 9 Jinsui Road, Tianhe District, Guangzhou
City, Guangdong Province, 510623, People's Republic of China. (2)Guangzhou Women 
and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. 
(4)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China. drzhongwei@foxmail.com. (5)Southern Medical University, No. 9 Jinsui Road,
Tianhe District, Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, 510623, People's Republic of
China. xia-huimin@foxmail.com. (6)Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, 
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. xia-huimin@foxmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Communicating bronchopulmonary foregut malformation (CBPFM) type IA
is extremely rare and is associated with a high mortality rate. This malformation
manifests with communication between the lung and the foregut, and this can lead 
to esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) to the distal pouch.
PURPOSE: To detail radiographic findings of CBPFM type IA cases and to summarize 
an appropriate therapeutic strategy for the management of this disorder.
METHODS: Medical data for two patients with CBPFM type IA were retrospectively
reviewed with regard to radiographic characteristics, therapy, and outcome.
RESULTS: Both cases were initially misdiagnosed due to the presence of EA-TEF.
Unusual atelectasis of the lateral lung was observed in chest radiographs, while 
non-aerated hypoplastic right lung and agenesis of the right main bronchus were
detected by computed tomography. A final diagnosis was made by esophagogram. Only
one patient survived following surgery.
CONCLUSION: CBPFM type IA is a rare condition and is extremely difficult to
diagnose. However, CBPFM type IA should be suspected in patients manifesting EA
and atelectasis of a unilateral lung on a chest radiograph. The decision to
perform a pneumonectomy or bronchoplasty depends on the degree of exiting
permitted due to pulmonary damage assessed by computed tomography.

PMID: 26077024  [PubMed - in process]


91. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015 Jun;67(2):196-9. doi:
10.1007/s12070-015-0842-7. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Endoscopic Occlusion of Tracheoesophageal Fistula in Ventilated Patients Using an
Amplatzer Septal Occluder.

Cohen-Atsmoni S(1), Tamir A(2), Avni Y(3), Priel IE(4), Roth Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, The Edith Wolfson Medical
Center, Tel-Aviv University Sackler School of Medicine, P.O. Box 5, 58100 Holon, 
Israel. (2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, The Edith Wolfson Medical Center, 
Tel-Aviv University Sackler School of Medicine, Holon, Israel. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, The Edith Wolfson Medical Center, Tel-Aviv University Sackler
School of Medicine, Holon, Israel. (4)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, The Edith
Wolfson Medical Center, Tel-Aviv University Sackler School of Medicine, Holon,
Israel.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a challenging, life threatening
condition. It most commonly appears in critically ill patients requiring
prolonged mechanical ventilation, who cannot withstand open neck or chest
surgery. An endoscopic technique could be better tolerated by these patients. We 
present our experience using a cardiac Amplatzer ASD septal occluder for an
endoscopic TEF repair in ventilation-dependent patients. Two high risk patients
underwent the procedure under general anesthesia and close respiratory
monitoring. In one patient the device was inserted through the trachea and in the
other through the esophagus. In both cases fistula closure was achieved for
different periods of time allowing the patients a temporary relief of symptoms.
The procedure was well tolerated by the patients, and no significant adverse
effect documented. The technique was successful as a temporary solution for
unstable patients with TEFs and should be considered as a treatment modality for 
similar patients.

PMCID: PMC4460100 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26075179  [PubMed]


92. Fungal Biol. 2015 Jul;119(7):615-30. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2015.03.007. Epub 2015
Apr 9.

Cornuvesica: A little known mycophilic genus with a unique biology and unexpected
new species.

Marincowitz S(1), Duong TA(2), Wilhelm de Beer Z(3), Wingfield MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI), University of
Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, Republic of South Africa.
Electronic address: seonju.marincowitz@fabi.up.ac.za. (2)Forestry and
Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI), University of Pretoria, Private Bag 
X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, Republic of South Africa; Department of Genetics,
University of Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, Republic of
South Africa. (3)Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI),
University of Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, Republic of
South Africa; Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, University of
Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, Republic of South Africa.
(4)Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI), University of
Pretoria, Private Bag X20, Hatfield, Pretoria 0028, Republic of South Africa.

Little is known about the biology of the monotypic genus Cornuvesica
(Microascales), apart from that isolates are notoriously difficult to culture on 
artificial media. A recent collection of material resembling this genus from
freshly made wounds on Gmelina arborea in Indonesia, provided an opportunity to
reconsider all available material of Cornuvesica falcata, type species of the
genus. In addition to morphological comparisons, multigene phylogenetic analyses 
were made using sequences of the SSU, ITS, LSU and TEF-1a genes. Our results
showed that the holotype of Cor. falcata from pine in Canada differed from all
other material previously considered to represent this species and also from the 
new Indonesian collections. The collections considered represented three
additional species that we describe here as new. Three New Zealand isolates and
an isolate from UK were respectively described as Cor. acuminata and Cor. crypta,
while the Indonesian isolates were described as Cor. magnispora. Phylogenies
based on the SSU and LSU data sets showed that Cornuvesica spp. do not belong in 
the Ceratocystidaceae as previously suggested, but represent a distinct lineage
in the Microascales that has yet to be named. Results showed that culture
filtrates from other fungi or ferric chloride markedly stimulated the growth of
Cor. magnispora.

Copyright © 2015 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 26058537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2015 Oct;22(20):15931-40. doi:
10.1007/s11356-015-4777-z. Epub 2015 Jun 7.

Carcinogenic activity of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons bounded on particle
fraction.

Jakovljevic I(1), Pehnec G(2), Vadjic V(2), iovic A(2), Davila S(2), Belic
I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health, Ksaverska c. 2, 10000,
Zagreb, Croatia. ijakovljevic@imi.hr. (2)Institute for Medical Research and
Occupational Health, Ksaverska c. 2, 10000, Zagreb, Croatia.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) originate from a variety of natural and
industrial processes. In this paper, concentrations of nine PAHs in PM10 particle
fraction were measured concurrently at four different sites (rural, urban
residential, urban traffic, and residential-industrial) in continental Croatia.
Measurements at all of the four sites showed much higher average concentrations
for all of the PAHs in the winter period. The highest winter average values were 
measured at the industrial site and the lowest at the rural and the urban
residential site. In the summer, the highest average values were also measured in
the industrial area, except for benzo(ghi)perylene and indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene,
which showed the highest average values in the rural area. Factor analysis has
been applied to PAH concentrations to identify their potential sources. Extracted
factors have been interpreted on basis of previous studies and weather
conditions. The diagnostic ratios calculated in this study indicated mixed
sources at all of the sites. The contribution of gasoline and diesel from traffic
was significant at all of the sites except for the urban industrial. In the
winter, potential PAH sources also arose from wood combustion. The industrial
site differed from the other sites with the highest influence of diesel sources
and refinery during the summer months. The contribution of BaP in total
carcinogenic activity exceeded 50 % in both seasons at all of the measured sites,
which suggests that BaP could be suitable as a marker of the carcinogenic
potential of a PAH mixture.

PMID: 26050151  [PubMed - in process]


94. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2015 Dec;38(6):1635-9. doi:
10.1007/s00270-015-1147-7. Epub 2015 Jun 6.

Closure of Nonmalignant Tracheoesophageal Fistula Using an Atrial Septal Defect
Occluder: Case Report and Review of the Literature.

Jiang P(1), Liu J(2), Yu D(3), Jie B(4), Jiang S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China. jiangpyn67@126.com. (2)Department of
Anesthesiology, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China. qingshou0822@126.com. (3)Department of Radiology,
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 507 Zhengmin
Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. yudong_mail@126.com. (4)Department of Radiology,
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 507 Zhengmin
Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. jbshh@163.com. (5)Department of Radiology,
Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 507 Zhengmin
Road, Shanghai, 200433, China. jasfly77@vip.163.com.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a life-threatening condition for which there
are several management techniques. We present a case of nonmalignant TEF closure 
using an atrial septal defect (ASD) occluder. A 53-year-old man with a severe TEF
was admitted to our hospital for TEF caused by stenting of an esophagogastric
anastomotic stricture. He was successfully treated with closure of the TEF using 
an endotracheal ASD occluder. Three hundred and eighteen days after placement of 
the occluder, he suddenly developed a severe cough after dilatation of the
esophagogastric anastomosis and spontaneously coughed out the occluder. The
fistula was repaired and complete closure that was confirmed on esophagography.
He had no recurrence of fistula during the follow-up period of 13 months.

PMID: 26048016  [PubMed - in process]


95. Mol Metab. 2015 Mar 10;4(6):461-70. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2015.03.001.
eCollection 2015.

Integration of body temperature into the analysis of energy expenditure in the
mouse.

Abreu-Vieira G(1), Xiao C(2), Gavrilova O(3), Reitman ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA ; Department of
Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University, 106 91
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. (3)Mouse Metabolism Core, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

OBJECTIVES: We quantified the effect of environmental temperature on mouse energy
homeostasis and body temperature.
METHODS: The effect of environmental temperature (4-33 °C) on body temperature,
energy expenditure, physical activity, and food intake in various mice (chow
diet, high-fat diet, Brs3 (-/y) , lipodystrophic) was measured using continuous
monitoring.
RESULTS: Body temperature depended most on circadian phase and physical activity,
but also on environmental temperature. The amounts of energy expenditure due to
basal metabolic rate (calculated via a novel method), thermic effect of food,
physical activity, and cold-induced thermogenesis were determined as a function
of environmental temperature. The measured resting defended body temperature
matched that calculated from the energy expenditure using Fourier's law of heat
conduction. Mice defended a higher body temperature during physical activity. The
cost of the warmer body temperature during the active phase is 4-16% of total
daily energy expenditure. Parameters measured in diet-induced obese and Brs3
(-/y) mice were similar to controls. The high post-mortem heat conductance
demonstrates that most insulation in mice is via physiological mechanisms.
CONCLUSIONS: At 22 °C, cold-induced thermogenesis is ~120% of basal metabolic
rate. The higher body temperature during physical activity is due to a higher set
point, not simply increased heat generation during exercise. Most insulation in
mice is via physiological mechanisms, with little from fur or fat. Our analysis
suggests that the definition of the upper limit of the thermoneutral zone should 
be re-considered. Measuring body temperature informs interpretation of energy
expenditure data and improves the predictiveness and utility of the mouse to
model human energy homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4443293
PMID: 26042200  [PubMed]


96. J Neonatal Surg. 2014 Jul 10;3(3):30.

Hypertrophic pyloric stenosis following repair of esophageal atresia and
tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Seguier-Lipszyc E(1), Klin B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery Department, Assaf Harofeh Medical Center, Zerifin 70300,
Israel.

Two cases of hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (HPS) developed after a few weeks of
repair of an esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA and TEF). Both
cases were dealt successfully with laparoscopic pyloromyotomy.

PMCID: PMC4420448
PMID: 26023501  [PubMed]


97. J Med Microbiol. 2015 Jul;64(7):694-701. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.000091. Epub 2015 May
22.

Differentiation of clinically relevant Mucorales Rhizopus microsporus and R.
arrhizus by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS).

Dolatabadi S(1), Kolecka A(2), Versteeg M(2), de Hoog SG(3), Boekhout T(4).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B> CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands 2<U+200B> Institute 
for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (2)1<U+200B> CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)1<U+200B> CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands 6<U+200B> Basic
Pathology Department, Federal University of Paraná State, Curitiba, Paraná,
Brazil 4<U+200B> Sun Yat-sen Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, PR China 7<U+200B>
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 5<U+200B> Changzheng Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, PR China 3<U+200B> Peking University Health
Science Center, Research Center for Medical Mycology, Beijing, PR China 2<U+200B>
Institute for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (4)1<U+200B> CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht,
The Netherlands 5<U+200B> Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, PR China.

This study addresses the usefulness of matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) MS for reliable identification of the two
most frequently occurring clinical species of Rhizopus, namely Rhizopus arrhizus 
with its two varieties, arrhizus and delemar, and Rhizopus microsporus. The
test-set comprised 38 isolates of clinical and environmental origin previously
identified by internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequencing of rDNA. Multi-locus
sequence data targeting three gene markers (ITS, ACT, TEF<U+200A>) showed two monophylic
clades for Rhizopus arrhizus and Rhizopus microsporus (bootstrap values of 99<U+200A>%).
Cluster analysis confirmed the presence of two distinct clades within Rhizopus
arrhizus representing its varieties arrhizus and delemar. The MALDI Biotyper 3.0 
Microflex LT platform (Bruker Daltonics) was used to confirm the distinction
between Rhizopus arrhizus and Rhizopus microsporus and the presence of two
varieties within the species Rhizopus arrhizus. An in-house database of 30
reference main spectra (MSPs) was initially tested for correctness using
commercially available databases of Bruker Daltonics. By challenging the database
with the same strains of which an in-house database was created, automatic
identification runs confirmed that MALDI-TOF MS is able to recognize the strains 
at the variety level. Based on principal component analysis, two MSP dendrograms 
were created and showed concordance with the multi-locus tree; thus, MALDI-TOF MS
is a useful tool for diagnostics of mucoralean species.

PMID: 26002944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Hepatology. 2015 Sep;62(3):915-31. doi: 10.1002/hep.27909. Epub 2015 Jul 30.

Rejection triggers liver transplant tolerance: Involvement of mesenchyme-mediated
immune control mechanisms in mice.

Morita M(1), Joyce D(2), Miller C(2), Fung JJ(2), Lu L(1,)(2), Qian S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Lerner Research InstituteCleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH. (2)Department of General Surgery, Transplant Center, Digestive
Disease Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.

Liver tolerance was initially recognized by the spontaneous acceptance of liver
allografts in many species. The underlying mechanisms are not completely
understood. However, liver transplant (LT) tolerance absolutely requires
interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, a rejection-associated inflammatory cytokine. In this study, 
we investigated the rejection of liver allografts deficient in the IFN-<U+03B3> receptor
and reveal that the liver graft is equipped with machineries capable of
counterattacking the host immune response through a mesenchyme-mediated immune
control (MMIC) mechanism. MMIC is triggered by T effector (Tef) cell-derived
IFN-<U+03B3> that drives expression of B7-H1 on graft mesenchymal cells leading to Tef
cell apoptosis. We describe the negative feedback loop between graft mesenchymal 
and Tef cells that ultimately results in LT tolerance. Comparable elevations of
T-regulatory cells and myeloid-derived suppressor cells were observed in both
rejection and tolerance groups and were not dependent on IFN-<U+03B3> stimulation,
suggesting a critical role of Tef cell elimination in tolerance induction. We
identify potent MMIC activity in hepatic stellate cells and liver sinusoidal
endothelial cells. MMIC is unlikely exclusive to the liver, given that
spontaneous acceptance of kidney allografts has been reported, although less
commonly, probably reflecting variance in MMIC activity.CONCLUSION: MMIC may
represent an important homeostatic mechanism that supports peripheral tolerance
and could be a target for the prevention and treatment of transplant rejection.
This study highlights that the graft is an active participant in the equipoise
between tolerance and rejection and warrants more attention in the search for
tolerance biomarkers.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4549241 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25998530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2015 Oct;22(19):14919-31. doi:
10.1007/s11356-015-4616-2. Epub 2015 May 22.

Effects of urbanization on gaseous and particulate polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons and polychlorinated biphenyls in a coastal city, China: levels,
sources, and health risks.

Hong Y(1,)(2,)(3), Chen J(4,)(5), Zhang F(6), Zhang H(7,)(8), Xu L(1,)(2), Yin
L(1,)(2), Chen Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, 361021, People's Republic of
China. (2)Ningbo Urban Environment Observation and Research Station-NUEORS,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315800, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Environmental Sciences, University of California, Riverside, CA,
92521, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban
Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, 361021, People's Republic of
China. jschen@iue.ac.cn. (5)Ningbo Urban Environment Observation and Research
Station-NUEORS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315800, People's Republic of
China. jschen@iue.ac.cn. (6)Environmental Monitoring Center of Fujian, Fuzhou,
350003, China. (7)Key Laboratory of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of
Urban Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, 361021, People's Republic
of China. hzhang@iue.ac.cn. (8)Ningbo Urban Environment Observation and Research 
Station-NUEORS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, 315800, People's Republic of
China. hzhang@iue.ac.cn.

Gas/particle distributions of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) were measured in Xiamen from May 2009 to March
2010 to evaluate the impacts of urbanization on the fate of persistent organic
pollutants (POPs) in the atmospheric environment. In a newly developing area
(NDA), the concentrations of 16 PAHs (gas + particle) were significantly higher
than that a historically urbanized area (HUA) (p value <0.05), while the trend of
28 PCBs was reversed. Diagnostic ratios and principle component analysis (PCA)
implied that atmospheric PAHs in the NDA were mainly derived from petrogenic
combustion, including mixed sources of vehicle emissions, biomass burning and oil
combustion, while pyrogenic combustion (e.g., traffic and coal combustion) was
considered the major source of PAHs in the HUA. Atmospheric PCBs in both HUA and 
NDA were dominated by TriCBs and PeCBs related to the use of commercial mixtures 
(Aroclors 1242 and 1254). Based on the toxicological equivalent factor (TEF)
approach, total benzo[a]pyrene equivalent values in the HUA and NDA were 1.12 and
2.02 ng m(-3), respectively, exceeding the standard threshold values (1.0 ng
m(-3)) of China and WHO. Average daily intake of dioxin-like compounds was 0.2 pg
kg(-1) day(-1) in the HUA, which are below the WHO tolerable daily intake level. 
The results showed that the contribution to the toxic equivalency (TEQ) was
dominated by PCB169, PCB105, and PCB81.

PMID: 25994262  [PubMed - in process]


100. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2015 Jul;105(1):28-36. doi: 10.5935/abc.20150045. Epub 2015 May
8.

Left Atrial Function in Patients with Chronic Chagasic Cardiomyopathy.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Fragata Cda S(1), Matsumoto AY(2), Ramires FJ(2), Fernandes F(2), Buck Pde C(2), 
Salemi VM(2), Nastari L(2), Mady C(2), Ianni BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Seção Médica de Eletrofisiologia, Instituto Dante Pazzanese de Cardiologia,
São Paulo, BR. (2)Instituto do Coração, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
São Paulo, São Paulo, BR.

BACKGROUND: Chagas disease is a cause of dilated cardiomyopathy, and information 
about left atrial (LA) function in this disease still lacks.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the different LA functions (reservoir, conduit and pump
functions) and their correlation with the echocardiographic parameters of left
ventricular (LV) systolic and diastolic functions.
METHODS: 10 control subjects (CG), and patients with Chagas disease as follows:
26 with the indeterminate form (GI); 30 with ECG alterations (GII); and 19 with
LV dysfunction (GIII). All patients underwent M-mode and two-dimensional
echocardiography, pulsed-wave Doppler and tissue Doppler imaging.
RESULTS: Reservoir function (Total Emptying Fraction: TEF): (p <0.0001), lower in
GIII as compared to CG (p = 0.003), GI (p <0.001) and GII (p <0.001). Conduit
function (Passive Emptying Fraction: PEF): (p = 0.004), lower in GIII (GIII and
CG, p = 0.06; GI and GII, p = 0.06; and GII and GIII, p = 0.07). Pump function
(Active Emptying Fraction: AEF): (p = 0.0001), lower in GIII as compared to CG (p
= 0.05), GI (p<0.0001) and GII (p = 0.002). There was a negative correlation of
E/e' (average) with the reservoir and pump functions (TEF and AEF), and a
positive correlation of e' (average) with s' wave (both septal and lateral walls)
and the reservoir, conduit and pump LA functions.
CONCLUSION: An impairment of LA functions in Chagas cardiomyopathy was observed.

PMCID: PMC4523285
PMID: 25993486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Dec;28(23):1877-9.

[The clinic experience and literature review with 1 case of chronic
tracheoesophageal fistula].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng Q, Wei J, Liu B, Zhong Y.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical features of chronic tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF), provided disease-related treatment experience and lessons for
clinicians.
METHOD: To successfully repair one case of chronic tracheoesophageal fistula with
surgery, and to analyze the clinical treatment process, combined with relevant
literature, the author reported the experiene of diagnosis and treatment in TEF.
RESULT: After the gastrointestinal ostomy and Stent implantation, the fistula
persisted, nine months later ,we took the surgery to repair the fistule, ten days
postoperation, the fistule healed and esophageal iodine water examination didn't 
prompt obvious abnormalities, the patient was discharged without any
postoperative complications 12 days postoperation.
CONCLUSION: If conservative treatment failed with TEF, the surgical repair should
be carried timely, By double sutured with fistula in surgery, and reinforced with
the approaching muscle tissue, It can achieve good results.

PMID: 25980162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Indian J Surg. 2015 Apr;77(Suppl 1):52-5. doi: 10.1007/s12262-014-1122-6. Epub
2014 Jun 18.

Foregut duplication cyst associated with esophageal atresia-one-stage neonatal
surgical repair.

Spataru RI(1), Popoiu MC(2), Ivanov M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, "Maria Sklodowska Curie" Children's Hospital,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol Davila", Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, "Louis Turcanu" Children's Hospital,
University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Victor Babes", Timisoara, Romania.

Foregut duplication cysts can occur anywhere along the foregut-derived
structures. Its association with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) is exceptionally rare, the majority of cases being diagnosed at an 
older age due to symptoms or complications. We present the third reported case in
the literature, when diagnosis and treatment were done at the time of repair for 
EA-TEF.

PMCID: PMC4425784
PMID: 25972643  [PubMed]


103. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2015 Oct;124(10):808-13. doi: 10.1177/0003489415586844.
Epub 2015 May 12.

Upper Airway Anomalies in Congenital Tracheoesophageal Fistula and Esophageal
Atresia Patients.

Hseu A(1), Recko T(1), Jennings R(2), Nuss R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology 
and Communication Enhancement, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA Roger.nuss@childrens.harvard.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the prevalence of upper airway anomalies in patients
diagnosed with congenital tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia
(TEF/EA).
METHODS: A retrospective review was conducted of all TEF/EA patients seen at a
tertiary pediatric hospital between January 2008 and December 2013. Inclusion
criteria included evaluation by the otolaryngology service. Exclusion criteria
included age>18 years, acquired TEF/EA, subsequent rule out of TEF/EA, and
otolaryngology evaluation for reasons not pertaining to the airway. Data
collected and analyzed included demographics, comorbidities, presenting symptoms,
surgical interventions, laryngoscopic and bronchoscopic examinations, and
subsequent medical and surgical management.
RESULTS: Four hundred and thirty patients were diagnosed with TEF/EA at our
institution. In all, 32.3%, or 139 children, were included in the analysis; 56.1%
(n=78) male, 43.9% (n=61) female. Of the analyzed patients, 4.3% (n=6) were
diagnosed with laryngomalacia. Eighteen patients (12.9%) were diagnosed with
subglottic stenosis. Thirty (21.6%) had vocal fold paresis or immobility.
Laryngeal cleft was diagnosed in 25.9% (n=36). Tracheomalacia was the most common
airway finding, diagnosed in 37.4% (n=52) patients.
CONCLUSION: Patients diagnosed with congenital TEF/EA have a high rate of
secondary upper airway anomalies. Consideration should be given to perform a
complete airway evaluation in all of these patients.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25969571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Aug;50(8):1418-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.04.015. Epub
2015 Apr 28.

Single-staged surgical approach in congenital diaphragmatic hernia associated
with esophageal atresia.

Zahn KB(1), Scherf S(2), Schaible T(2), Wessel LM(1), Hagl CI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Mannheim, Medical Faculty of
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
University of Mannheim, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3,
68167 Mannheim. (3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Mannheim,
Medical Faculty of Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim.
Electronic address: cornelia.hagl@medma.uni-heidelberg.de.

BACKGROUND: The coexistence of congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) with
esophageal atresia (EA) has only been reported occasionally in literature. Series
of patients from a single institution with comparison of different postnatal
therapeutic approaches have not been reported. We describe our management in this
unique cohort of patients and discuss the procedures that can lead to successful 
outcomes in this association of congenital anomalies.
METHODS: The surgical approaches and outcome of six neonates with CDH associated 
with EA and distal tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) are discussed.
RESULTS: Five newborns were treated surgically, while one patient with trisomy 18
only received palliative treatment. In four patients TEF was ligated during
laparotomy for CDH repair. Secondary surgery was performed for correction of EA
via thoracotomy after 4-6 weeks (primary anastomosis in two patients,
Foker's-technique in one patient, one patient deceased prior to secondary
surgery). All three surviving patients required fundoplication due to severe
gastro-esophageal reflux during the first year of life. Two patients also
required dilatation for anastomotic stricture. In one preterm infant correction
of both malformations was accomplished during one surgical intervention. The
herniated organs were eventrated and temporarily placed into a silastic bag to
allow a mediastinal shift to the left. Thus a continuous ventilation of the right
lung with minimal compression and sufficient oxygenation was possible during
esophageal repair via a right-sided thoracotomy and extrapleural approach. No
further surgery was required so far.
CONCLUSIONS: Definitive surgical correction in newborns with CDH and EA was so
far accomplished with multiple surgical interventions. Ligation of TEF via an
abdominal approach with repair of CDH followed by delayed repair of EA is prone
to stenosis and gastro-esophageal reflux due to loss of esophageal length. With a
new combination of established surgical methods a single-staged correction of
both malformations is possible. This new approach might help to preserve
sufficient length of esophagus to accomplish primary anastomosis without tension 
and therefore avoid long-term morbidity and repetitive surgeries.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25962843  [PubMed - in process]


105. Biophys J. 2015 May 5;108(9):2097-102. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.03.051.

Multidomain Assembler (MDA) Generates Models of Large Multidomain Proteins.

Hertig S(1), Goddard TD(1), Johnson GT(2), Ferrin TE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, California; Resource for Biocomputing,
Visualization, and Informatics, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California. (2)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California;
Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California; California Institute for
Quantitative Biosciences (QB3), University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California. (3)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic
Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California;
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, California; Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and
Informatics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California; 
California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3), University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California. Electronic address:
tef@cgl.ucsf.edu.

Homology modeling predicts protein structures using known structures of related
proteins as templates. We developed MULTIDOMAIN ASSEMBLER (MDA) to address the
special problems that arise when modeling proteins with large numbers of domains,
such as fibronectin with 30 domains, as well as cases with hundreds of templates.
These problems include how to spatially arrange nonoverlapping template
structures, and how to get the best template coverage when some sequence regions 
have hundreds of available structures while other regions have a few distant
homologs. MDA automates the tasks of template searching, visualization, and
selection followed by multidomain model generation, and is part of the widely
used molecular graphics package UCSF CHIMERA (University of California, San
Francisco). We demonstrate applications and discuss MDA's benefits and
limitations.

Copyright © 2015 Biophysical Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4423039 [Available on 2016-05-05]
PMID: 25954868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nano Lett. 2015 Jun 10;15(6):4114-20. doi: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b01225. Epub
2015 May 11.

Molecular-Resolution Interrogation of a Porphyrin Monolayer by Ultrahigh Vacuum
Tip-Enhanced Raman and Fluorescence Spectroscopy.

Chiang N, Jiang N, Chulhai DV(1), Pozzi EA, Hersam MC, Jensen L(1), Seideman T,
Van Duyne RP.

Author information: 
(1)<U+22A5>Department of Chemistry, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania 16802, United States.

Tip-enhanced Raman scattering (TERS) and optically excited tip-enhanced
fluorescence (TEF) of a self-assembled porphyrin monolayer on Ag(111) are studied
using an ultrahigh vacuum scanning tunneling microscope (UHV-STM). Through
selectively exciting different Q-bands of meso-tetrakis-
(3,5-ditertiarybutylphenyl)-porphyrin (H2TBPP), chemical information regarding
different vibronic excited states is revealed by a combination of theory and
experiment; namely, TERS and time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT)
simulations. The observed TEF spectra suggest a weak coupling of H2TBPP to the
substrate due to the bulky t-butyl groups and a possible alternative excited
state decay path. This work demonstrates the potential of combining TERS and TEF 
for studying surface-mounted porphyins on substrates, thus providing insight into
porphyrin-sensitized solar cells and catalysis.

PMID: 25938625  [PubMed - in process]


107. Fungal Biol. 2015 May;119(5):433-46. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2014.08.006. Epub 2014
Sep 16.

Polyphasic characterization of four new plant pathogenic Phyllosticta species
from China, Japan, and the United States.

Zhou N(1), Chen Q(2), Carroll G(3), Zhang N(4), Shivas RG(5), Cai L(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shijingshan Rd, Shijingshan, Beijing 100049, PR China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101,
PR China. (3)Department of Biology, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403-1210, 
USA. (4)Department of Plant Biology and Pathology, Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, Rutgers University, 59 Dudley Road, Foran Hall 201, New Brunswick, 
NJ 08901, USA. (5)Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Plant
Pathology Herbarium (BRIP), Plant Biosecurity Science, GPO Box 267, Brisbane, QLD
4001, Australia. (6)State Key Laboratory of Mycology, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, PR China. Electronic address:
mrcailei@gmail.com.

The black rot disease of Vitis species and other host genera of Vitacease is
caused by Phyllosticta ampelicida and allied taxa which is considered to be a
species complex. In this paper, we introduce four new species of Phyllosticta,
including two from the P. ampelicida complex, based on a polyphasic
characterization including disease symptoms and host association, morphology, and
molecular phylogeny. The phylogenetic analysis was conducted based on the
ribosomal internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region and a combined multi-locus
alignment of the ITS, actin (ACT), partial translation elongation factor 1-alpha 
(TEF-1), and glyceraldehydes 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPDH) gene regions. Our
study confirms the phylogenetic distinctions of the four new species, as well as 
their phenotypic differences with known species in the genus.

Copyright © 2014 The British Mycological Society. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25937069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Aug;50(8):1245-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.02.049. Epub
2015 Mar 10.

VACTERL associations in children undergoing surgery for esophageal atresia and
anorectal malformations: Implications for pediatric surgeons.

Lautz TB(1), Mandelia A(2), Radhakrishnan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago and Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: tlautz@luriechildrens.org.
(2)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Ann & Robert H. Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago and Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (3)University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago, IL USA.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to compare the frequency and nature of VACTERL
associations between children who underwent surgery for esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) and anorectal malformation (ARM).
METHODS: We identified all children who underwent surgery for EA/TEF and/or ARM
at hospitals participating in the Pediatric Health Information System (PHIS)
database between 2004 and 2012. PHIS is an administrative database of
free-standing children's hospitals managed by the Child Health Corporation of
America (Overland Park, KS) that contains patient-level care data from 43
hospitals. The complete records of patients in this cohort were cross-referenced 
for diagnoses of vertebral, cardiac, renal and limb anomalies.
RESULTS: 2689 children underwent repair of esophageal atresia. Mean gestational
age was 36.5±3.2weeks and mean birth weight was 2536.0±758.7g. Associated VACTERL
diagnoses included vertebral anomaly in 686 (25.5%), ARM in 312 (11.6%),
congenital heart disease in 1588 (59.1%), renal disease in 587 (21.8%) and limb
defect in 192 (7.1%). 899 (33.4%) had 3 or more anomalies and met criteria for a 
VACTERL diagnosis. 4962 children underwent repair of ARM. Mean gestational age
was 37.4±2.7weeks and mean birth weight was 2895.2±765.1g. Associated VACTERL
diagnoses included vertebral anomaly in 1562 (31.5%), congenital heart disease in
2007 (40.4%), EA/TEF in 348 (7.0%), renal disease in 1723 (34.7%) and limb defect
in 359 (7.2%). 1795 (36.2%) had 3 or more anomalies and met criteria for a
VACTERL diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: VACTERL associations are relatively common in children with EA/TEF
and ARM and occur in specific clusters, with cardiac disease more common in
EA/TEF and spinal and renal/urinary anomalies more common in ARM.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25913268  [PubMed - in process]


109. Updates Surg. 2015 Mar;67(1):75-81. doi: 10.1007/s13304-015-0292-5. Epub 2015 Apr
17.

Tracheoesophageal fistula in adults due to corrosive ingestion: challenges in
management.

Gupta V(1), Kurdia KC, Sharma A, Mishra AK, Yadav TD, Kochhar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh, 160012, India, vikaspgi@gmail.com.

Esophagorespiratory fistula in adults as a result of corrosive ingestion is a
rare occurrence and is a difficult problem to manage. Three young (15-19 years)
patients (2F, 1M) out of 115 (incidence 2.6%) of corrosive ingestion who had
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) were reviewed retrospectively. After initial
management, enteral route of nutrition was established. Based on the extent of
concomitant esophageal stricture, the fistulae were classified as: type I (short)
and type II (long segment). Fistula was repaired through thoracotomy and
formation of a neomembranous trachea. Esophageal stricture could be managed
either short-segment resection (type I) or resection and replacement (type II).
The etiology was aluminum phosphide in two and caustic soda in one. All the
patients were operated beyond 9 weeks of ingestion. Tracheal defect was 5, 9 and 
30 mm. Fistula could be repaired by neomembranous trachea in all the patients and
defect reinforced with pleural flap in two and intercostal muscle flap in one
patient. Two patients required colon interposition, while one could be managed
with short-segment resection. All the patients are well at follow-up. TEF due to 
corrosive ingestion is a rare entity in adults. Formation of a neomembranous
trachea is feasible in all patients. Management of esophageal stricture depends
upon the pattern of involvement of the esophagus.

PMID: 25894506  [PubMed - in process]


110. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Apr 15. doi: 10.1111/dote.12368. [Epub ahead of print]

Treatment outcomes for eosinophilic esophagitis in children with esophageal
atresia.

Chan LJ(1), Tan L(1), Dhaliwal J(1), Briglia F(1), Clarkson C(1), Krishnan U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Sydney Children's Hospital,
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) has been reported to be more prevalent in patients
with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF). To date, there is
limited data on the management of EoE in this group of patients. The aim of this 
study is to evaluate the treatment outcomes of EoE in children with EA-TEF. A
retrospective chart review was performed on all EA-TEF children who were
diagnosed with and treated for EoE between January 2000 and September 2013 at the
Sydney Children's Hospital. Data collected included details of the patient's
treatment, post-treatment endoscopy, symptoms and nutrition. Twenty patients were
included in the study. Median age at diagnosis was 26 months (8-103 months), and 
median time from diagnosis to last follow-up was 23 months (2-132 months).
Patients were treated with budesonide slurry, swallowed fluticasone, elimination 
diet alone or in combination. All patients were on proton pump inhibitors at time
of diagnosis of EoE which was continued. Six out of seven patients who had
furrowing/exudate in endoscopy at diagnosis had complete resolution at a median
follow-up period of 26 months (P = 0.031). Median peak intraepithelial eosinophil
count reduced significantly from 30/high-powered field (HPF) (19-80/HPF) to 8/HPF
(0-85/HPF) (median time for improvement = 24 months) (P = 0.015). There was a
significant reduction in symptoms of dysphagia and reflux post-treatment (P <
0.001). Prevalence of strictures significantly decreased (P = 0.016), as did need
for dilatations (P = 0.004). In four out of six patients with gastrostomies at
baseline, the feeding improved on treatment of EoE and the gastrostomy could be
closed. There was also a nonsignificant trend towards improvement in weight and
height 'z scores' of the patients. Treatment of EoE in children with EA-TEF was
found to significantly reduce intraepithelial eosinophil count, symptoms,
strictures and need for dilatations.

© 2015 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 25872589  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


111. Front Plant Sci. 2015 Mar 26;6:177. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2015.00177. eCollection
2015.

Genetic diversity in tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter].

Assefa K(1), Cannarozzi G(2), Girma D(3), Kamies R(4), Chanyalew S(1),
Plaza-Wüthrich S(2), Blösch R(2), Rindisbacher A(2), Rafudeen S(4), Tadele Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Tef Research Program, Debre Zeit Agricultural Research Center,
Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research Debre Zeit, Ethiopia. (2)Crop
Breeding and Genomics, Institute of Plant Sciences, Department of Biology,
University of Bern Bern, Switzerland. (3)Crop Breeding and Genomics, Institute of
Plant Sciences, Department of Biology, University of Bern Bern, Switzerland ;
National Agricultural Biotechnology Laboratory, Holetta Agricultural Research
Center, Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research Holetta, Ethiopia. (4)Plant 
Stress Laboratory, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape
Town Cape Town, South Africa.

Tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] is a cereal crop resilient to adverse
climatic and soil conditions, and possessing desirable storage properties.
Although tef provides high quality food and grows under marginal conditions
unsuitable for other cereals, it is considered to be an orphan crop because it
has benefited little from genetic improvement. Hence, unlike other cereals such
as maize and wheat, the productivity of tef is extremely low. In spite of the low
productivity, tef is widely cultivated by over six million small-scale farmers in
Ethiopia where it is annually grown on more than three million hectares of land, 
accounting for over 30% of the total cereal acreage. Tef, a tetraploid with 40
chromosomes (2n = 4x = 40), belongs to the family Poaceae and, together with
finger millet (Eleusine coracana Gaerth.), to the subfamily Chloridoideae. It was
originated and domesticated in Ethiopia. There are about 350 Eragrostis species
of which E. tef is the only species cultivated for human consumption. At the
present time, the gene bank in Ethiopia holds over five thousand tef accessions
collected from geographical regions diverse in terms of climate and elevation.
These germplasm accessions appear to have huge variability with regard to key
agronomic and nutritional traits. In order to properly utilize the variability in
developing new tef cultivars, various techniques have been implemented to catalog
the extent and unravel the patterns of genetic diversity. In this review, we show
some recent initiatives investigating the diversity of tef using genomics,
transcriptomics and proteomics and discuss the prospect of these efforts in
providing molecular resources that can aid modern tef breeding.

PMCID: PMC4374454
PMID: 25859251  [PubMed]


112. J Community Hosp Intern Med Perspect. 2015 Apr 1;5(2):26715. doi:
10.3402/jchimp.v5.26715. eCollection 2015.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula status post laryngeal neoplasm resection.

Luber S(1), Alweis R(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Reading Health System, Reading, PA, USA;
SL-SarahDO.Luber@readinghealth.org. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Reading
Health System, Reading, PA, USA. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Jefferson
Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

A tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), albeit rare, can be a life-threatening
condition that requires prompt identification and treatment. Pulmonary
contamination and restriction of proper nutrition are common, unfortunate
consequences of untreated TEFs and are often the causes of mortality in this
population. In our patient, a history of laryngeal malignancy along with symptoms
of chest pain and cough with ingestion of liquids, even without evidence of
aspiration pneumonia, appropriately prompted investigation for potential TEF.
Initial imaging through barium swallow identified the TEF, and the patient
underwent treatment with endoclips by endoscopy with bronchoscopic assistance.

PMCID: PMC4387319
PMID: 25846352  [PubMed]


113. Oecologia. 2015 Jul;178(3):631-42. doi: 10.1007/s00442-015-3305-7. Epub 2015 Apr 
7.

Meta-analysis of amino acid stable nitrogen isotope ratios for estimating trophic
position in marine organisms.

Nielsen JM(1), Popp BN, Winder M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology, Environment and Plant Sciences, Stockholm University,
10691, Stockholm, Sweden, jens.nielsen@su.se.

Estimating trophic structures is a common approach used to retrieve information
regarding energy pathways, predation, and competition in complex ecosystems. The 
application of amino acid (AA) compound-specific nitrogen (N) isotope analysis
(CSIA) is a relatively new method used to estimate trophic position (TP) and
feeding relationships in diverse organisms. Here, we conducted the first
meta-analysis of d(15)N AA values from measurements of 359 marine species
covering four trophic levels, and compared TP estimates from AA-CSIA to
literature values derived from food items, gut or stomach content analysis. We
tested whether the AA trophic enrichment factor (TEF), or the (15)N enrichment
among different individual AAs is constant across trophic levels and whether
inclusion of d(15)N values from multiple AAs improves TP estimation. For the TEF 
of glutamic acid relative to phenylalanine (Phe) we found an average value of
6.6 across all taxa, which is significantly lower than the commonly applied
7.6. We found that organism feeding ecology influences TEF values of several
trophic AAs relative to Phe, with significantly higher TEF values for herbivores 
compared to omnivores and carnivores, while TEF values were also significantly
lower for animals excreting urea compared to ammonium. Based on the comparison of
multiple model structures using the metadata of d(15)N AA values we show that
increasing the number of AAs in principle improves precision in TP estimation.
This meta-analysis clarifies the advantages and limitations of using individual
d(15)N AA values as tools in trophic ecology and provides a guideline for the
future application of AA-CSIA to food web studies.

PMID: 25843809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Antonie Van Leeuwenhoek. 2015 Jun;107(6):1451-73. doi: 10.1007/s10482-015-0441-3.
Epub 2015 Apr 4.

New Ceratocystis species from Eucalyptus and Cunninghamia in South China.

Liu F(1), Mbenoun M, Barnes I, Roux J, Wingfield MJ, Li G, Li J, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, Forestry and Agricultural
Biotechnology Institute (FABI), University of Pretoria, Private Bag X20,
Pretoria, 0028, South Africa.

During routine surveys for possible fungal pathogens in the rapidly expanding
plantations of Eucalyptus and Cunninghamia lanceolata in China, numerous isolates
of unknown species in the genus Ceratocystis (Microascales) were obtained from
tree wounds. In this study we identified the Ceratocystis isolates from
Eucalyptus and Cunninghamia in the GuangDong, GuangXi, FuJian and HaiNan
Provinces of South China based on morphology and through comparisons of DNA
sequence data for the ITS, partial ß-tubulin and TEF-1a gene regions.
Morphological and DNA sequence comparisons revealed two previously unknown
species residing in the Indo-Pacific Clade. These are described here as
Ceratocystis cercfabiensis sp. nov. and Ceratocystis collisensis sp. nov.
Isolates of Ceratocystis cercfabiensis showed intragenomic variation in their ITS
sequences and four strains were selected for cloning of the ITS gene region.
Twelve ITS haplotypes were obtained from 17 clones selected for sequencing,
differing in up to seven base positions and representing two separate
phylogenetic groups. This is the first evidence of multiple ITS types in isolates
of Ceratocystis residing in the Indo-Pacific Clade. Caution should thus be
exercised when using the ITS gene region as a barcoding marker for Ceratocystis
species in this clade. This study also represents the first record of a species
of Ceratocystis from Cunninghamia.

PMID: 25840908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Clin Nutr. 2016 Apr;35(2):422-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2015.03.004. Epub 2015 Mar
18.

Higher visceral adiposity is associated with an enhanced early thermogenic
response to carbohydrate-rich food.

Gepner Y(1), Bril N(1), Shelef I(2), Schwarzfuchs D(3), Serfaty D(1), Rein M(1), 
Cohen N(1), Shemesh E(2), Tangi-Rosental O(1), Sarusi B(3), Goshen E(3),
Kenigsbuch S(1), Chassidim Y(2), Golan R(1), Witkow S(1), Henkin Y(2), Stampfer
MJ(4), Rudich A(1), Shai I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva,
Israel. (2)Soroka University Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel. (3)Nuclear
Research Center Negev, Dimona, Israel. (4)Channing Division of Network Medicine, 
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of 
the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. Electronic address: irish@bgu.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Studies examining the dynamics of the thermic effect of feeding (TEF)
of specific food items and the relationship of TEF to visceral adiposity are
limited.
METHODS: We measured resting energy expenditure (REE) and early-TEF
(40-min postprandial, e-TEF) after 8-h fast by indirect calorimetry in 40 obese
men, and imaged abdominal fat tissues by magnetic resonance imaging. Each
participant was examined on two occasions, 3-weeks apart. At each examination we 
measured fasting REE and then postprandial REE following the isocaloric
[~380 kcal] consumption of either 56 gr walnuts [(8% carbohydrates; 84% fat, of
which 72% polyunsaturated fat)], or 5-slices (150gr) of whole-grain bread (48%
carbohydrates; 32% fat). e-TEF was calculated as the area under the curve between
the fasting and postprandial tests.
RESULTS: Participants had a mean age of 45 ± 8 years, body-mass-index
(BMI) = 31.1 ± 3.8 kg/m(2), total abdominal fat area = 901.4 ± 240 cm(2),
visceral fat area (VAT) = 260 ± 102.9 cm(2), fasting REE = 1854 ± 205 kcal,
REE/kg = 19.39 ± 1.73 kcal/kg, and respiratory quotient (RQ, CO2 eliminated/O2
consumed) = 0.82 ± 0.04. Individuals who exhibited increased e-TEF (top <U+0394>AUC
median) to bread had higher VAT (299 cm(2) vs. 223 cm(2); p = 0.024) and higher
BMI (32.4 kg/m(2) vs. 30.0 kg/m(2); p = 0.013), compared to their peers with the 
lower e-TEF response (<U+0394>AUC below median). As expected, postprandial e-TEF was
higher after whole-grain bread consumption [<U+0394>AUC = +14 kcal/40min] compared to
walnuts [<U+0394>AUC = -2 kcal/40 min; p < 0.001].
CONCLUSIONS: Higher early thermic effect of high-carbohydrate food, likely
reflecting digestion, early absorption and/or sympathetic tone (rather than
metabolic utilization (oxidation)), associates with visceral adiposity. Future
studies are required to determine if this association represents an added
causality between early carbohydrate processing and visceral fat accumulation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolism. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25823387  [PubMed - in process]


116. Phytopathology. 2015 Sep;105(9):1229-44. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-03-15-0065-R. Epub
2015 Aug 24.

Species or Genotypes? Reassessment of Four Recently Described Species of the
Ceratocystis Wilt Pathogen, Ceratocystis fimbriata, on Mangifera indica.

Oliveira LS(1), Harrington TC(1), Ferreira MA(1), Damacena MB(1), Al-Sadi AM(1), 
Al-Mahmooli IH(1), Alfenas AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)First, fourth, and seventh authors: Departamento de Fitopatologia,
Universidade Federal de Viçosa, Viçosa, MG 36570-900, Brazil; second author:
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Iowa State University, Ames
50011; third author: Departamento de Fitopatologia, Universidade Federal de
Lavras, Lavras, MG 37200-000, Brazil; and fifth and sixth authors: Department of 
Crop Sciences, Sultan Qaboos University, P.O. Box 34, AlKhoud 123, Oman.

Ceratocystis wilt is among the most important diseases on mango (Mangifera
indica) in Brazil, Oman, and Pakistan. The causal agent was originally identified
in Brazil as Ceratocystis fimbriata, which is considered by some as a complex of 
many cryptic species, and four new species on mango trees were distinguished from
C. fimbriata based on variation in internal transcribed spacer sequences. In the 
present study, phylogenetic analyses using DNA sequences of mating type genes,
TEF-1a, and ß-tubulin failed to identify lineages corresponding to the four new
species names. Further, mating experiments found that the mango isolates
representing the new species were interfertile with each other and a tester
strain from sweet potato (Ipomoea batatas), on which the name C. fimbriata is
based, and there was little morphological variation among the mango isolates.
Microsatellite markers found substantial differentiation among mango isolates at 
the regional and population levels, but certain microsatellite genotypes were
commonly found in multiple populations, suggesting that these genotypes had been 
disseminated in infected nursery stock. The most common microsatellite genotypes 
corresponded to the four recently named species (C. manginecans, C. acaciivora,
C. mangicola, and C. mangivora), which are considered synonyms of C. fimbriata.
This study points to the potential problems of naming new species based on
introduced genotypes of a pathogen, the value of an understanding of natural
variation within and among populations, and the importance of phenotype in
delimiting species.

PMID: 25822187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun;100(6):2291-302. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-3868.
Epub 2015 Mar 30.

Changes of Dietary Fat and Carbohydrate Content Alter Central and Peripheral
Clock in Humans.

Pivovarova O(1), Jürchott K(1), Rudovich N(1), Hornemann S(1), Ye L(1), Möckel
S(1), Murahovschi V(1), Kessler K(1), Seltmann AC(1), Maser-Gluth C(1), Mazuch
J(1), Kruse M(1), Busjahn A(1), Kramer A(1), Pfeiffer AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Nutrition (O.P., N.R., S.H., Y.L., S.M., V.M., K.K.,
A.-C.S., M.K., A.F.H.P.), German Institute of Human Nutrition Potsdam-Rehbruecke,
14558 Nuthetal, Germany; Department of Endocrinology (O.P., N.R., Y.L., V.M.,
K.K., M.K., A.F.H.P.), Diabetes and Nutrition, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité 
University Medicine, 12203 Berlin, Germany; Berlin-Brandenburg Center for
Regenerative Therapies (K.J.), Charité University Medicine, 13353 Berlin,
Germany; Institute for Pharmacology (C.M.-G.), University of Heidelberg, 69120
Heidelberg, Germany; Laboratory of Chronobiology (J.M., A.K.), Institute for
Medical Immunology, Charité University Medicine, 10115 Berlin, Germany; and
HealthTwiSt GmbH (A.B.), 13125 Berlin, Germany.

CONTEXT: The circadian clock coordinates numerous metabolic processes with
light-dark and feeding regimens. However, in humans it is unknown whether dietary
patterns influence circadian rhythms.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the effects of switching from a high-carbohydrate, low-fat
diet to a low-carbohydrate, high fat (LC/HFD) isocaloric diet on the central and 
peripheral circadian clocks in humans.
DESIGN: Diurnal patterns of salivary cortisol and gene expression were analyzed
in blood monocytes of 29 nonobese healthy subjects before and 1 and 6 weeks after
the dietary switch. For this, we established a method of rhythm prediction by
3-time point data.
RESULTS: The centrally driven cortisol rhythm showed a phase delay 1 and 6 weeks 
after the dietary switch to a LC/HFD as well as an amplitude increase. The
dietary switch altered diurnal oscillations of core clock genes (PER1, PER2,
PER3, and TEF) and inflammatory genes (CD14, CD180, NFKBIA, and IL1B). The LC/HFD
also affected the expression of nonoscillating genes contributing to energy
metabolism (SIRT1) and fat metabolism (ACOX3 and IDH3A). Expression of clock
genes but not of salivary cortisol in monocytes tightly correlated with levels of
blood lipids and with expression of metabolic and inflammatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the modulation of the dietary fat and
carbohydrate content alters the function of the central and peripheral circadian 
clocks in humans.

PMID: 25822100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg Rep. 2014 Dec;3(1):61-3. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1386719. Epub
2014 Sep 3.

Montgomery T-tube for the Management of Postintubation Tracheoesophageal Fistula 
with Synchronic Subglottic Laryngotracheal Stenosis.

Li Z(1), Zhong C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai, China.

A postintubation tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) complicated with subglottic
laryngotracheal stenosis (SLTS) is a challenge to surgical repair.
Laryngotracheal resection and primary reconstruction could result in treatment
failure. In this report, we describe the successful management of two cases of
postintubation TEF complicated with SLTS using a Montgomery T-tube because of the
patients' contraindications for laryngotracheal resection and primary
anastomosis.

PMCID: PMC4360681
PMID: 25798366  [PubMed]


119. Water Res. 2015 Jun 1;76:53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2015.02.036. Epub 2015 Feb 
28.

Adaptation of Fusarium oxysporum and Fusarium dimerum to the specific aquatic
environment provided by the water systems of hospitals.

Steinberg C(1), Laurent J(2), Edel-Hermann V(2), Barbezant M(3), Sixt N(4), Dalle
F(5), Aho S(6), Bonnin A(5), Hartemann P(3), Sautour M(5).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1347 Agroécologie, 17 rue Sully, BP 86510, F-21000 Dijon, France.
Electronic address: christian.steinberg@dijon.inra.fr. (2)INRA, UMR1347
Agroécologie, 17 rue Sully, BP 86510, F-21000 Dijon, France. (3)Department
Environment and Public, Health Nancy University, Hospital Hygiene Unit, 9 Avenue 
de la Forêt de Haye, BP154, F-54505 Vandoeuvre-Nancy Cedex, France.
(4)Environmental Microbiology, Plateau Technique de Biologie du CHU, 2 rue
Angélique Ducoudray, BP 37013, F-21070 Dijon Cedex, France. (5)Parasitology and
Mycology laboratory, Plateau Technique de Biologie du CHU, 2 rue Angélique
Ducoudray, BP 37013, F-21070 Dijon Cedex, France; Université de Bourgogne,
UMR1347 Agroécologie, 17 rue Sully, BP 86510, F-21000 Dijon, France. (6)Hospital 
Hygiene and Epidemiology unit, Hôpital du Bocage, BP 77908, F-21079 Dijon Cedex, 
France.

Members of the Fusarium group were recently detected in water distribution
systems of several hospitals in the world. An epidemiological investigation was
conducted over 2 years in hospital buildings in Dijon and Nancy (France) and in
non-hospital buildings in Dijon. The fungi were detected only within the water
distribution systems of the hospital buildings and also, but at very low
concentrations, in the urban water network of Nancy. All fungi were identified as
Fusarium oxysporum species complex (FOSC) and Fusarium dimerum species complex
(FDSC) by sequencing part of the translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF-1a)
gene. Very low diversity was found in each complex, suggesting the existence of a
clonal population for each. Density and heterogeneous distributions according to 
buildings and variability over time were explained by episodic detachments of
parts of the colony from biofilms in the pipes. Isolates of these waterborne
populations as well as soilborne isolates were tested for their ability to grow
in liquid medium in the presence of increasing concentrations of sodium
hypochlorite, copper sulfate, anti-corrosion pipe coating, at various
temperatures (4°-42 °C) and on agar medium with amphotericin B and voriconazole. 
The waterborne isolates tolerated higher sodium hypochlorite and copper sulfate
concentrations and temperatures than did soilborne isolates but did not show any 
specific resistance to fungicides. In addition, unlike waterborne isolates,
soilborne isolates did not survive in water even supplemented with glucose, while
the former developed in the soil as well as soilborne isolates. We concluded the 
existence of homogeneous populations of FOSC and FDSC common to all contaminated 
hospital sites. These populations are present at very low densities in natural
waters, making them difficult to detect, but they are adapted to the specific
conditions offered by the complex water systems of public hospitals in Dijon and 
Nancy and probably other localities in the world.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25792434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Parasitol Res. 2015 Jun;114(6):2309-15. doi: 10.1007/s00436-015-4426-y. Epub 2015
Mar 20.

The influence of conidial Pr1 protease on pathogenicity potential of Metarhizium 
anisopliae senso latu to ticks.

Golo PS(1), Santos HA, Perinotto WM, Quinelato S, Angelo IC, Camargo MG, Sá FA,
Massard CL, Fernandes ÉK, Roberts DW, Bittencourt VR.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Parasitologia Animal, Instituto de Veterinária, Universidade
Federal Rural do Rio de Janeiro (UFRRJ), BR 465, Km7, Seropédica, RJ, Brazil,
patriciagolo@gmail.com.

Pr1 is a subtilisin-like protease produced by Metarhizium spp. entomopathogenic
fungi, and it is recognized as heavily involved in the initial steps of the
fungal invasion of arthropod-host cuticles. In the current study, correlation was
sought between mortality of tick larvae and conidial Pr1 levels of one
Metarhizium anisopliae senso latu (s.l.) isolate (CG 148). Conidia with different
levels of pr1 gene expression and enzymatic activity were obtained by producing
them on either artificial medium (to yield low Pr1 activity) or on Rhipicephalus 
microplus cadavers (to yield high Pr1 activity). Conidial proteolytic activity
was assessed using N-suc-ala-ala-pro-phe-<U+03C1>NA as the chromogenic substrate, and
pr1 expression was profiled by qPCR using three genes (gpd, try, and tef) as
reference genes. Pr1 enzymatic (proteolytic) activity on conidia obtained from
tick cadavers was 36 U mg(-1) in comparison to 4 U mg(-1) on conidia from PDA
medium. Also, pr1 gene expression level was ten times higher in conidia from tick
cadavers compared to PDA medium. Bioassays of M. anisopliae s.l. CG 148 spores
with elevated Pr1 proteolytic activity and gene expression levels did not
demonstrate increased virulence (= significant change percent mortality of tick
larvae). The minimal levels of Pr1 on conidia produced on artificial medium was
adequate to afford high levels of virulence, and the elevated amounts of the
enzyme on tick-cadaver-produced conidia did not induce elevated larval mortality.
As long as some Pr1 activity was present, fungal virulence of isolate CG 148
against tick larvae was not elevated by increased levels of conidial Pr1.

PMID: 25786608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Aug;50(8):1260-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.01.015. Epub 
2015 Feb 7.

Esophageal perforations due to foreign body impaction in children.

Peters NJ(1), Mahajan JK(2), Bawa M(1), Chabbra A(1), Garg R(1), Rao KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education
and Research, Chandigarh India 160012. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh India
160012. Electronic address: jkmahajan@gmail.com.

AIMS: The treatment of perforating esophageal foreign body impaction (FBI) is
complex and unclear. We present the outcome of surgical treatment of esophageal
perforations due to FBI in children along with a management algorithm.
METHODS: During a period of 7 years, 7 cases of esophageal perforations due to
foreign body (FB) ingestion were referred to our unit. We analyzed the FB types, 
lodging duration and location, complications, and the surgical approaches.
RESULTS: There were 4 male and 3 female patients. Mean age was 28 months (5
months-6 years). Six patients had metal FBs of variable shapes and 1 had glass
marble. Three patients had witnessed history of FB ingestion. Duration of
ingestion was variable and unknown in half of the patients. The site of impaction
was cervical (1) and thoracic (5) esophagus. One patient had a marble as FB in
the superior mediastinum. One patient manifested with features of perforation
after removal of the impacted FB and 5 patients presented with perforations. Two 
patients presented with subcutaneous emphysema. One patient had
trachea-esophageal fistula (TEF) after disc battery ingestion. Rigid
esophagoscopy failed in 4 out of 6 patients. Five patients underwent thoracotomy,
and repair with a pleural patch reinforcement. One patient had lateral
esophagotomy in the cervical esophagus for removal of the impacted FB.
Mediastinal FB was removed without opening the esophagus. All the patients were
discharged uneventfully.
CONCLUSIONS: Esophageal perforation following FBI is rare and requires prompt
treatment. Surgical treatment tailored to the needs of individual patients is
associated with a successful outcome and decreased morbidity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25783392  [PubMed - in process]


122. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 May;50(5):805-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2015.02.036. Epub
2015 Feb 19.

A comparison of surgical outcomes between in-hours and after-hours
tracheoesophageal fistula repairs.

Yeung A(1), Butterworth SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(2)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of
Surgery, British Columbia Children's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Electronic 
address: sbutterworth@cw.bc.ca.

BACKGROUND: Emerging literature has found increased complications for some
patients undergoing nonemergent surgeries performed after-hours. For infants born
with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF), no literature
exists addressing the impact of the timing of surgery on outcomes.
METHODS: With IRB approval, EA/TEF repairs (2005-2010) performed at a tertiary
children's hospital were reviewed retrospectively. All patients had an esophageal
anastomosis. After-hours surgeries were defined as 1530-0800 Monday to Friday,
weekends/holidays. Demographics, EA/TEF type, operative details, anastomotic
tension, and complications were compared. Outcomes measured included
intraoperative desaturations, esophageal complications (leak, stricture,
recurrence), pneumothorax, and mortality.
RESULTS: There were 28 patients, of which 21 underwent the procedure in-hours and
7 after-hours. Patient age, gestational age, weight, EA/TEF type, cardiac
anomalies, and preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative variables were not
different between the groups. Operative time, intraoperative desaturations,
anastomotic tension, blood loss, total ventilation days, or length of
hospitalization were not significantly different. There was a significant
increase in esophageal leaks in the after-hours group (n=3) vs. the in-hours
(n=0) group (p=0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, infants with an EA/TEF repaired after-hours had a
significant increase in anastomotic leaks. The observed increase in leaks
requires further evaluation to ensure more optimal outcomes for this fragile
group of patients.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25783369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Jul;50(7):1099-103. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.09.070.
Epub 2014 Oct 11.

Quality of reporting of the literature on gastrointestinal reflux after repair of
esophageal atresia-tracheoesophageal fistula.

Shawyer AC(1), Pemberton J(2), Kanters D(2), Alnaqi AA(3), Flageole H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton,
Ontario. Electronic address: annashawyer@gmail.com. (2)McMaster Pediatric Surgery
Research Collaborative, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton, Ontario.
(3)Division of Pediatric Surgery, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton,
Ontario.

OBJECTIVES: There is variation in the management of postoperative
gastroesophageal reflux (GER) in esophageal atresia-tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA-TEF). Well-reported literature is important for clinical decision-making. We 
assessed the quality of reporting (QOR) of postoperative GER management in
EA-TEF.
METHODS: A comprehensive search of MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINHAL, CENTRAL databases and
gray literature was conducted. Included articles reported a primary diagnosis of 
EA-TEF, a secondary diagnosis of postoperative GER, and primary treatment of GER 
with antireflux medications. The QOR was assessed using the STrengthening the
Reporting of OBservational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) checklist.
RESULTS: Retrieval of 2910 articles resulted in 48 relevant articles (N=2592
patients) with an overall quality percentage score of 48%-95% (median=65%). The
best reported items were "participants" and "outcome data" (93.8% each),
"generalisability" (91.7%) and "background/rationale" (89.6%). Less than 20% of
studies provided detailed "main results"; less than 5% of studies reported
adequately on "bias" or "funding." Sample size calculation and study limitations 
were included in 17 (35.4%) and 16 (33.3%) studies respectively. Follow-up time
was inconsistently reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the overall QOR is moderate using STROBE, important areas
are underreported. Inadequate methodological reporting may lead to inappropriate 
clinical decisions. Awareness of STROBE, emphasizing proper reporting is needed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25783329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Thorac Dis. 2015 Feb;7(Suppl 1):S20-6. doi:
10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2015.02.01.

Repair of post-intubation tracheoesophageal fistulae through the left
pre-sternocleidomastoid approach: a recent case series of 13 patients.

Foroulis CN(1), Nana C(1), Kleontas A(1), Tagarakis G(1), Karapanagiotidis GT(1),
Zarogoulidis P(1), Tossios P(1), Anastasiadis K(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, AHEPA University Hospital, 2
Pulmonary-Oncology, "G. Papanikolaou" General Hospital, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Post-intubation tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a late complication
of tracheotomy, while membranous trachea laceration during percutaneous
dilational tracheostomy is implicated in the generation of early post-tracheotomy
TEF. Surgical repair is the only viable option for these patients and the
technique of repair depends on a variety of factors.
METHODS: Totally 13 patients (mean age: 54.1±12.6 years; male: 8) with
post-intubation TEF were managed between 2007 and 2013. The diagnosis was always 
made through esophagoscopy followed by endoscopic gastrostomy and bronchoscopy
for repositioning of the tracheal tube just above the carina. Repair of the
fistula was made in all patients through a left pre-sternocleidomastoid incision 
followed by dissection of the fistulous tract, suturing of esophagus and trachea 
and interposition of the whole pedicled left sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCMM)
between the two suture lines.
RESULTS: Five out of the 13 procedures were performed in mechanically ventilated 
patients; 3 of them died from septic complications during the postoperative
period while fistula recurred in 1 of those 3 patients due to extensive
inflammation of the tracheal wall. The rest 8 patients underwent fistula repair
after weaning from mechanical ventilation and the results of repair were
excellent. The additional procedure of temporary T-tube insertion was obviated in
one patient to manage extensive tracheomalacia.
CONCLUSIONS: The left pre-sternocleidomastoid incision is an excellent access for
the repair of a post-intubation TEF without tracheal resection. The interposition
of the whole left pedicled SCMM between the suture lines of trachea and esophagus
avoids fistula recurrence and offers the best chance for cure.

PMCID: PMC4332095
PMID: 25774303  [PubMed]


125. Am Surg. 2015 Mar;81(3):268-72.

Initial experience with thoracoscopic esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula repair: lessons learned and technical considerations to achieve success.

Robie DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Nemours Children's Clinic, Jacksonville,
Florida, USA.

The minimally invasive surgical (MIS) repair of esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is challenging and requires advanced
endoscopic skills. The purpose of this study was to provide insight in
successfully introducing the MIS repair based on the initial cases performed by a
single pediatric surgeon and review of the experience of others. A retrospective 
review of all MIS TEF repairs performed by a single surgeon was conducted. Data
gathered included patient demographics, technical details of repair including
operative time, short- and long-term postoperative morbidity, length of stay, and
follow-up. Eight cases (seven Type C, one Type D) were selected for MIS repair
based on the judgment of the surgeon with consideration of adequate patient size,
stability, type of associated anomalies, and expected length of esophageal gap.
Operative time was an average of 207 minutes and there was one conversion to open
for successful repair. There were no leaks and only one patient required a single
anastomotic dilation at 19 months of age. There were two postoperative
pneumothoraces of which one required bronchoscopic laser fistula ablation. Length
of stay was an average of 16 days and length of follow-up is a median of 219
days. MIS repair of EA/TEF can be done successfully but requires careful patient 
selection, advanced MIS skills and meticulous attention to operative technique.

PMID: 25760202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Se Pu. 2014 Sep;32(9):967-70.

[Uncertainty evaluation of the determination of toxic equivalent quantity of
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in soil by isotope dilution
high resolution gas chromatography and high resolution mass spectrometry].

[Article in Chinese]

Du B, Liu Aimin, Huang Y.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) in soil samples
were analyzed by isotope dilution method with high resolution gas chromatography 
and high resolution mass spectrometry (ID-HRGC/HRMS), and the toxic equivalent
quantity (TEQ) were calculated. The impacts of major source of measurement
uncertainty are discussed, and the combined relative standard uncertainties were 
calculated for each 2, 3, 7, 8 substituted con- gener. Furthermore, the
concentration, combined uncertainty and expanded uncertainty for TEQ of PCDD/Fs
in a soil sample in I-TEF, WHO-1998-TEF and WHO-2005-TEF schemes are provided as 
an example. I-TEF, WHO-1998-TEF and WHO-2005-TEF are the evaluation schemes of
toxic equivalent factor (TEF), and are all currently used to describe 2,3,7,8
sub- stituted relative potencies.

PMID: 25752089  [PubMed]


127. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Mar;50(3):489-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.10.055. Epub 
2014 Nov 20.

Lower esophageal banding in extremely low birth weight infants with esophageal
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula is a life saving practice followed by a
successful delayed primary thoracoscopy reconstruction.

Margain L(1), Perez-Etchepare E(2), Varlet F(2), Lopez M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital of Saint Etienne-France. 
Electronic address: loren.margain@hotmail.fr. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
University Hospital of Saint Etienne-France.

In extremely low birth weight (ELBW) infants, i.e. <1000g, with esophageal
atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), surgical treatment is a real
challenge. High morbidity is associated with primary repair of EA on these
patients. We report our recent experience with three cases of ELBW infants with
EA and TEF treated by lower esophageal banding (LEB). From September 2012 to
January 2013, three ELBW infants with EA/TEF were born prematurely with severe
respiratory distress. One of them had VACTER association with anorectal
malformation (ARM). The gestational age was between 25 and 27weeks, and the mean 
birth weight was 690g (500-790). All were treated by LEB and gastrostomy,
followed by delayed primary thoracoscopy reconstruction. One baby died in the
postoperative period because of intraventricular hemorrhage at 7days after
initial surgery. Among the 2 others cases, one of them required ligation without 
section of the TEF with removal of LEB by thoracoscopy at 30days old and 1300g.
Delayed primary thoracoscopy reconstruction and section of TEF were performed by 
thoracoscopy at 70 and 80days old and 2100g and 2200g respectively without early 
complication. The follow-up was 12months. One baby presented a stenosis requiring
one dilation of lower esophagus with uneventful course. LEB is a life saving
practice in ELBW babies with EA and TEF. The esophagus can tolerate the ligation 
even with a thread without having a long time major complication. Thoracoscopic
reconstruction of the esophagus is possible in these babies.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25746714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Pediatr. 2015 May;166(5):1140-1144.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2015.01.038. Epub
2015 Feb 24.

Vascular Anomalies Associated with Esophageal Atresia and Tracheoesophageal
Fistula.

Berthet S(1), Tenisch E(2), Miron MC(2), Alami N(3), Timmons J(4), Aspirot A(4), 
Faure C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition,
Sainte-Justine University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada. (2)Division of
Pediatric Radiology, Sainte-Justine University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec,
Canada. (3)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Sainte-Justine University Health
Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada. (4)Division of Surgery, Sainte-Justine
University Health Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada. (5)Division of Pediatric
Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition, Sainte-Justine University Health
Centre, Montreal, Québec, Canada. Electronic address:
christophe.faure@umontreal.ca.

OBJECTIVE: To report the incidence of congenital vascular anomalies in a cohort
of patients with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
while describing the clinical presentation, diagnosis, and consequences, and to
evaluate the diagnostic value of esophagram in diagnosing an aberrant right
subclavian artery (ARSA).
METHODS: All patients born with EA/TEF between 2005 and 2013 were studied.
Preoperative echocardiography reports, surgical descriptions of primary
esophageal repair, and esophagrams were reviewed retrospectively.
RESULTS: Of the 76 children born with EA/TEF included in this study, 14 (18%) had
a vascular malformation. The incidence of a right aortic arch (RAA) was 6% (5 of 
76), and that of an aberrant right subclavian artery (ARSA) was 12% (9 of 76).
RAA was diagnosed in the neonatal period by echocardiography (4 of 5) or surgery 
(1 of 5), and ARSA was diagnosed by echocardiography (7 of 9) or later on the
esophagram (2 of 9). Respiratory and/or digestive symptoms occurred in 9 of the
14 patients with vascular malformation. Both long-gap EA and severe cardiac
malformations necessitating surgery were significantly associated with vascular
anomalies (P<.05). The sensitivity of the esophagram for diagnosing ARSA was 66%,
the specificity was 98%, the negative predictive value was 95%, and the positive 
predictive value was 85%.
CONCLUSION: ARSA and RAA have an incidence of 12% and 6% respectively, in
patients with EA/TEF. A computed tomography angioscan is recommended to rule out 
such malformations when stenting of the esophagus is indicated, before esophageal
replacement surgery, and when prolonged (>2 weeks) use of a nasogastric tube is
considered.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25720367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biomed Opt. 2015 Feb;20(2):27005. doi: 10.1117/1.JBO.20.2.027005.

Tip-enhanced fluorescence with radially polarized illumination for monitoring
loop-mediated isothermal amplification on hepatitis C virus cDNA.

Wei SC(1), Chuang TL(2), Wang DS(2), Lu HH(2), Gu FX(3), Sung KB(4), Lin CW(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Taiwan University, Institute of Biomedical Electronics and
Bioinformatics, No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.
(2)National Taiwan University, Institute of Biomedical Engineering, No. 1,
Section 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. (3)University of Waterloo,
Department of Chemical Engineering, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario
N2L 3G1, Canada. (4)National Taiwan University, Institute of Biomedical
Electronics and Bioinformatics, No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10617,
TaiwandNational Taiwan University, Molecular Imaging Center, No. 1, Section 4,
Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. (5)National Taiwan University, Institute of
Biomedical Electronics and Bioinformatics, No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road,
Taipei 10617, TaiwanbNational Taiwan University, Institute of Biomedical
Engineering, No. 1, Section 4, Roosevelt Road, Taipei 10617, Tai.

A tip nanobiosensor for monitoring DNA replication was presented. The effects of 
excitation power and polarization on tip-enhanced fluorescence (TEF) were
assessed with the tip immersed in fluorescein isothiocyanate solution first. The 
photon count rose on average fivefold with radially polarized illumination at 50 
mW. We then used polymerase-functionalized tips for monitoring loop-mediated
isothermal amplification on Hepatitis C virus cDNA. The amplicon-SYBR® Green I
complex was detected and compared to real-time loop-mediated isothermal
amplification. The signals of the reaction using 4 and 0.004 ng/µl templates were
detected 10 and 30 min earlier, respectively. The results showed the potential of
TEF in developing a nanobiosensor for real-time DNA amplification.

© 2015 Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE)

PMID: 25679746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 2015 Jan-Mar;12(1):86-8. doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.151000.

Unilateral pulmonary agenesis associated with oesophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula: A case report with prenatal diagnosis.

Miyano G(1), Morita K, Kaneshiro M, Miyake H, Koyama M, Nouso H, Yamoto M, Nakano
R, Tanaka Y, Nishiguchi T, Kawamura T, Fukumoto K, Urushihara N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Shizuoka,
Japan.

We describe herein a case of unilateral pulmonary agenesis (PA) with oesophageal 
atresia (EA)/tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) that was diagnosed prenatally and
repaired by esophagoesophagostomy with stable postoperative course. The patient
was born at 34 weeks gestation, after ultrasonography at 22 weeks gestation
showed possible right-sided diaphragmatic eventration or PA and EA was
subsequently suspected due to hydramnios. The initial X-ray showed mediastinal
shift to the right, and coil up sign of the nasogastric tube, without
intracardiac anomaly. Immediately after the diagnosis of EA/TEF and unilateral PA
on day 0, the patient was intubated in the operating room, and a gastrostomy tube
was placed. After pulmonary status stabilized, at 4 days old, EA/TEF was repaired
through a thoracotomy in the right 4 th intercostal space. The right main
bronchus was noted to continue into the distal oesophagus; this fistula was
ligated and divided, and a single-layer esophagoesophagostomy was performed under
mild tension with one vertebral gap. The neonate was maintained on mechanical
ventilation and gradually weaned to extubation at 7 days old. The postoperative
course was uneventful, with the exception of prolonged jaundice that emerged at 3
months old. Laparoscopic cholangiography at that time excluded biliary atresia,
and jaundice resolved spontaneously. The patient has not shown any respiratory
symptoms or feeding difficulties as of the 12-month follow-up.

PMID: 25659560  [PubMed - in process]


131. Bioresour Technol. 2015 Apr;181:214-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2015.01.054. Epub 
2015 Jan 24.

Biomethane production and physicochemical characterization of anaerobically
digested teff (Eragrostis tef) straw pretreated by sodium hydroxide.

Chufo A(1), Yuan H(2), Zou D(2), Pang Y(2), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Resource and Environmental Research, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, No. 15 Beisanhuan East Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, PR
China; College of Natural Science, Arba Minch University, Arba Minch, Ethiopia.
(2)Centre for Resource and Environmental Research, Beijing University of Chemical
Technology, No. 15 Beisanhuan East Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100029, PR
China. (3)Centre for Resource and Environmental Research, Beijing University of
Chemical Technology, No. 15 Beisanhuan East Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing
100029, PR China. Electronic address: xjlibuct@gmail.com.

The biogas production potential and biomethane content of teff straw through
pretreatment by NaOH was investigated. Different NaOH concentrations (1%, 2%, 4% 
and 6%) were used for each four solid loadings (50, 65, 80 and 95 g/L). The
effects of NaOH as pretreatment factor on the biodegradability of teff straw,
changes in main compositions and enhancement of anaerobic digestion were
analyzed. The result showed that, using 4% NaOH for pretreatment in 80 g/L solid 
loading produced 40.0% higher total biogas production and 48.1% higher biomethane
content than the untreated sample of teff straw. Investigation of changes in
chemical compositions and physical microstructure indicated that there was
4.3-22.1% total lignocellulosic compositions removal after three days
pretreatment with NaOH. The results further revealed that NaOH pretreatment
changed the structural compositions and lignin network, and improved biogas
production from teff straw.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25656865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Chem Res Toxicol. 2015 Apr 20;28(4):641-50. doi: 10.1021/tx500434j. Epub 2015 Feb
13.

Consensus toxicity factors for polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, 
and biphenyls combining in silico models and extensive in vitro screening of
AhR-mediated effects in human and rodent cells.

Larsson M(1), van den Berg M(2), Brenerová P(3), van Duursen MB(2), van Ede
KI(2), Lohr C(4), Luecke-Johansson S(5), Machala M(3), Neser S(4), Pencíková
K(3), Poellinger L(5), Schrenk D(4), Strapácová S(3), Vondrácek J(3,)(6),
Andersson PL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.
(2)Endocrine Toxicology Group, Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht
University, P.O. Box 80177, NL-3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)#Department
of Chemistry and Toxicology, Veterinary Research Institute, 621 32 Brno, Czech
Republic. (4)<U+22A5>Department of Food Chemistry and Environmental Toxicology,
University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern 67663, Germany. (5)§Department of
Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)<U+2225>Department of Cytokinetics, Institute of Biophysics AS CR, 612 65 Brno, Czech
Republic.

Consensus toxicity factors (CTFs) were developed as a novel approach to establish
toxicity factors for risk assessment of dioxin-like compounds (DLCs). Eighteen
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs), and biphenyls (PCBs) 
with assigned World Health Organization toxic equivalency factors (WHO-TEFs) and 
two additional PCBs were screened in 17 human and rodent bioassays to assess
their induction of aryl hydrocarbon receptor-related responses. For each bioassay
and compound, relative effect potency values (REPs) compared to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin were calculated and analyzed. The responses
in the human and rodent cell bioassays generally differed. Most notably, the
human cell models responded only weakly to PCBs, with
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) being the only PCB that frequently
evoked sufficiently strong responses in human cells to permit us to calculate REP
values. Calculated REPs for PCB126 were more than 30 times lower than the WHO-TEF
value for PCB126. CTFs were calculated using score and loading vectors from a
principal component analysis to establish the ranking of the compounds and, by
rescaling, also to provide numerical differences between the different congeners 
corresponding to the TEF scheme. The CTFs were based on rat and human bioassay
data and indicated a significant deviation for PCBs but also for certain PCDD/Fs 
from the WHO-TEF values. The human CTFs for 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran,
1,2,3,4,7,8-hexachlorodibenzofuran, 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin,
and 1,2,3,4,7,8,9-heptachlorodibenzofuran were up to 10 times greater than their 
WHO-TEF values. Quantitative structure-activity relationship models were used to 
predict CTFs for untested WHO-TEF compounds, suggesting that the WHO-TEF value
for 1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran could be underestimated by an order of
magnitude for both human and rodent models. Our results indicate that the CTF
approach provides a powerful tool for condensing data from batteries of screening
tests using compounds with similar mechanisms of action, which can be used to
improve risk assessment of DLCs.

PMID: 25654323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Int J Oncol. 2015 Apr;46(4):1444-52. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2877. Epub 2015 Feb 5.

YAP/TAZ for cancer therapy: opportunities and challenges (review).

Guo L(1), Teng L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The 1st Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310003, P.R. China.

YAP (Yes-associated protein) and its paralog TAZ (transcriptional co-activator
with PDZ-binding motif) are the main downstream effectors of the Hippo signaling 
pathway. This pathway is an evolutionally conserved signal cascade, which plays
pivotal roles in organ size control and tumorigenesis from Drosophila to mammals.
Functionally, when the Hippo pathway is activated, YAP and TAZ will be
sequestered in the cytoplasm and degraded. Conversely, when the Hippo pathway is 
deactivated, YAP and TAZ will translocate into nucleus and promote transcription 
of downstream genes by forming complexes with transcription factors, such as
transcriptional enhancer factors (TEF; also referred to as TEAD), runt-domain
transcription factors (Runx) and others. Most of these transcription factors
belong to growth promoting or apoptosis-inhibition genes. It has been reported
that the deactivation of the Hippo pathway, as well as up-regulation of YAP and
TAZ was observed in many human cancers with a high frequency, which suggests that
the Hippo pathway may be a potent target for developing anticancer drugs. In this
review, we provide an overview of the Hippo pathway and summarize recent advances
with respect to the role of YAP and TAZ in Hippo signaling pathway and cancer
development. Furthermore, we describe the opportunities and challenges for
exploit YAP and TAZ as potential therapeutic targets in cancer.

PMID: 25652178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Pediatr Surg. 2015 Feb;50(2):250-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.11.004. Epub
2014 Nov 7.

Revisional surgery for recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula and anastomotic
complications after repair of esophageal atresia in 258 infants.

Koivusalo AI(1), Pakarinen MP(2), Lindahl HG(2), Rintala RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Section of Paediatric Surgery, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland. Electronic address: antti.koivusalo@hus.fi. (2)Children's
Hospital, Section of Paediatric Surgery, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

AIM: We assessed the occurrence and outcome of major reoperations following
repair of esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF).
Major outcome measures were survival, preservation of native esophagus, and
long-term esophageal function.
METHODS: Hospital charts of 258 consecutive patients treated for esophageal
atresia from 1980 to 2013 were reviewed.
RESULTS: Forty-two (16%) patients required a total of 57 reoperations after
primary repair (n=37) or esophageal reconstruction (n=5). The indications were
anastomotic leakage (n=17), anastomotic rupture after endoscopic dilatation
(n=5), recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF) (n=12), undiagnosed proximal TOF
(n=3), recalcitrant anastomotic stricture (n=11, primary anastomosis 9,
reconstruction 2), undetected proximal fistula (n=3), and inadvertently
perforated jejunal graft (n=1). Anastomotic leakage and rupture after dilatation 
were treated with rethoracotomy and suture and recurrent or undetected TOF by
open repair. Strictures not manageable with repeated dilatations were resected
and esophageal ends reanastomosed (n=10) or bridged with jejunum graft (n=1).
Five (12%) patients required further reoperations, two after recurrent TEF
(reocclusion n=1, reconstruction with gastric tube n=1), two after stricture
operations (re-resection n=1, resuture after leakage n=1), and one after
recurrent dilatation-related rupture. Mortality was 4/42 (10%). Two patients died
of recurred leakage or TOF and two of unrelated cause. Of 38 survivors, 35
retained their native or initially reconstructed esophagus, and 3 had secondary
reconstruction. After a median follow-up of 23 (range 0.6-32) years, 35 (95%)
patients have acceptable esophageal function. Three patients remained dependent
on gastrostomy feedings.
CONCLUSION: Anastomotic and TOF complications required a substantial number of
reoperations, including esophageal reconstructions. Over 90% of the patients
survived with a functioning native or reconstructed esophagus.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25638612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Scand Cardiovasc J. 2015 Feb;49(1):27-38. doi: 10.3109/14017431.2015.1010566.

Effect on left ventricular mass and geometry in patients with takotsubo
cardiomyopathy.

Waldenborg M(1), Lidén M, Kähäri A, Emilsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Physiology, School of Health and Medical Sciences,
Örebro University , Örebro , Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (TTC) is a condition of transient left
ventricular (LV) dysfunction. The effects on LV mass (LVM) and geometry have not 
been studied enough in TTC. Retrospectively, we analyzed our TTC cohort both by
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), for
comparative purposes.
DESIGN: Thirteen women undergoing TTE and MRI, at onset and three months later,
were included. LVM was estimated by MRI, and two TTE methods. Segmental wall
thickness (SWT) was measured, while radial strain was assessed by TTE. Data
analysis included Wilcoxon's test (between phases), Mann-Whitney U test and
McNemar's test (between and within groups). Bland-Altman analyses were used for
intertechnique coherence, while interactions regarding TTE were tested using
Spearman's coefficient.
RESULTS: LVM decreased during recovery (p < 0.05), by MRI and one of the TTE
methods; truncated ellipsoid formula (TEF), which also showed relatively better
coherence compared with MRI. SWT decreased in two of three sites, by both
modalities, but with ambiguous coherence there between. The TEF data interacted
partially with a demonstrated increase in radial strain.
CONCLUSIONS: TTC associates with acute increase in LVM, which appears to be an
apical effect, tending to follow the changes in concentric wall motion. MRI and
TTE show adequate coherence; primarily for the TEF method regarding LVM.

PMID: 25614080  [PubMed - in process]


136. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2015 Mar;66(2):140-7. doi: 10.3109/09637486.2014.986069.
Epub 2015 Jan 22.

The effect of fast eating on the thermic effect of food in young Japanese women.

Toyama K(1), Zhao X, Kuranuki S, Oguri Y, Kashiwa Kato E, Yoshitake Y, Nakamura
T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Health and Social Services,
Kanagawa University of Human Services , Kanagawa , Japan .

The relationship between eating speed and the thermic effect of food (TEF)
remains unclear. We investigated the difference in the TEF when meals containing 
the same amount of energy were eaten in 5 min (fast eating) or 15 min (regular
eating). Subjects were nine non-obese young women. Following a 350 kcal (1464 kJ)
meal, energy expenditure and autonomic nervous system activity were measured. The
frequency of mastication was also calculated. The TEF for the 15-min period after
the start of eating with fast eating was significantly lower than with regular
eating (p < 0.01). There was a significant positive correlation between the
low-frequency/high-frequency ratio and TEF at 5-min intervals up to 20 min after 
the start of eating and between total mastication frequency and TEF during
ingestion. Fast eating may reduce the TEF, potentially because a decrease in
mastication frequency decreases sympathetic nervous system activity.

PMID: 25609562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2015 May;25(5):441-4. doi: 10.1089/lap.2014.0250.
Epub 2015 Jan 16.

Current Practice and Outcomes of Thoracoscopic Esophageal Atresia and
Tracheoesophageal Fistula Repair: A Multi-institutional Analysis in Japan.

Okuyama H(1), Koga H, Ishimaru T, Kawashima H, Yamataka A, Urushihara N, Segawa
O, Uchida H, Iwanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine , Suita, Osaka, Japan .

BACKGROUND: In order to better understand the current practice and outcomes of
thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia (EA)/tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), 
a multi-institutional analysis was conducted among seven Japanese institutes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A survey was sent to the seven institutes regarding the
surgical technique, postoperative management, and outcomes of thoracoscopic
repair of EA/TEF.
RESULTS: The operation was uniformly performed via an intrapleural approach in
the 0-45° prone position. The TEF was occluded with suture ligature in four
(57.1%) institutes and clips in the remaining three (42.9%) institutes.
Anastomosis was performed using the extracorporeal knot-tying technique in four
institutes and the intracorporeal technique in three institutes. Patients were
routinely left intubated and paralyzed for 3-7 days postoperatively in four
institutes. In total, 58 patients underwent thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF.
Fifty-two (89.7%) of the patients underwent successful thoracoscopic repair. Six 
(10.3%) operations were converted to open thoracotomy because of a long gap
(n=4), right aortic arch (n=1), and intraoperative instability (n=1). The body
weight at operation ranged from 1.2 to 4.6 kg, and the operative time ranged from
115 to 428 minutes. There were no major intraoperative complications. Eleven
patients (19.0%) suffered from anastomotic leakage. Twenty-eight patients (48.3%)
developed anastomotic stricture. One patient died during the postoperative period
because of an unrelated disease. Recurrent TEF developed in three patients
(5.2%). Thirteen patients (22.4%) later required fundoplication.
CONCLUSIONS: The outcome of thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF was comparable to that
of the open procedure. As considerable variability was observed among the seven
institutes with respect to the surgical technique and management, standardizing
the surgical management may improve the outcome.

PMID: 25594776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Clin Diagn Res. 2014 Nov;8(11):GD01-3. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2014/8655.5099. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

A rare case of adult acquired tracheo-oesophageal fistula with sub-glottic
stenosis for corrective surgery- an anesthetic challenge.

Joshi S(1), Kulkarni A(2), Holkunde RS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Professor, Department of Anaesthesia, Padmashree Dr.D Y Patil Medical College 
, Pune, India . (2)Lecturer, Department of Anaesthesia, Padmashree Dr.D Y Patil
Medical College , Pune, India . (3)Postgradute, Department of Anaesthesia,
Padmashree Dr.D Y Patil Medical College , Pune, India .

Acquired trachea-esophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare condition in adults and
causative factors include malignancy, trauma and various iatrogenic causes. The
important causative factor of TEF in our case was percutaneous tracheostomy. The 
normal protective laryngeal reflexes are lost in TEF due to the patent tract from
the airway to the upper gastrointestinal tract. The TEF poses a challenge for the
surgeon and the anaesthesiologist, as the fistula lies in close proximity to
oesophagus, trachea, upper mediastinal contents and large blood vessel. Here we
present a rare case of anesthetic management of a 26 year old male patient with
complaints of regurgitation of part of swallowed food particles through an
in-situ tracheostomy tube since two years.

PMCID: PMC4290258
PMID: 25584239  [PubMed]


139. Case Rep Med. 2014;2014:738981. doi: 10.1155/2014/738981. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Endoscopic stenting and clipping for anastomotic stricture and persistent
tracheoesophageal fistula after surgical repair of esophageal atresia in an
infant.

Benatta MA(1), Benaired A(2), Khelifaoui A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Endoscopy Unit, Military Central Hospital (HCA), 16000 Algiers,
Algeria. (2)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Military Central Hospital (HCA),
16000 Algiers, Algeria.

Anastomotic stricture (AS) and recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) are two 
complications of surgical repair of esophageal atresia (EA). Therapeutic
endoscopic modalities include stenting, tissue glue, and clipping for TEF and
endoscopic balloon dilation bougienage and stenting for esophageal strictures. We
report herein a two-month infant with both EA and TEF who benefited from a
surgical repair for EA, at the third day of life. Two months later he experienced
deglutition disorders and recurrent chest infections. The esophagogram showed an 
AS and a TEF confirmed with blue methylene test at bronchoscopy. A partially
covered self-expanding metal type biliary was endoscopically placed. Ten weeks
later the stent was removed. This allows for easy passage of the endoscope in the
gastric cavity but a persistent recurrent fistula was noted. Instillation of
contrast demonstrated a fully dilated stricture but with a persistent TEF. Then
we proceeded to placement of several endoclips at the fistula site. The
esophagogram confirmed the TEF was obliterated. At 12 months of follow-up, he was
asymptomatic. Stenting was effective to alleviate the stricture but failed to
treat the TEF. At our knowledge this is the second case of successful use of
endoclips placement to obliterate recurrent TEF after surgical repair of EA in
children.

PMCID: PMC4279268
PMID: 25580132  [PubMed]


140. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2015 May;69(5):632-7. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2014.269. Epub 2015 Jan 
7.

A cross-over experiment to investigate possible mechanisms for lower BMIs in
people who habitually eat breakfast.

Reeves S(1), Huber JW(2), Halsey LG(1), Villegas-Montes M(1), Elgumati J(1),
Smith T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Roehampton, London, UK. (2)Centre
for Health and Wellbeing Research, University of Northampton, Northampton, UK.
(3)Department of Sport, Health and Exercise Science, University of Hull, Hull,
UK.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The body mass index (BMI) of breakfast eaters is
frequently reported to be lower compared with that of breakfast skippers. This is
not explained by differences in energy intakes, indicating there may be other
mechanisms serving to drive this paradoxical association between breakfast and
BMI. This study aimed to investigate the effect of eating breakfast versus
morning fasting on measures predominantly of metabolism in lean and overweight
participants who habitually eat or skip breakfast.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Participants (n=37) were recruited into four groups on the
basis of BMI (lean and overweight) and breakfast habit (breakfast eater and
breakfast skipper). Participants were randomly assigned to a breakfast
experimental condition, breakfast eating or no breakfast, for 7 days and then
completed the alternative condition. At the end of each breakfast experimental
condition, measurements were made before and after a high carbohydrate breakfast 
of 2274 ± 777 kJ or a rest period. Resting metabolic rate, thermic effect of food
(TEF), blood glucose, insulin and leptin levels were recorded. Hunger and
'morningness' were assessed and pedometers worn.
RESULTS: Lean participants had lower fasting insulin levels (P=0.045) and higher 
insulin concentrations following breakfast (P=0.001). BMI and breakfast habit did
not interact with the experimental breakfast condition, with the exception of
hunger ratings; breakfast eaters were hungrier in the mornings compared with
breakfast skippers in the no breakfast condition (P=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: There is little evidence from this study for a metabolic-based
mechanism to explain lower BMIs in breakfast eaters.

PMID: 25563734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Ann Thorac Surg. 2015 Jan;99(1):346-8. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.06.084.

Modified end-to-end anastomosis for the treatment of congenital tracheal stenosis
with a bridging bronchus.

Stock C(1), Nathan M(2), Murray R(3), Rahbar R(3), Fynn-Thompson F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Department of Otolaryngology and Communication
Disorders, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of
Cardiac Surgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic
address: francis.fynn-thompson@cardio.chboston.org.

An infant with a ventricular septal defect; Vertebral anomalies, Anal atresia,
Cardiac anomalies, Tracho Esophageal fistula (TEF), Renal anomalies, Limb
anomalies syndrome; and tracheal stenosis with a bridging bronchus underwent
repair of the ventricular septal defect and trachea-bronchial reconstruction at
age 11 months. Herein we describe our surgical approach to resection of the
bridging bronchus and a technique using a modified end-to-end tracheal
anastomosis for the correction of this complex anomaly.

Copyright © 2015 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25555968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Med Mycol. 2015 Apr;53(3):215-24. doi: 10.1093/mmy/myu088. Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Translation elongation factor 1-a gene as a potential taxonomic and
identification marker in dermatophytes.

Mirhendi H(1), Makimura K(2), de Hoog GS(3), Rezaei-Matehkolaei A(4), Najafzadeh 
MJ(5), Umeda Y(2), Ahmadi B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Parasitology & Mycology, School of Public Health;
National Institute of Health Research, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran mirhendi@tums.ac.ir. (2)Teikyo University, Institute of Medical
Mycology and Genome Research Center, Tokyo, Japan. (3)CBS-KNAW Fungal
Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Medical Mycology,
School of Medicine; Infectious and Tropical Diseases Research Center, Ahvaz
Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran. (5)Department of
Parasitology and Mycology, Ghaem Hospital, School of Medicine, Mashhad University
of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (6)Departments of Medical Parasitology &
Mycology, School of Public Health; National Institute of Health Research, Tehran 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Intra- and interspecies variations of the translation elongation factor 1-a
(Tef-1a) gene were evaluated as a new identification marker in a wide range of
dermatophytes, which included 167 strains of 30 species. An optimized
pan-dermatophyte primer pair was designed, and the target was sequenced.
Consensus sequences were used for multiple alignment and phylogenetic tree
analysis and the levels of intra- and interspecific nucleotide polymorphism were 
assessed. Between species, the analyzed part of the Tef-1a gene varied in length 
from 709 to 769 nucleotides. Significant numbers of species including
Trichophyton rubrum, T. tonsurans, T. schoenleinii, T. concentricum, T.
violaceum, Epidermophyton floccosum, Microsporum ferrugineum, M. canis, M.
audouinii, T. equinum, T. eriotrephon, and T. erinacei were invariant in Tef-1a
and had sufficient barcoding distance with neighboring species. Although overall 
consistency was found between ITS phylogeny as the current molecular marker of
dermatophytes and Tef-1a, a higher discriminatory power of Tef-1a appeared
particularly useful in some clades of closely related species such as the A.
vanbreuseghemii, T. rubrum, A. benhamiae, and A. otae complexes. Nevertheless, we
stress that a single gene can not specify species borderlines among dermatophytes
and multiple lines of evidence based on a multilocus inquiry may ascertain an
incontrovertible evaluation of kinship.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
International Society for Human and Animal Mycology. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25550390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Syst Biol Reprod Med. 2015 Apr;61(2):113-6. doi: 10.3109/19396368.2014.999390.
Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Seminal quality in the first fraction of ejaculate.

Hebles M(1), Dorado M, Gallardo M, González-Martínez M, Sánchez-Martín P.

Author information: 
(1)Clínica Ginemed and.

Semen samples from 40 patients were collected in consecutive fractions. The
variability in semen quality of each fraction was then determined. The first
ejaculated fraction (FEF) primarily contained prostatic secretions, while the
second ejaculate fraction (SEF) held the majority of the spermatozoa suspended in
the secretions from the seminal vesicle. Differences in sperm quality were
observed when the FEF was compared to the SEF and the total ejaculate fraction
(TEF). These included the seminal parameters (volume, sperm concentration,
motility) and sperm DNA fragmentation (SDF). When compared to TEF and SEF, the
FEF presented a lower volume, higher sperm concentration, higher motility rates, 
and lower SDF. The data suggest that the first fraction renders an improved
subpopulation of spermatozoa, with lower SDF. Spermatozoa from this fraction and 
hence their use for ART may have a positive effect on fertilization and embryo
development.

PMID: 25547665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Head Neck. 2014 Dec 24. doi: 10.1002/hed.23966. [Epub ahead of print]

Reconstruction of expanding tracheoesophageal fistulae in post-radiation therapy 
patients who undergo total laryngectomy with a bipaddled radial forearm free
flap: Report of 8 cases.

Dewey EH(1), Castro JR(2), Mojica J(2), Lazarus CL(1), Su HK(1), Alpert EH(1),
Dos Reis LL(1), Urken ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Thyroid Head and Neck Cancer (THANC) Foundation, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Head and Neck - Otolaryngology, Mount Sinai Beth Israel, New
York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Our surgical approach describes a bipaddled radial forearm free flap 
(RFFF) for closure of chronic tracheoesophageal fistulae (TEF) in patients who
underwent total laryngectomy. The desired functional results were achieved.
METHODS: Eight patients underwent the procedure. The surgical approach includes
exposure and resection of the fistula tract, and a bipaddled RFFF transfer. Key
surgical maneuvers include: circumferential dissection and mobilization of the
trachea; partial sternal resection in select cases; inset of flap's distal paddle
into the anterior esophageal wall; and inset of the proximal skin paddle to the
posterior tracheal wall and cervical skin.
RESULTS: Successful reconstruction of all 8 cases was done to restore a normal
diet and a widely patent tracheal opening. One patient developed a delayed
esophageal stricture, which was successfully managed with home dilation.
CONCLUSION: Several TEF treatment approaches have been reported. Our 87.5%
esophageal lumen preservation success rate, reestablishment of adequate airway,
and uncomplicated postoperative courses demonstrates the reliability of this
surgical approach. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Head Neck, 2015.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25545827  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


145. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Nov 11;13(4):9390-402. doi: 10.4238/2014.November.11.5.

Morphological and molecular characterization of Fusarium spp pathogenic to pecan 
tree in Brazil.

Lazarotto M(1), Milanesi PM(2), Muniz MF(2), Reiniger LR(3), Beltrame R(4),
Harakava R(5), Blume E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Horticultura e Silvicultura, Universidade Federal do Rio
Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil lilalazarotto@yahoo.com.br.
(2)Departmento de Defesa Fitossanitária, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria,
Santa Maria, RS, Brasil. (3)Departmento de Fitotecnia, Universidade Federal de
Santa Maria, Santa Maria, RS, Brasil. (4)Engenharia Industrial Madeireira,
Universidade Federal de Pelotas, Pelotas, RS, Brasil. (5)Instituto Biológico de
São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

The occurrence of Fusarium spp associated with pecan tree (Carya illinoinensis)
diseases in Brazil has been observed in recent laboratory analyses in Rio Grande 
do Sul State. Thus, in this study, we i) obtained Fusarium isolates from plants
with disease symptoms; ii) tested the pathogenicity of these Fusarium isolates to
pecan; iii) characterized and grouped Fusarium isolates that were pathogenic to
the pecan tree based on morphological characteristics; iv) identified Fusarium
spp to the species complex level through TEF-1a sequencing; and v) compared the
identification methods used in the study. Fifteen isolates collected from the
inflorescences, roots, and seeds of symptomatic plants (leaf necrosis or root
rot) were used for pathogenicity tests. Morphological characterization was
conducted using only pathogenic isolates, for a total of 11 isolates, based on
the mycelial growth rate, sporulation, colony pigmentation, and conidial length
and width variables. Pathogenic isolates were grouped based on morphological
characteristics, and molecular characterization was performed by sequencing
TEF-1a genes. Pathogenic isolates belonging to the Fusarium chlamydosporum
species complex, Fusarium graminearum species complex, Fusarium proliferatum, and
Fusarium oxysporum were identified based on the TEF-1a region. Morphological
characteristics were used to effectively differentiate isolates and group the
isolates according to genetic similarity, particularly conidial width, which
emerged as a key morphological descriptor in this study.

PMID: 25501150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Stud Mycol. 2014 Sep;79:221-88. doi: 10.1016/j.simyco.2014.10.002.

The genus Bipolaris.

Manamgoda DS(1), Rossman AY(2), Castlebury LA(2), Crous PW(3), Madrid H(4),
Chukeatirote E(5), Hyde KD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Plant Biodiversity and Biogeography of East Asia, Kunming
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Science, Kunming 650201, Yunnan, China ; 
World Agro-forestry Centre, East and Central Asia, Kunming 650201, China ;
Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville 20705, MA, USA.
(2)Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, United States Department of
Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville 20705, MA, USA.
(3)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, P.O. Box 85167, 3508 AD Utrecht, The
Netherlands ; Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI),
University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa. (4)CBS-KNAW Fungal
Biodiversity Centre, P.O. Box 85167, 3508 AD Utrecht, The Netherlands ; Center
for Genomics and Bioinformatics and Medicine Faculty, Mayor University, Camino La
Piramide 5750, Huechuraba, Santiago, Chile. (5)Institute of Excellence in Fungal 
Research, School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai 57100,
Thailand. (6)Key Laboratory for Plant Biodiversity and Biogeography of East Asia,
Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Science, Kunming 650201, Yunnan, 
China ; World Agro-forestry Centre, East and Central Asia, Kunming 650201, China 
; Institute of Excellence in Fungal Research, School of Science, Mae Fah Luang
University, Chiang Rai 57100, Thailand.

The genus Bipolaris includes important plant pathogens with worldwide
distribution. Species recognition in the genus has been uncertain due to the lack
of molecular data from ex-type cultures as well as overlapping morphological
characteristics. In this study, we revise the genus Bipolaris based on DNA
sequence data derived from living cultures of fresh isolates, available ex-type
cultures from worldwide collections and observation of type and additional
specimens. Combined analyses of ITS, GPDH and TEF gene sequences were used to
reconstruct the molecular phylogeny of the genus Bipolaris for species with
living cultures. The GPDH gene is determined to be the best single marker for
species of Bipolaris. Generic boundaries between Bipolaris and Curvularia are
revised and presented in an updated combined ITS and GPDH phylogenetic tree. We
accept 47 species in the genus Bipolaris and clarify the taxonomy, host
associations, geographic distributions and species' synonymies. Modern
descriptions and illustrations are provided for 38 species in the genus with
notes provided for the other taxa when recent descriptions are available.
Bipolaris cynodontis, B. oryzae, B. victoriae, B. yamadae and B. zeicola are epi-
or neotypified and a lectotype is designated for B. stenospila. Excluded and
doubtful species are listed with notes on taxonomy and phylogeny. Seven new
combinations are introduced in the genus Curvularia to accomodate the species of 
Bipolaris transferred based on the phylogenetic analysis. A taxonomic key is
provided for the morphological identification of species within the genus.

PMCID: PMC4255534
PMID: 25492990  [PubMed]


147. Stud Mycol. 2014 Sep;79:121-86. doi: 10.1016/j.simyco.2014.09.005.

Pestalotiopsis revisited.

Maharachchikumbura SS(1), Hyde KD(1), Groenewald JZ(2), Xu J(3), Crous PW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Economic Plants and Biotechnology, Kunming Institute of
Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 132 Lanhei Road, Kunming 650201, China ;
World Agroforestry Centre, China & East-Asia Office, 132 Lanhei Road, Kunming
650201, China ; Institute of Excellence in Fungal Research, School of Science,
Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai 57100, Thailand. (2)CBS-KNAW Fungal
Biodiversity Centre, P.O. Box 85167, 3508 AD Utrecht, The Netherlands. (3)Key
Laboratory of Economic Plants and Biotechnology, Kunming Institute of Botany,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, 132 Lanhei Road, Kunming 650201, China ; World
Agroforestry Centre, China & East-Asia Office, 132 Lanhei Road, Kunming 650201,
China. (4)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, P.O. Box 85167, 3508 AD Utrecht,
The Netherlands ; Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI),
University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa ; Wageningen University and
Research Centre (WUR), Laboratory of Phytopathology, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708
PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Species of Pestalotiopsis occur commonly as plant pathogens, and represent a
fungal group known to produce a wide range of chemically novel, diverse
metabolites. In the present study, we investigated 91 Pestalotiopsis isolates
from the CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre (CBS) culture collection. The
phylogeny of the Amphisphaeriaceae was constructed based on analysis of 28S nrRNA
gene (LSU) sequence data, and taxonomic changes are proposed to reflect more
natural groupings. We combined morphological and DNA data, and segregated two
novel genera from Pestalotiopsis, namely Neopestalotiopsis and
Pseudopestalotiopsis. The three genera are easily distinguishable on the basis of
their conidiogenous cells and colour of their median conidial cells. We coupled
morphological and combined sequence data of internal transcribed spacer (ITS),
partial ß-tubulin (TUB) and partial translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF)
gene regions, which revealed 30 clades in Neopestalotiopsis and 43 clades in
Pestalotiopsis. Based on these data, 11 new species are introduced in
Neopestalotiopsis, 24 in Pestalotiopsis, and two in Pseudopestalotiopsis. Several
new combinations are proposed to emend monophyly of Neopestalotiopsis,
Pestalotiopsis and Pseudopestalotiopsis.

PMCID: PMC4255583
PMID: 25492988  [PubMed]


148. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Dec;49(12):1758-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.09.013.
Epub 2014 Oct 1.

A contemporary prediction rule for esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF).

Turner B(1), Dasgupta R(2), Brindle ME(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Calgary, AB Canada. (2)Department of
Surgery University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati OH USA. (3)Department of Surgery,
University of Calgary, AB Canada. Electronic address: mary_brindle@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Existing prediction models for tracheo-esophageal fistula
(TEF) and esophageal atresia (EA) are derived from small single-institution
populations treated over long periods. A prediction rule developed in a
contemporary, multicenter cohort is important for counseling, tailoring therapy, 
and benchmarking outcomes.
METHODS: Data were obtained from the 2003, 2006, and 2009 editions of the HCUP
Kids' Inpatient Database. Subjects included patients with admission age<three
days and ICD-9 diagnostic classification of EA or TEF or procedural coding for
TEF repair. An internally validated prediction rule for survival to discharge was
developed using a stepwise logistic regression selection algorithm. Predictors
included were sex, birth weight, gestational age, cardiac anomalies (major and
minor), and chromosomal, other gastrointestinal, central nervous system, and
renal anomalies. The model was evaluated for discrimination and calibration and
compared with that of Spitz.
RESULTS: An integer-based prediction model was created, identifying patients at
high, intermediate, and low risk of death with very good discrimination (c=0.723)
and calibration. It is particularly effective at identifying the small population
at highest risk of death. The model can be summarized as follows with patients
first assigned a score for associated abnormalities: chromosomal abnormality=6
points, major cardiac anomaly=3 points, renal anomaly=2 points, and weight less
than 1500g=9 points. Point score cut-offs were 0-6 points low risk, 7-14
intermediate risk, and 15-20 high risk.
CONCLUSIONS: This model compares well with existing prediction models and more
effectively discriminates the highest risk patients who may require tailored
therapy. The Spitz model is also validated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25487478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Nov;49(11):1683-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.08.003. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

Chronic vomiting and recurrent pneumonia in an adolescent female.

Tashiro J(1), Malvezzi L(2), Kasi A(3), Burnweit CA(4).

Author information: 
(1)DeWitt-Daughtry Family Department of Surgery, Leonard M. Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Miami Children's Hospital, Miami, FL. (3)Department of Medical Education, Miami
Children's Hospital, Miami, FL. (4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Miami
Children's Hospital, Miami, FL. Electronic address: Cathy.Burnweit@mch.com.

A 17-year-old girl presented with episodic vomiting associated with chest pain, a
20-pound weight loss over the past year, and multiple hospitalizations for
pneumonia. She was bradycardic, cachectic (<3rd percentile), pale, and had
anterior cervical lymphadenopathy. CT angiography suggested an obstructive
vascular ring (formed by a right aortic arch with an aberrant left subclavian
artery), diverticulum of Kommerell, and a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). She
underwent left thoracotomy with ligation and division of the ligamentum
arteriosum to relieve the vascular ring. Flexible bronchoscopy at the time
demonstrated a large H-type TEF. Eight weeks later, she had the TEF closed via a 
right cervical incision and recovered uneventfully. Our case is unique, with
symptomatic presentation of a congenital TEF and vascular ring in a teenager.
Such major congenital anomalies are rarely discovered outside of childhood, and
TEFs virtually always (>90%) present as neonatal emergencies secondary to
esophageal obstruction. They have a high incidence of associated abnormalities,
cardiovascular being the most common. Unexplained recurrent respiratory symptoms 
in an otherwise normal child with dysphagia should prompt the clinician to
evaluate patients for foreign bodies, reflux and other more common problems.
Unusual etiologies, however, do occur - as in this case - and warrant more
complex workup.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25475818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Nov;49(11):1570-2. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.04.016. Epub
2014 Oct 1.

Thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula:
overcoming the learning curve.

Lee S(1), Lee SK(1), Seo JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School 
of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Surgery, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address:
jm0815.seo@samsung.com.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: We describe our initial experience of thoracoscopic
esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) repair.
METHODS: Twenty-three consecutive cases of thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF were
performed between October 2008 and March 2013. The medical records of 22 patients
were retrospectively reviewed, excluding one case of early postoperative
mortality.
RESULTS: The study period was divided into two sections: from 2008 to 2011 (13
cases) and from 2012 to 2013 (9 cases). Patient characteristics did not differ
between the two study periods. Mean operation time was significantly shorter in
period 2 compared to period 1 (p<0.01). There was one case that was converted to 
open repair via thoracotomy during period 1. Anastomosis leakage was seen in two 
cases during period 1, while no cases of leakage were encountered in period 2.
Ten of 13 cases (76.9 %) in period 1 had clinically significant esophageal
strictures requiring one or more sessions of balloon dilatations. No cases of
esophageal strictures were seen in period 2 (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: When the initial learning curve was endured, surgical outcomes of
thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF were superior to the outcomes of earlier cases,
and comparable to past experiences with open thoracotomy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25475795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Neth Heart J. 2015 Mar;23(3):168-73. doi: 10.1007/s12471-014-0638-5.

The effects of intraoperative dexamethasone on left atrial function and
postoperative atrial fibrillation in cardiac surgical patients.

Jacob KA(1), Dieleman JM, Nathoe HM, van Osch D, de Waal EE, Cramer MJ, Kluin J, 
van Dijk D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Mail Stop F.06.149, PO Box 85500, 3508, Utrecht, the Netherlands,
k.a.jacob@umcutrecht.nl.

Postoperative new-onset atrial fibrillation (PNAF) is very common after cardiac
surgery and postoperative inflammation may contribute to PNAF by inducing atrial 
dysfunction. Corticosteroids reduce inflammation and may thus reduce atrial
dysfunction and PNAF development. This study aimed to determine whether
dexamethasone protects against left atrial dysfunction and PNAF in cardiac
surgical patients. Cardiac surgical patients were randomised to a single dose of 
dexamethasone (1 mg.kg(-1)) or placebo after inducing anaesthesia.
Transoesophageal echocardiography was performed in patients before and after
surgery. Primary outcome was left atrial total ejection fraction (LA-TEF) after
sternal closure; secondary outcomes included left atrial diameter and PNAF. 62
patients were included. Baseline characteristics were well balanced.
Postoperative LA-TEF was 36.4 % in the dexamethasone group and 40.2 % in the
placebo group (difference -3.8 %; 95 % confidence interval (CI) -9.0 to 1.4 %;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.15). Postoperative left atrial diameter was 4.6 and 4.3 cm, respectively
(difference 0.3; 95 % CI -0.2 to 0.7; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.19). The incidence of PNAF was 30 %
in the dexamethasone group and 39 % in the placebo group (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.47).
Intraoperative high-dose dexamethasone did not protect against postoperative left
atrial dysfunction and did not reduce the risk of PNAF in cardiac surgical
patients.

PMCID: PMC4352148
PMID: 25475514  [PubMed]


152. Respirol Case Rep. 2014 Mar;2(1):27-9. doi: 10.1002/rcr2.38. Epub 2013 Dec 19.

Complete healing of tracheoesophageal fistula in a ventilator-dependent patient
by conservative treatment.

Lin WY(1), Chiu YC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, Taipei-Veterans General
Hospital Hsin-Chu branch Zhudong, Taiwan. (2)Division of Chest Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Taipei-Veterans General Hospital Hsin-Chu Branch Zhudong,
Taiwan.

Acquired nonmalignant tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare clinical
condition with multiple etiologies, although post-intubation injury is the most
common cause. TEFs can be fatal if left untreated due to devastating pulmonary
complications caused by tracheobronchial contamination and poor nutrition.
Herein, we present a case of complete healing of a post-intubation TEF under
conservative treatment in a ventilator-dependent patient, and review previous
studies regarding the treatment of acquired nonmalignant TEFs.

PMCID: PMC4184726
PMID: 25473556  [PubMed]


153. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2014;5(12):1288-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2013.09.016. Epub
2014 Nov 6.

Management of patients with combined tracheoesophageal fistula, esophageal
atresia, and duodenal atresia.

Nabzdyk CS(1), Chiu B(2), Jackson CC(1), Chwals WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Floating Hospital for
Children at Tufts Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
MA, United States. (2)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Floating Hospital for Children at Tufts Medical Center, Tufts University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address:
bchiu@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with combined esophageal atresia (EA), tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF), and duodenal atresia (DA) pose a rare management challenge.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: Three patients with combined esophageal atresia (EA),
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), and duodenal atresia safely underwent a staged
approach inserting a gastrostomy tube and repairing the EA/TEF first followed by 
a duodenoduodenostomy within one week. None of the patients suffered significant 
pre- or post-operative complications and our follow-up data (between 12 and 24
months) suggest that all patients eventually outgrow their reflux and respiratory
symptoms.
DISCUSSION: While some authors support repair of all defects in one surgery, we
recommend a staged approach. A gastrostomy tube is placed first for gastric
decompression before TEF ligation and EA repair can be safely undertaken. The
repair of the DA can then be performed within 3-7 days under controlled
circumstances.
CONCLUSION: A staged approach of inserting a gastrostomy tube and repairing the
EA/TEF first followed by a duodenoduodenostomy within one week resulted in
excellent outcomes.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4275966
PMID: 25460495  [PubMed]


154. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2014 Oct;23(5):261-9. doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2014.09.006. 
Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Difficult esophageal atresia: trick and treat.

Conforti A(1), Morini F(1), Bagolan P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Surgery Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, Bambino
Gesù Children Hospital - Research Institute, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165 Rome,
Italy. (2)Neonatal Surgery Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, 
Bambino Gesù Children Hospital - Research Institute, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165
Rome, Italy. Electronic address: pietro.bagolan@opbg.net.

Although most patients with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF) may benefit from "standard" management, which is deferred emergency
surgery, some may present unexpected elements that change this paradigm. Birth
weight, associated anomalies, and long gap can influence the therapeutic schedule
of the patients with EA/TEF and can make their treatment tricky. As a
consequence, detailed information on these aspects gives the power to develop a
decision-making process as correct as possible. In this article, we will review
the most important factors influencing the treatment of patients with EA/TEF and 
will share our experience on the diagnostic and therapeutic tips that may provide
pivotal help in the management of such patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25459010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):542-3. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.10.002. Epub
2014 Oct 13.

Were the wrong cells studied?

Koppe J(1), Ten Tusscher GW(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Amsterdam, Emma Children's Hospital-AMC, Dept. of Pulmonology,
Hollandstraat 6, 3634 AT Loenersloot, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Paediatrics and Neonatology, Westfriesgasthuis, Hoorn, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):544-5.

Comment on
    Toxicol Lett. 2014 Apr 7;226(1):43-52.

Peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) studying the effects of dioxins and
dioxin-like compounds in vitro is not correct. Peripheral lymphocytes in general 
(Th1, Th2) do not have an Ah-receptor. Polymorphonuclear leucocytes (PMN's) are
more logical to use.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mar Pollut Bull. 2015 Jan 15;90(1-2):334-8. doi: 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2014.09.021.
Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Origin, distribution and toxicological potential of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in surface sediments from the Bushehr coast, the Persian Gulf.

Mehdinia A(1), Aghadadashi V(2), Fumani NS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Science, Iranian National Institute for Oceanography and 
Atmospheric Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: mehdinia@inio.ac.ir.
(2)Department of Marine Science, Iranian National Institute for Oceanography and 
Atmospheric Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

To evaluate the hazards of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the Bushehr
coastal zones, 12 surface sediments were analyzed. The <U+2211>14PAHs concentrations
varied from 371 to 611 ng g(-1) dw. The primary sources of the observed PAHs were
pyrolytic processes, demonstrating the dominance of petroleum-related combustion 
inputs. The ERL/ERM and TEL/PEL values showed that there was a moderate level of 
toxicity risk for some PAHs. The toxicological significance of the pollutants was
assessed using the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) to calculate both the toxic
equivalent for dioxins (TEQTCDD) and the TEQ carcinogenic risks.
Dibenz(a,h)anthracene exhibited the highest proportion in the TEQs, ranging from 
49% to 56% (TEQcarc) and from 29% to 39% (TEQTCDD) regarding the overall toxicity
in the sampled sediments. This result suggests that the ambient
dibenz(a,h)anthracene concentration represents the risk posed by PAHs in the
sediments. Moreover, using a specific sediment criterion demonstrated the
bioaccumulation potential of benzo(a)pyrene for humans in the sampled sediments.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25440895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Carbohydr Polym. 2015 Jan 22;115:260-8. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2014.08.080. Epub 
2014 Sep 2.

Impact of variety type and particle size distribution on starch enzymatic
hydrolysis and functional properties of tef flours.

Abebe W(1), Collar C(2), Ronda F(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Agricultural and Forestry Engineering, University of Valladolid,
Av. Madrid 57, 34004 Palencia, Spain; Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural
Research, P.O. Box 2003, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. (2)Food Science Department,
Instituto de Agroquímica y Tecnología de Alimentos (CSIC), Avenida Catedrático
Agustín Escardino 7, Paterna 46980, Valencia, Spain. (3)College of Agricultural
and Forestry Engineering, University of Valladolid, Av. Madrid 57, 34004
Palencia, Spain. Electronic address: fronda@iaf.uva.es.

Tef grain is becoming very attractive in the Western countries since it is a
gluten-free grain with appreciated nutritional advantages. However there is
little information of its functional properties and starch digestibility and how 
they are affected by variety type and particle size distribution. This work
evaluates the effect of the grain variety and the mill used on tef flour
physico-chemical and functional properties, mainly derived from starch behavior. 
In vitro starch digestibility of the flours by Englyst method was assessed. Two
types of mills were used to obtain whole flours of different granulation. Rice
and wheat flours were analyzed as references. Protein molecular weight
distribution and flour structure by SEM were also analyzed to justify some of the
differences found among the cereals studied. Tef cultivar and mill type exhibited
important effect on granulation, bulking density and starch damage, affecting the
processing performance of the flours and determining the hydration and pasting
properties. The color was darker although one of the white varieties had a
lightness near the reference flours. Different granulation of tef flour induced
different in vitro starch digestibility. The disc attrition mill led to higher
starch digestibility rate index and rapidly available glucose, probably as
consequence of a higher damaged starch content. The results confirm the adequacy 
of tef flour as ingredient in the formulation of new cereal based foods and the
importance of the variety and the mill on its functional properties.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25439894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Med Mycol. 2015 Feb 1;53(2):99-106. doi: 10.1093/mmy/myu079. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

DNA barcoding of clinically relevant Cunninghamella species.

Yu J(1), Walther G(2), Van Diepeningen AD(3), Gerrits Van Den Ende AH(3), Li
RY(4), Moussa TA(5), Almaghrabi OA(6), De Hoog GS(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Medical Mycology, Peking University Health Science Center,
Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing, China CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology,
University of Jena, Jena, Germany Leibniz-Institute for Natural Product Research 
and Infection Biology - Hans-Knöll-Institute, Jena Microbial Resource Collection,
Jena, Germany. (3)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands. 
(4)Research Center for Medical Mycology, Peking University Health Science Center,
Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First Hospital,
Beijing, China. (5)Biological Sciences Department, Faculty of Science (North
Jeddah), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia Botany and Microbiology 
Department, Faculty of Science, Giza, Egypt. (6)Biological Sciences Department,
Faculty of Science (North Jeddah), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi
Arabia. (7)Research Center for Medical Mycology, Peking University Health Science
Center, Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Peking University First
Hospital, Beijing, China CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Utrecht, The
Netherlands Biological Sciences Department, Faculty of Science (North Jeddah),
King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia Institute for Biodiversity and
Ecosystem Dynamics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Sun
Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China, Shanghai
Institute of Medical Mycology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China, Basic Pathology Department, Federal University of
Paraná State, Curitiba, Brazil de.hoog@cbs.knaw.nl.

Mucormycosis caused, in part, by representatives of the genus Cunninghamella is a
severe infection with high mortality in patients with impaired immunity. Several 
species have been described in the literature as etiologic agents. A DNA
barcoding study using ITS rDNA and tef-1a provided concordance of molecular data 
with conventional characters. The currently accepted Cunninghamella species were 
well supported in phylogenetic trees of both markers except for C. septata with
ITS that clustered in the C. echinulata clade. Sequence variability was
distinctly higher for the ITS than for tef-1a. Intraspecific ITS variability of
some of the species exceeded that between some closely related species, but the
marker remained applicable for species identification. The most variable species 
for both markers was C. echinulata. Cunninghamella bertholletiae is the main
pathogenic species; infections by C. blakesleeana, C. echinulata, and C. elegans 
are highly exceptional.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
International Society for Human and Animal Mycology. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25431472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Ann Oncol. 2015 Jan;26(1):149-56.

Docetaxel plus oxaliplatin with or without fluorouracil or capecitabine in
metastatic or locally recurrent gastric cancer: a randomized phase II study.

Van Cutsem E, Boni C, Tabernero J, Massuti B, Middleton G, Dane F, Reichardt P,
Pimentel FL, Cohn A, Follana P, Clemens M, Zaniboni A, Moiseyenko V, Harrison M, 
Richards DA, Prenen H, Pernot S, Ecstein-Fraisse E, Hitier S, Rougier P.

BACKGROUND: Docetaxel/cisplatin/infusional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU; DCF) is a
standard chemotherapy regimen for patients with advanced gastric cancer (GC).
This phase II study evaluated docetaxel/oxaliplatin (TE),
docetaxel/oxaliplatin/5-FU (TEF), and docetaxel/oxaliplatin/capecitabine (TEX) in
patients with advanced GC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with metastatic or locally recurrent gastric
adenocarcinoma (including carcinoma of the gastro-oesophageal junction) were
randomly assigned (1 : 1 : 1) to TE, TEF, or TEX. Each regimen was tested at two 
doses before full evaluation at optimized dose levels. The primary end point was 
progression-free survival (PFS). Overall survival (OS), tumour response, and
safety were also assessed. A therapeutic index (median PFS relative to the
incidence of febrile neutropenia) was calculated for each regimen and compared
with DCF (historical data).
RESULTS: Overall, 248 patients were randomly assigned to receive optimized dose
treatment. Median PFS was longer with TEF (7.66 [95% confidence interval (CI):
6.97-9.40] months) versus TE (4.50 [3.68-5.32] months) and TEX (5.55 [4.30-6.37] 
months). Median OS was 14.59 (95% CI: 11.70-21.78) months for TEF versus 8.97
(7.79-10.87) months for TE and 11.30 (8.08-14.03) months for TEX. The rate of
tumour response (complete or partial) was 46.6% (95% CI 35.9-57.5) for TEF versus
23.1% (14.3-34.0) for TE and 25.6% (16.6-36.4) for TEX. The frequency and type of
adverse events (AEs) were similar across the three arms. Common grade 3/4 AEs
were fatigue (21%), sensory neuropathy (14%), and diarrhoea (13%). Febrile
neutropenia was reported in 2% (TEF), 14% (TE), and 9% (TEX) of patients. The
therapeutic index was improved with TEF versus TEX, TE, or DCF.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that TEF is worthy of evaluation as an arm in a
phase III trial or as a backbone regimen for new targeted agents in advanced GC. 
CLINICALTRIALS.GOV: Identifier Trial registration number: NCT00382720.

PMID: 25416687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2015 Feb;20(2):286-7. doi: 10.1093/icvts/ivu387.
Epub 2014 Nov 16.

Rare association of pulmonary artery sling with tracheo-oesophageal fistula and
patent ductus arteriosus.

Zhang J(1), Deng L(1), Tang M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of ICU (PICU), West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Sichuan,
China. (2)Department of ICU (PICU), West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Sichuan, China zjmtg2014@126.com.

Congenital tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) is a life-threatening complication
caused by communication between the oesophagus and the tracheobronchial tree
within the neck or the thorax. TEF without oesophageal atresia is commonly known 
as 'H'-type TEF, and it is extremely rare in infants, accounting for ~2-4% of all
congenital tracheo-oesophageal malformations. Here, we report a rare case of a
pulmonary artery sling with TEF and patent ductus arteriosus.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25404231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Pediatr Surg Int. 2015 Feb;31(2):181-5. doi: 10.1007/s00383-014-3641-4. Epub 2014
Nov 18.

Esophageal atresia and malrotation: what association?

Pachl M(1), Eaton S, Kiely EM, Drake D, Cross K, Curry JI, Pierro A, DeCoppi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond
Street Hospital, London, UK, max.pachl@nhs.net.

INTRODUCTION: Esophageal atresia/tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA/TEF) has an
incidence of approximately 1:3,500. The incidence of malrotation is thought to be
1:200-500. We attempted to define the incidence of a combination and discuss the 
implications.
METHODS: This was a retrospective review of all patients admitted to a single
institution with a diagnosis of EA or EA/TEF or TEF between April 1981 and
January 2013. Patients were included if the position of the duodeno-jejunal
flexure (DJF) was determined by upper GI contrast study (UGIS), surgery or
post-mortem.
RESULTS: Case notes were reviewed for 235 patients. In the EA type A group, 3/28 
(11 %; 95 % CI 3.7-27.2 %) had malrotation, significantly higher than the
reported incidence of malrotation in the general population (p = 0.0008). All
three patients in this group were symptomatic with one patient found to have a
volvulus at emergency surgery. In the type C group, 6/196 (3 %, 95 % CI
1.4-6.5 %) had malrotation, significantly higher than the incidence reported for 
the general population (p = 0.0033) but not significantly different to that of
the type A group (p = 0.0878). There were no patients with malrotation identified
in any other EA/TEF type. In total, 9/235 (3.8 %; 95 % CI 2.0-7.2 %) patients
with EA had malrotation, significantly higher than the 5/1,050 (0.48 %) reported 
for the general population (p = 0.0002).
CONCLUSION: There is a high incidence of malrotation in patients with pure EA. In
the type A group an attempt to identify the DJF position at gastrostomy siting
and/or performance of UGIS in the neonatal period should be undertaken. There
should also be a low threshold for UGIS in all EA/TEF patients.

PMID: 25403487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Emerg Trauma Shock. 2014 Oct;7(4):316-21. doi: 10.4103/0974-2700.142773.

Severe esophageal injuries caused by accidental button battery ingestion in
children.

Fuentes S(1), Cano I(1), Benavent MI(1), Gómez A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, 12 de Octubre University Hospital, Madrid,
Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Button batteries represent a low percentage of all foreign bodies
swallowed by children and esophageal location is even less frequent. However,
these cases are more likely to develop severe injuries. The aim of this essay is 
to report three cases treated in our institution and review previous reports.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Chart review and literature search.
CASE REPORTS: We treated three children between 2-7- years old with button
batteries lodged at esophagus. They all presented esophageal burns (EB), which
evolved in esophageal stenosis in two out of the three cases.
RESULTS: We found 29 more cases in literature and the injuries included EB,
esophageal perforation (EP) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
DISCUSSION: Swallowed button batteries rarely remain in esophagus, but these
cases present a higher risk of tisular damage. Injuries can take place even after
few hours; and therefore, endoscopy must be performed as soon as possible.
Further study on button batteries' safety and the establishment of a maximum size
for them would be good preventive measures.

PMCID: PMC4231271
PMID: 25400396  [PubMed]


163. J Exp Bot. 2015 Feb;66(3):933-44. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru452. Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Semi-dwarfism and lodging tolerance in tef (Eragrostis tef) is linked to a
mutation in the a-Tubulin 1 gene.

Jöst M(1), Esfeld K(1), Burian A(1), Cannarozzi G(1), Chanyalew S(2), Kuhlemeier 
C(1), Assefa K(2), Tadele Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Bern, Altenbergrain 21, CH-3013
Bern, Switzerland. (2)Ethiopian Institute of Agricultural Research, Debre Zeit
Agricultural Research Center, PO Box 32, Debre Zeit, Ethiopia. (3)Institute of
Plant Sciences, University of Bern, Altenbergrain 21, CH-3013 Bern, Switzerland
zerihun.tadele@ips.unibe.ch.

Genetic improvement of native crops is a new and promising strategy to combat
hunger in the developing world. Tef is the major staple food crop for
approximately 50 million people in Ethiopia. As an indigenous cereal, it is well 
adapted to diverse climatic and soil conditions; however, its productivity is
extremely low mainly due to susceptibility to lodging. Tef has a tall and weak
stem, liable to lodge (or fall over), which is aggravated by wind, rain, or
application of nitrogen fertilizer. To circumvent this problem, the first
semi-dwarf lodging-tolerant tef line, called kegne, was developed from an ethyl
methanesulphonate (EMS)-mutagenized population. The response of kegne to
microtubule-depolymerizing and -stabilizing drugs, as well as subsequent gene
sequencing and segregation analysis, suggests that a defect in the a-Tubulin gene
is functionally and genetically tightly linked to the kegne phenotype. In diploid
species such as rice, homozygous mutations in a-Tubulin genes result in extreme
dwarfism and weak stems. In the allotetraploid tef, only one homeologue is
mutated, and the presence of the second intact a-Tubulin gene copy confers the
agriculturally beneficial semi-dwarf and lodging-tolerant phenotype.
Introgression of kegne into locally adapted and popular tef cultivars in Ethiopia
will increase the lodging tolerance in the tef germplasm and, as a result, will
improve the productivity of this valuable crop.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4321551
PMID: 25399019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cryo Letters. 2014 Sep-Oct;35(5):395-9.

Extracellular ice phase transitions in insects.

Hawes TC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Asian University, Banglamung, Chonburi 20260, Thailand.
timothyhawes@hotmail.com.

At temperatures below their temperature of crystallization (Tc), the
extracellular body fluids of insects undergo a phase transition from liquid to
solid. Insects that survive the transition to equilibrium (complete freezing of
the body fluids) are designated as freeze tolerant. Although this phenomenon has 
been reported and described in many Insecta, current nomenclature and theory does
not clearly delineate between the process of transition (freezing) and the final 
solid phase itself (the frozen state). Thus freeze tolerant insects are
currently, by convention, described in terms of the temperature at which the
crystallization of their body fluids is initiated, Tc. In fact, the correct
descriptor for insects that tolerate freezing is the temperature of equilibrium
freezing, Tef. The process of freezing is itself a separate physical event with
unique physiological stresses that are associated with ice growth.
Correspondingly there are a number of insects whose physiological cryo-limits are
very specifically delineated by this transitional envelope. The distinction also 
has considerable significance for our understanding of insect cryobiology:
firstly, because the ability to manage endogenous ice growth is a fundamental
segregator of cryotype; and secondly, because our understanding of internal ice
management is still largely nascent.

PMID: 25397954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. G Ital Med Lav Ergon. 2014 Jul-Sep;36(3):133-9.

[Carcinogenic risk of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons: classification and
interpretation of the monitoring].

[Article in Italian]

Catalani S, Fostinelli J, Apostoli P.

The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are widespread contaminants
characterized by various chemical, physical and toxic properties. The
characterization of occupational and environmental exposures and the use of
suitable measurements protocols are very significant because their presence in
mixtures and environmental persistency. In the past few years, the knowledge
concerning carcinogenicity of PAHs have been reviewed, the mechanisms involved
are the interaction of PAH's metabolites with DNA and oxidative damages. The main
requirement for research concerns lack of knowledge on reference values and
occupational exposure's assessment in particular PAHs sampling methods that can
lead to combined measurements of vapor and aerosol mixtures. Aims of this study
are to describe a possible occupational sources of PAHs providing also an update 
of mechanism involved in their carcinogenicity and risk calculation as is done in
the TEF approach. The classifications provided by International Agencies and
Institutions and the limit values adopted have been reviewed and taken into
account.

PMID: 25369710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Jun;82(6):831-7. doi: 10.1111/cen.12652. Epub 2015
Jan 9.

Enhanced thermic effect of food, postprandial NEFA suppression and raised
adiponectin in obese women who eat slowly.

Reddy NL(1,)(2), Peng C(2), Carreira MC(3), Halder L(2), Hattersley J(2), Piya
MK(1,)(2), Tripathi G(1), Randeva HS(1,)(2), Casanueva FF(3,)(4), McTernan PG(1),
Kumar S(1,)(2), Barber TM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational and Systems Medicine, Warwick Medical School, The
University of Warwick, Clinical Sciences Research Laboratories, University
Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire, Coventry, UK. (2)Warwickshire Institute for 
the Study of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University Hospitals
Coventry and Warwickshire, Coventry, UK. (3)CIBER Fisiopatología Obesidad y
Nutrición (CB06/03), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Santiago de
Compostela, Spain. (4)Department of Medicine, Santiago de Compostela University, 
Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago (CHUS), Santiago de Compostela,
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Meal duration may influence cardiometabolic health. The aim of this
study was to explore postprandial effects of meal duration on human metabolism
and appetite.
DESIGN: Postprandial comparisons following a standard meal eaten slowly over 40
min ('D40') and the same meal eaten quickly over 10 min ('D10') on a different
day. Each participant therefore acted as their own control, thereby limiting
confounding factors.
PATIENTS: Obese premenopausal Caucasian women (n = 10) with confirmed
normoglycaemia were recruited from an obesity clinic at UHCW, Coventry UK.
Subjects underwent whole-body calorimetry (8-h) on two separate days.
MEASUREMENTS: Following standard lunch (D40 vs D10), 4-h postprandial analysis
included thermic effect of food (TEF) and bloods taken at predefined times
(including baseline fasting). Analytes included lipid profile, adiponectin,
insulin, glucose, ghrelin, leptin, endotoxin, gut and pancreatic hormones.
Appetite was measured using visual-analogue scales and ad libitum food intake at 
subsequent meal. Paired sample t-tests [including area under the curve (AUC)]
were used to compare D40 and D10 trials.
RESULTS: Postprandial TEF (over 240-min) was significantly greater for D40 than
D10 [mean (SEM): 80·9 kcal (3·8) vs 29·9 kcal (3·4); 10·6% vs 3·9%, respectively,
P = 0·006; AUC 71·7 kcal.h vs 22·4 kcal.h, respectively, P = 0·02]. Postprandial 
plasma NEFA was significantly lower, and adiponectin levels were significantly
higher for D40 than D10 [AUC (SEM): NEFA 627 µmol.h/l (56) vs 769 µmol.h/l (60), 
respectively, P = 0·02; adiponectin 33·4 µg.h/ml (3·9) vs 27·3 µg.h/ml (3·8),
respectively, P = 0·04]. Other postprandial analytes and appetite measures were
equivalent.
CONCLUSIONS: In obese women, eating slowly associates with enhanced TEF, elevated
serum adiponectin and suppressed NEFA.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25369176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int J Dev Biol. 2014;58(5):369-77. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.130353ct.

Two different vestigial like 4 genes are differentially expressed during Xenopus 
laevis development.

Barrionuevo MG(1), Aybar MJ, Tríbulo C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Superior de Investigaciones Biológicas (INSIBIO, CONICET-UNT),
Universidad Nacional de Tucumán, San Miguel de Tucumán, Tucumán, Argentina.

The vestigial gene (vg) was first characterized in Drosophila and several
homologues were identified in vertebrates and called vestigial like 1-4
(vgll1-4). Vgll proteins interact with the transcription factors TEF-1 and MEF-2 
through a conserved region called TONDU (TDU). Vgll4s are characterized by two
tandem TDU domains which differentiate them from other members of the vestigial
family. In Xenopus two genes were identified as vgll4. Our bioinformatic analysis
demonstrated that these two genes are paralogues and must be named differently.
We designated them as vgll4 and vgll4l. In situ hybridization analysis revealed
that the expression of these two genes is rather different. At gastrula stage,
both were expressed in the animal pole. However, at neurula stage, vgll4 was
mainly expressed in the neural plate and neural folds, while vgll4l prevailed in 
the neural folds and epidermis. From the advanced neurula stage onward,
expression of both genes was strongly enhanced in neural tissues, anterior neural
plate, migrating neural crest, optic and otic vesicles. Nevertheless, there were 
some differences: vgll4 presented somite expression and vgll4l was localized at
the skin and notochord. Our results demonstrate that Xenopus has two orthologues 
of the vgll4 gene, vgll4 and vgll4l with differential expression in Xenopus
embryos and they may well have different roles during development.

PMID: 25354458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 20;9(10):e110717. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110717.
eCollection 2014.

Molecular and morphological analysis reveals five new species of Zygophiala
associated with flyspeck signs on plant hosts from China.

Gao L(1), Zhang M(1), Zhao W(1), Hao L(1), Chen H(1), Zhang R(1), Batzer JC(2),
Gleason ML(2), Sun G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of State Key Laboratory of Crop Stress Biology in Arid Areas and
College of Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi
Province, China. (2)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Iowa State
University, Ames, Iowa State, United States of America.

Species in the genus Zygophiala are associated with sooty blotch and flyspeck
disease on a wide range of hosts. In this study, 63 Zygophiala isolates collected
from flyspeck colonies on a range of plants from several regions of China were
used for phylogeny, host range and geographic distribution analysis. Phylogenetic
trees were constructed on four genes--internal transcribed spacer (ITS), partial 
translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF), ß-tubulin (TUB2), and actin
(ACT)--both individually and in combination. Isolates were grouped into 11 clades
among which five new species, Z. emperorae, Z. trispora, Z. musae, Z. inaequalis 
and Z. longispora, were described. Species of Zygophiala differed in observed
host range and geographic distribution. Z. wisconsinensis and Z. emperorae were
the most prevalent throughout the sampled regions of China, whereas Z. trispora, 
Z. musae, Z. inaequalis and Z. longispora were collected only in southern China. 
The hosts of Z. wisconsinensis and Z. emperorae were mainly in the family
Rosaceae whereas Z. trispora, Z. musae, Z. inaequalis and Z. longispora were
found mainly on banana (Musa spp.). Cross inoculation tests provided evidence of 
host specificity among SBFS species.

PMCID: PMC4203821
PMID: 25329930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Dyn. 2015 Mar;244(3):277-88. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24219. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

One shall become two: Separation of the esophagus and trachea from the common
foregut tube.

Billmyre KK(1), Hutson M, Klingensmith J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina.

The alimentary and respiratory organ systems arise from a common endodermal
origin, the anterior foregut tube. Formation of the esophagus from the dorsal
region and the trachea from the ventral region of the foregut primordium occurs
by means of a poorly understood compartmentalization process. Disruption of this 
process can result in severe birth defects, such as esophageal atresia and
tracheo-esphageal fistula (EA/TEF), in which the lumina of the trachea and
esophagus remain connected. Here we summarize the signaling networks known to be 
necessary for regulating dorsoventral patterning within the common foregut tube
and cellular behaviors that may occur during normal foregut compartmentalization.
We propose that dorsoventral patterning serves to establish a lateral region of
the foregut tube that is capable of undergoing specialized cellular
rearrangements, culminating in compartmentalization. We review established as
well as new rodent models that may be useful in addressing this hypothesis.
Finally, we discuss new experimental models that could help elucidate the
mechanism behind foregut compartmentalization. An integrated approach to future
foregut morphogenesis research will allow for a better understanding of this
complex process.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4778253
PMID: 25329576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 2014 Oct-Dec;11(4):280-6. doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.143127.

Management of associated anomalies of oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal
fistula.

Pal K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, King Fahad Hospital of
the University, College of Medicine, University of Dammam, Al Khobar, Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia.

Tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF)/oesophageal atresia is one of the most common
and serious congenital malformation. Despite progresses made in the field of
early diagnosis, surgical techniques, ventilatory support and control of chest
infections; morbidity and mortality still remains quite high and differs a lot
from one to another centre particularly in the developing countries; as the
availability and the level of neonatal care facilities are different. Associated 
anomalies play a significant role in dictating the outcome, timing of
intervention and even the approach to management. The objectives of this review
article is to outline the spectrum of associated anomalies, emphasise need of
standardised system of documentation of anomalies, prognosis and management
issues that would influence timing and approach of TEF repair.

PMID: 25323174  [PubMed - in process]


171. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2015 Jul;25(7):599-604. doi:
10.1089/lap.2014.0370. Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Evaluation of Three Sources of Validity Evidence for a Synthetic Thoracoscopic
Esophageal Atresia/Tracheoesophageal Fistula Repair Simulator.

Barsness KA(1,)(2), Rooney DM(3), Davis LM(4), O'Brien E(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Pediatric Surgery, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital
of Chicago , Chicago, Illinois. (2)2 Departments of Surgery and Medical
Education, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine , Chicago,
Illinois. (3)3 Department of Learning Health Sciences, University of Michigan
Medical School , Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)4 Innovations Laboratory, Northwestern
Simulation, Center for Education in Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine , Chicago, Illinois.

PURPOSE: Thoracoscopic esophageal atresia (EA)/tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
repair is technically challenging. We have previously reported our experiences
with a high-fidelity hybrid model for simulation-based educational instruction in
thoracoscopic EA/TEF, including the high cost of the tissue for these models. The
purposes of this study were (1) to create a low-cost synthetic tissue EA/TEF
repair simulation model and (2) to evaluate the content validity of the synthetic
tissue simulator.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Review of the literature and computed tomography images
were used to create computer-aided drawings (CAD) for a synthetic,
size-appropriate EA/TEF tissue insert. The inverse of the CAD image was then
printed in six different sections to create a mold that could be filled with
platinum-cured silicone. The silicone EA/TEF insert was then placed in a
previously described neonatal thorax and covered with synthetic skin. Following
institutional review board-exempt determination, 47 participants performed some
or all of a simulated thoracoscopic EA/TEF during two separate international
meetings (International Pediatric Endosurgery Group [IPEG] and World Federation
of Associations of Pediatric Surgeons [WOFAPS]). Participants were identified as 
"experts," having 6-50 self-reported thoracoscopic EA/TEF repairs, and "novice," 
having 0-5 self-reported thoracoscopic EA/TEF repairs. Participants completed a
self-report, six-domain, 24-item instrument consisting of 23 5-point rating
scales and one 4-point Global Rating Scale. Validity evidence relevant to test
content and response processes was evaluated using the many-facet Rasch model,
and evidence of internal structure (interitem consistency) was estimated using
Cronbach's alpha.
RESULTS: A review of the participants' ratings indicates there were no overall
differences across sites (IPEG versus WOFAPS, P=.84) or experience (expert versus
novice, P=.17). The highest observed averages were 4.4 (Value of Simulator as a
Training Tool), 4.3 (Physical Attributes-chest circumference, chest depth, and
intercostal space), and 4.3 (Realism of Experience-fistula location). The lowest 
observed averages were 3.5 (Ability to Perform-closure of fistula), 3.7 (Ability 
to Perform-acquisition target trocar sites), 3.8 (Physical Attributes-landmark
visualization), 3.8 (Ability to Perform-anastomosis and dissection of upper
pouch), and 3.9 (Realism of Materials-skin). The Global Rating Scale was 2.9,
coinciding with a response of "this simulator can be considered for use in
neonatal TEF repair training, but could be improved slightly." Material costs for
the synthetic EA/TEF inserts were less than $2 U.S. per insert.
CONCLUSIONS: We have successfully created a low-cost synthetic EA/TEF tissue
insert for use in a neonatal thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair simulator. Analysis of
the participants' ratings of the synthetic EA/TEF simulation model indicates that
it has value and can be used to train pediatric surgeons, especially those early 
in their learning curve, to begin to perform a thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair. Areas
for model improvement were identified, and these areas will be the focus for
future modifications to the synthetic EA/TEF repair simulator.

PMID: 25314617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Sci Total Environ. 2015 Feb 1;505:90-101. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.09.091.
Epub 2014 Oct 10.

The qualitative and quantitative source apportionments of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons in size dependent road deposited sediment.

Zhang J(1), Wang J(2), Hua P(3), Krebs P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Urban Water Management, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062
Dresden, Germany. Electronic address: jin.zhang@hotmail.com. (2)Institute of
Urban Water Management, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Chair of Water Supply Engineering, Institute of Urban Water Management,
Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany. Electronic address:
pei.hua@hotmail.com.

This study showcases the qualitative and quantitative source apportionments of
size-dependent polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in road deposited sediment
by means of molecular diagnostic ratio (MDR) and positive matrix factorisation
(PMF) approaches. The MDR was initially used to narrow the PAH source candidates.
PMF modelling was subsequently used to provide more precise source apportionment 
with the assistance of a multiple linear regression analysis. Through a combined 
qualitative and quantitative source apportionment, different potential source
contributors were identified at different size fractions. Explicitly, three major
contributors to sorption at the size fraction of 1000-400 µm were tentatively
identified as incineration (26%), coal combustion (53%) and gasoline-powered
vehicle (20%). Four major contributors to the size fraction of 400-100 µm were
identified as gasoline-powered vehicle (25%), surface pavement (15%),
diesel-powered vehicle (37%) and industrial boiler (24%). Four major contributors
to the size fraction of 100-63 µm were identified as cogeneration emission (13%),
diesel-powered vehicle (28%), tire debris (45%) and wood combustion (14%). The
potential contributors in the size fraction 63-0.45 µm were identified as
diesel-powered vehicle (21%), heterogeneous sources (41%) and biomass burning
(38%). In addition, the highest <U+2211>16PAH concentration was found in the smallest
size fraction of 63-0.45 µm, which is also where the highest BaPE and TEF values 
for potential risk assessment occurred.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25310884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Eur Radiol. 2015 Feb;25(2):306-14. doi: 10.1007/s00330-014-3444-y. Epub 2014 Oct 
11.

The contribution of fetal MR imaging to the assessment of oesophageal atresia.

Hochart V(1), Verpillat P, Langlois C, Garabedian C, Bigot J, Debarge VH, Sfeir
R, Avni FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Radiology, CHRU Lille, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital,
59037, Lille, France, hochart.vero@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Present challenges are to improve the diagnosis rate of oesophageal
atresia (OA) and evaluate as completely as possible a fetus affected by OA,
specifically the type of OA and the length of the gap. Our aim was to evaluate
the accuracy of fetal MR imaging (fMRI) for diagnosis of OA.
METHODS: We reviewed fMRI performed because of sonographic suspicion of an OA.
The signs reviewed included stomach size, "pouch sign", bowing of the trachea and
visualization of the lower oesophageal lumen. The fetuses were assigned by
consensus as having or not having EA, as well as having a tracheaoesophageal
fistula (TOF). All findings were correlated with postnatal data. Sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) 
were calculated.
RESULTS: Se, Sp, PPV and NPV of the technique were respectively 91%, 100%, 100%
and 88%. The presence of the pouch sign yielded corresponding values of 82%,
100%, 100% and 78%. Mid-tracheal bowing was correlated positively with EA. The
type of atresia was correctly evaluated in 90% of patients.
CONCLUSION: fMRI is useful for the diagnosis of EA through the visualization of
the oesophageal pouch or through associated signs such as tracheal bowing.
Visualization of the lower oesophageal lumen seems to be a good sign of TEF.
KEY POINTS:  Challenges are to improve the prenatal diagnosis of EA and
associated malformations.  fMRI is able to diagnose EA through demonstration of 
the pouch sign.  Tracheal bowing is a promising indirect sign of EA. 
Tracheoesophageal fistula can also be suspected thanks to fMRI.  Obstetrical US,
fMRI and fetal CT are complementary for assessing associated malformations.

PMID: 25304819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):544-5. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.10.003. Epub
2014 Oct 5.

Reply to Koppe and Ten Tusscher's letter to the Editor concerning the use of
human peripheral blood lymphocytes to determine relative effect potencies for
dioxin like compounds.

van Ede K(1), Gaisch K(2), van den Berg M(2), van Duursen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Toxicology,
Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, Netherlands. Electronic address: k.i.vanede@uu.nl.
(2)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Toxicology,
Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, Netherlands.

Comment on
    Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):542-3.
    Toxicol Lett. 2014 Apr 7;226(1):43-52.

PMID: 25290575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Case Rep Pulmonol. 2014;2014:567582. doi: 10.1155/2014/567582. Epub 2014 Sep 3.

Tracheal penetration and tracheoesophageal fistula caused by an esophageal
self-expanding metallic stent.

Madan K(1), Venuthurimilli A(2), Ahuja V(3), Hadda V(1), Mohan A(1), Guleria
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine & Sleep Disorders, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Ansari Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India. (2)Department of
Gastrointestinal Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), Ansari Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India.

Tracheal penetration of esophageal self-expanding metallic stents (SEMS)
with/without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) formation is a rare occurrence. We
report the case of a 66-year-old female patient with advanced esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma who had undergone palliative esophageal stenting on three
occasions for recurrent esophageal stent obstruction. On evaluation of symptoms
of breathing difficulty and aspiration following third esophageal stent
placement, tracheal erosion and TEF formation due to the tracheal penetration by 
esophageal stent were diagnosed. The patient was successfully managed by covered 
tracheal SEMS placement under flexible bronchoscopy.

PMCID: PMC4167813
PMID: 25276461  [PubMed]


176. ScientificWorldJournal. 2014;2014:567257. doi: 10.1155/2014/567257. Epub 2014 Aug
31.

CFD analysis to study effect of circular vortex generator placed in inlet section
to investigate heat transfer aspects of solar air heater.

Gawande VB(1), Dhoble AS(1), Zodpe DB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mechanical Engineering, Visvesvaraya National Institute of
Technology, Nagpur, India.

CFD analysis of 2-dimensional artificially roughened solar air heater duct with
additional circular vortex generator, inserted in inlet section is carried out.
Circular transverse ribs on the absorber plate are placed as usual. The analysis 
is done to investigate the effect of inserting additional vortex generator on the
heat transfer and flow friction characteristics inside the solar air heater duct.
This investigation covers relative roughness pitch in the range of 10 = P/e = 25 
and relevant Reynolds numbers in the range of 3800 = Re = 18000. Relative
roughness height (e/D) is kept constant as 0.03 for analysis. The turbulence
created due to additional circular vortex generator increases the heat transfer
rate and at the same time there is also increase in friction factor values. For
combined arrangement of ribs and vortex generator, maximum Nusselt number is
found to be 2.05 times that of the smooth duct. The enhancement in Nusselt number
with ribs and additional vortex generator is found to be 1.06 times that of duct 
using ribs alone. The maximum increase in friction factor with ribs and circular 
vortex generator is found to be 2.91 times that of the smooth duct. Friction
factor in a combined arrangement is 1.114 times that in a duct with ribs alone on
the absorber plate. The augmentation in Thermal Enhancement Factor (TEF) with
vortex generator in inlet section is found to be 1.06 times more than with
circular ribs alone on the absorber plate.

PMCID: PMC4165206
PMID: 25254251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2014 Nov;109:77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2014.07.022.
Epub 2014 Aug 28.

Occurrence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in the Soan River, Pakistan:
insights into distribution, composition, sources and ecological risk assessment.

Aziz F(1), Syed JH(2), Malik RN(3), Katsoyiannis A(4), Mahmood A(5), Li J(6),
Zhang G(6), Jones KC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Biology and Ecotoxicology Laboratory, Department of
Environmental Sciences, Quaid-I-Azam University, 45320 Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
shahg14@gmail.com. (3)Environmental Biology Laboratory, Department of
Environmental Sciences, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. Electronic 
address: r_n_malik2000@yahoo.co.uk. (4)Norwegian Institute for Air Research
(NILU) - FRAM High North Research Centre on Climate and the Environment, Hjalmar 
Johansens gt. 14, NO - 9296 Tromsø, Norway. (5)Environmental Biology Laboratory, 
Department of Environmental Sciences, Quaid-I-Azam University, Islamabad,
Pakistan. (6)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, China. (7)Centre for
Chemical Management, Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University,
Bailrigg, Lancaster, United Kingdom.

Present study investigates the occurrence, distribution and sources of <U+2211>17
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in the surface water of Soan River,
Pakistan. The concentrations of total PAHs ranged from 61 to 207 ng/l. Low
molecular weight (LMW) PAHs were recorded higher in concentrations (64.7 percent)
as compared to high molecular weight (HMW) PAHs (35.6 percent). Principal
component analysis (PCA) revealed domestic and industrial wastewater discharge,
vehicular exhaust, petroleum residues and biomass combustion as the main sources 
for PAHs contamination. Using the USEPA toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach: 
Benzo(a)Pyrene and Dibenzo(a,h)Anthracene contributed highly carcinogenic
exposure equivalent. The surface water of the Soan River is found to be slightly 
polluted with PAHs thereby posing health risks to aquatic bodies.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25241944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Microb Ecol. 2015 Apr;69(3):457-71. doi: 10.1007/s00248-014-0494-2. Epub 2014 Sep
20.

Morphological and phylogenetic analysis of Fusarium solani species complex in
Malaysia.

Chehri K(1), Salleh B, Zakaria L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800, Penang,
Malaysia, khchehri@gmail.com.

Members of Fusarium solani species complex (FSSC) have been known as plant,
animal, and human pathogens. Nevertheless, the taxonomic status of such an
important group of fungi is still very confusing and many new species as well as 
lineages have been elucidated recently. Unfortunately, most of the new taxa came 
from temperate and subtropical regions. Therefore, the objectives of the present 
study were to identify strains of FSSC recovered from different sources in
Malaysia. In the present study, 55 strains belonging to the FSSC were examined
and phylogenetically analyzed on the basis of internal transcribed spacer (ITS)
regions and partial translation elongation factor-1 (TEF-1a) sequences. Based on 
morphological features, a total of 55 strains were selected for molecular
studies. Based on morphological features, the strains were classified into four
described Fusarium species, namely Fusarium keratoplasticum, Fusarium falciforme,
FSSC 5, and Fusarium cf. ensiforme, and one unknown phylogenetic species was
introduced. Although the data obtained from morphological and molecular studies
sufficiently supported each other, the phylogenetic trees based on ITS and TEF-1a
dataset clearly distinguished closely related species and distinctly separated
all morphological taxa. All members of FSSC in this research were reported for
the first time for Malaysian mycoflora.

PMCID: PMC4356886
PMID: 25238930  [PubMed - in process]


179. J Biol Rhythms. 2014 Aug;29(4):243-56. doi: 10.1177/0748730414544741.

USP2 regulates the intracellular localization of PER1 and circadian gene
expression.

Yang Y(1), Duguay D(2), Fahrenkrug J(3), Cermakian N(2), Wing SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Polypeptide Laboratory, Department of Medicine, McGill University and McGill
University Health Centre Research Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Chronobiology, Douglas Mental Health University
Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada. (3)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Bispebjerg
Hospital, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Polypeptide Laboratory, Department of Medicine, McGill University and McGill
University Health Centre Research Institute, Montréal, Québec, Canada
simon.wing@mcgill.ca.

Endogenous 24-h rhythms in physiology are driven by a network of circadian clocks
located in most tissues. The molecular clock mechanism is based on feedback loops
involving clock genes and their protein products. Posttranslational
modifications, including ubiquitination, are important for regulating the clock
feedback mechanism. Recently, we showed that the deubiquitinating enzyme
ubiquitin-specific peptidase 2 (USP2) associates with clock proteins and
deubiquitinates PERIOD1 (PER1) but does not affect its overall stability. Mice
devoid of USP2 display defects in clock function. Here, we show that USP2
regulates nucleocytoplasmic shuttling and nuclear retention of PER1 and its
repressive role on the clock transcription factors CLOCK and BMAL1. The rhythm of
nuclear entry of PER1 in Usp2 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) was
advanced but with reduced nuclear accumulation of PER1. Although Per1 mRNA
expression rhythm remained intact in the Usp2 KO MEFs, the expression profiles of
other core clock genes were altered. This was also true for the expression of
clock-controlled genes (e.g., Dbp, Tef, Hlf, E4bp4). A similar phase advance of
PER1 nuclear localization rhythm and alteration of clock gene expression profiles
were also observed in livers of Usp2 KO mice. Taken together, our results
demonstrate a novel function of USP2 in the molecular clock in which it regulates
PER1 function by gating its nuclear entry and accumulation.

© 2014 The Author(s).

PMID: 25238854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Sep 16;281(1):48-57. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.09.001. [Epub ahead of print]

2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran is far less potent than
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in disrupting the pituitary-gonad axis of the
rat fetus.

Taura J(1), Takeda T(1), Fujii M(1), Hattori Y(1), Ishii Y(1), Kuroki H(2),
Tsukimori K(3), Uchi H(4), Furue M(5), Yamada H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Daiichi University of Pharmacy, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Department of Obstetrics,
Fukuoka Children's Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Research and Clinical Center for 
Yusho and Dioxin, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan. (5)Research and
Clinical Center for Yusho and Dioxin, Kyushu University Hospital, Fukuoka, Japan;
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
Electronic address: hyamada@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

The effect of 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PnCDF) on the fetal
pituitary-gonad axis was compared with that produced by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in Wistar rats. Maternal treatment at 
gestational day (GD) 15 with PnCDF and TCDD reduced the fetal expression at GD20 
of pituitary luteinizing hormone (LH) and the testicular proteins necessary for
steroidogenesis. The relative potencies of PnCDF ranged from 1/42nd to 1/63rd of 
the TCDD effect. While PnCDF, at a dose sufficient to cause a reduction in fetal 
LH, provoked defects in sexual behavior at adulthood, a dose less than the ED50
failed to produce any abnormality. There was a loss of fetal body weight
following in utero exposure to PnCDF, and the effect of PnCDF was also much less 
than that of TCDD. The disturbance in fetal growth was suggested to be due to a
reduction in the level of fetal growth hormone (GH) by dioxins. The disorder
caused by PnCDF/TCDD in the fetal pituitary-gonad axis occurred at doses less
than those needed to cause wasting syndrome in pubertal rats. The harmful effect 
of PnCDF relative to TCDD was more pronounced in fetal rats than in pubertal
rats. These lines of evidence suggest that: 1) PnCDF as well as TCDD imprints
defects in sexual behavior by disrupting the fetal pituitary-gonad axis; 2) these
dioxins hinder fetal growth by reducing the expression of fetal GH; and 3) the
fetal effects of PnCDF/TCDD are more sensitive than sub-acute toxicity during
puberty, and the relative effect of PnCDF varies markedly depending on the
indices used.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25220434  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


181. Cell Transplant. 2015;24(11):2285-96. doi: 10.3727/096368914X684060. Epub 2014
Aug 29.

MR imaging monitoring of iron-labeled pancreatic islets in a small series of
patients: islet fate in successful, unsuccessful, and autotransplantation.

Malosio ML(1), Esposito A, Brigatti C, Palmisano A, Piemonti L, Nano R, Maffi P, 
De Cobelli F, Del Maschio A, Secchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Institute, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Islet transplantation is one of the most promising and effective therapies for
restoring normoglycemia in type 1 diabetes (T1D) patients, but islet engraftment 
is one of the main obstacles hampering long-term success. Monitoring graft loss, 
caused either by immunological or nonimmunological events, occurring in the first
phase after transplantation and at later stages of a patient's life is a very
important issue. Among the imaging approaches previously applied, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) monitoring of islet fate following labeling with
superparamagnetic iron oxide agents yielded promising results. The aim of this
study was to translate into patients the method of islet labeling and MRI
monitoring developed in our preclinical setting and to compare imaging results
with graft clinical outcome.Three T1D patients and one nondiabetic patient
undergoing autotransplantation following subtotal pancreatectomy received
Endorem(®)-labeled islets. Patients were monitored by MRI and metabolically
(HbA1c, exogenous insulin requirement, and C-peptide, TEF) at 1, 3, and 7 days
following transplantation and once a month up to 10 months. Labeled transplanted 
islets appeared as hypointense areas scattered within the liver parenchyma, whose
absolute number at 24 h after transplantation reflected the labeling efficiency. 
In patients #1 and #3 with good midterm graft function, MRI follow-up showed an
important early loss of hypointense spots followed by a slow and progressive
disappearance at later timepoints. Graft loss of function in patient #2 4 weeks
after transplantation was associated with the complete disappearance of all
hypointense signals. The autotransplanted patient, stably insulin free, showed no
significant signal reduction during the first 3 days, followed by loss of spots
similar to a patient with good midterm graft function. These results suggest that
MRI monitoring of islet transplantation at early time points could represent a
meaningful readout for helping in predicting transplant failure or success, but
its relevance for mid/long-term islet function assessment appears evanescent.

PMID: 25198915  [PubMed - in process]


182. J Nutr Sci. 2014 Aug 13;3:e17. doi: 10.1017/jns.2014.17. eCollection 2014.

Mannoheptulose has differential effects on fasting and postprandial energy
expenditure and respiratory quotient in adult Beagle dogs fed diets of different 
macronutrient contents.

McKnight LL(1), Flickinger EA(2), France J(1), Davenport GM(2), Shoveller AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Nutrition Modelling , Department of Animal and Poultry Science ,
University of Guelph , 50 Stone Road East , Guelph , Ontario , Canada N1G 2W1.
(2)Procter and Gamble (P&G) Pet Care , 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road , Mason , OH , 
45040 , USA. (3)Centre for Nutrition Modelling , Department of Animal and Poultry
Science , University of Guelph , 50 Stone Road East , Guelph , Ontario , Canada
N1G 2W1 ; Procter and Gamble (P&G) Pet Care , 8700 Mason-Montgomery Road , Mason 
, OH , 45040 , USA.

The present study aimed to determine the effects of mannoheptulose (MH) (8 mg/kg)
on energy expenditure (EE), respiratory quotient (RQ) and glycaemic response in
healthy adult Beagle dogs (n 8; 9·62 (sem 0·31) kg; body condition score 4·5).
The study was designed as replicated 4 × 4 Latin squares with a 2 × 2 factorial
treatment structure. The dietary treatments were low carbohydrate (CHO) relative 
to fat diet (LC; 31 % CHO, 28 % fat) with placebo (0 mg/kg) or MH supplement and 
high CHO relative to fat diet (HC; 54 % CHO, 11 % fat) with placebo (0 mg/kg) or 
MH supplement. Dogs were fed to maintain body weight (HC and HC(+MH) 3625 (sem
295) kJ and LC and LC(+MH) 3542 (sem 284) kJ). Resting and postprandial (0-4 h;
5-10 h; 11-17 h; 18-23 h) EE and RQ were determined by indirect calorimetry (days
12 or 14). Glycaemic response to a meal (24 h) and plasma MH concentrations were 
determined on days 12 or 14. Plasma MH followed first-order kinetics, confirming 
that MH is absorbed and available to the animal. In the presence of high dietary 
CHO, MH increased postprandial EE (5-10 h only), suggesting MH increased dietary 
induced thermogenesis. In contrast to earlier reports, MH did not affect serum
glucose or insulin in the present study. Irrespective of MH, dogs adapted RQ to
diet composition and dogs consuming the LC diet had a greater incremental AUC for
glucose, but not insulin, than dogs consuming the HC diet.

PMCID: PMC4153035
PMID: 25191609  [PubMed]


183. Int J Food Microbiol. 2014 Nov 3;190:54-60. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.08.018. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Phytic acid degrading lactic acid bacteria in tef-injera fermentation.

Fischer MM(1), Egli IM(2), Aeberli I(3), Hurrell RF(4), Meile L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Nutrition, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH
Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 7, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address:
maren.fischer@hest.ethz.ch. (2)Laboratory of Human Nutrition, Institute of Food, 
Nutrition and Health, ETH Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 7, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: ines.egli@ethrat.ch. (3)Laboratory of Human Nutrition,
Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 7, 8092
Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address: isabelle.aeberli@hest.ethz.ch.
(4)Laboratory of Human Nutrition, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH
Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 7, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland. Electronic address:
richard.hurrell@hest.ethz.ch. (5)Laboratory of Food Biotechnology, Institute of
Food, Nutrition and Health, ETH Zurich, Schmelzbergstrasse 7, 8092 Zurich,
Switzerland. Electronic address: leo.meile@hest.ethz.ch.

Ethiopian injera, a soft pancake, baked from fermented batter, is preferentially 
prepared from tef (Eragrostis tef) flour. The phytic acid (PA) content of tef is 
high and is only partly degraded during the fermentation step. PA chelates with
iron and zinc in the human digestive tract and strongly inhibits their
absorption. With the aim to formulate a starter culture that would substantially 
degrade PA during injera preparation, we assessed the potential of microorganisms
isolated from Ethiopian household-tef fermentations to degrade PA. Lactic acid
bacteria (LAB) were found to be among the dominating microorganisms. Seventy-six 
isolates from thirteen different tef fermentations were analyzed for phytase
activity and thirteen different isolates of seven different species were detected
to be positive in a phytase screening assay. In 20-mL model tef fermentations,
out of these thirteen isolates, the use of Lactobacillus (L.) buchneri strain
MF58 and Pediococcus pentosaceus strain MF35 resulted in lowest PA contents in
the fermented tef of 41% and 42%, respectively of its initial content. In
comparison 59% of PA remained when spontaneously fermented. Full scale tef
fermentation (0.6L) and injera production using L. buchneri MF58 as culture
additive decreased PA in cooked injera from 1.05 to 0.34±0.02 g/100 g,
representing a degradation of 68% compared to 42% in injera from non-inoculated
traditional fermentation. The visual appearance of the pancakes was similar. The 
final molar ratios of PA to iron of 4 and to zinc of 12 achieved with L. buchneri
MF58 were decreased by ca. 50% compared to the traditional fermentation. In
conclusion, selected LAB strains in tef fermentations can degrade PA, with L.
buchneri MF58 displaying the highest PA degrading potential. The 68% PA
degradation achieved by the application of L. buchneri MF58 would be expected to 
improve human zinc absorption from tef-injera, but further PA degradation is
probably necessary if iron absorption has to be increased.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25180667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2015 Oct;272(10):2961-8. doi:
10.1007/s00405-014-3246-5. Epub 2014 Sep 2.

Treatment of tracheopharyngeal and tracheo-oesophageal fistulas following
laryngectomy and fistula classification based on individual silicone casts.

Herzog M(1), Lorenz KJ, Glien A, Greiner I, Plontke S, Plößl S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Martin-Luther-University, Halle-Wittenberg, 06120, Halle (Saale), Germany,
michael.herzog@uk-halle.de.

Persistent tracheopharyngeal (TPF) and tracheo-oesophageal (TEF) fistulas after
laryngectomy create a therapeutic challenge. The current classification of TPFs
and TEFs is based on clinical experience without detailed anatomical information.
In this study, casts of TPFs/TEFs were obtained from 16 patients; these were the 
first steps in manufacturing customised prostheses. Fistulas were classified
according to the shape and dimension of the tracheopharyngeal and
tracheo-oesophageal silicone casts and prostheses as well as on epithetic
requirements. Four different types of fistulas were classified: Type A, a fistula
with a straight axis between the neopharynx and oesophagus; Type B, a fistula
with a stenosis of the neopharynx but a straight axis; Type C, the axis between
the neopharynx and oesophagus is flexed anteriorly; and Type D, neighbouring
structures are absent creating a large defect. This classification system might
improve the manufacturing processes of customised prostheses in individual cases 
with challenging tracheopharyngeal and tracheo-oesophageal fistulas.

PMID: 25178413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Environ Pollut. 2014 Nov;194:188-95. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2014.07.032. Epub 2014
Aug 20.

Chemical and biological characterization of air particulate matter 2.5, collected
from five cities in China.

Leung PY(1), Wan HT(2), Billah MB(3), Cao JJ(4), Ho KF(5), Wong CK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Croucher Institute for Environmental Sciences, Partner State Key Laboratory of
Environmental and Biological Analysis, Department of Biology, 200 Waterloo Road, 
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
becky10851@hotmail.com. (2)Croucher Institute for Environmental Sciences, Partner
State Key Laboratory of Environmental and Biological Analysis, Department of
Biology, 200 Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong
Kong, China. Electronic address: wanhinting@gmail.com. (3)Croucher Institute for 
Environmental Sciences, Partner State Key Laboratory of Environmental and
Biological Analysis, Department of Biology, 200 Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong
Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
bakibillah29@gmail.com. (4)Key Lab of Aerosol Science & Technology, SKLLQG,
Institute of Earth Environment, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xi'an 710075, China.
Electronic address: cao@loess.llqg.ac.cn. (5)Jockey Club School of Public Health 
and Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Tai Po Road, Shatin, Hong 
Kong, China. Electronic address: kfho@cuhk.edu.hk. (6)Croucher Institute for
Environmental Sciences, Partner State Key Laboratory of Environmental and
Biological Analysis, Department of Biology, 200 Waterloo Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong
Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China. Electronic address:
ckcwong@hkbu.edu.hk.

Erratum in
    Environ Pollut. 2014 Dec;195:232.

Fifteen polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in PM2.5 samples collected in
five different cities (Hong Kong (HK), Guangzhou (GZ), Xiamen (XM), Xi'an (XA)
and Beijing (BJ)) in China in the winter 2012-13 [corrected] were analyzed by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry. The biological effects of organic extracts were
assayed using the human bronchial epithelial cells BEAS-2B. All sixteen priority 
PAHs can be found in the PM2.5 samples of XA and BJ, but not in HK, GZ and XM,
demonstrating the differential spatial source and distribution of PAHs. Our
results showed that the total PAHs ranged from 3.35 to 80.45 ng/m(3) air, leading
by BJ, followed by XA, XM, GZ and HK. In the cell culture study, transcript
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6), CYP1A1 and CYP1B1 were 
found to be induced in the treatment. The cells exposed to extracts from XA and
BJ demonstrated significant migratory activities, indicating a sign of increase
of tumorigenicity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25150452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Acta Med Iran. 2014;52(7):565-8.

Successful airway management in a patient with tracheal stenosis and
tracheoesophageal fistula: a case report.

Davari HR(1), Latifi S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. davarih@sums.ac.ir. (2)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. saharlatifi_med@yahoo.com.

A twenty-year-old girl was referred with tracheal stenosis (TS) which was a
consequence of prolonged intubation after head injury because of previous car
accident. The patient was aphasic and had normal respiration. Fiberoptic
bronchoscopy showed complete tracheal obstruction at second tracheal ring level. 
Distal trachea was normal through tracheostomy tube. Removal of the tracheostomy 
tube and blind reinsertion with a new one was complicated with hypoxia and
respiratory distress. Fibrotic bronchoscopy revealed large tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) below tracheal obstruction. Reinsertion of the tracheostomy tube by
fiber optic bronchoscope was successful. Multidetector CT scan was performed on
the same day with confirmation of TS combined with TEF. Surgery was performed on 
the next day. No clinical evidence of TEF was found in back history. Inadequate
evaluation of the whole length of the trachea during the first bronchoscopy was
the reasons for missing TEF. TEF should be considered in patients with TS in
spite of no typical symptom such as food aspiration or pulmonary infections.

PMID: 25135268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Transplant Proc. 2014 Jul-Aug;46(6):1992-5. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2014.06.008.

Clinical porcine islet xenotransplantation under comprehensive regulation.

Matsumoto S(1), Tan P(2), Baker J(3), Durbin K(2), Tomiya M(4), Azuma K(4), Doi
M(4), Elliott RB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Otsuka Pharmaceutical Factory, Naruto, Japan. Electronic address:
matsumoto.shinichi@otsuka.jp. (2)Living Cell Technologies, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Centre for Clinical Research and Effective Practice, Middlemore Hospital,
Auckland, New Zealand. (4)Otsuka Pharmaceutical Factory, Naruto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Xenotransplantation with porcine islets is a promising approach to
overcome the shortage of human donors. This is the first report of phase 1/2a
xenotransplantation study of encapsulated neonatal porcine islets under the
current framework of regulations for xenotransplantation in New Zealand.
METHODS: Newborn piglets were anesthetized and bled, and the pancreata were
removed with the use of sterile technique and processed. Encapsulated neonatal
porcine islets were implanted with the use of laparoscopy into the peritoneal
cavity of 14 patients with unstable type 1 diabetes without any immunosuppressive
drugs. The patients received encapsulated islets of 5,000 (n = 4; group 1),
10,000 (n = 4; group 2), 15,000 (n = 4; group 3), or 20,000 (n = 2; group 4)
islet equivalents per kg body weight. Outcome was determined from adverse event
reports, HbA1c, total daily insulin dose, and frequency of unaware hypoglycemic
events. To assess graft function, transplant estimated function (TEF) scores were
calculated. Sufficient or marginal numbers of encapsulated neonatal porcine
islets were transplanted into streptozotocin-induced diabetic B6 mice as an
in vivo functional assay.
RESULTS: There were 4 serious adverse events, of which 3 were considered to be
possibly related to the procedure. Tests for porcine endogenous retrovirus DNA
and RNA were all negative. The numbers of unaware hypoglycemia events were
reduced after transplantation in all groups. Four of 14 patients attained
HbA1c <7% compared with 1 at baseline. The average TEF scores were 0.17,
0.02, -0.01, and 0.08 in groups 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. The in vivo study
demonstrated that a sufficient number of the transplanted group reversed diabetes
with positive porcine C-peptide.
CONCLUSIONS: Transplantation of encapsulated neonatal porcine islets was safe and
was followed by a reduction in unaware hypoglycemia events in unstable type 1
diabetic patients. The mouse in vivo assessment data demonstrated certain graft
function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25131091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Diabetes Complications. 2014 Nov-Dec;28(6):858-62. doi:
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2014.07.010. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Effects of diabetes mellitus on left atrial volume and functions in normotensive 
patients without symptomatic cardiovascular disease.

Atas H(1), Kepez A(2), Atas DB(3), Kanar BG(1), Dervisova R(1), Kivrak T(1),
Tigen MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marmara University Training and Research Hospital, Cardiology Clinic,
Istanbul, Turkey. (2)Marmara University Training and Research Hospital,
Cardiology Clinic, Istanbul, Turkey. Electronic address: alperkepez@yahoo.com.
(3)Marmara University Training and Research Hospital, Internal Medicine Clinic,
Istanbul, Turkey.

PURPOSE: Left atrial (LA) size has been shown to be a predictor of adverse
cardiovascular outcomes. The aim of the study was to evaluate the direct effect
of diabetes mellitus (DM) on left atrial volume and phasic functions by using
real-time three-dimensional echocardiography (RT3DE) in a population of patients 
free of symptomatic cardiovascular disease and hypertension.
METHODS: Comprehensive transthoracic echocardiographic examination was performed 
on 40 consecutive patients with DM (20 male, age: 50.5±7.3 years) and 40 healthy 
controls (20 male, age: 48.4±6.7 years). In addition to conventional 2D
echocardiographic measurements RT3DE was performed to assess LA volumes and
phasic functions.
RESULTS: There were no significant difference between groups regarding parameters
reflecting LV systolic function as LV diameters and ejection fraction. However,
regarding parameters reflecting LV diastolic function; transmitral deceleration
time and E/E' ratio values were significantly higher and majority of early
diastolic tissue Doppler velocity values were significantly lower in diabetic
patients compared with controls. RT3DE demonstrated significantly higher LA
maximum and minimum volumes for diabetic patients compared with controls
(40.9±11.9 vs 34.6±9.3 mL, p: 0.009 and 15.6±5.9 vs 11.9±4.6 mL, p: 0.002,
consecutively). LA total emptying fraction (TEF), expansion index (EI) and active
emptying fraction (AEF) were found to be significantly lower in diabetics
reflecting depressed LA reservoir and pump functions. There was no significant
difference between groups regarding passive emptying fraction (PEF) which is
assumed to be a marker of left atrial conduit function.
CONCLUSION: Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus were found to have increased
LA volume and impaired atrial compliance and contractility. Evaluation of
asymptomatic diabetic patients by using RT3DE atrial volume analysis may
facilitate recognition of subtle myocardial alterations related with type 2
diabetes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25130919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Jul 15;7(7):1910-3. eCollection 2014.

Use of improved tracheal catheters in patient of tracheostomy tube-induced
tracheoesophageal fistula: a case report.

Zhang CB(1), Liu BL(1), Zhang J(1), Tian FB(2), Fang NY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine 1630 Dongfang Road, Shanghai 200127, China. (2)Department of
Anesthesiology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University No. 419
Fangxie Road, Shanghai 200011, China.

Tracheostomy tube might cause tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) due to high cuff
pressure or direct mechanical trauma. Surgical repair provides the ideal way to
deal with TEF but it necessitates the weaning the patient from mechanical
ventilation. Here we report a spontaneous closure of TEF by managing it with
improved tracheal catheters in a patient who is dependent on mechanical
ventilation.

PMCID: PMC4132164
PMID: 25126200  [PubMed]


190. Zhong Yao Cai. 2013 Dec;36(12):1978-82.

[Protective effects of total epimedium flavonoids against QA-induced toxicity in 
SH-SY5Y cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao SM, Wang L, Shi YX, Ju CX, Zhang F, Li FX.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effects and its mechanisms of total
epimedium flavonoids (TEF) against Quindinince acid (QA)-induced toxicity in
SH-SY5Y cells.
METHODS: The MT assay was used to detect the toxicity of QA and the cell
viability of pretreatment of TEF and co-incubation with QA in SH-SY5Y cells; Cell
apoptosis was observed by Hochest33258 staining; SOD and GSH-Px activities as
well as MDA content were measured by colorimetric method; The mitochondrial
membrane potential (delta psi m) and intracellular free calcium concentration
([Ca2+]i) were monitored by FCM.
RESULTS: TEF increased the cell viability of SH-SY5Y cells, reduced apoptosis
cells significantly, improved SOD and GSH-Px activities, decreased MDA content,
increased the mitochondrial membrane potential and reduced intracellular free
calcium concentration( [Ca2+]i ).
CONCLUSION: TEF has significant protective effects against QA-induced toxicity in
SH-SY5Y cells,the action mechanism may be associated with resisting oxidative
stress, decreasing the [Ca2]i and up-regulating delta psi m.

PMID: 25090685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 1;9(8):e103457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103457. eCollection
2014.

Multigene molecular phylogeny and biogeographic diversification of the earth
tongue fungi in the genera Cudonia and Spathularia (Rhytismatales, Ascomycota).

Ge ZW(1), Yang ZL(2), Pfister DH(3), Carbone M(4), Bau T(5), Smith ME(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Plant Diversity and Biogeography of East Asia, Kunming
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan, China; Harvard
University Herbaria and Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Plant Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
United States of America. (2)Key Laboratory for Plant Diversity and Biogeography 
of East Asia, Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, 
Yunnan, China. (3)Harvard University Herbaria and Department of Organismic and
Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States
of America. (4)Via Don Luigi Sturzo 173, Genova, Italy. (5)Institute of Mycology,
Jilin Agriculture University, Changchun, Jilin, China. (6)Department of Plant
Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

The family Cudoniaceae (Rhytismatales, Ascomycota) was erected to accommodate the
"earth tongue fungi" in the genera Cudonia and Spathularia. There have been no
recent taxonomic studies of these genera, and the evolutionary relationships
within and among these fungi are largely unknown. Here we explore the molecular
phylogenetic relationships within Cudonia and Spathularia using maximum
likelihood and Bayesian inference analyses based on 111 collections from across
the Northern Hemisphere. Phylogenies based on the combined data from ITS, nrLSU, 
rpb2 and tef-1a sequences support the monophyly of three main clades, the
/flavida, /velutipes, and /cudonia clades. The genus Cudonia and the family
Cudoniaceae are supported as monophyletic groups, while the genus Spathularia is 
not monophyletic. Although Cudoniaceae is monophyletic, our analyses agree with
previous studies that this family is nested within the Rhytismataceae. Our
phylogenetic analyses circumscribes 32 species-level clades, including the
putative recognition of 23 undescribed phylogenetic species. Our molecular
phylogeny also revealed an unexpectedly high species diversity of Cudonia and
Spathularia in eastern Asia, with 16 (out of 21) species-level clades of Cudonia 
and 8 (out of 11) species-level clades of Spathularia. We estimate that the
divergence time of the Cudoniaceae was in the Paleogene approximately 28 Million 
years ago (Mya) and that the ancestral area for this group of fungi was in
Eastern Asia based on the current data. We hypothesize that the large-scale
geological and climatic events in Oligocene (e.g. the global cooling and the
uplift of the Tibetan plateau) may have triggered evolutionary radiations in this
group of fungi in East Asia. This work provides a foundation for future studies
on the phylogeny, diversity, and evolution of Cudonia and Spathularia and
highlights the need for more molecular studies on collections from Europe and
North America.

PMCID: PMC4118880
PMID: 25084276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Sep;78(9):1554-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.06.017. Epub 2014 Jun 20.

Trans-cervical, trans-tracheal approach to proximal tracheo-oesophageal fistula: 
a novel technique.

Oosthuizen JC(1), Ramli RR(2), Aworanti OM(3), Awadalla S(3), O'Dwyer TP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Ireland. Electronic 
address: c.oosth@gmail.com. (2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, Ireland. (3)Department of Paediatric Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck 
Surgery, Children's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) occur in 1/2400-4500
births. Whilst the diagnosis of esophageal atresia is readily made shortly after 
birth, patients with an isolated H type TEF can present with varying degrees of
symptomatology which can pose a diagnostic challenge. A combination of contrast
esophagogram and endoscopic evaluastion is the most commonly employed
localization strategy. Despite accurate pre-operative localization,
intra-operative identification of the TEF can prove substantially more
challenging. The authors of this report describe a novel approach in the
management of a proximal TEF, which allows direct visualization and cannulation
via a trans-cervical, trans-tracheal approach.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25063506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Exp Bot. 2014 Oct;65(18):5351-65. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru306. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

TEF-7A, a transcript elongation factor gene, influences yield-related traits in
bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.).

Zheng J(1), Liu H(2), Wang Y(2), Wang L(3), Chang X(3), Jing R(3), Hao C(4),
Zhang X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Crop Genomics and Bioinformatics Center and National Key Lab of Crop Genetics 
and Germplasm Enhancement, College of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu, China Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources 
and Germplasm Enhancment, Ministry of Agriculture/The National Key Facility for
Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement/Institute of Crop Science, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China Institute of Wheat
Research, Shanxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Linfen 041000, China. (2)Crop 
Genomics and Bioinformatics Center and National Key Lab of Crop Genetics and
Germplasm Enhancement, College of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu, China Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources 
and Germplasm Enhancment, Ministry of Agriculture/The National Key Facility for
Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement/Institute of Crop Science, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Enhancment, Ministry of Agriculture/The
National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement/Institute
of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources and Germplasm Enhancment, Ministry of
Agriculture/The National Key Facility for Crop Gene Resources and Genetic
Improvement/Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Beijing 100081, China haochy74@163.com zhangxueyong@caas.cn. (5)Crop Genomics and
Bioinformatics Center and National Key Lab of Crop Genetics and Germplasm
Enhancement, College of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing 210095, Jiangsu, China Key Laboratory of Crop Gene Resources and
Germplasm Enhancment, Ministry of Agriculture/The National Key Facility for Crop 
Gene Resources and Genetic Improvement/Institute of Crop Science, Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing 100081, China haochy74@163.com
zhangxueyong@caas.cn.

In this study, TaTEF-7A, a member of the transcript elongation factor gene
family, and its <U+FB02>anking sequences were isolated. TaTEF-7A was located on
chromosome 7A and was <U+FB02>anked by markers Xwmc83 and XP3156.3. Subcellular
localization revealed that TaTEF-7A protein was localized in the nucleus. This
gene was expressed in all organs, but the highest expression occurred in young
spikes and developing seeds. Overexpression of TaTEF-7A in Arabidopsis thaliana
produced pleiotropic effects on vegetative and reproductive development that
enhanced grain length, silique number, and silique length. No diversity was found
in the coding region of TaTEF-7A, but 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms and
Indels were detected in the promoter regions of different cultivars. Markers
based on sequence variations in the promoter regions (InDel-629 and InDel-604)
were developed, and three haplotypes were identified based on those markers.
Haplotype-trait association analysis of the Chinese wheat mini core collection
revealed that TaTEF-7A was significantly associated with grain number per spike. 
Phenotyping of near-isogenic lines (NILs) confirmed that TaTEF-7A increases
potential grain yield and yield-related traits. Frequency changes in favoured
haplotypes gradually increased in cultivars released in China from the 1940s.
Geographic distributions of favoured haplotypes were characterized in six major
wheat production regions worldwide. The presence of Hap-7A-3, the favoured
haplotype, showed a positive correlation with yield in a global set of breeding
lines. These results suggest that TaTEF-7A is a functional regulatory factor for 
grain number per spike and provide a basis for marker-assisted selection.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4157721
PMID: 25056774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Pediatr Surg Int. 2014 Sep;30(9):883-7. doi: 10.1007/s00383-014-3554-2. Epub 2014
Jul 23.

Thoracoscopic versus open repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula at a single institution.

Yamoto M(1), Urusihara N, Fukumoto K, Miyano G, Nouso H, Morita K, Miyake H,
Kaneshiro M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, 860 Urushiyama,
Aoi-ku, Shizuoka, 420-8660, Japan, m1157918@med.osaka-cu.ac.jp.

PURPOSE: The potential benefits of thoracoscopic repair (TR) of esophageal
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) in newborns are still unclear. Our
aim was to define the criteria, perioperative outcome after undergoing TR versus 
open repair (OR) for EA/TEF.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective chart review was conducted of 36
consecutive neonates who underwent EA/TEF repair between 2001 and 2012 in
Shizuoka Children's Hospital. Patients in this study were birth weight >2,000 g, 
and did not have severe cardiac malformations or chromosomal aberrations. Of the 
26 newborns who met the selection criteria, 11 patients underwent attempts at TR 
compared to 15 patients who underwent OR. All cases were followed 1 year after
operation at least.
RESULTS: All 11 TR were successfully completed. There were no significant
differences between intra- and perioperative complications in the two groups.
Intraoperative EtCO2 and arterial blood gases were not significantly different
between the two groups. We did not found eating disorder, respiratory disorder,
and failure of growth in all cases.
CONCLUSION: In our study, the thoracoscopic approach appeared to be favorable and
safe for EA/TEF repair in carefully selected patients.

PMID: 25052256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. World J Clin Cases. 2014 Jul 16;2(7):309-10. doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v2.i7.309.

Passage of nasogastric tube through tracheo-esophageal fistula into stomach: A
rare event.

Kamble RS(1), Gupta R(1), Gupta A(1), Kothari P(1), Dikshit KV(1), Kesan K(1),
Mudkhedkar K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ravikiran Shankar Kamble, Rahulkumar Gupta, Abhaya Gupta, Paras Kothari, K
Vishesh Dikshit, Krishnakumar Kesan, Kedar Mudkhedkar, Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Lokamany Tilak Municipal Medical College and Government Hospital,
Maharashtra 400022, India.

Esophageal atresia with tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) occurs in 1 in 3500
live births. Anorectal malformation is found to be associated with 14% of TEF.
Esophageal atresia with TEF is a congenital anomaly which classically presents as
excessive frothing from the mouth and respiratory distress. Rarely gastric
position of the feeding tube in a case of TEF can be obtained delaying the
diagnosis of TEF. We had an uncommon situation where a nasogastric tube reached
the stomach through the trachea and tracheo-esophageal fistula, leading to
misdiagnosis in a case of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula. By
using a stiff rubber catheter instead of a soft feeding tube for the diagnosis of
esophageal atresia and TEF, such situation can be avoided.

PMCID: PMC4097162
PMID: 25032210  [PubMed]


196. Food Addit Contam Part B Surveill. 2014;7(3):186-201. doi:
10.1080/19393210.2013.875598. Epub 2014 Feb 21.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans and dioxin-like polychlorinated 
biphenyls in food and feed in Latvia in 2009-2011.

Zacs D(1), Bartkevics V.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Food Safety, Animal Health and Environment "BIOR" , Lejupes
iela 3, Riga LV-1076 , Latvia.

During 2009-2011 a monitoring programme for 17 polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins 
(PCDDs)/polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and 12 dioxin-like polychlorinated 
biphenyls (DL-PCBs) was conducted in the Latvian food and feed market. Using ISO 
17025-accredited analytical methodology, investigation of 121 food (milk, dairy
products, meat, eggs, fish, fish products) and 66 feed samples (fish meal and
oil, compound and mineral feed, vegetable and animal fats) was performed. Most
samples showed contamination below the European Commission (EC) Regulation No.
1881/2006 and Commission Directive 2006/13/EC limits. Average total toxicological
equivalent (total-TEQ(1998)) concentrations within the food sample groups, except
fish and fish products, ranged between 0.41 and 15.1 pg total-TEQ(1998) g(-1)
fat. Fish and fish products showed contamination levels from 0.18 to 46.0 pg
total-TEQ(1998) g(-1) fresh weight (f.w.). Fifty-seven per cent of cod liver
samples were non-compliant. The most contaminated feed samples were fish meal and
fish oil. A comparison with WHO-TEF(2005) data is given.

PMID: 25029402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Pediatr Surg Int. 2014 Oct;30(10):987-96. doi: 10.1007/s00383-014-3548-0. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

The management of postoperative reflux in congenital esophageal
atresia-tracheoesophageal fistula: a systematic review.

Shawyer AC(1), D'Souza J, Pemberton J, Flageole H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton, ON,
Canada, annashawyer@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: Esophageal atresia (EA), with or without tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF), is associated with postoperative gastroesophageal reflux (GER). We
performed a systematic review of the literature regarding routine anti-reflux
medication post EA-TEF repair and its impact on postoperative GER and associated 
complications.
METHODS: A comprehensive search was conducted using MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINHAL,
CENTRAL (Cochrane library) electronic databases and gray literature. Full-text
screening was performed in duplicate. Included articles reported a primary
diagnosis of EA-TEF, a secondary diagnosis of postoperative GER, and primary
treatment of GER with anti-reflux medications.
RESULTS: Screening of 2,910 articles resulted in 25 articles (1,663 patients) for
analysis. Most were single-center studies (92%) and retrospective (76%); there
were no randomized control trials. Fifteen studies named the class of anti-reflux
agent used, 3 the duration of therapy, and none either the dose prescribed or
number of doses. Complications were inconsistently reported. Anti-reflux surgery 
was performed in 433/1,663 (26.0%) patients. Average follow-up was 53.2 months
(14 studies).
CONCLUSION: The quality of literature regarding anti-reflux medication for GER
post EA-TEF repair is poor. There are no well-outlined algorithms for anti-reflux
agents, doses, or duration of therapy. Standardized protocols and reliable
reporting are necessary to develop guidelines to better manage postoperative GER 
in EA-TEF patients.

PMID: 25011995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Jan;82(1):84-8. doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1493-5. Epub 2014 
Jul 11.

Clinical, cytogenetic, environmental and inheritance findings in Mexican neonates
with VACTERL association.

Salinas-Torres VM(1), Pérez-García N, Pérez-García G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Civil Hospital of Guadalajara Fray Antonio
Alcalde and University of Guadalajara, Hospital No. 278, Col. El Retiro, 44280,, 
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico, vm_salinas7@hotmail.com.

In this series the authors evaluate clinical, cytogenetic, environmental and
inheritance characteristics of neonates with VACTERL association. Twenty-six
patients were diagnosed with VACTERL association and had a normal somatometric
profile. Fifty-eight percent cases were males. The frequency of each component
was: vertebral defects (V), 77 %; anal atresia (A), 62 %; tracheo-esophageal
fistula/esophageal atresia (TEF/EA), 58 %; renal anomalies (R), 58 %; limb
abnormalities (L), 50 %, and cardiac malformations (C), 42 %. The most frequent
combination was VAR (n = 3). Sixteen patients had non-VACTERL anomalies such as
bilateral cryptorchidism (n = 4). Two probands (8 %) had first or second-degree
relatives with two components. Five patients (19 %) had environmental factors
that interacted with occurrence of VACTERL association. All patients had a normal
karyotype. This study contributes to a better characterization of VACTERL
phenotype in neonatal period. In spite of predominant sporadic occurrence,
underlying genetic susceptibility and environmental influences point to a complex
interplay between genes and environmental factors in VACTERL association.

PMID: 25008186  [PubMed - in process]


199. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 9;15:581. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-581.

Genome and transcriptome sequencing identifies breeding targets in the orphan
crop tef (Eragrostis tef).

Cannarozzi G, Plaza-Wüthrich S, Esfeld K, Larti S, Wilson YS, Girma D, de Castro 
E, Chanyalew S, Blösch R, Farinelli L, Lyons E, Schneider M, Falquet L,
Kuhlemeier C, Assefa K, Tadele Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bern, Institute of Plant Sciences, Altenbergrain 21, Bern
CH-3013, Switzerland. zerihun.tadele@ips.unibe.ch.

BACKGROUND: Tef (Eragrostis tef), an indigenous cereal critical to food security 
in the Horn of Africa, is rich in minerals and protein, resistant to many biotic 
and abiotic stresses and safe for diabetics as well as sufferers of immune
reactions to wheat gluten. We present the genome of tef, the first species in the
grass subfamily Chloridoideae and the first allotetraploid assembled de novo. We 
sequenced the tef genome for marker-assisted breeding, to shed light on the
molecular mechanisms conferring tef's desirable nutritional and agronomic
properties, and to make its genome publicly available as a community resource.
RESULTS: The draft genome contains 672 Mbp representing 87% of the genome size
estimated from flow cytometry. We also sequenced two transcriptomes, one from a
normalized RNA library and another from unnormalized RNASeq data. The normalized 
RNA library revealed around 38000 transcripts that were then annotated by the
SwissProt group. The CoGe comparative genomics platform was used to compare the
tef genome to other genomes, notably sorghum. Scaffolds comprising approximately 
half of the genome size were ordered by syntenic alignment to sorghum producing
tef pseudo-chromosomes, which were sorted into A and B genomes as well as
compared to the genetic map of tef. The draft genome was used to identify novel
SSR markers, investigate target genes for abiotic stress resistance studies, and 
understand the evolution of the prolamin family of proteins that are responsible 
for the immune response to gluten.
CONCLUSIONS: It is highly plausible that breeding targets previously identified
in other cereal crops will also be valuable breeding targets in tef. The draft
genome and transcriptome will be of great use for identifying these targets for
genetic improvement of this orphan crop that is vital for feeding 50 million
people in the Horn of Africa.

PMCID: PMC4119204
PMID: 25007843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Pediatr Res. 2014 Oct;76(4):355-62. doi: 10.1038/pr.2014.105. Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Abnormal Sonic hedgehog signaling in the lung of rats with esophageal atresia
induced by adriamycin.

Fragoso AC(1), Martinez L(2), Estevão-Costa J(3), Tovar JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid,
Spain [2] Laboratory of Congenital Malformations, INGEMM and IdiPaz Research
Laboratory, Madrid, Spain [3] Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto,
Portugal. (2)1] Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz,
Madrid, Spain [2] Laboratory of Congenital Malformations, INGEMM and IdiPaz
Research Laboratory, Madrid, Spain. (3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal lung development was recently described in the rat model of 
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF). Since in this
condition the ventral-to-dorsal switch of Shh expression in the foregut is
disturbed, the present study tested the hypothesis that this abnormal expression 
at the emergence of the tracheobronchial bud might be translated into the
developing lung.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either 1.75<U+2009>mg/kg i.p. adriamycin or vehicle from
E7 to E9. Three groups were studied: control and adriamycin-exposed with and
without EA-TEF. Embryos were recovered and the lungs were harvested and processed
for reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and immunofluorescence
analysis of the Shh signaling cascade.
RESULTS: Shh signaling was downregulated at the late embryonic stage of lung
development (E13) in embryos with EA-TEF. Throughout the subsequent stages of
development, the expression of both Shh and its downstream components increased
significantly and remained upregulated throughout gestation. Immunofluorescent
localization was consistent with these findings.
CONCLUSION: Defective Shh signaling environment in the foregut is present beyond 
the emergence of lung buds and probably impairs lung development. Later in
gestation, lungs exhibited a remarkable ability to upregulate the Shh cascade,
suggesting a compensatory response. These findings may be relevant to understand 
pulmonary disease suffered by children with EA-TEF.

PMID: 25003913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mycologia. 2014 Jul-Aug;106(4):865-78. doi: 10.3852/13-401. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry applied to identifying species of insect-pathogenic
fungi from the Metarhizium anisopliae complex.

Lopes RB(1), Faria M(1), Souza DA(1), Bloch C Jr(1), Silva LP(1), Humber RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Genetic Resources and Biotechnology, Brasilia DF, CP 02372, 70770-917,
Brazil. (2)USDA-ARS Biological Integrated Pest Management Research, Robert W.
Holley Center for Agriculture and Health, 538 Tower Road, Ithaca, New York 14853 
richard.humber@ars.usda.gov.

Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(MALDI-TOF MS) has proven to be a powerful tool for taxonomic resolution of
microorganisms. In this proof-of-concept study, we assessed the effectiveness of 
this technique to track the current gene sequence-based phylogenetic
classification of species in the Metarhizium anisopliae complex. Initially the
phylogenetic analysis of 5' strains by sequencing of the 59' end of the TEF-1a
gene region revealed seven species within M. anisopliae sensu lato and two
varieties outside this complex. Because initial studies on MS profiles from
different cell types showed that mycelial fragments or conidia produced on
nutrient-poor medium may yield too much background noise, all subsequent
spectrometric analyses were performed with acidhydrolyzed conidia from 10-12 d
old PDA cultures. The initial MALDI-TOF reference library included protein
spectral profiles from nine taxonomically distinct, molecularly identified
isolates sharing high genetic homology with the ex-type or ex-epitype isolates of
these taxa in Metarhizium. A second reference library added one isolate each for 
M. anisopliae sensu stricto and M. robertsii. The second, larger reference
library (including 11 taxa) allowed nearly perfect MALDI-TOF matching of
DNA-based species identification for the 40 remaining isolates molecularly
recognized as M. anisopliae sensu stricto (n = 19), M. robertsii (n = 6), M.
majus (n = 3), M. lepidiotae (n = 1), M. acridum (n = 3), M. flavoviride var.
pemphigi (n = 1), plus seven unidentified strains (six of them phylogenetically
close to M. anisopliae sensu stricto and one outside the Metarhizium
pingshaense-anisopliae-robertsii-brunneum clade). Due to the increasing frequency
of phylogenetically (genomically) based taxonomic revisions of fungi, this
approach is especially useful for culture collections, because once the protein
profiles of Metarhizium isolates are obtained taxonomic updating of MALDI-TOF
library data is easily accomplished by comparing stored profiles with those of
newly proposed taxa.

© 2014 by The Mycological Society of America.

PMID: 24987123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mycologia. 2014 Jul-Aug;106(4):757-84. doi: 10.3852/13-298. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Reconsidering species boundaries in the Ceratocystis paradoxa complex, including 
a new species from oil palm and cacao in Cameroon.

Mbenoun M(1), Wilhelm de Beer Z(1), Wingfield MJ(1), Wingfield BD(2), Roux J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, Forestry and Agricultural
Biotechnology Institute (FABI), Private Bag X20, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, 0028, South Africa. (2)Department of Genetics, Forestry and
Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI), Private Bag X20, University of
Pretoria, Pretoria, 0028, South Africa. (3)Department of Microbiology and Plant
Pathology, Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute (FABI), Private Bag 
X20, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 0028, South Africa Jolanda.Roux@up.ac.za.

The Ceratocystis paradoxa complex accommodates a group of fungal pathogens that
have become specialized to infect mostly monocotyledonous plants. Four species
currently are recognized in this group, including C. paradoxa, which has a
widespread distribution and broad host range. In this study, multigene
phylogenetic analyses involving sequences of the ITS, ß-tubulin and TEF-1a gene
loci, in combination with phenotypic and mating studies, were used to
characterize purported C. paradoxa isolates from Cameroon and to compare them
with isolates from elsewhere, including protologs and type specimens of known
species. We show that the C. paradoxa complex comprises substantially greater
species diversity than previously recognized. One new species in this group is
described from Cameroon as Ceratocystis cerberus, while C. paradoxa sensu stricto
(s. str.) and four other species are redefined. Lectotypes are designated for C. 
ethacetica and Endoconidium fragrans (synonym of C. ethacetica), while epitypes
are designated for C. paradoxa s. str., C. ethacetica and C. musarum. A neotype
is designated for Catenularia echinata (synonym of C. ethacetica) and two
species, previously treated in Thielaviopsis, are transferred to Ceratocystis.

© 2014 by The Mycological Society of America.

PMID: 24987122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Laryngoscope. 2015 Feb;125(2):469-74. doi: 10.1002/lary.24804. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

The association between laryngeal cleft and tracheoesophageal fistula: myth or
reality?

Fraga JC(1), Adil EA, Kacprowicz A, Skinner ML, Jennings R, Lillehei C, Rahbar R.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Thoracic Surgery Unit/Pediatric Surgery Service, Hospital de
Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Federal
University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre RS, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Laryngeal cleft (LC) associated with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) with or without esophageal atresia (EA) has rarely been described. 
The purpose of this study is to review our experience, clinical features,
management, delay in diagnosis, and complications in children with these
anomalies.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective chart review at pediatric tertiary referral center.
METHODS: Patients diagnosed with LC alone or LC and TEF over a 10-year period
were included. Data including demographics, type of TEF and LC, comorbidities,
symptoms, management, complications and swallowing outcomes were analyzed.
RESULTS: There were 161 pediatric patients diagnosed with LC alone and 22 with LC
and TEF. In patients with LC and TEF, aspiration was the most common presenting
symptom (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11, 50%). Seventeen patients (77%, mean age 4 years 7 months)
underwent endoscopic repair and five patients (23%) with type I clefts did not
require surgery. Two patients required revision surgery. For patients with LC
alone, the mean age at repair was 3.70 years (4 months-19.9 years) compared to
4.69 years (8 months-17.83 years) for patients with LC and TEF (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0187). The 
postoperative swallowing studies from 15 patients showed no aspiration. Mean
follow-up was 4 years and 6 months.
CONCLUSION: The diagnosis and management of LC in patients with TEF is often
delayed. If a child presents with persistent aspiration after TEF repair, a
complete airway endoscopy should be performed to evaluate for vocal fold mobility
and cleft. Endoscopic repair is the recommended approach for those patients
requiring surgical intervention.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4.

© 2014 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

PMID: 24964996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Surgery. 2014 Aug;156(2):483-91. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2014.03.016. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

Morbidity and mortality in patients with esophageal atresia.

Sulkowski JP(1), Cooper JN(2), Lopez JJ(2), Jadcherla Y(2), Cuenot A(2), Mattei
P(3), Deans KJ(1), Minneci PC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Surgical Outcomes Research, The Research Institute at Nationwide
Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH; Department of Surgery, Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, OH. (2)Center for Surgical Outcomes Research, The Research
Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH. (3)Department of
Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA. (4)Center for
Surgical Outcomes Research, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's
Hospital, Columbus, OH; Department of Surgery, Nationwide Children's Hospital,
Columbus, OH. Electronic address: peter.minneci@nationwidechildrens.org.

BACKGROUND: This study reports national estimates of population characteristics
and outcomes for patients with esophageal atresia with or without
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) and evaluates the relationships between
hospital volume and outcomes.
METHODS: Patients admitted within 30 days of life who had International
Classification of Diseases, 9th Edition, Clinical Modification diagnosis and
procedure codes relevant to EA/TEF during 1999-2012 were identified with the
Pediatric Health Information System database. Baseline demographics,
comorbidities, and postoperative outcomes, including predictors of in-hospital
mortality, were examined up to 2 years after EA/TEF repair.
RESULTS: We identified 3,479 patients with EA/TEF treated at 43 children's
hospitals; 37% were premature and 83.5% had =1 additional congenital anomaly,
with cardiac anomalies (69.6%) being the most prevalent. Within 2 years of
discharge, 54.7% were readmitted, 5.2% had a repeat TEF ligation, 11.4% had a
repeat operation for their esophageal reconstruction, and 11.7% underwent
fundoplication. In-hospital mortality was 5.4%. Independent predictors of
mortality included lower birth weight, congenital heart disease, other congenital
anomalies, and preoperative mechanical ventilation. There was no relationship
between hospital volume and mortality or repeat TEF ligation.
CONCLUSION: This study describes population characteristics and outcomes,
including predictors of in-hospital mortality, in EA/TEF patients treated at
children's hospitals across the United States. Across these hospitals, rates of
mortality or repeat TEF ligation were not dependent on hospital volume.

Copyright © 2014 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4099299
PMID: 24947650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Aug;57(8):440-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.05.009. Epub
2014 Jun 13.

Clinical and etiological heterogeneity in patients with tracheo-esophageal
malformations and associated anomalies.

Brosens E(1), Ploeg M(2), van Bever Y(3), Koopmans AE(4), IJsselstijn H(5),
Rottier RJ(5), Wijnen R(5), Tibboel D(5), de Klein A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands; Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre - Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
e.brosens@erasmusmc.nl. (2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus
Medical Centre - Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Centre, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical
Centre - Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Esophageal Atresia (EA) is a severe developmental defect of the foregut that
presents with or without a Tracheo-Esophageal Fistula (TEF). The prevalence of
EA/TEF over time and around the world has been relatively stable. EA/TEF is
manifested in a broad spectrum of anomalies: in some patients it manifests as an 
isolated atresia or fistula, but in over half it affects several organ systems.
While the associated malformations are often those of the VACTERL spectrum
(Vertebral, Anorectal, Cardiac, Tracheo-Esophageal, Renal and Limb), many
patients are affected by other malformations, such as microcephaly, micrognathia,
pyloric stenosis, duodenal atresia, a single umbilical artery, and anomalies of
the genitourinary, respiratory and gastrointestinal systems. Though EA/TEF is a
genetically heterogeneous condition, recurrent genes and loci are sometimes
affected. Tracheo-Esophageal (TE) defects are in fact a variable feature in
several known single gene disorders and in patients with specific recurrent Copy 
Number Variations and structural chromosomal aberrations. At present, a causal
genetic aberration can be identified in 11-12% of patients. In most, EA/TEF is a 
sporadic finding; the familial recurrence rate is low (1%). As this suggests that
epigenetic and environmental factors also contribute to the disease,
non-syndromic EA/TEF is generally believed to be a multifactorial condition.
Several population-based studies and case reports describe a wide range of
associated risks, including age, diabetes, drug use, herbicides, smoking and
fetal alcohol exposure. The phenotypical and genetic heterogeneity seen in EA/TEF
patients indicates not one underlying cause, but several. Unraveling the complex 
multifactorial and heterogeneous etiology of EA/TEF and associated features will 
require large cohorts of patients. Combined statistical analysis of component
findings, genome sequencing, and genome wide association studies will elucidate
new causal genetic defects and predisposing loci in the etiology within specific 
sub-populations. Improved knowledge of environmental risk factors, genetic
predisposition and causal genetic syndromes may improve prediction and parental
counseling, and prevent co-morbidity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24931924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Chem Res Toxicol. 2014 Jul 21;27(7):1120-32. doi: 10.1021/tx5001255. Epub 2014
Jun 18.

In vitro and in silico derived relative effect potencies of ah-receptor-mediated 
effects by PCDD/Fs and PCBs in rat, mouse, and guinea pig CALUX cell lines.

Ghorbanzadeh M(1), van Ede KI, Larsson M, van Duursen MB, Poellinger L,
Lücke-Johansson S, Machala M, Pencíková K, Vondrácek J, van den Berg M, Denison
MS, Ringsted T, Andersson PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Umeå University , SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

For a better understanding of species-specific relative effect potencies (REPs), 
responses of dioxin-like compounds (DLCs) were assessed. REPs were calculated
using chemical-activated luciferase gene expression assays (CALUX) derived from
guinea pig, rat, and mouse cell lines. Almost all 20 congeners tested in the
rodent cell lines were partial agonists and less efficacious than
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). For this reason, REPs were calculated
for each congener using concentrations at which 20% of the maximal TCDD response 
was reached (REP20TCDD). REP20TCDD values obtained for PCDD/Fs were comparable
with their toxic equivalency factors assigned by the World Health Organization
(WHO-TEF), while those for PCBs were in general lower than the WHO-TEF values.
Moreover, the guinea pig cell line was the most sensitive as indicated by the 20%
effect concentrations of TCDD of 1.5, 5.6, and 11.0 pM for guinea pig, rat, and
mouse cells, respectively. A similar response pattern was observed using
multivariate statistical analysis between the three CALUX assays and the
WHO-TEFs. The mouse assay showed minor deviation due to higher relative induction
potential for 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran and
2,3,4,6,7,8-hexachlorodibenzofuran and lower for
1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzofuran and 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl
(PCB126). 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzofuran was more than two times more potent in 
the mouse assay as compared with that of rat and guinea pig cells, while measured
REP20TCDD for PCB126 was lower in mouse cells (0.05) as compared with that of the
guinea pig (0.2) and rat (0.07). In order to provide REP20TCDD values for all
WHO-TEF assigned compounds, quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR)
models were developed. The QSAR models showed that specific electronic properties
and molecular surface characteristics play important roles in the AhR-mediated
response. In silico derived REP20TCDD values were generally consistent with the
WHO-TEFs with a few exceptions. The QSAR models indicated that, e.g.,
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran and 1,2,3,7,8,9-hexachlorodibenzofuran were
more potent than given by their assigned WHO-TEF values, and the non-ortho PCB 81
was predicted, based on the guinea-pig model, to be 1 order of magnitude above
its WHO-TEF value. By combining in vitro and in silico approaches, REPs were
established for all WHO-TEF assigned compounds (except OCDD), which will provide 
future guidance in testing AhR-mediated responses of DLCs and to increase our
understanding of species variation in AhR-mediated effects.

PMID: 24901989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mycologia. 2014 Nov-Dec;106(6):1168-87. doi: 10.3852/14-042. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

Alessioporus and Pulchroboletus (Boletaceae, Boletineae), two novel genera for
Xerocomus ichnusanus and X. roseoalbidus from the European Mediterranean basin:
molecular and morphological evidence.

Gelardi M(1), Simonini G(2), Ercole E(3), Vizzini A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Via Traversa della Selciatella 2B, I-00062 Bracciano (RM), Italy. (2)Via
Bell'aria 8, I-42121Reggio Emilia, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e
Biologia dei Sistemi, Università di Torino, Viale P.A. Mattioli 25, I-10125
Torino, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze della Vita e Biologia dei Sistemi,
Università di Torino, Viale P.A. Mattioli 25, I-10125 Torino, Italy
alfredo.vizzini@unito.it.

Alessioporus and Pulchroboletus are proposed as new monotypic genera to
accommodate the thermo-xerophilic European species Xerocomus ichnusanus and X.
roseoalbidus respectively. The present research focused on both morphological
features and multigene molecular phylogeny (nrITS, nrLSU, tef-1a datasets) to
elucidate the taxonomic status of these two rare Mediterranean boletes and
delineate a natural classification within the family Boletaceae. Macro- and
microscopic descriptions of the two species based on inclusive taxon sampling are
provided and supported by line drawings of the main anatomical features.
Phylogenetic relationships, ecology, geographical distribution and delimitation
from the most closely allied taxa also are highlighted. In addition, epitype
specimens are selected for both species.

© 2014 by The Mycological Society of America.

PMID: 24895429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mycologia. 2014 Jul-Aug;106(4):811-29. doi: 10.3852/13-319. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Clarification of generic and species boundaries for Metarhizium and related fungi
through multigene phylogenetics.

Kepler RM(1), Humber RA(2), Bischoff JF(3), Rehner SA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, USDA-ARS, Bldg 010A,
Beltsville, Maryland 20705 rmkepler@gmail.com. (2)Biological Integrated Pest
Management Research, USDA-ARS, RW Holley Center for Agriculture and Health,
Ithaca, New York 14853-2901. (3)Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, 
USDA-ARS, Bldg. 010A, Beltsville, Maryland 20705.

The genus Metarhizium historically refers to green-spored asexual insect
pathogenic fungi. Through culturing and molecular methods, Metarhizium has been
linked to Metacordyceps sexual states. Historically fungal nomenclature has
allowed separate names for the different life stages of pleomorphic fungi.
However, with the move to one name for one fungus regardless of life stage, there
is a need to determine which name is correct. For Metarhizium the situation is
complicated by the fact that Metacordyceps sexual states are interspersed among
additional asexual genera, including Pochonia, Nomuraea and Paecilomyces.
Metarhizium has priority as the earliest available name, but delimiting the
boundaries of this genus remains problematic. To clarify relationships among
these taxa we have obtained representative material for each genus and
established a molecular dataset of the protein-coding genes BTUB, RPB1, RPB2 and 
TEF. The resulting phylogeny supports Metarhizium combining the majority of
species recognized in Metacordyceps as well as the green-spored Nomuraea species 
and those in the more recently described genus Chamaeleomyces. Pochonia is
polyphyletic, and we restrict the definition of this genus to those species
forming a monophyletic clade with P. chlamydosporia, and the excluded species are
transferred to Metapochonia gen. nov. It is our hope that this unified concept of
sexual and asexual states in Metarhizium will foster advances in communication
and understanding the unique ecologies of the associated species.

© 2014 by The Mycological Society of America.

PMID: 24891418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Plant Biotechnol J. 2014 Jun;12(5):534-40. doi: 10.1111/pbi.12199.

The origins and progress of genomics research on Tef (Eragrostis tef).

Girma D(1), Assefa K, Chanyalew S, Cannarozzi G, Kuhlemeier C, Tadele Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Sciences, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland; Ethiopian 
Institute of Agricultural Research, Debre Zeit Agricultural Research Centre,
Debre Zeit, Ethiopia.

Tef, Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter, is the most important cereal in Ethiopia.
Tef is cultivated by more than five million small-scale farmers annually and
constitutes the staple food for more than half of the population of 80 million.
The crop is preferred by both farmers and consumers due to its beneficial traits 
associated with its agronomy and utilization. The genetic and phenotypic
diversity of tef in Ethiopia is a national treasure of potentially global
importance. In order for this diversity to be effectively conserved and utilized,
a better understanding at the genomic level is necessary. In the recent years,
tef has become the subject of genomic research in Ethiopia and abroad.
Genomic-assisted tef improvement holds tremendous potential for improving
productivity, thereby benefiting the smallholder farmers who have cultivated and 
relied on the crop for thousands of years. It is hoped that such research
endeavours will provide solutions to some of the age-old problems of tef's
husbandry. In this review, we provide a brief description of the genesis and
progress of tef genomic research to date, suggest ways to utilize the genomic
tools developed so far, discuss the potential of genomics to enable sustainable
conservation and use of tef genetic diversity and suggest opportunities for the
future research.

© 2014 Society for Experimental Biology, Association of Applied Biologists and
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24891040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Jun;49(6):910-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.01.022.

Slide tracheoplasty for the treatment of tracheoesophogeal fistulas.

Provenzano MJ(1), Rutter MJ(2), von Allmen D(3), Manning PB(4), Paul Boesch R(5),
Putnam PE(6), Black AP(1), de Alarcon A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45229-3026. (2)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH
45229-3026. Electronic address: mike.rutter@cchmc.org. (3)Division of General and
Thoracic Surgery, Division of Pediatric Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3026. (4)The Heart
Center: Cardiology Cardiothoracic Surgery, St. Louis Children's Hospital, One
Children's Place, Suite 5S50, Saint Louis, MO 63110. (5)Pediatric and Adolescent 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 201W Center St, Rochester, MN 55902. (6)Division of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3026.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study is to determine the surgical outcome of slide 
tracheoplasty for the treatment of tracheoesophageal (TE) fistula in pediatric
patients.
METHODS: After internal review board approval, the charts of pediatric patients
(0-18years old) who had undergone slide tracheoplasty for tracheoesophageal
fistula were retrospectively reviewed. Patient information and surgical outcomes 
were reviewed.
RESULTS: Nine patients underwent slide tracheoplasty for correction of TE
fistula. In five patients the original TE fistula was congenital. Other causes
included battery ingestion, tracheostomy tube complications, foreign body
erosion, and an iatrogenic injury. The average age at repair was 48±64 months
(range: 1-190). Seven patients had undergone previous TEF repair either open or
endoscopically. There were no recurrences after repair. Two patients had sternal 
periosteum interposed between the esophagus and trachea. There were no TEF
recurrences. A single patient had dehiscence of the tracheal anastomosis and
underwent a second procedure.
CONCLUSION: Slide tracheoplasty is an effective method to treat complex TE
fistulas. The procedure was not associated with any recurrences. This is the
first description of a novel, effective, and safe method to treat TE fistulas.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24888833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Surg Res. 2014 Aug;190(2):604-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2014.04.033. Epub 2014 Apr
28.

A nationwide analysis of clinical outcomes among newborns with esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistulas in the United States.

Wang B(1), Tashiro J(1), Allan BJ(1), Sola JE(1), Parikh PP(1), Hogan AR(1),
Neville HL(1), Perez EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, DeWitt-Daughtry Family Department of Surgery,
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida. (2)Division of
Pediatric Surgery, DeWitt-Daughtry Family Department of Surgery, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida. Electronic address:
eperez3@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to examine national outcomes in newborn
patients with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) in the
United Sates.
METHODS: Kids' Inpatient Database (KID) is designed to identify, track, and
analyze national outcomes for hospitalized children in the United States.
Inpatient admissions for pediatric patients with EA/TEF for kids' Inpatient
Database years 2000, 2003, 2006, and 2009 were analyzed. Patient demographics,
socioeconomic measures, disposition, survival and surgical procedures performed
were analyzed using standard statistical methods.
RESULTS: A total of 4168 cases were identified with diagnosis of EA/TEF. The
overall in-hospital mortality was 9%. Univariate analysis revealed lower survival
in patients with associated acute respiratory distress syndrome, ventricular
septal defect (VSD), birth weight (BW) < 1500 g, gestational age (GA), time of
operation within 24 h of admission, coexisting renal anomaly, imperforate anus,
African American race, and lowest economic status. Multivariate logistic
regression identified BW < 1500 g (odds ratio [OR] = 4.5, P < 0.001), operation
within 24 h (OR = 6.9, P < 0.001), GA <28 wk (OR = 2.2, P < 0.030), and presence 
of VSD (OR = 3.8, P < 0.001) as independent predictors of in-hospital mortality. 
Children's general hospital and children's unit in a general hospital were found 
to have a lower mortality rate compared with not identified as a children's
hospital after excluding immediate transfers (P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: BW < 1500 g, operation within 24 h, GA < 28 wk, and presence of VSD 
are the factors that predict higher mortality in EA/TEF population. Despite
dealing with more complicated cases, children's general hospital and children's
unit in a general hospital were able to achieve a lower mortality rate than not
identified as a children's hospital.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24881472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jul;42(Web Server issue):W478-84. doi:
10.1093/nar/gku377. Epub 2014 May 26.

Enhancing UCSF Chimera through web services.

Huang CC(1), Meng EC(1), Morris JH(1), Pettersen EF(1), Ferrin TE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics, Department of
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94143, USA. (2)Resource for Biocomputing, Visualization, and Informatics,
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, CA 94143, USA tef@cgl.ucsf.edu.

Integrating access to web services with desktop applications allows for an
expanded set of application features, including performing computationally
intensive tasks and convenient searches of databases. We describe how we have
enhanced UCSF Chimera (http://www.rbvi.ucsf.edu/chimera/), a program for the
interactive visualization and analysis of molecular structures and related data, 
through the addition of several web services
(http://www.rbvi.ucsf.edu/chimera/docs/webservices.html). By streamlining access 
to web services, including the entire job submission, monitoring and retrieval
process, Chimera makes it simpler for users to focus on their science projects
rather than data manipulation. Chimera uses Opal, a toolkit for wrapping
scientific applications as web services, to provide scalable and transparent
access to several popular software packages. We illustrate Chimera's use of web
services with an example workflow that interleaves use of these services with
interactive manipulation of molecular sequences and structures, and we provide an
example Python program to demonstrate how easily Opal-based web services can be
accessed from within an application. Web server availability:
http://webservices.rbvi.ucsf.edu/opal2/dashboard?command=serviceList.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4086125
PMID: 24861624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Jul;78(7):985-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.04.011. Epub 2014 May 5.

Cervical/thoracotomic/thoracoscopic approaches for H-type congenital
tracheo-esophageal fistula: a systematic review.

Parolini F(1), Morandi A(2), Macchini F(2), Gentilino V(2), Zanini A(2), Leva
E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy; Department of Paediatric Surgery, Azienda
Ospedaliera Spedali Civili Brescia, Italy. Electronic address: parfil@hotmail.it.
(2)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale
Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy.

PURPOSE: Aim of this systematic review is to investigate the thoracic and
cervical surgical approaches of H-type tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) according
to the position of the fistula.
METHODS: The PubMed database was searched for original studies on H-type TEF
treatment published between 1977 and 2012. Manuscripts finally included were
divided into open and thoracoscopic surgery groups.
RESULTS: Seventeen studies were selected for open surgery group, and most of them
agree on the importance of pre-operative diagnosis of the fistula by preliminary 
tracheoscopy. Right cervicotomy was used in 70 cases (76.9%), left cervicotomy in
12 (13.2%), and thoracotomy only in 9 (9.9%). Five studies were included in
thoracoscopic group (6 patients). Indications for the surgical approach (cervical
vs thoracic) according to the position of the TEF were clearly described in 10
manuscripts, and all stated differences in surgical technique details.
Complications and mortality rates were not statistically correlated to the
different surgical approaches.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence base in regard to the treatment of H-type fistula in
children is poor and the skills and preferences of the surgeons guide the choice 
of the procedure. Surgical division of the fistula is curative, and the key to a 
successful repair is the pre-operatively identification of the level of the
fistula with tracheoscopy. Right cervicotomy seems to be the approach of choice
in the majority of case, with the thoracic approach appropriate only for fistulae
opening below T2. Further well-designed prospective studies which take into
account of selection and performance bias are strongly required.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24856837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Arch Pediatr. 2014 Jul;21(7):716-21. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2014.04.010. Epub 2014
May 20.

[Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula in type III esophageal atresia. Diagnosis
and treatment are not easy].

[Article in French]

Lepeytre C(1), Roquelaure B(2), de Lagausie P(3), Merrot T(4), Dubus JC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unité de pneumologie pédiatrique, CHU Timone-Enfants, 13385 Marseille cedex 5,
France. (2)Service de pédiatrie multidisciplinaire, CHU Timone-Enfants, 13385
Marseille cedex 5, France. (3)Service de chirurgie pédiatrique, CHU
Timone-Enfants, 13385 Marseille cedex 5, France; Centre de compétence des
atrésies de l'sophage, CHU Timone-Enfants, 13385 Marseille cedex 5, France.
(4)Centre de compétence des atrésies de l'sophage, CHU Timone-Enfants, 13385
Marseille cedex 5, France; Service de chirurgie pédiatrique, hôpital Nord, 13915 
Marseille cedex 20, France. (5)Unité de pneumologie pédiatrique, CHU
Timone-Enfants, 13385 Marseille cedex 5, France; Centre de compétence des
atrésies de l'sophage, CHU Timone-Enfants, 13385 Marseille cedex 5, France.
Electronic address: jean-christophe.dubus@ap-hm.fr.

Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is possible after repair of congenital 
esophageal atresia. The frequency of recurrent TEF is observed in about 10% of
the cases. Within a cohort of 67 children with type III esophageal atresia
repaired between 1998 and 2009, we aimed to identify the number of children with 
recurrent TEF, the risk factors for this condition, and the treatment proposed.
The sex ratio was 1.7. Surgery was performed between 4 and 36 hours of life. Five
children (7.5%) had a recurrent TEF, usually during the first 3 months, revealed 
by respiratory symptoms related to feeding in some cases. We noted that recurrent
TEF was more frequent with anastomotic leakage (P=0.09) or postsurgical
pneumothorax (P<0.01). The diagnosis was made in four cases out of five by a
methylene blue test performed during a tracheobronchial endoscopy. Surgical
treatment was noted in four children, with three postsurgical secondary effects. 
One child was treated by endoscopy and an esophageal clip. With a median
follow-up of 52 months, no recurrence was noted. The recurrence of TEF may be
linked to postsurgical events. Diagnosis is not easy and treatment is not clearly
codified. Endoscopic treatment may be an advantageous option to surgery, likely
with less morbidity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24856368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 May;49(5):716-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2014.02.052. Epub
2014 Feb 22.

Post-operative management of esophageal atresia-tracheoesophageal fistula and
gastroesophageal reflux: a Canadian Association of Pediatric Surgeons annual
meeting survey.

Shawyer AC(1), Pemberton J(2), Flageole H(3).

Author information: 
(1)McMaster Children's Hospital, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5. (2)McMaster
Pediatric Surgery Research Collaborative, Department of Surgery, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5. (3)McMaster Children's Hospital,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5; McMaster Pediatric Surgery Research
Collaborative, Department of Surgery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario,
Canada L8N 3Z5. Electronic address: flageol@mcmaster.ca.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal atresia (EA), with or without tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF), is commonly associated with gastroesophageal reflux (GER) after surgical
repair. One risk factor for anastomotic stricture is post-operative GER. This
survey assessed practice patterns among attendees at the Canadian Association of 
Pediatric Surgeons (CAPS) annual meeting with respect to management of GER post
EA-TEF repair.
METHODS: A pre-piloted survey was handed out and collected at the 2012 CAPS
annual meeting. Data were entered and coded, and descriptive statistics were
calculated.
RESULTS: We distributed 70 surveys, and 57 (81.4%) surveys were returned. On
average, the incidence of EA-TEF is 8-10 cases per institution, per year.
Anti-reflux medication is started immediately post-operatively in 74% of patients
at institution of feeds (11%), or if symptoms of reflux develop (14%). Proton
pump inhibitors and H2-receptor antagonists are used in approximately equal
proportion. Patients are typically kept on anti-reflux medication for 3-6 months 
(37%) or 6-12 months (35%).
CONCLUSIONS: Most CAPS attendees treat postoperative GER prophylactically.
However, there is no consistency in management strategy regarding which
anti-reflux agent to use or for how long. A multi-centered study is required to
establish a standardized protocol for the post-operative management of EA-TEF to 
prevent reflux and its effect on anastomotic strictures.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24851754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Cell. 2014 Jun 19;54(6):920-31. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.04.013. Epub 2014 
May 15.

H2B ubiquitylation promotes RNA Pol II processivity via PAF1 and pTEFb.

Wu L(1), Li L(2), Zhou B(1), Qin Z(2), Dou Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Department of Biological
Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. Electronic address: 
yalid@umich.edu.

Histone H2B ubiquitination plays an important role in transcription regulation.
It has been shown that H2B ubiquitination is regulated by multiple upstream
events associated with elongating RNA polymerase. Here we demonstrate that H2B
K34 ubiquitylation by the MOF-MSL complex is part of the protein networks
involved in early steps of transcription elongation. Knocking down MSL2 in the
MOF-MSL complex affects not only global H2BK34ub, but also multiple
cotranscriptionally regulated histone modifications. More importantly, we show
that the MSL, PAF1, and RNF20/40 complexes are recruited and stabilized at active
gene promoters by direct binary interactions. The stabilized complexes serve to
regulate chromatin association of pTEFb through a positive feedback loop and
facilitate Pol II transition during early transcription elongation. Results from 
our biochemical studies are underscored by genome-wide analyses that show high
RNA Pol II processivity and transcription activity at MSL target genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4065619
PMID: 24837678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Front Pediatr. 2014 May 5;2:39. doi: 10.3389/fped.2014.00039. eCollection 2014.

The multifactorial origin of respiratory morbidity in patients surviving neonatal
repair of esophageal atresia.

Fragoso AC(1), Tovar JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)INGEMM and Idipaz Research Laboratory, Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Hospital Universitario La Paz , Madrid , Spain ; Department of Pediatrics,
Universidad Autonoma de Madrid , Madrid , Spain ; Faculty of Medicine, University
of Porto , Porto , Portugal. (2)INGEMM and Idipaz Research Laboratory, Department
of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz , Madrid , Spain ; Department
of Pediatrics, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid , Madrid , Spain.

Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA<U+2009>±<U+2009>TEF) occurs in
1 out of every 3000 births. Current survival approaches 95%, and research is
therefore focused on morbidity and health-related quality of life issues. Up to
50% of neonates with EA<U+2009>±<U+2009>TEF have one or more additional malformations including
those of the respiratory tract that occur in a relatively high proportion of them
and particularly of those with vertebral, anal, cardiac, tracheoesophageal,
renal, and limb association. Additionally, a significant proportion of survivors 
suffer abnormal pulmonary function and chronic respiratory tract disease. The
present review summarizes the current knowledge about the nature of these
symptoms in patients treated for EA<U+2009>±<U+2009>TEF, and explores the hypothesis that
disturbed development and maturation of the respiratory tract could contribute to
their pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4017156
PMID: 24829898  [PubMed]


218. Food Sci Nutr. 2014 Jan;2(1):39-45. doi: 10.1002/fsn3.80. Epub 2013 Dec 8.

Hydration kinetics of direct expanded tef flour breakfast cereals in water and
milk.

Solomon WK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Technology and Process Engineering, Haramaya University
Haramaya, Ethiopia ; Department of Consumer Sciences, University of Swaziland
Luyengo, Swaziland.

Hydration kinetics of tef flour breakfast cereals extruded at barrel temperatures
of 110, 130, and 150°C was investigated by hydrating them in water and whole milk
at 25°C (±1°C). The normalized Weibull model described the rehydration
characteristics of the extrudates in water and milk adequately (R
(2) = 0.98-0.99). Water absorption rate was significantly (P < 0.05) influenced
by barrel temperature where extrudates processed at 150°C barrel temperature
exhibited high water absorption rate followed by those extruded at 130 and 100°C,
respectively. Hydration rate and equilibrium moisture content were higher for
samples hydrated in water than those in milk. In view of the values of the shape 
parameter ß, the hydration process is predominantly controlled by diffusion
(ß = 0.40-0.51) for samples extruded at 110°C whereas external resistance to mass
transfer dominated (ß = 0.60-0.73) those extruded using 150 and 130°C. Extrudates
processed at 130 and 150°C exhibited better hydration characteristics. Thus,
these temperature ranges could be used to produce extruded products from tef.

PMCID: PMC3951549
PMID: 24804063  [PubMed]


219. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2014 Sep;33(9):1623-30. doi:
10.1007/s10096-014-2111-1. Epub 2014 May 3.

European Confederation of Medical Mycology (ECMM) epidemiological survey on
invasive infections due to Fusarium species in Europe.

Tortorano AM(1), Prigitano A, Esposto MC, Arsic Arsenijevic V, Kolarovic J,
Ivanovic D, Paripovic L, Klingspor L, Nordøy I, Hamal P, Arikan Akdagli S, Ossi
C, Grancini A, Cavanna C, Lo Cascio G, Scarparo C, Candoni A, Caira M, Drogari
Apiranthitou M; ECMM Working Group.

Collaborators: Faber E, Streharova A, Argynopoulou A, Baltadakis J, Christofidou 
M, Giamarellos-Bourboulis E, Harahalakis N, Marango M, Meletiadis J, Pananikolaou
K, Pirounaki M, Stamouli M, Passera M, Oliveri S, Bonetti C, Grandesso S, Milani 
R, Ciceri F, Verona C, Malato S, Chiesa R, Puglisi A, Manunta P, Pajetta E,
Giglio F, Rossi CM, Assanelli A, Valeri B, Boschetti C, Tarsia P, Annaloro C,
Viola G, Casaroli I, Sanguinetti M, Sartor A, Uzun O, Alp S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche per la Salute, Università degli Studi di
Milano, Milano, Italy, annamaria.tortorano@unimi.it.

In order to better understand the epidemiology of fusariosis in Europe, a survey 
collecting information on the clinical characteristics of the patients infected
by Fusarium as well as on the infecting isolates was launched. A total of 76
cases of invasive fusariosis occurring from January 2007 to June 2012 were
collected and Fusarium isolates were identified by sequencing the translation
elongation factor 1a (TEF) gene. Also, antifungal susceptibility was tested by
broth microdilution according to the European Committee on Antimicrobial
Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) and the Etest. Disseminated disease was
considered proven in 46 cases and probable in 17 cases. Localised infection was
seen in 13 cases. Gibberella fujikuroi species complex (SC), including Fusarium
verticillioides and F. proliferatum, and F. solani SC were the most frequent
aetiology of disseminated and localised infections, respectively. The crude
mortality rate was 46 %, the highest associated with F. solani SC (67 %) and F.
proliferatum (62.5 %). A wide range of antifungal susceptibilities was observed. 
Amphotericin B was the most potent antifungal in vitro, and itraconazole the
least effective. The azoles exhibited lower minimum inhibitory concentrations
(MICs) against F. verticillioides strains, with posaconazole having a slightly
better performance, while F. solani SC isolates were resistant to all three
azoles tested. The essential agreement between the Etest and the EUCAST method
was 100 % for itraconazole and voriconazole, and 96 % for amphotericin B and
posaconazole. In conclusion, we confirm that fusariosis is a rare but severe
event in Europe, that G. fujikuroi SC is the predominant cause of deep infections
and that different species have different antifungal in vitro susceptibility
patterns.

PMID: 24791951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Pak J Biol Sci. 2014 Jan 1;17(1):92-7.

Interrelationship and path coefficient analysis of yield components in F4
progenies of tef (Eragrostis tef).

Debebe A, Singh H, Tefera H.

This experiment was conducted at Debre Zeit and Akaki during 2004-2005 cropping
season on F2-derived F4 bulk families of three crosses, viz, DZ-01-974 x
DZ-01-2786, DZ-01-974 x DZ-Cr-37 and Alba x Kaye Murri. To estimate the
correlations and path coefficients between yield and yield components, 63 F4
families were taken randomly from each of the three crosses. The 189 F4 families,
five parents and two checks were space planted following in 14 x 14 simple
lattice design. Study of associations among traits indicated that yield was
positively associated with shoot biomass, harvest index, lodging index and
panicle kernel weight at phenotypic level at Debre Zeit. At Akaki, yield had
significant positive correlation with shoot biomass, harvest index, plant height,
panicle length and panicle weight. At genotypic level, grain yield per plot
exhibited positive association with harvest index, shoot biomass, lodging index
and panicle kernel weight at Debre Zeit. By contrast, days to heading, days to
maturity, plant height and panicle length showed negative association with yield.
At Akaki, kernel yield per plot was positively correlated at genotypic level with
all the traits considered where lodging index had the highest correlation
followed by shoot biomass, panicle kernel weight and harvest index. Path
coefficient analysis at both phenotypic and genotypic levels for both the
locations suggested those shoot biomass and harvest indexes are the two important
yield determining traits. These two traits might be useful in indirect selection 
for yield improvement in the material generated from the three crosses under
consideration.

PMID: 24783784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mycologia. 2014 Mar-Apr;106(2):291-306. doi: 10.3852/106.2.291.

Molecular phylogeny and taxonomy of the genus Veloporphyrellus.

Li YC(1), Ortiz-Santana B, Zeng NK, Feng B, Yang ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Plant Diversity and Biogeography of East Asia, Kunming
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming 650201, China.

Veloporphyrellus is a genus known from North and Central America, southeastern
Asia, and Africa. Because species of this genus are phenotypically similar to
some taxa in several genera, such as Boletellus, Leccinum, Strobilomyces, Suillus
and Tylopilus s.l. belonging to Boletales, its phylogenetic disposition has never
been addressed. We analyzed four DNA regions, the nuclear ribosomal LSU and
tef-1a, and the mitochondrial mtSSU and atp6 genes, to investigate the
phylogenetic disposition of Veloporphyrellus. Although the monophyly of the genus
and its systematic placement within the Boletaceae was well supported, its
relationship to other genera was not resolved. Morphologically Veloporphyrellus
is distinguished from other boletoid genera by the combination of the pinkish or 
grayish pink hymenophore, the membranous veil hanging on the pilea margin, the
trichoderm-like pileus covering and the smooth basidiospores. Five species,
including two new species and two new combinations, are described and
illustrated. A key to the species of Veloporphyrellus also is provided.

PMID: 24782497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mycologia. 2014 Mar-Apr;106(2):260-75. doi: 10.3852/106.2.260.

Entomopathogens of Amazonian stick insects and locusts are members of the
Beauveria species complex (Cordyceps sensu stricto).

Sanjuan T(1), Tabima J, Restrepo S, Læssøe T, Spatafora JW, Franco-Molano AE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Taxonomía y Ecología de Hongos, Universidad de Antioquia, calle
67 No. 53 - 108, A.A. 1226, Medellin, Colombia.

In the Amazon the only described species of Cordyceps sensu stricto (Hypocreales,
Cordycipitaceae) that parasitize insects of Orthopterida (orders Orthoptera and
Phasmida) are Cordyceps locustiphila and C. uleana. However, the type specimens
for both taxa have been lost and the concepts of these species are uncertain. To 
achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the systematics of these species,
collections of Cordyceps from the Amazon regions of Colombia, Ecuador and Guyana 
were subjected to morphological, ecological and molecular phylogenetic studies.
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted on partial sequences of SSU, LSU, TEF, RPB1 
and RPB2 nuclear loci. Two new species are proposed including C.
diapheromeriphila, a parasite of Phasmida, and C. acridophila, a parasite of the 
superfamily Acridomorpha (Orthoptera), which is broadly distributed across the
Amazon. For C. locustiphila a lectotypification and an epitypification are made. 
Cordyceps locustiphila is host specific with Colpolopha (Acridomorpha:
Romaleidae), and its distribution coincides with that of its host. The
phylogenetic placement of these three species was resolved with strong support in
the Beauveria clade of Cordyceps s. str. (Cordycipitaceae). This relationship and
the morphological similarity of their yellow stromata with known teleomorphs of
the clade, suggest that the holomorphs of these species may include Beauveria or 
Beauveria-like anamorphs. The varying host specificity of the beauverioid
Cordyceps species suggest the potential importance of identifying the natural
host taxon before future consideration of strains for use in biological control
of pest locusts.

PMID: 24782494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 29;9(4):e88610. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088610. eCollection
2014.

Essential role of TEA domain transcription factors in the negative regulation of 
the MYH 7 gene by thyroid hormone and its receptors.

Iwaki H(1), Sasaki S(1), Matsushita A(1), Ohba K(1), Matsunaga H(1), Misawa H(1),
Oki Y(1), Ishizuka K(2), Nakamura H(3), Suda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Kuma Hospital, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(8):e106385.

MYH7 (also referred to as cardiac myosin heavy chain ß) gene expression is known 
to be repressed by thyroid hormone (T3). However, the molecular mechanism by
which T3 inhibits the transcription of its target genes (negative regulation)
remains to be clarified, whereas those of transcriptional activation by T3
(positive regulation) have been elucidated in detail. Two MCAT (muscle C, A, and 
T) sites and an A/T-rich region in the MYH7 gene have been shown to play a
critical role in the expression of this gene and are known to be recognized by
the TEAD/TEF family of transcription factors (TEADs). Using a reconstitution
system with CV-1 cells, which has been utilized in the analysis of positive as
well as negative regulation, we demonstrate that both T3 receptor (TR) ß1 and a1 
inhibit TEAD-dependent activation of the MYH7 promoter in a T3 dose-dependent
manner. TRß1 bound with GC-1, a TRß-selective T3 analog, also repressed
TEAD-induced activity. Although T3-dependent inhibition required the DNA-binding 
domain (DBD) of TRß1, it remained after the putative negative T3-responsive
elements were mutated. A co-immunoprecipitation study demonstrated the in vivo
association of TRß1 with TEAD-1, and the interaction surfaces were mapped to the 
DBD of the TRß1 and TEA domains of TEAD-1, both of which are highly conserved
among TRs and TEADs, respectively. The importance of TEADs in MYH7 expression was
also validated with RNA interference using rat embryonic cardiomyocyte H9c2
cells. These results indicate that T3-bound TRs interfere with transactivation by
TEADs via protein-protein interactions, resulting in the negative regulation of
MYH7 promoter activity.

PMCID: PMC4004540
PMID: 24781449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 2014 Jun;35(2):77-9. doi: 10.1097/PAF.0000000000000042.

An autopsy case of iatrogenic tracheoesophageal fistula secondary to
tracheostomy.

Menezes RG(1), Pant S, Prasad SC, Rao Padubidri J, Prabhu P, Monteiro FN, Kanchan
T, Yallapur Prahalad RB, Bhagavath P, Sathyanarayan Achar M, Lasrado S.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Forensic Medicine Division, Department of Pathology, College of
Medicine, King Fahd Hospital of the University, University of Dammam, Dammam,
Saudi Arabia; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Arkansas for
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR; Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head &
Neck Surgery, and §Department of Forensic Medicine, Kasturba Medical College,
Mangalore, India; <U+2225>Department ofOtorhinolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, and
¶Department of Forensic Medicine, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India; and
#Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, Father Muller Medical
College, Mangalore, India.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is an uncommon but life-threatening sequel of
prolonged use of a cuffed tracheostomy tube. We describe a patient who developed 
a TEF after a tracheostomy done for management of head injury due to a road
traffic mishap. The patient subsequently died of sepsis after bilateral
bronchopneumonia. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first autopsy case of
iatrogenic TEF after tracheal intubation reported in forensic literature.

PMID: 24781407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Fungal Biol. 2014 Apr;118(4):402-12. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2014.02.005. Epub 2014
Mar 7.

A single nucleotide polymorphism in the translation elongation factor 1a gene
correlates with the ability to produce fumonisin in Japanese Fusarium fujikuroi.

Suga H(1), Kitajima M(2), Nagumo R(2), Tsukiboshi T(3), Uegaki R(3), Nakajima
T(4), Kushiro M(5), Nakagawa H(5), Shimizu M(2), Kageyama K(6), Hyakumachi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, Gifu 501-1193, Japan.
Electronic address: suga@gifu-u.ac.jp. (2)Faculty of Applied Biological Science, 
Gifu University, Gifu 501-1193, Japan. (3)National Institute of Livestock and
Grassland Science, National Agriculture and Food Research Organization (NARO),
Tsukuba 305-0901, Japan. (4)National Agricultural Research Center for Kyushu
Okinawa Region, NARO, Kumamoto 861-1192, Japan. (5)National Food Research
Institute, NARO, Tsukuba 305-8642, Japan. (6)River Basin Research Center, Gifu
University, 501-1193 Gifu, Japan.

PCR-RFLP based on the translation elongation factor 1a (TEF) gene was developed
to identify Fusarium fujikuroi in the Fusarium (Gibberella) fujikuroi species
complex. Ninety-three strains, most of which were obtained from various sources
in Japan, were identified as F. fujikuroi and their capability to produce
fumonisin was investigated using an in vitro assay. Fumonisin production was
detected in 50 strains isolated from maize, strawberry, wheat, and rice, whereas 
it was undetectable in 43 strains derived from rice seeds and rice seedlings
carrying the bakanae disease, and from unknown sources. A single nucleotide
polymorphism in the TEF gene (T618G) correlated with the ability to synthesize
fumonisin.

Copyright © 2014 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24742835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Jul 1;485-486:528-33. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2014.03.021. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Long-term sampling of dioxin-like substances from a clinker kiln stack using
alternative fuels.

Rivera-Austrui J(1), Martinez K(1), Marco-Almagro L(2), Abalos M(1), Abad E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dioxins, Environmental Chemistry Department, IDAEA-CSIC, J.
Girona 18-26, Barcelona 08034, Spain. (2)Department of Statistics and Operational
Research, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Avda. Diagonal 647,
Barcelona 08028, Spain. (3)Laboratory of Dioxins, Environmental Chemistry
Department, IDAEA-CSIC, J. Girona 18-26, Barcelona 08034, Spain. Electronic
address: esteban.abad@idaea.csic.es.

The aim of this work is to characterize atmospheric emissions of polychlorinated 
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)/polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and dioxin-like
polychlorinated biphenyls (dl-PCBs) from a cement production plant where the
existing clinker production line was completely replaced by a new
state-of-the-art installation. The project started in April 2008 with the
installation of a long-term sampling system in the stack of the clinker kiln that
used petroleum coke as fuel; PCDD/PCDF and dl-PCB emissions were then evaluated
for a two year period. To carry out the second part of the study, in 2010 the
sampling system was moved to the new installation in which, apart from
conventional fuel, recovered derived fuel (RDF) and WWTP sludge were used as
alternative fuels. For both the old and new clinker kilns, PCDD/PCDF emission
values were well below the limit established by the European Waste Incineration
Directive 2000/76/CE (EWID) of 100 pg I-TEQ/Nm(3); values ranged from 0.43 to
2.02 and from 0.07 to 3.31 pg I-TEQ/Nm(3), respectively. dl-PCBs accounted for
approximately 25% of the WHO-TEQ toxicity. These results prove that the
installation is capable of reducing PCDD/PCDF and dl-PCB emissions when
alternative fuels are integrated into the process. In the case of PCDDs/PCDFs,
the major contributions to total TEQ were usually from 2,3,7,8-TCDD (owing to its
relative abundance) and 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF (due to its high I-TEF of 0.5); while for
dl-PCBs, the major contribution was from PCB-126. The slight shift in the
congener profile between the old and new installations was characterized and a
regression model was proposed for dl-PCB emissions depending on the RDF flow rate
in the clinker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24742561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2014;196:159-62.

Design and development of low-cost tissue replicas for simulation of rare
neonatal congenital defects.

Hawkinson EK(1), Davis LM(1), Barsness KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Education in Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University.

Studies have shown that simulation can be a valuable tool for training pediatric 
surgeons to perform thoracoscopic repair of rare congenital anomalies [1-3]. The 
previously evaluated models were high fidelity, hybrid models that required the
use of fetal bovine or porcine tissue blocks within a simulated neonate chest
cavity. Real tissue blocks can be expensive, and may not be readily available in 
some parts of the world. We have developed low-cost, portable simulators for
esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) and duodenal atresia
(DA) that recreate the 3-dimensional challenges for minimally invasive repair.
These are fully simulated models of the thoracic and abdominal cavities
containing synthetic tissue that replicates the required anatomy.

PMID: 24732499  [PubMed - in process]


228. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2014;5(5):282-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2014.03.017. Epub 2014
Mar 25.

Platysma myocutaneous flap interposition in surgical management of large acquired
post-traumatic tracheoesophageal fistula: A case report.

Akaraviputh T(1), Angkurawaranon C(2), Phanchaipetch T(3), Lohsiriwat V(4),
Nimmanwudipong T(2), Chinswangwatanakul V(2), Metasate A(2), Trakarnsanga A(2),
Swangsri J(2), Taweerutchana V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand. Electronic
address: thawatchai.aka@mahidol.ac.th. (2)Division of General Surgery, Department
of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10700, Thailand. (3)Division of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery, Department
of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok
10700, Thailand. (4)Division of Head Neck and Breast Surgery, Department of
Surgery, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700,
Thailand.

INTRODUCTION: Acquired post-traumatic tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is an
uncommon entity requiring early diagnosis. Among the many strategies in surgical 
management, we report a case successfully treated with a single-stage tracheal
resection and esophageal repair with platysma myocutaneous interposition flap.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: A 24-year-old man had a motor vehicle accident with head
injury and cerebral contusion who required mechanical ventilation support. Three 
weeks later, he developed hypersecretion, and recurrent episodes of aspiration
pneumonia. The chest computed tomography, esophagogastroduodenoscopy, and
bronchoscopy revealed a large TEF diameter of 3cm at 4.5cm from carina.
Single-stage tracheal resection with primary end-to-end anastomosis and
esophageal repair with platysma myocutaneous interposition flap was performed. A 
contrast esophagography was done on post-operative day 7 and revealed no leakage.
He was discharged on post-operative day 10. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy at 1 month
revealed patient esophageal lumen. At present he is doing well without any
evidence of complications such as esophageal stricture or fistula.
DISCUSSION: There are many choices of myocutaneous muscle flaps in trachea and
esophageal closure or reinforcement. The platysma myocutaneous flap interposition
is simple with the advantage of reduced bulkiness. Concern on the vascular supply
is that flap should be elevated with the deep adipofascial tissue under the
platysma to ensure that the flap survival is not threatened.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of acquired TEF with platysma myocutaneous flap is an
alternative procedure for a large uncomplicated TEF as it is effective,
technically ease, minimal donor site defect and yields good surgical results.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4008854
PMID: 24727740  [PubMed]


229. Toxicol Sci. 2014 Jun;139(2):488-500. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfu041. Epub 2014 Apr
8.

Relative potency for altered humoral immunity induced by polybrominated and
polychlorinated dioxins/furans in female B6C3F1/N mice.

Frawley R(1), DeVito M, Walker NJ, Birnbaum L, White K Jr, Smith M, Maynor T,
Recio L, Germolec D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences.

The use of brominated flame retardants and incineration of bromine-containing
materials has lead to an increase in polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans (PBDD/Fs) in the environment. Measurable amounts of PBDD/Fs have
been detected in soil, seafood, and human breast milk and serum. Studies indicate
that the relative potencies of some PBDD/Fs based on enzyme induction are
equivalent to those of some polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans. 
To assess the humoral immunity relative potencies of PBDD/Fs and compare them to 
their chlorinated analogs, female B6C3F1/N mice received a single oral exposure
to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 2,3,7,8-tetrabromodibenzofuran
(TBDF), 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF), 1,2,3,7,8-pentabromodibenzofuran 
(1PeBDF), 1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (1PeCDF),
2,3,4,7,8-pentabromodibenzofuran (4PeBDF), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran
(4PeCDF), 2,3-dibromo-7,8-dichlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (DBDCDD), or
2,3,7-tribromodibenzo-p-dioxin (TriBDD). Inhibition of the immunoglobulin M (IgM)
antibody forming cell response was measured 4 days following immunization with
sheep red blood cells. The data were fit to a Hill model to estimate the ED50 for
inhibition. Expression of xenobiotic metabolizing enzyme (XME) and thyroxine
transport protein (Ttr) genes in liver was measured by PCR to assess aryl
hydrocarbon-mediated responses. TCDD, TBDF, TCDF, 1PeBDF, 4PeBDF, 4PeCDF, and
DBDCDD suppressed the IgM antibody response and Ttr gene expression, and
upregulated phase I XME genes. 1PeCDF suppressed the IgM antibody response but
only upregulated phase I XME genes; TriBDD had no effect on antibody response.
The rank order of potency (ED50) for these chemicals was
TCDD>TBDF>4PeBDF>TCDF/4PeCDF/1PeBDF>1PeCDF. Whereas TCDD was the most potent
compound tested, the brominated analogs were more potent than their chlorinated
analogs, suggesting that these compounds should be considered in toxic
equivalency factor evaluation and risk assessment.

PMCID: PMC4031622
PMID: 24713691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Food Chem. 2014 Aug 15;157:408-12. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.02.060. Epub 2014
Feb 23.

Comparison of extraction methods for analysis of citrinin in red fermented rice.

Wang W(1), Chen Q(2), Zhang X(2), Zhang H(2), Huang Q(2), Li D(3), Yao J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei
Collaborative Innovation Center for Industrial Fermentation, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan 430068, China. Electronic address: Wang1wei1ping1@163.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering (Ministry of Education), Hubei
Collaborative Innovation Center for Industrial Fermentation, Hubei University of 
Technology, Wuhan 430068, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Fermentation Engineering
(Ministry of Education), Hubei Collaborative Innovation Center for Industrial
Fermentation, Hubei University of Technology, Wuhan 430068, China. Electronic
address: Dongshengli86@163.com. (4)Wuhan Jiacheng Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Wuhan 
430074, China.

There is no standard method for the extraction and analysis of citrinin in red
fermented rice (RFR). In the study, five extraction methods were compared for
their efficiency to analyse citrinin in RFR by HPLC-FLD (reversed phase high
performance liquid chromatography with fluorescence detection), including, (1)
ultrasonic extraction with EW solution (ethanol:water, 7:3, v/v); (2) ultrasonic 
extraction with TEF solvent mixtures (toluene:ethyl acetate:formic acid, 7:3:1,
v/v); (3) shaking extraction with EW; (4) shaking extraction with EF solvent
mixtures (ethyl acetate:formic acid, 1:1, v/v); (5) shaking combined with
ultrasonic extraction in EW. Comparison of chromatograms of citrinin by HPLC-FLD 
with different extraction methods revealed that EW was the best extraction
solvent. It was also found that shaking combined with ultrasonic extraction in EW
was the most efficient extraction method to extract citrinin from RFR for
qualitative and quantitative analysis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24679798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e91375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091375. eCollection
2014.

Adaptive expression of microRNA-125a in adipose tissue in response to obesity in 
mice and men.

Diawara MR(1), Hue C(1), Wilder SP(2), Venteclef N(1), Aron-Wisnewsky J(1), Scott
J(3), Clément K(1), Gauguier D(4), Calderari S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) UMRS 872,
Cordeliers Research Center, University Pierre & Marie Curie, Paris, France;
Institute of Cardiometabolism & Nutrition, ICAN, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital,
University Pierre & Marie-Curie, Paris, France. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)National Heart
and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. (4)Institut 
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) UMRS 872, Cordeliers
Research Center, University Pierre & Marie Curie, Paris, France; Institute of
Cardiometabolism & Nutrition, ICAN, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, University Pierre
& Marie-Curie, Paris, France; Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

MicroRNAs are emerging as new mediators in the regulation of adipose tissue
biology and the development of obesity. An important role of microRNA-125a has
been suggested in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance (IR). Here, we
characterized the function of microRNA-125a in adipose tissue in a context of
experimentally-induced IR and obesity in mice and in obese patients. We showed
time dependent overexpression of the microRNA in adipose tissue of BALB/c and
C57BL/6J mice in response to high fat diet (HFD) feeding. MicroRNA-125a
expression was downregulated in vitro in insulin resistant 3T3-L1 adipocytes and 
ex vivo in adipose tissue of obese patients. In vitro modulation of microRNA-125a
expression in 3T3-L1 adipocytes did not affect glucose uptake. Gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) identified significantly altered expression patterns
of predicted microRNA-125a gene targets in transcriptomic datasets of adipose
tissue from HFD-fed mice and obese patients. Among genes that contributed to
global enrichment of altered expression of microRNA-125a targets, Thyrotroph
embryonic factor (Tef), Mannan-binding lectin serine peptidase 1, Reticulon 2 and
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2L3 were significantly differentially expressed in 
adipose tissue in these groups. We showed that Tef expression is reduced in
adipose tissue of obese patients following gastric bypass surgery. Our findings
indicate that microRNA-125a expression in adipose tissue adapts to IR and may
play a role in the development of obesity in mice and obese subjects through
uncoupled regulation of the expression of microRNA-125a and its targets.

PMCID: PMC3967993
PMID: 24675842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Asian J Surg. 2014 Mar 24. pii: S1015-9584(14)00020-7. doi:
10.1016/j.asjsur.2014.01.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Closure of tracheoesophageal fistula with prefabricated deltopectoral flap.

Murono S(1), Ishikawa E(2), Nakanishi Y(2), Endo K(2), Kondo S(2), Wakisaka N(2),
Yoshizaki T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan. Electronic address:
murono@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, School of Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a serious complication associated with
impaired quality of life. However, a successful TEF closure is difficult owing to
the high incidence of recurrence. We utilized a prefabricated deltopectoral (DP) 
flap for closure of a TEF that occurred after an extended total thyroidectomy.
Prefabrication of the inner soft tissue lining the DP flap with a split skin
graft was performed prior to surgical closure of a TEF. Esophageal and tracheal
mucosa were sutured to the split thickness side and full thickness side of the
prefabricated DP flap, respectively. A successful closure of the fistula was
achieved with this procedure. Prefabricated DP flap is a useful procedure for the
surgical treatment of TEF.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24674898  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


233. Saudi J Anaesth. 2014 Jan;8(1):134-7. doi: 10.4103/1658-354X.125977.

Anesthetic management of a 2-day-old with complete congenital heart block.

Khanna P(1), Arora S(1), Aravindan A(1), Prasad G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Maternal connective tissue disorders such as Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (most
common), Sjogren's syndrome, mixed connective tissue disorders may lead to the
rare condition of complete congenital heart block in the neonate. Rare fetal
syndromes such as myocarditis, 18p syndrome, mucopolysaccharidoses and
mitochondrial diseases are other causes. The mortality rate of this condition is 
inversely propotional to the age of presentation being 6 % in the neonatal age
group. As the cardiac output in the neonate is heart rate dependent, it is
crucial to maintain the heart rate in these patients. Pharamacological
interventions with dopamine, isoprenaline, epinephrine and atropine are known for
their variable response. Although permanent pacing is the most reliable mode of
management, the access to it is often not readily available, especially in the
developing countries. In such cases temporary pacing methods become lifesaving.
Of all the modalities of temporary pacing (transcutaneous, transesophageal and
transvenous) transcutaneous pacing is the most readily available and immediate
mode. In this case report we present a two day old neonate with isolated complete
congenital heart block and a resting heart rate of 50-55/min in immediate need of
palliative surgery for trachea-esophageal fistula (TEF). With pharmacological
intervention the heart rate could only be raised to 75-80/min. The surgery was
successfully carried out using transcutaneous pacing to maintain a heart rate of 
100/min.

PMCID: PMC3950440
PMID: 24665257  [PubMed]


234. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 2014 Jan-Mar;11(1):35-8. doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.129212.

Experience with livaditis circular myotomy in management of long gap TEF.

Singh A, Bajpai M(1), Sharma N, Panda SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Management of long gap oesophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (OA TEF) is challenging. Various intra-operative and pre-operative
manures have been described to tackle this challenge. We reviewed our experiences
with livaditis circular myotomy. The aim of this study was to evaluate long-term 
outcomes in cases of long gap OA TEF managed primarily with livaditis circular
myotomy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This is a cross-sectional study including cases of long
gap oesophagus managed by livaditis circular myotomy between January 1998 and
October 2012. Their case records were evaluated for operative and post-operative 
data. The anthropometric data of these cases were collected. All these cases were
subjected to barium swallow and manometry. Those cases with other associated
neurological anomalies, multiple congenital anomalies, parents refusing consent
for the study, less than 6 months of follow up or incomplete data were excluded
from the study.
RESULTS: Out of the total of 109 patients of OA TEF managed, long gaps OA TEF
were 37. Out of the 37 cases, 13 were managed by primary repair with livaditis
circular myotomy. Of these 13 cases, 11 formed the study group. Mean age at
evaluation was 36 ± 9 months. Mean age at primary surgery was 3 ± 2.5 days of
life. Minor leak in the immediate post-operative period was present in 2/11
cases. Manometry was done in all the cases and revealed motility disorder in the 
form of un-coordinated contraction in 4/11 cases. Remaining 7/11 cases were
normal.
CONCLUSION: Livaditis circular myotomy is a viable option in the management of
long gap OA TEF with good comparable long-term results.

PMID: 24647291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Arch Microbiol. 2014 Jun;196(6):445-52. doi: 10.1007/s00203-014-0976-0. Epub 2014
Mar 18.

Phylogenetic relationship between different race representative populations of
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceris in respect of translation elongation factor-1a,
ß-tubulin, and internal transcribed spacer region genes.

Dubey SC(1), Priyanka K, Singh V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plant Pathology, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New
Delhi, 110012, India, scdube2002@yahoo.co.in.

Genetic diversity of 70 isolates of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. ciceris originated 
from various states of India representing eight races causing wilt in chickpea
(Cicer arietinum) was analyzed using translation elongation factor-1a (TEF-1a),
ß-tubulin, and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) gene regions. TEF-1a, ß-tubulin,
and ITS gene-specific markers produced ~720-, ~500-, and ~550-bp amplicons,
respectively, in all the isolates of the pathogen. A phylogenetic tree
constructed from the sequences generated in the present study along with the
sequences of foreign isolates of Fusarium species available in NCBI database
sharing more than 90 % nucleotide sequence similarity grouped the isolates into
two major clusters. Most of the isolates of the present study showed more or less
similar grouping pattern in case of the three gene sequences. Each group had the 
isolates representing different races as well as place of origin indicating low
level of diversity among the isolates in respect of these gene sequences. Except 
TEF-1a, the groups generated by ß-tubulin and ITS gene sequences did not
correspond to the state of origin and races of the pathogen. However, the groups 
of TEF-1a partially corresponded to the place of origin as well as races of the
pathogen. The isolates did not show any race-specific grouping patterns; however,
most of the isolates representing race 1 clustered separately.

PMID: 24639029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Springerplus. 2014 Feb 27;3:113. doi: 10.1186/2193-1801-3-113. eCollection 2014.

Delayed diagnosis of high proximal tracheoesophageal fistula in esophageal
atresia and a novel approach to the treatment of tracheomalacia by submanubrial
tracheopexy.

Bjornson C(1), Brindle M(2), Bailey JM(3), Mitchell I(3), Soles M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hospital Pediatrics, The University of Calgary, Calgary, AB Canada
; Alberta Children's Hospital, Room C3-208, 2888 Shaganappi Trail NW, Calgary, AB
T2B 6A8 Canada. (2)Alberta Children's Hospital, Room C3-208, 2888 Shaganappi
Trail NW, Calgary, AB T2B 6A8 Canada. (3)Division of Hospital Pediatrics, The
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB Canada.

An infant with esophageal atresia (EA) had delayed diagnosis of proximal
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and severe tracheomalacia. We recommend
bronchoscopy via laryngeal mask or rigid bronchoscopy to rule out associated TEF 
in infants diagnosed with esophageal atresia, as flexible bronchoscopy via
endotracheal tube may not provide complete visualization of the trachea. We also 
describe a novel cervical approach to tracheopexy via neck incision for treatment
of associated severe tracheomalacia in this infant.

PMCID: PMC3951653
PMID: 24634808  [PubMed]


237. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2014 Jun;104:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2014.02.007. Epub
2014 Mar 12.

Impacts of human activities and sampling strategies on soil heavy metal
distribution in a rapidly developing region of China.

Shao X(1), Huang B(2), Zhao Y(3), Sun W(3), Gu Z(4), Qian W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Subtropical Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry,
Fuyang 311400, China; Key Laboratory of Soil Environment and Pollution
Remediation, Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing
210008, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Soil Environment and Pollution Remediation,
Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Nanjing 210008, China.
Electronic address: bhuang@issas.ac.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Soil Environment and
Pollution Remediation, Institute of Soil Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Nanjing 210008, China. (4)Service Station for Soil and Fertilizer, Agricultural
Bureau of Zhangjiagang City, Zhangjiagang 215600, China.

The impacts of industrial and agricultural activities on soil Cd, Hg, Pb, and Cu 
in Zhangjiagang City, a rapidly developing region in China, were evaluated using 
two sampling strategies. The soil Cu, Cd, and Pb concentrations near industrial
locations were greater than those measured away from industrial locations. The
converse was true for Hg. The top enrichment factor (TEF) values, calculated as
the ratio of metal concentrations between the topsoil and subsoil, were greater
near industrial location than away from industrial locations and were further
related to the industry type. Thus, the TEF is an effective index to distinguish 
sources of toxic elements not only between anthropogenic and geogenic but also
among different industry types. Target soil sampling near industrial locations
resulted in a greater estimation in high levels of soil heavy metals. This study 
revealed that the soil heavy metal contamination was primarily limited to local
areas near industrial locations, despite rapid development over the last 20
years. The prevention and remediation of the soil heavy metal pollution should
focus on these high-risk areas in the future.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24632116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Biol. 2014 Jul 1;391(1):111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.02.008. Epub 2014
Mar 12.

BMP antagonism by Noggin is required in presumptive notochord cells for mammalian
foregut morphogenesis.

Fausett SR(1), Brunet LJ(2), Klingensmith J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United
States. (2)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States. Electronic address:
john.klingensmith@duke.edu.

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a serious human
birth defect, in which the esophagus ends before reaching the stomach, and is
aberrantly connected with the trachea. Several mouse models of EA/TEF have
recently demonstrated that proper dorsal/ventral (D/V) patterning of the
primitive anterior foregut endoderm is essential for correct compartmentalization
of the trachea and esophagus. Here we elucidate the pathogenic mechanisms
underlying the EA/TEF that occurs in mice lacking the BMP antagonist Noggin,
which display correct dorsal/ventral patterning. To clarify the mechanism of this
malformation, we use spatiotemporal manipulation of Noggin and BMP receptor 1A
conditional alleles during foregut development. Surprisingly, we find that the
expression of Noggin in the compartmentalizing endoderm is not required to
generate distinct tracheal and esophageal tubes. Instead, we show that Noggin and
BMP signaling attenuation are required in the early notochord to correctly
resolve notochord cells from the dorsal foregut endoderm, which in turn, appears 
to be a prerequisite for foregut compartmentalization. Collectively, our findings
support an emerging model for a mechanism underlying EA/TEF in which impaired
notochord resolution from the early endoderm causes the foregut to be
hypo-cellular just prior to the critical period of compartmentalization. Our
further characterizations suggest that Noggin may regulate a cell rearrangement
process that involves reciprocal E-cadherin and Zeb1 expression in the resolving 
notochord cells.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24631216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Rapid Commun Mass Spectrom. 2014 Apr 30;28(8):908-16. doi: 10.1002/rcm.6859.

Structural characterization of arabinoxylans from two African plant species
Eragrostis nindensis and Eragrostis tef using various mass spectrometric methods.

Plancot B(1), Vanier G, Maire F, Bardor M, Lerouge P, Farrant JM, Moore J,
Driouich A, Vicré-Gibouin M, Afonso C, Loutelier-Bourhis C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Glyco-MEV EA 4358, GRR IRIB, GRR VASI, Plateforme de Recherche en 
Imagerie Cellulaire de Haute-Normandie, Faculté des Sciences, Université de
Rouen, 76 821, Mont saint Aignan, Cedex, France.

RATIONALE: The arabinoxylans are one of the main components of plant cell walls
and are known to play major roles in plant tissues properties depending in
particular on their structural features. It has been recently shown that one of
the strategies developed by resurrection plants to overcome dehydration is based 
on cell wall composition. For this purpose, the structural characterization of
arabinoxylans from desiccation-tolerant grass Eragrostis nindensis (E. nindensis)
was compared with its close relative, the desiccation-sensitive Eragrostis tef
(E. tef) in order to further understand mechansism of desiccation tolerance in
resurrection plants.
METHODS: Ion mobility spectrometry coupled to mass spectrometry (IM-MS) in
combination with the conventional mass spectrometric approaches, including
matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS),
electrospray ionization multistage tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS(n)) and gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS), were used to characterize arabinoxylan 
fragments obtained after endo-xylanase digestion of leave extracts from E.
nindensis and E. tef.
RESULTS: Whole fingerprinting by MALDI-MS analysis showed the presence of various
arabinoxylan fragments within leaves of E. nindensis and E. tef. The
monosaccharide composition and some linkage information were determined by GC/MS 
experiments. Information regarding the branching and sequence details was
obtained by ESI-MS(n) experiments after sample permethylation. The presence of
structural isomeric ions with different collision cross sections was evidenced by
IM-MS which could be differentiated using ESI-MS(n).
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that an orthogonal approach, and especially IM-MS
associated to ESI-MS(n) (n = 2 to 4) and GC/MS allowed characterization of
arabinoxylan fragments of E. nindensis and E. tef and revealed the presence of
isomeric structures. The same arabinoxylan structures were identified for both
species but in different relative abundance. Moreover, this work illustrated that
IM-MS can efficiently separate isomeric structures and advantageously complements
the conventional mass spectrometric methodologies used for arabinoxylan
structural characterization.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24623695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Chemistry. 2014 Mar 24;20(13):3759-68. doi: 10.1002/chem.201304466. Epub 2014 Feb
24.

Complexes of monocationic Group 13 elements with pentaphospha- and
pentaarsaferrocene.

Fleischmann M(1), Welsch S, Krauss H, Schmidt M, Bodensteiner M, Peresypkina EV, 
Sierka M, Gröger C, Scheer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anorganische Chemie, Universität Regensburg, 93040 Regensburg
(Germany), Fax: (+49)<U+2009>941-943-4439.

Reactions of the sandwich complexes [Cp*Fe(<U+03B7>(5)-E5)] (Cp*=<U+03B7>(5)-C5Me5; E=P (1), As
(2)) with the monovalent Group 13 metals Tl(+), In(+), and Ga(+) containing the
weakly coordinating anion [TEF] ([TEF]=[Al{OC(CF3)3}4](-)) are described. Here,
the one-dimensional coordination polymers [M(µ,<U+03B7>(5):<U+03B7>(1 -E5 FeCp*)3]n [TEF]n
(E=P, M=Tl (3<U+2009>a), In (3<U+2009>b), Ga (3<U+2009>c); E=As, M=Tl (4<U+2009>a), In (4<U+2009>b)) are obtained as
sole products in good yields. All products were analyzed by single-crystal X-ray 
diffraction, revealing a similar assembly of the products with <U+03B7>(5)-bound E5
ligands and very weak s-interactions between one P or As atom of the ring to the 
neighbored Group 13 metal cation. By exchanging the [TEF] anion of 4<U+2009>a for the
larger [FAl] anion ([FAl]=[FAl{OC6F10(C6F5)}3](-)), the coordination compound
[Tl{(<U+03B7>(5)-As5)FeCp*}3][FAl] (5) without any s-interactions of the As5-ring is
obtained. All products are readily soluble in CH2 Cl2 and exhibit a dynamic
coordination behavior in solution, which is supported by NMR spectroscopy and
ESI-MS spectrometry as well as by osmometric molecular-weight determination. For 
a better understanding of the proceeding equilibrium DFT calculations of the
cationic complexes were performed for the gas phase and in solution. Furthermore,
the (31)P{(1)H} magic-angle spinning (MAS) NMR spectra of 3<U+2009>a-c are presented and
the first crystal structure of the starting material 2 was determined.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24615817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Aquat Toxicol. 2014 Apr;149:133-44. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.02.002. Epub 2014
Feb 18.

Applicability of the TCDD-TEQ approach to predict sublethal embryotoxicity in
Fundulus heteroclitus.

Rigaud C(1), Couillard CM(2), Pellerin J(3), Légaré B(4), Hodson PV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Mer, Université du Québec à Rimouski, 310 Allée
des Ursulines, Rimouski, Québec G5L 3A1, Canada; Fisheries and Oceans Canada,
Maurice Lamontagne Institute, P.O. Box 1000, Mont-Joli, Québec G5H 3Z4, Canada.
Electronic address: rigaud.cyril@gmail.com. (2)Fisheries and Oceans Canada,
Maurice Lamontagne Institute, P.O. Box 1000, Mont-Joli, Québec G5H 3Z4, Canada.
Electronic address: catherine.couillard@dfo-mpo.gc.ca. (3)Institut des Sciences
de la Mer, Université du Québec à Rimouski, 310 Allée des Ursulines, Rimouski,
Québec G5L 3A1, Canada. (4)Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Maurice Lamontagne
Institute, P.O. Box 1000, Mont-Joli, Québec G5H 3Z4, Canada. (5)Queen's
University, 99 University Avenue, Kingston, Ontario K7L 3N6, Canada.

The 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) toxic equivalent quantity
(TCDD-TEQ) approach was used successfully to predict lethal embryotoxicity in
salmonids, but its applicability to sublethal effects of mixtures of
organohalogenated compounds in other fish species is poorly known. The sublethal 
toxicity of two dioxin-like compounds (DLCs), 3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl
(PCB77) and 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (2,3,4,7,8-PnCDF), two
non-dioxin-like (NDL) polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
2,2',5,5'-tetrachlorobiphenyl (PCB52) and 2,3,3',4',6-pentachlorobiphenyl
(PCB110), and of Aroclor 1254, a complex commercial mixture of PCBs, was assessed
in Fundulus heteroclitus embryos exposed by intravitelline injection. At 16 days 
post-fertilization, the two DLCs and Aroclor 1254 altered prey capture ability in
addition to inducing classical aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated responses:
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) induction, craniofacial deformities and
reduction in body length. None of these responses was induced by the two NDL
PCBs, at doses up to 5400 ng g(-1)wet weight. Dose-response curves for prey
capture ability for the 2 DLCs tested were not parallel to that of TCDD,
violating a fundamental assumption for relative potency (ReP) estimation.
Dose-response curves for EROD induction were parallel for 2,3,4,7,8-PnCDF and
TCDD, but the ReP of 2,3,4,7,8-PnCDF for F. heteroclitus was 5-fold higher than
the World Health Organization (WHO) fish toxic equivalent factor (TEF) based on
embryolethality in salmonids. The chemically derived TCDD-TEQs of Aroclor 1254,
calculated using 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) concentrations and it
ReP for F. heteroclitus, overestimated its potency to induce EROD activity
possibly due to antagonistic interactions among PCBs. This study highlights the
limitations of using TEFs based on salmonid toxicity data alone for risk
assessment to other fish species. There is a need to assess the variability of
RePs of DLCs in different species for a variety of endpoints and to better
understand interactions between DLCs and other toxic chemicals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Indian J Pediatr. 2014 Jul;81(7):660-4. doi: 10.1007/s12098-014-1342-6. Epub 2014
Mar 6.

A survey of pulmonary function abnormalities following thoracotomy.

Panda SS(1), Agarwala S, Kabra SK, Bhatnagar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, 110029, India.

OBJECTIVE: To study the incidence and type of pulmonary function abnormalities
after thoracotomy in children.
METHODS: Children below 12 y of age who had undergone thoracotomy for any
condition and have at least 2 y follow up were included in the study. Detailed
assessment of the patients included history and general examination, clinical
assessment of pulmonary function, bedside tests to assess pulmonary function and 
laboratory pulmonary function test using portable spirometer.
RESULTS: Fifty two patients were included in the study. Twenty-seven were cases
of esophageal atresia with trachea-esophageal fistula (EATEF), nine pulmonary
metastasis from abdominal solid tumors, six mediastinal masses, three hydatid
cyst, three eventration of diaphragm, two bronchiectasis, and one each of H-type 
TEF and congenital esophageal stenosis. The mean age at the time of evaluation
was 6.3 y (range 2-18 y). While all the patients were clinically assessed, only
25 (48 %) were eligible for bedside tests and 23 (44 %) for spirometery. The
incidences of abnormalities picked were: dyspnea during exercise 8/52 (15.4 %),
dyspnea on exercise and on climbing stairs 1/52 (2 %), decreased breath holding
time 2/25 (8 %), abnormal incentive spirometry 1/25 (4 %), mild restrictive
pattern on pulmonary function test (PFT) 11/23 (47.8 %), moderate restrictive
pattern on PFT 2/23 (8.7 %). None had an obstructive pattern on PFT.
CONCLUSIONS: Though the incidences of pulmonary function abnormalities were high,
these were of mild grade. Close follow up of patients after thoracotomy would be 
needed for early pick up and appropriate management of these abnormalities to
prevent long-term consequences.

PMID: 24596059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Sci Med Sport. 2015 Mar;18(2):204-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jsams.2014.01.008. Epub
2014 Feb 6.

Thermic effect of food, exercise, and total energy expenditure in active females.

Binns A(1), Gray M(2), Di Brezzo R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Human Performance and Recreation, University of
Arkansas, United States. Electronic address: binns@uark.edu. (2)Department of
Health, Human Performance and Recreation, University of Arkansas, United States. 
(3)Department of Health, Human Performance and Recreation, University of
Arkansas, United States; Academic Affairs - Vice Provost, University of Arkansas,
United States.

OBJECTIVES: Exercise and the thermic effect of food contribute to total energy
expenditure and overall maintenance of health. The aim of this study was to
determine the interaction between TEF and exercise on TEE based on meal protein
content.
DESIGN: A randomized, repeated measures study.
METHODS: Ten active females, of normal body weight, participated. Preliminary
maximal aerobic capacity (VO2max) was determined. Three additional testing
sessions consisted of performing a 30-min bout of exercise at 60% VO2max after
consumption of a high (45% total kcal) or low (15% total kcal) protein meal, or
fasted.
RESULTS: Repeated measures ANOVA indicated a significant main effect for the
feeding protocols (a=.05). The high protein meal elicited a 30.39% and 98.15%
greater increase in TEF compared to the low protein meal (p=.006) and fasted
state (p<.001), respectively. The low protein meal resulted in 94.34% greater TEF
compared to fasted (p<.001). Combined with exercise, high protein meal TEF was
significantly greater compared to fasted (p=.010) but was not significantly
greater than the low protein meal (p=.122). Significant differences were not
found between the low protein meals with exercise compared to fasted conditions
(p=.094).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings of this study provide insight on increased TEE under acute 
high protein feeding conditions as compared to a low protein meal and fasted
state. Combined with exercise, potential for further increases in TEE exists as a
result of TEF.

Copyright © 2014 Sports Medicine Australia. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 24589371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Affect Disord. 2014 Mar;157:100-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.11.019. Epub 2013
Dec 1.

Cry1 and Tef gene polymorphisms are associated with major depressive disorder in 
the Chinese population.

Hua P(1), Liu W(2), Chen D(3), Zhao Y(4), Chen L(5), Zhang N(5), Wang C(5), Guo
S(5), Wang L(6), Xiao H(7), Kuo SH(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China. (2)Department of Neurology, Affiliated
Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China.
Electronic address: liuweiguo1111@sina.com. (3)Department of Neurology,
University of Washington, School of Medicine, Washington, 98195, United States.
(4)Department of Neurology, BenQ Medical Center Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China. (5)Medical Psychology, Affiliated Brain
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China. (6)Clinical
Laboratory, Affiliated Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, P.R. China. (7)Institute of Scientific Research, Affiliated Brain
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, P.R. China. (8)Department
of Neurology, The Neurological Institute of New York, Columbia University Medical
Center, NY 10032, United States. Electronic address: sk3295@columbia.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Accumulating evidences indicate that circadian abnormalities lead
to sleep disorder, neurodegenerative diseases and depression. We have reported
that the polymorphisms of a clock-related gene, Tef, contributed to the risk of
sleep disturbances and depression in the Parkinson disease. The objective of the 
present study was to examine whether the three clock genes we previously studied 
are associated with major depressive disorder (MDD) in the Chinese population.
METHODS: 105 Subjects with MDD and 485 control subjects participated in this
case-control study. Demographics, Mini-mental Status Examination (MMSE), and the 
Hamilton rating scale for depression (HAMD) were obtained in all subjects.
Genotypes of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of Cry1 rs2287161, Cry2
rs10838524 and Tef rs738499 were screened by polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: MDD cases had a significantly higher frequency carrying the C allele and
CC genotype in Cry1 rs2287161 and the T allele and TT genotype in Tef rs738499
than controls.
LIMITATIONS: The sample size of MDD group was relatively small.
CONCLUSIONS: The polymorphisms of Cry1 rs2287161 and Tef rs738499 are associated 
to MDD.

© 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4058073
PMID: 24581835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2014 Apr;78(4):701-3. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.01.034. Epub 2014 Feb 6.

Postoperative recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula: an unusual complication of
oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel®).

Dokumcu Z(1), Polatdemir K(2), Ozcan C(2), Erdener A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ege University Facuty of Medicine, 35100
Bornova, Izmir, Turkey. Electronic address: zafer.dokumcu@ege.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ege University Facuty of Medicine, 35100
Bornova, Izmir, Turkey.

Oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel(®)) is a commonly used material in
Pediatric Surgery. We present a case of recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula
(RTEF) repaired by Surgicel(®). In this case, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
recurred due to migration of Surgicel into the tracheal and esophageal lumen.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24576454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;37(2):543-52. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2014.01.009. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Polychlorinated biphenyls and organochlorine pesticides in human milk samples
from two regions in Croatia.

Klincic D(1), Herceg Romanic S(2), Matek Saric M(3), Grzunov J(4), Dukic B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Research and Occupational Health, Ksaverska c. 2, 10 001
Zagreb, Croatia. Electronic address: darija@imi.hr. (2)Institute for Medical
Research and Occupational Health, Ksaverska c. 2, 10 001 Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)University of Zadar, Department of Health Studies, Trg Kneza Vieslava 9, 23
000 Zadar, Croatia. (4)Institute of Public Health Zadar, Kolovare 2, 23 000
Zadar, Croatia. (5)General Hospital Zadar, Boe Perincica 5, 23 000 Zadar,
Croatia.

We analyzed 20 polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and seven organochlorine
pesticides (OCPs) in milk samples collected during 2009-2011 from primiparae
living in two different regions in Croatia. p,p'-DDE is the dominant
organochlorine pesticide. a-HCH/<U+03B3>-HCH and p,p'-DDE/p,p'-DDT ratios indicate that 
there is fresh input of <U+03B3>-HCH in investigated population on both locations, while
this is not applicable to p,p'-DDT. The PCB profile was dominated by higher
chlorinated congeners. Non-ortho PCB congeners which have the highest TEF values 
were not detected in any of individual samples. Toxic equivalents for mono-ortho 
substituted PCB congeners indicated higher exposure to toxic PCBs in Zadar, but
estimated daily intakes for both locations indicate that infants consuming
mother's milk are not at risk of adverse effects caused by PCBs and OCPs. Our
study builds on the previous research of human milk samples collected in Zagreb
and reveals that over 10-year period, levels of investigated organochlorine
compounds decreased significantly.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24562053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Dec 3;93(45):3629-31.

[Anesthetic management of elderly patients during percutaneous endoscopic
gastrostomy].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang XL(1), Liu JL, Mi WD, Zhang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesia and Operation Center, Chinese People's Liberation Army General
Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (2)Email: mazuimao301@yahoo.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate anesthetic techniques for elderly patients during
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG).
METHODS: Clinical data about 5 cases aged 80 years or more undergoing PEG from
June 2012 to May 2013 in Chinese People's Liberation Army General Hospital were
retrospectively analyzed and literature review.
RESULTS: Analgesia/minimal sedation combined with local anesthesia (LA including 
throat spray and operative site infiltrated ) is employed in the one of patients 
with Tracheoesophageal Fistula (TEF), for the remaining patients, analgesia/deep 
sedation and LA combination were used, during induction, temporary respiratory
depression, blood pressure and heart rate decreased occurred respectively in the 
different patient, assisted ventilation and ephedrine IV was effective, the
anesthesia strategy was to maintain a desired sedation with propofol or etomidate
intravenously in small increments or by adjusted infusion , and to keep SpO2 at
95% or more with a supplemental oxygen through face mask under spontaneous
ventilation. During the therapeutic period, an increase in blood pressure (BP)
and heart rate (HR), slight cough occurred in one patient. Of all cases
undergoing this procedure uneventfully and recovering well at the end of surgery 
without aspiration, asthma or airway obstruction, 4 were placed with jejunal
feeding tube successfully, the mean duration of surgery is 80 min, ranging
between 40 and 150 min, no anesthesia-related or cardiorespiratory complications 
occurred at follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: a combination of intravenous sedative/analgesic anesthesia with LA
is efficiently and safely suited to the patients at advanced age during PEG, for 
anesthesiologists, it should be the most important tenets of anesthetic practice 
to have preanesthetic evaluation well done about cardiorespiratory function and
the ability of individual cooperation with anesthesia providers, to control
airway and to manage circulatory system intraoperatively.

PMID: 24534319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Feb;49(2):367-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.09.009.

Laryngotracheobronchoscopy prior to esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula repair--its use and importance.

Sharma N(1), Srinivas M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India 110049. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India 110049. Electronic address:
srinivasem@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Pure esophageal atresia (EA) and esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) are commonly associated with various
anomalies. Associated anomalies, especially those of upper airways may alter the 
management strategies. This study was designed to find out the role of
preoperative laryngotracheobronchoscopy (LTB) just prior to the standard surgical
procedure.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a retrospective study. The data of all the newborn babies 
(n=88) with a provisional diagnosis of EA or EA-TEF with preoperative rigid LTB, 
using 2.5/3.0/3.5F rigid bronchoscope were analyzed. This additional procedure
entailed documenting the abnormalities, endoscopic lavage and noting the site of 
the fistula. The fistula was cannulated by 3.0 F ureteric catheter just prior to 
the standard surgical procedure. Management strategies were changed as per the
additional findings.
RESULTS: Out of 88 patients, 77 had EA-TEF while 11 had pure EA. LTB was
performed in all of them. Additional findings in bronchoscopy were noted in 18
(20.46%) babies. These additional findings were: fistula at unusual site in 12,
laryngotracheal cleft in 2 and vallecular cyst in 1 neonate. The diagnosis of
pure EA turned out to be EA-TEF in 3 cases. Unusual fistula sites were
carinal/subcarinal in 4/12 (33.33%), upper pouch fistula in 1/12 (8.33%), double 
fistula in 2/12 (16.67%) and fistula from main bronchus in 5/12 (41.67%) cases.
CONCLUSIONS: LTB performed just prior to the definitive surgical procedure in EA 
and EA-TEF would diagnose, document and may aid in the surgical management
strategies.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24528988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(7):4332-47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku096. Epub 2014 Feb
4.

The transcript elongation factor SPT4/SPT5 is involved in auxin-related gene
expression in Arabidopsis.

Dürr J(1), Lolas IB, Sørensen BB, Schubert V, Houben A, Melzer M, Deutzmann R,
Grasser M, Grasser KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology & Plant Biochemistry, Biochemie-Zentrum Regensburg 
(BZR), University of Regensburg, Universitätsstrasse 31, D-93053 Regensburg,
Germany, Department of Biotechnology, Chemistry and Environmental Engineering,
Aalborg University, Sohngaardsholmsvej 49, DK-9000 Aalborg, Denmark, Leibniz
Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK), Corrensstrasse 3,
06466 Gatersleben, Germany and Institute for Biochemistry I, Biochemie-Zentrum
Regensburg (BZR), University of Regensburg, Universitätsstrasse 31, D-93053
Regensburg, Germany.

The heterodimeric complex SPT4/SPT5 is a transcript elongation factor (TEF) that 
directly interacts with RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) to regulate messenger RNA
synthesis in the chromatin context. We provide biochemical evidence that in
Arabidopsis, SPT4 occurs in a complex with SPT5, demonstrating that the SPT4/SPT5
complex is conserved in plants. Each subunit is encoded by two genes SPT4-1/2 and
SPT5-1/2. A mutant affected in the tissue-specifically expressed SPT5-1 is
viable, whereas inactivation of the generally expressed SPT5-2 is homozygous
lethal. RNAi-mediated downregulation of SPT4 decreases cell proliferation and
causes growth reduction and developmental defects. These plants display
especially auxin signalling phenotypes. Consistently, auxin-related genes, most
strikingly AUX/IAA genes, are downregulated in SPT4-RNAi plants that exhibit an
enhanced auxin response. In Arabidopsis nuclei, SPT5 clearly localizes to the
transcriptionally active euchromatin, and essentially co-localizes with
transcribing RNAPII. Typical for TEFs, SPT5 is found over the entire
transcription unit of RNAPII-transcribed genes. In SPT4-RNAi plants, elevated
levels of RNAPII and SPT5 are detected within transcribed regions (including
those of downregulated genes), indicating transcript elongation defects in these 
plants. Therefore, SPT4/SPT5 acts as a TEF in Arabidopsis, regulating
transcription during the elongation stage with particular impact on the
expression of certain auxin-related genes.

PMCID: PMC3985667
PMID: 24497194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 Jan 15;7(1):327-8. eCollection 2014.

Simple strategy of anesthesia for the neonate with tracheoesophageal fistula: a
case report.

Ni Y(1), Yao Y(1), Liang P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu,
China.

A 3-day-old neonate, given a diagnosis of esophageal atresia (EA) with
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), which is large and just above the carina, was
scheduled for TEF repair. Routine anesthetic management focuses on adequate
ventilation and avoidance of gastric distension during positive pressure
ventilation. Using a balloon-tipped embolectomy catheter or a Fogarty catheter to
block the fistula under the guidance of fiberoptic scope has been described. In
most of the medical centers, however, the pediatric fiberoptic scope may not be
available. We present a case of a newborn undergoing type C EA/TEF repair and
describe a simple intra-operative technique that could temporarily occlude the
gastroesophageal junction, allowing stable vital signs of patient and definitive 
repair of the tracheoesophageal fistula.

PMCID: PMC3902279
PMID: 24482727  [PubMed]


251. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Apr 7;226(1):43-52. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2014.01.026. Epub
2014 Jan 26.

Differential relative effect potencies of some dioxin-like compounds in human
peripheral blood lymphocytes and murine splenic cells.

van Ede KI(1), Gaisch KP(2), van den Berg M(3), van Duursen MB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584
CM Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: k.i.vanede@uu.nl. (2)Institute
for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, 
The Netherlands. Electronic address: konrad_gaisch@yahoo.co.uk. (3)Institute for 
Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: m.vandenberg@uu.nl. (4)Institute for Risk
Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, 3584 CM Utrecht, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: m.vanduursen@uu.nl.

Comment in
    Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):544-5.
    Toxicol Lett. 2015 Jan 22;232(2):542-3.

Human risk assessment for dioxin-like compounds is typically based on the
concentration measured in blood serum multiplied by their assigned toxic
equivalency factor (TEF). Consequently, the actual value of the TEF is very
important for accurate human risk assessment. In this study we investigated the
effect potencies of three polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), six
polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and 10 polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
relative to the reference congener 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in
in vitro exposed primary human peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and mouse
splenic cells. REPs were determined based on cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1, 1B1 and
aryl hydrocarbon receptor repressor (AhRR) gene expression as well as CYP1A1
activity in human PBLs and Cyp1a1 gene expression in murine splenic cells.
Estimated median human REPs for 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(1234678-HpCDD), 2,3,4,7,8,-pentachlorodibenzofuran (23478-PeCDF),
1,2,3,4,7,8-hexachlorodibenzofuran (123478-HxCDF) and
1,2,3,4,7,8,9-heptachlorodibenzofuran (1234789-HpCDF) were with 0.1, 1.1, 1 and
0.09, respectively, significantly higher compared to those estimated for mouse
with REPs of 0.05, 0.45, 0.09 and 0.04, respectively. Opposite to these results, 
the estimated median human REP of 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126), was 
with 0.001 30-fold lower compared to the mouse REP of 0.03. Furthermore, human
REPs for 1234678-HpCDD, 23478-PeCDF, 123478-HxCDF, 1234789-HpCDF and PCB 126 were
all outside the ± half log uncertainty range that is taken into account in the
WHO-assigned TEFs. Together, these data show congener- and species-specific
differences in REPs for some, but not all dioxin-like congeners tested. This
suggests that, more emphasis should be placed on human-tissue derived REPs in the
establishment of a TEF for human risk assessment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Apr;28(3):205-10. doi: 10.1111/dote.12174. Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Esophageal atresia: a critical review of management at a single center in
Algeria.

Bouguermouh D(1), Salem A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery Department, Pr Nefissa Hamoud University Hospital Center,
Algiers, Algeria; Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Algiers, Algiers,
Algeria.

The purpose was to study the outcomes and factors affecting the survival of
esophageal atresia in our center. A retrospective analysis of 86 cases of
esophageal atresia (EA) over a 10-year period was performed with 46 boys and 42
girls. Demographic data, birth weight, gestational age, consanguinity, incidence 
of associated anomalies, place of delivery, history of feeding, and outcomes were
studied. EA with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) was the commonest type
with 58/86 (67%). The percentage of patients with at least one associated anomaly
was 52/86 (60%), with 7/86 (8%) who are from consanguineous parents; most
commonly associated anomalies were cardiac 13/86 (15%). The average gestational
age and birth weight were 36 ± 2 weeks and 2300 ± 570<U+2009>g, respectively. Survival
rates for the patients according to the Waterston classification was 80% in group
A, 58% in group B, and 25% in group C (three patients died before surgery).
Prematurity, the gap between the two ends of the esophagus, and preoperative
respiratory status were the most significant factors affecting the survival. Late
complication of EA/TEF include respiratory symptoms, especially in the first
year, associating tracheomalacia and bronchopulmonary infections in about 24/45
(53%), recurrence of TEF 3/45 (7%), esophageal stricture 26/45 (58%), and
gastroesophageal reflux 22/45 (49%). The high incidence of delayed diagnosis, low
birth weight, and lack of advanced neonatological management are important
contributory factors to the poor outcome. The frequency of late complications
highlights the need for multidisciplinary clinics to follow these children's.

© 2014 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 24467412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Apr;28(3):229-33. doi: 10.1111/dote.12173. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

Alternations in genes expression of pathway signaling in esophageal tissue with
atresia: results of expression microarray profiling.

Smigiel R(1), Lebioda A, Blaszczynski M, Korecka K, Czauderna P, Korlacki W,
Jakubiak A, Bednarczyk D, Maciejewski H, Wizinska P, Sasiadek MM, Patkowski D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

Esophageal atresia (EA) is a congenital defect of the esophagus involving the
interruption of the esophagus with or without connection to the trachea
(tracheoesophageal fistula [TEF]). EA/TEF may occur as an isolated anomaly, may
be part of a complex of congenital defects (syndromic), or may develop within the
context of a known syndrome or association. The molecular mechanisms underlying
the development of EA are poorly understood. It is supposed that a combination of
multigenic factors and epigenetic modification of genes play a role in its
etiology. The aim of our work was to assess the human gene expression microarray 
study in esophageal tissue samples. Total RNA was extracted from 26 lower pouches
of esophageal tissue collected during thoracoscopic EA repair in neonates with
the isolated (IEA) and the syndromic form (SEA). We identified 787 downregulated 
and 841 upregulated transcripts between SEA and controls, and about 817
downregulated and 765 upregulated probes between IEA and controls. Fifty percent 
of these genes showed differential expression specific for either IEA or SEA.
Functional pathway analysis revealed substantial enrichment for Wnt and Sonic
hedgehog, as well as cytokine and chemokine signaling pathways. Moreover, we
performed reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction study in a group of SHH
and Wnt pathways genes with differential expression in microarray profiling to
confirm the microarray expression results. We verified the altered expression in 
SFRP2 gene from the Wnt pathway as well as SHH, GLI1, GLI2, and GLI3 from the
Sonic hedgehog pathway. The results suggest an important role of these pathways
and genes for EA/TEF etiology.

© 2014 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 24460849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mycologia. 2014 Jan 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Entomopathogens of Amazonian stick insects and locusts are members of the
Beauveria species complex (Cordyceps sensu stricto).

Sanjuan TI(1), Tabima J, Spatafora JW, Laessoe T, Restrepo S, Franco Molano AE.

Author information: 
(1)Biologia, Universidad de Antioquia, Calle 67 N 53 108, bloque 7 305, Medellin,
Antioquia, 050010, Colombia.

In the Amazon the only described species of Cordyceps sensu stricto (Hypocreales,
Cordycipitaceae) that parasitize insects of Orthopterida (orders Orthoptera and
Phasmida) are Cordyceps locustiphila and C. uleana. However, the type specimens
for both taxa have been lost and the concepts of these species are uncertain. To 
achieve a more comprehensive understanding of the systematics of these species,
collections of Cordyceps from the Amazon regions of Colombia, Ecuador and Guyana 
were subjected to morphological, ecological and molecular phylogenetic studies.
Phylogenetic analyses were conducted on partial sequences of SSU, LSU, TEF, RPB1 
and RPB2 nuclear loci. Two new species are proposed including C.
diapheromeriphila, a parasite of Phasmida, and C. acridophila, a parasite of the 
superfamily Acridomorpha (Orthoptera), which is broadly distributed across the
Amazon. For C. locustiphila a lectotypification and an epitypification are made. 
Cordyceps locustiphila is host specific with Colpolopha (Acridomorpha:
Romaleidae), and its distribution coincides with that of its host. The
phylogenetic placement of these three species was resolved with strong support in
the Beauveria clade of Cordyceps s. str. (Cordycipitaceae). This relationship and
the morphological similarity of their yellow stromata with known teleomorphs of
the clade, suggest that the holomorphs of these species may include Beauveria or 
Beauveria-like anamorphs. The varying host specificity of the beauverioid
Cordyceps species suggest the potential importance of identifying the natural
host taxon before future consideration of strains for use in biological control
of pest locusts.

PMID: 24459123  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


255. Dis Esophagus. 2015 Apr;28(3):216-23. doi: 10.1111/dote.12177. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Predictive factors for complications in children with esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Shah R(1), Varjavandi V, Krishnan U.

Author information: 
(1)University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

The objective of this study was to describe the incidence of complications in
children with esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) at a tertiary pediatric hospital and to identify predictive factors for
their occurrence. A retrospective chart review of 110 patients born in or
transferred to Sydney Children's Hospital with EA/TEF between January 1999 and
December 2010 was done. Univariate and multivariate regression analyses were
performed to identify predictive factors for the occurrence of complications in
these children. From univariate analysis, early esophageal stricture formation
was more likely in children with 'long-gap' EA (odds ratio [OR] = 16.32).
Patients with early strictures were more likely to develop chest infections (OR =
3.33). Patients with severe tracheomalacia were more likely to experience
'cyanotic/dying' (OR = 180) and undergo aortopexy (OR = 549). Patients who had
gastroesophageal reflux disease were significantly more likely to require
fundoplication (OR = 10.83) and undergo aortopexy (OR = 6.417). From multivariate
analysis, 'long-gap' EA was a significant predictive factor for late esophageal
stricture formation (P = 0.007) and for gastrostomy insertion (P = 0.001). Reflux
was a significant predictive factor for requiring fundoplication (P = 0.007) and 
gastrostomy (P = 0.002). Gastrostomy insertion (P = 0.000) was a significant
predictive factor for undergoing fundoplication. Having a prior fundoplication (P
= 0.001) was a significant predictive factor for undergoing a subsequent
aortopexy. Predictive factors for the occurrence of complications post EA/TEF
repair were identified in this large single centre pediatric study.

© 2014 International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 24456536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Jan;49(1):29-32; discussion 32-3. doi:
10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.09.069. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

Validation of measures from a thoracoscopic esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal 
fistula repair simulator.

Barsness KA(1), Rooney DM(2), Davis LM(3), Chin AC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of
Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA;
Center for Simulation Technology and Immersive Learning, Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address:
kbarsness@luriechildrens.org. (2)Department of Medical Education, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (3)Center for Simulation Technology 
and Immersive Learning, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Ann and Robert H Lurie
Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

PURPOSE: A validated high fidelity simulation model would provide a safe
environment to teach thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair to novices. The study purpose
was to evaluate validity evidence for performance measures on an EA/TEF
simulator.
METHODS: IRB-exempt data were collected from 12 self-reported "novice" and 8
"experienced" pediatric surgeons. Participants evaluated the EA/TEF repair
simulator using survey ratings that were analyzed for test content validity
evidence. Additionally, deidentified operative performances were videotaped and
independently rated by two surgeons using the Objective Structured Assessment for
Technical Skills (OSATS) instrument. Novice and experienced OSATS were compared
with p<.05 significant.
RESULTS: Participants had high overall simulator ratings. Internal structure was 
supported by high interitem consistency (a=.95 and .96) and interrater agreement 
(ICC) [.52, .84] for OSATS ratings. Experienced surgeons performed at a
significantly higher level than novices for all five primary and two supplemental
OSATS items (p<.05).
CONCLUSION: Favorable participant ratings indicate the simulator is relevant to
clinical practice and valuable as a learning tool. Further, performance ratings
can discriminate experienced and novice performances of EA/TEF repair. These
findings support the use of the simulator for performance assessment,
representing the first validated measures from a simulator intended for pediatric
surgical training.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24439576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. BMC Vet Res. 2014 Jan 14;10:16. doi: 10.1186/1746-6148-10-16.

Management of a congenital tracheoesophageal fistula in a young Spanish water
dog.

Kaminen PS(1), Viitanen SJ, Lappalainen AK, Kipar A, Rajamäki MM,
Laitinen-Vapaavuori OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Equine and Small Animal Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Helsinki University, Helsinki, Finland. pia.kaminen@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUND: Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in dogs is a rare disease with only
few reports in the literature. This report aims to contribute to the current
literature on suitable diagnostic methods for TEF and to provide follow-up
information after successful surgical treatment.
CASE PRESENTATION: A seven-month-old intact female Spanish Water Dog was
presented for further investigation of recurrent respiratory symptom.
Bronchoscopy revealed a small hole-like defect in the tracheal wall at the
bifurcation. The finding of the contrast material swallow study under fluoroscopy
was indicative of a TEF. To further evaluate the connection between the trachea
and esophagus, a computed tomography scan was performed. The TEF was surgically
approached by thoracotomy through the right lateral sixth intercostal space. The 
fistula was identified, double ligated and divided. Histopathology confirmed the 
process to originate from the esophagus and to be patent. The dog was re-examined
two weeks and ten months after surgery, with no evidence of recurring clinical
signs.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrast material swallow study using fluoroscopy was the most
reliable diagnostic method. Bronchoscopy may allow the fistula to be visualized, 
but due to a small fistular opening it can lead to a false negative result.
Surgical correction by ligation and dividing of the fistula suggests a good
prognosis for early diagnosed and operated TEF.

PMCID: PMC3895692
PMID: 24423070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Sep;22(9):1077-84. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.295. Epub 2014
Jan 8.

Structural and numerical changes of chromosome X in patients with esophageal
atresia.

Brosens E(1), de Jong EM(1), Barakat TS(2), Eussen BH(3), D'haene B(4), De Baere 
E(4), Verdin H(4), Poddighe PJ(3), Galjaard RJ(3), Gribnau J(2), Brooks AS(3),
Tibboel D(5), de Klein A(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands [2] Department of Paediatric Surgery,
Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Reproduction and Development, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical
Centre-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Center for
Medical Genetics, Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a
relatively common birth defect often associated with additional congenital
anomalies such as vertebral, anal, cardiovascular, renal and limb defects, the
so-called VACTERL association. Yet, little is known about the causal genetic
factors. Rare case reports of gastrointestinal anomalies in children with triple 
X syndrome prompted us to survey the incidence of structural and numerical
changes of chromosome X in patients with EA/TEF. All available (n=269) karyotypes
of our large (321) EA/TEF patient cohort were evaluated for X-chromosome
anomalies. If sufficient DNA material was available, we determined genome-wide
copy number profiles with SNP array and identified subtelomeric aberrations on
the difficult to profile PAR1 region using telomere-multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification. In addition, we investigated X-chromosome inactivation (XCI)
patterns and mode of inheritance of detected aberrations in selected patients.
Three EA/TEF patients had an additional maternally inherited X chromosome. These 
three female patients had normal random XCI patterns. Two male EA/TEF patients
had small inherited duplications of the XY-linked SHOX (Short stature
HOmeoboX-containing) locus. Patients were small for gestational age at birth
(<P5) and had additional, mostly VACTERL associated, anomalies. Triple X syndrome
is rarely described in patients with EA/TEF and no duplications of the SHOX gene 
were reported so far in these patients. As normal patterns of XCI were seen,
overexpression of X-linked genes that escape XCI, such as the SHOX gene, could be
pathogenic by disturbing developmental pathways.

PMCID: PMC4135408
PMID: 24398799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Food Nutr Res. 2013 Dec 23;57. doi: 10.3402/fnr.v57i0.19676. eCollection 2013.

Thermic effect of a meal and appetite in adults: an individual participant data
meta-analysis of meal-test trials.

Ravn AM(1), Gregersen NT(1), Christensen R(2), Rasmussen LG(1), Hels O(3), Belza 
A(1), Raben A(1), Larsen TM(1), Toubro S(4), Astrup A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University
of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Denmark. (2)The Parker Institute: Musculoskeletal
Statistics Unit, Copenhagen University Hospital at Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)StatistiConsult, Ølstykke, Denmark. (4)Reduce APS -
Research Clinic of Nutrition, Roskilde, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Thermic effect of a meal (TEF) has previously been suggested to
influence appetite.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess whether there is an association
between appetite and TEF. Second, to examine whether protein intake is associated
with TEF or appetite.
DESIGN: Individual participant data (IPD) meta-analysis on studies were performed
at the Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. Five randomized meal-test studies, with 111 participants, were included.
The included studies measured energy expenditure (EE) in respiration chambers and
pre- and postprandial appetite sensations using Visual Analog Scales (VAS). The
primary meta-analysis was based on a generic-inverse variance random-effects
model, pooling individual study Spearman's correlation coefficients, resulting in
a combined r-value with 95% confidence interval (95% CI). The I (2) value
quantifies the proportion (%) of the variation in point estimates due to
among-study differences.
RESULTS: The IPD meta-analysis found no association between satiety and TEF
expressed as the incremental area under the curve (TEFiAUC) (r=0.06 [95% CI -0.16
to 0.28], P=0.58; I (2)=15.8%). Similarly, Composite Appetite Score (CAS) was not
associated with TEFiAUC (r=0.08 [95% CI -0.12 to 0.28], P=0.45; I (2)=0%).
Posthoc analyses showed no association between satiety or CAS and TEF expressed
as a percentage of energy intake (EI) (P>0.49) or TEF expressed as a percentage
of baseline EE (P>0.17). When adjusting for covariates, TEFiAUC was associated
with protein intake (P=0.0085).
CONCLUSIONS: This IPD meta-analysis found no evidence supporting an association
between satiety or CAS and TEF at protein intakes ~15 E% (range 11-30 E%).

PMCID: PMC3873760
PMID: 24376394  [PubMed]


260. Commun Agric Appl Biol Sci. 2014;79(4):54-61.

Triticale adaption and competence assessment result in the high lands of
Ethiopia.

Legesse W.

Triticale is a crop that resulted from the addition of chromosomes of wheat
(Triticum aestivum ) and rye cereals (Secale cereale). The crop came on the
market as bread cereal in the 1980s. Different varieties were released. Triticale
is a high yielding crop when compared with tef, wheat and barley, particularly on
locations with soil nutrient deficiency. The study was initiated with the
question to which extent the growing of triticale crop (Triticosecale Wittmack)
improves food security, and which factors can play a major role for its
successful adoption, particularly in major food insecure areas of Ethiopia. The
study has three main objectives: (1) to investigate the adaptability of triticale
to the Ethiopian agro-ecological conditions, particularly in areas with low soil 
fertility, hence this is a crop considered to provide considerably a higher
harvest under low agricultural inputs, such as fertilizer, insects and pests
sprays; (2) to analyze the injera--and bread-baking quality of the crop in
comparison with tef (a staple cereal limited to Ethiopia) and wheat cereals, and 
examine the acceptance by consumers of these products made from this grain. The
study was conducted in the two major triticale producing districts (wereda),
Farta and Estie of the South Gondar Administrative Zone in the Amhara Region,
Ethiopia. The production of crops and the adoption of triticale as a new
technology by smallholder farmers are influenced by several factors such as
family size, age, gender and education of the household head, availability of
agricultural extension services and farm credits, and labour. Despite the high
yield and widespread adoption of triticale crop in the study areas and the Amhara
Region at large, it faced some amount of resistance from a few farmers and some
agriculturalists. This is because of the possibility of soil nutrients
exploitation by the triticale plant, with a consequent drop of nutrition for the 
succeeding crops. This is however, a hardly valid concern, since triticale takes 
up soil nutrients the same as other cereals do, there is the same need to replace
the removed nutrients by compost and organic and/ or chemical fertilizers. The
suitability of triticale grain for the preparation of a variety of foods such as 
the main staple food injera and bread, and local beverages were tasted and
acknowledged by the sample households, which was asserted by the researcher's own
experiment during a workshop. Based on the investigation results concerning the
quality of triticale grain for injera and bread baking, it shall be underscored
that in spite of the fact that tef and wheat flours outperformed triticale flour 
in the 0:100 (triticale to tef, and triticale to wheat). Triticale flour provided
the best or "most preferred quality" of injera and bread in the 25:75 triticale
to tef, and triticale to wheat) mixtures ratio respectively, followed by the
50:50 mix-ratios. Triticale grain has also provided very good quality of tella
and areke/areqe (locally distilled schnapps like vodka), which is comparable with
that from finger millet (Eleusinecoracana) and sorghum (Sorghum bicolor).

PMID: 26072574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Pediatr Surg Int. 2014 Feb;30(2):151-7. doi: 10.1007/s00383-013-3445-y.

Maternal hyperthyroidism increases the prevalence of foregut atresias in fetal
rats exposed to adriamycin.

Fragoso AC(1), Martinez L, Estevão-Costa J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)INGEMM and IdiPaz Research Laboratory, Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, 28046, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: Gastrointestinal malformations such as esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) and duodenal atresia (DA) have been reported
in infants born to hyperthyroid mothers or with congenital hypothyroidism. The
present study aimed to test whether maternal thyroid status during embryonic
foregut division has any influence on the prevalence of EA/TEF and DA in an
accepted rat model of these malformations.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either vehicle or 1.75 mg/kg i.p. adriamycin on
gestational days 7, 8 and 9. Transient maternal hyper or hypothyroidism was
induced by oral administration of levothyroxine (LT4, 50 µg/kg/day) or
propylthiouracil (PTU, 2 mg/kg/day), respectively, on days 7 to 12 of gestation. 
Plasma cholesterol, total T3, free T4 and TSH were measured at gestational days
7, 12, and 21. At the end of gestation, the mothers were sacrificed and
embryo-fetal mortality was recorded. Fetuses were dissected to determine the
prevalence of esophageal and intestinal atresias.
RESULTS: At gestational day 12, mothers treated with LT4 or PTU had hyper or
hypothyroid status, respectively; plasma cholesterol levels were similar. In the 
adriamycin-exposed fetuses from hyperthyroid mothers, the embryonal resorption
rate and the prevalence of both EA/TEF and DA were significantly higher than in
the other groups; maternal hypothyroidism during the same period did not have
significant effect on the prevalence of atresias.
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal hyperthyroidism during the embryonic window corresponding
to foregut cleavage increased the prevalence of both EA/TEF and duodenal atresia 
in fetal rats exposed to adriamycin. This suggests that maternal thyroid hormone 
status might be involved in the pathogenesis of foregut atresias and invites
further research on this likely clinically relevant issue in humans.

PMID: 24363086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Arch Toxicol. 2014 Mar;88(3):637-46. doi: 10.1007/s00204-013-1186-2. Epub 2013
Dec 21.

Comparison of intake and systemic relative effect potencies of dioxin-like
compounds in female rats after a single oral dose.

van Ede KI(1), Andersson PL, Gaisch KP, van den Berg M, van Duursen MB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, P.O. Box 80177,
3508 TD, Utrecht, The Netherlands, k.i.vanede@uu.nl.

Risk assessment for mixtures of dioxin-like compounds uses the toxic equivalency 
factor (TEF) approach. Although current WHO-TEFs are mostly based on oral
administration, they are commonly used to determine toxicity equivalencies (TEQs)
in human blood or tissues. However, the use of "intake" TEFs to calculate
systemic TEQs in for example human blood, has never been validated. In this
study, intake and systemic relative effect potencies (REPs) for
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (PeCDD), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran 
(4-PeCDF), 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126),
2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-118) and 2,3,3',4,4',5-hexachlorobiphenyl
(PCB-156) were compared in rats. The effect potencies were calculated based on
administered dose and liver, adipose or plasma concentrations in female
Sprague-Dawley rats 3 days after a single oral dose, relative to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Hepatic ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase 
activity and gene expression of Cyp1a1, 1a2, 1b1 and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
repressor in liver and peripheral blood lymphocytes were used as endpoints.
Results show that plasma-based systemic REPs were generally within a half log
range around the intake REPs for all congeners tested, except for 4-PeCDF.
Together with our previously reported systemic REPs from a mouse study, these
data do not warrant the use of systemic REPs as systemic TEFs for human risk
assessment. However, further investigation for plasma-based systemic REPs for
4-PeCDF is desirable.

PMID: 24363026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Int J Obes (Lond). 2014 Sep;38(9):1153-8. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.239. Epub 2013
Dec 19.

Postprandial thermogenesis and substrate oxidation are unaffected by sleep
restriction.

Shechter A(1), Rising R(1), Wolfe S(1), Albu JB(1), St-Onge MP(1).

Author information: 
(1)New York Obesity Nutrition Research Center, St Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital, New 
York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The extent to which alterations in energy expenditure (EE)
in response to sleep restriction contribute to the short sleep-obesity
relationship is not clearly defined. Short sleep may induce changes in resting
metabolic rate (RMR), thermic effect of food (TEF) and postprandial substrate
oxidation.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Ten females (age and body mass index: 22-43 years and
23.4-28<U+2009>kg<U+2009>m(-2)) completed a randomized, crossover study assessing the effects
of short (4<U+2009>h per night) and habitual (8<U+2009>h per night) sleep duration on fasting
and postprandial RMR and respiratory quotient (RQ). Measurements were taken after
three nights using whole-room indirect calorimetry. The TEF was assessed over a
6-h period following consumption of a high-fat liquid meal.
RESULTS: Short versus habitual sleep did not affect RMR (1.01±0.05 and
0.97±0.04<U+2009>kcal<U+2009>min(-1); P=0.23). Fasting RQ was significantly lower after short
versus habitual sleep (0.84±0.01 and 0.88±0.01; P=0.028). Postprandial EE (short:
1.13±0.04 and habitual: 1.10±0.04, P=0.09) and RQ (short: 0.88±0.01 and habitual:
0.88±0.01, P=0.50) after the high-fat meal were not different between conditions.
TEF was similar between conditions (0.24±0.02<U+2009>kcal<U+2009>min(-1) in both; P=0.98), as
was the ~6-h incremental area under the curve (1.16±0.10 and
1.17±0.09<U+2009>kcal<U+2009>min(-1) × 356<U+2009>min after short and habitual sleep, respectively;
P=0.92).
CONCLUSIONS: Current findings observed in non-obese healthy premenopausal women
do not support the hypothesis that alterations in TEF and postprandial substrate 
oxidation are major contributors to the higher rate of obesity observed in short 
sleepers. In exploring a role of sleep duration on EE, research should focus on
potential alterations in physical activity to explain the increased obesity risk 
in short sleepers.

PMCID: PMC4063893
PMID: 24352294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Environ Int. 2014 Feb;63:173-81. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2013.11.007. Epub 2013 Dec
4.

Source attribution of personal exposure to airborne polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon mixture using concurrent personal, indoor, and outdoor measurements.

Choi H(1), Spengler J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, SUNY at Albany, School of Public 
Health, One University Place, Room 153, Rensselaer, NY 12144, United States.
Electronic address: hchoi@albany.edu. (2)Harvard School of Public Health, 401
Park Drive, Landmark Center 4th Floor West, Room 406A, Boston, MA 02215, United
States. Electronic address: spengler@hsph.harvard.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Relative importance of multiple indoor and outdoor venues on personal
exposure concentrations to pro-carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
(c-PAHs) remains poorly understood. This is particularly challenging because many
c-PAHs share sources and occur as a complex mixture. Accurate and precise
apportionment of personal exposure according to exposure venues could aid in the 
understanding of human health effects due to a given source. Here, we partitioned
indoor and personal exposure concentrations to seven c-PAHs and pyrene according 
to the indoor- and outdoor-origins.
METHODS: A simultaneous, integrated monitoring of personal, indoor and outdoor
concentrations of nine PAHs was conducted in 75 homes for a consecutive 48-hour
period across a two-year period in Kraków, Poland. Due to few known indoor
sources for chrysene, we used this PAH species as a tracer for infiltration of
outdoor PAHs. Personal and indoor concentrations of seven c-PAHs and pyrene were 
apportioned to home indoor, non-home indoor and outdoor origins.
RESULTS: Using Chrysenein/Chryseneout as proxy for an infiltration factor, Finf, 
infiltrated PAHs of outdoor origin are overall higher in concentration than those
emitted from the indoor origin. Average contribution by the outdoor sources on
B[a]A, B[b]F, and B[k]F were 92%, 79%, and 78% across all seasons, respectively. 
In contrast, in homes where a household member smoked, average contributions by
the outdoor sources on B[ghi]P, B[a]P, D[ah]A, and IP were lower (i.e., 67%, 65%,
67%, and 66%, respectively). Season-averaged contributions by the outdoor sources
on personal exposure to B[a]A, B[b]F, and B[k]F were 92%, 74%, and 77%,
respectively. On the other hand, season-averaged home indoor source contributions
on personal exposure to B[a]A, B[b]F, and B[k]F were estimated at 6%, 15%, and
19%, respectively. Similar contributions by season-averaged home indoor sources
on personal exposure were estimated at 28% for B[ghi]P, 31% for B[a]P, 25% for
D[ah]A, and 28% for IP.
CONCLUSION: Of the seven c-PAHs, B[a]A, B[b]F, and B[k]F are enriched in indoor
and personal exposure concentrations from the outdoor coal-combustion. B[ghi]P,
B[a]P, D[a,h]A, and IP, PAHs with some of the highest carcinogenic and mutagenic 
potencies, are considerably enriched by cigarette smoke in addition to the
outdoor sources.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3908783
PMID: 24316321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):324-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36294. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

Surgical intervention for esophageal atresia in patients with trisomy 18.

Nishi E(1), Takamizawa S, Iio K, Yamada Y, Yoshizawa K, Hatata T, Hiroma T,
Mizuno S, Kawame H, Fukushima Y, Nakamura T, Kosho T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Nagano Children's Hospital, Azumino, Japan;
Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University Graduate School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan.

Trisomy 18 is a common chromosomal aberration syndrome involving growth
impairment, various malformations, poor prognosis, and severe developmental delay
in survivors. Although esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) is a potentially fatal complication that can only be rescued through
surgical correction, no reports have addressed the efficacy of surgical
intervention for EA in patients with trisomy 18. We reviewed detailed clinical
information of 24 patients with trisomy 18 and EA who were admitted to two
neonatal intensive care units in Japan and underwent intensive treatment
including surgical interventions from 1982 to 2009. Nine patients underwent only 
palliative surgery, including six who underwent only gastrostomy or both
gastrostomy and jejunostomy (Group 1) and three who underwent gastrostomy and TEF
division (Group 2). The other 15 patients underwent radical surgery, including 10
who underwent single-stage esophago-esophagostomy with TEF division (Group 3) and
five who underwent two-stage operation (gastrostomy followed by
esophago-esophagostomy with TEF division) (Group 4). No intraoperative death or
anesthetic complications were noted. Enteral feeding was accomplished in 17
patients, three of whom were fed orally. Three patients could be discharged home.
The 1-year survival rate was 17%: 27% in those receiving radical surgery (Groups 
3 and 4); 0% in those receiving palliative surgery (Groups 1 and 2). Most causes 
of death were related to cardiac complications. EA is not an absolute poor
prognostic factor in patients with trisomy 18 undergoing radical surgery for EA
and intensive cardiac management.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24311518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2013 Dec;97(12):786-91. doi:
10.1002/bdra.23205. Epub 2013 Dec 5.

Second study on the recurrence risk of isolated esophageal atresia with or
without trachea-esophageal fistula among first-degree relatives: no evidence for 
increased risk of recurrence of EA/TEF or for malformations of the VATER/VACTERL 
association spectrum.

Choinitzki V(1), Zwink N, Bartels E, Baudisch F, Boemers TM, Hölscher A, Turial
S, Bachour H, Heydweiller A, Kurz R, Bartmann P, Pauly M, Brokmeier U, Leutner A,
Nöthen MM, Schumacher J, Jenetzky E, Reutter H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal atresia with/without trachea-esophageal fistula (EA/TEF)
denotes a spectrum of severe congenital malformations. The aim of this systematic
study was to determine both the recurrence risk for EA/TEF, and the risk for
malformations of the VATER/VACTERL association spectrum, in first-degree
relatives of patients with isolated EA/TEF.
METHODS: A total of 108 unrelated patients with isolated EA/TEF were included.
These individuals had 410 first-degree relatives including 194 siblings. The
presence of EA/TEF and malformations of the VATER/VACTERL association spectrum in
relatives was systematically assessed. Data from the EUROCAT network were used
for comparison.
RESULTS: None of the first-degree relatives displayed any form of EA/TEF. In two 
families, a first-degree relative presented with malformations from the
VATER/VACTERL association spectrum. However, no increase in the risk for
malformations of the VATER/VACTERL association spectrum was found compared with
the control cohort (p = 0.87). In three families, one more distantly related
relative presented with EA/TEF.
CONCLUSION: In contrast to previous studies, our results suggest a very low
recurrence risk for isolated EA/TEF and/or for malformations of the VATER/VACTERL
association spectrum among first-degree relatives.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24307608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Stud Mycol. 2013 Sep 30;76(1):1-29. doi: 10.3114/sim0019.

A phylogenetic re-evaluation of Phyllosticta (Botryosphaeriales).

Wikee S(1), Lombard L, Nakashima C, Motohashi K, Chukeatirote E, Cheewangkoon R, 
McKenzie EH, Hyde KD, Crous PW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiangrai 57100, Thailand ;
Institute of Excellence in Fungal Research, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiangrai
57100, Thailand.

Phyllosticta is a geographically widespread genus of plant pathogenic fungi with 
a diverse host range. This study redefines Phyllosticta, and shows that it
clusters sister to the Botryosphaeriaceae (Botryosphaeriales, Dothideomycetes),
for which the older family name Phyllostictaceae is resurrected. In moving to a
unit nomenclature for fungi, the generic name Phyllosticta was chosen over
Guignardia in previous studies, an approach that we support here. We use a
multigene DNA dataset of the ITS, LSU, ACT, TEF and GPDH gene regions to
investigate 129 isolates of Phyllosticta, representing about 170 species names,
many of which are shown to be synonyms of the ubiquitous endophyte P.
capitalensis. Based on the data generated here, 12 new species are introduced,
while epitype and neotype specimens are designated for a further seven species.
One species of interest is P. citrimaxima associated with tan spot of Citrus
maxima fruit in Thailand, which adds a fifth species to the citrus black spot
complex. Previous morphological studies lumped many taxa under single names that 
represent complexes. In spite of this Phyllosticta is a species-rich genus, and
many of these taxa need to be recollected in order to resolve their phylogeny and
taxonomy.TAXONOMIC NOVELTIES: New species - Phyllosticta abieticola Wikee &
Crous, P. aloeicola Wikee & Crous, P. citrimaxima Wikee, Crous, K.D. Hyde &
McKenzie, P. leucothoicola Wikee, Motohashi & Crous, P. mangifera-indica Wikee,
Crous, K.D. Hyde & McKenzie, P. neopyrolae Wikee, Motohashi, Crous, K.D. Hyde &
McKenzie, P. pachysandricola Wikee, Motohashi & Crous, P. paxistimae Wikee &
Crous, P. podocarpicola Wikee, Crous, K.D. Hyde & McKenzie, P. rhaphiolepidis
Wikee, C. Nakash. & Crous, P. rubra Wikee & Crous, P. vacciniicola Wikee, Crous, 
K.D. Hyde & McKenzie; New combinations - P. foliorum (Sacc.) Wikee & Crous, P.
philoprina (Berk. & M.A. Curtis) Wikee & Crous; Epitypifications (basionyms) - P.
concentrica Sacc., P. cussoniae Cejp, P. owaniana G. Winter; Neotypifications
(basionyms) - Phyllosticta cordylinophila P.A. Young, Physalospora gregaria var. 
foliorum Sacc., Sphaeropsis hypoglossi Mont., Sphaeropsis minima Berk. & M.A.
Curtis.

PMCID: PMC3825230
PMID: 24302788  [PubMed]


268. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan 15;306(2):E210-24. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00188.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 3.

Weight cycling promotes fat gain and altered clock gene expression in adipose
tissue in C57BL/6J mice.

Dankel SN(1), Degerud EM, Borkowski K, Fjære E, Midtbø LK, Haugen C, Solsvik MH, 
Lavigne AM, Liaset B, Sagen JV, Kristiansen K, Mellgren G, Madsen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Science, K. G. Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway;

Repeated attempts to lose weight by temporary dieting may result in weight
cycling, eventually further gain of body fat, and possible metabolic adaptation. 
We tested this with a controlled experiment in C57BL/6J mice subjected to four
weight cycles (WC), continuous hypercaloric feeding (HF), or low-fat feeding
(LF). To search for genes involved in an adaptive mechanism to former weight
cycling and avoid acute effects of the last cycle, the last hypercaloric feeding 
period was prolonged by an additional 2 wk before euthanization. Total energy
intake was identical in WC and HF. However, compared with HF, the WC mice gained 
significantly more total body mass and fat mass and showed increased levels of
circulating leptin and lipids in liver. Both the HF and WC groups showed
increased adipocyte size and insulin resistance. Despite these effects, we also
observed an interesting maintenance of circulating adiponectin and free fatty
acid levels after WC, whereas changes in these parameters were observed in HF
mice. Global gene expression was analyzed by microarrays. Weight-cycled mice were
characterized by a downregulation of several clock genes (Dbp, Tef, Per1, Per2,
Per3, and Nr1d2) in adipose tissues, which was confirmed by quantitative PCR. In 
3T3-L1 cells, we found reduced expression of Dbp and Tef early in adipogenic
differentiation, which was mediated via cAMP-dependent signaling. Our data
suggest that clock genes in adipose tissue may play a role in metabolic
adaptation to weight cycling.

PMID: 24302006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Fungal Biol. 2013 Nov-Dec;117(11-12):764-75. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2013.09.004.
Epub 2013 Oct 2.

A three-gene phylogeny of the Mycena pura complex reveals 11 phylogenetic species
and shows ITS to be unreliable for species identification.

Harder CB(1), Læssøe T, Frøslev TG, Ekelund F, Rosendahl S, Kjøller R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Copenhagen, Department of Biology, Terrestrial Ecology,
Universitetsparken 15, 2100 København Ø, Denmark. Electronic address:
cbharder@bio.ku.dk.

Phylogenetic analyses of Mycena sect. Calodontes using ITS previously suggested
ten cryptic monophyletic ITS lineages within the Mycena pura morphospecies. Here,
we compare ITS data (645 bp incl. gaps) from 46 different fruit bodies that
represent the previously described ITS diversity with partial tEF-1-a (423 bp)
and RNA polymerase II (RPB1) (492 bp) sequence data to test the genealogical
concordance. While neither of the markers were in complete topological agreement,
the branches differing between the tEF and RPB1 trees had a low bootstrap (<50)
support, and the partition homogeneity incongruence length difference (ILD) tests
were not significant. ILD tests revealed significant discordances between ITS and
the tEF and RPB1 markers in several lineages. And our analyses suggested
recombination between ITS1 and ITS2, most pronounced in one phylospecies that was
identical in tEF and RPB1. Based on the agreement between tEF and RPB1, we
defined 11 mutually concordant terminal clades as phylospecies inside the M. pura
morphospecies; most of them cryptic. While neither of the markers showed an
unequivocal barcoding gap between inter- and intraspecific diversity, the overlap
was most pronounced for ITS (intraspecific diversity 0-3.5 %, interspecific
diversity 0.4 %-8.8 %). A clustering analysis on tEF separated at a 1.5 % level
returned all phylogenetic species as Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs), while
ITS at both a 1.5 % level and at a 3 % threshold level not only underestimated
diversity as found by the tEF and RPB1, but also identified an OTU which was not 
a phylogenetic species. Thus, our investigation does not support the universal
suitability of ITS for species recognition in particular, and emphasises the
general limitation of single gene analyses combined with single percentage
separation values.

Copyright © 2013 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24295915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jan;41(1):309-15.

Investigation of four candidate genes (IGF2, JHDM1A, COPB1 and TEF1) for growth
rate and backfat thickness traits on SSC2q in Large White pigs.

Han X, Yang H, Jiang T, Zhang Q, Zeng C, Fan B, Liu B.

As important quantitative traits, the growth rate and backfat thickness are
controlled by multiple genes. The aim of this investigation was to evaluate the
effect of the single and multiple SNPs of four candidate genes (IGF2, JHDM1A,
COPB1 and TEF-1) on growth rate and backfat thickness. The four candidate genes
were mapped on the p arm of SSC 2, and there are several QTLs, such as average
daily gain, backfat thickness, an imprinted QTLs affecting muscle mass and fat
deposition have been reported in this region. The polymorphisms of these genes
were detected using PCR-RFLP methods, mixed procedure was used to analyze the
single marker association with the growth and backfat thickness traits, and the
gene-gene combination was investigated using multiple-markers analysis. The
single marker association analysis indicated that the IGF2 intron-3 g.3072G > A
and the substitution g.93G > A of TEF-1 gene were significantly associated with
the age at 100 kg (P < 0.05). The JHDM1A 3'UTR g.224C > G, the c.3096C > T
polymorphism of COPB1 gene and the substitution g.93G > A of TEF-1 gene were all 
significantly associated with the backfat at the shoulder (P < 0.05), backfat at 
the last rib, backfat at the lumbar, and the average backfat thickness,
respectively. The multiple-markers analysis indicated that IGF2 and TEF-1
integrated gene networks for the age at 100 kg. Therefore, we can suggest that
the polymorphism of IGF2 and TEF-1 gene could be used in marker-assisted
selection for the age at 100 kg in Large White pigs.

PMID: 24234674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Environ Pollut. 2014 Jan;184:511-4. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2013.10.012. Epub 2013 
Oct 27.

Long-term behaviour of 137Cs in spruce bark in coniferous forests in the Czech
Republic.

Rulík P(1), Pilátová H, Suchara I, Sucharová J.

Author information: 
(1)National Radiation Protection Institute, Bartoskova 28, CZ 140 00 Prague 4,
Czech Republic. Electronic address: petr.rulik@suro.cz.

Activity concentrations of (137)Cs were detected in more than 400 outer spruce
bark samples collected at sites variably affected by Chernobyl fallout across the
Czech Republic in 1995 and 2010. The temporal changes in the (137)Cs activities
were found. The mean effective half-life (TEF) for (137)Cs in spruce bark was 9.6
years, and the mean environmental half-life (TE) was 14 years. The effective
half-lives were significantly higher in areas with higher long-term annual
precipitation sums. Coefficient a in linear regression y = ax + b of half-lives
on precipitation sums was 0.015 y mm(-1) for TEF and 0.036 y mm(-1) for TE. The
aggregated transfer factor of (137)Cs from soil to bark was determined and the
pre-Chernobyl bark contamination related to year 2010 was estimated.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24172658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 11;8(10):e77668. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077668.
eCollection 2013.

Prenatal exposure to dietary fat induces changes in the transcriptional factors, 
TEF and YAP, which may stimulate differentiation of peptide neurons in rat
hypothalamus.

Poon K(1), Mandava S, Chen K, Barson JR, Buschlen S, Leibowitz SF.

Author information: 
(1)The Rockefeller University, Laboratory of Behavioral Neurobiology, New York,
New York, United States of America.

Gestational exposure to a high-fat diet (HFD) stimulates the differentiation of
orexigenic peptide-expressing neurons in the hypothalamus of offspring. To
examine possible mechanisms that mediate this phenomenon, this study investigated
the transcriptional factor, transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF), and
co-activator, Yes-associated protein (YAP), which when inactivated stimulate
neuronal differentiation. In rat embryos and postnatal offspring prenatally
exposed to a HFD compared to chow, changes in hypothalamic TEF and YAP and their 
relationship to the orexigenic peptide, enkephalin (ENK), were measured. The HFD 
offspring at postnatal day 15 (P15) exhibited in the hypothalamic paraventricular
nucleus a significant reduction in YAP mRNA and protein, and increased levels of 
inactive and total TEF protein, with no change in mRNA. Similarly, HFD-exposed
embryos at embryonic day 19 (E19) showed in whole hypothalamus significantly
decreased levels of YAP mRNA and protein and TEF mRNA, and increased levels of
inactive TEF protein, suggesting that HFD inactivates TEF and YAP. This was
accompanied by increased density and fluorescence intensity of ENK neurons. A
close relationship between TEF and ENK was suggested by the finding that TEF
co-localizes with this peptide in hypothalamic neurons and HFD reduced the
density of TEF/ENK co-labeled neurons, even while the number and fluorescence
intensity of single-labeled TEF neurons were increased. Increased YAP inactivity 
by HFD was further evidenced by a decrease in number and fluorescence intensity
of YAP-containing neurons, although the density of YAP/ENK co-labeled neurons was
unaltered. Genetic knockdown of TEF or YAP stimulated ENK expression in
hypothalamic neurons, supporting a close relationship between these transcription
factors and neuropeptide. These findings suggest that prenatal HFD exposure
inactivates both hypothalamic TEF and YAP, by either decreasing their levels or
increasing their inactive form, and that this contributes to the stimulatory
effect of HFD on ENK expression and possibly the differentiation of
ENK-expressing neurons.

PMCID: PMC3795669
PMID: 24147051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Waste Manag. 2014 Jan;34(1):67-78. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2013.09.002. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

Sulfur recirculation for increased electricity production in Waste-to-Energy
plants.

Andersson S(1), Blomqvist EW, Bäfver L, Jones F, Davidsson K, Froitzheim J,
Karlsson M, Larsson E, Liske J.

Author information: 
(1)Götaverken Miljö AB, Box 8876, SE-402 72 Göteborg, Sweden. Electronic address:
sven.andersson@gmab.se.

Sulfur recirculation is a new technology for reducing boiler corrosion and dioxin
formation. It was demonstrated in full-scale tests at a Waste to Energy plant in 
Göteborg (Sweden) during nearly two months of operation. Sulfur was recirculated 
as sulfuric acid from the flue gas cleaning back to the boiler, thus creating a
sulfur loop. The new technology was evaluated by extensive measurement campaigns 
during operation under normal conditions (reference case) and operation with
sulfur recirculation. The chlorine content of both fly ash and boiler ash
decreased and the sulfur content increased during the sulfur recirculation tests.
The deposit growth and the particle concentration decreased with sulfur
recirculation and the dioxin concentration (I-TEQ) of the flue gas was reduced by
approximately 25%. Sulfuric acid dew point measurements showed that the sulfuric 
acid dosage did not lead to elevated SO3 concentrations, which may otherwise
induce low temperature corrosion. In the sulfur recirculation corrosion probe
exposures, the corrosion rate decreased for all tested materials (16Mo3, Sanicro 
28 and Inconel 625) and material temperatures (450 °C and 525 °C) compared to the
reference exposure. The corrosion rates were reduced by 60-90%. Sulfur
recirculation prevented the formation of transition metal chlorides at the
metal/oxide interface, formation of chromate and reduced the presence of zinc in 
the corrosion products. Furthermore, measured corrosion rates at 525 °C with
sulfur recirculation in operation were similar or lower compared to those
measured at 450 °C material temperature in reference conditions, which
corresponds to normal operation at normal steam temperatures. This implies that
sulfur recirculation allows for higher steam data and electricity production
without increasing corrosion.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2014 Jan;98(1):251-62. doi: 10.1007/s00253-013-5295-x.
Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Metabolic engineering for ricinoleic acid production in the oleaginous yeast
Yarrowia lipolytica.

Beopoulos A(1), Verbeke J, Bordes F, Guicherd M, Bressy M, Marty A, Nicaud JM.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1319, Micalis, 78352, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Although there are numerous oleochemical applications for ricinoleic acid (RA)
and its derivatives, their production is limited and subject to various safety
legislations. In an effort to produce RA from alternative sources, we constructed
a genetically modified strain of the oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. This
strain is unable to perform ß-oxidation and is invalidated for the native
triacylglycerol (TAG) acyltransferases (Dga1p, Dga2p, and Lro1p) and the <U+2206>12
desaturase (Fad2p). We also expressed the Ricinus communis <U+2206>12 hydroxylase
(RcFAH12) under the control of the TEF constitutive promoter in this strain.
However, RA constituted only 7% of the total lipids produced by this modified
strain. By contrast, expression of the Claviceps purpurea hydroxylase CpFAH12 in 
this background resulted in a strain able to accumulate RA to 29% of total
lipids, and expression of an additional copy of CpFAH12 drove RA accumulation up 
to 35% of total lipids. The co-expression of the C. purpurea or R. communis type 
II diacylglycerol acyltransferase (RcDGAT2 or CpDGAT2) had negative effects on RA
accumulation in this yeast, with RA levels dropping to below 14% of total lipids.
Overexpression of the native Y. lipolytica PDAT acyltransferase (Lro1p) restored 
both TAG accumulation and RA levels. Thus, we describe the consequences of
rerouting lipid metabolism in this yeast so as to develop a cell factory for RA
production. The engineered strain is capable of accumulating RA to 43% of its
total lipids and over 60 mg/g of cell dry weight; this is the most efficient
production of RA described to date.

PMID: 24136468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Chemosphere. 2014 Jan;94:70-5. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.09.014. Epub 2013 
Sep 29.

Evaluation of the release of dioxins and PCBs during kiln-firing of ball clay.

Broadwater K(1), Meeker JD, Luksemburg W, Maier M, Garabrant D, Demond A,
Franzblau A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States.

Ball clay is known to be naturally contaminated with high levels of
polychlorinated di-benzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs). This study evaluated the potential
for PCDD, polychlorinated dibenzofuran (PCDF) and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) 
release during the kiln firing of ball clay in an art studio. Toxic equivalence
(TEQ) were calculated using World Health Organization (WHO) 2005 toxic
equivalence factors (TEF) and congener concentrations. Ten bags of commercial
ball clay were found to have an average TEQ of 1,370 nanograms/kilogram (ng
kg(-1)) dry weight (dw), almost exclusively due to PCDDs (99.98% of TEQ). After
firing, none of the 29 dioxin-like analytes was measured above the limits of
detection (LOD) in the clay samples. Air samples were taken during firings using 
both low-flow and high-flow air samplers. Few low-flow air samples contained
measurable levels of dioxin congeners above the LOD. The mean TEQ in the high
volume air samples ranged from 0.07 pg m(-3) to 0.21 pg m(-3) when firing ball
clay, and was 0.11 pg m(-3) when no clay was fired. These concentrations are
within the range measured in typical residences and well-controlled industrial
settings. The congener profiles in the high-flow air samples differed from the
unfired clay; the air samples had a considerable contribution to the TEQ from
PCDFs and PCBs. Given that the TEQs of all air samples were very low and the
profiles differed from the unfired clay, it is likely that the PCDDs in dry ball 
clay were destroyed during kiln firing. These results suggest that inhalation of 
volatilized dioxins during kiln firing of dry ball clay is an unlikely source of 
exposure for vocational and art ceramicists.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24083905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Sep;48(9):1850-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.02.062.

Using the Pediatric Health Information System to study rare congenital pediatric 
surgical diseases: development of a cohort of esophageal atresia patients.

Sulkowski JP(1), Deans KJ, Asti L, Mattei P, Minneci PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA;
Center for Surgical Outcomes Research and the Center for Innovation in Pediatric 
Practice, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus OH, 
USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Administrative databases include large multi-institutional
cohorts of patients with rare congenital anomalies that can potentially be used
to characterize these diseases and study variations in practice and outcomes. The
purpose of this study was to develop a methodology to accurately identify a
cohort of patients with a rare disease (esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal 
fistula, EA/TEF) in the Pediatric Health Information System (PHIS) database.
METHODS: Patients with EA/TEF treated from 2001 to 2010 were identified by chart 
review at two institutions and then located within the PHIS database to find
ICD-9-CM coding patterns unique to EA/TEF. Subsequently, a step-wise search
strategy for PHIS was developed to identify patients with EA/TEF: this included
searching the ICD-9-CM diagnosis code for congenital EA/TEF; adding the ICD-9-CM 
code for acquired TEF; limiting age to = 30 days; and adding at least one of a
number of specified ICD-9-CM procedure codes. The PHIS search results were
subsequently validated by chart review at each institution.
RESULTS: The institutional chart reviews identified 207 patients with EA/TEF. The
most refined PHIS search strategy identified 221 patients. The positive
predictive value of the search increased incrementally from 65% with using only
the correct ICD-9 code to 96% with the full methodology. A cohort of 2977
patients with EA/TEF is identified when this search strategy is applied to the
entire PHIS database.
CONCLUSION: Administrative databases such as PHIS can be utilized to identify
cohorts of patients with rare congenital anomalies; however, cohort development
requires a systematic search strategy and validation process to ensure correct
identification of patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24074656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Lipids. 2013;2013:297932. doi: 10.1155/2013/297932. Epub 2013 Aug 22.

Reduction of Cellular Lipid Content by a Knockdown of Drosophila PDP1 <U+03B3> and
Mammalian Hepatic Leukemia Factor.

Dzitoyeva S(1), Manev H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Psychiatric Institute, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

In exploring the utility of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) injections for silencing 
the PAR-domain protein 1 (Pdp1) gene in adult Drosophila, we noticed a dramatic
loss of fat tissue lipids. To verify that our RNAi approach produced the expected
Pdp1 knockdown, the abdominal fat tissues sections were stained with PDP1
antibodies. PDP1 protein immunostaining was absent in flies injected with dsRNA
targeting a sequence common to all known Pdp1 isoforms. Subsequent experiments
revealed that lipid staining is reduced in flies injected with dsRNA against Pdp1
<U+03B3> (fat body specific) and not against Pdp1 e (predominantly involved in circadian
mechanisms). Drosophila PDP1 <U+03B3> protein shows a high homology to mammalian
thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF), albumin D site-binding protein (DBP), and
hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) transcription factors. In an in vitro model of
drug- (olanzapine-) induced adiposity in mouse 3T3-L1 cells, the mRNA content of 
HLF but not TEF and DBP was increased by the drug treatment. A knockdown of the
HLF mRNA by transfecting the cultures with HLF dsRNA significantly reduced their 
lipid content. Furthermore, the HLF RNAi prevented olanzapine from increasing the
cell lipid content. These results suggest that the PDP1/HLF system may play a
role in physiological and drug-influenced lipid regulation.

PMCID: PMC3766575
PMID: 24062952  [PubMed]


278. Sci Rep. 2013;3:2698. doi: 10.1038/srep02698.

Efficient gate-tunable light-emitting device made of defective boron nitride
nanotubes: from ultraviolet to the visible.

Attaccalite C(1), Wirtz L, Marini A, Rubio A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Néel, CNRS, 25 rue des Martyrs BP 166, 38042 Grenoble cedex 9 France.

Boron nitride is a promising material for nanotechnology applications due to its 
two-dimensional graphene-like, insulating, and highly-resistant structure.
Recently it has received a lot of attention as a substrate to grow and isolate
graphene as well as for its intrinsic UV lasing response. Similar to carbon,
one-dimensional boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) have been theoretically predicted
and later synthesised. Here we use first principles simulations to unambiguously 
demonstrate that i) BN nanotubes inherit the highly efficient UV luminescence of 
hexagonal BN; ii) the application of an external perpendicular field closes the
electronic gap keeping the UV lasing with lower yield; iii) defects in BNNTS are 
responsible for tunable light emission from the UV to the visible controlled by a
transverse electric field (TEF). Our present findings pave the road towards
optoelectronic applications of BN-nanotube-based devices that are simple to
implement because they do not require any special doping or complex growth.

PMCID: PMC3781396
PMID: 24060843  [PubMed]


279. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Dec;136(2):595-604. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft203. Epub 2013 Sep
17.

A genomics-based analysis of relative potencies of dioxin-like compounds in
primary rat hepatocytes.

Rowlands JC(1), Budinsky R, Gollapudi B, Black MB, Wolfinger RD, Cukovic D,
Dombkowski A, Thompson CM, Urban JD, Thomas RS.

Author information: 
(1)* Toxicology and Environmental Research and Consulting, The Dow Chemical
Company, Midland, Michigan 48674;

Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for dioxin-like compounds are largely based on
relative potency (REP) values derived from biochemical endpoints such as enzyme
activity. As of yet, REPs based on gene expression changes have not been
accounted for in the TEF values. In this study, primary rat hepatocytes were
treated for 24h with 11 concentrations of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin,
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (4-PeCDF), or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran
(TCDF) ranging from 0.00001 to 100 nM. Differential changes in gene expression
were analyzed using analysis of variance to assess the relative contributions of 
concentration, congener, and the interaction between concentration and congener
for each gene. A total of 3283 genes showed significant changes with
concentration (false discovery rate < .05 and fold-change ± 1.5 in at least 1
concentration for 1 congener). Among these genes, 399 were significant for both
concentration and congener effects indicating parallel concentration-response
curves with significant differences in potency. Only 8 genes showed a significant
concentration and congener interaction term indicating a minority of genes show
nonparallel dose-response curves among the 3 congeners. Benchmark dose (BMD)
modeling was used to derive BMD values for induced individual genes and signaling
pathways. The REP values for 4-PeCDF and TCDF were generally 3- to 5-fold lower
than the World Health Organization (WHO) TEF values on both a gene and pathway
basis. These findings suggest that the WHO TEF values may possibly overpredict
the potency of these polychlorinated dibenzofuran congeners and demonstrate the
importance of identifying functional pathways relevant to the toxicological modes
of action for establishing pertinent REPs.

PMID: 24046277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Sci Food Agric. 2014 Apr;94(6):1132-9. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.6380. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Molecular identification and characterization of Fusarium spp. associated with
sorghum seeds.

Divakara ST(1), Santosh P, Aiyaz M, Ramana MV, Hariprasad P, Nayaka SC, Niranjana
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Studies in Biotechnology, University of Mysore, Mysore, 570006, 
Karnataka, India.

BACKGROUND: Fusarium spp. are not only pathogenic to plants but are also known as
toxin producers that negatively affect animal and human health. The
identification of Fusarium spp. remains one of the most critical issues in fungal
taxonomy. In this study, different strains of Fusarium spp. were isolated from
sorghum seed samples and identified at the molecular level by tef-1a gene
amplification. A multiplex polymerase chain reaction (mPCR) assay was developed
to differentiate toxigenic and non-toxigenic Fusarium spp. by designing a primer 
for the Fum21 gene along with the Fum1 and Fum8 genes. A competitive direct
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (CD-ELISA) was employed to assess the
fumonisin-producing ability of Fusarium spp. Phylogenetic analyses were performed
using partial sequences of tef-1a and inter-simple sequence repeat (ISSR) markers
of different Fusarium spp.
RESULTS: All 27 isolates of Fusarium spp. were positive for the tef-1a gene and
revealed the presence of F. verticillioides, F. thapsina and F. cf.
incarnatum-equiseti complex. The standardized mPCR assay distinguished toxigenic 
and non-toxigenic F. verticillioides. Further, mPCR fumonisin-positive F.
verticillioides isolates were also positive by CD-ELISA. The tef-1a gene sequence
was found to be useful in revealing intraspecific polymorphism to some extent.
ISSR markers revealed a high level of polymorphism among different isolates of
Fusarium spp., and the dendrogram of ISSR analyses grouped the 27 isolates into
two major clusters.
CONCLUSION: The present method provided rapid and reliable detection of
fumonisin-producing Fusarium spp. The mPCR assay could be an alternative strategy
to current conventional mycotoxin analytical techniques and a reliable tool for
high-throughput monitoring of major mycotoxin-producing fungi during the
processing steps of food and feed commodities.

© 2013 Society of Chemical Industry.

PMID: 24003016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Masui. 2013 Aug;62(8):956-9.

[A case of large tracheoesophageal fistula after repair of the right discending
aortic arch].

[Article in Japanese]

Nojiri F(1), Kobayashi Y, Aoyama C, Asayama K, Shiga Y, Maehara Y, Hosaka S,
Kawachi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 
Tokyo 162-8655.

A 77-year-old woman with right aortic arch was diagnosed as aortic dissection (De
Bakey IIIb) and hospitalized for conservative treatment. But, her respiratory
condition deteriorated due to tracheal stenosis with aortic dissection. Surgical 
graft replacement of the descending aorta was performed to release tracheal
stenosis. Six days after surgery, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) was noticed.
The size of the fistula was 3 cm in diameter, located 3cm to the oral side from
the carina and 23 cm from the incisors. Nineteen days after surgery, an
esophageal stent was placed leading to temporary improvement of the respiratory
status, but it aggravated again. Unfortunately, she died due to ventricular
fibrillation 26 days after surgery. The case is extremely rare with dissection of
the right aortic arch. Such a case is considered to be a high risk of TEF, and it
is necessary to perform early preventive measures.

PMID: 23984573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013 Nov;67(2):278-84. doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2013.08.007.
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

A sensitivity analysis using alternative toxic equivalency factors to estimate
U.S. dietary exposures to dioxin-like compounds.

Parvez S(1), Evans AM, Lorber M, Hawkins BS, Swartout JC, Teuschler LK, Rice GE.

Author information: 
(1)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE), MC-100-44, P.O. Box
117, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-0117, USA.

EPA recommends sensitivity analyses when applying the toxic equivalency factor
(TEF) method to evaluate exposures to dioxin-like compounds (DLCs). Applying the 
World Health Organization's (WHO) 2005 TEF values and estimating average U.S.
daily dietary intakes of 25 DLCs from eight food categories, we estimate a toxic 
equivalency (TEQ) intake of 23 pg/day. Among DLCs, PCB 126 (26%) and
1,2,3,7,8-PeCDD (23%) dominate TEQ intakes. Among food categories, milk (14%),
other dairy (28%), beef (25%), and seafood (18%) most influenced TEQ intakes. We 
develop two approaches to estimate alternative TEF values. Based on WHO's
assumption regarding TEF uncertainty, Approach1 estimates upper and lower TEFs
for each DLC by multiplying and dividing, respectively, its individual TEF by ±
half a log. Based on compiled empirical ranges of relative potency estimates,
Approach2 uses percentile values for individual TEFs. Total TEQ intake estimates 
using the lower and upper TEFs based on Approach1 were 8 and 68 pg TEQ/day,
respectively. The 25th and 75th percentile TEFs from Approach2 yielded 12 and 28 
pg TEQ/day, respectively. The influential DLCs and food categories remained
consistent across alternative TEFs, except at the 90th percentile using
Approach2. We highlight the need for developing underlying TEF probability
distributions.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23973911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e71684. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071684. eCollection
2013.

Chronic ethanol consumption disrupts the core molecular clock and diurnal rhythms
of metabolic genes in the liver without affecting the suprachiasmatic nucleus.

Filiano AN(1), Millender-Swain T, Johnson R Jr, Young ME, Gamble KL, Bailey SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology-Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of
America.

Chronic ethanol consumption disrupts several metabolic pathways including
ß-oxidation and lipid biosynthesis, facilitating the development of alcoholic
fatty liver disease. Many of these same metabolic pathways are directly regulated
by cell autonomous circadian clocks, and recent studies suggest that disruption
of daily rhythms in metabolism contributes to multiple common cardiometabolic
diseases (including non-alcoholic fatty liver disease). However, it is not known 
whether ethanol disrupts the core molecular clock in the liver, nor whether this,
in turn, alters rhythms in lipid metabolism. Herein, we tested the hypothesis
that chronic ethanol consumption disrupts the molecular circadian clock in the
liver and potentially changes the diurnal expression patterns of lipid metabolism
genes. Consistent with previous studies, male C57BL/6J mice fed an
ethanol-containing diet exhibited higher levels of liver triglycerides compared
to control mice, indicating hepatic steatosis. Further, the diurnal oscillations 
of core clock genes (Bmal1, Clock, Cry1, Cry2, Per1, and Per2) and
clock-controlled genes (Dbp, Hlf, Nocturnin, Npas2, Rev-erba, and Tef) were
altered in livers from ethanol-fed mice. In contrast, ethanol had only minor
effects on the expression of core clock genes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN). These results were confirmed in Per2(Luciferase) knock-in mice, in which
ethanol induced a phase advance in PER2::LUC bioluminescence oscillations in
liver, but not SCN. Further, there was greater variability in the phase of
PER2::LUC oscillations in livers from ethanol-fed mice. Ethanol consumption also 
affected the diurnal oscillations of metabolic genes, including Adh1, Cpt1a,
Cyp2e1, Pck1, Pdk4, Ppargc1a, Ppargc1b and Srebp1c, in the livers of C57BL/6J
mice. In summary, chronic ethanol consumption alters the function of the
circadian clock in liver. Importantly, these results suggest that chronic ethanol
consumption, at levels sufficient to cause steatosis, disrupts the core hepatic
clock as well as the diurnal rhythms of key lipid metabolism genes.

PMCID: PMC3741117
PMID: 23951220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Chemosphere. 2013 Nov;93(8):1464-70. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2013.07.027. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

Resembling a "natural formation pattern" of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins by
varying the experimental conditions of hydrothermal carbonization.

Tirler W(1), Basso A.

Author information: 
(1)Eco-Research, Via Negrelli 13, 39100 Bolzano, Italy. Electronic address:
w.tirler@eco-research.it.

Until several years ago dioxins were considered as just an unwanted by product of
anthropogenic activities and stigmatized as the symbol of man-made environmental 
pollution. Natural processes, such as forest fires, can emit dioxins, but
compared to industrial processes, usually very low quantities are emitted.
However after a case of food contamination occurred in the United States of
America in 1996 caused by kaolinitic clay a discussion on the provenience
started. Besides the relatively high concentration also an unusual PCDD/F
distribution pattern was found in these ball clay samples. This specific pattern 
related to none of the known anthropogenic sources for these contaminants and, in
relation to a supposed natural formation, later it was named "natural formation
pattern". Hydrothermal carbonization (HTC) can transform biomass within hours
into a brown coal-like product which resembles naturally occurring coal
formation. HTC can also transform an already present PCDD/F contamination in a
way to obtain a "natural formation pattern" characterized by an unusual high
ratio between 1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDD and 1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDD and the absence of almost
all chlorinated dibenzofurans. By varying the experimental conditions of the HTC 
process applied to sewage sludge samples contaminated with PCDD/Fs from
anthropogenic sources, beside the "natural formation pattern" at a temperatures
of 255 °C, a remarkable increase of the toxicity based on WHO-TEQ was observed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23948607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 30;8(7):e68436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068436. Print 2013.

The carbohydrate sensitive rat as a model of obesity.

Nadkarni NA(1), Chaumontet C, Azzout-Marniche D, Piedcoq J, Fromentin G, Tomé D, 
Even PC.

Author information: 
(1)Chaire Aliment, Nutrition, Comportement Alimentaire, AgroParisTech, Paris,
France.

BACKGROUND: Sensitivity to obesity is highly variable in humans, and rats fed a
high fat diet (HFD) are used as a model of this inhomogeneity. Energy expenditure
components (basal metabolism, thermic effect of feeding, activity) and variations
in substrate partitioning are possible factors underlying the variability.
Unfortunately, in rats as in humans, results have often been inconclusive and
measurements usually made after obesity onset, obscuring if metabolism was a
cause or consequence. Additionally, the role of high carbohydrate diet (HCD) has 
seldom been studied.
METHODOLOGY/FINDINGS: Rats (n=24) were fed for 3 weeks on HCD and then 3 weeks on
HFD. Body composition was tracked by MRI and compared to energy expenditure
components measured prior to obesity.
RESULTS: 1) under HFD, as expected, by adiposity rats were variable enough to be 
separable into relatively fat resistant (FR) and sensitive (FS) groups, 2) under 
HCD, and again by adiposity, rats were also variable enough to be separable into 
carbohydrate resistant (CR) and sensitive (CS) groups, the normal body weight of 
CS rats hiding viscerally-biased fat accumulation, 3) HCD adiposity sensitivity
was not related to that under HFD, and both HCD and HFD adiposity sensitivities
were not related to energy expenditure components (BMR, TEF, activity cost), and 
4) only carbohydrate to fat partitioning in response to an HCD test meal was
related to HCD-induced adiposity.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The rat model of human obesity is based on substantial 
variance in adiposity gains under HFD (FR/FS model). Here, since we also found
this phenomenon under HCD, where it was also linked to an identifiable metabolic 
difference, we should consider the existence of another model: the carbohydrate
resistant (CR) or sensitive (CS) rat. This new model is potentially complementary
to the FR/FS model due to relatively greater visceral fat accumulation on a low
fat high carbohydrate diet.

PMCID: PMC3728328
PMID: 23935869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Neurotoxicology. 2013 Dec;39:18-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2013.07.005. Epub 2013
Aug 8.

Non-dioxin-like PCBs inhibit [(3)H]WIN-35,428 binding to the dopamine
transporter: a structure-activity relationship study.

Wigestrand MB(1), Stenberg M, Walaas SI, Fonnum F, Andersson PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Oslo, NO-0316 Oslo, Norway. Electronic address: m.b.wigestrand@medisin.uio.no.

Non-dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (NDL-PCBs) are neurotoxic compounds
with known effects at the dopaminergic system in the brain. In a previous study
we demonstrated that NDL-PCBs inhibit uptake of dopamine into rat brain
synaptosomes, an effect most likely mediated by inhibition of the dopamine
transporter (DAT). Here, using the cocaine analogue [(3)H]WIN-35,428 binding
assay and synaptosomes, we directly investigate whether NDL-PCBs act via DAT and 
explore the structure-activity relationship of this effect. In total, thirty PCBs
were investigated, including a previously selected training set of twenty PCBs
covering the structural variation within tri- to hepta-chlorinated NDL-PCBs, and 
an additional set of ten NDL-PCB congeners selected to validate the
structure-activity pattern of neurotoxic PCBs. Since previous work has
demonstrated that NDL-PCBs can also inhibit the vesicular monoamine transporter 2
(VMAT2), we additionally examined whether some PCB congeners favour an effect on 
VMAT2 and others on DAT. Our results show that NDL-PCBs are potent inhibitors of 
[(3)H]WIN-35,428 binding to DAT. In fact, we identify a PCB congener (PCB 110)
with similar potency for [(3)H]WIN-35,428 binding inhibition as cocaine. All
active congeners were ortho-chlorinated PCBs, and in particular, tetra- and
penta-chlorinated with 2-3 chlorine atoms in the ortho position were potent
inhibitors of [(3)H]WIN-35,428 binding. Notably, the most active PCBs are highly 
prevalent in commercial mixtures of PCBs (Aroclor 1242, 1254 and 1260), which
indicates that DAT inhibition could be one of the factors contributing to
behavioural effects after Aroclor exposure. Derived data correlated well with the
recently derived neurotoxic equivalency factors (NEQs), indicating the generality
and applicability of the NEQ scheme in risk assessments of PCBs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23933243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Mycologia. 2013 Sep-Oct;105(5):1202-18. doi: 10.3852/12-132. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

Three new Pochonia taxa (Clavicipitaceae) from soils in Japan.

Nonaka K(1), Omura S, Masuma R, Kaifuchi S, Masuma R.

Author information: 
(1)Kitasato Institute for Life Sciences, Kitasato University, 5-9-1 Shirokane,
Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8641, Japan.

Fifty Pochonia strains were isolated from soil samples collected throughout
Japan. Using a combination of micromorphological characters and multigene (SSU,
LSU, TEF, RPB1, RPB2) phylogenics, seven taxa were identified, three of which
previously were undescribed. In this paper we describe the new species, P.
boninensis, and two new varieties, P. chlamydosporia var. ellipsospora and var.
spinulospora. They were recovered from Chichi-jima, Aogashima and Okinawa's main 
island. The three new taxa are distinguished from known species and varieties by 
conidial morphology. We also report the first finding of P. rubescens from Japan.

PMID: 23921245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Jan 1;466-467:345-56. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.07.019. Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Site specific risk assessment of an energy-from-waste thermal treatment facility 
in Durham Region, Ontario, Canada. Part A: Human health risk assessment.

Ollson CA(1), Knopper LD, Whitfield Aslund ML, Jayasinghe R.

Author information: 
(1)Intrinsik Environmental Sciences, 6605 Hurontario Street, Mississauga, ON L5T 
0A3, Canada. Electronic address: collson@intrinsik.com.

The regions of Durham and York in Ontario, Canada have partnered to construct an 
energy-from-waste thermal treatment facility as part of a long term strategy for 
the management of their municipal solid waste. This paper presents the results of
a comprehensive human health risk assessment for this facility. This assessment
was based on extensive sampling of baseline environmental conditions (e.g.,
collection and analysis of air, soil, water, and biota samples) as well as
detailed site specific modeling to predict facility-related emissions of 87
identified contaminants of potential concern. Emissions were estimated for both
the approved initial operating design capacity of the facility (140,000 tonnes
per year) and for the maximum design capacity (400,000 tonnes per year). For the 
140,000 tonnes per year scenario, this assessment indicated that facility-related
emissions are unlikely to cause adverse health risks to local residents, farmers,
or other receptors (e.g., recreational users). For the 400,000 tonnes per year
scenarios, slightly elevated risks were noted with respect to inhalation
(hydrogen chloride) and infant consumption of breast milk (dioxins and furans),
but only during predicted 'upset conditions' (i.e. facility start-up, shutdown,
and loss of air pollution control) that represent unusual and/or transient
occurrences. However, current provincial regulations require that additional
environmental screening would be mandatory prior to expansion of the facility
beyond the initial approved capacity (140,000 tonnes per year). Therefore, the
potential risks due to upset conditions for the 400,000 tonnes per year scenario 
should be more closely investigated if future expansion is pursued.

© 2013.

PMID: 23911923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Mol Immunol. 2013 Dec;56(4):358-68. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.05.236. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

The effect of avian influenza virus NS1 allele on virus replication and innate
gene expression in avian cells.

Adams S(1), Xing Z, Li J, Mendoza K, Perez D, Reed K, Cardona C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Population Health and Reproduction, University of California,
Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

The NS1 gene encoded by Type A influenza virus circulates as two alleles, the A
and B allele. The immunomodulatory properties of the NS1 A allele have been
thoroughly examined; however, comparisons of allele function have been
predominantly made in mammalian systems. Here we show that counter to the current
understanding of allele function in mammals, the two alleles similarly regulate
elements of the type I interferon (IFN) signaling pathway, including the
interferon-inducible genes Mx and 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthase (2'-5' OAS), and 
IL-6, which share the same induction pathway as the interferons in embryo
fibroblasts from chickens, turkeys or ducks. Replication of two reassortant
viruses demonstrated that the B allele virus replicates more and to higher titers
than the A allele virus in duck cells; however, the A allele virus replicates
more in the cells from chickens and turkeys. Finally, chimeric constructs were
used to identify a region of the NS1 gene that conferred the statistically
significant differences in expression and replication observed between the
alleles.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Sci Total Environ. 2014 Jan 1;466-467:136-51. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.07.016. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and
organochlorine pesticides in selected cereals available on the Polish retail
market.

Roszko M(1), Jedrzejczak R, Szymczyk K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Analysis, Institute of Agricultural and Food Biotechnology,
Rakowiecka 36, 02-532 Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: roszko@ibprs.pl.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), and
organochlorine pesticides (DDT, HCH, HCB, chlordane, endrin, dieldrin, aldrin,
nitrophene, metoxychlor) are man-made chemicals manufactured for numerous
applications. The aim of this study was to assess levels of PCBs, PBDEs, and
organochlorine pesticides in selected types of cereals available on the Polish
retail market. 191 samples of various cereals have been analyzed in total.
Average EC6 concentrations ranged from 56.4 (snacks) to 442.2 pg g(-1) (bran)
while the concentration of 12 dioxin-like PCBs was in 15 (groats)-37.6 pg g(-1)
(snacks) range. Mean dioxin equivalency concentration calculated as lower bound
results in 2005 TEF values amounted to 0.120 ± 0.445 pg TEQ g(-1), while 0.091 ± 
0.338 pg TEQ g(-1) if 1998 TEF values were used. Average concentration of all 14 
studied BDEs (<U+2211>14 BDE) was 112 ± 80 pg g(-1), while average concentration of 13
BDEs excluding BDE #209 was only 15 ± 6 pg g(-1). Pesticide concentrations
observed in the analyzed samples were generally low in comparison to maximum
residue levels (MRLs) actually permitted by the European Union. However, MRLs
were exceeded in 7 out of all 191 analyzed samples. Total concentration of DDT
isomers in one of the tested bran samples was as high as 0.053 mg kg(-1). DMDT
concentrations slightly above MRL = 0.01 mg kg(-1)were observed in 6 other
samples (2 × bran, 1 × children porridge, 2 × snacks and 1 × bread). This study
has shown that levels of PCBs, PBDEs and organochlorine pesticides in cereal
products available on the Polish market are generally low. However, elevated
levels of individual pollutants were observed in several instances.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23906852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Indian J Surg. 2012 Aug;74(4):337-9. doi: 10.1007/s12262-012-0410-2. Epub 2012
May 1.

Tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia with absent external ear: a
unusual association.

Upadhyaya VD(1), Gangopadhyay AN, Srivastava PK, Hasan Z, Sharma SP.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery, IMS, BHU, Varanasi India.

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF with EA) is a common
disease which is associated with many other congenital abnormalities. The most
common association is with VACTERL syndrome.. Various types of ear malformations 
have been reported in CHARGE syndrome associated with EA and TEF. However,
absence of external ear has not been described which is being reported in this
article. We could not found this association even on extensive search of
literature.

PMCID: PMC3444599
PMID: 23904729  [PubMed]


292. Surg Radiol Anat. 2014 May;36(4):397-400. doi: 10.1007/s00276-013-1173-6. Epub
2013 Jul 31.

Esophageal lung diagnosed following the primary repair of esophageal atresia with
tracheo-esophageal fistula in a neonate.

Chung JH(1), Lim GY, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yeouido St' Mary's Hospital, The Catholic University of
Korea, 62 Youido-dong, Youngdeungpo-gu, Seoul, 150-713, Korea,
jhjung@catholic.ac.kr.

Communicating bronchopulmonary foregut malformations are a diverse group of
congenital anomalies characterized by a fistula between the respiratory and
alimentary systems. Among these malformations, the association of an esophageal
lung with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) is
extremely rare. We report the case of a neonate with esophageal lung detected
following the primary repair of EA with TEF. Despite the rarity of esophageal
lung with EA and TEF, it should be considered to develop in infants with abnormal
findings on chest radiographs and an unusual preoperative and/or in the
postoperative clinical course of EA and TEF. Swallowing study with water-soluble 
contrast medium is the investigation of choice to demonstrate the anatomic
connection, if EA and TEF were already primarily repaired. If not, although the
use of preoperative CT may be debatable in neonates due to the associated
radiation exposure, in selected cases such as our patient, preoperative CT can be
useful for early preoperative diagnosis.

PMID: 23900505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. IMA Fungus. 2013 Jul;4(1):133-54. doi: 10.5598/imafungus.2013.04.01.13. Epub 2013
Jun 24.

A phylogenetic re-evaluation of Arthrinium.

Crous PW(1), Groenewald JZ.

Author information: 
(1)CBS-KNAW Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The
Netherlands ; Microbiology, Department of Biology, Utrecht University, Padualaan 
8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands ; Wageningen University and Research Centre
(WUR), Laboratory of Phytopathology, Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen,
The Netherlands.

Although the genus Arthrinium (sexual morph Apiospora) is commonly isolated as an
endophyte from a range of substrates, and is extremely interesting for the
pharmaceutical industry, its molecular phylogeny has never been resolved. Based
on morphology and DNA sequence data of the large subunit nuclear ribosomal RNA
gene (LSU, 28S) and the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) and 5.8S rRNA gene of 
the nrDNA operon, the genus Arthrinium is shown to belong to Apiosporaceae in
Xylariales. Arthrinium is morphologically and phylogenetically circumscribed, and
the sexual genus Apiospora treated as synonym on the basis that Arthinium is
older, more commonly encountered, and more frequently used in literature. An
epitype is designated for Arthrinium pterospermum, and several well-known species
are redefined based on their morphology and sequence data of the translation
elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF), beta-tubulin (TUB) and internal transcribed
spacer (ITS1, 5.8S, ITS2) gene regions. Newly described are A. hydei on Bambusa
tuldoides from Hong Kong, A. kogelbergense on dead culms of Restionaceae from
South Africa, A. malaysianum on Macaranga hullettii from Malaysia, A. ovatum on
Arundinaria hindsii from Hong Kong, A. phragmites on Phragmites australis from
Italy, A. pseudospegazzinii on Macaranga hullettii from Malaysia, A.
pseudosinense on bamboo from The Netherlands, and A. xenocordella from soil in
Zimbabwe. Furthermore, the genera Pteroconium and Cordella are also reduced to
synonymy, rejecting spore shape and the presence of setae as characters of
generic significance separating them from Arthrinium.

PMCID: PMC3719201
PMID: 23898419  [PubMed]


294. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Jul;48(7):1463-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.12.026.

A case series study of therapeutic implications of type IIIb4: a rare variant of 
esophageal atresia and distal tracheoesophageal fistula.

Puri A(1), Yadav PS, Saha U, Singh R, Chadha R, Choudhary SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Lady Hardinge Medical College and Kalawati
Saran Children's Hospital, New Delhi-110 001, India. puriarchana@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: A wide spectrum of variations can occur in type IIIb esophageal
atresia and distal tracheoesophageal fistula [EA-TEF] (Kluth D. Atlas of
esophageal atresia. J Pediatr Surg 1976; 11 (6):901-19). The aim of this study
was to evaluate the variant anatomy of subtype IIIb4 EA-TEF and its therapeutic
implications.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of 4 patients of this variant
subtype within a series of 259 esophageal atresias, managed over a study period
of three years, at our institution. The diagnosis was made at thoracotomy. The
overlapping upper and lower esophageal pouches, initially, gave a false
impression of esophageal continuity. The long TEF coursed parallel in proximity
to the upper pouch (UP) and the trachea needing meticulous dissection. The TEF
measured 8-10mm in diameter and was ligated and divided high on the trachea near 
the thoracic inlet. The patients were followed up by a contrast swallow,
radioactive technetium-99m- sulfur colloid scan, echocardiography and
bronchoscopy (if indicated).
RESULTS: The mean birth weight and gestational age was 2250 g and 38 weeks
respectively. The mean follow up was eighteen months (range 5-42 months). An
associated anorectal malformation was present in two patients while none had
associated congenital heart disease. The Waterston grading was A and B in one
patient each and C in two patients. All the patients had muscular UP extending
up-to the level of arch of azygous vein (T(3-4)). The lower esophageal pouch (LP)
and the fistula extended high, near the thoracic inlet. Tracheal injury occurred 
in one patient, with thin LP, warranting postoperative elective ventilation. A
postoperative barium swallow did not reveal anastomotic leak or stricture in any 
patient. Follow-up barium swallow showed long LP extending high up in the chest, 
up to clavicles in all four patients and redundancy of UP in case 1. Severe
gastroesophageal reflux was present in two patients. Bronchoscopy revealed
tracheomalacia in case 1. Three patients were thriving well at the last
follow-up. One patient died at five months of age due to aspiration pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: The knowledge of diagnostic and therapeutic implications of the
variant subtype IIIb4 EA-TEF should be in the armamentarium of the treating
surgeon to reduce pitfalls in its management.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23895955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Pak Med Assoc. 2012 Aug;62(8):851-3.

Tracheo-esophageal fistula secondary to tracheostomy, delayed diagnosis.

Altinsoy B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Afyon Chest Diseases Hospital, Turkey.
altinsoyb@ymail.com

Persistent air leak is not a common problem in patients who are under mechanical 
ventilation support; however, it can be encountered in intensive care unit (ICU).
It is often due to nonuniform contact between the cuff and the tracheal wall
caused by insufficient cuff pressure or malposition of the tube. Tracheostomy is 
commonly applied and is a relatively safe invasive procedure in ICU. We report a 
case of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), secondary to tracheostomy, initially
manifested with persistent air leak under mechanical ventilation in ICU.
Consequently, TEF should be considered in patients with unexplained upper airway 
leaks.

PMID: 23862267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2014 Feb;24(1):14-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1350060. Epub 2013
Jul 12.

Thoracoscopic procedures in pediatric surgery: what is the evidence?

Dingemann C(1), Ure B(1), Dingemann J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Pediatric Surgery, Hannover Medical School and Bult Children's
Hospital, Hannover, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) has gained enormous
acceptance among pediatric surgeons. However, most studies on advantages of VATS 
do not reach a high level of evidence. According to a recent classification of
the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (CEBM), studies can be classified
into Levels 1 to 5 in order of descending quality. We aimed to identify
comparative studies investigating VATS versus open procedures in pediatric
surgery and to classify publications according to the CEBM criteria.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Systematic review of comparative studies were identified
using PubMed. Only studies published in English, comparing pediatric VATS with
the corresponding open operation were included. End points were advantages and
disadvantages of VATS as compared with the open procedure. Levels of evidence
were determined using the recent CEBM criteria.
RESULTS: A total of 3 meta-analysis (MA) and 18 retrospective comparative studies
(RCS) investigating 5 different VATS procedures (repair of congenital
diaphragmatic hernia [CDH], repair of esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA/TEF), lung resection, treatment of pneumothorax, and resection of
neuroblastoma) were included in this study. No studies of CEBM Level 1 or Level 2
were identified. All studies were classified as CEBM Level 3. The advantages of
VATS were less postoperative pain (CDH repair, EA/TEF repair, and pneumothorax
repair), shorter hospital stay (CDH repair, EA/TEF repair, lung resection, and
pneumothorax), shorter time of ventilation and lower Pco 2 (CDH repair), shorter 
duration of chest drain (lung resection), and less blood loss (resection of
neuroblastoma). However, disadvantages such as higher recurrence rates (CDH
repair), higher Pco 2 (EA/TEF repair), and longer operative times (CDH and EA/TEF
repair) were also identified.
CONCLUSION: Only RCS on pediatric VATS are available. Therefore, the best
available evidence is Level 3. Randomized controlled trials comparing VATS and
the corresponding open procedure are mandatory to obtain the highest possible
evidence.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23852720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 Jul 8;4:82. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00082.
eCollection 2013.

Profiling of circadian genes expressed in the uterus endometrial stromal cells of
pregnant rats as revealed by DNA microarray coupled with RNA interference.

Tasaki H(1), Zhao L, Isayama K, Chen H, Nobuhiko Yamauchi, Yasufumi Shigeyoshi,
Hashimoto S, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kyushu University , Fukuoka , Japan.

The peripheral circadian oscillator plays an essential role in synchronizing
local physiology to operate in a circadian manner via regulation of the
expression of clock-controlled genes. The present study aimed to evaluate the
circadian rhythms of clock genes and clock-controlled genes expressed in the rat 
uterus endometrial stromal cells (UESCs) during the stage of implantation by a
DNA microarray. Of 12,252 genes showing significantly expression, 7,235 genes
displayed significant alterations. As revealed by the biological pathway analysis
using the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery online
annotation software, genes were involved in cell cycle, glutathione metabolism,
MAPK signaling pathway, fatty acid metabolism, ubiquitin mediated proteolysis,
focal adhesion, and PPAR signaling pathway. The clustering of clock genes were
mainly divided into four groups: the first group was Rora, Timeless, Npas2,
Bmal1, Id2, and Cry2; the second group Per1, Per2, Per3, Dec1, Tef, and Dbp; the 
third group Bmal2, Cry1, E4bp4, Rorß, and Clock; the fourth group Rev-erba.
Eleven implantation-related genes and 24 placenta formation-related genes
displayed significant alterations, suggesting that these genes involved in
implantation and placenta formation are controlled under circadian clock. Some
candidates as clock-controlled genes were evaluated by using RNA interference to 
Bmal1 mRNA. Down-regulation of Igf1 gene expression was observed by Bmal1
silencing, whereas the expression of Inhßa was significantly increased. During
active oscillation of circadian clock, the apoptosis-related genes Fas and
Caspase3 remained no significant changes, but they were significantly increased
by knockdown of Bmal1 mRNA. These results indicate that clock-controlled genes
are up- or down-regulated in rat UESCs during the stage of decidualization. DNA
microarray analysis coupled with RNA interference will be helpful to understand
the physiological roles of some oscillating genes in blastocyst implantation and 
placenta formation.

PMCID: PMC3703733
PMID: 23847593  [PubMed]


298. Front Physiol. 2013 Jul 1;4:155. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00155. eCollection 2013.

A standardized approach to study human variability in isometric thermogenesis
during low-intensity physical activity.

Sarafian D(1), Miles-Chan JL, Yepuri G, Montani JP, Schutz Y, Dulloo AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Physiology, University of Fribourg Fribourg,
Switzerland.

Limitations of current methods: The assessment of human variability in various
compartments of daily energy expenditure (EE) under standardized conditions is
well defined at rest [as basal metabolic rate (BMR) and thermic effect of feeding
(TEF)], and currently under validation for assessing the energy cost of
low-intensity dynamic work. However, because physical activities of daily life
consist of a combination of both dynamic and isometric work, there is also a need
to develop standardized tests for assessing human variability in the energy cost 
of low-intensity isometric work.EXPERIMENTAL OBJECTIVES: Development of an
approach to study human variability in isometric thermogenesis by incorporating a
protocol of intermittent leg press exercise of varying low-intensity isometric
loads with measurements of EE by indirect calorimetry.
RESULTS: EE was measured in the seated position with the subject at rest or while
intermittently pressing both legs against a press-platform at 5 low-intensity
isometric loads (+5, +10, +15, +20, and +25 kg force), each consisting of a
succession of 8 cycles of press (30 s) and rest (30 s). EE, integrated over each 
8-min period of the intermittent leg press exercise, was found to increase
linearly across the 5 isometric loads with a correlation coefficient (r) > 0.9
for each individual. The slope of this EE-Load relationship, which provides the
energy cost of this standardized isometric exercise expressed per kg force
applied intermittently (30 s in every min), was found to show good repeatability 
when assessed in subjects who repeated the same experimental protocol on 3
separate days: its low intra-individual coefficient of variation (CV) of ~ 10%
contrasted with its much higher inter-individual CV of 35%; the latter being
mass-independent but partly explained by height.
CONCLUSION: This standardized approach to study isometric thermogenesis opens up 
a new avenue for research in EE phenotyping and metabolic predisposition to
obesity.

PMCID: PMC3696839
PMID: 23847539  [PubMed]


299. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Jun;48(6):E13-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.04.018.

Esophageal atresia with proximal tracheoesophageal fistula: a missed diagnosis.

Parolini F(1), Morandi A, Macchini F, Canazza L, Torricelli M, Zanini A, Leva E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale,
Maggiore Policlinico, Padiglione Alfieri (Chirurgia Pediatrica), Via Commenda, 10
20122 Milano, Italy. parfil@hotmail.it

AIM OF THE STUDY: This retrospective study was performed to compare the relative 
incidence of esophageal atresia (EA) with proximal tracheoesophageal fistula
(PTEF) at our institution with those reported in literature and to test the
hypothesis that our higher relative incidence is caused by the routine use of
tracheoscopy.
METHODS: A total of 204 children with EA were managed at our institution from
1981 to 2012. The type of EA and the diagnostic assessment were noted, and the
relative incidence of PTEF was calculated. For patients managed from 1981 to 2003
(Group 1), the PTEF was diagnosed by contrast esophagogram or during surgical
repair. For those born after 2004 (Group 2), the final diagnosis was made by
routine rigid tracheoscopy performed preoperatively. The relative incidence of
PTEF was compared between these two groups and with those reported in 15 selected
published large series, encompassing 4197 patients with EA.
MAIN RESULTS: Of 204 patients with EA, 10 had PTEF, with a relative incidence of 
4.9%, statistically higher than those reported in reference group (1.14%,
P<0.001). The routine employ of tracheoscopy involved a higher relative incidence
of PTEF (Group 2=11.11%, Group 1=3.14%, P=0.038). The age of diagnosis of PTEF
was 2.8 days for children of Group 2 and 4.2 days for Group 1 (P=0.038).
CONCLUSION: The presence of the proximal TEF should be always ruled out before
surgery. Routine employ of rigid tracheoscopy avoids delay of the diagnosis,
improves diagnostic accuracy, and involves a higher relative incidence of
proximal fistul. This procedure should be recommended in children undergoing EA
repair.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23845651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Jun;48(6):1232-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.03.015.

Collaboration in simulation: the development and initial validation of a novel
thoracoscopic neonatal simulator.

Barsness KA(1), Rooney DM, Davis LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Ann and Robert H Lurie Children's Hospital of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. kbarsness@luriechildrens.org

PURPOSE: We sought to create and validate a high fidelity, anatomically correct
real tissue simulation model for thoracoscopic esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) repair.
METHODS: A scale reproduction of a neonatal rib cage was created. Surgically
modified (EA/TEF) fetal bovine tissue completed the simulator. Nine pediatric
surgery fellows and two attending pediatric surgeons (n=11) performed the
simulated thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair. Participants completed a self-report
rating scale, ranging from 1 (Don't know) to 5 (Highly realistic). Construct
validity relevant to test content was evaluated by examining the ratings using
the many-Facet Rasch model.
RESULTS: Analyses indicated no differences when comparing faculty (Observed
Average (OA)=4.5/5.0) to fellow (OA=3.3) ratings, p=.71. In descending order,
observed averages of the domains were 4.7 (Relevance), 4.5 (Physical attributes),
4.5 (Realism of materials), 4.4 (Ability to perform task), and 4.2 (Value). The
observed Global opinion rating indicated the simulator can be considered for
teaching thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair but could be improved slightly.
CONCLUSIONS: Fellow and faculty ratings indicated the simulator was valuable as a
learning tool with minor modifications. Comments were consistent with high
physical attribute ratings.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23845612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Ital J Pediatr. 2013 Jul 10;39:45. doi: 10.1186/1824-7288-39-45.

Esophageal atresia in newborns: a wide spectrum from the isolated forms to a full
VACTERL phenotype?

La Placa S(1), Giuffrè M, Gangemi A, Di Noto S, Matina F, Nociforo F, Antona V,
Di Pace MR, Piccione M, Corsello G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sciences for Health Promotion and Mother and Child Care,
Università di Palermo, Via Alfonso Giordano 3, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
simonalaplaca@libero.it

BACKGROUND: VATER association was first described in 1972 by Quan and Smith as an
acronym which identifies a non-random co-occurrence of Vertebral anomalies, Anal 
atresia, Tracheoesophageal fistula and/or Esophageal atresia, Radial dysplasia.
It is even possible to find out Cardiovascular, Renal and Limb anomalies and the 
acronym VACTERL was adopted, also, embodying Vascular, as single umbilical
artery, and external genitalia anomalies.
METHODS: Data on patients with esophageal atresia (EA) with or without
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) admitted in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(NICU) between January 2003 and January 2013 were evaluated for the contingent
occurrence of typical VACTERL anomalies (VACTERL-type) and non tipical VACTERL
anomalies (non-VACTERL-type). The inclusion criterion was the presence of EA with
or without TEF plus two or more of the following additional malformations:
vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiovascular defects, renal anomalies and
lower limb deformities, like radial dysplasia.
RESULTS: Among 52 patients with EA/TEF, 20 (38,4%) had isolated EA and 7 (21,8%) 
had a recognized etiology such a syndrome and therefore were excluded. Among 32
infants with EA and associated malformations, 15 (46,8%) had VACTERL association.
The most common anomalies were congenital heart defects (73,3%), followed by
vertebral anomalies (66,6%). Many patients also had additional non-VACTERL-type
defects. Single umbilical artery was the most common one followed by nervous
system abnormalities and anomalies of toes. Between the groups of infants with
VACTERL type and non-VACTERL-type anomalies, there are several overlapping data
regarding both the tipically described spectrum and the most frequently reported 
non-VACTERL-type malformations. Thus, it is possible to differentiate infants
with a full phenotype (VACTERL full phenotype) and patients that do not meet all 
the criteria mentioned above, but with some homologies with the first group
(VACTERL partial phenotype).
CONCLUSION: The high frequency of non-VACTERL-type anomalies encountered in full 
and partial phenotype patients would suggest the need for an extension of the
clinical criteria for the diagnosis of VACTERL association and also for pre- and 
post-operative management and follow-up in the short and long term.

PMCID: PMC3726359
PMID: 23842449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Sep;98(9):3776-84. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1087. Epub 
2013 Jul 3.

Enhanced thermic effect of food after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery.

Wilms B(1), Ernst B, Schmid SM, Thurnheer M, Schultes B.

Author information: 
(1)Obesity Center, Cantonal Hospital 9016 St. Gallen, 9016 St. Gallen,
Switzerland.

CONTEXT: The mechanisms of weight loss after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB)
surgery are incompletely understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to investigate changes in metabolic processing of
ingested food that may contribute to the weight-reducing effect of RYGB surgery.
DESIGN AND SETTING: This was a cross-sectional case-control study at the
Interdisciplinary Obesity Center, Cantonal Hospital St. Gallen, St. Gallen,
Switzerland.
PATIENTS: Ten formerly obese women (mean ± SEM body mass index [BMI] = 26.6 ± 0.9
kg/m(2)) who had undergone RYGB surgery 41.9 ± 9.7 months before, 8 severely
obese women (BMI = 40.8 ± 2.0 kg/m(2)), and 10 lean women (BMI = 20.9 ± 0.6
kg/m(2)).
INTERVENTION: Intervention was a standardized liquid meal test.
MAIN OUTCOME: The thermic effect of food (TEF), respiratory quotient, and
circulating levels of glucose, insulin, and C-peptide were assessed before and
repeatedly during the first 90 minutes after the ingestion of a standardized
liquid mixed meal containing 39.2 g carbohydrates, 15.4 g protein, and 2.8 g fat.
RESULTS: TEF area under curve (0-90 minutes) was significantly greater in RYGB
patients than in severely obese and lean women (both P < .01). After ingestion of
the mixed meal, the respiratory quotient increased to significantly greater
values in the RYGB patients than in the severely obese and lean group (P < .001
for ANOVA time × group interaction). Also, the postprandial rise in circulating
glucose, insulin, and C-peptide levels was remarkably higher in the RYGB patients
than in the other 2 groups (all P < .001 for ANOVA time × group interaction).
CONCLUSION: Data demonstrate an enhanced TEF after RYGB surgery. Although this
observation likely contributes to the weight-reducing effects of the surgery,
data also point to an altered metabolic processing of food in RYGB patients
characterized by an enhanced glucose absorption and postprandial carbohydrate
oxidation.

PMID: 23824425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Plant Physiol Biochem. 2013 Sep;70:304-10. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2013.05.038.
Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Validation of reference genes for quantitative real-time PCR during Chinese
wolfberry fruit development.

Wang L(1), Wang Y, Zhou P.

Author information: 
(1)Ningxia University, 750021 Yinchuan, PR China. lijuanwang279@hotmail.com

Lycium barbarum L., a woody bush that grows in Eurasia and North Africa, is an
ornamental and medicinal plant. Its fruits have been used for centuries in China 
as a traditional herbal medicine and as a valuable nourishing tonic. There has
been no report describing the selection of reference genes for stringent
normalization for quantitative PCR (qPCR) in L. barbarum. The present study
identified reliable reference genes for normalization of qPCR data in L. barbarum
during fruit development from among eight candidate genes (GAPDH, TEF G, EF 1a,
UBQ, TUB a, SAMS, EF2 and Hsp80) using the geNorm and NormFinder statistical
algorithms. The results showed that the best-ranked references genes differed
across the samples. A combination of GAPDH and EF1a would be appropriate as a
reference panel for normalizing gene expression data across fruit developmental
stages. A combination of EF 1a and SAMS would be appropriate as a reference panel
for normalizing gene expression data at the stage A tested, whereas the
combination of TUB a, and TEF G was the most suitable for stage B. EF2 and Hsp80 
exhibited the most stable expression under stage C and stage D. NormFinder
ranking of reference gene candidates was slightly different from that determined 
by geNorm. These results provide guidelines for the selection of reference genes 
under different development stages and also represent a foundation for more
accurate and widespread use of qRT-PCR in L. barbarum gene analysis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23811043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Front Physiol. 2013 Jun 19;4:146. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00146. eCollection
2013.

Partitioning of heat production in growing pigs as a tool to improve the
determination of efficiency of energy utilization.

Labussière E(1), Dubois S, van Milgen J, Noblet J.

Author information: 
(1)INRA - UMR Pegase Saint-Gilles, France ; Agrocampus Ouest - UMR Pegase Rennes,
France.

In growing pigs, the feed cost accounts for more than 60% of total production
costs. The determination of efficiency of energy utilization through calorimetry 
measurements is of importance to sustain suitable feeding practice. The objective
of this paper is to describe a methodology to correct daily heat production (HP) 
obtained from measurements in respiration chamber for the difference in energy
expenditure related to physical activity between animals. The calculation is
based on a preliminary published approach for partitioning HP between HP due to
physical activity (AHP), thermic effect of feeding (TEF) and basal metabolic rate
(fasting HP; FHP). Measurements with male growing pigs [mean body weight (BW):
115 kg] which were surgically castrated (SC), castrated through immunization
against GnRH (IC), or kept as entire male (EM) were used as an example. Animals
were fed the same diet ad-libitum and were housed individually in two 12-m(3)
open-circuit respiration chambers during 6 days when fed ad-libitum and one
supplementary day when fasted. Physical activity was recorded through
interruption of an infrared beam to detect standing and lying positions and with 
force transducers that recorded the mechanical force the animal exerted on the
floor of the cage. Corrected AHP (AHPc), TEF (TEFc), and HP (HPc) were calculated
to standardize the level of AHP between animals, assuming that the ratio between 
AHPc and ME intake should be constant. Inefficiency of energy utilization (sum of
AHPc and TEFc) was lower than the inefficiency estimated from the slope of the
classical relationship between HPc and ME intake but was associated with higher
requirements for maintenance. Results indicate that EM pigs had higher FHP but
lower TEFc than IC and SC pigs. These results agree with the higher contents in
viscera of EM pigs that stimulate their basal metabolic rate and with the reduced
utilization of dietary protein to provide energy for maintenance energy
requirements and fat deposition (FD).

PMCID: PMC3685799
PMID: 23801965  [PubMed]


305. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2013 Apr;34(4):1252-7.

[Characteristics of PAHs in the atmosphere in winter and summer in the urban and 
suburban of Fuzhou].

[Article in Chinese]

Yi ZG(1), Huang XR, Bi JQ, Guo PP, Zheng LL.

Author information: 
(1)College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry
University, Fuzhou 350002, China. zgyi@fjau.edu.cn

Air samples from four sampling sites in urban and suburban in Fuzhou were
collected by Hi-vol air samplers in winter and summer in 2010, and concentrations
of PAHs were analyzed by GC-MSD. The total (particle and gas phase) PAHs
concentrations in ambient air were in the range of 115.45-187.76 ng x m(-3) in
winter and 45.55-59.20 ng x m(-3) in summer. PAHs in the gas phase were
significantly higher than those in the particle phase, and PAHs in winter were
higher than those in summer. No significantly difference was found between urban 
and suburban, with little higher PAHs in urban in winter and lower PAHs in
summer. The ratios of PAHs in the gas phase to particle phase in summer were
significantly higher than those in winter. The 2-4 rings PAHs were the dominant
components in the gas phase while PAHs in the particle phase were dominated by
4-6 rings. The 3 rings PAHs were the dominant components in the gas phase in
winter while 3 and 4 rings in summer. No significantly seasonal trends of PAHs
components were found in the particle phase. The toxic equivalence factor (TEF)
assessment showed that the pollution of PAHs in Fuzhou city was at a low level.
Source analysis indicated that PAHs mainly came from combustion and diesel fuel
was the predominant fuel in Fuzhou.

PMID: 23798099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Toxicol Lett. 2013 Aug 14;221(2):83-90. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.06.216. Epub
2013 Jun 21.

The impact of prolonged cadmium exposure and co-exposure with polychlorinated
biphenyls on thyroid function in rats.

Buha A(1), Antonijevic B(2), Bulat Z(2), Jacevic V(3), Milovanovic V(4), Matovic 
V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology "Akademik Danilo Soldatovic", University of Belgrade,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450, Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address:
aleksandra@pharmacy.bg.ac.rs. (2)Department of Toxicology "Akademik Danilo
Soldatovic", University of Belgrade, Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450,
Belgrade, Serbia. (3)Poison Control Center, Military Medical Academy, Crnotravska
17, Belgrade, Serbia. (4)Chemicals Department, Ministry of Energy, Development
and Environmental Protection of Republic of Serbia, Ruze Jovanovic 27a, Belgrade,
Serbia.

Endocrine-disrupting chemicals currently represent one of the major concerns and 
this study was aimed to investigate the effects of different doses of cadmium,
widespread toxic metal, on the levels of thyroid hormones and to calculate
Benchmark doses for these effects. Furthermore, the effects of co-exposure to
cadmium and polychlorinated biphenyls on thyroid function were investigated. Six 
orally-treated groups of rats were receiving 0.3, 0.6, 1.25, 2.5, 5 and
10mgCd/kgb.w./day, five groups were orally treated with 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and
8mgPCBs/kgb.w./day, while nine groups of rats were orally-treated with different 
dose combinations of Cd and PCBs (0.6, 1.25 and 2.5mgCd/kgb.w. and 2, 4 and
8mgPCBs/kgb.w./day), during 28 days. Thyroid hormones were adversely affected by 
cadmium, with most prominent effect observed on triiodothyroxine levels
indicating Cd interference with thyroid function at extrathyroidal level.
Calculated Benchmark doses for Cd effects on thyroid hormones indicate
triiodothyroxine as the most sensitive one that can be used as a basis for risk
assessment. This study also implicates possible synergistic effects of Cd and
PCBs on thyroid function as a consequence of their interference at different
levels of thyroid homeostasis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Water Sci Technol. 2013;67(12):2699-705. doi: 10.2166/wst.2013.172.

Variation in PAH patterns in road runoff.

Aryal R(1), Furumai H, Nakajima F, Beecham S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Natural and Built Environment, University of South Australia, Mawson
Lakes 5095, Australia. Rupak.Aryal@unisa.edu.au

Twelve particle-bound polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were measured in
the first flush regime of road runoff during nine events in Winterthur in
Switzerland. The total PAH contents ranged from 17 to 62 µg/g. The PAH patterns
measured at different time intervals during the first flush periods were very
similar within each event irrespective of variation in suspended solids (SS)
concentration within the first flush regime. However, the PAH patterns were
different from event to event. This indicates that the environment plays an
important role in PAH accumulation in SS. A toxicity identification evaluation
approach using a toxicity equivalency factor (TEF) was applied to compare
toxicities in the different events. The TEFs were found to be between 8 and 33 µg
TEQ g(-1) (TEQ: toxic equivalent concentration). In some cases, two events having
similar total PAH contents showed two fold toxicity differences.

PMID: 23787306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2013 Dec;64(8):915-20. doi: 10.3109/09637486.2013.806448.
Epub 2013 Jun 19.

Antioxidant capacity, total phenolics and nutritional content in selected
ethiopian staple food ingredients.

Forsido SF(1), Rupasinghe HP, Astatkie T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Post-Harvest Management, College of Agriculture and Veterinary
Medicine, Jimma University , P.O. Box 307, Jimma , Ethiopia and.

The total antioxidant capacity, total phenolics content (TPC) and nutritional
content of five types of enset (Enset ventricosum) flour in comparison with four 
staples (teff [Eragrostis tef], wheat, corn and tapioca) were evaluated. Teff,
corn and "amicho" (corm of enset) had the highest ferric reducing antioxidant
power (FRAP). The FRAP and TPC of teff (1.8<U+2009>mmol Trolox equivalence/100<U+2009>g dry
matter (DM) and 123.6<U+2009>mg gallic acid equivalent/100<U+2009>g DM, respectively) were over
4-fold larger than the lowest obtained from "bulla" (dehydrated juice of
pseudostem of enset). Corn had the lowest IC(50) value of
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical scavenging (10.27<U+2009>mg DM mL(-1)). Teff had
the highest crude fat content (3.71%) and some mineral profile (P, Mg, Mn and
Cu). Enset products had higher fiber, Ca, K, Mg and Mn content as compared to
wheat and corn. Ethiopian staple teff has a potential for developing value-added 
food products with nutritional and health benefits.

PMID: 23777527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2013 Jul;23(7):635-8. doi: 10.1089/lap.2013.0210.
Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Current patterns of practice and technique in the repair of esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistua: an IPEG survey.

Lal D(1), Miyano G, Juang D, Sharp NE, St Peter SD.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

BACKGROUND: Optimal surgical treatment of infants with esophageal atresia (EA)
and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) remains controversial. In order to better
understand variability in management, we surveyed the International Pediatric
Endosurgery Group (IPEG) membership.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: An online-based survey, conducted in 2012, was sent to all
IPEG members.
RESULTS: The survey was completed by 170 surgeons from 31 countries. A majority
of respondents practiced in academic/university settings (86%) and performed one 
to three EA/TEF repairs annually (67%). Those practicing for over 15 years made
up 39% of the study group, followed by those practicing 6-10 years (24%), 0-5
years (22%), and 11-15 years (15%). Utilization of a thoracoscopic approach was
reported by half of the respondents with a frequency of 1-3 cases (76%), 4-6
cases (17%), and greater than 7 cases (7%) per year. Low birth weight, congenital
heart disease, long gap length, and compromised physiologic status were
identified as the most common exclusion criteria for thoracoscopic repair. The
thoracoscopic repair was almost uniformly performed via an intrapleural approach 
(96%), in contrast with the open repair that was done extrapleurally in 89%.
Preoperative bronchoscopy was routinely performed by 60%. Size 4-0 to 5-0
absorbable suture predominated for EA repair. Postoperative chest tube/drain and 
transanastomotic tube placement were used by 83%. A normal esophagram was
required by 85% to initiate oral feeding. Sixty-six percent initiated
transanastomotic feeds prior to obtaining an esophagram. Postoperative antibiotic
use was common (76%) and varied from less than 1 to greater than 14 days. Acid
suppression medication was used by 76% with duration ranging from 7 days to
lifelong. For long gap EA, spiral myotomies were rarely performed (10%), and
gastric transposition was the favored method for esophageal replacement (66%).
CONCLUSIONS: Considerable variability existed among the IPEG membership in
treatment of patients with EA/TEF. The identification of variance is the first
step in creating future studies to identify best practices.

PMID: 23758564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Gastric Cancer. 2014 Apr;17(2):341-7. doi: 10.1007/s10120-013-0266-6. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Biweekly docetaxel, fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin (TEF) as first-line
treatment for advanced gastric cancer and adenocarcinoma of the gastroesophageal 
junction: safety and efficacy in a multicenter cohort.

Pernot S(1), Mitry E, Samalin E, Dahan L, Dalban C, Ychou M, Seitz JF, Turki H,
Mazard T, Zaanan A, Lepère C, Vaillant JN, Landi B, Rougier P, Taieb J.

Author information: 
(1)HEGP, APHP, Paris Sorbonne Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France,
simon.pernot@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Docetaxel-cisplatin-5-FU chemotherapy is superior to 5-FU-cisplatin
in terms of response rate and survival in advanced gastric cancer (AGC), but is
more toxic. Oxaliplatin is better tolerated than cisplatin, which it can
effectively replace in this setting. We hypothesize that incorporating docetaxel 
into a simplified FOLFOX regimen should be a tolerable and effective option in
first-line treatment of AGC.
METHODS: Data were collected at six French centers from patients with metastatic 
or local AGC who received docetaxel, fluorouracil, leucovorin, or oxaliplatin
(TEF) as first-line treatment. TEF was administered as follows: docetaxel (50
mg/m(2)), oxaliplatin (85 mg/m(2)), and leucovorin (40 mg/m(2)) on day 1, and
5-FU continuous infusion for 48 h (2400 mg/m(2)) every 2 weeks.
RESULTS: Forty-one patients were enrolled. Performance status was grade 0 and 1
in respectively 27 and 58 % of patients; 17 patients had adenocarcinoma of the
gastroesophageal junction; 37 patients had metastatic disease, 22 had a poorly
differentiated or diffuse type. Objective response rate was 66 %, with a complete
response in two patients (5 %). Median progression-free survival and overall
survival were respectively 6.3 and 12.1 months. Tolerability was acceptable with 
no treatment-related deaths. The most frequent grade 3-4 toxicities were
neutropenia (30 %) and neuropathy (12.5 %). Curative intent surgery after
response to TEF was performed in seven patients (17 %).
CONCLUSION: TEF is an effective first-line treatment with an acceptable toxicity 
profile for patients with AGC. It may allow curative resection in initially
unresectable patients. TEF should now be evaluated in prospective randomized
trials.

PMID: 23739764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Clin Microbiol. 2013 Aug;51(8):2571-81. doi: 10.1128/JCM.00308-13. Epub 2013
May 29.

Echinocandin and triazole antifungal susceptibility profiles for clinical
opportunistic yeast and mold isolates collected from 2010 to 2011: application of
new CLSI clinical breakpoints and epidemiological cutoff values for
characterization of geographic and temporal trends of antifungal resistance.

Pfaller MA(1), Messer SA, Woosley LN, Jones RN, Castanheira M.

Author information: 
(1)JMI Laboratories, North Liberty, Iowa, USA. mike-pfaller@jmilabs.com

The SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program monitors global susceptibility and 
resistance rates of newer and established antifungal agents. We report the
echinocandin and triazole antifungal susceptibility patterns for 3,418
contemporary clinical isolates of yeasts and molds. The isolates were obtained
from 98 laboratories in 34 countries during 2010 and 2011. Yeasts not
presumptively identified by CHROMagar, the trehalose test, or growth at 42°C and 
all molds were sequence identified using internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and
28S (yeasts) or ITS, translation elongation factor (TEF), and 28S (molds) genes. 
Susceptibility testing was performed against 7 antifungals (anidulafungin,
caspofungin, micafungin, fluconazole, itraconazole, posaconazole, and
voriconazole) using CLSI methods. Rates of resistance to all agents were
determined using the new CLSI clinical breakpoints and epidemiological cutoff
value criteria, as appropriate. Sequencing of fks hot spots was performed for
echinocandin non-wild-type (WT) strains. Isolates included 3,107 from 21 Candida 
spp., 146 from 9 Aspergillus spp., 84 from Cryptococcus neoformans, 40 from 23
other mold species, and 41 from 9 other yeast species. Among Candida spp.,
resistance to the echinocandins was low (0.0 to 1.7%). Candida albicans and
Candida glabrata that were resistant to anidulafungin, caspofungin, or micafungin
were shown to have fks mutations. Resistance to fluconazole was low among the
isolates of C. albicans (0.4%), Candida tropicalis (1.3%), and Candida
parapsilosis (2.1%); however, 8.8% of C. glabrata isolates were resistant to
fluconazole. Among echinocandin-resistant C. glabrata isolates from 2011, 38%
were fluconazole resistant. Voriconazole was active against all Candida spp.
except C. glabrata (10.5% non-WT), whereas posaconazole showed decreased activity
against C. albicans (4.4%) and Candida krusei (15.2% non-WT). All agents except
for the echinocandins were active against C. neoformans, and the triazoles were
active against other yeasts (MIC90, 2 µg/ml). The echinocandins and triazoles
were active against Aspergillus spp. (MIC90/minimum effective concentration
[MEC90] range, 0.015 to 2 µg/ml), but the echinocandins were not active against
other molds (MEC90 range, 4 to >16 µg/ml). Overall, echinocandin and triazole
resistance rates were low; however, the fluconazole and echinocandin coresistance
among C. glabrata strains warrants continued close surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3719648
PMID: 23720791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Jun;23(3):175-81. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1347911. Epub 2013
May 29.

Gastroesophageal reflux after repair of esophageal atresia.

Tovar JA(1), Fragoso AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Universidad
Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) is extremely frequent in
patients with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). It is
often refractory to antireflux medication and requires antireflux surgery. The
reasons for this close association, the dangers of persistent GER, and the
indications, technical aspects, and pitfalls of antireflux operations in these
patients are examined in the present study.
METHODS: The literature and summary of a large institutional experience of the
authors were reviewed.
RESULTS: The esophagus is permanently defective in EA/TEF patients even when
successful repair, sometimes under tension, has been achieved. Extrinsic and
intrinsic innervations are abnormal and consequently, motor function and
sphincters are defective. The result is that close to one half of these patients 
overall suffer chronic GER that leads often to Barrett esophagus. Fundoplication 
becomes necessary in more than 40% of them, particularly in cases of with
refractory anastomotic stenoses and in those with pure and long-gap EA/TEF. In
the long run, the risks of esophageal carcinoma are 50-fold higher in EA/TEF
survivors than in the population at random. On the contrary, fundoplication is
anatomically difficult to perform and it fails in one-fifth of these children due
to the persistence of the conditions that facilitate GER in them.
CONCLUSIONS: GER is extremely frequent in patients treated for EA/TEF because of 
serious structural and functional deficiencies. It is refractory to medical
treatment and often requires antireflux surgery. However, the high rates of wrap 
failure invite close follow-up in all cases and reoperation or other measures
whenever necessary.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23720211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Jun;23(3):198-203. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1347914. Epub
2013 May 29.

Minimally invasive repair of esophageal atresia: an update.

Dingemann C(1), Ure BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hannover Medical School and Bult Children's
Hospital, Hannover, Germany.

We reviewed the available literature on the role of minimally invasive techniques
for esophageal atresia (EA)/tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair. No
prospective studies have been published to date. According to the recent
classification of the Oxford Centre for Evidence based Medicine, the best
available evidence for studies comparing the minimally invasive versus open
approach for EA/TEF repair is Level 3 (a, b). Similar postoperative results of
the thoracoscopic versus conventional repair are confirmed in four retrospective 
comparative studies and one meta-analysis. However, the available data on
complications and postoperative esophageal function are derived from series
operated by experienced surgeons in specialized centers. More data on the impact 
of the learning curve are mandatory before a recommendation on a widespread use
can be made. Patient selection and a low threshold for conversion may further
improve results.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23720207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 Jun 18;47(12):6510-7. doi: 10.1021/es400760h. Epub 2013
May 28.

PCDD/F formation in an iron/potassium-catalyzed diesel particle filter.

Heeb NV(1), Zennegg M, Haag R, Wichser A, Schmid P, Seiler C, Ulrich A, Honegger 
P, Zeyer K, Emmenegger L, Bonsack P, Zimmerli Y, Czerwinski J, Kasper M, Mayer A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Analytical Chemistry, Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for
Materials Testing and Research, Überlandstrasse 129, CH-8600 Dübendorf,
Switzerland.

Catalytic diesel particle filters (DPFs) have evolved to a powerful environmental
technology. Several metal-based, fuel soluble catalysts, so-called fuel-borne
catalysts (FBCs), were developed to catalyze soot combustion and support filter
regeneration. Mainly iron- and cerium-based FBCs have been commercialized for
passenger cars and heavy-duty vehicle applications. We investigated a new
iron/potassium-based FBC used in combination with an uncoated silicon carbide
filter and report effects on emissions of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins/furans
(PCDD/Fs). The PCDD/F formation potential was assessed under best and worst case 
conditions, as required for filter approval under the VERT protocol. TEQ-weighted
PCDD/F emissions remained low when using the Fe/K catalyst (37/7.5 µg/g) with the
filter and commercial, low-sulfur fuel. The addition of chlorine (10 µg/g)
immediately led to an intense PCDD/F formation in the Fe/K-DPF. TEQ-based
emissions increased 51-fold from engine-out levels of 95 to 4800 pg I-TEQ/L after
the DPF. Emissions of 2,3,7,8-TCDD, the most toxic congener (TEF = 1.0),
increased 320-fold, those of 2,3,7,8-TCDF (TEF = 0.1) even 540-fold. Remarkable
pattern changes were noticed, indicating a preferential formation of
tetrachlorinated dibenzofurans. It has been shown that potassium acts as a
structural promoter inducing the formation of magnetite (Fe3O4) rather than
hematite (Fe2O3). This may alter the catalytic properties of iron. But the
chemical nature of this new catalyst is yet unknown, and we are far from an
established mechanism for this new pathway to PCDD/Fs. In conclusion, the
iron/potassium-catalyzed DPF has a high PCDD/F formation potential, similar to
the ones of copper-catalyzed filters, the latter are prohibited by Swiss
legislation.

PMID: 23713673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Talanta. 2013 Sep 15;113:99-105. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2013.03.086. Epub 2013
Apr 6.

Determination of PCDD/Fs, PBDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs in human milk from mothers
residing in the rural areas in Flanders, using the CALUX bioassay and GC-HRMS.

Croes K(1), Colles A, Koppen G, De Galan S, Vandermarken T, Govarts E, Bruckers
L, Nelen V, Schoeters G, Van Larebeke N, Denison MS, Mampaey M, Baeyens W.

Author information: 
(1)Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Department of Analytical and Environmental
Chemistry (ANCH), Pleinlaan 2, 1050 Brussels, Belgium. kim.croes@vub.ac.be

Since the CALUX (Chemically Activated LUciferase gene eXpression) bioassay is a
fast and inexpensive tool for the determination of dioxin-like compounds in a
large number of samples and requires only small sample volumes, the use of this
technique in human biomonitoring programs provides a good alternative to GC-HRMS.
In this study, a new CALUX method for the separate analysis of PCDD/Fs and
dioxin-like PCBs (dl-PCBs) in small amounts of human milk samples with the new
sensitive H1L7.5c1 cell line was used to analyze 84 human milk samples, collected
from mothers residing in the Flemish rural communities. The geometric mean
CALUX-Bioanalytical Equivalent (CALUX-BEQ) values, reported for the 84 mothers
from the study area were 10.4 (95% CI: 9.4-11.4) pg CALUX-BEQ per gram lipid or
0.41 (95% CI: 0.37-0.45) pg CALUX-BEQ per gram milk for the PCDD/Fs and 1.73
(1.57-1.91) pg CALUX-BEQ per gram lipid or 0.07 (95% CI: 0.06-0.08) pg CALUX-BEQ 
per gram milk for the dioxin-like PCBs. Multiple regression analysis showed
significant associations between PCDD/Fs and weight change after pregnancy,
smoking and consumption of local eggs. One pooled human milk sample was analyzed 
with both CALUX and GC-HRMS. The ratio of CALUX and GC-HRMS results for this
sample were respectively 1.60, 0.58 and 1.23 for the PCDD/Fs, the dl-PCBs and the
sum of both fractions, when using the 2005-TEF values. Additionally, also low
levels of certain brominated dioxins and furans were detected in the pooled
sample with GC-HRMS.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3690775
PMID: 23708629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. BMJ Case Rep. 2013 May 20;2013. pii: bcr2013009620. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2013-009620.

Oesophageal atresia associated with congenital oesophageal stenosis.

Escobar MA Jr(1), Pickens MK, Holland RM, Caty MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgical Services, Mary Bridge Children's Hospital &
Health Center, Tacoma, Washington, USA. mauricio.escobar@multicare.org

Congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) is associated with oesophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF). Tracheobronchial (cartilaginous) rests are
typically found within the area of stenosis. The authors present a case report of
EA-TEF associated with CES and present a modification of a novel technique to
facilitate the management of CES. The impact of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease
is discussed in this unique entity. Finally, the literature is reviewed for this 
unique entity.

PMCID: PMC3669858
PMID: 23696146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Agric Food Chem. 2013 Jun 12;61(23):5425-37. doi: 10.1021/jf400651p. Epub 2013 
May 31.

Fusarium damage in cereal grains from Western Canada. 1. Phylogenetic analysis of
moniliformin-producing fusarium species and their natural occurrence in
mycotoxin-contaminated wheat, oats, and rye.

Gräfenhan T(1), Patrick SK, Roscoe M, Trelka R, Gaba D, Chan JM, McKendry T,
Clear RM, Tittlemier SA.

Author information: 
(1)Grain Research Laboratory, Canadian Grain Commission, Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada. tom.graefenhan@grainscanada.gc.ca

Harvest samples of common wheat (Triticum aestivum), oats (Avena sativa), and rye
(Secale cereale) from producers in western Canada were analyzed for fungal
infection by toxigenic Fusarium species and contamination by trichothecenes and
moniliformin (MON). Fusarium graminearum and F. avenaceum were the two most
frequently isolated species from samples of rye and wheat collected in 2010. F.
poae and F. sporotrichioides were more commonly detected in randomly selected oat
seeds. Other toxigenic Fusarium species including F. acuminatum, F. culmorum, and
F. pseudograminearum as well as Phaeosphaeria nodorum (a.k.a. Septoria nodorum)
were recovered primarily from fusarium-damaged kernels of wheat. Pure cultures of
F. avenaceum, F. acuminatum, and other related species known to produce
moniliformin were isolated from incubated seeds based on micro- and
macromorphological criteria. The phylogenetic analysis inferred from partial DNA 
sequences of the acl1 and tef-1a genes revealed two major clades representing F. 
avenaceum and F. acuminatum, respectively. These clades comprised all Canadian
isolates of the two species and a number of reference cultures studied earlier
for their propensity to form moniliformin in vitro and in planta. However, some
reference cultures previously reported to produce significant amounts of
moniliformin formed minor phylogenetic lineages that represent rather distinct
but closely related species. Concomitantly, cereal samples were analyzed for the 
presence of deoxynivalenol and moniliformin. These two Fusarium toxins were
observed most frequently in common wheat, at concentrations up to 1.1 and 4.0
mg/kg, respectively. There was no apparent relationship between moniliformin
concentrations and detection of F. avenaceum and F. acuminatum in rye and oat
samples. Geographical analysis of the distribution of moniliformin and F.
avenaceum and F. acuminatum across the Canadian Prairies also did not indicate a 
strong relationship.

PMID: 23683177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Dis Esophagus. 2013 May-Jun;26(4):413-6. doi: 10.1111/dote.12061.

Long-term respiratory complications of congenital esophageal atresia with or
without tracheoesophageal fistula: an update.

Kovesi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8 L1.
kovesi@cheo.on.ca

Despite early surgical repair, congenital esophageal atresia with or without
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA ± TEF) has long-term effects on respiratory and
gastrointestinal function. This review updates summarizes research published
since 2003 on long-term respiratory complications in patients with a history of
EA ± TEF. Pulmonary hypoplasia appears to not be rare in patients with EA ± TEF. 
Tracheomalacia is common and is associated with respiratory symptoms in
childhood. Aspiration, associated with esophageal dysmotility and/or
gastroesophageal reflux, may lead to reduced pulmonary function and
bronchiectasis. Pulmonary function is generally normal, although lower than in
control patients, and restrictive defects tend to be commoner than obstructive
defects. Abnormal airway reactivity is common and, along with respiratory
symptoms, is associated with atopy. However, the inflammatory profile in EA ± TEF
patients based on bronchial biopsies and exhaled nitric oxide differs from
typical allergic asthma. Recent studies suggest that in older patients,
respiratory symptoms tend to be associated with atopy, but abnormal lung function
tends to be associated with gastroesophageal reflux and with chest wall
abnormalities. Early detection and management of aspiration may be important to
help prevent decrements in pulmonary function and serious long-term complications
in EA ± TEF patients.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the International Society for Diseases of the 
Esophagus.

PMID: 23679034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dis Esophagus. 2013 May-Jun;26(4):401-4. doi: 10.1111/dote.12063.

Anti-reflux surgery for patients with esophageal atresia.

Tovar JA(1), Fragoso AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, La Paz University Hospital, Autonomous
University of Madrid, 28046 Madrid, Spain. juan.tovar@salud.madrid.org

Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) is almost constant in esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). These patients resist medical treatment and
require antireflux surgery quite often. The present review examines why this
happens, the long-term consequences of GER and the main indications and results
of fundoplication in this particular group of patients. The esophagus of EA/TEF
patients is malformed and has abnormal extrinsic and intrinsic innervation and,
consequently, deficient sphincter function and dysmotility. These anomalies are
permanent. Fifty percent of patients overall have GER, and one-fifth have
Barrett's metaplasia. Close to 100%, GER of pure and long-gap cases require
fundoplication. In the long run, these patients have 50-fold higher risk of
carcinoma than the control population. GER in EA/TEF does not respond well to
dietary, antacid, or prokinetic medication. Surgery is necessary in protracted
anastomotic stenoses, in pure and long-gap cases, and when there is an associated
duodenal atresia. It should be indicated as well in other symptomatic cases when 
conservative treatment fails. However, confection of a suitable wrap is
anatomically difficult in this condition as shown by a failure rate of 30% that
is also explained by the persistence for life of the conditions facilitating GER.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the International Society for Diseases of the 
Esophagus.

PMID: 23679031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Dis Esophagus. 2013 May-Jun;26(4):380-1. doi: 10.1111/dote.12049.

Diagnosis and surgical management of recurrent tracheoesophageal fistulas.

Coran AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109-4211, USA. acoran@umich.edu

Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is difficult to diagnose and even more 
difficult to repair. The key to the diagnosis is an adequate contrast study and
bronchoscopy. The key to the repair is complete separation of the esophagus from 
the trachea, with the placement of viable tissue between the two suture lines. I 
have presented a personal experience with 38 consecutive repairs of recurrent
TEFs. The original series of 26 patients had three recurrences, all of which were
re-repaired successfully. My more recent experience with the last 12 patients,
who were far more complex, was also successful in ultimately repairing the
recurrent TEFs.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. and the International Society for Diseases of the 
Esophagus.

PMID: 23679027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 Jun 18;47(12):6656-63. doi: 10.1021/es401155g. Epub
2013 Jun 4.

Alternative in vitro approach for assessing AHR-mediated CYP1A induction by
dioxins in wild cormorant (Phalacrocorax carbo) population.

Thuruthippallil LM(1), Kubota A, Kim EY, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5,
Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.

Our line of papers revealed that the common (great) cormorant (Phalacrocorax
carbo) possesses two isoforms of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (ccAHR1 and
ccAHR2). This paper addresses in vitro tests of the ccAHR signaling pathways to
solve two questions: (1) whether there are functional differences in the two
ccAHR isoforms, and (2) whether a molecular perturbation, cytochrome P450 1A
(ccCYP1A) induction, in the population-level can be predicted from the in vitro
tests. The transactivation potencies mediated by ccAHR1 and ccAHR2 were measured 
in COS-7 cells treated with 15 selected dioxins and related compounds (DRCs),
where ccAHR1 or ccAHR2 expression plasmid and ccCYP1A5 promoter/enhancer-linked
luciferase reporter plasmid were transfected. For congeners that exhibited
dose-dependent luciferase activities, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
relative potencies (REPs) and induction equivalency factors (IEFs) were
estimated. ccAHR1-IEF profile was similar to WHO avian TCDD toxic equivalency
factor (TEF) profile except for dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls that showed
lower IEFs in ccAHR1-driven reporter assay. ccAHR2-IEF profile was different from
WHO TEFs and ccAHR1-IEFs. Notably, 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF was more potent than TCDD for 
ccAHR2-mediated response. Using ccAHR1- and ccAHR2-IEFs and hepatic DRC
concentrations in the Lake Biwa cormorant population, total TCDD induction
equivalents (IEQs) were calculated for each ccAHR-mediated response. Nonlinear
regression analyses provided significant sigmoidal relationships of ccAHR1- and
ccAHR2-derived IEQs with hepatic ccCYP1A5 mRNA levels, supporting the results of 
in vitro ccAHR-mediated TCDD dose-response curves. Collectively, our in vitro AHR
reporter assay potentially could be an alternative to molecular epidemiology of
the species of concern regarding CYP1A induction by AHR ligands.

PMID: 23676118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Environ Health Perspect. 2013 Jul;121(7):847-53. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1206336. Epub
2013 May 3.

Comparison of intake and systemic relative effect potencies of dioxin-like
compounds in female mice after a single oral dose.

van Ede KI(1), Andersson PL, Gaisch KP, van den Berg M, van Duursen MB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, the
Netherlands. k.i.vanede@uu.nl

BACKGROUND: Risk assessment for mixtures of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins
(PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) is performed using the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach. These TEF 
values are derived mainly from relative effect potencies (REPs) linking an
administered dose to an in vivo toxic or biological effect, resulting in "intake"
TEFs. At present, there is insufficient data available to conclude that intake
TEFs are also applicable for systemic concentrations (e.g., blood and tissues).
OBJECTIVE: We compared intake and systemic REPs of
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzodioxin (PeCDD), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran
(4-PeCDF), 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126),
2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-118), and 2,3,3',4,4',5-hexachlorobiphenyl
(PCB-156) in female C57BL/6 mice 3 days after a single oral dose.
METHODS: We calculated intake REPs and systemic REPs based on administered dose
and liver, adipose, or plasma concentrations relative to TCDD. Hepatic cytochrome
P450 1A1-associated ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity and gene
expression of Cyp1a1, 1a2 and 1b1 in the liver and peripheral blood lymphocytes
(PBLs) were used as biological end points.
RESULTS: We observed up to one order of magnitude difference between intake REPs 
and systemic REPs. Two different patterns were discerned. Compared with intake
REPs, systemic REPs based on plasma or adipose levels were higher for PeCDD,
4-PeCDF, and PCB-126 but lower for the mono-ortho PCBs 118 and 156.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on these mouse data, the comparison between intake REPs and
systemic REPs reveals significant congener-specific differences that warrants the
development of systemic TEFs to calculate toxic equivalents (TEQs) in blood and
body tissues.

PMCID: PMC3702004
PMID: 23674508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jul;98(7):2791-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1289. Epub
2013 May 10.

Extent and determinants of thermogenic responses to 24 hours of fasting, energy
balance, and five different overfeeding diets in humans.

Thearle MS(1), Pannacciulli N, Bonfiglio S, Pacak K, Krakoff J.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Phoenix, Arizona 85106, USA. thearlem@mail.nih.gov

CONTEXT: Individual variation in the ability to convert excess calories to heat
and the effects of dietary macronutrient composition are unclear.
OBJECTIVE: Stability and determinants of the energy expenditure (EE) response to 
overconsumption were assessed.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Twenty subjects (75% male) with normal glucose
regulation were evaluated during 24 hours each of energy balance, fasting, and 5 
different diets with 200% energy requirements in a clinical research unit.
INTERVENTIONS: Five 1-day overfeeding diets were given in random order: high
carbohydrate (75%) and low protein (3%); high carbohydrate and normal protein
(20%); high fat (46%) and low protein; high fat (60%) and normal protein; and
balanced (50% carbohydrates, 20% protein).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The 24-hour EE, sleeping EE, and thermic effect of food
(TEF) during each diet were measured with a metabolic chamber. Appetitive
hormones were measured before and after the diets.
RESULTS: The EE response to overfeeding exhibited good intraindividual
reproducibility. Similar increases above eucaloric feeding in 24-hour EE (mean
10.7 ± 5.7%, P < .001; range 2.9-18.8%) and sleeping EE (14.4 ± 11.3%, P < .001; 
range 1.0-45.1%) occurred when overfeeding diets containing 20% protein, despite 
differences in fat and carbohydrate content, but the EE response during
overfeeding diets containing 3% protein was attenuated. The percent body fat
negatively correlated with TEF during normal protein overfeeding (r = -0.53, P < 
.01). Fasting peptide YY negatively correlated with TEF (r = -0.56, P < .01) and 
the increase in sleeping EE (r = -0.54, P < .01) during overfeeding.
CONCLUSIONS: There is an intrinsic EE response to overfeeding that negatively
associates with adiposity, although it represents a small percentage of consumed 
calories.

PMCID: PMC3701281
PMID: 23666976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Environ Health Perspect. 2013 Aug;121(8):886-92. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1205739. Epub
2013 May 10.

Relative effect potency estimates of dioxin-like activity for dioxins, furans,
and dioxin-like PCBs in adults based on two thyroid outcomes.

Trnovec T(1), Jusko TA, ovcíková E, Lancz K, Chovancová J, Patayová H,
Palkovicová L, Drobná B, Langer P, Van den Berg M, Dedik L, Wimmerová S.

Author information: 
(1)Slovak Medical University, Bratislava, Slovakia. tomas.trnovec@szu.sk

BACKGROUND: Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) are an important component in the
risk assessment of dioxin-like human exposures. At present, this concept is based
mainly on in vivo animal experiments using oral dosage. Consequently, the current
human TEFs derived from mammalian experiments are applicable only for exposure
situations in which oral ingestion occurs. Nevertheless, these "intake" TEFs are 
commonly-but incorrectly-used by regulatory authorities to calculate "systemic"
toxic equivalents (TEQs) based on human blood and tissue concentrations, which
are used as biomarkers for either exposure or effect.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to determine relative effect potencies (REPs) for systemic 
human concentrations of dioxin-like mixture components using thyroid volume or
serum free thyroxine (FT4) concentration as the outcomes of interest.
METHODS: We used a benchmark concentration and a regression-based approach to
compare the strength of association between each dioxin-like compound and the
thyroid end points in 320 adults residing in an organochlorine-polluted area of
eastern Slovakia.
RESULTS: REPs calculated from thyroid volume and FT4 were similar. The regression
coefficient (ß)-derived REP data from thyroid volume and FT4 level were
correlated with the World Health Organization (WHO) TEF values (Spearman r =
0.69, p = 0.01 and r = 0.62, p = 0.03, respectively). The calculated REPs were
mostly within the minimum and maximum values for in vivo REPs derived by other
investigators.
CONCLUSIONS: Our REPs calculated from thyroid end points realistically reflect
human exposure scenarios because they are based on chronic, low-dose human
exposures and on biomarkers reflecting body burden. Compared with previous
results, our REPs suggest higher sensitivity to the effects of dioxin-like
compounds.

PMCID: PMC3734489
PMID: 23665575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2013;48(10):1190-200. doi:
10.1080/10934529.2013.776455.

Occurrence and distribution of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in surface water 
of the Raba River, Hungary.

Nagy AS(1), Szabó J, Vass I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Chemistry, Széchenyi István University, Gyor,
Hungary. nszaboa@sze.hu

The objective of this study was to investigate the concentration level and
distribution of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in surface water of the
Raba River; the largest Danube tributary in Hungary. A total of 54 water samples 
were collected in the period of 2008-2011 and analysed for PAHs by gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS) method. The total PAH concentrations
(sum of the concentrations of 17 individual PAH compounds) ranged from 41 to
437 ng/L with the mean value of 111 ±  69.4 ng/L. Phenanthrene and naphthalene
were the dominant species in the surface water. Using TEF approaches on the mean 
concentration PAH data, benzo[a]pyrene and dibenz[ah]anthracene contributed the
highest carcinogenic exposure equivalent. A selected number of concentration
ratios of specific PAH compounds were calculated to evaluate the possible sources
of PAH contamination. The ratios reflected a pattern of pyrogenic input as a
major source of PAHs. The comparison of the total PAH concentrations observed for
Raba River with other surface waters of the world confirmed that the Raba River
could not be regarded as a contaminated river according to the levels of PAHs.

PMID: 23647110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Front Physiol. 2013 May 1;4:94. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00094. eCollection 2013.

Practical aspects of estimating energy components in rodents.

van Klinken JB(1), van den Berg SA, van Dijk KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center Leiden,
Netherlands.

Recently there has been an increasing interest in exploiting computational and
statistical techniques for the purpose of component analysis of indirect
calorimetry data. Using these methods it becomes possible to dissect daily energy
expenditure into its components and to assess the dynamic response of the resting
metabolic rate (RMR) to nutritional and pharmacological manipulations. To perform
robust component analysis, however, is not straightforward and typically requires
the tuning of parameters and the preprocessing of data. Moreover the degree of
accuracy that can be attained by these methods depends on the configuration of
the system, which must be properly taken into account when setting up
experimental studies. Here, we review the methods of Kalman filtering, linear,
and penalized spline regression, and minimal energy expenditure estimation in the
context of component analysis and discuss their results on high resolution
datasets from mice and rats. In addition, we investigate the effect of the sample
time, the accuracy of the activity sensor, and the washout time of the chamber on
the estimation accuracy. We found that on the high resolution data there was a
strong correlation between the results of Kalman filtering and penalized spline
(P-spline) regression, except for the activity respiratory quotient (RQ). For low
resolution data the basal metabolic rate (BMR) and resting RQ could still be
estimated accurately with P-spline regression, having a strong correlation with
the high resolution estimate (R (2) > 0.997; sample time of 9 min). In contrast, 
the thermic effect of food (TEF) and activity related energy expenditure (AEE)
were more sensitive to a reduction in the sample rate (R (2) > 0.97). In
conclusion, for component analysis on data generated by single channel systems
with continuous data acquisition both Kalman filtering and P-spline regression
can be used, while for low resolution data from multichannel systems P-spline
regression gives more robust results.

PMCID: PMC3640188
PMID: 23641217  [PubMed]


327. J Microbiol Methods. 2013 Jul;94(1):25-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mimet.2013.04.004. Epub 
2013 Apr 20.

A simple procedure for protein ubiquitination detection in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: Gap1p as an example.

Lv Y(1), Zhao X, Liu L, Du G, Zhou J, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology and Key Laboratory of Industrial Biotechnology,
Ministry of Education, Jiangnan University, 1800 Lihu Road, Wuxi, Jiangsu 214122,
China.

We established a simple procedure for protein ubiquitination detection in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) was split
into two parts, an N-terminal (GN) and a C-terminal (GC) region. The fusion
fragments GN-UBI3 and multi-cloning site (MCS)-GC were inserted into the vector
pY26-TEF/GPD, resulting in pUbDetec16. pUbDetec16 was designed for use in
detecting protein ubiquitination. Any gene of interest can be inserted into the
MCS and the recombinant plasmid can be transferred into a <U+0394>ura3 auxotrophic S.
cerevisiae strain. Protein ubiquitination can then be detected using a
fluorescence microscope. The ubiquitination of a protein can be determined based 
on a fluorescence signal. To validate the reliability of this procedure, Gap1p, a
protein known to be ubiquitinated, was used as a positive control. A triple
mutant of Gap1p, Gap1p(K9R,K16R,K76R), which did not contain any ubiquitination
site, was used as a negative control. pUbDetec16-GAP1 and
pUbDetec16-GAP1(K9R,K16R,K76R) were constructed and transferred into the <U+0394>ura3
auxotrophic S. cerevisiae strain CEN.PK2-1D. Transformants of pUbDetec16-GAP1
emitted fluorescence, while the pUbDetec16-GAP1(K9R,K16R,K76R) transformants did 
not. The ubiquitination of Gap1p and Gap1p(K9R, K16R, K76R) was further verified 
using classical SDS-PAGE analysis. This procedure significantly simplifies
manipulation involving ubiquitination detection using the BiFC approach,
particularly on a large scale.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23611841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Ann Surg. 2013 Dec;258(6):895-900. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31828fab55.

Hypercapnia and acidosis during open and thoracoscopic repair of congenital
diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: results of a pilot randomized
controlled trial.

Bishay M(1), Giacomello L, Retrosi G, Thyoka M, Garriboli M, Brierley J, Harding 
L, Scuplak S, Cross KM, Curry JI, Kiely EM, De Coppi P, Eaton S, Pierro A.

Author information: 
(1)*UCL Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, 
London, United Kingdom Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United
Kingdom UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to evaluate the effect of thoracoscopy in neonates on
intraoperative arterial blood gases, compared with open surgery.
BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) and esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) can be repaired thoracoscopically, but this
may cause hypercapnia and acidosis, which are potentially harmful.
METHODS: This was a pilot randomized controlled trial. The target number of 20
neonates (weight > 1.6 kg) were randomized to either open (5 CDH, 5 EA/TEF) or
thoracoscopic (5 CDH, 5 EA/TEF) repair. Arterial blood gases were measured every 
30 minutes intraoperatively, and compared by multilevel modeling, presented as
mean and difference (95% confidence interval) from these predictions.
RESULTS: Overall, the intraoperative PaCO2 was 61 mm Hg in open and 83 mm Hg
[difference 22 mm Hg (2 to 42); P = 0.036] in thoracoscopy and the pH was 7.24 in
open and 7.13 [difference -0.11 (-0.20 to -0.01); P = 0.025] in thoracoscopy. The
duration of hypercapnia and acidosis was longer in thoracoscopy compared with
that in open. For patients with CDH, thoracoscopy was associated with a
significant increase in intraoperative hypercapnia [open 68 mm Hg; thoracoscopy
96 mm Hg; difference 28 mm Hg (8 to 48); P = 0.008] and severe acidosis [open
7.21; thoracoscopy 7.08; difference -0.13 (-0.24 to -0.02); P = 0.018]. No
significant difference in PaCO2, pH, or PaO2 was observed in patients undergoing 
thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot randomized controlled trial shows that thoracoscopic
repair of CDH is associated with prolonged and severe intraoperative hypercapnia 
and acidosis, compared with open surgery. These findings do not support the use
of thoracoscopy with CO2 insufflation and conventional ventilation for the repair
of CDH, calling into question the safety of this practice. The effect of
thoracoscopy on blood gases during repair of EA/TEF in neonates requires further 
evaluation. (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01467245).

PMID: 23604057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Aug;58:86-94. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.04.014. Epub 2013
Apr 18.

Effect of smoke generation sources and smoke curing duration on the levels of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) in different suites of fish.

Essumang DK(1), Dodoo DK, Adjei JK.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Research Group, Department of Chemistry, University of Cape
Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. kofiessumang@yahoo.com

The research studied the impact of smoke generation sources on PAH contamination 
in four different smoke-cured fish (mackerel, sardine, tuna and Cigar minnows).
The smoke sources used included acacia, sugarcane bagasse and mangrove. PAHs in
the smoke-cured fish were analysed using Varian GC/MS (3800-GC) system. The mean 
total PAH concentrations in the smoked fish (n=108) ranged from 250.59-1376.09
µg/kg in tuna, cigar minnows, sardine and mackerel smoke-cured with sugarcane
bagasse, mangrove and acacia for between 2 and 8h. The mean BaP levels for most
fish cured with smoke from acacia and mangrove for between 2 and 8h were all
above the European Commission set limit of 5.0 µg/kg. Positive correlations (at
P=0.01, 2-tailed) were observed between PAH levels in smoked fish and lignin
contents of wood type used for the smoke generation, the fat content and the
smoke-curing duration. Risk assessment conducted using benzo[a]pyrene
carcinogenic and mutagenic toxicity equivalency factors (TEF and MEF
respectively) showed high risk associated with consuming fish smoke-cured with
hard woods (acacia and mangroves). Sugarcane bagasse was found to be relatively
the best and safest smoke-generating source for smoke-curing of fish among the
three wood types when using the traditional kiln.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23603007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Tijdschr Psychiatr. 2013;55(4):247-57.

[Defence style and therapeutic technique as predictors of the outcome of
psychodynamic psychotherapy in depression].

[Article in Dutch]

Hendriksen M(1), Dekker JJ, de Jonghe FE, Gijsbers van Wijk CM, Peen J, Van HL.

Author information: 
(1)NPI en Arkin GGZ, Amsterdam.

BACKGROUND: In psychodynamic psychotherapy it is assumed that insight-fostering
interventions lead to better results when used with patients who have relatively 
strong personality structures.
AIM: To investigate to what extent the use of supportive or insight-fostering
interventions is determined by sociodemographic variables, the severity, duration
and recurrence of depression and defence style and to find out whether the type
of intervention used can predict the treatment outcome of psychotherapy in
depression.
METHOD: The study-group consisted of 147 depressed patients with or without a
comorbid personality disorder who had been treated with supportive PsychoDynamic 
Therapy (PDT) with or without medication and for whom the Therapist Evaluation
Form (TEF) was available. On the TEF the therapist assessed the patients defence
style and the therapeutic technique that was used. The most important outcome
measure was the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HAM-D).
RESULTS: No correlation was found between technique used and sociodemographic
characteristics or the severity and duration of the depression. Insight-fostering
interventions were related to better treatment outcomes. Not only age and
educational level but also defence style turned out to be confounding variables
in the relationship between technique and outcome. We found no interaction
between treatment success and insight-fostering interventions in patients who
used mature defence styles.
CONCLUSION: In our study it was defence style as evaluated by the therapist
rather than the technique used which was the strongest independent predictor of a
successful outcome. This indicates that patients with primitive defence styles
may also benefit from insight-fostering interventions.

PMID: 23595839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Microbiol Res. 2013 Oct 1;168(8):525-32. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2013.02.010. Epub 
2013 Apr 8.

Systematic analyses of Ophiocordyceps lanpingensis sp. nov., a new species of
Ophiocordyceps in China.

Chen ZH(1), Dai YD, Yu H, Yang K, Yang ZL, Yuan F, Zeng WB.

Author information: 
(1)Yunnan Herbal Laboratory, Institute of Herb Biotic Resources, Yunnan
University, Kunming 650091, Yunnan, China.

A new species of Ophiocordyceps, Ophiocordyceps lanpingensis collected from
Lanping County, Yunnan Province, southwestern China, was described based on
morphological characteristic, ITS1-5.8S-ITS2 rDNA sequences analyses, 5-gene
(nrSSU, nrLSU, tef-1a, rpb1 and rpb2) sequences analyses and MAT1-2-1 gene
sequences analyses. This species was characterized by thinner stroma, smaller
perithecium, thinner ascospore (multiseptate with short septation). The
phylogenetic analyses based on the ITS, the 5-gene and MAT1-2-1 gene dataset
showed O. lanpingensis had the closest evolution relationship with O. robertsii
and O. sinensis, but still had obvious distances to them. Both morphological
character and systematic analyses supported that O. lanpingensis was a new
species of Ophiocordyceps.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23578962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Control Release. 2013 Jul 10;169(1-2):73-81. doi:
10.1016/j.jconrel.2013.03.028. Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Intra-articular drug delivery from an optimized topical patch containing
teriflunomide and lornoxicam for rheumatoid arthritis treatment: does the topical
patch really enhance a local treatment?

Xi H(1), Cun D, Xiang R, Guan Y, Zhang Y, Li Y, Fang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University,
Shenyang 110016, China.

Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) often bear joint destruction and
symptomatic pain. The aim of this work is to develop a compound transdermal patch
containing teriflunomide (TEF) and lornoxicam (LOX) to transport these drugs
across the skin with the isochronous permeation rates for RA therapy and
investigate intra-articular delivery of TEF and LOX following transdermal patches
applied topically. The salts of TEF and LOX with organic amines diethylamine
(DEtA), triethylamine (TEtA), diethanolamine (DEA), triethanolamine (TEA) and
N-(2'-hydroxy-ethanol)-piperdine (NP) were prepared to improve the skin
permeation of the parent drug. The optimized patch formulation is obtained from a
3-factor, 2-level central composite design. After topical application of the
optimized compound patch to only one knee joint in rabbit, intra-articular
delivery of TEF and LOX on the application site was compared with that on the
non-application site. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic effects of the optimized
compound patch were evaluated using the adjuvant arthritis model and the pain
model induced by acetic acid, respectively. The in vitro experiment results
showed that the amine salts of TEF and LOX, especially TEF-TEtA and LOX-TEtA,
enhanced the skin permeation of TEF and LOX from the transdermal patch system.
The optimal formulation successfully displayed isochronous permeation rates for
TEF and LOX across rabbit skin, and was defined with 5% of TEF-TEtA, 10% of
LOX-TEtA and 15% of azone. The in vivo study showed that TEF and LOX from
transdermal patches were transferred into skin, ligament and fat pad on the
application site by direct diffusion and on the non-application site by the
redistribution of systemic blood supply, while local absorption of TEF and LOX in
synovial fluid originated from the systemic blood supply rather than direct
diffusion. In the RA rat model, the results of swelling inhibition on primary
arthritis of bilateral hind paws further confirmed the above-mentioned point. The
optimal formulation displayed a double response on joint inflammation and
symptomatic pain. In conclusion, although transdermal administration applied
topically can provide a local enhanced drug delivery for the superficial joint
tissues by direct diffusion, it seemed unlikely to do that for the deeper tissue 
synovial fluid.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Eur Radiol. 2013 Aug;23(8):2127-36. doi: 10.1007/s00330-013-2821-2. Epub 2013 Apr
4.

Perfusion CT allows prediction of therapy response in non-small cell lung cancer 
treated with conventional and anti-angiogenic chemotherapy.

Tacelli N(1), Santangelo T, Scherpereel A, Duhamel A, Deken V, Klotz E, Cortot A,
Lafitte JJ, Wallyn F, Remy J, Remy-Jardin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Imaging, Hospital Calmette (EA 2694), University of
Lille Nord de France, 59000, Lille, France.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether CT can depict early perfusion changes in lung
cancer treated by anti-angiogenic drugs, allowing prediction of response.
METHODS: Patients with non-small cell lung cancer, treated by conventional
chemotherapy with (Group 1; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>17) or without (Group 2; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>23) anti-vascular
endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) drug (bevacizumab) underwent CT perfusion
before (TIME<U+2009>0) and after 1 (TIME<U+2009>1), 3 (TIME<U+2009>2) and 6 (TIME<U+2009>3) cycles of
chemotherapy. The CT parameters evaluated included: (1) total tumour vascular
volume (TVV) and total tumour extravascular flow (TEF); (2) RECIST (Response
Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours) measurements. Tumour response was also
assessed on the basis of the clinicians' overall evaluation.
RESULTS: In Group 1, significant reduction in perfusion was identified between
baseline and: (1) TIME<U+2009>1 (TVV, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0395; TEF, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.015); (2) TIME<U+2009>2 (TVV,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0043; TEF, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001); (3) TIME<U+2009>3 (TVV, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0034; TEF, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0005)
without any significant change in Group 2. In Group 1: (1) the reduction in TVV
at TIME<U+2009>1 was significantly higher in responders versus non-responders at TIME<U+2009>2 
according to RECIST (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0128) and overall clinicians' evaluation (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0079);
(2) all responders at TIME<U+2009>2 had a concurrent decrease in TVV and TEF at TIME<U+2009>1.
CONCLUSION: Perfusion CT demonstrates early changes in lung cancer vascularity
under anti-angiogenic chemotherapy that may help predict therapeutic response.
KEY POINTS:  Perfusion CT has the potential of providing in vivo information
about tumour vasculature.  CT depicts early and specific perfusion changes in
NSCLC under anti-angiogenic drugs.  Specific therapeutic effects of
anti-angiogenic drugs can be detected before tumour shrinkage.  Early perfusion 
changes can help predict therapeutic response to anti-angiogenic treatment. 
Perfusion CT could be a non-invasive tool to monitor anti-angiogenic treatment.

PMID: 23553586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Kardiologiia. 2013;53(1):51-6.

[Epicardial adiposity as risk factor of coronary atherosclerosis].

[Article in Russian]

Chumakova GA, Veselovskaia NG, Gritsenko OV, Kozarenko AA, Subbotin EA.

AIM: To study effect of epicardial adiposity on risk of development and severity 
of coronary atherosclerosis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We registered classical metabolic risk factors (RF) and
additional factors of cardiovascular risk in 138 men aged 55.47+/-9.07 years with
ischemic heart disease (IHD), functional class (FC) II-III angina, and I-III
degree obesity. Diagnostic coronary angiography (CAG) was performed in all
patients. Thickness of epicardial fat (tEF) in millimeters was measured at
transthoracic echocardiography (ECG).
RESULTS: Average tEF indexes were highest (10 [8; 10] mm) in the group of
patients with multiple stenoses in coronary arteries (CA). According to
ROC-analysis tEF appeared to be a predictor of significant coronary
atherosclerosis. Its sensitivity was 80.4%, specificity - 67.6 % (cut-off value 6
mm). Epicardial adiposity was among factors associated with presence of coronary 
atherosclerosis (odds ratio [OR] 4.44, 95% confidence interval [CI] 2,06 to 9.59;
p<0,001) along with age (OR 6.56; 95% CI 2.59 to 16.60; p=0,001), leptin (OR
3.50; 95% CI 1.46 to 8.37; p <0,001), resistin (OR 3.13; 95% CI 1.32 to 7.42; p
<0,001) and waist circumference (OR 1.65; 95% CI 0.72 to 3.80; p=0.018).

PMID: 23548351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Neonatal Surg. 2013 Apr 1;2(2):21.

Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula with unilateral pulmonary
agenesis - hypoplasia.

Verma S(1), Mahajan JK(1), Laxmi Narsimha Rao K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.

Association of unilateral severe pulmonary hypoplasia or agenesis and esophageal 
atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is an exceedingly
rare and highly lethal combination. We report a case of full term male baby who
had EA with TEF and right lung hypoplasia, managed at our centre. He is alive and
doing well at 10 years of age.

PMCID: PMC4420375
PMID: 26023441  [PubMed]


336. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 May 7;47(9):4661-9. doi: 10.1021/es304939c. Epub 2013
Apr 8.

An interaction model for estimating in vitro estrogenic and androgenic activity
of chemical mixtures.

Johnson CM(1), Achary M, Suri RP.

Author information: 
(1)NSF Water & Environmental Technology (WET) Center, Department of Civil and
Environmental Engineering, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122,
USA.

There is a need to better understand and predict the biological activity and
interaction of chemical constituents in mixtures. Many existing methods assume
that the mixture components are additive, and in the case of endocrine
disruption, deviation from additivity may occur and render predictions
inconclusive. In this study, an alternate index, aRP, which enables the
quantification of an antagonistic interaction from analytically derived
concentrations of chemical constituents within a mixture that act upon the same
molecular target is described. The index is calculated by measuring the degree to
which the test compound modulates the activity of a standard hormone as a
function of mixture proportions. The aRP was shown to be valid for additive
mixtures. It theoretically estimates the product of the relative potential and
the interaction index inverse for nonadditive mixtures. The aRP values were
computed for agonists and antagonists of both the estrogen and androgen receptors
by using yeast-based methods (YES and YAS). The resulting aRP estimates were then
validated using higher order mixtures of agonists and antagonists. The use of aRP
led to improved predictions compared to estimates based on the toxicity
equivalent factor (TEF) approach. The aRP model yielded estimates that were
statistically indistinguishable (a = 0.01) from the measured responses in 75% of 
the 32 mixtures tested. By the same criteria, the TEF approach successfully
predicted 34% of the mixtures. Both the aRP and TEF approach correlated well with
the observed responses (Pearson R = 0.98 and 0.84, respectively); however, the
TEF estimates produced higher percent errors, particularly in mixtures with
higher proportions of antagonists. It is suggested that the use of the aRP index 
allows for a better approximation of the net activity captured by the bioassays
through the use of chemically derived concentrations.

PMID: 23514127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cell Prolif. 2013 Apr;46(2):203-13. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12014.

Tocotrienols promote apoptosis in human breast cancer cells by inducing
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage and inhibiting nuclear factor kappa-B
activity.

Loganathan R(1), Selvaduray KR, Nesaretnam K, Radhakrishnan AK.

Author information: 
(1)Malaysian Palm Oil Board, Selangor, 43000, Malaysia.

OBJECTIVES: Tocotrienols and tocopherols are members of the vitamin E family,
with similar structures; however, only tocotrienols have been reported to achieve
potent anti-cancer effects. The study described here has evaluated anti-cancer
activity of vitamin E to elucidate mechanisms of cell death, using human breast
cancer cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Anti-cancer activity of a tocotrienol-rich fraction (TRF) 
and a tocotrienol-enriched fraction (TEF) isolated from palm oil, as well as pure
vitamin E analogues (a-tocopherol, a-, d- and <U+03B3>-tocotrienols)<U+F029> were studied using
highly aggressive triple negative MDA-MB-231 cells and oestrogen-dependent MCF-7 
cells, both of human breast cancer cell lines. Cell population growth was
evaluated using a Coulter particle counter. Cell death mechanism,
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage and levels of NF-<U+03BA>B were determined using
commercial ELISA kits.
RESULTS: Tocotrienols exerted potent anti-proliferative effects on both types of 
cell by inducing apoptosis, the underlying mechanism of cell death being
ascertained using respective IC50 concentrations of all test compounds. There was
marked induction of apoptosis in both cell lines by tocotrienols compared to
treatment with Paclitaxel, which was used as positive control. This activity was 
found to be associated with cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (a DNA repair
protein), demonstrating involvement of the apoptotic cell death signalling
pathway. Tocotrienols also inhibited expression of nuclear factor kappa-B
(NF-<U+03BA>B), which in turn can increase sensitivity of cancer cells to apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: Tocotrienols induced anti-proliferative and apoptotic effects in
association with DNA fragmentation, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase cleavage and
NF-<U+03BA>B inhibition in the two human breast cancer cell lines.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 23510475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Sci Total Environ. 2013 May 1;452-453:155-62. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.02.057. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Levels of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, polychlorinated dibenzofurans and
polychlorinated biphenyls in human milk from different regions of France.

Focant JF(1), Fréry N, Bidondo ML, Eppe G, Scholl G, Saoudi A, Oleko A,
Vandentorren S.

Author information: 
(1)CART Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Organic and Biological Analytical
Chemistry, Chemistry Department, University of Liège, Sart-Tilman, B-4000 Liège, 
Belgium. JF.Focant@ulg.ac.be

We report on the pilot study carried out before the start of the Elfe project
(French longitudinal study from childhood). A total of 44 samples of mature human
milk were collected at home 8 weeks after delivery. A total of 7 polychlorinated 
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), 10 polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), 12
dioxin-like (DL) polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and 6 non dioxin-like
(NDL)-PCBs were measured. For total TEQ (PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs), the geometric mean
concentration was 17.81 pg TEQ(WHO05)/g lipids. Relative PCDD, PCDF, and DL-PCB
contributions to the arithmetic mean TEQ(WHO05) were 38%, 18%, and 44%,
respectively. The use of TEF(WHO05) instead of TEF(WHO98) resulted in a 27%
reduction of the total TEQ value. Although PCDD levels did not significantly
change (less than 0.5% increase), PCDF and DL-PCB levels both decreased by 35%
and 38%, respectively. Levels have been compared to data obtained during a
previous non-reported national study conducted in 1998 (TEF(WHO98)) in French
lactaria (n=244). The mean of PCDD/Fs has decreased about 39.4% (18.8 pg
TEQ(WHO98)/g lipids in 1998 vs 11.4 pg TEQ(WHO98)/g lipids in pilot study),
respectively 41.5% for PCDDs (10.6 pg TEQ(WHO98)/g lipids in 1998 vs 6.2 pg
TEQ(WHO98)/g lipids in pilot study) and 36.7% for PCDFs (7.9 pg TEQ(WHO98)/g
lipids in 1998 vs 5.0 pg TEQ(WHO98)/g lipids in pilot study). For the sum of the 
6 NDL-PCBs, the 2007 geometric mean concentration in milk was 176.3 ng/g lipids. 
The arithmetic mean lipid concentration in 2007 breast milk was 26.4 g/l (range
from 6.0 to 46.7 g/l). A PCDD/F and DL-PCB daily intake was estimated to be 62.3 
pg TEQ(WHO05)/kg body weight per day (85.0 pg TEQ(WHO98)/kg body weight per day) 
for a baby of 5 kg of body weight fed daily with 700 ml of maternal milk
containing 25 g/l of lipids.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23500409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Scand J Rheumatol. 2013;42(4):276-80. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2013.765031. Epub
2013 Mar 16.

TNF-a modulates expression of the circadian clock gene Per2 in rheumatoid
synovial cells.

Yoshida K(1), Hashiramoto A, Okano T, Yamane T, Shibanuma N, Shiozawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To study the effect of tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-a, responsible
for the inflammation and circadian rhythm of rheumatoid arthritis (RA), on the
expression of circadian clock genes in primary cultured human rheumatoid synovial
cells.
METHOD: The expression of circadian clock genes, including circadian locomotor
output cycles kaput (Clock), brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1), period
(Per)1/2, and cryptochrome (Cry)1/2, and the proline and acidic amino acid-rich
basic leucine zipper (PAR bZip) genes, a transcriptional activator of Per2,
including D site of albumin promoter binding protein (Dbp), hepatic leukaemia
factor (Hlf), and thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef), and a transcriptional
repressor of Per2, E4-binding protein 4 (E4bp4), in TNF-a-stimulated synovial
cells was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The D-box
motifs in the Per2 promoter were mutated by site-directed mutagenesis, and the
promoter activity of the Per2 gene was examined using the luciferase assay.
RESULTS: TNF-a enhanced the mRNA expression of Bmal1 and Cry1 but did not affect 
that of Clock, Per1, or Cry2. However, TNF-a inhibited the mRNA expression of the
Per2 gene, as well as Dbp, Hlf, and Tef, but enhanced the mRNA expression of
E4bp4. Furthermore, TNF-a inhibited the transcriptional activity of the wild-type
Per2 gene in a manner dependent on the D-box 1 and D-box 2 motifs in the Per2
promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: TNF-a modulates the expression of the Per2 gene through the D-box
binding proteins DBP, HLF, TEF, and E4BP4, in rheumatoid synovial cells, and
thereby may contribute to the pathogenesis of RA.

PMID: 23496259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Jun;133(2):197-208. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft070. Epub 2013 Mar
14.

Polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphenyls: inclusion in the 
toxicity equivalency factor concept for dioxin-like compounds.

van den Berg M(1), Denison MS, Birnbaum LS, Devito MJ, Fiedler H, Falandysz J,
Rose M, Schrenk D, Safe S, Tohyama C, Tritscher A, Tysklind M, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences-IRAS and WHO Collaborating Centre for
Environmental Health Risk Assessment, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. m.vandenberg@uu.nl

In 2011, a joint World Health Organization (WHO) and United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP) expert consultation took place, during which the possible
inclusion of brominated analogues of the dioxin-like compounds in the WHO
Toxicity Equivalency Factor (TEF) scheme was evaluated. The expert panel
concluded that polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PBDDs), dibenzofurans (PBDFs),
and some dioxin-like biphenyls (dl-PBBs) may contribute significantly in daily
human background exposure to the total dioxin toxic equivalencies (TEQs). These
compounds are also commonly found in the aquatic environment. Available data for 
fish toxicity were evaluated for possible inclusion in the WHO-UNEP TEF scheme
(van den Berg et al., 1998). Because of the limited database, it was decided not 
to derive specific WHO-UNEP TEFs for fish, but for ecotoxicological risk
assessment, the use of specific relative effect potencies (REPs) from fish embryo
assays is recommended. Based on the limited mammalian REP database for these
brominated compounds, it was concluded that sufficient differentiation from the
present TEF values of the chlorinated analogues (van den Berg et al., 2006) was
not possible. However, the REPs for PBDDs, PBDFs, and non-ortho dl-PBBs in
mammals closely follow those of the chlorinated analogues, at least within one
order of magnitude. Therefore, the use of similar interim TEF values for
brominated and chlorinated congeners for human risk assessment is recommended,
pending more detailed information in the future.

PMCID: PMC3663561
PMID: 23492812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Toxins (Basel). 2013 Mar 13;5(3):537-55. doi: 10.3390/toxins5030537.

Sequence divergence of the enniatin synthase gene in relation to production of
beauvericin and enniatins in Fusarium species.

Stepien L(1), Waskiewicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland.
lste@igr.poznan.pl

Beauvericin (BEA) and enniatins (ENNs) are cyclic peptide mycotoxins produced by 
a wide range of fungal species, including pathogenic Fusaria. Amounts of BEA and 
ENNs were quantified in individual rice cultures of 58 Fusarium strains belonging
to 20 species, originating from different host plant species and different
geographical localities. The species identification of all strains was done on
the basis of the tef-1a gene sequence. The main aim of this study was to analyze 
the variability of the esyn1 gene encoding the enniatin synthase, the essential
enzyme of this metabolic pathway, among the BEA- and ENNs-producing genotypes.
The phylogenetic analysis based on the partial sequence of the esyn1 gene clearly
discriminates species producing exclusively BEA from those synthesizing mainly
enniatin analogues.

PMCID: PMC3705277
PMID: 23486233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Esophagus. 2013 Mar;10(1):27-29. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

Successful esophageal bypass surgery in a patient with a large tracheoesophageal 
fistula following endotracheal stenting and chemoradiotherapy for advanced
esophageal cancer: case report.

Miyata T(1), Watanabe M, Nagai Y, Iwatsuki M, Iwagami S, Baba Y, Furushou C,
Ikuta Y, Yamamoto T, Baba H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1, Honjo, Kumamoto, 860-8556 Japan.

A 63-year-old man with esophageal achalasia for more than 20 years complained of 
respiratory distress. He was admitted as an emergency to the referral hospital
three months previously. Computed tomography revealed tracheobronchial stenosis
due to advanced esophageal cancer with tracheal invasion. He underwent
tracheobronchial stenting and chemoradiotherapy. A large tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) developed after irradiation (18 Gy) and chemotherapy, and he was
unable to eat. Thereafter, he was referred to our hospital, where we performed
esophageal bypass surgery using a gastric conduit. A percutaneous cardiopulmonary
support system was prepared due to the risk of airway obstruction during
anesthesia. A small-diameter tracheal tube inserted into the stent achieved
ordinary respiratory management. No anesthesia-related problems were encountered.
Oral intake commenced on postoperative day 9. He was discharged on postoperative 
day 23 and was able to take in sustenance orally right up to the last moment of
his life. Esophageal bypass under general anesthesia can be performed in patients
with large TEF with sufficient preparation for anesthetic management.

PMCID: PMC3589656
PMID: 23482402  [PubMed]


343. Med J Malaysia. 2013;68(1):48-51.

Review of oesophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula in hospital sultanah 
bahiyah, alor star. Malaysia from january 2000 to december 2009.

Narasimman S(1), Nallusamy M, Hassan S.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah, Department of Surgery, Hospital Sultanah Bahiyah,
Alor Star, Kedah, Malaysia. drnara@hotmail.com.

Oesophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is one of the
congenital anomaly occurring in the newborns with the incidence of 1 in 2500
births seen worldwide. A retrospective review of newborns admitted to Hospital
Sultanah Bahiyah (HSB) from 1st January 2000 to 31st December 2009 was done. The 
objective was to look at the influence of birth weight, time of surgical
intervention, presence of other congenital anomaly and presence of preoperative
pneumonia to the immediate outcome (mortality) of the surgery. There were 47
patients with oesophageal atresia, out of which 26 (55%) were males and 21 (45%) 
females. The distribution of patients by race were 34 Malays (72%), 9 Chinese
(19%) and 4 Indians (9%). The birth weight of the babies range from 0.8 kg to 4.0
kg and there was a significant association with the outcome of the surgery (p<
0.05). Most of the babies (20) were operated within 24 hours of presentation but 
there was no significant association to the outcome. 23 (49%) of them were born
with congenital malformation and there was a significant association with the
outcome of the surgery (p<0.05). Based on the chest roentgenogram, 20 (43%) of
them had pneumonia with significant association with the outcome (p<0.05). The
mortality rate is 23% and the causes of death were pneumonia (36%), renal failure
(18%), cardiac malformation (18%) and multiple congenital malformations (28%).
The outcome of EA and TEF is determined mainly by birth weight, congenital
malformations and presence of preoperative pneumonia in HSB.

PMID: 23466767  [PubMed - in process]


344. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Mar 4;14(3):5182-97. doi: 10.3390/ijms14035182.

Blood translation elongation factor-1d is a novel marker for cadmium exposure.

Lu Q(1), Lei YX, He CC, Lei ZN.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182,
China. YixiongLei_gz@hotmail.com.

Translation elongation factor-1d (TEF-1d) has been identified as a novel
cadmium-responsive proto-oncogene. However, it is still unclear whether TEF-1d
could be a potential biomarker of cadmium exposure. Rats were treated with CdCl2 
at different concentrations (high dose 1.225, mid-dose 0.612 and low dose 0.306
mg/kg body weight, respectively) for 14 weeks, and the cadmium levels, weight
coefficients, serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase
(AST), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), serum creatinine (SCR), 24-h urine protein
(24hPro), urinary creatinine (Cr) and pathological features were determined. The 
TEF-1d expression in white blood cells and multiple organs were examined by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and were also confirmed
with fluorescence quantitative PCR. A cadmium dose-dependent increase (p < 0.05) 
of cadmium levels in blood, urine, liver, kidney, heart and lung, and the weight 
coefficients was observed. The liver and renal function indictors including AST, 
ALT, SCR, BUN and 24hPro, were elevated in a cadmium dose-dependent manner (p <
0.05). Significant pathological changes in liver, kidney, heart and lung were
indicated. The TEF-1d expression was up-regulated in both blood and organs (p <
0.05). Moreover, the expression level of blood TEF-1d was positively correlated
to TEF-1d expression level, cadmium level and toxicity in the organs (p < 0.01). 
This study indicates that blood TEF-1d is a novel valuable biomarker for cadmium 
exposure and its organ toxicity.

PMCID: PMC3634498
PMID: 23459232  [PubMed]


345. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Feb;48(2):441-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.11.040.

Tracheoesophageal fistula following button battery ingestion: successful
non-operative management.

Russell RT(1), Cohen M, Billmire DF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Children's of Alabama, Birmingham, AL 35233, USA.
robert.russell@childrensal.org

The incidence of devastating complications from button battery ingestions is
increasing. Battery impactions may result in erosive esophagitis,
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), esophageal strictures, spondylodiscitis, vocal
cord paralysis due to paralysis of recurrent laryngeal nerve(s), and
aortoesophageal fistulas with significant morbidity and mortality. We present a
case of a 15 month old boy who developed an acquired TEF secondary to ingestion
of a 20mm button battery lodged at the level of the carina. The clinical course
and imaging findings are reviewed. Serial limited CT imaging with 3-D
reconstruction was helpful in noninvasive assessment of healing and clinical
decision making. Of special interest are the negative initial esophagram and the 
healing of the fistula without the need for surgical intervention.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23414882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2013;184:114-6.

Design and development of a novel thoracoscopic tracheoesophageal fistula repair 
simulator.

Davis LM(1), Barsness KA, Rooney DM.

Author information: 
(1)Simulation Technology and Immersive Learning, Northwestern University, USA.
Laurendavis@northwestern.edu

Thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA/TEF) is a technically challenging surgical procedure. This congenital anomaly
is rare; therefore, training opportunities for surgical trainees are limited.
There are currently no validated simulation tools available to help train
pediatric surgery trainees. The simulator that was developed is a low-cost,
reusable model. It simulates the right side of a term neonate chest and contains 
a tissue block that has been surgically modified to replicate the anatomy of
EA/TEF.

PMID: 23400141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Coll Antropol. 2012 Nov;36 Suppl 2:103-6.

The use of ultrasound in determining the length of the Provox II voice
prosthesis.

Pedisic D(1), Ticac R, Candrlic B, Marijic B, Sepic T, Malvic G, Velepic M,
Starcevic R.

Author information: 
(1)University of Rijeka, Rijeka University Hospital Center, University Department
of ENT, Rijeka, Croatia. marzic.diana@gmail.com

The use of speech prosthesis after total laryngectomy has become an international
standard for voice restoration today. Provox II voice prosthesis is not
permanently inserted, and as such, it must meet the criterion of achieving
prolonged retention time within the walls of tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF).
Complications after the insertion of speech prosthesis are familiar and
anticipated but efforts are being made in order to reduce them. Part of the
complications is caused by inadequate choice of the length of the prosthesis. The
Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery in Rijeka conducted a
study which included 91 patients in the period from 01.01.2004. to 31.12.2010. We
used ultrasound and computerized neck tomography on 58 (63.7%) patients in
preoperative procedure through which we determined the length of the subsequent
TE fistula. At the same time we used this opportunity to specify the length of
the speech prosthesis we have inserted primarily or secondary. The number of
respondents who had complications, and with whom we used neck ultrasound during
preoperative procedure in order to determine the length of the prosthesis, was
significantly smaller than the number of respondents who had complications but
with whom we did not use the above mentioned procedure (5.6% vs. 15.5%, p =
0.042). Comparing our results to other studies, we believe that we managed to
reduce the number of complications caused by inadequate length of the prosthesis,
by routine preoperative use of neck ultrasound. This procedure has extended the
median retention time of the prosthesis within the TE fistula, thus improving the
results of speech restoration using voice prosthesis on laryngectomized patients.

PMID: 23397765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Coll Antropol. 2012 Nov;36 Suppl 2:93-7.

Analysis of saliva pepsin level in patients with tracheoesophageal fistula and
voice prosthesis complications.

Hadzibegovic AD(1), Danic D, Prgomet D, Ticac R, Kozmar A.

Author information: 
(1)Josip Juraj Strossmayer University, Osijek School of Medicine, Dr. Josip
Bencevic General Hospital, Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck
Surgery, Slavonski Brod, Croatia. ana_djanic@yahoo.com

The aim of this crossectional study was to investigate the relationship between
pepsin concentration in saliva and the occurrence of tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) complications and voice prosthesis (VP) complications, after total
laryngectomy and VP implantation. We assessed the concentrations of pepsin in the
saliva of 41 laryngectomized patients and correlated it with the incidence of TEF
complications (periprostethic leakage, atrophy, esophageal mucosa hypertrophy,
granulations, fistula enlargement, and VP dislocation), VP complications
(transprosthetic leakage, Candida infection) and voice quality. Pepsin levels
were measured by enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assay (ELISA). Voice quality was
assessed by Harrison-Robilard--Schultz (HRS) scale. In all, 17 (42%) patients had
complications. All of them had TEF complications, whereas VP complication,
together with TEF was found in 9 (22%) patients. We found no significant
correlation between adjuvant radiotherapy and TEF complications. Most of
patients, 30 (73%), had positive pepsin level in saliva. Median value of pepsin
concentration in all patients was 4.8 (range 81.7). Median pepsin concentration
was higher in patients free of TEF or VP complications (6.6, range 81.7 vs. 3.2, 
range 19.3) but that difference was not statistically significant (Mann-Whitney
test, Z--1.562, p = 0.118). In addition, statistically insignificant negative
correlation between pepsin levels and voice quality measured by HRS scale
(Spearman's rho, p > 0.05). Although reflux was proposed as cause of TEF
complications and pepsin has been proven as a most sensitive and specific marker 
of ekstraesophageal reflux, we did not find any statistically significant
correlation between pepsin levels and occurrence of TEF or VP complications.

PMID: 23397763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mycologia. 2013 May-Jun;105(3):547-63. doi: 10.3852/12-266. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Multigene sequence data reveal morphologically cryptic phylogenetic species
within the genus Laccaria in southern Australia.

Sheedy EM(1), Van de Wouw AP, Howlett BJ, May TW.

Author information: 
(1)School of Botany, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
e.sheedy@student.unimelb.edu.au

Laccaria (Hydnangiaceae, Agaricales, Basidiomycota) is one of the more
intensively studied ectomycorrhizal genera; however, species boundaries within
Laccaria and the closely related Hydnangium and Podohydnangium in Australia have 
not yet been examined with molecular sequence data. Based on morphological
characters, eight native species of Laccaria are currently recognized in
Australia, as well as three Hydnangium species and the monotypic Podohydnangium
australe. Sequences of the internal transcribed spacer region of nuclear rDNA
(ITS), RNA polymerase beta subunit II (rpb2) and translation elongation factor 1 
alpha (tef-1a) were generated from 77 collections of Laccaria, Hydnangium and
Podohydnangium from Australia. Ten phylogenetic species and a further 11
potential species (represented by singletons) of Laccaria in Australia are
delimited from sequence analyses. Most of the morphological species contained
cryptic phylogenetic species, but these species were always nested entirely
within a given morphological species, although not always as sister taxa. The
rpb2 locus performed best as a species barcode with pairwise and patristic
distance measures. The ITS sequence region returned the least resolved gene tree 
of the three regions examined and was the least useful as a barcode region. Based
on the phylogenetic topology, there appears to have been multiple gains and/or
losses of the ectomycorrhizal association of some species with the myrtle beech, 
Nothofagus cunninghamii as well as of sequestrate basidiocarps and two-spored
basidia.

PMID: 23396157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Feb;23(1):3-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1333891. Epub 2013
Feb 1.

The Foker technique (FT) and Kimura advancement (KA) for the treatment of
children with long-gap esophageal atresia (LGEA): lessons learned at two European
centers.

Sroka M(1), Wachowiak R, Losin M, Szlagatys-Sidorkiewicz A, Landowski P,
Czauderna P, Foker J, Till H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Urology for Children and Adolescents, Medical
University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: We present the experiences from two European centers performing the
Foker technique (FT) of esophageal lengthening by axial traction and the Kimura
advancement (KA) method of lengthening the upper pouch by extrathoracic resiting 
a spit fistula (SF) in children with long-gap esophageal atresia (LGEA, gap
length > 5 cm).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 15 children were treated (8 pure EA, 6 lower
tracheoesophageal fistula [TEF], and 1 upper TEF). Gaps ranged from 5 to 14 cm.
Nine children already had a SF. Patients were grouped according to the presence
of a SF and the subsequent surgical strategy: Group A (no SF, n = 6) received FT 
on both pouches. Group B (with SF, n = 6) received KA of SF and FT of the lower
pouch. Group C (with SF, n = 3) received closure of the SF and subsequent Foker
traction (CSFT) on both pouches.
RESULTS: Group A: Primary repairs for all six children (mean age 3 months, gap
length 6.5 cm) after a mean traction time of 3 weeks and a mean of 2.1
thoracotomies (range 2 to 3). Dilations were required in three out of six for
anastomotic strictures with one perforation during the second dilation. Group B: 
All six children (mean age 16.4 months, gap length 9.5 cm) had a primary
anastomosis, although for two it was significantly delayed (48 and 143 weeks
traction time) because of infections. The number of thoracotomies ranged from 2
to 8 (mean 3.6). Leaks occurred in five out of six anastomoses (responsive to
conservative management). Two children developed severe strictures, which
required the anastomosis to be redone. In group C (mean age 10.6 months, gap
length 6.5 cm), several major complications occurred. The three SF closures
leaked (one iatrogenic) causing severe mediastinitis. CSFT was successful in only
one case and the other two children had an esophageal replacement (stomach,
jejunum). No deaths occurred in the series.
CONCLUSION: FT of both pouches (group A) resulted in primary repairs of all six
LGEA patients. The combination of KA and FT (group B) resulted in an equivalent
rate of primary repairs, but with an increased number of thoracotomies and rate
of complications compared with group A. CSFT (group C) resulted in a high failure
rate. More data are needed (we propose a multicenter registry) to elucidate the
safety and efficacy of each elongation technique and to establish an algorithm
with clearer inclusion and exclusion criteria.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23378143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Toxicology. 2013 Nov 16;313(2-3):129-33. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.01.009. Epub
2013 Jan 26.

Mixtures of endocrine disruptors: how similar must mechanisms be for
concentration addition to apply?

Webster TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health,
715 Albany St., Boston, MA 02118, USA. Electronic address: twebster@bu.edu.

Must molecular mechanisms be the same for concentration addition to predict the
effect of a mixture or is it sufficient for compounds to affect similar pathways 
or common outcomes? Does concentration addition provide a closer approximation to
observations than alternative models such as independent action? Suppose effects 
are mediated by hormone A through receptor R, synthesis of A is reduced by
compound B, and that C is a competitive antagonist to A. Both B and C reduce
levels of the receptor-ligand complex AR but via different specific mechanisms.
Are combinations of B and C concentration additive? We used simple
pharmacodynamic models, deriving mathematical models using equilibrium binding
and mass balance. Assume A binds the receptor at one site of R with effects
proportional to the concentration of AR. Let C act as a competitive antagonist
via the Gaddum equation. Let B affect synthesis of A via a function g(B). We
derive a model describing the joint response surface of B and C, and a function
describing its isoboles. Under concentration addition, the isoboles must be
negatively sloped straight lines. We show that linearity of the isoboles depends 
crucially on g(B). The mixture is concentration additive if g<U+2033>(B), the second
derivative of g(B) with respect to B, is always zero. Responses are greater than 
concentration additive if g<U+2033>(B) is always positive and less than concentration
additive if g<U+2033>(B) is always negative. We describe functions g(B) that lead to all
three cases as well as one that is greater than concentration additive in some
regions and less than concentration additive in others. At least in this simple
model, concentration addition cannot be assumed: mixtures of competitive
antagonists and compounds that alter hormone synthesis can lead to results that
are concentration additive, greater than concentration additive or less than
concentration additive. Nevertheless, concentration addition appears to provide a
closer approximation to the pharmacodynamic model examined here than independent 
action. Care needs to be taken in extrapolating to other situations, but analysis
of simple pharmacodynamic models appears to be a useful strategy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23357612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. IMA Fungus. 2012 Dec;3(2):159-73. doi: 10.5598/imafungus.2012.03.02.08. Epub 2012
Nov 30.

Two novel species of Aspergillus section Nigri from indoor air.

Jurjevic Z(1), Peterson SW, Stea G, Solfrizzo M, Varga J, Hubka V, Perrone G.

Author information: 
(1)EMSL Analytical, Inc., 200 Route 130 North, Cinnaminson, New Jersey 08077 USA;

Aspergillus floridensis and A. trinidadensis spp. nov. are described as novel
uniseriate species of Aspergillus section Nigri isolated from air samples. To
describe the species we used phenotypes from 7-d Czapek yeast extract agar
culture (CYA), creatine agar culture (CREA) and malt extract agar culture (MEA), 
with support by molecular analysis of the ß-tubulin, calmodulin, RNA polymerase
II (RPB2), and translation elongation factor-alpha (TEF) gene amplified and
sequenced from 56 air isolates and one isolate from almonds belonging to
Aspergillus sectionNigri.Aspergillus floridensis is closely related to A.
aculeatus, and A. trinidadensis is closely related to A. aculeatinus. Aspergillus
brunneoviolaceus (syn. A. fijiensis) and A. uvarum are reported for the first
time from the USA and from the indoor air environment. The newly described
species do not produce ochratoxin A.

PMCID: PMC3539319
PMID: 23355969  [PubMed]


353. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 2014 Jan-Feb;42(1):56-63. doi:
10.1016/j.aller.2012.08.010. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Utility of opium seed extract tests in preventing hypersensitivity reactions
during surgery.

Armentia A(1), Pineda F(2), Palacios R(2), Martín-Gil FJ(3), Miguel AS(3), Arenal
JJ(4), Tejedor J(5), Tef BM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Unit, Rio Hortega University Hospital, UMDAI, Valladolid, Spain.
Electronic address: aliciaarmentia@gmail.com. (2)DIATER Laboratories, Madrid,
Spain. (3)Clinical Chemistry Service, Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega,
Valladolid, Spain. (4)Surgical Service, Hospital Universitario Rio Hortega,
Valladolid, Spain. (5)Health Area Director, Delegacion del Gobierno de Castilla y
León, Spain. (6)Research Unit, IEN, Rio Hortega University Hospital, Valladolid, 
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Anaphylaxis during anaesthesia is fatal in 3-9% of patients and
analgesics, including opioids, and is the second most common medicament-related
cause, although the prevalence is underestimated. We recently found that patients
may generate IgE antibodies to opium seeds.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the diagnostic accuracy of specific antibodies to
morphine, codeine, rocuronium and oil body and aqueous fractions of Papaver
somniferum seeds in the diagnosis and prevention of allergy to opioids.
METHODS: Patients with hypersensitivity reactions during surgery, and severe
clinical allergy (pollen, tobacco), and illicit heroin users were selected. The
sensitivity, specificity and predictive values of in vivo and in vitro diagnostic
techniques including oil body and aqueous fractions of P. somniferum seeds were
measured.
RESULTS: We studied 203 patients, with mean age 35.1±17.1 and 200 healthy
controls. Patients sensitised to heroin or with hypersensitivity reactions during
surgery responded to P. somniferum seed tests. Of patients not known to be
sensitised to opioids, the highest positivity was in patients sensitised to
tobacco (p<0.001). Opium seed skin tests and IgE, especially the oil body
fraction, were more sensitive (64.2%) and specific (98.4%) than morphine, codeine
and rocuronium tests for opioid sensitivity. Pollen allergy was not a risk factor
for sensitisation to morphine.
CONCLUSIONS: Sensitivity to opioids and intraoperative anaphylaxis can be
diagnosed by routine tests. IgE and skin tests for the oil body fraction of P.
somniferum had the highest sensitivity for sensitisation to opioids.

Copyright © 2012 SEICAP. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23332099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2012 Sep 11;83(1):119. doi: 10.4102/jsava.v83i1.119.

Preliminary evaluation of selected minerals in liver samples from springbok
(Antidorcas marsupialis) from the National Zoological Gardens of South Africa.

Mbatha KR(1), Lane EP, Lander M, Tordiffe AS, Corr S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research and Scientific Services, National Zoological Gardens of
South Africa, South Africa. khanyi@nzg.ac.za

Limited information is available on the mineral nutrition of captive antelope in 
South Africa. Zoo animals are usually offered a very limited array of feeds,
which may result in nutritional imbalances. As a pilot study to investigate the
presence of myopathy in antelope at the National Zoological Gardens of South
Africa (NZG), stored liver samples from six springbok (Antidorcas marsupialis)
and seven other antelopes from the NZG, as well as selected food items, were
submitted for analysis of selenium, copper, manganese and zinc content by
spectrophotometry. Springbok liver levels of copper were 23.07 mg/kg ± 0.72
mg/kg, whilst manganese, selenium and zinc levels were 6.73 mg/kg ± 0.22 mg/kg,
0.14 mg/kg ± 0.05 mg/kg and 135.02 mg/kg ± 1.26 mg/kg, respectively. Liver
mineral levels in the other species were very variable. Food item copper levels
ranged from 4.00 mg/kg (Eragrostis tef) to 17.38 mg/kg (antelope cubes), lucerne 
(Medicago sativa) and E. tef contained no detectable selenium. The highest zinc
levels were in antelope cubes (147.00 mg/kg) and the lowest were in lucerne
(20.80 mg/kg). Interpretation of these results was hampered by the small number
of samples and a paucity of information on liver mineral levels in free-ranging
and captive antelope; however, results suggested that, in the springbok, whilst
copper and manganese intake are likely adequate, selenium nutrition is probably
insufficient and may account for the myopathy diagnosed. Zinc liver levels are
possibly within the toxic range, perhaps as a result of the high levels of zinc
in the antelope cubes. This pilot study highlighted the need to establish
baseline mineral nutrition data for captive and freeranging antelope under South 
African conditions.

PMID: 23327132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Mar 15;128-129:203-14. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2012.12.013.
Epub 2012 Dec 26.

Relative potency of PCB126 to TCDD for sublethal embryotoxicity in the mummichog 
(Fundulus heteroclitus).

Rigaud C(1), Couillard CM, Pellerin J, Légaré B, Gonzalez P, Hodson PV.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Mer, Université du Québec à Rimouski, Rimouski,
Québec, Canada.

The relative potency (ReP) of 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) for sublethal responses was assessed
in Fundulus heteroclitus embryos. Eggs were treated with intravitelline
injections of graded sublethal doses of PCB126 (312-5000 pg g(-1) wet weight, ww)
or TCDD (5-1280 pg g(-1) ww). At 16 days post-fertilization (DPF), craniofacial
deformities were observed in larvae hatched from eggs treated with the two
highest doses of PCB126 (2500-5000 pg g(-1) ww). Both compounds caused a
dose-responsive reduction of larval growth and prey capture ability (at =1250 pg 
g(-1) ww), and induction of ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity (at =80 
pg g(-1) ww). The dose-response relationships for EROD activity for PCB126 and
TCDD had similar slopes and the ReP of PCB126 to TCDD for EROD activity was
estimated at 0.71. This is 140-fold higher than the World Health Organization
(WHO) TCDD equivalency factor (TEF) of PCB126 for fish (0.005), which is based on
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) embryolethality data. The slope of the
dose-response relationship for prey capture ability for PCB126 was steeper than
for TCDD, suggesting different mechanisms of action. Expression levels of several
genes were also studied by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) following exposure to single doses of TCDD or PCB126 (1280 and 1250 pg
g(-1) ww, respectively) causing similar EROD induction. A different pattern of
responses was observed between PCB126 and TCDD: PCB126 appeared to induce
antioxidant responses by inducing sod2 expression, while TCDD did not. These
results suggest that relative potencies are species-specific and that the current
ReP for PCB126 underestimates its toxicity for some fish species. It is
recommended to develop species-specific RePs for a variety of sublethal endpoints
and at environmentally relevant doses.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23314333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Interdiscip Sci. 2012 Sep;4(3):201-8. doi: 10.1007/s12539-012-0128-7. Epub 2013
Jan 8.

Molecular differentiation of Fusarium spp. with varied lifestyles based on TEF 1 
alpha gene sequence analysis.

Barik BP(1), Tayung K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and DBT-Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility,
North Orissa University, Sriramchandra Vihar, Takatpur, Baripada, Odisha, 757003,
India.

The occurrence of Fusarium in different lifestyles is quite speculative. Methods 
to differentiate them morphologically are extremely difficult. Molecular studies 
available to discriminate this species with varied lifestyles are insufficient.
Herein, we investigated affiliation among endophytic, saprophytic and pathogenic 
Fusarium species considering TEF1 alpha gene sequences and attempted to mark out 
differences within different groups based on in silico proteomic analyses. The
study revealed similar named Fusarium species clustered together based on their
lifestyles forming distinct clades, indicating that coding genes could be better 
used as a phylogenetic marker than non-coding one to differentiate Fusarium
species occurring in different forms. Translated proteins showed similarity
between endophytic and pathogenic forms in terms of instability and aliphatic
indices. Grand average of hydropathicity (GRAVY) exhibited negative values
indicating hydrophilic nature of the proteins. The generated consensus RNA
secondary structures of different forms revealed distinct structural features
supporting the phylogenetic inference. Protein disorders are found to be quite
high in all forms of Fusarium species studied implying its complexity and ability
to adapt in diverse environments.

PMID: 23292693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Pediatr Surg Int. 2013 May;29(5):519-23. doi: 10.1007/s00383-012-3255-7. Epub
2013 Jan 5.

Combined free autologous auricular cartilage and fascia lata graft repair for a
recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula.

Sugiyama A(1), Urushihara N, Fukumoto K, Fukuzawa H, Watanabe K, Mitsunaga M,
Aoba T, Park S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Shizuoka Children's Hospital, Shizuoka,
Japan. akihide@mte.biglobe.ne.jp

Repair of recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) after repair of congenital
esophageal atresia continues to be a difficult problem. The most common
re-operation for a recurrent TEF involves repair via a right thoracotomy and use 
of a flap as interposed tissue between the closure sites. Although several
materials have been reported for recurrent fistula repair, natural pedicled flaps
have been used in most previous reports. The harvesting of a pedicled flap can
sometimes be difficult when the patient has had multiple surgeries. In this
report, the successful use of a combined free autologous auricular cartilage and 
free fascia lata graft repair for a complex patient with multiple recurrent TEFs 
is described. We believe that our technique should be considered as an approach
for patients with recurrent TEF.

PMID: 23292540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Ecol Resour. 2013 Mar;13(2):210-7. doi: 10.1111/1755-0998.12058. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

Genome-assisted development of nuclear intergenic sequence markers for
entomopathogenic fungi of the Metarhizium anisopliae species complex.

Kepler RM(1), Rehner SA.

Author information: 
(1)Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, USDA-ARS, Bldg 010A,
Beltsville, MD 20705, USA.

Entomopathogenic fungi in the genus Metarhizium are useful for biological control
programmes against economically important arthropod pests worldwide. However,
understanding the true diversity and ecology of these organisms is hampered by
convergent morphologies between species. The application of molecular techniques 
has enabled greater resolution of species than allowed by morphology alone. In
particular, the commonly used biocontrol agent M. anisopliae was found to be a
species complex composed of nine species. This prior work was conducted with
commonly used markers in fungal phylogenetics (BTUB, RPB1, RPB2 and TEF), which
likely under-represent diversity in the M. anisopliae complex. Using sequence
data from nuclear genomes of M. acridum and M. robertsii we identified regions of
conserved gene synteny and developed primers to amplify intergenic regions of
seven loci. Using ex-type and authenticated tissue specimens for species in the
M. anisopliae complex, we demonstrate that sequence data derived from intergenic 
loci is more variable and phylogenetically informative than previously available 
markers. These new markers will facilitate investigations at or below the species
level for the M. anisopliae complex. The method of marker development employed
here should be extendable to any group with sufficiently divergent genome data
available.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMID: 23286460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. ISRN Orthop. 2013 Feb 28;2013:801784. doi: 10.1155/2013/801784. eCollection 2013.

TEFTOM: A Promising General Trauma Expectation/Outcome Measure-Results of a
Validation Study on Pan-American Ankle and Distal Tibia Trauma Patients.

Suk M(1), Daigl M(2), Buckley RE(3), Paccola CA(4), Lorich DG(5), Helfet DL(6),
Hanson B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopaedic Trauma Service, College of Medicine Jacksonville, University of
Florida, 655 West Eight St, 2nd Floor ACC, Jacksonville, FL 32209, USA.
(2)Clinical Investigation and Documentation, AO Foundation, Stettbachstrasse 6,
8600 Duebendorf, Switzerland. (3)Department of Surgery, Foothills Medical Centre,
University of Calgary, AC 144A, 1403 29th Street NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 2T9.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Ribeirão Preto School of
Medicine, São Paulo University, São Paolo, Brazil. (5)Orthopaedic Trauma Service,
New York Presbyterian University Hospital of Columbia and Cornell, 525 East 68th 
Street, New York, NY 10065-4870, USA. (6)Orthopaedic Trauma Service, Hospital for
Special Surgery, 535 East 70th Street, New York, NY 10021-4898, USA.

Background. In orthopedics, there is no instrument specifically designed to
assess patients' expectations of their final surgery outcome in general trauma
populations. We developed the Trauma Expectation Factor Trauma Outcome Measure
(TEFTOM) to investigate the fulfilment of patients' expectations one year after
surgery as a measure of general trauma surgical outcomes. The aim of this paper
was to assess the psychometric characteristics of this new general trauma outcome
measure. Methods. The questionnaire was tested in 201 ankle and distal tibia
fracture patients scheduled for surgery. Patients were followed up for twelve
months. The TEFTOM questionnaire was evaluated for its criterion validity,
internal consistency, reproducibility, and responsiveness. Results. TOM showed
good criterion validity against the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Foot
and Ankle Scale (Pearson's correlation coefficient = 0.69-0.77). Internal
consistency was acceptable for TEF (Cronbach's alpha = 0.65-0.76) and excellent
for TOM (Cronbach's alpha = 0.76-0.85). Reproducibility was moderate to very good
(intraclass coefficient correlation (ICC) =0.67) for TEF and very good (ICC
=0.92) for TOM. TOM also proved to be responsive to changes in patients'
condition over time (Wald test; P < 0.001). Conclusions. TEFTOM is a promising
tool for measuring general trauma outcomes in terms of patients' expectation
fulfilment that proved to be valid, internally consistent, reproducible, and
responsive to change.

PMCID: PMC4045348
PMID: 24967116  [PubMed]


360. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013 Aug;37(8):1147-53. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2012.200. Epub 2012
Dec 11.

Energy expenditure in obese children with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a.

Shoemaker AH(1), Lomenick JP, Saville BR, Wang W, Buchowski MS, Cone RD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Vanderbilt Children's Hospital,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. ashley.h.shoemaker@vanderbilt.edu

CONTEXT: Patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a (PHP-1a) develop
early-onset obesity. The abnormality in energy expenditure and/or energy intake
responsible for this weight gain is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate energy expenditure in children
with PHP-1a compared with obese controls.
PATIENTS: We studied 6 obese females with PHP-1a and 17 obese female controls.
Patients were recruited from a single academic center.
MEASUREMENTS: Resting energy expenditure (REE) and thermogenic effect of a high
fat meal were measured using whole room indirect calorimetry. Body composition
was assessed using whole body dual energy x-ray absorptiometry. Fasting glucose, 
insulin, and hemoglobin A1C were measured.
RESULTS: Children with PHP-1a had decreased REE compared with obese controls
(P<0.01). After adjustment for fat-free mass, the PHP-1a group's REE was 346.4
kcals day(-1) less than obese controls (95% CI (-585.5--106.9), P<0.01). The
thermogenic effect of food (TEF), expressed as percent increase in postprandial
energy expenditure over REE, was lower in PHP-1a patients than obese controls,
but did not reach statistical significance (absolute reduction of 5.9%, 95% CI
(-12.2-0.3%), P=0.06).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that children with PHP-1a have decreased REE
compared with the obese controls, and that may contribute to the development of
obesity in these children. These patients may also have abnormal diet-induced
thermogenesis in response to a high-fat meal. Understanding the causes of obesity
in PHP-1a may allow for targeted nutritional or pharmacologic treatments in the
future.

PMCID: PMC3610772
PMID: 23229731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Pediatr Surg. 2012 Nov;47(11):e11-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.06.012.

Double H-type tracheoesophageal fistulas identified and repaired in 1 operation.

Mattei P(1).

Author information: 
(1)General, Thoracic and Fetal Surgery, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. mattei@email.chop.edu

Isolated tracheoesophageal ("H-type") fistula is a relatively uncommon congenital
anomaly that can be difficult to identify and, at times, challenging to repair.
We present a very unusual case of an infant with 2 distinct H-type
tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs) identified and repaired in 1 operation. A
newborn male infant presented with coughing with feeds. Contrast esophagram
demonstrated an intrathoracic H-type fistula without esophageal atresia. In the
operating room, rigid bronchoscopy was performed, and a second TEF was identified
in the cervical region. A separate balloon catheter was placed in each fistula.
The intrathoracic fistula was repaired through a thoracotomy incision, and the
more proximal fistula was repaired through a cervical incision. Each repair was
uncomplicated, and recovery was uneventful. Double H-type tracheoesophageal
appears to be extremely rare. This case underscores the importance of searching
for a second fistula by bronchoscopy before undertaking definitive repair of a
TEF.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23164022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Aug;50(8):568-70.

[Multi-disciplinary hybrid therapy for tracheoesophageal fistula in children:
analysis of 4 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng ZH(1), Yan ZL, Yin Y, Zhang L, Chu B, Xu YZ, Zhang B, Jiang LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore an innovative technique that is aided by multi-disciplinary
hybrid approach in identification and treatment of tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) in children intraoperatively.
METHOD: From April 2008 to October 2011, 4 patients with isolated TEF were
presented with 2 H-type fistulas and 2 recurrent TEF. For all the four cases,
with the cooperation of the gastroenterologists, respiratory physician and
surgeon, methylene blue was first injected into the trachea for detecting the dye
in the esophagus by the gastroscopy. Bronchoscopy was performed where the fistula
tract was shown by the methylene blue and a guide wire was passed through the
fistula. The patients underwent rigid gastroscopy and the guide wire was
identified and brought out through the mouth by biopsy pliers. This created a
wire loop through the fistula. X-ray was then used to identify the level of the
fistula. According to the level of the fistula it was determined whether surgical
incision and approach should be used. The fistula was then repaired successfully 
by surgery.
RESULT: In the 4 patients, with the aid of gastroscopy and bronchoscopy,
identification of the fistula intraoperatively was then facilitated by traction
on the loop. The fistula was identified and repaired. There were no fistula
recurrences.
CONCLUSION: Multi-disciplinary hybrid therapy for tracheoesophageal fistula in
children is beneficial for the precise localization of the fistula. This new
technique is an effective and definitive method in identification and treatment
of TEF in children.

PMID: 23158731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Fertil Steril. 2013 Feb;99(2):362-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.10.003. Epub 
2012 Nov 10.

The impact of surgical sperm retrieval on the in vitro fertilization outcomes of 
infertile patients with temporary ejaculation failure on their oocyte retrieval
day.

Junsheng L(1), Quan B, Ying L, Xiaoying Z, Ming L, Ping Z, Ping L, Jie Q.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medical Centre, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking
University Third Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2013 Sep;190(3):990.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of testicular sperm aspiration on the clinical 
outcomes of IVF patients with temporary ejaculation failure (TEF) on the day of
oocyte retrieval.
DESIGN: A case-control study.
SETTING: University-affiliated IVF center.
PATIENT(S): One hundred eight infertile couples encountering TEF on the day of
oocyte retrieval.
INTERVENTION(S): Testicular sperm aspiration and intracytoplasmic sperm injection
(TESA-ICSI) were employed to help the TEF couples to complete their IVF
treatments. A group of obstructive azoospermia (OA) patients was chosen as a
control group to evaluate the efficiency and safety of this intervention.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Fertilization rates, transferable embryo rates, and
clinical pregnancy rates (PRs).
RESULT(S): Through the TESA-ICSI, TEF couples achieved a 38.83% (40/103) clinical
PR per IVF cycle. Compared with the OA group, the TEF group showed a comparable
fertilization rate (66.43% vs. 65.25%), transferable embryo rate (60.76% vs.
60.85%), and PR (51.61% vs. 50.00%) in thawed ET cycles but a relatively low PR
(25.49% vs. 44.64%) in fresh ET cycles.
CONCLUSION(S): TESA-ICSI is a relatively efficient and safe way to help the
patients encountering TEF.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23148923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Pediatr Surg Int. 2013 Feb;29(2):171-7. doi: 10.1007/s00383-012-3195-2.

Abnormal control of lung branching in experimental esophageal atresia.

Fragoso AC(1), Aras-Lopez R, Martinez L, Estevão-Costa J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, INGEMM and Idipaz Research Laboratory,
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Paseo de La Castellana, 261, 28046, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: Esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA-TEF) result from
abnormal division of the foregut into esophagus and trachea thus, it may
influence airway branching and lung development. The present study examined lung 
morphogenesis in fetuses with EA-TEF focusing in the expression of FGF10 and its 
receptor FGFR2 IIIb.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either 1.75 mg/kg i.p. adriamycin or vehicle on
E7, E8 and E9. Embryos were recovered at E15, E18 and E21 and lungs processed for
immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Three groups were studied: control,
adriamycin-exposed with EA-TEF, and adriamycin-exposed without EA-TEF.
Comparisons were performed with Mann-Whitney or t tests (significance level,
5 %).
RESULTS: Lung weight at E15 and E18 were significantly lower in adriaEA fetuses
in which the relative mRNA levels of FGF10 were significantly higher. These
differences disappeared near term. The receptor FGFR2 IIIb messenger was only
significantly increased in adria noEA fetuses at E15. Immunohistochemical study
was consistent with these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal expression of FGF10 during earlier stages of development,
when the lungs are smaller than controls, suggests a compensatory response aimed 
at "catching up" delayed tracheobronchial branching. Whether similar changes take
place in the human condition and influence respiratory physiology remain to be
determined.

PMID: 23143078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mov Disord. 2012 Nov;27(13):1694-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.25195. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Association of Tef polymorphism with depression in Parkinson disease.

Hua P(1), Liu W, Kuo SH, Zhao Y, Chen L, Zhang N, Wang C, Guo S, Wang L, Xiao H, 
Kwan JY, Wu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Circadian rhythm disturbance has been implicated in depression, and
polymorphisms of circadian genes Cry1, Cry2, and Tef are associated with
depression. However, the relationship between these genes and depression symptoms
in Parkinson's disease (PD) has not been established.
METHODS: Four hundred eight subjects with PD participated in this study.
Demographics, UPDRS, Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE), and Hamilton Rating
Scale for Depression (HAMD) were obtained in all subjects. Frequency of
polymorphisms of Cry1 rs2287161, Cry2 rs10838524, and Tef rs738499 was
determined, and the association between genetic polymorphisms of circadian genes 
and HAMD scores in patients with PD was examined.
RESULTS: Tef, but not Cry1 or Cry2, is associated with HAMD scores in patients
with PD in a linear regression model after adjusting for clinical variables (P = 
0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: The polymorphism of Tef rs738499 is associated with depression
symptoms in PD.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

PMID: 23138696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Ter Arkh. 2012;84(9):22-9.

[Aspects of risk stratification in acute coronary syndrome: prognostic value of
evaluation of left ventricular myocardial viability according to the data of
pharmacological stress echocardiography].

[Article in Russian]

Gukasian VA, Matskeplishvili ST, Ioshina VI, Aripov MA, Shakhnazarian LS,
Asymbekova ÉU, Zhertovskaia EV, Buziashvili IuI.

AIM: To define the prognostic value of the indicators of left ventricular
myocardial viability according to the data of pharmacological stress
echocardiography in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The results of examinations were analyzed in a total of 91
patients with ACS; 71 of them were found to have areas of asynergy (these cases
formed the key basis for statistical processing). An analysis of the outcomes
registered in the established follow-up period (mean 14.3 +/- 0.7 months) took
into consideration death from cardiac diseases, a recurrent acute coronary
episode (nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI), unstable angina (UA)).
RESULTS: Risk stratification for cardiac events in patients with ACS requires
both the assessment of a myocardial viability testing result and the detection of
stress-induced ischemia. An analysis of the impact of the indicators of
myocardial viability on prognosis in the ACS group showed that the most important
predictors of cardiac death were impaired segmental contractility index (ISCI),
number of asynergic segments, and total ejection fraction (TEF) at rest; TEF,
ISCI, number of segments with a negative response to low-dose drug infusion; TEF,
deltaTEF (as compared to the baseline data), and a positive or negative peak
stress testing result. The most important predictors of major cardiac events
(death MI, UA) were ascertained to be ISCI, number of asynergic segments, resting
TEF; TEF, ISCI, number of segments with a negative response to low-dose drug
infusion; a positive or negative testing result, TEF, deltaTEF (as compared to
the baseline data), and ISCI during the peak stress test.
CONCLUSION: The low myocardial/coronary reserve increases mortality rates; the
high one worsens the prognosis of major cardiac events, particularly when the
test is positive, which tacitly transfers these patients to a very high risk
group.

PMID: 23091849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Pediatr Surg. 2012 Oct;47(10):e9-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.05.012.

Flexible bronchoscopic cannulation of an isolated H-type tracheoesophageal
fistula in a newborn.

Amat F(1), Heraud MC, Scheye T, Canavese M, Labbé A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Pediatric Pulmonology, CHU-Estaing-University Teaching Hospital of
Clermont-Ferrand, Clermont-Ferrand, France. famat@chu-clermontferrand.fr

Congenital isolated H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (H-TEF) is a rare
malformation of the airways. Surgery should not be delayed once the diagnosis is 
established. Identification of the fistula during surgery is a prerequisite for a
successful outcome. Intubation or cannulation of the H-TEF with a catheter can
help the surgeon to identify the fistula. A rigid bronchoscope is generally used 
for cannulation of the fistula. Cannulation of an H-TEF in a newborn with a
flexible bronchoscope has the merit of simplicity and safety. We report the
insertion of a catheter in an isolated H-TEF in a newborn using a flexible
bronchoscope and think that this method can be easily applied.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23084237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Pediatr Surg. 2012 Oct;47(10):1926-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2012.07.051.

Esophageal atresia associated with a rare vascular ring and esophageal
duplication diverticulum: a case report and review of the literature.

Escobar MA Jr(1), Welke KF, Holland RM, Caty MG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Mary Bridge Children's Hospital & Health
Center, Tacoma, WA 98415, USA. Mauricio.escobar@multicare.org

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) associated with a
right aortic arch poses a dilemma to the pediatric surgeon, often necessitating
an operative approach via a left thoracotomy. A right aortic arch may be
associated with a vascular ring, and EA-TEF, too, has been reported in
association with a vascular ring. Rarely, esophageal atresia is associated with a
second esophageal anomaly, such as a so-called "esophageal lung." To our
knowledge, there is no report of all three in one patient. We report the first
case of a patient with associated EA-TEF, vascular ring (diverticulum of
Kommerell), and esophageal lung. The literature is reviewed for these rare
entities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23084209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Apr;97(7):3037-52. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4421-5. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Generalizing a hybrid synthetic promoter approach in Yarrowia lipolytica.

Blazeck J(1), Reed B, Garg R, Gerstner R, Pan A, Agarwala V, Alper HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, 1
University Station, C0400, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Both varied and strong promoters are essential for metabolic and pathway
engineering applications in any host organism. To enable this capacity, here we
demonstrate a generalizable method for the de novo construction of strong,
synthetic hybrid promoter libraries. Specifically, we demonstrate how promoter
truncation and fragment dissection analysis can be utilized to identify both
novel upstream activating sequences (UAS) and core promoters-the two components
required to generate hybrid promoters. As a base case, the native TEF promoter in
Yarrowia lipolytica was examined to identify putative UAS elements that serve as 
modular synthetic transcriptional activators. Resulting synthetic promoters
containing a core promoter region activated by between one and twelve tandem
repeats of the newly isolated, 230 nucleotide UASTEF#2 element showed promoter
strengths 3- to 4.5-fold times the native TEF promoter. Further analysis through 
transcription factor binding site abrogation revealed the GCR1p binding site to
be necessary for complete UASTEF#2 function. These various promoters were tested 
for function in a variety of carbon sources. Finally, by combining disparate UAS 
elements (in this case, UASTEF and UAS1B), we developed a high-strength promoter 
with for Y. lipolytica with an expression level of nearly sevenfold higher than
that of the strong, constitutive TEF promoter. Thus, the general strategy
described here enables the efficient, de novo construction of synthetic promoters
to both increase native expression capacity and to produce libraries for tunable 
gene expression.

PMID: 23053080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Chin Med J (Engl). 2012 Oct;125(19):3492-5.

Comparison of neonatal tolerance to thoracoscopic and open repair of esophageal
atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Ma L(1), Liu YZ, Ma YQ, Zhang SS, Pan NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Beijing Military General Hospital of Chinese
People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100700, China.

BACKGROUND: Advances in minimally invasive surgical techniques and neonatal
intensive care for neonates have allowed for repair of the neonatal esophageal
atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) to be approached endoscopically. 
However, thoracoscopic surgery in children is still performed in only a few
centers throughout the world. The aim of this study was to compare the neonatal
tolerance to the thoracoscopic repair (TR) and the open repair (OR) and also to
discuss anesthetic management in thoracoscopic procedure.
METHODS: We performed a prospective study enrolling newborns diagnosed with EA
with distal TEF (type C) receiving the repair surgery between June 2009 and
January 2012 in our institution. Data collected included the newborns'
gestational age and weight at the time of the operation, operative time,
parameters of intraoperative mechanical ventilation, oxygenation, end-tidal
carbon dioxide (ETCO2), and analysis of blood gases. Time to extubation and
length of stay were also recorded.
RESULTS: Intravenous induction with muscle paralysis followed by pressure-control
ventilation and tracheal intubation regardless of the position of the fistula can
be performed uneventfully in EA/TEF newborns with no additional airway anomalies 
and large, pericarinal fistulas in our experiences. The thoracoscopic approach
appeared to take longer than the open approach. During the procedure of repair,
hypercarbia and acidosis developed immediately 1 hour after pneumothorax in both 
groups. CO2 insufflation did have additional influence on the respiratory
function of the newborns in the TR group; values of PaCO2 and ETCO2 were higher
in the TR group but the difference did not reach statistical significance. By the
end of the procedure, values of PaCO2 and ETCO2 returned to the baseline levels
while pH did not, but all parameters made no difference in the two groups.
Besides, time to extubation was shorter in the TR group.
CONCLUSIONS: Thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF is comparable to the open repair, and
is believed to be safe and tolerable in selected patients. A wider range of
neonates may be acceptable for thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair with increasing
surgical experience.

PMID: 23044311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Metab Eng. 2013 Jan;15:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2012.08.007. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Engineering the push and pull of lipid biosynthesis in oleaginous yeast Yarrowia 
lipolytica for biofuel production.

Tai M(1), Stephanopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, United States.

Microbial oil production by heterotrophic organisms is a promising path for the
cost-effective production of biofuels from renewable resources provided high
conversion yields can be achieved. To this end, we have engineered the oleaginous
yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. We first established an expression platform for high
expression using an intron-containing translation elongation factor-1a (TEF)
promoter and showed that this expression system is capable of increasing gene
expression 17-fold over the intronless TEF promoter. We then used this platform
for the overexpression of diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGA1), the final step
of the triglyceride (TAG) synthesis pathway, which yielded a 4-fold increase in
lipid production over control, to a lipid content of 33.8% of dry cell weight
(DCW). We also show that the overexpression of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC1), the
first committed step of fatty acid synthesis, increased lipid content 2-fold over
control, or 17.9% lipid content. Next we combined the two genes in a tandem gene 
construct for the simultaneous coexpression of ACC1 and DGA1, which further
increased lipid content to 41.4%, demonstrating synergistic effects of ACC1+DGA1 
coexpression. The lipid production characteristics of the ACC1+DGA1 transformant 
were explored in a 2-L bioreactor fermentation, achieving 61.7% lipid content
after 120h. The overall yield and productivity were 0.195g/g and 0.143g/L/h,
respectively, while the maximum yield and productivity were 0.270g/g and
0.253g/L/h during the lipid accumulation phase of the fermentation. This work
demonstrates the excellent capacity for lipid production by the oleaginous yeast 
Y. lipolytica and the effects of metabolic engineering of two important steps of 
the lipid synthesis pathway, which acts to divert flux towards the lipid
synthesis and creates driving force for TAG synthesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23026119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Neonatal Surg. 2012 Oct 1;1(4):50.

Esophageal anastomosis medial to preserved azygos vein in esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula: restoration of normal mediastinal anatomy.

Rashid KA(1), Maletha M(1), Khan TR(1), Wakhlu A(1), Rawat J(1), Kureel SN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, King George Medical University, Lucknow,
India.

OBJECTIVE: We intended to prospectively study the technical feasibility and
advantages of esophageal anastomosis medial to the preserved azygos vein in
neonates diagnosed with esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA/TEF). The results were compared to the cases where azygos vein was either not
preserved, or the anastomosis was done lateral to the arch of preserved azygos
vein.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A total of 134 patients with EA/TEF were admitted between
January 2007 and July 2008 of which 116 underwent primary repair. Eleven patients
with long gap esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula and 7 
patients who expired before surgery were excluded. Patients were randomly divided
in three groups comparable with respect to the gestational age, age at
presentation, sex, birth weight, associated anomalies and the gap between the
pouches after mobilization: Group A (azygos vein ligated and divided), Group B
(azygos vein preserved with esophageal anastomosis lateral to the vein), and
Group C azygos vein preserved with esophageal anastomosis medial to the vein).
All the patients were operated by extra-pleural approach. The three groups were
compared with respect to operative time and early postoperative complications
like pneumonitis, anastomotic leaks and mortality. Odds ratio and Chi square test
were used for the statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Group A, B and C had 35, 43 and 38 patients respectively. No significant
difference was observed in average operative time in the 3 groups. Though
incidence of postoperative pneumonitis was higher in group A (28%) as compared to
group B (13.95%) and group C (11.62%), it was not statistically significant (p > 
0.005). Anastomotic leak occurred in 7 patients in group A (20%), 6 patients in
group B (13.95%) and 4 patients (10.52%) in group C (p > 0.005). Group A had 3
major and 4 minor anastomotic leaks; group B had 2 major and 4 minor leaks and
group C had 1 major and 3 minor leaks. There were10 deaths in the series- 5 in
group A, 3 in group B and 2 in group C (p > 0.005). Patients with major
anastomotic leaks in all 3 groups expired after re-exploration. The minor leaks
were managed conservatively and all of them healed spontaneously. Severe
pneumonitis and septicemia in patients having major associated anomalies also
contributed to the mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Although esophageal anastomosis medial to the preserved azygos vein 
restores the normal mediastinal anatomy without technical difficulty or increased
operative time, the study could not prove a statistically significant advantage
in terms of mortality and postoperative complications.

PMCID: PMC4420363
PMID: 26023409  [PubMed]


373. Environ Sci Technol. 2012 Oct 2;46(19):10781-8. doi: 10.1021/es302317y. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

Dioxin-like potency of HO- and MeO- analogues of PBDEs' the potential risk
through consumption of fish from eastern China.

Su G(1), Xia J, Liu H, Lam MH, Yu H, Giesy JP, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Resource Reuse & School of the
Environment, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) and their analogues, such as hydroxylated 
PBDE (HO-PBDEs) and methoxylated PBDE (MeO-PBDEs) are of interest due to their
wide distribution, bioaccumulation and potential toxicity to humans and wildlife.
While information on the toxicity/biological potencies of PBDEs was available,
information on analogues of PBDEs was limited. Dioxin-like toxicity of 34 PBDEs
analogues was evaluated by use of the H4IIE-luc, rat hepatoma transactivation
bioassay in 384-well plate format at concentrations ranging from 0 to 10<U+2009>000
ng/mL. Among the 34 target analogues of PBDEs studied here, 19 activated the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) and induced significant dioxin-like responses in
H4IIE-luc cells. Efficacies of the analogues of PBDEs ranged from 5.0% to 101.8% 
of the maximum response caused by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD-max) 
and their respective 2,3,7,8-TCDD potency factors (ReP(H4IIE-luc)) ranged from
7.35 × 10(-12) to 4.00 × 10(-4), some of which were equal to or more potent than 
some mono-ortho-substituted PCBs (TEF-(WHO) = 3 × 10(-5)). HO-PBDEs exhibited
greater dioxin-like activity than did the corresponding MeO-PBDEs. Analogues of
PBDEs were detected mostly in marine organisms. Of these 11 detected analogues of
PBDEs, 6 were found to have measurable dioxin-like potency. Though some analogues
of PBDEs exhibited significant dioxin-like potency as measured by responses of
the H4IIE-luc transactivation assay, concentrations of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) equivalents ((PBDEs
analogues)TEQ(H4IIE-luc)), calculated as the sum of the product of concentrations
of individual PBDE and their ReP(H4IIE-luc), were less than the tolerance limit
proposed by European Union and the oral reference dose (RfD) derived by U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, respectively. (Hazard Quotients (HQ) < 0.005)
Additional investigations should be conducted to evaluate the toxic potencies of 
these chemicals, especially for 2'-MeO-BDE-28, 4-HO-BDE-90, 6-HO-BDE-47, and
6-MeO-BDE-47, which had been detected in other environmental media, including
human blood.

PMID: 22954249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. APSP J Case Rep. 2012 Jan;3(1):4. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Early recognition of h-type tracheoesophageal fistula.

Riazulhaq M(1), Elhassan E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery King Faisal Hospital, Taif, KSA.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) without associated esophageal atresia (EA) is a
rare congenital anomaly. Diagnosis in neonatal period is usually not made and
most of the patients are treated as cases of pneumonia. A case of H-type of
tracheoesophageal fistula, diagnosed within 24 hours of delivery based upon
choking and cyanosis on first trial of feed, is being reported. Diagnosis was
confirmed with contrast esophagram. Through cervical approach fistula was
repaired and baby had uneventful post operative outcome.

PMCID: PMC3418037
PMID: 22953298  [PubMed]


375. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jan;1832(1):228-38. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.08.010.
Epub 2012 Aug 19.

Altered feeding differentially regulates circadian rhythms and energy metabolism 
in liver and muscle of rats.

Reznick J(1), Preston E, Wilks DL, Beale SM, Turner N, Cooney GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Sydney, Australia.

Energy metabolism follows a diurnal pattern responding to the light/dark cycle
and food availability. This study investigated the impact of restricting feeding 
to the daylight hours and feeding a high fat diet on circadian clock (bmal1, dbp,
tef and e4bp4) and metabolic (pepck, fas, ucp3, pdk4) gene expression and markers
of energy metabolism in muscle and liver of rats. The results show that in
chow-fed rats switched to daylight feeding, the peak diurnal expression of genes 
in liver was shifted by 6-12h while expression of these genes in muscle remained 
in a similar phase to rats feeding ad libitum. High fat feeding during the
daylight hours had limited effect on clock gene expression in liver or muscle but
shifted the peak expression of metabolic genes (pepck, fas) in liver by 6-12h.
The differential effects of daylight feeding on gene and protein expression in
muscle and liver were accompanied by an 8% reduction in whole body energy
expenditure, a 20-30% increased glycogen content during the light phase in muscle
of day-fed rats and increased adipose tissue deposition per gram food consumed.
These data demonstrate that a mismatch of feeding and light/dark cycle disrupts
tissue metabolism in muscle with significant consequences for whole body energy
homeostasis.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22952003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Sci Total Environ. 2013 Oct 1;463-464:1230-8. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2012.07.097. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Levels of PCDDs, PCDFs, and dioxin-like PCBs in human milk among Hong Kong
mothers.

Wong TW(1), Wong AH, Nelson EA, Qiu H, Ku SY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Sha Tin, New Territories, Hong Kong.

Dioxins are a family of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) listed under the
Stockholm Convention, and include PCDDs, PCDFs, and dioxin-like PCBs. These toxic
chemicals are carcinogenic, widely dispersed, and have long half-lives. They have
contaminated the food web and, being fat-soluble, accumulate in adipose tissues
and milk in the human body. To assess human exposure, we collected breast milk
samples from 137 first-time mothers recruited from around Hong Kong. Samples were
analysed by HRGC-HRMS in four pools, according to the subject's age and length of
residency. Exposure was related to age, duration of stay, and possibly diet.
Generally, older mothers, and mothers with a longer stay in Hong Kong, had higher
levels of dioxins in their milk. This pattern was clearest for the PCBs, although
deviations were observed for some of the PCDD/Fs. Mean concentrations, measured
per gram of lipid weight in terms of WHO toxic equivalents (WHO-TEQs), were 7.48 
pg/g for PCDD/Fs and 3.79 pg/g for PCBs, giving a total of 11.27 pg/g for PCDD/Fs
and PCBs combined. Compared to an earlier Hong Kong study we conducted in 2002,
the mean WHO-TEQ values in our latest findings were about 9% lower overall for
PCDD/Fs and 19% lower for PCBs, with the mean total WHO-TEQ for PCDD/Fs and PCBs 
being around 13% lower in this study. This indicates a general declining trend in
the levels of POPs in Hong Kong. However, our levels were still high when
compared to those in some other Asian-Pacific countries. More stringent policies 
on reducing and eliminating POPs should help to lower these. Continued
surveillance for POPs in human milk, as well as in common foodstuffs, will
provide us with important information on human exposures that will be necessary
for tracking our progress, and making future health risk assessments.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22939609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Environ Sci Health B. 2012;47(10):925-32. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2012.706549.

Assays of polychlorinated biphenyl congeners and co-contaminated heavy metals in 
the transgenic Arabidopsis plants carrying the recombinant guinea pig aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-mediated ß-glucuronidase reporter gene expression system.

Shimazu S(1), Ohta M, Ohkawa H, Ashida H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

The transgenic Arabidopsis plant XgD2V11-6 carrying the recombinant guinea pig
(g) aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated ß-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene 
expression system was examined for assay of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
congeners and co-contaminated heavy metals. When the transgenic Arabidopsis
plants were treated with PCB126 (toxic equivalency factor; TEF: 0.1) and PCB169
(TEF: 0.03), the GUS activity of the whole plants was increased significantly.
After treatment with PCB80 (TEF: 0), the GUS activity was nearly the same level
as that treated with 0.1% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) as a vehicle control. After
exposure to a 1:1 mixture of PCB126 and PCB169, the GUS activity was increased
additively. However, after exposure to a mixture of PCB126 and PCB80, the GUS
activity was lower than that of the treatment with PCB126 alone. Thus, PCB80
seemed to be an antagonist towards AhR. When the transgenic plants were treated
with each of the heavy metals Fe, Cu, Zn, Cd and Pb together with PCB126, Cd and 
Pb increased the PCB126-induced GUS activity. On the other hand, Fe, Cu and Zn
did not affect the PCB126-induced GUS activity. In the presence of the
biosurfactant mannosylerythritol lipid-B (MEL-B) and the carrier protein bovine
serum albumin (BSA), the PCB126-induced GUS activity was increased, but the
Cd-assisted PCB126-induced GUS activity was not affected. Thus, MEL-B and BSA
seemed to increase uptake and transport of PCB126, respectively.

PMID: 22938576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42766. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042766. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Comparative study of esophageal stent and feeding gastrostomy/jejunostomy for
tracheoesophageal fistula caused by esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen YH(1), Li SH, Chiu YC, Lu HI, Huang CH, Rau KM, Liu CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and 
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: A malignant tracheoesophageal/bronchoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a
life-threatening complication of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma. A feeding
gastrostomy/jejunostomy had been the most common treatment method for patients
with TEF before the era of stenting. The aim of this retrospective study is to
compare the prognosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma patients with TEF
treated with an esophageal metallic stent to those treated with a feeding
gastrostomy/jejunostomy.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed a total of 1011 patients with esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma between 1996 and 2011 at Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, and 86 patients with TEF (8.5%) were identified. The overall survival
and other clinical data were compared between 30 patients treated with an
esophageal metallic stent and 35 patients treated with a feeding
gastrostomy/jejunostomy.
RESULTS: Among the 65 patients receiving either an esophageal metallic stent or a
feeding gastrostomy/jejunostomy, univariate analysis showed that treatment
modality with an esophageal metallic stent (P = 0.007) and radiotherapy treatment
after fistula diagnosis (P = 0.04) were predictive of superior overall survival. 
In the multivariate comparison, treatment modality with an esophageal metallic
stent (P = 0.026, odds ratio: 1.859) represented the independent predictive
factor of superior overall survival. There were no significant differences
between groups in mean decrease in serum albumin or mean body weight loss.
Compared to the feeding gastrostomy/jejunostomy group, a significantly higher
proportion of patients in the stenting group (53% versus 14%, P = 0.001) were
able to receive chemotherapy within 30 days after fistula diagnosis, indicating
better infection control in the stenting group.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with a feeding gastrostomy/jejunostomy, an esophageal
metallic stent significantly improves overall survival in patients with malignant
TEF in our retrospective analysis. Esophageal metallic stent placement may be
considered the first-line of treatment for patients with malignant TEF.

PMCID: PMC3418295
PMID: 22912737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2013 Mar;97(5):2029-41. doi:
10.1007/s00253-012-4306-7. Epub 2012 Aug 22.

Characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae promoters for heterologous gene
expression in Kluyveromyces marxianus.

Lee KS(1), Kim JS, Heo P, Yang TJ, Sung YJ, Cheon Y, Koo HM, Yu BJ, Seo JH, Jin
YS, Park JC, Kweon DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering and Center for Human Interface Nano
Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, South Korea.

Kluyveromyces marxianus is now considered one of the best choices of option for
industrial applications of yeast because the strain is able to grow at high
temperature, utilizes various carbon sources, and grows fast. However, the use of
K. marxianus as a host for industrial applications is still limited. This
limitation is largely due to a lack of knowledge on the characteristics of the
promoters since the time and amount of protein expression is strongly dependent
on the promoter employed. In this study, four well-known constitutive promoters
(P(CYC), P(TEF), P(GPD), and P(ADH)) of Saccharomyces cerevisiae were
characterized in K. marxianus in terms of protein expression level and their
stochastic behavior. After constructing five URA3-auxotrophic K. marxianus
strains and a plasmid vector, four cassettes each comprising one of the
promoters--the gene for the green fluorescence protein (GFP)--CYC1 terminator
(T(CYC)) were inserted into the vector. GFP expression under the control of each 
one of the promoters was analyzed by reverse transcription PCR, fluorescence
microscopy, and flow cytometer. Using these combined methods, the promoter
strength was determined to be in the order of P(GPD) > P(ADH) ~ P(TEF) >> P(CYC).
All promoters except for the P(CYC) exhibited three distinctive populations,
including non-expressing cells, weakly expressing cells, and strongly expressing 
cells. The relative ratios between populations were strongly dependent on the
promoter and culture time. Forward scattering was independent of GFP fluorescence
intensity, indicating that the different fluorescence intensities were not just
due to different cell sizes derived from budding. It also excluded the
possibility that the non-expressing cells resulted from plasmid loss because
plasmid stability was maintained at almost 100 % over the culture time. The same 
cassettes, cloned into a single copy plasmid pRS416 and transformed into S.
cerevisiae, showed only one population. When the cassettes were integrated into
the chromosome, the stochastic behavior was markedly reduced. These combined
results imply that the gene expression stochasticity should be overcome in order 
to use this strain for delicate metabolic engineering, which would require the
co-expression of several genes.

PMID: 22911091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Genetics. 2012 Nov;192(3):819-29. doi: 10.1534/genetics.112.144436. Epub 2012 Aug
17.

High-throughput discovery of mutations in tef semi-dwarfing genes by
next-generation sequencing analysis.

Zhu Q(1), Smith SM, Ayele M, Yang L, Jogi A, Chaluvadi SR, Bennetzen JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602, USA.

Tef (Eragrostis tef) is a major cereal crop in Ethiopia. Lodging is the primary
constraint to increasing productivity in this allotetraploid species, accounting 
for losses of ~15-45% in yield each year. As a first step toward identifying
semi-dwarf varieties that might have improved lodging resistance, an ~6× fosmid
library was constructed and used to identify both homeologues of the dw3
semi-dwarfing gene of Sorghum bicolor. An EMS mutagenized population, consisting 
of ~21,210 tef plants, was planted and leaf materials were collected into 23
superpools. Two dwarfing candidate genes, homeologues of dw3 of sorghum and rht1 
of wheat, were sequenced directly from each superpool with 454 technology, and
120 candidate mutations were identified. Out of 10 candidates tested, six
independent mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing, including two
predicted detrimental mutations in both dw3 homeologues with a potential to
improve lodging resistance in tef through further breeding. This study
demonstrates that high-throughput sequencing can identify potentially valuable
mutations in under-studied plant species like tef and has provided mutant lines
that can now be combined and tested in breeding programs for improved lodging
resistance.

PMCID: PMC3522160
PMID: 22904035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 11;109(37):E2441-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212021109. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

The Hippo pathway target, YAP, promotes metastasis through its TEAD-interaction
domain.

Lamar JM(1), Stern P, Liu H, Schindler JW, Jiang ZG, Hynes RO.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator Yes-associated protein (YAP) is a major regulator
of organ size and proliferation in vertebrates. As such, YAP can act as an
oncogene in several tissue types if its activity is increased aberrantly.
Although no activating mutations in the yap1 gene have been identified in human
cancer, yap1 is located on the 11q22 amplicon, which is amplified in several
human tumors. In addition, mutations or epigenetic silencing of members of the
Hippo pathway, which represses YAP function, have been identified in human
cancers. Here we demonstrate that, in addition to increasing tumor growth,
increased YAP activity is potently prometastatic in breast cancer and melanoma
cells. Using a Luminex-based approach to multiplex in vivo assays, we determined 
that the domain of YAP that interacts with the TEAD/TEF family of transcription
factors but not the WW domains or PDZ-binding motif, is essential for
YAP-mediated tumor growth and metastasis. We further demonstrate that, through
its TEAD-interaction domain, YAP enhances multiple processes known to be
important for tumor progression and metastasis, including cellular proliferation,
transformation, migration, and invasion. Finally, we found that the metastatic
potential of breast cancer and melanoma cells is strongly correlated with
increased TEAD transcriptional activity. Together, our results suggest that
increased YAP/TEAD activity plays a causal role in cancer progression and
metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3443162
PMID: 22891335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Chemosphere. 2012 Nov;89(8):957-63. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.06.051. Epub 
2012 Aug 6.

Assessment of the daily intake of 62 polychlorinated biphenyls from dietary
exposure in South Korea.

Son MH(1), Kim JT, Park H, Kim M, Paek OJ, Chang YS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, POSTECH, San 31, Hyojadong,
Namku, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea.

The dietary intake of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) was estimated using the
sum of 62 PCB congeners (<U+2211>(62)PCBs), including seven indicator PCBs and 12
dioxin-like PCBs, in the South Korea. In this study, 200 individual food samples 
belonging to 40 different foodstuffs were investigated to estimate the
distribution of PCB congeners in five sampling cities. PCB exposure was estimated
using Korean dietary habits as established by the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES). The PCB concentrations in rice, the most frequently 
consumed food in Korea, was relatively low in whole food samples. The mean PCB
levels measured in fish were the highest in this study, but each fish is consumed
in relatively small amounts by the general population. Therefore, the daily
dietary intake should also be considered with regard to human exposure to PCBs,
especially with the consumption of contaminated foods. Dioxin-like PCB levels
were also calculated using TEF values that were established in 2005. The average 
levels (pg TEQ/g) were 0.0002 for rice and 0.0098 for fish. The dioxin-like PCBs 
accounted for a relatively small percentage of the total PCBs, compared to
previous studies. According to our research, the health risks associated with
exposure to PCBs could be estimated using the tolerable daily intake (TDI) of the
general population.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22874429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg. 2012 Jul;17(3):107-10. doi: 10.4103/0971-9261.98123.

Esophageal atresia associated with anorectal malformation: Is the outcome better 
after surgery in two stages in a limited resources scenario?

Singh S(1), Wakhlu A, Pandey A, Singh A, Kureel SN, Rawat J, Srivastava PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, CSM Medical University (Erstwhile King George
Medical University), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.

AIMS: To analyze whether outcome of neonates having esophageal atresia with or
without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA±TEF) associated with anorectal malformation
(ARM) can be improved by doing surgery in 2 stages.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective study of neonates having both EA±TEF and ARM
from 2004 to 2011. The patients with favorable parameters were operated in a
single stage, whereas others underwent first-stage decompression surgery for ARM.
Thereafter, once septicemia was under control and ventilator care available,
second-stage surgery for EA±TEF was performed.
RESULTS: Total 70 neonates (single stage = 20, 2 stages = 30, expired after
colostomy = 9, only EA±TEF repair needed = 11) were enrolled. The admission rate 
for this association was 1 per 290. Forty-one percent (24/70) neonates had
VACTERL association and 8.6% (6/70) neonates had multiple gastrointestinal
atresias. Sepsis screen was positive in 71.4% (50/70). The survival was 45%
(9/20) in neonates operated in a single stage and 53.3% (16/30) when operated in 
2 stages (P = 0.04). Data analysis of 50 patients revealed that the survived
neonates had significantly better birth weight, better gestational age, negative 
sepsis screen, no cardiac diseases, no pneumonia, and 2-stage surgery (P value
0.002, 0.003, 0.02, 0.02, 0.04, and 0.04, respectively). The day of presentation 
and abdominal distension had no significant effect (P value 0.06 and 0.06,
respectively). This was further supported by stepwise logistic regression
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: In a limited resources scenario, the survival rate of babies with
this association can be improved by treating ARM first and then for EA±TEF in
second stage, once mechanical ventilator care became available and sepsis was
under control.

PMCID: PMC3409897
PMID: 22869975  [PubMed]


384. Int J Food Microbiol. 2012 Sep 3;158(3):171-85. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2012.06.021. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

ATP citrate lyase 1 (acl1) gene-based loop-mediated amplification assay for the
detection of the Fusarium tricinctum species complex in pure cultures and in
cereal samples.

Niessen L(1), Gräfenhan T, Vogel RF.

Author information: 
(1)Lehrstuhl für Technische Mikrobiologie, Technische Universität München,
Weihenstephaner Steig 16, D-85350 Freising, Germany. niessen@wzw.tum.de

The combined data set of the acl1 and tef-1a gene sequences of 61 fungal strains 
assigned to Fusarium tricinctum, Fusarium avenaceum, Fusarium acuminatum,
Fusarium arthrosporioides, Fusarium flocciferum and Fusarium torulosum were used 
to study the phylogenetic relations between taxa. F. tricinctum, F. acuminatum
and F. avenaceum formed distinct clades. Members of the F. tricinctum/F.
acuminatum clade fall into three well supported lineages, of which the largest
includes the epitype of F. tricinctum. Loop-mediated isothermal amplification
(LAMP) was used to amplify a 167 bp portion of the acl1 gene in F. tricinctum
(Corda) Saccardo. DNA amplification was detected in-tube by indirect calcein
fluorescence under black light after 60 min of incubation at 65.5 °C. The assay
had a detection limit of 0.95 pg of purified genomic DNA of F. tricinctum CBS
410.86 per reaction, corresponding to ca. 18 genomic copies of the acl1 gene.
Specificity of the assay was tested using purified DNA from 67 species and
subspecies of Fusarium as well as 50 species comprising 22 genera of other
filamentous fungi and yeasts. The assay detected 21 of the 23 F. tricinctum
strains tested. Cross reactivity was observed with eight out of 13 strains in F. 
acuminatum but with none of 17 F. avenaceum strains tested. Specificity was
further confirmed by conventional PCR with primers designed from the same gene.
Detection of F. tricinctum from culture scrapings directly added to the reaction 
master mix, in DNA extracts from wheat, in single barley grains or in washings of
bulk grain samples are proposed as possible applications showing the suitability 
of the method for food analysis. Finally it was demonstrated that the LAMP
reaction can be run using simple lab equipment such as a heating block, water
bath, hybridization oven or household equipment, e.g. a microwave oven.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22867849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2012 Nov;31(11):2545-56. doi: 10.1002/etc.1975. Epub 2012
Aug 31.

Incidence of jaw lesions and activity and gene expression of hepatic P4501A
enzymes in mink (Mustela vison) exposed to dietary
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran, and
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran.

Bursian SJ(1), Moore J, Newsted JL, Link JE, Fitzgerald SD, Bello N, Bhat VS, Kay
D, Zhang X, Wiseman S, Budinsky RA, Giesy JP, Zwiernik MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI,
USA. bursian@msu.edu

This study assessed the effects of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF), and 2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzofuran
(TCDF) on the incidence of jaw lesions and on hepatic cytochrome P4501A (CYP1A)
endpoints in mink (Mustela vison). Adult female mink were assigned randomly to
one of 13 dietary treatments (control and four increasing doses of TCDD, PeCDF,
or TCDF) and provided spiked feed for approximately 150 d (60 d prior to breeding
through weaning of offspring at 42 d post-parturition). Offspring were maintained
on their respective diets for an additional 150 d. Activity of hepatic CYP1A
enzymes in adult and juvenile mink exposed to TCDD, PeCDF, or TCDD was generally 
greater compared with controls, but changes in other CYP1A endpoints were less
consistent. Histopathology of the mandible and maxilla of juvenile mink suggested
a dose-related increase in the incidence of jaw lesions. The dietary effective
doses (ED) for jaw lesions in 50% of the population (ED50) were estimated to be
6.6, 14, and 149 ng/kg body weight (bw)/d for TCDD, PeCDF, and TCDF,
respectively. The relative potencies of PeCDF and TCDF compared with TCDD based
on ED10, ED20, and ED50 values ranged from 0.5 to 1.9 and 0.04 to 0.09,
respectively. These values are within an order of magnitude of the World Health
Organization toxic equivalency factor (TEF(WHO)) values of 0.3 and 0.1 for PeCDF 
and TCDF, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 SETAC.

PMID: 22865772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jul 28;18(28):3662-72. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i28.3662.

Current knowledge on esophageal atresia.

Pinheiro PF(1), Simões e Silva AC, Pereira RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Odilon Behrens Hospital, Avenida José
Bonifácio, São Cristovão, Belo Horizonte, 31210-690 Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is the
most common congenital anomaly of the esophagus. The improvement of survival
observed over the previous two decades is multifactorial and largely attributable
to advances in neonatal intensive care, neonatal anesthesia, ventilatory and
nutritional support, antibiotics, early surgical intervention, surgical materials
and techniques. Indeed, mortality is currently limited to those cases with
coexisting severe life-threatening anomalies. The diagnosis of EA is most
commonly made during the first 24 h of life but may occur either antenatally or
may be delayed. The primary surgical correction for EA and TEF is the best option
in the absence of severe malformations. There is no ideal replacement for the
esophagus and the optimal surgical treatment for patients with long-gap EA is
still controversial. The primary complications during the postoperative period
are leak and stenosis of the anastomosis, gastro-esophageal reflux, esophageal
dysmotility, fistula recurrence, respiratory disorders and deformities of the
thoracic wall. Data regarding long-term outcomes and follow-ups are limited for
patients following EA/TEF repair. The determination of the risk factors for the
complicated evolution following EA/TEF repair may positively impact long-term
prognoses. Much remains to be studied regarding this condition. This manuscript
provides a literature review of the current knowledge regarding EA.

PMCID: PMC3406418
PMID: 22851858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Dalton Trans. 2012 Aug 28;41(36):10988-99. doi: 10.1039/c2dt30968h.

TeX4 (X = F, Cl, Br) as Lewis acids--complexes with soft thio- and seleno-ether
ligands.

Hector AL(1), Jolleys A, Levason W, Reid G.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.

TeF(4) reacts with OPR(3) (R = Me or Ph) in anhydrous CH(2)Cl(2) to give the
colourless, square based pyramidal 1 : 1 complexes [TeF(4)(OPR(3))] only, in
which the OPR(3) is coordinated basally in the solid state, (R = Me: d(Te-O) =
2.122(2) Å; R = Ph: d(Te-O) = 2.1849(14) Å). Variable temperature (19)F{(1)H},
(31)P{(1)H} and (125)Te{(1)H} NMR spectroscopic studies strongly suggest this is 
the low temperature structure in solution, although the systems are dynamic. The 
much softer donor ligands SMe(2) and SeMe(2) show a lower affinity for TeF(4),
although unstable, yellow products with spectroscopic features consistent with
[TeF(4)(EMe(2))] are obtained by the reaction of TeF(4) in neat SMe(2) or via
reaction in CH(2)Cl(2) with SeMe(2). TeX(4) (X = F, Cl or Br) causes oxidation
and halogenation of TeMe(2) to form X(2)TeMe(2). The Br(2)TeMe(2) hydrolyses in
trace moisture to form [BrMe(2)Te-O-TeMe(2)Br], the crystal structure of which
has been determined. TeX(4) (X = Cl or Br) react with the selenoethers SeMe(2),
MeSe(CH(2))(3)SeMe or o-C(6)H(4)(SeMe)(2) (X = Cl) in anhydrous CH(2)Cl(2) to
give the distorted octahedral monomers trans-[TeX(4)(SeMe(2))(2)],
cis-[TeX(4){MeSe(CH(2))(3)SeMe}] and cis-[TeCl(4){o-C(6)H(4)(SeMe)(2)}], which
have been characterised by IR, Raman and multinuclear NMR ((1)H, (77)Se{(1)H} and
(125)Te{(1)H}) spectroscopy, and via X-ray structure determinations of
representative examples. Tetrahydrothiophene (tht) can form both 1 : 1 and 1 : 2 
Te : L complexes. For X = Br, the former has been shown to be a Br-bridged dimer,
[Br(3)(tht)Te(µ-Br)(2)TeBr(3)(tht)], by crystallography with the tht ligands
anti, whereas the latter are trans-octahedral monomers. Like its selenoether
analogue, MeS(CH(2))(3)SMe forms distorted octahedral cis-chelates,
[TeX(4){MeS(CH(2))(3)SMe}], whereas the more rigid o-C(6)H(4)(SMe)(2)
unexpectedly forms a zig-zag chain polymer in the solid state,
[TeCl(4){o-C(6)H(4)(SMe)(2)}](n), in which the dithioether adopts an extremely
unusual bridging mode. This is in contrast to the chelating monomer,
cis-[TeCl(4){o-C(6)H(4)(SeMe)(2)}], formed with the analogous selenoether and may
be attributed to small differences in the ligand chelate bite angles. The wider
bite angle xylyl-linked bidentates, o-C(6)H(4)(CH(2)EMe(2))(2) behave
differently; the thioether forms cis-chelated [TeX(4){o-C(6)H(4)(CH(2)SMe)(2)}]
confirmed crystallographically, whereas the selenoether undergoes C-Se cleavage
and rearrangement on treatment with TeX(4), forming the cyclic selenonium salts, 
[C(9)H(11)Se](2)[TeX(6)]. The tetrathiamacrocycle, [14]aneS(4)
(1,4,8,11-tetrathiacyclotetradecane), does not react cleanly with TeCl(4), but
forms the very poorly soluble [TeCl(4)([14]aneS(4))](n), shown by crystallography
to be a zig-zag polymer with exo-coordinated [14]aneS(4) units linked via
alternate S atoms to a cis-TeCl(4) unit. Trends in the (125)Te{(1)H} NMR shifts
for this series of Te(IV) halides chalcogenoether complexes are discussed.

PMID: 22851019  [PubMed]


388. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012:372878. doi: 10.1155/2012/372878.
Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Tocotrienol supplementation improves late-phase fracture healing compared to
alpha-tocopherol in a rat model of postmenopausal osteoporosis: a biomechanical
evaluation.

Mohamad S(1), Shuid AN, Mokhtar SA, Abdullah S, Soelaiman IN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Jalan Raja Muda Abd Aziz, 50300 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

This study investigated the effects of a-tocopherol and palm oil tocotrienol
supplementations on bone fracture healing in postmenopausal osteoporosis rats. 32
female Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups. The first group was
sham operated (SO), while the others were ovariectomised. After 2 months, the
right femora were fractured under anesthesia and fixed with K-wire. The SO and
ovariectomised-control rats (OVXC) were given olive oil (vehicle), while both the
alpha-tocopherol (ATF) and tocotrienol-enriched fraction (TEF) groups were given 
alpha-tocopherol and tocotrienol-enriched fraction, respectively, at the dose of 
60<U+2009>mg/kg via oral gavages 6 days per week for 8 weeks. The rats were then
euthanized and the femora dissected out for bone biomechanical testing to assess 
their strength. The callous of the TEF group had significantly higher stress
parameter than the SO and OVXC groups. Only the SO group showed significantly
higher strain parameter compared to the other treatment groups. The load
parameter of the OVXC and ATF groups was significantly lower than the SO group.
There was no significant difference in the Young's modulus between the groups. In
conclusion, tocotrienol is better than a-tocopherol in improving the
biomechanical properties of the fracture callous in postmenopausal osteoporosis
rat model.

PMCID: PMC3398681
PMID: 22829855  [PubMed]


389. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Jul;1261:79-87. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06640.x.

Transforming growth factor-beta inhibits the expression of clock genes.

Gast H(1), Gordic S, Petrzilka S, Lopez M, Müller A, Gietl A, Hock C, Birchler T,
Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital Berne, University of
Berne, Berne, Switzerland.

Disturbances of sleep-wake rhythms are an important problem in Alzheimer's
disease (AD). Circadian rhythms are regulated by clock genes. Transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-ß) is overexpressed in neurons in AD and is the only cytokine
that is increased in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Our data show that TGF-ß2
inhibits the expression of the clock genes Period (Per)1, Per2, and Rev-erba, and
of the clock-controlled genes D-site albumin promoter binding protein (Dbp) and
thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef). However, our results showed that TGF-ß2 did
not alter the expression of brain and muscle Arnt-like protein-1 (Bmal1). The
concentrations of TGF-ß2 in the CSF of 2 of 16 AD patients and of 1 of 7 patients
with mild cognitive impairment were in the dose range required to suppress the
expression of clock genes. TGF-ß2-induced dysregulation of clock genes may alter 
neuronal pathways, which may be causally related to abnormal sleep-wake rhythms
in AD patients.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22823397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Toxicology. 2012 Nov 15;301(1-3):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.07.005. Epub 2012
Jul 17.

Repeated dose toxicity and relative potency of 1,2,3,4,6,7-hexachloronaphthalene 
(PCN 66) 1,2,3,5,6,7-hexachloronaphthalene (PCN 67) compared to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) for induction of CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and
thymic atrophy in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats.

Hooth MJ(1), Nyska A, Fomby LM, Vasconcelos DY, Vallant M, DeVito MJ, Walker NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of the National Toxicology Program, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA. hooth@niehs.nih.gov

In this study we assessed the relative toxicity and potency of the chlorinated
naphthalenes 1,2,3,4,6,7-hexachloronaphthalene (PCN 66) and
1,2,3,5,6,7-hexachloronaphthalene (PCN 67) relative to that of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Chemicals were administered in corn
oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage to female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats at dosages of 0
(vehicle), 500, 1500, 5000, 50,000 and 500,000 ng/kg (PCN 66 and PCN 67) and 1,
3, 10, 100, and 300 ng/kg (TCDD) for 2 weeks. Histopathologic changes were
observed in the thymus, liver and lung of TCDD treated animals and in the liver
and thymus of PCN treated animals. Significant increases in CYP1A1 and CYP1A2
associated enzyme activity were observed in all animals exposed to TCDD, PCN 66
and PCN 67. Dose response modeling of CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and thymic atrophy gave
ranges of estimated relative potencies, as compared to TCDD, of 0.0015-0.0072,
for PCN 66 and 0.00029-0.00067 for PCN 67. Given that PCN 66 and PCN 67 exposure 
resulted in biochemical and histopathologic changes similar to that seen with
TCDD, this suggests that they should be included in the WHO toxic equivalency
factor (TEF) scheme, although the estimated relative potencies indicate that
these hexachlorinated naphthalenes should not contribute greatly to the overall
human body burden of dioxin-like activity.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3471150
PMID: 22813907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Case Rep Med. 2012;2012:524687. doi: 10.1155/2012/524687. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

An unusual case of tracheoesophageal fistulae.

Giquel J(1), Matadial C, Rodriguez Blanco YF, Martinez-Ruiz R, Nguyen D,
Candiotti K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine
and Veterans Hospital 1611 NW 12 Ave Miami, FL 33125, USA.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistulae (TEF) are commonly due to malignancy (M. F.
Reed and D. J. Mathisen, 2003). We present the case of a patient with a deceptive
history for TEF and report an approach that provides adequate oxygenation,
ventilation, surgical exposure, and postoperative analgesia with excellent
outcome.

PMCID: PMC3395297
PMID: 22811726  [PubMed]


392. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2012 May 4;52(5):581-7.

[Cloning beta-tubulin from Fusarium fujikuroi to analyze its relationship with
carbendazim resistance].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma X(1), Xing C, Yu J, Wang Y, Chen Z, Wang J, Zhou M, Chen C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Protection, Nanjing Agricultural University, Key Laboratory
of Pestcides of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing 210095, China. maxiaoweiying@126.com

OBJECTIVE: We studied the resistance of Fusarium fujikuroi against carbendazim,
to confirm whether the resistance was related to the beta-tubulin gene.
METHODS: The isolated strains were identified based on TEF-1alpha gene sequence
and morphological characteristics. The whole nucleotide sequence of beta-tubulin 
gene was analyzed from different sensitive strains by the primers designed
according to the nucleotide sequence of beta-tubulin gene from the sequenced
strain 7600 of F. verticillioides. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was
applied to analyze the expression pattern of beta-tubulin gene from different
sensitive strains treated with or without carbendazim.
RESULTS: The full-length nucleotide sequence of beta-tubulin gene (Accession
Number: JQ026022) was cloned from different sensitive strains of F. fujikoroi,
which spanned 1671 bp with 4 introns, encoding 447 amino acids. This gene showed 
100% nucleotide sequence homology between sensitive and resistant strains. The
expression of the beta-tubulin gene in 2 sensitive strains was significantly
higher than 3 resistant strains when these strains were cultured on
carbendazim-free media (p = 0.05). Carbendazim at the concentration of their EC50
caused the expression of the gene from the five strains increasing significantly 
(p = 0.05) in comparison with that of strains treated without carbendazim.
However, there was no significant difference between strains when treated with
carbendazim.
CONCLUSION: The resistance of F. fujikuroi against carbendazim was irrelative to 
beta-tubulin gene.

PMID: 22803343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Int J Pharm. 2012 Oct 15;436(1-2):857-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2012.07.004.
Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Effect of the stability of hydrogen-bonded ion pairs with organic amines on
transdermal penetration of teriflunomide.

Xi H(1), Cun D, Wang Z, Shang L, Song W, Mu L, Fang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University,
Shenyang 110016, China.

The aim of this work was to investigate the effect of the stability of
hydrogen-bonded ion pairs with organic amines on transdermal penetration of
teriflunomide (TEF). Five organic amines, diethylamine (DEtA), triethylamine
(TEtA), diethanolamine (DEA), triethanolamine (TEA), and
N-(2'-hydroxyethanol)-piperdine (NP), were chosen to form ion pairs with TEF
separately, and the passage of each TEF ion pair through the rabbit skin was
evaluated in vitro. FTIR and (1)H NMR spectroscopy were performed to confirm the 
formation of ion pairs between TEF and organic amines in solution. The stability 
parameter of ion pairs in terms of ion-pair lifetimes (T(life)) was calculated
from the NMR data. TEF could form ion pairs with these amines via hydrogen bond. 
The formation of ion pairs enhanced the percutaneous absorption of TEF except
TEF-DEA. It was found that, for most studied organic amines, the longer the
ion-pair lifetime, the higher the flux of skin permeation. The stability of TEF
ion pairs was a pivotal factor influencing the skin permeation of TEF.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22796174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mycobiology. 2012 Mar;40(1):66-70. doi: 10.5941/MYCO.2012.40.1.066. Epub 2012 Mar
31.

First Report on Isolation of Penicillium adametzioides and Purpureocillium
lilacinum from Decayed Fruit of Cheongsoo Grapes in Korea.

Deng JX(1), Paul NC, Sang HK, Lee JH, Hwang YS, Yu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences,
Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea.

Two species, Penicillium adametzioides and Purpureocillium lilacinum, were
isolated from decayed grapes (cv. Cheongsoo) in Korea. Each species was initially
identified by phylogenetic analysis of a combined dataset of two genes. Internal 
transcribed spacer (ITS) and ß-tubulin (BT2) genes were used for identification
of Penicillium adametzioides, and ITS and partial translation elongation factor
1-a (TEF) genes were used for identification of Purpureocillium lilacinum.
Morphologically, they were found to be identical to previous descriptions. The
two species presented here have not been previously reported in Korea.

PMCID: PMC3385147
PMID: 22783137  [PubMed]


395. J Anim Breed Genet. 2012 Aug;129(4):325-35. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0388.2011.00979.x. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Molecular characterization of the porcine TEAD3 (TEF-5) gene: examination of a
promoter mutation as the causal mutation of a quantitative trait loci affecting
the androstenone level in boar fat.

Robic A(1), Larzul C, Grindflek E, Chevillon P, Hofer A, Fève K, Iannuccelli N,
Milan D, Prunier A, Riquet J.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, Laboratoire de Génétique Cellulaire, Castanet-Tolosan, France.
annie.robic@toulouse.inra.fr

A quantitative trait loci (QTL) for accumulation of androstenone in fat has been 
identified in an Large White × Meishan cross in a region of SSC7-containing
TEAD3. In humans, TEAD3 is a transcription activator, known to be able to
regulate the transcription of HSD3B. This enzyme is involved in the degradation
of androstenone in the liver. In this study, porcine transcripts of TEAD3 were
characterized and compared with mammalian transcripts. The complete structure of 
porcine TEAD3 gene was characterized including two 5' non-coding exons and one
exon 5 not used in porcine transcripts. Variations were screened in sequences
related to TEAD3: in exons, in flanking sequences of exons and in the promoter
region. A SNP characterized at 726 bp at 5' of the first exon was tested on
several pig populations without coherent and convincing results concerning its
association with androstenone levels. We showed that in the liver of adult boars,
the transcripts levels of TEAD3 and HSD3B were correlated. As in humans, it is
possible that HSD3B is a target gene of TEAD3 in porcine liver. Nevertheless, no 
expression variation was observed for TEAD3 or HSD3B in liver between animals
with different genotypes at the SNP. We concluded that this SNP was not the
causal mutation of this QTL.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 22775265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Dis Esophagus. 2012 Jul;25(5):393-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-2050.2010.01175.x. Epub 
2011 Feb 10.

A novel variant of esophageal atresia with tracheo-esophageal fistula with a
crossed-over proximal esophageal pouch: a diagnostic dilemma.

Rathod K(1), Khanna S, Kanojia RP, Rao KL.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, 
Chandigarh, India.

Diagnosis of esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) can be
easily done in newborns with symptoms of excessive salivation and failure to pass
infant-feeding tube (IFT) into the stomach. There are many reports in the
literature which describe the diagnostic pitfall of this IFT test. We describe a 
case of a neonate with EA with TEF in which the upper atretic esophageal pouch
had grown long enough to reach up to the level of diaphragm, thus allowing the
IFT to go up to significant distance from the alveolus giving the radiograph as
if the tube is in the upper part of stomach, thus creating a diagnostic dilemma.

© 2011 Copyright the Authors. Journal compilation © 2011, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
and the International Society for Diseases of the Esophagus.

PMID: 22759370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Endocrinology. 2012 Sep;153(9):4290-303. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1242. Epub 2012 Jun
29.

Loss of coiled-coil domain containing 80 negatively modulates glucose homeostasis
in diet-induced obese mice.

Tremblay F(1), Huard C, Dow J, Gareski T, Will S, Richard AM, Syed J, Bailey S,
Brenneman KA, Martinez RV, Perreault M, Lin Q, Gimeno RE.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Therapeutic Innovation, Pfizer Inc., 3 Blackfan Circle, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA. frederic.tremblay@pfizer.com

Coiled-coil domain containing 80 (Ccdc80) is a secreted protein highly enriched
in mouse and human white adipose tissue (WAT) that plays an important role during
adipocyte differentiation in vitro. To investigate the physiological function of 
Ccdc80 in energy and glucose homeostasis, we generated mice in which the gene
encoding Ccdc80 was disrupted. Mice lacking Ccdc80 showed increased sensitivity
to diet-induced hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance while displaying reduced
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in vivo. Gene expression analysis by
microarray revealed that only 10 transcripts were simultaneously altered in
pancreas, skeletal muscle, and WAT from Ccdc80(-/-) mice, including some
components of the circadian clock. Expression of the core clock member
Arntl/Bmal1 was reduced whereas that of the oscillating transcription factors Dbp
and Tef was increased in all tissues examined. Furthermore, knockdown of Ccdc80
in 3T3-L1 cells led to an increase of Dbp mRNA levels during adipocyte
differentiation, suggesting that Ccdc80 might be involved in the regulation of
this gene in a cell-autonomous manner. Importantly, transcriptional alterations
in Ccdc80(-/-) mice were associated with changes in feeding behavior, increased
caloric intake, decreased energy expenditure, and obesity. Taken together, our
results suggest that Ccdc80 is a novel modulator of glucose and energy
homeostasis during diet-induced obesity.

PMID: 22753645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Dec;19(13):4223-8. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2459-3. Epub 2012
Jul 3.

Esophageal stenting and radiotherapy: a multimodal approach for the palliation of
symptomatic malignant dysphagia.

Rueth NM(1), Shaw D, D'Cunha J, Cho C, Maddaus MA, Andrade RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Thoracic and Foregut Surgery, Department of Surgery,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. ruet0012@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Esophageal stents provide immediate palliation of malignant
dysphagia; however, radiotherapy (RT) is a superior long-term option. We review
the outcomes of combined esophageal stenting and RT for patients with malignant
dysphagia.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed patients with esophageal stents placed for
palliation of malignant dysphagia from esophageal stricture, esophageal extrinsic
compression, or malignant tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). We excluded patients
with radiation-induced TEF in the absence of tumor. We analyzed and compared
outcomes between patients with no RT, RT before stent placement, and RT after
stent placement.
RESULTS: We placed stents in 45 patients for esophageal stricture from esophageal
cancer (n = 30; 66.7 %), malignant TEF (n = 8; 17.7 %), and esophageal
compression from airway, mediastinal, or metastatic malignancies (n = 7; 15.6 %).
Twenty patients (44.4 %) had no RT; 25 patients had RT before stent placement (n 
= 16; 35.6 %), RT after stent placement (n = 8; 17.8 %), or both (n = 1; 2.2 %). 
Median follow-up was 30 days. Complications requiring stent revision were similar
with or without RT. Subjective symptom relief was achieved in 68.9 % of all
patients, with no differences noted between groups (p = 0.99). The 30-day
mortality was 15.6 %. Patients with RT after stent placement had a longer median 
survival compared to those without RT (98 vs. 38 days).
CONCLUSIONS: Esophageal stent placement with RT is a safe approach for malignant 
dysphagia.

PMID: 22752374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Dev Biol. 2012 Sep 1;369(1):54-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.06.016. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Genetic and cellular mechanisms regulating anterior foregut and esophageal
development.

Jacobs IJ(1), Ku WY, Que J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Separation of the single anterior foregut tube into the esophagus and trachea
involves cell proliferation and differentiation, as well as dynamic changes in
cell-cell adhesion and migration. These biological processes are regulated and
coordinated at multiple levels through the interplay of the epithelium and
mesenchyme. Genetic studies and in vitro modeling have shed light on relevant
regulatory networks that include a number of transcription factors and signaling 
pathways. These signaling molecules exhibit unique expression patterns and play
specific functions in their respective territories before the separation process 
occurs. Disruption of regulatory networks inevitably leads to defective
separation and malformation of the trachea and esophagus and results in the
formation of a relatively common birth defect, esophageal atresia with or without
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). Significantly, some of the signaling pathways
and transcription factors involved in anterior foregut separation continue to
play important roles in the morphogenesis of the individual organs. In this
review, we will focus on new findings related to these different developmental
processes and discuss them in the context of developmental disorders or birth
defects commonly seen in clinics.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3409292
PMID: 22750256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Environ Manage. 2012 Sep;50(3):352-64. doi: 10.1007/s00267-012-9883-9. Epub 2012 
Jun 24.

Conservation of socioculturally important local crop biodiversity in the Oromia
region of Ethiopia: a case study.

Balemie K(1), Singh RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biodiversity Conservation (IBC), P.O. Box 30726, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia. kebubal@gmail.com

In this study, we surveyed diversity in a range of local crops in the Lume and
Gimbichu districts of Ethiopia, together with the knowledge of local people
regarding crop uses, socio-economic importance, conservation, management and
existing threats. Data were collected using semistructured interviews and
participant observation. The study identified 28 farmers' varieties of 12 crop
species. Among these, wheat (Triticum turgidum) and tef (Eragrostis tef) have
high intra-specific diversity, with 9 and 6 varieties respectively. Self-seed
supply or seed saving was the main (80 %) source of seeds for replanting.
Agronomic performance (yield and pest resistance), market demand, nutritional and
use diversity attributes of the crop varieties were highlighted as important
criteria for making decisions regarding planting and maintenance. Over 74 % of
the informants grow a combination of "improved" and farmers' varieties. Of the
farmers' varieties, the most obvious decline and/or loss was reported for wheat
varieties. Introduction of improved wheat varieties, pest infestation, shortage
of land, low yield performance and climate variability were identified as the
principal factors contributing to this loss or decline. Appropriate interventions
for future conservation and sustainable use of farmers' varieties were suggested.

PMID: 22729809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Pediatr Surg Int. 2012 Oct;28(10):961-6. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Role of preoperative 3D CT reconstruction for evaluation of patients with
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Mahalik SK(1), Sodhi KS, Narasimhan KL, Rao KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Advanced Pediatric Center, Post Graduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research (PGIMER), Chandigarh, India.
dr.santosh25@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The role of preoperative contrast-enhanced computerized tomography
(CT) of chest with three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions was evaluated in
neonates with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.
METHODS: This was a prospective study which investigated 30 cases of esophageal
atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula. All patients were evaluated
preoperatively with contrast-enhanced spiral CT using a low-dose CT protocol. 3D 
CT reconstruction images were evaluated for the type of esophageal atresia, the
distance between the upper and lower esophageal pouches, origin, level and
position of the fistula, and the presence or absence of any other cardiac,
pulmonary or mediastinal lesions and the findings were correlated with the
findings at surgery. The radiation dose for each patient was calculated using the
formula-Effective dose (E) = DLP × (E/DLP)age.
RESULTS: All the 30 cases had type-C esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula as per Gross classification. The exact site of the fistula could be
identified only in 26 (80 %) cases. The mean gap between the upper pouch and
lower fistula was 0.95 ± 0.57 cm (range 0.2-2.8 cm) on CT scan and 1.38 ± 0.61 cm
(range 0.5-3.2 cm) at surgery. On statistical analysis, the correlation was found
to be significant (p < 0.0001). In addition, lung pathology (consolidation),
cardiac pathology and vertebral anomaly were also detected on CT scan in some
cases. The mean radiation dose for the neonates who underwent CT chest was
calculated to be 1.79 mSv which is significantly high.
CONCLUSION: Though preoperative CT scan of chest has many advantages, it involves
significant exposure to ionizing radiation and risk of radiation-induced cancer
in the future. Additionally in 20 % of cases, the fistula could not be located on
CT scan. The most common variety of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula is Gross type C (86 %) that has low to intermediate gap (97 %) and can be
anastomosed primarily. Thus, CT scan can provide good anatomical delineation, but
may not help in surgical decision making. Hence, performing CT in these cases
would unnecessarily expose the neonates to ionizing radiation. Therefore, there
is no role for CT scan in the routine preoperative assessment of EA with distal
TEF.

PMID: 22722826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mycologia. 2012 Nov-Dec;104(6):1369-80. doi: 10.3852/12-068. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Phylogenetic relationship and species delimitation of matsutake and allied
species based on multilocus phylogeny and haplotype analyses.

Ota Y(1), Yamanaka T, Murata H, Neda H, Ohta A, Kawai M, Yamada A, Konno M,
Tanaka C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forest Microbiology, Forestry and Forest Products Research
Institute, Tsukuba, lbaraki, Japan. yuota@ffpri.affrc.go.jp

Tricholoma matsutake (S. Ito & S. Imai) Singer and its allied species are
referred to as matsutake worldwide and are the most economically important edible
mushrooms in Japan. They are widely distributed in the northern hemisphere and
established an ectomycorrhizal relationship with conifer and broadleaf trees. To 
clarify relationships among T. matsutake and its allies, and to delimit
phylogenetic species, we analyzed multilocus datasets (ITS, megB1, tef, gpd) with
samples that were correctly identified based on morphological characteristics.
Phylogenetic analyses clearly identified four major groups: matsutake, T.
bakamatsutake, T. fulvocastaneum and T. caligatum; the latter three species were 
outside the matsutake group. The haplotype analyses and median-joining haplotype 
network analyses showed that the matsutake group included four closely related
but clearly distinct taxa (T. matsutake, T. anatolicum, Tricholoma sp. from
Mexico and T. magnivelare) from different geographical regions; these were
considered to be distinct phylogenetic species.

PMID: 22684294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Toxicon. 2012 Oct;60(5):864-73. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2012.05.022. Epub 2012 Jun
7.

A comparative study for PSP toxins quantification by using MBA and HPLC official 
methods in shellfish.

Ben-Gigirey B(1), Rodríguez-Velasco ML, Otero A, Vieites JM, Cabado AG.

Author information: 
(1)European Union Reference Laboratory for Marine Biotoxins-EURLMB, Spanish Food 
Safety and Nutrition Agency, Ministry of Health, Social Policy and Equality,
CITEXVI, Campus Universitario de Vigo, Fonte das Abelleiras, Lagoas-Marcosende,
36310 Vigo, Spain.

Commission Regulation (EC) N° 2074/2005 recognises the biological method as the
reference method for Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning (PSP) toxins detection in
molluscs. It was amended by Commission Regulation (EC) N° 1664/2006 that accepted
the so-called Lawrence method as an alternative to the reference method. The goal
of this study was to compare AOAC Official Methods of Analysis 959.08 (Biological
method) and 2005.06 (Prechromatographic Oxidation and Liquid Chromatography with 
fluorescence detection) in samples with different toxin profiles. The influence
of extraction solvent in the total samples toxicity was also evaluated. A total
of 40 samples including mussels, clams, scallops, razor-clams, cockles, oysters
and barnacles were analysed by both official methods. Samples were selected with 
Alexandrium and Gymnodinium toxic profiles, from different origin and including
several presentations: fresh, frozen, canned and boiled. Acetic and hydrochloric 
acid extractions were performed in all samples and the extracts were
simultaneously analysed by both methods. Most samples were naturally contaminated
and two samples were spiked. Comparison of both official methods, mouse bioassay 
(MBA) with HCl extraction and Liquid Chromatography with fluorescence detection
(HPLC-FLD) with acetic acid extraction, led to an 85% of consistent results
regarding compliance with legal limit, including samples below and above it. The 
linear correlation coefficient was r² = 0.69 and the paired t test (two tails, a 
= 0.05) indicated that there were not significant differences among both sets of 
data. Nevertheless, toxicity differences were found in several samples. In 15 out
of 18 shellfish with a Gymnodinium toxic profile, higher toxicity levels were
obtained by MBA. This fact was more evident in 7 samples, partially related to
the lack of standards and the impossibility of analysing dc-NEO, C1, 2 and GTX6
at the beginning of the study. However, other factors concerning the extraction
and SPE clean-ups steps may also contribute. By contrast, 9 samples presented a
much higher total toxicity by HPLC-FLD than by MBA. These higher results obtained
by HPLC-FLD could not only be due to the use of the highest toxicity equivalency 
factor (TEF) for isomers oxidated into products that coelute when total toxicity 
of these samples were calculated. Further analyses of results obtained by
HPLC-FLD and by MBA with both extracts were done separately.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22683532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Nutr Clin Pract. 2012 Aug;27(4):545-52. doi: 10.1177/0884533612442726. Epub 2012 
May 29.

Which is more effective to prevent enteral nutrition-related complications, high-
or medium-viscosity thickened enteral formula in patients with percutaneous
endoscopic gastrostomy?: a single-center retrospective chart review.

Ichimaru S(1), Amagai T, Wakita M, Shiro Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Management, Kobe City Hospital Organization Medical
Center West Hospital, Kobe, Japan. Satomi.ichimaru@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Administration of thickened enteral formula (TEF) through a
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube is becoming a common practice in
Japan to prevent enteral nutrition (EN)-related complications. However, what
constitutes an adequate viscosity of TEF remains unclear. The aim of this study
was to examine the clinical effects of TEFs with different viscosities
administered through PEG.
METHODS: The subjects were 50 patients admitted to a single institution who
underwent PEG placement. Viscosities of TEFs frequently administered to the
patients were measured, and EN-related complications, nutrition intakes, and
clinical outcomes were compared between high- and medium-viscosity TEFs during
the first 2 weeks after TEF feeding initiation.
RESULTS: The measured viscosities of high- and medium-viscosity TEFs were 10,382 
± 931 and 3492 ± 296 mPa·s, respectively. Protein and fluid intakes with TEF were
significantly less in the high-viscosity group. There was no significant
difference in EN-related complications, energy intakes, or clinical outcomes
between high- and medium-viscosity TEFs.
CONCLUSION: In this study, high-viscosity TEFs showed no statistical difference
in either EN-related complications or clinical outcomes, in comparison with
medium-viscosity TEF.

PMID: 22645104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013 Jan;34(1):64-9. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0386-5. Epub 2012
May 26.

Treatment strategy and long-term prognosis for patients with esophageal atresia
and congenital heart diseases.

Hayashi T(1), Inuzuka R, Shiozawa Y, Shindo T, Shimizu N, Katori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. taiyuhayashi@gmail.com

A review examined six consecutive cases of patients with esophageal atresia (EA) 
and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) who underwent cardiac surgery at the authors'
institution between 2001 and 2011 for associated complex congenital heart
diseases. All the patients had a normal karyotype and showed EA with distal TEF. 
In all cases, gastrostomy was the initial surgical intervention. Cardiac surgery 
was performed concurrently with gastrostomy for one patient who had a total
anomalous pulmonary venous connection with pulmonary venous obstruction. For two 
patients with duct-dependent pulmonary circulation, EA/TEF was corrected in the
neonatal period, and an aortopulmonary shunt operation was electively performed
after the first month of life. For two patients with duct-dependent systemic
circulation, repair of EA/TEF was performed concurrently with gastrostomy,
followed by palliative cardiac surgery during the neonatal period. For another
patient without duct-dependent circulation, repair of EA/TEF was performed in the
neonatal period. No mortality occurred during a median follow-up period of
6.2 years. However, respiratory complications including severe tracheomalacia for
two patients, recurrent episodes of respiratory infection for three patients, and
severe gastroesophageal reflux for five patients caused considerable long-term
morbidity.

PMID: 22639007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Biotechnol. 2013 Jun;54(2):158-69. doi: 10.1007/s12033-012-9557-0.

Comparison of the heterologous expression of Trichoderma reesei endoglucanase II 
and cellobiohydrolase II in the yeasts Pichia pastoris and Yarrowia lipolytica.

Boonvitthya N(1), Bozonnet S, Burapatana V, O'Donohue MJ, Chulalaksananukul W.

Author information: 
(1)Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand. nassapat.boonvitthya@hotmail.com

The sequences encoding the genes for endoglucanase II and cellobiohydrolase II
from the fungus Trichoderma reesei QM9414 were successfully cloned and expressed 
in Yarrowia lipolytica under the control of the POX2 or TEF promoters, and using 
either the native or preproLip2 secretion signals. The expression level of both
recombinant enzymes was compared with that obtained using Pichia pastoris, under 
the control of the AOX1 promoter to evaluate the utility of Y. lipolytica as a
host strain for recombinant EGII and CBHII production. Extracellular
endoglucanase activity was similar between TEF-preoproLip2-eglII expressed in Y. 
lipolytica and P. pastoris induced by 0.5 % (v/v) methanol, but when recombinant 
protein expression in P. pastoris was induced with 3 % (v/v) methanol, the
activity was increased by about sevenfold. In contrast, the expression level of
cellobiohydrolase from the TEF-preproLip2-cbhII cassette was higher in Y.
lipolytica than in P. pastoris. Transformed Y. lipolytica produced up to 15 mg/l 
endoglucanase and 50 mg/l cellobiohydrolase, with the specific activity of both
proteins being greater than their homologs produced by P. pastoris. Partial
characterization of recombinant endoglucanase II and cellobiohydrolase II
expressed in both yeasts revealed their optimum pH and temperature, and their pH 
and temperature stabilities were identical and hyperglycosylation had little
effect on their enzymatic activity and properties.

PMID: 22638966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2012 Sep;64(3):500-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ympev.2012.05.005.
Epub 2012 May 22.

New molecular markers for fungal phylogenetics: two genes for species-level
systematics in the Sordariomycetes (Ascomycota).

Walker DM(1), Castlebury LA, Rossman AY, White JF Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology and Pathology, Rutgers University, 59 Dudley Rd,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Although significant progress has been made resolving deep branches of the fungal
tree of life, many fungal systematists are interested in species-level questions 
to both define species and assess fungal biodiversity. Fungal genome sequences
are a useful resource to systematic biologists for developing new phylogenetic
markers that better represent the whole genome. Here we report primers for two
newly identified single-copy protein-coding genes, FG1093 and MS204, for use with
ascomycetes. Although fungi were the focus of this study, this methodological
approach could be easily applied to marker development for studies of other
organisms. The tests used here to assess phylogenetic informativeness are
computationally rapid, require only rudimentary datasets to evaluate existing or 
newly developed markers, and can be applied to other non-model organisms to
assist in experimental design of phylogenetic studies. Phylogenetic utility of
the markers was tested in two genera, Gnomoniopsis and Ophiognomonia
(Gnomoniaceae, Diaporthales). The phylogenetic performance of ß-tubulin, ITS, and
tef-1a was compared with FG1093 and MS204. Phylogenies inferred from FG1093 and
MS204 were largely in agreement with ß-tubulin, ITS, and tef-1a although some
topological conflict was observed. Resolution and support for branches differed
based on the combination of markers used for each genus. Based on two independent
tests of phylogenetic performance, FG1093 and MS204 were determined to be equal
to or better than ß-tubulin, ITS, and tef-1a in resolving species relationships. 
Differences were found in site-specific rate of evolution in all five markers. In
addition, isolates from 15 orders and 22 families of Ascomycota were screened
using primers for FG1093 and MS204 to demonstrate primer utility across a wide
diversity of ascomycetes. The primer sets for the newly identified genes FG1093
and MS204 and methods used to develop them are useful additions to the ascomycete
systematists' toolbox.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22626621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Mycopathologia. 2012 Oct;174(4):259-71. doi: 10.1007/s11046-012-9551-x. Epub 2012
May 13.

Significance of molecular identification and antifungal susceptibility of
clinically significant yeasts and moulds in a global antifungal surveillance
programme.

Pfaller MA(1), Woosley LN, Messer SA, Jones RN, Castanheira M.

Author information: 
(1)JMI Laboratories, 345 Beaver Kreek Centre, Suite A, North Liberty, IA 52317,
USA. michael-pfaller@jmilabs.com

The increasing diversity of opportunistic fungi causing serious invasive fungal
infections (IFI) has been documented. Accurate identification (ID) is important
in guiding therapy, determining prognosis for IFIs and in epidemiological
surveys. We assessed the utility of PCR-based methods for the ID of yeasts and
moulds that either were uncommon, failed conventional ID, or represented unusual 
biochemical or phenotypic profiles of common species. Among 1,790 viable fungal
clinical isolates received during the SENTRY Program in 2010, 322 strains from 40
study sites had ID confirmed by molecular methods. Isolates were previously
identified in participant institutions. Yeasts that were not confirmed by
morphology on CHROMagar, growth at 45 °C (Candida albicans/dubliniensis), or
assimilation of trehalose (C. glabrata) as well as non-Candida yeasts and all
moulds were amplified and sequenced using primers amplifying one or more of the
following genes: ITS, 28S, ß-tubulin (Aspergillus spp.), TEF (Fusarium spp.), IGS
(Trichosporon spp.). The isolates selected for molecular ID included 149 isolates
of Candida species, 77 of Aspergillus species, 73 non-Candida yeasts, and 23
other moulds (a total of 41 different species). Overall, the ID determined by the
submitting site was confirmed for 189 isolates (58.7 %): Aspergillus spp. (64.1 %
correct); Candida spp. (60.1 % correct); non-Candida yeasts (58.9 % correct);
non-Aspergillus moulds (30.4 % correct). Species with high levels of concordance 
between conventional and molecular ID included A. fumigatus (95.0  %), C.
lusitaniae (100 %), C. dubliniensis (92.3 %), C. kefyr (100 %), and C. neoformans
(90.2 %). Only 50.0 % of isolates of C. albicans and 59.1 % of C. glabrata
selected due to unusual phenotypic or biochemical features were found to be
correctly identified by the submitting site. Molecular methods for the
identification of fungal pathogens are an important adjunct to the conventional
identification of many less common clinically relevant yeasts and moulds
including species of Candida with unusual or erroneous phenotypic or biochemical 
profiles. Molecular confirmation of fungal identification is essential in
epidemiological surveys such as SENTRY.

PMID: 22580756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Chemosphere. 2012 Jul;88(3):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2012.03.057. Epub 
2012 Apr 24.

Environmental release of dioxins from reservoir sources during beach nourishment 
programs.

Tondeur Y(1), Vining B, Mace K, Mills W, Hart J.

Author information: 
(1)Analytical Perspectives, Wilmington, NC 28405, USA.

In late 1990s, USEPA/FDA made an important connection regarding the presence of
elevated levels of dioxins (e.g., 1500 ng kg(-1) TEQ) in ball clays mined in
Mississippi (USA) from a geological deposit dated to ~40 million years
(Mississippi Embayment) that stretches over several states (northern part of
Mississippi to Kentucky) and levels of dioxins in selected animal food sources.
Following a recent beach nourishment program along the mid-Atlantic coast of the 
US, a number of dark gray, blue tinted nuggets of varying sizes were found on
beach strands and near the shoreline. Using the presence of these balls of clay
(shape, color, and knowledge regarding their use in pottery) on the beach,
together with our direct experience analyzing ball clays for dioxins, we made a
possible association between these clays and elevated dioxins. Concerns regarding
the potential of nourishment programs to cause severe damage to our beaches drove
us to test the dioxin content of nourishment exposed clays. A number of the
nuggets, along with freshly dredged and deposited sand (collected the morning
after nourishment) with the same coloration, and others (sun-bleached), collected
approximately 2 weeks after the completion of the nourishment efforts, were
analyzed for the presence of PCDD/Fs, PCBs, and selected semi-volatile
chlorinated organics. The clay PCDD/F WHO2005-TEQs (dry weight; ND=DL; EMPC=EMPC)
ranged from 0.41 to 5.78 ng kg(-1) with an average of 2.64 ng kg(-1), whereas the
sand sample's TEQs ranged from 0.18 to 0.31 ng kg(-1) PCDD/F WHO-2005, with an
average of 0.22 ng kg(-1). The average total tetra- through octachlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxin concentration was 2700 ng kg(-1) (with a maximum of 5800 ng
kg(-1)) for the clays and 8.5 ng kg(-1) (with a maximum of 16.8 ng kg(-1)) for
the sand samples. The congener 2,3,7,8-TCDD (TEF=1) was detected in half of the
clay samples (0.11-0.77 ng kg(-1)). All of the clay and sand samples displayed an
unambiguous and dominating 1,4,6,9-chlorination pattern across homolog groups. No
other chlorinated aromatics were detected above background levels. The
observations, along with the absence or an extremely low level of polychlorinated
dibenzofurans, together with the mineralogical analysis, supports the conclusion 
that off-shore dredging activities are reaching reservoir sources containing
dioxin-tainted, smectic/kaolinite clay minerals. Subsequent beach erosion
provides additional environmental releases over time, as buried balls of clay
from previous nourishment efforts become exposed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22534200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2012 Oct;206(2):120-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1748-1716.2012.02438.x. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Electrophysiological characterization of sodium-activated potassium channels in
NG108-15 and NSC-34 motor neuron-like cells.

Wu SN(1), Yeh CC, Huang HC, So EC, Lo YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, National Cheng Kung University Medical College,
Tainan City, Taiwan. snwu@mail.ncku.edu.tw

AIMS: The electrical properties of Na(+) -activated K(+) current (I(K(Na)) ) and 
its contribution to spike firing has not been characterized in motor neurons.
METHODS: We evaluated how activation of voltage-gated K(+) current (I(K) ) at the
cellular level could be coupled to Na(+) influx through voltage-gated Na(+)
current (I(N) (a) ) in two motor neuron-like cells (NG108-15 and NSC-34 cells).
RESULTS: Increasing stimulation frequency altered the amplitudes of both I(Na)
and I(K) simultaneously. With changes in stimulation frequency, the kinetics of
both I(Na) inactivation and I(K) activation were well correlated at the same
cell. Addition of tetrodotoxin or ranolazine reduced the amplitudes of both I(Na)
and I(K) simultaneously. Tefluthrin (Tef) increased the amplitudes of both I(Na) 
and I(K) throughout the voltages ranging from -30 to + 10 mV. In cell-attached
recordings, single-channel conductance from a linear current-voltage relation was
94 ± 3 pS (n = 7). Tef (10 µm) enhanced channel activity with no change in
single-channel conductance. Tef increased spike firing accompanied by enhanced
facilitation of spike-frequency adaptation. Riluzole (10 µm) reversed
Tef-stimulated activity of K(Na) channels. In motor neuron-like NSC-34 cells,
increasing stimulation frequency altered the kinetics of both I(Na) and I(K) .
Modelling studies of motor neurons were simulated to demonstrate that the
magnitude of I(K(Na)) modulates AP firing.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a direct association of Na(+) and K(Na) channels which can 
provide the rapid activation of K(Na) channels required to regulate AP firing
occurring in motor neurons.

© 2012 The Authors Acta Physiologica © 2012 Scandinavian Physiological Society.

PMID: 22533628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Mar;16(3):422-4.

Endoscopic palliative treatement of a post-radiation tracheoesophageal fistula.

Lucantoni G(1), Lombardi C, Galluccio G.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Thoracic Endoscopy, San-Camillo Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy.
lucantonig@libero.it

Malignant Tracheoesophageal Fistula (TEF) is a life-threatening condition and
conventional palliative surgical approach sometimes could be very dangerous or
not suitable. We describe a case of a post-radiation TEF involving distal trachea
and main carina treated by the placement of endotracheal silicon stent.

PMID: 22530362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(2):599-606.

Whole genome analysis of human papillomavirus type 16 multiple infection in
cervical cancer patients.

Chansaenroj J(1), Theamboonlers A, Junyangdikul P, Swangvaree S, Karalak A,
Poovorawan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Clinical Virology, Department of Paediatrics, Faculty 
of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.

The characterization of the whole genome of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV16) 
from cervical cancer specimens with multiple infections in comparison with single
infection samples as the oncogenic potential of the virus may differ. Cervical
carcinoma specimens positive for HPV16 by PCR and INNO-LiPA were randomly
selected for whole genome characterization. Two HPV16 single infection and six
HPV16 multiple infection specimens were subjected to whole genome analysis by
using conserved primers and subsequent sequencing. All HPV16 whole genomes from
single infection samples clustered in the European (E) lineage while all multiple
infection specimens belonged to the non-European lineage. The variations in
nucleotide sequences in E6, E7, E2, L1 and Long control region (LCR) were
evaluated. In the E6 region, amino acid changes at L83V were related to increased
cancer progression. An amino acid variation N29S within the E7 oncoprotein
significantly associated with severity of lesion was also discovered. In all
three domains of the E2 gene non synonymous mutations were found. The L1 region
showed various mutations which may be related to conformation changes of viral
epitopes. Some transcription factor binding sites in the LCR region correlated to
virulence were shown on GRE/1, TEF- 1, YY14 and Oct-1. HPV16 European variant
prone to single infection may harbor a major variation at L83V which
significantly increases the risk for developing cervical carcinoma. HPV16
non-European variants prone to multiple infections may require many polymorphisms
to enhance the risk of cervical cancer development.

PMID: 22524831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Pediatr Surg Int. 2012 Jul;28(7):677-80. doi: 10.1007/s00383-012-3082-x. Epub
2012 Apr 11.

The value of preoperative CT scan in newborns with type C esophageal atresia.

Su P(1), Huang Y, Wang W, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning, China.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to evaluate the accuracy of preoperative CT scan
in depicting the structure of type C esophageal atresia (EA) and determine its
role in planning the surgical strategy by digitally measuring the interpouch
distance.
METHODS: Thirty-five neonates (20 males, 15 females) born with type C EA were
enrolled in this study. A helical CT scan was performed after chest radiographs
of the neonates with a coiled oroesophageal tube in the upper esophageal pouch.
The interpouch distances measured on CT images were compared with the findings at
surgery.
RESULTS: With the use of helical CT scan, the structure of EA-TEF was accurately 
depicted; the origins of the fistula and the interpouch distance were defined.
The interpouch distance detected by CT scan correlated well with the findings at 
surgery. Statistical analysis demonstrated no significant difference (R = 0.99, P
< 0.001). CT scan findings were crucial in planning the surgical strategy in 14
patients (40%).
CONCLUSION: Preoperative CT scan could provide more accurate information about
the origin of the fistula and the interpouch distance in type C EA and played a
crucial role in planning the surgical strategy.

PMID: 22491897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Surg Endosc. 2012 Sep;26(9):2678-80. doi: 10.1007/s00464-012-2214-7. Epub 2012
Apr 5.

Video: argon plasma coagulator in a 2-month-old child with tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Nardo GD(1), Oliva S, Barbato M, Aloi M, Midulla F, Roggini M, Valitutti F,
Frediani S, Cucchiara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Gastroenterology and Liver Unit, Sapienza 
University of Rome, University Hospital Umberto I, Viale Regina Elena, 324-00161 
Rome, RM, Italy. giovanni.dinardo@uniroma1.it

A 2 month-old boy was admitted to the authors' hospital because of regurgitation 
and persistent cough during breastfeeding. A chest X-ray examination and a barium
esophagogram disclosed small amounts of barium passing in the trachea, suggesting
a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Bronchoscopy combined with upper
gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy performed with the patient under general
anesthesia confirmed the fistula. The TEF was treated by injection of 1 ml
Glubran 2 from the esophageal side. A nasogastric tube was placed for feedings,
and 7 days later, a barium esophagogram showed a reduction of caliber but not
complete closure of the TEF. Unsuccessful fistula obliteration with Glubran was
attributed to technical difficulties in catheterization of the fistula orifice,
mainly resulting from its close proximity to the upper esophageal sphincter and
to its small caliber. Therefore, an argon plasma coagulator (APC) probe with a
circumferentially oriented nozzle was used from the esophageal side as an
alternative technique to fulgurate the residual fistula orifice (see video). A
nasogastric tube was placed for feedings. Oral feeding was started 7 days later
when a barium esophagogram confirmed complete fistula closure. At the 2-year
follow-up visit, the boy was asymptomatic, and the barium esophagogram was
negative. This report describes a case in which esophagoscopy gave a clear view
of the fistula due to its direction from esophagus to trachea. Complete fistula
obliteration was not obtained with Glubran. However, APC was successfully used to
close the residual fistula orifice. The authors suggest that APC can be used as
an alternative endoscopic technique to repair TEF when other techniques fail.

PMID: 22476825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Middle East J Dig Dis. 2012 Apr;4(2):107-10.

Clinical evaluation of disc battery ingestion in children.

Mirshemirani A(1), Khaleghnejad-Tabari A(1), Kouranloo J(1), Sadeghian N(1),
Rouzrokh M(1), Roshanzamir F(1), Razavi S(2), Sayary AA(3), Imanzadeh F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery Research Center, Mofid Children's Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit,
Mofid Children's Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. (3)Pediatric Gastroenterology Ward, Mofid Children's Hospital,
Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,Iran.

BACKGROUND The purpose of this study was to evaluate the characteristics,
management, and outcomes of disc battery ingestion in children. METHODS We
reviewed the medical records of children admitted to Mofid Children's Hospital
due to disc battery ingestion from January 2006 to January 2010. Clear history,
clinical symptoms and results of imaging studies revealed diagnosis of disc
battery ingestion in suspected patients. The clinical data reviewed included age,
gender, clinical manifestation, radiologic findings, location of disc battery,
duration of ingestion, endoscopic results and surgical treatment. RESULTS We
found 22 cases (11 males and 11 females) of disc battery ingestion with a mean
age of 4.3 years (range: 9 months to 12 years). Common symptoms were vomiting,
cough, dysphagia, and dyspnea. The mean duration of ingestion was 2.7 days (4
hours to 1.5 months). A total of 19 patients had histories of disc battery
ingestion, but three cases referred with the above symptoms, and the batteries
were accidentally found by x-ray. Only three cases had batteries impacted in the 
esophagus. Twelve batteries were removed endoscopically, 6 batteries
spontaneously passed through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract within 5 to 7 days, 
and 4 patients underwent surgery due to complications: 3 due to
tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) and 1 due to intestinal perforation. There was
no mortality in our study. CONCLUSION Most cases of disc battery ingestion run
uneventful courses, but some may be complicated. If the battery lodges in the
esophagus, emergency endoscopic management is necessary. However, once in the
stomach, it will usually pass through the GI tract.

PMCID: PMC4017686
PMID: 24829643  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


416. J Environ Sci Health B. 2012;47(4):233-9. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2012.636575.

Assays of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds in actually contaminated soils using 
transgenic tobacco plants carrying a recombinant mouse aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-mediated ß-glucuronidase reporter gene expression system.

Inui H(1), Gion K, Utani Y, Wakai T, Kodama S, Eun H, Kim YS, Ohkawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Genomics, Kobe University, Kobe, Hyogo,
Japan. hideo.ohkawa@gmail.com

Retraction in
    J Environ Sci Health B. 2012;47(7):759.

The transgenic tobacco plant XD4V-26 carrying the recombinant mouse aryl
hydrocarbon receptor XD4V-mediated ß-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene expression
system was used for assay of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds consisting of
polychlorodibenzo-p-dioxins, polychlorinated dibenzofurans, and coplanar
polychlorinated biphenyls (Co-PCBs) in actually contaminated soils. The
transgenic tobacco plant XD4V-26 showed a significant dose-dependent induced GUS 
activity when cultured on MS medium containing PCB126 [toxic equivalency factor
(TEF) = 0.1]. In contrast, PCB169 and PCB180, which have 0.03 of TEF and
unassigned TEF values, respectively, did not significantly induce GUS activity
under the same conditions as with PCB126. When the tobacco plants were cultivated
for up to 5 weeks on actually contaminated soils with dioxins and dioxin-like
compounds collected from the periphery of an incinerator used for disposal of
life and industrial wastes, GUS activity in the leaves was dose-dependently
increased. The plants clearly detected 360 pg-TEQ g(-1) of dioxins and
dioxin-like compounds in this assay. There was a positive correlation between GUS
activity and TEQ value of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds in the plants. This
assay does not require any extraction and purification processes for the actually
contaminated soil samples.

PMCID: PMC3662081
PMID: 22428884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 2012 Mar-Apr;18(2):151-2. doi: 10.4103/1319-3767.93827.

Megaesophagus in the pediatric age group: a diagnostic dilemma. H-type
tracheoesophageal fistula (H-type TEF).

Singh S(1), Wakhlu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery CSMMU, Lucknow, India.
drsunitasingh28@gmail.com

PMCID: PMC3326980
PMID: 22421725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Mar;2(3):407-19. doi: 10.1534/g3.111.001511. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Haplotype Analysis and Linkage Disequilibrium at Five Loci in Eragrostis tef.

Smith SM, Yuan Y, Doust AN, Bennetzen JL.

Eragrostis tef (Zucc.), a member of the Chloridoideae subfamily of grasses, is
one of the most important food crops in Ethiopia. Lodging is the most important
production problem in tef. The rht1 and sd1 dwarfing genes have been useful for
improving lodging resistance in wheat and rice, respectively, in what has been
known as the "Green Revolution." All homologs of rht1 and sd1 were cloned and
sequenced from 31 tef accessions collected from across Ethiopia. The
allotetraploid tef genome was found to carry two rht1 homologs. From sequence
variation between these two putative homologs, an approximate ancestral
divergence date of 6.4 million years ago was calculated for the two genomes
within tef. Three sd1 homologs were identified in tef, with unknown
orthologous/paralogous relationships. The genetic diversity in the 31 studied
accessions was organized into a relatively small number of haplotypes (2-4) for
four of these genes, whereas one rht1 homeologue exhibited 10 haplotypes. A low
level of nucleotide diversity was observed at all loci. Linkage disequilibrium
analysis demonstrated strong linkage disequilibrium, extending the length of the 
five genes investigated (2-4 kb), with no significant decline. There was no
significant correlation between haplotypes of any of these genes and their
recorded site of origin.

PMCID: PMC3291510
PMID: 22413094  [PubMed]


419. Persoonia. 2011 Dec;27:80-9. doi: 10.3767/003158511X617110. Epub 2011 Dec 2.

Stem cankers on sunflower (Helianthus annuus) in Australia reveal a complex of
pathogenic Diaporthe (Phomopsis) species.

Thompson SM(1), Tan YP, Young AJ, Neate SM, Aitken EA, Shivas RG.

Author information: 
(1)Agri-Science Queensland, Department of Employment, Economic Development and
Innovation, P.O. Box 102, Toowoomba, Qld 4350, Australia; corresponding author
e-mail: sue.thompson@deedi.qld.gov.au .

The identification of Diaporthe (anamorph Phomopsis) species associated with stem
canker of sunflower (Helianthus annuus) in Australia was studied using
morphology, DNA sequence analysis and pathology. Phylogenetic analysis revealed
three clades that did not correspond with known taxa, and these are believed to
represent novel species. Diaporthe gulyae sp. nov. is described for isolates that
caused a severe stem canker, specifically pale brown to dark brown, irregularly
shaped lesions centred at the stem nodes with pith deterioration and mid-stem
lodging. This pathogenicity of D. gulyae was confirmed by satisfying Koch's
Postulates. These symptoms are almost identical to those of sunflower stem canker
caused by D. helianthi that can cause yield reductions of up to 40 % in Europe
and the USA, although it has not been found in Australia. We show that there has 
been broad misapplication of the name D. helianthi to many isolates of Diaporthe 
(Phomopsis) found causing, or associated with, stem cankers on sunflower. In
GenBank, a number of isolates had been identified as D. helianthi, which were
accommodated in several clades by molecular phylogenetic analysis. Two less
damaging species, D. kochmanii sp. nov. and D. kongii sp. nov., are also
described from cankers on sunflower in Australia.

PMCID: PMC3251322
PMID: 22403478  [PubMed]


420. Persoonia. 2011 Dec;27:20-45. doi: 10.3767/003158511X606239. Epub 2011 Oct 7.

Fungal pathogens of Proteaceae.

Crous PW(1), Summerell BA, Swart L, Denman S, Taylor JE, Bezuidenhout CM, Palm
ME, Marincowitz S, Groenewald JZ.

Author information: 
(1)CBS Fungal Biodiversity Centre, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The
Netherlands; corresponding author e-mail: p.crous@cbs.knaw.nl .

Species of Leucadendron, Leucospermum and Protea (Proteaceae) are in high demand 
for the international floriculture market due to their brightly coloured and
textured flowers or bracts. Fungal pathogens, however, create a serious problem
in cultivating flawless blooms. The aim of the present study was to characterise 
several of these pathogens using morphology, culture characteristics, and DNA
sequence data of the rRNA-ITS and LSU genes. In some cases additional genes such 
as TEF 1-a and CHS were also sequenced. Based on the results of this study,
several novel species and genera are described. Brunneosphaerella leaf blight is 
shown to be caused by three species, namely B. jonkershoekensis on Protea repens,
B. nitidae sp. nov. on Protea nitida and B. protearum on a wide host range of
Protea spp. (South Africa). Coniothyrium-like species associated with
Coniothyrium leaf spot are allocated to other genera, namely Curreya grandicipis 
on Protea grandiceps, and Microsphaeropsis proteae on P. nitida (South Africa).
Diaporthe leucospermi is described on Leucospermum sp. (Australia), and Diplodina
microsperma newly reported on Protea sp. (New Zealand). Pyrenophora blight is
caused by a novel species, Pyrenophora leucospermi, and not Drechslera biseptata 
or D. dematoidea as previously reported. Fusicladium proteae is described on
Protea sp. (South Africa), Pestalotiopsis protearum on Leucospermum cuneiforme
(Zimbabwe), Ramularia vizellae and R. stellenboschensis on Protea spp. (South
Africa), and Teratosphaeria capensis on Protea spp. (Portugal, South Africa).
Aureobasidium leaf spot is shown to be caused by two species, namely A. proteae
comb. nov. on Protea spp. (South Africa), and A. leucospermi sp. nov. on
Leucospermum spp. (Indonesia, Portugal, South Africa). Novel genera and species
elucidated in this study include Gordonomyces mucovaginatus and Pseudopassalora
gouriqua (hyphomycetes), and Xenoconiothyrium catenata (coelomycete), all on
Protea spp. (South Africa).

PMCID: PMC3251321
PMID: 22403475  [PubMed]


421. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2012 Jul;22(6):458-60. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2012.668574.
Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Tyrosine hydroxylase assay: a bioassay for aryl hydrocarbon receptor-active
compounds based on tyrosine hydroxylase promoter activation.

Akahoshi E(1), Yoshimura S, Uruno S, Itoh S, Ishihara-Sugano M.

Author information: 
(1)Frontier Research Laboratory, Corporate Research and Development Center,
Toshiba Corporation, Komukai-Toshiba-cho, Saiwai-ku, Kawasaki, Japan.

Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) assay is a novel bioassay for screening aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-active compounds with diverse toxicities. The TH assay
employs reporter genes to evaluate TH promoter activity, which is linked to
dopamine synthesis and regulated by the AhR-aryl hydrocarbon receptor responsive 
element-III (AHRE-III)-mediated pathway. The toxic equivalency factors for higher
chlorinated dioxin congeners in the TH assay (TH-TEF) exhibit the same tendency
as those for the WHO-TEF, indicating that the activity of the TH assay is
consistent with that of existing methods. Furthermore, other chemicals, such as
lower chlorinated dioxin congeners that were minimally investigated in the past
could be detected preferentially by this assay.

PMID: 22394336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Appl Genet. 2012 May;53(2):237-47. doi: 10.1007/s13353-012-0087-z. Epub 2012
Feb 25.

Genetic variation of Fusarium oxysporum isolates forming fumonisin B(1) and
moniliformin.

Irzykowska L(1), Bocianowski J, Waskiewicz A, Weber Z, Karolewski Z, Golinski P, 
Kostecki M, Irzykowski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Phytopathology, Poznan University of Life Sciences, Dabrowskiego
159, 60-594 Poznan, Polan. irzyk@up.poznan.pl

Thirty single-spore isolates of a toxigenic fungus, Fusarium oxysporum, were
isolated from asparagus spears and identified by species-specific polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and translation elongation factor 1-a (TEF) sequence
analysis. In the examined sets of F. oxysporum isolates, the DNA sequences of
mating type genes (MAT) were identified. The distribution of MAT idiomorph may
suggest that MAT1-2 is a predominant mating type in the F. oxysporum population. 
F. oxysporum is mainly recognised as a producer of moniliformin-the highly toxic 
secondary metabolite. Moniliformin content was determined by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis in the range 0.05-1,007.47 µg g(-1) (mean
115.93 µg g(-1)) but, also, fumonisin B(1) was detected, in the concentration
range 0.01-0.91 µg g(-1) (mean 0.19 µg g(-1)). There was no association between
mating types and the mycotoxins biosynthesis level. Additionally, a significant
intra-species genetic diversity was revealed and molecular markers associated
with toxins biosynthesis were identified.

PMCID: PMC3334483
PMID: 22367665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2012 Mar-Apr;1(2):184-202. doi: 10.1002/wdev.12. 
Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Compartmentalization of the foregut tube: developmental origins of the trachea
and esophagus.

Fausett SR(1), Klingensmith J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Duke University, Durham, NC,
USA.

The mammalian trachea and esophagus share a common embryonic origin. They arise
by compartmentalization of a single foregut tube, composed of foregut endoderm
(FGE) and surrounding mesenchyme, around midgestation. Aberrant
compartmentalization is thought to lead to relatively common human birth defects,
such as esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF), which can
prevent or disrupt a newborn infant's ability to feed and breathe. Despite its
relevance to human health, morphogenesis of the anterior foregut is still poorly 
understood. In this article, we provide a comprehensive review of trachea and
esophagus formation from a common precursor, including the embryonic origin of
the FGE, current models for foregut morphogenesis, relevant human birth defects, 
insights from rodent models, and the emerging picture of the mechanisms
underlying normal and abnormal foregut compartmentalization. Recent research
suggests that a number of intercellular signaling pathways and several
intracellular effectors are essential for correct formation of the trachea and
esophagus. Different types of defects in the formation of either ventral or
dorsal foregut tissues can disrupt compartmentalization in rodent models. This
implies that EA/TEF defects in humans may also arise by multiple mechanisms.
Although our understanding of foregut compartmentalization is growing rapidly, it
is still incomplete. Future research should focus on synthesizing detailed
information gleaned from both human patients and rodent models to further our
understanding of this enigmatic process.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23801435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Appl Genet. 2012 May;53(2):227-36. doi: 10.1007/s13353-012-0085-1. Epub 2012
Feb 22.

Polymorphism of mycotoxin biosynthetic genes among Fusarium equiseti isolates
from Italy and Poland.

Stepien L(1), Gromadzka K, Chelkowski J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolomics, Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Strzeszynska 34, 60-479 Poznan, Poland. lste@igr.poznan.pl

Fusarium equiseti (Corda) Saccardo is a soil saprophyte and a weak pathogen,
associated with several diseases of fruit and other crops in subtropical and
tropical areas, but also in countries with temperate climate. A wide range of
secondary metabolites has been identified among natural F. equiseti populations, 
with zearalenone (ZEA), fusarochromanone and fusarenon-X being the most common.
In present study, the genetic diversity of strains from two populations (from
Italy and Poland) was evaluated by analysing the translation elongation factor 1a
(tef-1a) sequences, two polyketide synthases from the ZEA biosynthetic pathway
(PKS13 and PKS4) and the TRI5 gene from the trichothecene biosynthetic pathway.
ZEA was produced in rice cultures by 20 of the 27 tested isolates in
concentrations ranging from 1.34 ng/g to 34,000 ng/g). The ability to produce
enniatins and trichothecenes was evaluated in all strains by identifying esyn1,
TRI13 and TRI4 genes. The presence of PKS4 and PKS13 genes was confirmed by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in only some ZEA-producing isolates. Similarly,
the TRI5 gene was found in 14 of the 27 isolates tested. This is likely to have
been caused by the divergence of those genes between F. equiseti and F.
graminearum (the latter species was used for the primers design) and can be
exploited in phylogenetic studies. The analysis of the mycotoxin biosynthetic
gene sequences can be used to differentiate the studied genotypes even more
precisely than the analysis of the non-coding regions (like tef-1a).

PMCID: PMC3334484
PMID: 22354659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Ann Thorac Med. 2012 Jan;7(1):48-50. doi: 10.4103/1817-1737.91553.

Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula: A rare and late presentation in adult
patient.

Hajjar WM(1), Iftikhar A, Al Nassar SA, Rahal SM.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery Department, Thoracic Surgery Unit, King Khalid University
Hospital, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in adults is a rare
presentation and can test the diagnostic acumen of a surgeon, endoscopist, and
the radiologist. These undetected fistulas may present as chronic lung disease of
unknown origin because repeated aspirations can lead to recurrent lung infections
and bronchiectasis. Congenital TEFs should be considered in the diagnosis of
infants and young adults with recurrent respiratory distress and/or infections.
Here, we present the successful management of this rare case in an adult patient.

PMCID: PMC3277043
PMID: 22347352  [PubMed]


426. J Anaesthesiol Clin Pharmacol. 2012 Jan;28(1):114-6. doi:
10.4103/0970-9185.92460.

Early presentation of postintubation tracheoesophageal fistula: Perioperative
anesthetic management.

Kaur D(1), Anand S, Sharma P, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology, LRS Institute of Tuberculosis and Respiratory
Diseases, Mehrauli, New Delhi, India.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in adults occurs as a result of trauma,
malignancy, cuff-induced tracheal necrosis from prolonged mechanical ventilation,
traumatic endotracheal intubation, foreign body ingestion, prolonged presence of 
rigid nasogastric tube, and surgical complication. Anesthetic management for
repair of TEF is a challenge. Challenges include difficulties in oxygenation or
ventilation resulting from placement of endotracheal tube in or above the
fistula; large fistula defect causing loss of tidal volume with subsequent
gastric dilatation, atelactasis, and maintenance of one lung ventilation. The
most common cause of acquired nonmalignant TEF is postintubation fistula, which
develops after prolonged intubation for ventilatory support. Acquired TEF, which 
occurs after prolonged intubation, usually develops after 12-200 days of
mechanical ventilation, with a mean of 42 days. We present a rare case of TEF
that developed after 7 days of intubation. It was a difficult case to be
diagnosed as patient had a history of polytrauma, followed by emergency
intubation and both these conditions can contribute to tracheobronchial injury.

PMCID: PMC3275943
PMID: 22345958  [PubMed]


427. J Clin Anesth. 2012 Mar;24(2):133-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinane.2011.04.022. Epub
2012 Feb 17.

Airway and ventilation management during repair of a large acquired
tracheoesophageal fistula: the novel use of a readily available tool.

Malik AM(1), Ahmed Z, Durgham N, Stockmann PT, Belenky WM, Zestos M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Henry Ford West Bloomfield Hospital, Henry Ford 
Health System, West Bloomfield, MI 48322, USA. amalik1@hfhs.org

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a life-threatening disorder of the
airway that requires early diagnosis and treatment. The case of an infant who had
delayed development of a TEF following endoscopic removal of a disc battery
lodged in the midesophagus is reported. A repeat bronchoscopy, performed for
respiratory distress 4 days later, showed a large defect in the posterior wall of
the distal trachea, including the carina. A Foley catheter was used for airway
management in the repair of the acquired TEF.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22342211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Nutr Clin Pract. 2012 Feb;27(1):82-90. doi: 10.1177/0884533611427146.

Determinant factors of the viscosity of enteral formulas: basic analysis of
thickened enteral formulas.

Wakita M(1), Masui H, Ichimaru S, Amagai T.

Author information: 
(1)Mukogawa Women's University, 6-46, Ikebiraki, Nishinomiya, 663-8558, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Thickened enteral formula (TEF), which is made by adding thickener to
enteral formula, has been used mainly in Japan to reduce the incidence of
clinical complications associated with enteral nutrition. However, the optimal
viscosity of TEF needed to achieve a high efficiency is different for each
medical complication and for individual patients.
METHODS: The viscosity of TEF, which consists of enteral formula and thickener,
was determined by 5 factors: (1) formula energy density, (2) formula temperature,
(3) stirring speed, (4) stirring time, and (5) time elapsed since preparation.
Then, the changing index (CI) was calculated for each of the 5 factors to
determine which exerts the most influence on TEF viscosities.
RESULTS: The most influential factor (CI =-50%) for the decrease in TEF viscosity
was formula energy density. In contrast, the most influential factors (CI =50%)
for the increase in TEF viscosity were stirring time and time elapsed since
preparation.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study indicate that formula energy density,
stirring time, and time elapsed since preparation are the most influential
factors to consider during manipulation of TEF viscosity.

PMID: 22307493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Apr 1;260(1):58-64. doi: 10.1016/j.taap.2012.01.022.
Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Comparative potency approach based on H2AX assay for estimating the genotoxicity 
of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.

Audebert M(1), Zeman F, Beaudoin R, Péry A, Cravedi JP.

Author information: 
(1)INRA UMR1331, TOXALIM-Research Center in Food Toxicology, 180 Chemin de
Tournefeuille, F-31027 Toulouse, France. marc.audebert@toulouse.inra.fr

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) constitute a family of over one hundred
compounds and can generally be found in complex mixtures. PAHs metabolites cause 
DNA damage which can lead to the development of carcinogenesis. Toxicity
assessment of PAH complex mixtures is currently expressed in terms of toxic
equivalents, based on Toxicity Equivalent Factors (TEFs). However, the definition
of new TEFs for a large number of PAH could overcome some limitations of the
current method and improve cancer risk assessment. The current investigation
aimed at deriving the relative potency factors of PAHs, based on their genotoxic 
effect measured in vitro and analyzed with mathematical models. For this purpose,
we used a new genotoxic assay (<U+03B3>H2AX) with two human cell lines (HepG2 and
LS-174T) to analyze the genotoxic properties of 13 selected PAHs at low doses
after 24h treatment. The dose-response for genotoxic effects was modeled with a
Hill model; equivalency between PAHs at low dose was assessed by applying
constraints to the model parameters. In the two cell lines tested, we observed a 
clear dose-response for genotoxic effects for 11 tested compounds. LS-174T was on
average ten times more sensitive than HepG2 towards PAHs regarding genotoxicity. 
We developed new TEFs, which we named Genotoxic Equivalent Factor (GEF).
Calculated GEF for the tested PAHs were generally higher than the TEF usually
used. Our study proposed a new in vitro based method for the establishment of
relevant TEFs for PAHs to improve cancer risk assessment.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22306620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Front Genet. 2011 Dec 28;2:95. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2011.00095. eCollection 2011.

A Network of Regulations by Small Non-Coding RNAs: The P-TEFb Kinase in
Development and Pathology.

Ghanbarian H(1), Grandjean V, Cuzin F, Rassoulzadegan M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U636 Nice, France.

Part of the heterodimeric P-TEF-b element of the Pol II transcription machinery, 
the cyclin-dependent kinase 9 plays a critical role in gene expression.
Phosphorylation of several residues in the polymerase is required for elongation 
of transcript. It determines the rates of transcription and thus, plays a
critical role in several differentiation pathways, best documented in heart
development. The synthesis and activity of the protein are tightly regulated in a
coordinated manner by at least three non-coding RNAs. First, its kinase activity 
is reversibly inhibited by formation of a complex with the 334<U+2009>nt 7SK RNA, from
which it is released under conditions of stress. Then, heart development requires
a maximal rate of synthesis during cardiomyocyte differentiation, followed by a
decrease in the differentiated state. The latter is insured by microRNA-mediated 
translational inhibition. In a third mode of RNA control, increased levels of
transcription are induced by small non-coding RNA molecules with sequences
homologous to the transcript. Designated paramutation, this epigenetic variation,
stable during development, and hereditarily transmitted in a non-Mendelian manner
over several generations, is thought to be a response to the inactivation of one 
of the two alleles by an abnormal recombination event such as insertion of a
transposon.

PMCID: PMC3268644
PMID: 22303389  [PubMed]


431. Lab Chip. 2012 Mar 21;12(6):1183-90. doi: 10.1039/c2lc21028b. Epub 2012 Jan 31.

A vertically aligned carbon nanotube-based impedance sensing biosensor for rapid 
and high sensitive detection of cancer cells.

Abdolahad M(1), Taghinejad M, Taghinejad H, Janmaleki M, Mohajerzadeh S.

Author information: 
(1)Nano-Electronics and Thin Film Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.

A novel vertically aligned carbon nanotube based electrical cell impedance
sensing biosensor (CNT-ECIS) was demonstrated for the first time as a more rapid,
sensitive and specific device for the detection of cancer cells. This biosensor
is based on the fast entrapment of cancer cells on vertically aligned carbon
nanotube arrays and leads to mechanical and electrical interactions between CNT
tips and entrapped cell membranes, changing the impedance of the biosensor.
CNT-ECIS was fabricated through a photolithography process on Ni/SiO(2)/Si
layers. Carbon nanotube arrays have been grown on 9 nm thick patterned Ni
microelectrodes by DC-PECVD. SW48 colon cancer cells were passed over the surface
of CNT covered electrodes to be specifically entrapped on elastic nanotube beams.
CNT arrays act as both adhesive and conductive agents and impedance changes
occurred as fast as 30 s (for whole entrapment and signaling processes). CNT-ECIS
detected the cancer cells with the concentration as low as 4000 cells cm(-2) on
its surface and a sensitivity of 1.7 × 10(-3)O cm(2). Time and cell efficiency
factor (TEF and CEF) parameters were defined which describe the sensor's
rapidness and resolution, respectively. TEF and CEF of CNT-ECIS were much higher 
than other cell based electrical biosensors which are compared in this paper.

PMID: 22294045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Fungal Biol. 2012 Feb;116(2):204-13. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2011.11.003. Epub 2011
Nov 18.

Molecular and phenotypic characterization of Sebacina vermifera strains
associated with orchids, and the description of Piriformospora williamsii sp.
nov.

Basiewicz M(1), Weiss M, Kogel KH, Langen G, Zorn H, Zuccaro A.

Author information: 
(1)Justus Liebig University Gießen, Institute of Phytopathology and Applied
Zoology, Gießen, Germany.

Sebacinales was described in 2004 and is currently recognized as the earliest
diverging lineage of mycorrhizal Basidiomycota. In addition, recent research has 
demonstrated that no other known fungal order harbours a broader spectrum of
mycorrhizal types. Yet because of the character poor morphology of these
inconspicuous fungi, a reliable systematic framework for Sebacinales is still out
of reach. In order to increase the body of comparative data on Sebacinales, we
followed a polyphasic approach using a sampling of seven diverse Sebacinales
strains, including several isolates of Australian orchid mycorrhizae,
Piriformospora indica, and a multinucleate rhizoctonia isolated from a pot
culture of Glomus fasciculatum (Williams 1985) with clover. We performed
molecular phylogenetic analyses from candidate barcoding regions [rDNA: internal 
transcribed spacer (ITS)1-5.8-ITS2, 28S; translation elongation factor 1-a
(TEF)], enzymatic profiling, genome size estimation by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), and karyotype analysis using pulsed field gel
electrophoresis. Here, we report significant differences in the physiological and
molecular parameters inferred from these morphologically very similar strains.
Particularly, our results indicate that intron sequences of the TEF gene are
useful markers for Sebacinales at the species level. As a first taxonomic
consequence, we describe Piriformospora williamsii as a new member of the so far 
monotypic genus Piriformospora and show that this genus contains still
undescribed species that were recently discovered as endophytes of
field-collected specimens of Anthyllis, Medicago, and Lolium in Germany.

Copyright © 2011 British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22289766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29021. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029021. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Genome-wide progesterone receptor binding: cell type-specific and shared
mechanisms in T47D breast cancer cells and primary leiomyoma cells.

Yin P(1), Roqueiro D, Huang L, Owen JK, Xie A, Navarro A, Monsivais D, Coon JS
5th, Kim JJ, Dai Y, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Progesterone, via its nuclear receptor (PR), exerts an overall
tumorigenic effect on both uterine fibroid (leiomyoma) and breast cancer tissues,
whereas the antiprogestin RU486 inhibits growth of these tissues through an
unknown mechanism. Here, we determined the interaction between common or
cell-specific genome-wide binding sites of PR and mRNA expression in
RU486-treated uterine leiomyoma and breast cancer cells.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: ChIP-sequencing revealed 31,457 and 7,034 PR-binding sites in
breast cancer and uterine leiomyoma cells, respectively; 1,035 sites overlapped
in both cell types. Based on the chromatin-PR interaction in both cell types, we 
statistically refined the consensus progesterone response element to GACA 
TGTC. We identified two striking differences between uterine leiomyoma and
breast cancer cells. First, the cis-regulatory elements for HSF, TEF-1, and
C/EBPa and ß were statistically enriched at genomic RU486/PR-targets in uterine
leiomyoma, whereas E2F, FOXO1, FOXA1, and FOXF sites were preferentially enriched
in breast cancer cells. Second, 51.5% of RU486-regulated genes in breast cancer
cells but only 6.6% of RU486-regulated genes in uterine leiomyoma cells contained
a PR-binding site within 5 kb from their transcription start sites (TSSs),
whereas 75.4% of RU486-regulated genes contained a PR-binding site farther than
50 kb from their TSSs in uterine leiomyoma cells. RU486 regulated only seven
mRNAs in both cell types. Among these, adipophilin (PLIN2), a pro-differentiation
gene, was induced via RU486 and PR via the same regulatory region in both cell
types.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies have identified molecular components in a
RU486/PR-controlled gene network involved in the regulation of cell growth, cell 
migration, and extracellular matrix function. Tissue-specific and common patterns
of genome-wide PR binding and gene regulation may determine the therapeutic
effects of antiprogestins in uterine fibroids and breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3260146
PMID: 22272226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Pediatr Res. 2012 Mar;71(3):235-40. doi: 10.1038/pr.2011.41. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Lung hypoplasia in rats with esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Xiaomei L(1), Aras-Lopez R, Martinez L, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Central Laboratory, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, 
China.

INTRODUCTION: Survivors of esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula
(EA-TEF) often suffer chronic respiratory tract disease. EA-TEF results from
abnormal emergence of the trachea from the foregut. This study in a rat model
tests the hypothesis that primary lung maldevelopment might be a downstream
consequence of this defect.
RESULTS: The lung was hypoplastic in rats with EA-TEF although the histological
pattern was normal. Maturation and arteriolar wall thickness were unchanged, but 
mesenchymal control of airway branching was weakened. This branching was
deficient from embryonal day (E13) on in adriamycin-treated explants.
DISCUSSION: In conclusion, the lungs were hypoplastic in rats with experimental
EA-TEF due to defective embryonal airway branching. However, arteriolar wall and 
respiratory epithelial patterns remained normal. These findings suggest that
similarly defective lung development might contribute to chronic respiratory
disease in EA-TEF patients.
METHODS: Pregnant rats received either 1.75<U+2009>mg/kg i.p. adriamycin or vehicle on
E7, E8, and E9. Lungs were recovered at E15, E18, and E2. Lung weight/body weight
ratio, total DNA and protein, radial alveolar count, arteriolar wall thickness,
lung maturity, and mesenchymal control of airway branching were assessed. E13
lungs were cultured for 72<U+2009>h and explant airway branching was measured daily. For
comparisons, nonparametric tests (*P < 0.05) were used.

PMID: 22258084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Sleep Med. 2012 Mar;13(3):297-300. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2011.06.023. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Tef polymorphism is associated with sleep disturbances in patients with
Parkinson's disease.

Hua P(1), Liu W, Zhao Y, Ding H, Wang L, Xiao H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Circadian mechanisms play an important role in the regulation of
sleep. A circadian clock-controlled gene, Tef, has been suggested to be
associated with depressive symptoms, restless legs syndrome, and slow wave sleep 
in patients with sleep disorders. The present study sought to explore the
association between Tef and sleep disturbances in patients with Parkinson's
disease (PD).
METHODS: Three hundred and ninety-two unrelated patients with PD were recruited
for this study. All of them completed the PD Sleep Scale (PDSS) and other
clinical and demographic assessments. rs738499, a single nucleotide polymorphism 
of the Tef gene, was genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism.
RESULTS: Mean total PDSS scores were 111.5 (standard deviation [SD] 23.0) in the 
TT genotype and 122.2 (SD 18.2) in the TG+GG genotypes (P<0.01). Significant
differences were found between genotypes (TT vs TG+GG) for 14 item scores (all
P<0.05). Total and item scores displayed negative associations with the TT
genotype (all P<0.05) except Item 2 (P=0.178). Linear regression adjusted for
gender, duration, depression and disease severity showed that the polymorphism
could explain 0.9% of the variance in PDSS scores.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that the TT genotype in Tef
rs738499 is associated with sleep disturbances in PD. Depression and disease
severity are the main contributors to these findings, but rs738499 itself is an
independent risk factor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22257907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Ter Arkh. 2012;84(12):23-9.

[Aspects of risk stratification in acute coronary syndrome (Part II): Prognostic 
value of evaluation of exercise-induced myocardial ischemia according to the data
of pharmacological stress echocardiography].

[Article in Russian]

Gukasian VA, Matskeplishvili ST, Ioshina VI, Aripov MA, Shakhnazarian LS,
Asymbekova ÉU, Zhertovskaia EV, Buziashvili IuI.

AIM: To define the prognostic value of evaluation exercise-induced myocardial
ischemia according to the data of pharmacological (dobutamine or dipyridamole)
stress echocardiography (EchoCG) in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The results of examinations were analyzed in a total of 91 
patients with ACS. An analysis of events in the established follow-up period
(mean 14.3 +/- 0.7 months) took into consideration outcomes, such as death from
cardiac diseases, a recurrent acute coronary episode (nonfatal myocardial
infarction (MI), unstable angina (UA).
RESULTS: Pharmacological stress EchoCG showed a positive result in 40 (44%)
patients (Group 1) and a negative one in 51 (56%) patients (Group 2). Thus, the
sensitivity and specificity of the pharmacological test in determining the risk
for cardiac events were 89.3 and 76.2%, respectively; the prognostic value of
positive and negative results was 62.5 and 94.1%, respectively. Analysis of
EchoCG parameters used to identify poor prognostic factors in patients with ACS
has indicated that the most important predictors of death and major cardiac
events (cardiac death, acute MI, UA) are resting impaired segmental contractility
index (ISCI), number of asynergic segments, and total ejection fraction (TEF) at 
baseline; TEF, ISCI, deltaISCI (as compared to the baseline data), and the number
of segments with a negative response after low-dose drug infusion; a positive or 
negative result, TEF, deltaTEF (as compared to the baseline data), and ISCL at
the test peak.
CONCLUSION: Pharmacological stress EchoCG is a safe noninvasive diagnostic method
in a group of patients with ACS. When the latter is diagnosed, it may be
performed in the earliest periods (on day 4 after onset of the disease) to
estimate its prognosis and to decide whether aggressive treatments should be
used.

PMID: 23479984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Scand J Surg. 2011;100(4):273-8.

Current controversies in the surgical treatment of esophageal atresia.

Tovar JA(1), Fragoso AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz and Universidad
Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. jatovar.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF) is a rare condition that can be nowadays succesfully treated. The
current interest therefore is focused on the management of the difficult cases,
on thoracoscopic approach, and on some aspects of the long-term results.
METHODS: The current strategies for the difficult or impossible anastomoses in
pure and long-gap EA, the introduction of thoracoscopic repair and the causes,
mechanisms and management of post-operative gastro-esophageal reflux (GER) are
reviewed.
RESULTS: Methods of esophageal elongation and multi-staged repair of pure and
long-gap EA allow anastomosis but with functional results that are often poor.
Esophageal replacement with colon or stomach achieves at least similar results
and often requires less procedures. Thoracoscopic repair is a promising adjunct, 
but the difficulties for setting it as a gold-standard are pointed out. GER is a 
part of the disease and its surgical treatment, that is often required, is
burdened by high failure rates.
CONCLUSIONS: EA with or without TEF can be successfully treated in most cases,
but a number of unsolved issues remain and the current approach to difficult
cases will certainly evolve in the future.

PMID: 22182849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2012 Apr;215(3):286-92. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2011.11.003. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Fusarium species recovered from the water distribution system of a French
university hospital.

Sautour M(1), Edel-Hermann V, Steinberg C, Sixt N, Laurent J, Dalle F, Aho S,
Hartemann P, L'ollivier C, Goyer M, Bonnin A.

Author information: 
(1)Parasitology and Mycology laboratory, Plateau Technique de Biologie du CHU, 2 
rue Angélique Ducoudray, BP 37013, 21070 Dijon Cedex, France.
msautour@u-bourgogne.fr

Dijon Hospital is a French tertiary care institution undergoing major renovation,
and different microbiological controls revealed the presence of Fusarium spp. in 
the water distribution system. Because some Fusarium spp. can cause
life-threatening opportunistic infections in immunocompromised patients, an
8-month survey was conducted in two hospital sites in order to evaluate the
prevalence of the fungi in the water system. In 2 units of one hospital site,
100% of the samples of tap-water were positive, with high concentrations of
Fusarium spp. (up to 10(5)cfu/L). In the second hospital site, 94% of samples
were positive, but generally with lower concentrations. The analysis of
translation elongation factor 1a (TEF) sequences of 146 isolates revealed the
presence of two different Fusarium species: F. oxysporum was detected in all
units explored of both hospital sites, and F. dimerum only in one unit of one
hospital site. For both species, we suggest that the fungi discovered could be
particularly adapted to an aquatic environment.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22177529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2011 Dec;21(6):386-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1291269. Epub 2011 
Dec 14.

Incidence, diagnosis, and outcomes of vocal fold immobility after esophageal
atresia (EA) and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair.

Mortellaro VE(1), Pettiford JN, St Peter SD, Fraser JD, Ho B, Wei J.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Mercy Hospital and Clinics, General Surgery, Kansas City, USA.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of vocal fold paralysis in an infant is a devastating
finding that may require a permanent tracheotomy. The incidence of congenital
vocal fold paralysis is unknown, but it is thought to be more common in infants
with anatomic anomalies in the aero-digestive system. Vocal fold paralysis after 
surgical repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula is a rare
finding often diagnosed after multiple failed extubations. Currently infants do
not routinely undergo documentation of vocal fold motion prior to esophageal
atresia repair. We report here on our experience with this rare complication.
METHOD: A retrospective review was done of patients with esophageal atresia
and/or tracheoesophageal fistula from 1985 to 2009. Patient demographics,
operative techniques, and outcomes were collected.
RESULTS: 150 patients were identified. Mean age at surgical intervention was 12 ±
33 days. Otolaryngology service was consulted for 13% of patients with
postoperative failure. Awake fiberoptic laryngoscopy identified 3% of patients
with vocal fold paralysis. Bilateral vocal fold paralysis was found in 3
patients, and 2 patients had unilateral vocal fold paralysis. Patients with
bilateral paralysis were treated with tracheotomy; unilateral paralysis was
treated expectantly.
CONCLUSION: In this study, 3% of patients were diagnosed with vocal fold
paralysis after esophageal atresia repair. The etiology of vocal fold paralysis
in this study is difficult to assess. Pre-operative fiberoptic laryngoscopy is
recommended to identify children with congenital vocal fold paralysis prior to
surgical intervention, especially in those requiring revision surgery.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22169990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2012 Feb;22(1):67-73. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1291299. Epub 2011 
Dec 7.

Abnormal development of lung innervation in experimental esophageal atresia.

Liu XM(1), Aras-Lopez R, Martinez L, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Health Ministry for Congenital Malformations, Shengjing
Hospital l, China Medical University, Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Patients with esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula
(EA-TEF) have chronic respiratory tract disease and deficient tracheal
innervation. This study tests the hypothesis in rats with EA-TEF that deficient
lung innervation could be one of the causes of respiratory disease.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant rats were treated with either 2 mg/kg i.p.
adriamycin or vehicle on E7, E8 and E9. Lungs and tracheas were retrieved on E15,
E18 and E21 (term: E22). Innervation was examined by regular (PGP 9.5 and GDNF)
and whole-mount (PGP 9.5 and a-actin) immunohistochemistry. PGP 9.5 and GDNF mRNA
were measured by real-time, quantitative RT-PCR and the levels of PGP 9.5 protein
by immunoblot. Embryonic lung primordia harvested on E13 were cultured for 72 h
and airway peristalsis was assessed under an inverted microscope. PGP 9.5
expression was then examined in explants by whole-mount immunohistochemistry and 
RT-PCR. Values were compared with non-parametric tests.
RESULTS: Neural networks were present in both EA-TEF and control fetuses on E15, 
E18 and E21, but the neural network was obviously disorganized in whole-mount
immunohistochemistry of EA-TEF. The pan-neural marker PGP 9.5 protein was
increased at term whereas the neural chemo-attractant GDNF protein was unchanged.
PGP 9.5 mRNA significantly increased from subnormal levels on E15 to very
increased ones on E18 compared with controls. GDNF mRNA levels followed the same 
trend. Airway peristalsis of explanted embryonal lungs was similar in both
groups. The neural networks were underdeveloped in these primordia, as assessed
by whole-mount PGP 9.5 immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: The development of respiratory tract innervation in
adriamycin-induced EA-TEF was delayed and abnormally controlled in rats compared 
with controls. However, these deficiencies were apparently compensated for at
term and had no effect on airway peristalsis. The possible significance of
innervation anomalies for respiratory sequelae in EA-TEF patients deserves
further investigation.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 22161073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Can J Diet Pract Res. 2011 Winter;72(4):201-4. doi: 10.3148/72.4.2011.201.

n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids increase thermic effect of food in men with
metabolic syndrome.

Matheson KM(1), Cutting JE, Mazurak VC, Robinson LE, Buchholz AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph, ON.

PURPOSE: Effects on energy metabolism of a test meal and a two-week dietary
intervention were observed in men with metabolic syndrome (MetS). Both the meal
and the intervention included foods containing fish-derived n-3 polyunsaturated
fats (PUFA).
METHODS: Six men with MetS (46.7 ± 12.1 years, 37.2 ± 5.6 kg/m(2), mean ±
standard deviation) completed two test days, separated by a 14-day dietary
intervention during which they consumed at least 2.0 g per day of n-3 PUFA from
supplied foods. Pre- and post-intervention measurements included body
composition, resting metabolic rate (RMR), and the thermic effect of food (TEF)
measured for six hours after ingestion of a test meal consisting of 1.43 g of
fish-derived n-3 PUFA.
RESULTS: Intakes of n-3 PUFA increased over the 14-day intervention, from 0.43 g 
per day ± 0.48 to 2.92 g per day ± 1.97 (p=0.013), while no changes were observed
in total energy intakes, weight, body composition, or RMR (all p>0.05). The TEF
increased by 51.3% (p=0.036), and the non-protein respiratory quotient decreased 
by 36.0% (p=0.700).
CONCLUSIONS: Subjects increased their intake of fish-derived n-3 PUFA in an
isocaloric manner while maintaining body weight and composition, and increased
the TEF. More studies with larger sample sizes and longer intervention periods
are required to confirm the use of fish-derived n-3 PUFA as a therapeutic dietary
strategy for people with MetS.

PMID: 22146121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Med Food. 2011 Dec;14(12):1654-62. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2010.0255.

Chronic intake of fractionated yellow pea flour reduces postprandial energy
expenditure and carbohydrate oxidation.

Marinangeli CP(1), Jones PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Richardson Centre for Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals, University of
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

Effects of dietary fibers on human postprandial energetics remain undefined. The 
objective of the present study was to explore effects of whole yellow pea flour
(WPF) and fractionated pea flour (FPF) on postprandial energy expenditure,
substrate utilization, and hepatic triglyceride synthesis rate. Using a
crossover-diet controlled design, 23 overweight men and women received muffins
containing WPF, FPF, and white wheat flour (WF) for 28 days, followed by 28-day
washout periods. Subjects received 50 g/day WPF and WF. Given that FPF is
approximately 84% fiber, the amount of FPF administered to volunteers was
equivalent to the amount of pea-derived fiber in the WPF treatment. Four weeks of
FPF consumption reduced (P=.007) total postprandial energy expenditure (333.0±3.6
kcal/330 minutes) compared with WF (349.3±3.6 kcal/330 minutes). When values were
normalized to the level of food energy consumed, FPF (4.6±0.3%) decreased
(P=.018) the thermic effect of food (TEF) compared with WF (5.7±0.3%).
Carbohydrate oxidation tended to be lower (P=.075) with FPF (44.7±2.1 g/330
minutes) versus WF (51.2±0.1.9 g/330 minutes). WPF had no effect on total energy 
expenditure, TEF, or carbohydrate oxidation. Only after 370 minutes was
cumulative oxidation of [1-(13)C]palmitic acid higher (P=.045) in the WPF group
(0.96±0.05%) compared with FPF (0.81±0.05%). Neither treatment had any effect on 
hepatic triglyceride synthesis rate. In conclusion, chronic ingestion of
different fractions of yellow peas imposes distinctive effects on postprandial
energy expenditure and substrate utilization.

PMID: 22145774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Pediatr Surg Int. 2012 Apr;28(4):335-40. doi: 10.1007/s00383-011-3022-1. Epub
2011 Nov 15.

Mutational analysis of NOG in esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula
patients.

Murphy AJ(1), Li Y, Pietsch JB, Chiang C, Lovvorn HN 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Vanderbilt University Children's Hospital,
Doctor's Office Tower, Suite 7102, 2200 Children's Way, Nashville, TN 37232-9780,
USA. andrew.j.murphy@vanderbilt.edu

PURPOSE: The NOG protein is a secretory antagonist of bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs). Nog-/- mouse embryos demonstrate proximal esophageal atresia (EA) and
distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) compatible with the most common
configuration of EA/TEF observed in humans. Four microdeletions that span the NOG
locus at 17q22 have been described in human patients having EA/TEF. We
investigated the incidence of point mutations in the coding region of the NOG
gene in human EA/TEF.
METHODS: DNA was collected from 50 patients previously treated for EA/TEF. PCR
was used to amplify the coding region of NOG. To detect single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), amplicons were subjected to temperature gradient capillary 
electrophoresis (TGCE). Candidate SNPs were directly sequenced.
RESULTS: TGCE analysis revealed a SNP in the coding region of NOG in 1 of 50
patients (2%). DNA sequencing revealed a synonymous SNP at position 468 (C-T) of 
the NOG coding region.
CONCLUSION: SNPs in the coding region of the NOG gene are identified infrequently
in human cases of EA/TEF. Further investigation of SNPs in the promoter region of
NOG is warranted, as is the effect of synonymous SNPs on NOG mRNA stability.

PMCID: PMC4148071
PMID: 22083168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Int J Food Sci Nutr. 2012 Jun;63(4):461-7. doi: 10.3109/09637486.2011.634790.
Epub 2011 Nov 14.

A randomized trial investigating an iron-rich bread as a prophylaxis against iron
deficiency in pregnancy.

Bokhari F(1), Derbyshire EJ, Hickling D, Li W, Brennan CS.

Author information: 
(1)Hollings Faculty, Centre of Food, Nutrition & Health Research, Manchester
Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK.

The iron-rich bread (2.2 mg iron per 50 g slice) used in the study was developed 
using Eragrostis tef flour, naturally rich in iron. Iron deficiency is prevalent 
in pregnancy and compliance with supplements can be low. In this double-blind,
randomized trial 34 Caucasian, primiparous antenatal patients were randomized to 
receive intervention bread or a placebo for 6 weeks. Women consumed on an average
of 2.3 slices per day, providing a total of 5.0 mg iron. Using World Health
Organisation (2001) haemoglobin cut-offs, 12% of participants eating the
iron-rich bread were iron deficient by the end of the study compared with 27% in 
the control group. For other markers of iron status, these were improved in the
placebo versus the treatment group. For example, a significant decline in serum
iron and transferrin saturation was not observed in this group. Findings
demonstrate that other modes of delivery, i.e. food fortification, may be needed 
to generate 'physiological effects', or further measures are taken to improve
intervention compliance.

PMID: 22081981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Environ Sci Technol. 2012 Jan 3;46(1):525-33. doi: 10.1021/es2028263. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

In vitro transactivation potencies of black-footed albatross (Phoebastria
nigripes) AHR1 and AHR2 by dioxins to predict CYP1A expression in the wild
population.

Mol TL(1), Kim EY, Ishibashi H, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies, Ehime University, Bunkyo-cho 2-5,
Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.

Our previous studies have detected high levels of dioxins and related compounds
(DRCs) including polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), furans (PCDFs), and
coplanar PCBs (Co-PCBs) in the black-footed albatross (BFA), Phoebastria
nigripes, from the North Pacific region. We have also cloned two aryl hydrocarbon
receptors, AHR1 and AHR2, of the BFA. To evaluate the sensitivity to DRCs in the 
BFA and to assess the status of cytochrome P450 1A (CYP1A) induction in the wild 
population, this study investigated the mRNA expression levels of BFA AHR1 and
AHR2 and also the transactivation potencies of each AHR by 15 selected DRC
congeners. Quantitative real-time PCR of BFA AHR mRNAs showed that hepatic AHR1
is more highly expressed than AHR2. Transactivation by graded concentrations of
individual DRCs was measured in COS-7 cells, where BFA AHR1 or AHR2 was
transiently transfected. For congeners that exhibited AHR-mediated dose-dependent
activities, 50% effective concentration (EC(50)) and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) relative potencies (REPs) were
estimated. Based on the estimates of the REPs, TCDD induction equivalency factors
(IEFs) were determined. For BFA AHR1, PeCDF was equipotent to TCDD, but other
congeners exhibited lower IEFs. For BFA AHR2, PCDD/F congeners except OCDD/F
showed IEFs = 1.0. Using BFA AHR1- or AHR2-IEFs and hepatic concentrations of
DRCs in North Pacific BFAs, TCDD induction equivalents (IEQs) were calculated. We
further constructed nonlinear regression models on the relationships between BFA 
AHR1- or AHR2-IEF derived total IEQ or WHO-TEF derived total TEQ and
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase activity (EROD) in the liver of wild BFAs. The
results indicated that the relationships of BFA AHR1- and AHR2-based IEQs and
EROD were predictable from BFA AHR1- and AHR2-mediated transactivation by TCDD,
respectively. Collectively, these results suggest that the in vitro assay
incorporating the AHR of species of concern would be a useful tool to predict the
sensitivity to DRCs in the species and CYP1A induction in the wild population.

PMID: 22074031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Int J Mol Sci. 2011;12(10):6722-32. doi: 10.3390/ijms12106722. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Molecular identification of Fusarium species in Gibberella fujikuroi species
complex from rice, sugarcane and maize from Peninsular Malaysia.

Hsuan HM(1), Salleh B, Zakaria L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 11800 USM, Pulau
Pinang, Malaysia; E-Mails: hmsuan@yahoo.com (H.M.H.); sallehb@usm.my (B.S.).

The objective of this study was to identify Fusarium species in the Gibberella
fujikuroi species complex from rice, sugarcane and maize as most of the Fusarium 
species in the species complex are found on the three crops. Isolates used were
collected from the field and obtained from culture collection. The Fusarium
isolates were initially sorted based on morphology and identifications confirmed 
based on the DNA sequence of the translation elongation factor 1-a (TEF-1a) gene.
Based on the closest match of BLAST analysis, five species were recovered,
namely, F. sacchari, F. fujikuroi, F. proliferatum, F. andiyazi and F.
verticillioides. This is the first report regarding F. andiyazi from rice in
Malaysia and Southeast Asia. The phylogenetic tree generated by using the
neighbor joining method showed that isolates from the same species were grouped
in the same clade. The present study indicated that Fusarium species in the G.
fujikuroi species complex are widespread in rice, sugarcane and maize in
Peninsular Malaysia. The findings also suggest that the use of morphological
characters for identification of Fusarium species in the G. fujikuroi species
complex from the three crops will lead to incorrect species designation.

PMCID: PMC3211005
PMID: 22072914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2012 Mar;22(2):195-9. doi: 10.1089/lap.2011.0063.
Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula in
neonates: evolution of a technique.

Rothenberg SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children, Denver, Colorado 80205, USA.
steverberg@aol.com

Advancements in minimally invasive surgical techniques and instruments for
neonates have allowed even the most complex neonatal procedures to be
endoscopically approached. In 1999, the first successful thoracoscopic repair of 
an esophageal atresia (EA) was performed in a 2-month-old infant. One year later,
the first totally thoracoscopic repair of an atresia with distal fistula
(tracheo-esophageal fistula [TEF]) was realized in a newborn. Over the ensuing 10
years, this technique was used and modified by a single surgeon in 49 consecutive
patients. Overall, 43 patients with TEF and 6 with pure EA were repaired by using
a thoracoscopic approach. An additional 3 patients with H-type TEF were also
thoracoscopically treated. Weight ranged from 1.2 to 3.8 kg. Operative time
ranged from 50 to 120 minutes. In fact, 48 out of 49 were successfully completed 
thoracoscopically. There were 2 patients with leaks that resolved with
conservative management. Thirty percent of patients required at least one
dilatation, but this number dropped to less than 10% in the second half of the
series. There were no deaths and no recurrent fistula. Thoracoscopic TEF repair
has proved to be an effective and safe technique. Evolution of the technique has 
resulted in fewer complications while avoiding the significant short- and
long-term morbidity associated with thoracotomy in neonates.

PMID: 22044457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Fungal Biol. 2011 Nov;115(11):1138-50. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2011.07.008. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Aspergillus niger contains the cryptic phylogenetic species A. awamori.

Perrone G(1), Stea G, Epifani F, Varga J, Frisvad JC, Samson RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sciences of Food Production-ISPA, National Research Council-CNR, 
Via G. Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy. giancarlo.perrone@ispa.cnr.it

Aspergillus section Nigri is an important group of species for food and medical
mycology, and biotechnology. The Aspergillus niger 'aggregate' represents its
most complicated taxonomic subgroup containing eight morphologically
indistinguishable taxa: A. niger, Aspergillus tubingensis, Aspergillus acidus,
Aspergillus brasiliensis, Aspergillus costaricaensis, Aspergillus lacticoffeatus,
Aspergillus piperis, and Aspergillus vadensis. Aspergillus awamori, first
described by Nakazawa, has been compared taxonomically with other black
aspergilli and recently it has been treated as a synonym of A. niger.
Phylogenetic analyses of sequences generated from portions of three genes coding 
for the proteins ß-tubulin (benA), calmodulin (CaM), and the translation
elongation factor-1 alpha (TEF-1a) of a population of A. niger strains isolated
from grapes in Europe revealed the presence of a cryptic phylogenetic species
within this population, A. awamori. Morphological, physiological, ecological and 
chemical data overlap occurred between A. niger and the cryptic A. awamori,
however the splitting of these two species was also supported by AFLP analysis of
the full genome. Isolates in both phylospecies can produce the mycotoxins
ochratoxin A and fumonisin B2, and they also share the production of pyranonigrin
A, tensidol B, funalenone, malformins, and naphtho-<U+03B3>-pyrones. In addition,
sequence analysis of four putative A. awamori strains from Japan, used in the
koji industrial fermentation, revealed that none of these strains belong to the
A. awamori phylospecies.

Copyright © 2011 British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22036292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Biotechnol Res Int. 2011;2011:309731. doi: 10.4061/2011/309731. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Somatic embryogenesis and massive shoot regeneration from immature embryo
explants of tef.

Gugsa L(1), Kumlehn J.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Reproductive Biology, Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Leibniz
Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK) Gatersleben,
Corrensstraße 3, 06466 Gatersleben, Germany.

Tef (Eragrostis tef) provides a major source of human nutrition in the Horn of
Africa, but biotechnology has had little impact on its improvement to date. Here,
we report the elaboration of an in vitro regeneration protocol, based on the use 
of immature zygotic embryos as explant. Explant size was an important determinant
of in vitro regeneration efficiency, as was the formulation of the culture
medium. Optimal results were obtained by culturing 0.2-0.35<U+2009>mm embryo explants on
a medium containing KBP minerals, 9.2-13.8<U+2009>µM 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
6<U+2009>mM glutamine, and 0.5% Phytagel. Although this protocol was effective for both 
the improved cultivar "DZ-01-196" and the landrace "Fesho", the former produced
consistently more embryogenic tissue and a higher number of regenerants. An
average of more than 2,800 shoots could be obtained from each "DZ-01-196" explant
after 12 weeks of in vitro culture. These shoots readily formed roots, and
plantlets transferred to soil were able to develop into morphologically normal,
fertile plants. This regeneration and multiplication system should allow for the 
application of a range of biotechnological methods to tef.

PMCID: PMC3199081
PMID: 22028975  [PubMed]


450. J Environ Sci Health B. 2012;47(1):59-65. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2012.611018.

Assays of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds in actually contaminated soils using 
transgenic tobacco plants carrying a recombinant mouse aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-mediated ß-glucuronidase reporter gene expression system.

Inui H(1), Gion K, Utani Y, Wakai T, Kodama S, Eun H, Kim YS, Ohkawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Genomics, Kobe University, Hyogo, Japan.

The transgenic tobacco plant XD4V-26 carrying the recombinant mouse aryl
hydrocarbon receptor XD4V-mediated ß-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene expression
system was used for assay of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds consisting of
polychlorinated dibenzeno-p-dioxins, polychlorinated dibenzofurans, and coplanar 
polychlorinated biphenyls (Co-PCBs) in actually contaminated soils. The
transgenic tobacco plant XD4V-26 showed a significant dose-dependent induced GUS 
activity when cultured on MS medium containing PCB126 [toxic equivalency factor
(TEF) = 0.1]. In contrast, PCB169 and PCB180, which have 0.03 of TEF and
unassigned TEF values, respectively, did not significantly induce GUS activity
under the same conditions as with PCB126. When the tobacco plants were cultivated
for up to 5 weeks on actually contaminated soils with dioxins and dioxin-like
compounds collected from the periphery of an incinerator used for disposal of
residential and industrial wastes, GUS activity in the leaves was
dose-dependently increased. The plants clearly detected 360 pg-TEQ g(-1) of
dioxins and dioxin-like compounds in this assay. There was a positive correlation
between GUS activity and TEQ value of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds in the
plants. This assay does not require any extraction and purification processes for
the actually contaminated soil samples.

PMID: 22022789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2012 Apr;20(4):765-72. doi: 10.1038/oby.2011.312. Epub
2011 Oct 20.

Comparisons of energy intake and energy expenditure in overweight and obese women
with and without binge eating disorder.

Raymond NC(1), Peterson RE, Bartholome LT, Raatz SK, Jensen MD, Levine JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA. raymo002@umn.edu

The purpose of this study was to determine whether there are differences in
energy intake or energy expenditure that distinguish overweight/obese women with 
and without binge eating disorder (BED). Seventeen overweight/obese women with
BED and 17 overweight/obese controls completed random 24-h dietary recall
interviews, and had total daily energy expenditure (TDEE) assessed by the doubly 
labeled water (DLW) technique with concurrent food log data collection.
Participants received two baseline dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scans
and had basal metabolic rate (BMR) and thermic effect of food (TEF) measured
using indirect calorimetry. Results indicated no between group differences in
TDEE, BMR, and TEF. As in our previous work, according to dietary recall data,
the BED group had significantly higher caloric intake on days when they had binge
eating episodes than on days when they did not (3,255 vs. 2,343 kcal). There was 
no difference between BED nonbinge day intake and control group intake (2,233 vs.
2,140 kcal). Similar results were found for food log data. Dietary recall data
indicated a trend toward higher average daily intake in the BED group (2,587 vs. 
2,140 kcal). Furthermore, when comparing TDEE to dietary recall and food log
data, both groups displayed significant under-reporting of caloric intake of
similar magnitudes ranging from 20 to 33%. Predicted energy requirements
estimated via the Harris-Benedict equation (HBE) underestimated measured TDEE by 
23-24%. Our data suggest that increased energy intake reported by BED individuals
is due to increased food consumption and not metabolic or under-reporting
differences.

PMCID: PMC3882077
PMID: 22016098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Afr J Paediatr Surg. 2011 May-Aug;8(2):244-8. doi: 10.4103/0189-6725.86075.

Multiple anastomotic complications following repair of oesophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula: a report of two cases.

Jain P(1), Debnath PR, Jain V, Chadha R, Choudhury SR, Puri A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Lady Hardinge Medical College, Kalawati
Saran Children's Hospital, New Delhi, India.

This report describes the clinical course and management of two children with
multiple anastomotic complications following primary repair of oesophageal
atresia (EA) with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). These included
anastomotic leak and stricture, oesophageal perforation during antegrade
dilatation, and finally a recurrent fistula between the oesophagus and the
tracheo-bronchial tree. Ultimately, after multiple operative interventions, a
successful outcome was achieved in both patients with preservation of the native 
oesophagus. The anastomotic complications following primary repair of EA with TEF
are discussed, with special reference to difficulties in the management of
recurrent TEF.

PMID: 22005378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Breast. 2012 Apr;21(2):194-8. doi: 10.1016/j.breast.2011.09.011. Epub 2011 Oct
14.

Combination of two local flaps for large defects after breast conserving surgery.

Lee J(1), Bae Y, Audretsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical Research Institute, Pusan National University, 
Busan, Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: Oncoplastic surgery is a technique for wide excision of breast cancer
without compromising the natural shape of the breast. We have combined two local 
flaps, referred to as a 'combined local flap', for large defects of the breast
after a partial mastectomy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-one patients with breast cancer underwent a partial 
mastectomy with immediate reconstruction when the surgical margin was positive
and further excision was required or the tumor size was larger than the
pre-operative evaluation. Reconstruction was consisted of a rotational local flap
and a thoraco-epigastric flap (TEF), so-called a combined local flap. The
cosmetic results were self-estimated after chemotherapy and radiotherapy
according to a four-point scoring system.
RESULTS: The mean age of patients was 53.3 years and the mean tumor size was 2.2 
cm. The mean excised breast volume was 133.8 mm(3) and the percentage of excised 
volume was 20.4%. The cosmetic outcomes were judged as excellent, good, and fair 
in 11, 8, and 2 cases, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The combined local flap, consisting of a rotational local flap and a 
TEF is a useful oncoplastic technique for large defects after breast-conserving
surgery.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22000046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Environ Int. 2012 Jan;38(1):73-8. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2011.08.009. Epub 2011
Sep 22.

The predictive power of the elimination of dioxin-like pollutants from pigs: an
in vivo study.

Shen H(1), Henkelmann B, Rambeck WA, Mayer R, Wehr U, Schramm KW.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Urban Environment and Health, Institute of Urban Environment,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiamen, PR China. hqshen@iue.ac.cn

Pigs accidentally given feed contaminated by dioxin-like pollutants are a serious
public health issue. We have examined whether pigs with limited exposure during
early periods of fattening would be categorized as non-compliant with the EU
limit at slaughtering when growth-dilution, excretion and metabolism effects are 
considered. Sixteen female and sixteen castrated male weaned pigs were divided
into four groups (e.g. DG0, DG1, DG2 and DG3) in week 2 after birth. From weeks 3
to 13, groups DG1, DG2, and DG3 pigs were fed with a polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxin/dibenzofuran (PCDD/F) and polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) mixture
at dosages of 1, 10 and 100ng-toxic equivalent (TEQ) per kg dry mass feed in
capsules, respectively. From weeks 13 to 23, the animals were nourished with
clear feed. Control group DG0 was always fed with clear feed. Subcutaneous fat
samples were collected at weeks 13, 18 and 23 by biopsies. The pollutant residues
were analyzed by high resolution gas chromatography-high resolution mass
spectrometry and quantified by a (13)C-isotope dilution method. The results
showed the following: (1) when slaughtered at week 23, the TEQ for DG1 pigs
(0.66±0.21pg/g fat) was under the EU limit of 1pg PCDD/F-TEQ/g fat; (2) PCDD/F
congener-specific first-order elimination rates were linearly correlated with
their toxicity equivalency factors (TEFs), and the rates were significantly
dose-dependent for the more toxic congeners (TEF=0.1). Therefore, the pigs'
exposure above the EU limit during the early fattening stage did not necessarily 
lead to their categorization as non-compliant pork; and the residual TEQ for pork
can be predicted from early exposure concentrations based on the models
established here.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21982036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 29;11:57. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-57.

Loss of the Drosophila cell polarity regulator Scribbled promotes epithelial
tissue overgrowth and cooperation with oncogenic Ras-Raf through impaired Hippo
pathway signaling.

Doggett K(1), Grusche FA, Richardson HE, Brumby AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle and Development Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, 7 St
Andrews Place, East Melbourne, 3002, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial neoplasias are associated with alterations in cell
polarity and excessive cell proliferation, yet how these neoplastic properties
are related to one another is still poorly understood. The study of Drosophila
genes that function as neoplastic tumor suppressors by regulating both of these
properties has significant potential to clarify this relationship.
RESULTS: Here we show in Drosophila that loss of Scribbled (Scrib), a cell
polarity regulator and neoplastic tumor suppressor, results in impaired Hippo
pathway signaling in the epithelial tissues of both the eye and wing imaginal
disc. scrib mutant tissue overgrowth, but not the loss of cell polarity, is
dependent upon defective Hippo signaling and can be rescued by knockdown of
either the TEAD/TEF family transcription factor Scalloped or the transcriptional 
coactivator Yorkie in the eye disc, or reducing levels of Yorkie in the wing
disc. Furthermore, loss of Scrib sensitizes tissue to transformation by oncogenic
Ras-Raf signaling, and Yorkie-Scalloped activity is required to promote this
cooperative tumor overgrowth. The inhibition of Hippo signaling in scrib mutant
eye disc clones is not dependent upon JNK activity, but can be significantly
rescued by reducing aPKC kinase activity, and ectopic aPKC activity is sufficient
to impair Hippo signaling in the eye disc, even when JNK signaling is blocked. In
contrast, warts mutant overgrowth does not require aPKC activity. Moreover,
reducing endogenous levels of aPKC or increasing Scrib or Lethal giant larvae
levels does not promote increased Hippo signaling, suggesting that aPKC activity 
is not normally rate limiting for Hippo pathway activity. Epistasis experiments
suggest that Hippo pathway inhibition in scrib mutants occurs, at least in part, 
downstream or in parallel to both the Expanded and Fat arms of Hippo pathway
regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of Scrib promotes Yorkie/Scalloped-dependent epithelial tissue 
overgrowth, and this is also important for driving cooperative tumor overgrowth
with oncogenic Ras-Raf signaling. Whether this is also the case in human cancers 
now warrants investigation since the cell polarity function of Scrib and its
capacity to restrain oncogene-mediated transformation, as well as the tissue
growth control function of the Hippo pathway, are conserved in mammals.

PMCID: PMC3206446
PMID: 21955824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Caspian J Intern Med. 2011 Fall;2(4):336-9.

Tracheoesophageal fistula following disc battery ingestion and foreign body
impaction.

Khaleghnejad Tabari A(1), Mirshemirani A(1), Rouzrokh M(1), Seyyedi J(1),
Khaleghnejad Tabari N(1), Razavi S(1), Talebian M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery Research Center, Mofid Children's Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Ingestion of foreign bodies may result in the formation of a
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), which causes severe morbidity in children. We
describe four cases of TEF, who underwent emergent surgery for repair.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this report, we present about four patients aged between 9 
months to 2.5 years, who referred due to disc battery ingestion. There were two
boys and two girls. The common symptoms were cough, cyanosis, and dysphagia,
choking and vomiting. The diagnosis was performed through an x-ray, barium
swallow and CT Scan. All batteries were impacted in the esophagus, two in upper, 
one in the middle, and one in lower esophagus position. All disc batteries were
removed endoscopically, but had tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). All the patients
underwent TEF repaired surgically. There was no morbidity in four patients, but
one patient developed moderate esophageal stenosis, which was repaired by staged 
dilatation. There was no mortality in our cases.
CONCLUSION: Long-term impaction of foreign bodies may result in tracheoesophageal
fistula. This complication may be seen earlier with alkaline disc batteries.
Removal of these foreign bodies should be followed carefully for the diagnosis
and treatment of these fistulas.

PMCID: PMC3895833
PMID: 24551442  [PubMed]


457. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2012 Jan;93(2):679-85. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-3561-3.
Epub 2011 Sep 16.

Selection of optimal reference genes for expression analysis in the
entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana during development, under changing
nutrient conditions, and after exposure to abiotic stresses.

Zhou YH(1), Zhang YJ, Luo ZB, Fan YH, Tang GR, Liu LJ, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Center, Southwest University, 215 Tiansheng Road,
Beibei, 400716, Chongqing, People's Republic of China.

The selection of suitable reference genes is crucial for accurate quantification 
of gene expression. To identify suitable reference genes in Beauveria bassiana,
the expression of 14 candidates (18S, 28S, ß-Tub, GAPD, <U+03B3>-Act, TEF, HGPT, His3,
His2A, TBP, CypA, CypB, PP1, and CrzA) was measured by quantitative polymerase
chain reaction at different development stages and under various nutritional and 
stress conditions. Expression stability, as evaluated by the geNorm and
NormFinder programs, revealed that His2A/<U+03B3>-Act/CrzA was the most stably expressed
set of genes throughout development, while 28S/PP1/CypA and His2A/<U+03B3>-Act/CypA were
the most stably expressed gene sets under a variety of nutritional and stress
conditions, respectively. Overall, the most stably expressed genes under all
conditions examined were PP1, <U+03B3>-Act, and CypA.

PMID: 21922424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Surg Today. 2011 Oct;41(10):1391-4. doi: 10.1007/s00595-010-4460-4. Epub 2011 Sep
16.

Management of esophageal atresia with a tracheoesophageal fistula complicated by 
gastric perforation.

Rathod KK(1), Bawa M, Mahajan JK, Samujh R, Rao KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Advanced Pediatric Centre, Block 3-A, Post
Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Sector 12, Chandigarh,
160012, India.

PURPOSE: Gastric perforations generally develop in neonates with esophageal
atresia (EA) and a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), requiring preoperative
mechanical ventilation. To the best of our knowledge, spontaneous gastric
perforation in patients who have not been treated with mechanical ventilation has
not been described in the literature. There is also no current consensus or
treatment protocol available for the management of these patients.
METHODS: Over a period of 6 years, six patients with EA and TEF presented with
gastric perforation at our center. We studied the clinical presentation, initial 
resuscitation, surgical management, and outcome of these six patients.
RESULTS: Out of the six patients, five were treated with initial flank drain
insertion for peritoneal decompression. In all of the patients, a thoracotomy was
performed first, followed by a laparotomy for closure of the stomach perforation.
Four of the six patients survived and were discharged uneventfully. Two patients 
died of sepsis. Early feeding was established in all of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Spontaneous gastric perforation can occur in patients with EA and
TEF even without mechanical ventilation. Initial stabilization with peritoneal
drain insertion and subsequent thoracotomy for esophageal anastomosis followed by
laparotomy for stomach repair, both done in a single sitting, should be the ideal
management of such patients.

PMID: 21922362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Chem Res Toxicol. 2011 Oct 17;24(10):1601-9. doi: 10.1021/tx200316x. Epub 2011
Sep 28.

Why toxic equivalency factors are not suitable for perfluoroalkyl chemicals.

Peters JM(1), Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences and The Center for Molecular 
Toxicology and Carcinogenesis, The Pennsylvania State University , University
Park, PA 16802, United States. jmp21@psu.edu

The pervasive nature of perfluoroalkyl chemicals in the environment has generated
considerable interest for developing new strategies for risk assessment. In
experimental animal models, exposure to perfluoroalkyl chemicals can cause
developmental toxicity and hepatotoxicity. Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-a (PPARa) is required to mediate some but not all of these effects.
Since PPARa has a role in mediating some of these effects, and there is some
overlap in the type of toxicities elicited by perfluoroalkyl chemicals, it has
been suggested that a scaling system analogous to the toxic equivalency factor
(TEF) system used for polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), polychlorinated
dibenzofurans (PCDF), and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) could be used for
perfluoroalkyl chemicals. However, evidence suggests that perfluoroalkyl
chemicals can activate/interfere with other receptors, and there is reason to
suggest the possibility of species differences in the response mediated by
different receptors as well as qualitative differences in toxicities elicited by 
perfluoroalkyl chemicals. These differences and other data gaps preclude the
development of a TEF approach for perfluoroalkyl chemicals.

PMID: 21913657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2011 Nov;74(8):2245-51. doi:
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2011.07.023. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Towards a scheme of toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for the acute toxicity of
PAHs in sediment.

Fisher TT(1), Law RJ, Rumney HS, Kirby MF, Kelly C.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, Cefas Lowestoft
Laboratory, Pakefield Road, Lowestoft, Suffolk NR330HT, UK.
tom.fisher@cefas.co.uk

Toxic equivalency factors/quotients (TEF/TEQs) express the toxicity of complex
mixtures. For PAHs, TEF values are available for assessing their carcinogenic
potential and are expressed as benzo[a]pyrene equivalents. This study develops a 
similar approach for their acute toxicity in sediments. Acute toxicity (10 day
EC50) values were generated using the marine amphipod Corophium volutator
bioassay for twelve low molecular weight PAHs. The results ranged from 24 to >
1000 mg/Kg sediment dry weight for 4-methyldibenzothiophene and anthracene,
respectively. Phenanthrene was used as the reference compound (TEF=1) and so the 
TEQ values derived are expressed as phenanthrene equivalents. In order to
illustrate the applicability of this approach to the development of marine
indicators we plotted TEQ values for acute toxicity to UK environmental
monitoring data. Further work is required to validate the TEF values produced and
to extend the TEQ approach to include a wider range of low molecular weight PAHs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21885125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Nat Prod Res. 2012;26(7):619-29. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2010.538924. Epub 2011 Aug
26.

Chemical and biological study of the seeds of Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter.

El-Alfy TS(1), Ezzat SM, Sleem AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University,
Kasr-El-Ainy, Cairo11562, Egypt.

A chemical study of the red type of the seeds of Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter
(Poaceae) led to the isolation of seven compounds from its ethanol extract,
namely ß-sitosterol (1), ß-amyrin-3-O-(2'-acetyl(glucoside (2),
ß-sitosterol-3-O-ß-D-glucoside (3), naringenin (4),
naringenin-4'-methoxy-7-O-a-L-rhamnoside (5),
eriodictyol-3',7-dimethoxy-4'-O-ß-D-glucoside (6) and
isorhamnetin-3-O-rhamnoglucoside (7), which are reported for the first time in
the genus Eragrostis. This is the first report for the isolation of compounds (2)
and (6) in nature. The isolated compounds were identified using different
spectroscopic methods (EIMS, UV, ¹H NMR, ¹³C NMR, HMQC and HMBC). A proximate
analysis revealed the high nutritive value of the seeds: carbohydrates (57.27%), 
protein (20.9%), essential amino acids (8.15%) with major leucine and lysine
(1.71 and 1.35%, respectively), vitamin B1 (1.56<U+2009>mg/100<U+2009>g) and potassium and
calcium (32.4 and 9.63%, respectively). The seeds yielded 22% w/w of fixed oil
rich in unsaturated fatty acids (72.46%), among which oleic acid, was predominant
(32.41%), followed by linolenic acid (23.83%). The ethanolic extract and fixed
oil of the seeds exhibited anti-hyperlipedaemic and anti-hyperglycaemic
activities. Oral administration of the fixed oil for 10 days resulted in a rise
in serum calcium levels in rats.

PMID: 21867458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022566. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Calcium prevents tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colorectal cancer.

Wang JL(1), Lin YW, Chen HM, Kong X, Xiong H, Shen N, Hong J, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of
Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai,
China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Calcium has been proposed as a mediator of the
chemoprevention of colorectal cancer (CRC), but the comprehensive mechanism
underlying this preventive effect is not yet clear. Hence, we conducted this
study to evaluate the possible roles and mechanisms of calcium-mediated
prevention of CRC induced by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH) in mice.
METHODS: For gene expression analysis, 6 non-tumor colorectal tissues of mice
from the DMH + Calcium group and 3 samples each from the DMH and control groups
were hybridized on a 4×44 K Agilent whole genome oligo microarray, and selected
genes were validated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Functional
analysis of the microarray data was performed using KEGG and Gene Ontology (GO)
analyses. Hub genes were identified using Pathway Studio software.
RESULTS: The tumor incidence rates in the DMH and DMH + Calcium groups were 90%
and 40%, respectively. Microarray gene expression analysis showed that S100a9,
Defa20, Mmp10, Mmp7, Ptgs2, and Ang2 were among the most downregulated genes,
whereas Per3, Tef, Rnf152, and Prdx6 were significantly upregulated in the DMH + 
Calcium group compared with the DMH group. Functional analysis showed that the
Wnt, cell cycle, and arachidonic acid pathways were significantly downregulated
in the DMH + Calcium group, and that the GO terms related to cell
differentiation, cell cycle, proliferation, cell death, adhesion, and cell
migration were significantly affected. Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) and nuclear factor
kappa-B (NF-<U+03BA>B) were considered as potent hub genes.
CONCLUSION: In the DMH-induced CRC mouse model, comprehensive mechanisms were
involved with complex gene expression alterations encompassing many altered
pathways and GO terms. However, how calcium regulates these events remains to be 
studied.

PMCID: PMC3157344
PMID: 21857934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Transplantation. 2011 Oct 15;92(7):815-21. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e31822ca79b.

Comparative evaluation of simple indices of graft function after islet
transplantation.

Caumo A(1), Maffi P, Nano R, Luzi L, Hilbrands R, Gillard P,
Jacobs-Tulleneers-Thevissen D, Secchi A, Keymeulen B, Pipeleers D, Piemonti L.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, Division of Metabolic and Cardiovascular
Sciences, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Several simple measures of graft function after islet transplantation
have been proposed but a comparative evaluation is lacking. Here, we compared the
performance of five indices of ß-cell function: ß-score, transplant estimated
function (TEF), homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) 2-B%, C-peptide/glucose
ratio, and Secretory Units of Islets in Transplantation (SUIT).
METHODS: Two cohorts of transplanted patients were analyzed. Cohort 1 consisted
of 14 recipients with type 1 diabetes of islet transplantation whereas cohort 2
consisted of 21 recipients with type 1 diabetes of cultured islet cell graft. The
five surrogate indices were compared against the first- and second-phase insulin 
response to arginine in cohort 1, and against the C-peptide response to a
hyperglycemic clamp in cohort 2.
RESULTS: We found that the performances of the five surrogate indices were close 
one to each other in cohort 1. The correlation coefficients ranged 0.62 to 0.67
and 0.62 to 0.68 against the first- and second-phase insulin response to
arginine, respectively. In cohort 2, we found that the ß-score, TEF,
C-peptide/glucose ratio, and SUIT were reasonably well correlated with the clamp 
response (correlation coefficients were in the range 0.71-0.81), whereas HOMA2-B%
showed a modest performance (r=0.54). HOMA2-B% could not be evaluated in one
patient whose fasting glucose concentration level was below the lower bound
indicated by the HOMA calculator (3 mmol/L). SUIT could not be evaluated in three
patients whose fasting glucose concentration was below the glucose threshold of
the SUIT formula (3.43 mmol/L).
CONCLUSION: In summary, no single index outperformed the others. Nevertheless,
when the benefit to cost ratio is considered, TEF stands out for its good
performance at a very low cost.

PMID: 21836536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2011 Aug;4(8):833-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jcmg.2011.03.019.

Pre-operative left atrial mechanical function predicts risk of atrial
fibrillation following cardiac surgery.

Haffajee JA(1), Lee Y, Alsheikh-Ali AA, Kuvin JT, Pandian NG, Patel AR.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Imaging and Hemodynamic Laboratory, Tufts Medical Center,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to examine whether left atrial (LA)
mechanical function, as measured by LA total emptying fraction (TEF), is a
predictor for the development of post-operative atrial fibrillation (POAF)
following cardiac surgery.
BACKGROUND: POAF is an important and frequent complication of cardiac surgery. LA
enlargement has been reported to be a risk factor for POAF, but the relationship 
between LA mechanical function and POAF is not well understood. We examined the
relationship between pre-operative LA function and POAF in patients without a
history of atrial fibrillation.
METHODS: A total of 101 subjects (mean age 64 ± 13 years) underwent pre-operative
transthoracic echocardiograms and were followed for occurrence of POAF during the
hospitalization for cardiac surgery. The left atrial maximum volume (LAVmax) and 
left atrial minimum volume (LAVmin) were measured and indexed to body surface
area (LAVmaxI and LAVminI, respectively). LA TEF was calculated as: {[(LAVmax -
LAVmin)/LAVmax] × 100%}. Univariate and multivariate analyses examined clinical
and echocardiographic predictors of POAF.
RESULTS: POAF occurred in 41% of subjects. Mean LA TEF was 49 ± 15%, mean LAVmaxI
was 38 ± 15 ml/m(2), and mean LAVminI was 20 ± 13 ml/m(2). Age, LA TEF, and
LAVminI were independent predictors of POAF. LA TEF was lower in patients with
POAF compared with those without POAF (43 ± 15% vs. 55 ± 13%, p < 0.001), and
patients with a LA TEF <50% had a high risk of POAF (odds ratio: 7.94, 95%
confidence interval: 3.23 to 19.54, p < 0.001). Compared with LAVmaxI >32
ml/m(2), LA TEF <50% had higher discriminatory power for POAF, which remained
significantly higher when adjusted for age (p = 0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: LA TEF is an independent predictor of POAF and is a stronger
predictor of POAF than LAVmaxI is. Impaired LA mechanical function may help to
identify patients who are most likely to benefit from prophylaxis for POAF.

Copyright © 2011 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2011 Aug;89(8):539-50. doi: 10.1139/y11-049. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

M-CAT element mediates mechanical stretch-activated transcription of B-type
natriuretic peptide via ERK activation.

Koivisto E(1), Karkkola L, Majalahti T, Aro J, Tokola H, Kerkelä R, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter
Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu FIN-90014, Finland.

The muscle-CAT (M-CAT) promoter element is found on promoters of most
muscle-specific cardiac genes, but its role in cardiac pathology is poorly
understood. Here we studied whether the M-CAT element is involved in hypertrophic
process activated by mechanical stretch, and identified the intracellular
pathways mediating the response. When an in vitro stretch model of cultured
neonatal rat cardiomyocytes and luciferase reporter construct driven by rat
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) promoter were used, mutation of M-CAT element
inhibited not only the basal reporter activity (88%), but also the
stretch-activated BNP transcription (58%, p < 0.001). Stretch-induced BNP
promoter activation was associated with an increase in transcriptional enhancer
factor-1 (TEF-1) binding activity after 24 h mechanical stretch (p < 0.05).
Inhibition of mitogen-activated protein kinases ERK, JNK, or p38 attenuated
stretch-induced BNP activation. Interestingly, as opposed to p38 and JNK,
inhibition of ERK had no additional effect on transcriptional activity of BNP
promoter harboring the M-CAT mutation, suggesting a pivotal role for ERK in
regulating stretch-induced BNP transcription via M-CAT binding site. Finally,
immunoprecipitation studies showed that mechanical stretch induced myocyte
enhancer factor-2 (MEF-2) binding to TEF-1. These data suggest a central role for
M-CAT element in regulation of mechanical stretch-induced hypertrophic response
via ERK activation.

PMID: 21812548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Am J Surg. 2011 Aug;202(2):203-6. doi: 10.1016/j.amjsurg.2010.09.035.

Repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula via thoracotomy: a
contemporary series.

Burford JM(1), Dassinger MS, Copeland DR, Keller JE, Smith SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, AR, USA.

BACKGROUND: A recent series detailing thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia 
with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) reported lower complication rates
compared with historic controls. This study provides a contemporary cohort of
patients repaired via thoracotomy for comparison with the recent large
multi-institutional thoracoscopic series.
METHODS: Records of patients with EA/TEF between 1993 and 2008 were reviewed.
Attention was focused on demographics and complications including anastomotic
leak, recurrent fistulae, stricture formation, and need for fundoplication.
RESULTS: Seventy-two patients underwent repair of EA/TEF via thoracotomy.
Complication rates in the current series compared with the thoracoscopic series
were anastomotic leak, 2.7% versus 7.6%; recurrent fistulae, 2.7% versus 1.9%;
stricture, 5.5% versus 3.8%; and need for fundoplication, 12% versus 24%.
Differences in complication rates did not reach statistical significance. Two
children in this cohort developed mild scoliosis attributed to congenital
vertebral anomalies, neither of whom required intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF yielded complication rates similar to
this contemporary series; however, trends toward increased anastomotic leaks and 
greater need for fundoplication were noted. No musculoskeletal sequelae were
directly attributable to thoracotomy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21810502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Appl Genet. 2011 Nov;52(4):487-96. doi: 10.1007/s13353-011-0059-8. Epub 2011
Jul 28.

Genetic and phenotypic variation of Fusarium proliferatum isolates from different
host species.

Stepien L(1), Koczyk G, Waskiewicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolomics, Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Poznan, Poland. lste@igr.poznan.pl

Fusarium proliferatum (Matsushima) Nirenberg is a common pathogen infecting
numerous crop plants and occurring in various climatic zones. It produces large
amounts of fumonisins, a group of polyketide-derived mycotoxins. Fumonisin
biosynthesis is determined by the presence and activity of the FUM cluster,
several co-regulated genes with a common expression pattern. In the present work,
we analyzed 38 F. proliferatum isolates from different host plant species,
demonstrating host-specific polymorphisms in partial sequences of the key FUM1
gene (encoding polyketide synthase). We also studied growth rates across
different temperatures and sample origin and tried to establish the relationships
between DNA sequence polymorphism and toxigenic potential. Phylogenetic analysis 
was conducted based on FUM1 and tef-1a sequences for all isolates. The results
indicated the greatest variations of both toxigenic potential and growth patterns
found across the wide selection of isolates derived from maize. Fumonisin
production for maize isolates ranged from 3.74 to 4,500 µg/g of fumonisin B(1).
The most efficient producer isolates obtained from other host plants were only
able to synthesize 1,820-2,419 µg/g of this metabolite. A weak negative rank
correlation between fumonisin content and isolate growth rates was observed. All 
garlic-derived isolates formed a distinct group on a FUM1-based dendrogram. A
second clade consisted of tropical and sub-tropical strains (isolated from
pineapple and date palm). Interestingly, isolates with the fastest growth
patterns were also grouped together and included both isolates originating from
rice. The sequence of the FUM1 gene was found to be useful in revealing the
intraspecific polymorphism, which is, to some extent, specifically correlated
with the host plant.

PMCID: PMC3189322
PMID: 21796391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Case Rep Oncol. 2011;4(2):350-7. doi: 10.1159/000330368. Epub 2011 Jul 9.

Tracheoesophageal fistula closed by chemoradiotherapy in lung cancer.

Honda T(1), Tsuzaki Y, Mitaka K, Fukasawa K, Miyashita Y, Marino K, Saito A,
Oyama T, Inase N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kofu, Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan.

A 45-year-old man complaining of cough, dyspnea, and difficulty in swallowing was
referred to our hospital. Chest CT scan showed a mediastinal mass compressing the
trachea. He was diagnosed with poorly differentiated lung carcinoma by
percutaneous needle biopsy. Bronchoscopy and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
revealed a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Long-lasting febrile neutropenia made
it impossible to continue chemotherapy, but a course of radiotherapy (total 61
Gy) was completed. The next endoscopy revealed closure of the TEF.
Chemoradiotherapy (CRT) has been reported to close TEF in esophageal cancer, but 
the risk of a CRT-induced worsening of the fistula has dissuaded physicians from 
using CRT to treat TEF in lung cancer patients. CRT may serve as a palliative
treatment for TEF in lung cancer as well as esophageal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3134035
PMID: 21769294  [PubMed]


469. J Chromatogr A. 2011 Aug 19;1218(33):5688-93. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2011.06.080. 
Epub 2011 Jun 30.

Are the results of customary methods for analyzing dioxin and dioxin-like
compound congener profiles court-proof?

Uhlig S(1), Eichler S.

Author information: 
(1)quo data, Gesellschaft für Qualitätsmanagement und Statistik mbH, Kaitzer Str.
135, 01187 Dresden, Germany. uhlig@quodata.de

The congener profile of samples contaminated with dioxin and dioxin-like
compounds allows identifying sources of contamination. This article studies the
statistical methods of congener profile analysis reported in the literature with 
respect to the reliability of obtained results. The performance of customary
analysis methods regarding raw data transformation and applied TEF (toxic
equivalency factor) values is discussed. In particular, the method of principal
component analysis and k-means cluster is taken as an example and examined in
detail. Reasons for occurring inconsistencies such as the dependence of results
on raw data transformation and the disregard of measurement uncertainty are
described, and it is shown that they also explain inconsistencies in other
methods of cluster analysis such as hierarchical cluster analysis and neural
networks. It is concluded that these methods cannot be employed to reach
court-proof decisions, i.e. decisions which meet court evidentiary standards. An 
alternative approach to analyzing congener profiles based on mathematical
statistics is briefly presented, allowing reliable, court-proof decisions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Int J Gen Med. 2011;4:487-91. doi: 10.2147/IJGM.S19301. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Associated congenital anomalies between neonates with short-gap and long-gap
esophageal atresia: a comparative study.

Aslanabadi S(1), Ghabili K, Rouzrokh M, Hosseini MB, Jamshidi M, Adl FH, Shoja
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Health Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,
Tabriz;

BACKGROUND: Predicting the presence of long-gap esophageal atresia (EA) prior to 
the surgery is of clinical importance. No comparison between short-gap and
long-gap EA for the prevalence of VACTERL and non-VACTERL-type anomalies has yet 
been performed.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to compare VACTERL and non-VACTERL-type
anomalies between patients with short-gap and long-gap EA.
METHODS: Retrospectively, medical records of all newborns managed for
EA/tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in Tabriz Children's Hospital and Tehran Mofid
Hospital between 2007 and 2010 were evaluated. Demographic data and associated
anomalies including both the VACTERL and non-VACTERL-type defects were listed.
The VACTERL spectrum defects covered vertebral/costal, anorectal, cardiovascular,
TEF, and renal- or radial-type limb anomalies. The non-VACTERL-type anomalies
included hydrocephalus, orofacial defects, respiratory system anomalies,
gastrointestinal anomalies, genital anomalies, and non-VACTERL limb defects.
Demographic data, and the VACTERL and non-VACTERL-type anomalies were compared
among children with long-gap EA and those with short-gap EA.
RESULTS: Two hundred and seventy-six children were included in the study: 230
(83.3%) in the short-gap EA group and 46 (16.7%) in the long-gap EA group.
Although prevalence of the VACTERL spectrum anomalies did not differ between the 
two groups, the non-VACTERL anomaly was more common in the long-gap EA group (P =
0.02). Among the VACTERL-type defects, TEF was detected in 30 (65.2%) and 218
(94.7%) patients in long-gap and short-gap EA groups, respectively (P = 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: The non-VACTERL-type anomalies, but not the VACTERL spectrum defects,
are more frequent in patients with long-gap EA than those with short-gap EA.

PMCID: PMC3133517
PMID: 21760750  [PubMed]


471. J Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug 30;47(2):179-93. doi: 10.1530/JME-11-0025. Print 2011 
Oct.

Identification of functional CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein and Ets protein
binding sites in the human chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer sequences.

Lytras A(1), Detillieux K, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Room 444, 745 Bannatyne
Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. aristides.lytras@joslin.harvard.edu

The human chorionic somatomammotropin (CS) A and B genes (listed as CSH1 and CSH2
in the HUGO database) are highly expressed in placenta. A 241<U+200A>bp potent enhancer,
nucleotides (nts) 1-241, located at the 3' end of the CS-B gene (CS-Benh)
stimulates promoter activity specifically in placental trophoblast cells in
vitro. Strong activity is exerted by a 23<U+200A>bp element within the CS-Benh (nts
117-139), shown to interact with transcription enhancer factor (TEF) members of
the transcription enhancer activator (TEA) DNA-binding domain-containing family. 
An identical TEF element is present in the homologous (97.5%) CS-Aenh; however, a
few nucleotide differences suppress its activity. Previously, we identified
regulatory sequences distinct from the TEF element within an 80<U+200A>bp modulatory
domain (nts 1-80) in the CS-Benh. Using structural and functional assays we now
show that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) binding sites exist in the 80<U+200A>bp
modulatory domains of both enhancers, and an Elk-1 binding site exists in the
modulatory domain of the CS-Aenh. C/EBPa or C/EBPß strongly repressed CSp.CAT
activity but stimulated CSp.CAT.CS-Benh activity. In contrast, the equivalent
CS-A enhancer sequences were unable to relieve promoter repression. Elk-1
overexpression also resulted in differential effects on the CS-Aenh versus
CS-Benh. Finally, we provide evidence for the association of C/EBPß with the CS-A
and CS-B genes in human placental chromatin, including differential involvement
of C/EBPß with the CS-Aenh versus the CS-Benh, and therefore consistent with the 
notion that these are regions of regulatory significance in vivo. We conclude
that members of the C/EBP and Ets families can differentially modulate CS-Benh
and CS-Aenh activity.

PMID: 21737519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Chemosphere. 2011 Sep;85(2):232-8. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2011.06.026. Epub
2011 Jul 2.

Transcriptional profiles induced by the Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor agonists
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran and
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran in primary rat hepatocytes.

Rowlands JC(1), Budinsky R, Gollapudi B, Novak R, Abdelmegeed M, Cukovic D,
Dombkowski A.

Author information: 
(1)The Dow Chemical Company, Toxicology and Environmental Research & Consulting, 
1803 Bldg., Washington Street, Midland, MI 48674, United States.
jcrowlands@dow.com

Toxicogenomics was used to examine mRNA expression profiles obtained from primary
rat hepatocytes treated for 24h with 0.01 or 1.0 nM
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD), 0.02 or 2.0 nM
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF) and 0.1 or 10nM
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (2,3,7,8-TCDF). The concentrations of
2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF and 2,3,7,8-TCDF were chosen to be equivalent to 2,3,7,8-TCDD's
concentration based on the toxic equivalency factor/toxic equivalent (TEF/TEQ)
method for estimating biological potency. 2,3,7,8-TCDD at 1.0 nM altered the
expression of 533 genes; 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF at 2.0 nM altered 182 genes, and
2,3,7,8-TCDF at 10nM altered 154 genes. Of these, 57 genes were affected by all
three congeners. Agglomerative hierarchical clustering revealed distinct
congener-dependent gene subclusters. Principal components analyses of the
microarray data revealed that these congeners cluster independently of one
another. Data presented here demonstrate that equivalent TEQ concentrations of
2,3,7,8-TCDD, 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF and 2,3,7,8-TCDF, while altering the expression of 
a small battery of genes in common, also produce substantial congener specific
alterations in gene expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21724226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Clin Exp Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 Jun;4(2):105-8. doi: 10.3342/ceo.2011.4.2.105.
Epub 2011 Mar 3.

Post-intubation tracheoesophageal fistula with posterior glottic web.

Lee JE(1), Chang MY, Kim KH, Jung YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Seoul National University 
Boramae Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) after prolonged intubation could present as
chronic aspiration and could be mistaken as unilateral or bilateral vocal fold
palsy, especially when there was combined posterior glottic synechia. We present 
a case of post-intubation TEF which was successfully treated with tracheal
resection and anastomosis with primary esophageal closure. The accompanying
posterior glottic web was treated by endoscopic technique of web lysis, with
topical application of mitomycin C solution.

PMCID: PMC3109326
PMID: 21716949  [PubMed]


474. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2011 Aug;55(8):1266-70. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201100132. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Immunological evaluation of the alcohol-soluble protein fraction from gluten-free
grains in relation to celiac disease.

Bergamo P(1), Maurano F, Mazzarella G, Iaquinto G, Vocca I, Rivelli AR, De Falco 
E, Gianfrani C, Rossi M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Sciences, National Research Council, Avellino, Italy.

Celiac disease (CD) is a gluten-sensitive enteropathy with an immune basis. We
established the immune reactivity of the alcohol-soluble fraction from two minor 
cereals (tef and millet) and two pseudocereals (amaranth and quinoa) which are
believed to be nontoxic based on taxonomy. Grains were examined in intestinal
T-cell lines (iTCLs), cultures of duodenal explants from HLA-DQ2(+) CD patients
and HLA-DQ8 transgenic mice for signs of activation. Our data indicated that tef,
millet, amaranth, and quinoa did not show any immune cross-reactivity toward
wheat gliadin, and therefore confirming their safety in the diet of CD patients.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21710563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mycologia. 2011 Nov-Dec;103(6):1384-410. doi: 10.3852/11-006. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Novel species of Celoporthe from Eucalyptus and Syzygium trees in China and
Indonesia.

Chen S(1), Gryzenhout M, Roux J, Xie Y, Wingfield MJ, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, Forestry and Agricultural
Biotechnology Institute, University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.

Many species in the Cryphonectriaceae cause diseases of trees, including those in
the genera Eucalyptus and Syzygium. During disease surveys on these trees in
southern China, fruiting structures typical of fungi in the Cryphonectriaceae and
associated with dying branches and stems were observed. Morphological comparisons
suggested that these fungi were distinct from the well known Chrysoporthe
deuterocubensis, also found on these trees in China. The aim of this study was to
identify these fungi and evaluate their pathogenicity to Eucalyptus
clones/species as well as Syzygium cumini. Three morphologically similar fungal
isolates collected previously from Indonesia also were included in the study.
Isolates were characterized based on comparisons of morphology and DNA sequence
data for the partial LSU and ITS nuclear ribosomal DNA, ß-tubulin and TEF-1a gene
regions. After glasshouse trials to select virulent isolates field inoculations
were undertaken to screen different commercial Eucalyptus clones/species and S.
cumini trees for susceptibility to infection. Phylogenetic analyses showed that
the Chinese isolates and those from Indonesia reside in a clade close to
previously identified South African Celoporthe isolates. Based on morphology and 
DNA sequence comparisons, four new Celoporthe spp. were identified and they are
described as C. syzygii, C. eucalypti, C. guangdongensis and C. indonesiensis.
Field inoculations indicated that the three Chinese Celoporthe spp., C. syzygii, 
C. eucalypti and C. guangdongensis, are pathogenic to all tested Eucalyptus and
S. cumini trees. Significant differences in the susceptibility of the inoculated 
Eucalyptus clones/species suggest that it will be possible to select
disease-tolerant planting stock for forestry operations in the future.

PMID: 21700641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020309. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Yes-associated protein 65 (YAP) expands neural progenitors and regulates Pax3
expression in the neural plate border zone.

Gee ST(1), Milgram SL, Kramer KL, Conlon FL, Moody SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of
America.

Yes-associated protein 65 (YAP) contains multiple protein-protein interaction
domains and functions as both a transcriptional co-activator and as a scaffolding
protein. Mouse embryos lacking YAP did not survive past embryonic day 8.5 and
showed signs of defective yolk sac vasculogenesis, chorioallantoic fusion, and
anterior-posterior (A-P) axis elongation. Given that the YAP knockout mouse
defects might be due in part to nutritional deficiencies, we sought to better
characterize a role for YAP during early development using embryos that develop
externally. YAP morpholino (MO)-mediated loss-of-function in both frog and fish
resulted in incomplete epiboly at gastrulation and impaired axis formation,
similar to the mouse phenotype. In frog, germ layer specific genes were
expressed, but they were temporally delayed. YAP MO-mediated partial knockdown in
frog allowed a shortened axis to form. YAP gain-of-function in Xenopus expanded
the progenitor populations in the neural plate (sox2(+)) and neural plate border 
zone (pax3(+)), while inhibiting the expression of later markers of tissues
derived from the neural plate border zone (neural crest, pre-placodal ectoderm,
hatching gland), as well as epidermis and somitic muscle. YAP directly regulates 
pax3 expression via association with TEAD1 (N-TEF) at a highly conserved,
previously undescribed, TEAD-binding site within the 5' regulatory region of
pax3. Structure/function analyses revealed that the PDZ-binding motif of YAP
contributes to the inhibition of epidermal and somitic muscle differentiation,
but a complete, intact YAP protein is required for expansion of the neural plate 
and neural plate border zone progenitor pools. These results provide a thorough
analysis of YAP mediated gene expression changes in loss- and gain-of-function
experiments. Furthermore, this is the first report to use YAP structure-function 
analyzes to determine which portion of YAP is involved in specific gene
expression changes and the first to show direct in vivo evidence of YAP's role in
regulating pax3 neural crest expression.

PMCID: PMC3110623
PMID: 21687713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2011;2011:527323. doi: 10.1155/2011/527323. Epub 2011
May 17.

A new technique in primary repair of congenital esophageal atresia preventing
anastomotic stricture formation and describing the opening condition of blind
pouch: plus ("+") incision.

Melek M(1), Cobanoglu U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Yuzuncu Yil Medical Faculty,
65300 Van, Turkey.

Anastomotic strictures are common and important problems following repair
procedures of esophageal atresia. We hereby defined an anastomosis technique that
could efficiently prevent this complication in 11 patients with esophageal
atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The proximal end of the atretic
esophagus was opened with a plus ("+")-shaped incision providing sufficient
anastomosis width. Longitudinal incisions of 2<U+2009>mm length were made on the
anterior and posterior parts of the distal end according to the patients. The two
ends were anastomosed with a primary suture at a single plain. We performed this 
technique on 11 patients, and in the 4-year follow-up period no dilatation proved
necessary in any of our patients due to anastomotic strictures or symptomatic
dysphagia. This technique that we have described provides a large zigzag
anastomosis line and in this way minimizes the incidence of stricture formation. 
Furthermore, this technique, which we believe to have provided a new opinion on
the topic of how to open the proximal end of an atretic esophagus, is quite easy 
and effective.

PMCID: PMC3113255
PMID: 21687616  [PubMed]


478. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2011;46(8):817-23. doi:
10.1080/10934529.2011.579843.

Health risk assessment of inhabitants exposed to PAHs particulate matter in air.

Froehner S(1), Maceno M, Machado KS, Grube M.

Author information: 
(1)Federal University of Parana, Department of Environmental Engineering,
Curitiba  PR, Brazil. froehner@ufpr.br

The presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon compounds (PAHs) was investigated
in the particulate matter of samples taken at six sampling sites in the city of
Curitiba (southern Brazil). The concentrations of suspended particulate matter
ranged from 11.02 to 177.27 ng/m(3). The analysis showed that 14 of the 16 PAHs
are considered a priority compound by the USEPA (US Environmental Protection
Agency). The mixture of PAHs was predominantly composed of PAHs with 3 and 4
aromatic rings. Isomer pair ratios show that the main source of PAHs was from
burning fossil fuels (gasoline and diesel oil), although other sources may have
contributed also. Benzo(a)pyrene, (BaP), regarded one of the most toxic PAHs, was
present in all samples, but with concentrations lower than the maximum
concentrations defined by some EU Countries. The risk assessment was conducted
using the toxic equivalent factor (TEF) considering the toxicity of the
individual PAHs compared to BaP. The BaP(eq) for all samples was between
0.42-1.12 ng/m(3). The equivalent BaP(eq) indicated low health risk associated
with exposure to the total PAHs content in air. The incremental lifetime cancer
risk (ILCR) model was used to find the risk level for workers close to the
emitting pollution sources. Outdoor exposure showed no risk for the amount of
PAHs emitted. The acceptable risk is 10(-6); however, all results were lower than
this value.

PMID: 21644163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mycologia. 2011 Nov-Dec;103(6):1230-44. doi: 10.3852/10-231. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

Genetic diversity of Rhizoctonia solani associated with potato tubers in France.

Fiers M(1), Edel-Hermann V, Héraud C, Gautheron N, Chatot C, Le Hingrat Y,
Bouchek-Mechiche K, Steinberg C.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, Université de Bourgogne UMR 1229, Microbiologie du Sol et de
l'Environnement, CMSE, 17 rue Sully, BP 86510, Dijon cedex 21065, France.

The soilborne fungus Rhizoctonia solani is a pathogen of many plants and causes
severe damage in crops around the world. Strains of R. solani from the
anastomosis group (AG) 3 attack potatoes, leading to great yield losses and to
the downgrading of production. The study of the genetic diversity of the strains 
of R. solani in France allows the structure of the populations to be determined
and adapted control strategies against this pathogen to be established. The
diversity of 73 French strains isolated from tubers grown in the main potato seed
production areas and 31 strains isolated in nine other countries was assessed by 
phylogenetic analyses of (i) the internal transcribed spacer sequences (ITS1 and 
ITS2) of ribosomal RNA (rRNA), (ii) a part of the gene tef-1a and (iii) the total
DNA fingerprints of each strain established by amplified fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP). The determination of the AGs of R. solani based on the
sequencing of the ITS region showed three different AGs among our collection (60 
AG 3 PT, 8 AG 2-1 and 5 AG 5). Grouping of the strains belonging to the same AG
was confirmed by sequencing of the gene tef-1a used for the first time to study
the genetic diversity of R. solani. About 42% of ITS sequences and 72% of tef-1a 
sequences contained polymorphic sites, suggesting that the cells of R. solani
strains contain several copies of ITS and the tef-1a gene within the same nucleus
or between different nuclei. Phylogenetic trees showed a greater genetic
diversity within AGs in tef-1a sequences than in ITS sequences. The AFLP analyses
showed an even greater diversity among the strains demonstrating that the French 
strains of R. solani isolated from potatoes were not a clonal population.
Moreover there was no relationship between the geographical origins of the
strains or the variety from which they were isolated and their genetic diversity.

PMID: 21642342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2011 Aug;321(2):141-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2011.02322.x. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Purpureocillium, a new genus for the medically important Paecilomyces lilacinus.

Luangsa-Ard J(1), Houbraken J, van Doorn T, Hong SB, Borman AM, Hywel-Jones NL,
Samson RA.

Author information: 
(1)Phylogenetics Laboratory, National Center for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, NSTDA Science Park, Pathum Thani, Thailand.

Paecilomyces lilacinus was described more than a century ago and is a commonly
occurring fungus in soil. However, in the last decade this fungus has been
increasingly found as the causal agent of infections in man and other
vertebrates. Most cases of disease are described from patients with compromised
immune systems or intraocular lens implants. In this study, we compared clinical 
isolates with strains isolated from soil, insects and nematodes using 18S rRNA
gene, internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and partial translation elongation factor
1-a (TEF) sequences. Our data show that P. lilacinus is not related to
Paecilomyces, represented by the well-known thermophilic and often pathogenic
Paecilomyces variotii. The new genus name Purpureocillium is proposed for P.
lilacinus and the new combination Purpureocillium lilacinum is made here.
Furthermore, the examined Purpureocillium lilacinum isolated grouped in two
clades based on ITS and partial TEF sequences. The ITS and TEF sequences of the
Purpureocillium lilacinum isolates used for biocontrol of nematode pests are
identical to those causing infections in (immunocompromised) humans. The use of
high concentrations of Purpureocillium lilacinum spores for biocontrol poses a
health risk in immunocompromised humans and more research is needed to determine 
the pathogenicity factors of Purpureocillium lilacinum.

2011 Federation of European Microbiological Societies. Published by Blackwell
Publishing Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21631575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Hazard Mater. 2012 Mar 15;207-208:152-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2011.04.064.
Epub 2011 Apr 21.

Destruction and formation of PCDD/Fs in a fluidised bed combustor co-incinerating
automotive shredder residue with refuse derived fuel and wastewater treatment
sludge.

Van Caneghem J(1), Vermeulen I, Block C, Van Brecht A, Van Royen P, Jaspers M,
Wauters G, Vandecasteele C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Leuven, W. De Croylaan 46,
3001 Heverlee, Belgium. jo.vancaneghem@cit.kuleuven.be

During an eight day trial automotive shredder residue (ASR) was added to the
usual waste feed of a Fluidized Bed Combustor (FBC) for waste-to-energy
conversion; the input waste mix consisted of 25% ASR, 25% refuse-derived fuel
(RDF) and 50% wastewater treatment (WWT) sludge. All inputs and outputs were
sampled and the concentration of the 17 PCDD/Fs with TEF-values was determined in
order to obtain "PCDD/F fingerprints". The ASR contained approximately 9000 ng
PCDD/Fs/kg(DW), six times more than the RDF and 10 times more than the WWT
sludge. The fingerprint of ASR and RDF was dominated by HpCDD and OCDD, which
accounted for 90% of the total PDDD/F content, whereas the WWT sludge contained
relatively more HpCDFs and OCDF (together 70%). The flue gas cleaning residue
(FGCR) and fly and boiler ash contained approximately 30,000 and 2500 ng
PCDD/Fs/kg(DW), respectively. The fingerprints of these outputs were also
dominated by HpCDFs and OCDF. The bottom ash contained only OCDD and OCDF, in
total 8 ng PCDD/Fs/kg (DW). From the comparison of the bottom ash fingerprints
with the fingerprints of the other output fractions and of the inputs, it could
be concluded that the PCDD/Fs in the waste were destroyed and new PCDD/Fs were
formed in the post combustion process by de novo synthesis. During the
ASR-co-incineration, the PCDD/F congener concentrations in the fly and boiler
ash, FGCR and flue gas were 1.25-10 times higher compared to the same output
fractions generated during incineration of the usual waste mix (70% RDF and 30%
WWT sludge). The concentration of the higher chlorinated PCDD/Fs increased most. 
As these congeners have the lowest TEF-factors, the total PCDD/F output,
expressed in kg TEQ/year, of the FBC did not increase significantly when ASR was 
co-incinerated. Due to the relatively high copper levels in the ASR, the copper
concentrations in the FBCs outputs increased. As copper catalysis the de novo
syntheses, this could explain the increase in PCDD/F concentrations in these
outputs.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21621915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Sep;91(9):862-5. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20821. Epub 2011 May 23.

De novo deletion of chromosome 20q13.33 in a patient with tracheo-esophageal
fistula, cardiac defects and genitourinary anomalies implicates GTPBP5 as a
candidate gene.

Solomon BD(1), Pineda-Alvarez DE, Hadley DW, Keaton AA, Agochukwu NB, Raam MS,
Carlson-Donohoe HE, Kamat A, Chandrasekharappa SC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. solomonb@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) with/or without esophageal atresia
(EA) is a common congenital malformation that is often accompanied by other
anomalies. The causes of this condition are thought to be heterogeneous but are
overall not well understood.
CASE REPORT: We identified a patient with a TEF/EA, as well as cardiac and
genitourinary anomalies, who was found to have a 0.7 Mb de novo deletion of
chromosome 20q13.33. One gene within the deleted interval, GTPBP5, is of
particular interest as a candidate gene.
CONCLUSIONS: GTPBP5 bears further study as a cause of TEF/EA accompanied by other
malformations.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3193386
PMID: 21608104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Aug;39(14):e92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr346. Epub 2011 May
17.

Re-engineering multicloning sites for function and convenience.

Crook NC(1), Freeman ES, Alper HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, 1
University Station, C0400 Austin, TX 78712, USA.

Multicloning sites (MCSs) in standard expression vectors are widely used and
thought to be benign, non-interacting elements that exist for mere convenience.
However, MCSs impose a necessary distance between promoter elements and genes of 
interest. As a result, the choice of cloning site defines the genetic context and
may introduce significant mRNA secondary structure in the 5'-untranslated region 
leading to strong translation inhibition. Here, we demonstrate the first
performance-based assessment of MCSs in yeast, showing that commonly used MCSs
can induce dramatic reductions in protein expression, and that this inhibition is
highly promoter and gene dependent. In response, we develop and apply a novel
predictive model of structure-based translation inhibition to design improved
MCSs for significantly higher and more consistent protein expression. In doing
so, we were able to minimize the inhibitory effects of MCSs with the yeast TEF,
CYC and GPD promoters. These results highlight the non-interchangeable nature of 
biological parts and represent the first complete, global redesign of a genetic
circuit of such widespread importance as a multicloning site. The improved
translational control offered by these designed MCSs is paramount to obtaining
high titers of heterologous proteins in eukaryotes and to enabling precise
control of genetic circuits.

PMCID: PMC3152365
PMID: 21586584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mycologia. 2011 Sep-Oct;103(5):1037-46. doi: 10.3852/10-261. Epub 2011 May 10.

Cantharellus texensis sp. nov. from Texas, a southern lookalike of C.
cinnabarinus revealed by tef-1 sequence data.

Buyck B(1), Cruaud C, Couloux A, Hofstetter V.

Author information: 
(1)Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Dépt. Systématique et évolution, Paris, 
France. buyck@mnhn.fr

This contribution to the genus Cantharellus in North America deals with the
smaller, reddish pink species from the Gulf of Mexico states and eastern United
States. C. texensis sp. nov. is presented as a new southern lookalike of C.
cinnabarinus. The morphological species concepts are supported by newly generated
molecular sequence data from the protein coding gene tef1. Similarities to C.
persicinus, a third pinkish taxon, are discussed. The very different microscopic 
features for the three taxa are illustrated in detail. C. cinnabarinus is
neotypified. C. minor forma intensissima is considered to be possibly unrelated
not only to the discussed taxa in this paper but also to typical C. minor.

PMID: 21558500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 24;286(25):22699-705. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.237024. Epub
2011 May 2.

RTEF-1, an upstream gene of hypoxia-inducible factor-1a, accelerates recovery
from ischemia.

Jin Y(1), Wu J, Song X, Song Q, Cully BL, Messmer-Blust A, Xu M, Foo SY,
Rosenzweig A, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

The amount of available hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a has been considered to 
be largely a consequence of post-translational modification by multiple
ubiquitin-proteasome pathways. However, the role of transcriptional regulation of
HIF-1a is less certain, and the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of
HIF-1a require further investigation. Here we report that related transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (RTEF-1), a member of the TEF transcriptional factor family,
transcriptionally regulates the HIF-1a gene under normoxic and hypoxic
conditions. The expression of HIF-1a mRNA was decreased in endothelial cells in
which RTEF-1 was knocked down with siRNA. Sequential deletional analysis of the
HIF-1a promoter revealed that the MCAT-like element in the HIF-1a promoter was
essential for HIF-1a transcription. Binding of RTEF-1 to the MCAT-like element
was confirmed by ChIP. Treatment of endothelial cells with a HIF-1 inhibitor
resulted in retardation of RTEF-1-induced proliferation and tube formation.
Moreover, increased HIF-1a expression was observed in transgenic mice expressing 
RTEF-1 under the VE-cadherin promoter (VE-Cad/RTEF-1). VE-Cad/RTEF-1 mice
subjected to hindlimb ischemia demonstrated increased levels of HIF-1a,
accelerated recovery of blood flow, and increased capillary density compared with
littermate controls. These results identify RTEF-1 as a regulator of HIF-1a
transcription, which results in up-regulation of HIF-1a and acceleration of
recovery from ischemia.

PMCID: PMC3121413
PMID: 21540178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Stud Mycol. 2011;68:115-38. doi: 10.3114/sim.2011.68.05.

A revision of Cyanonectria and Geejayessia gen. nov., and related species with
Fusarium-like anamorphs.

Schroers HJ(1), Gräfenhan T, Nirenberg HI, Seifert KA.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Institute of Slovenia, Hacquetova 17, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.

A revision of Fusarium-like species associated with the plant genus Buxus led to 
a reconsideration of generic concepts in the Fusarium clade of the Nectriaceae.
Phylogenetic analyses of the partial second largest subunit of the RNA polymerase
II (rpb2) and the larger subunit of the ATP citrate lyase (acl1) gene exons
confirm the existence of a clade, here called the terminal Fusarium clade, that
includes genera such as Fusariumsensu stricto (including its Gibberella
teleomorphs), Albonectria, Cyanonectria, "Haematonectria", the newly described
genus Geejayessia, and "Nectria" albida. Geejayessia accommodates five species.
Four were previously classified in Nectria sensu lato, namely the black
perithecial, KOH-species G. atrofusca and the orange or reddish, KOH+ G.
cicatricum, G. desmazieri and G. zealandica.Geejayessia celtidicola is newly
described. Following our phylogenetic analyses showing its close relationship
with Cyanonectria cyanostoma, the former Gibbera buxi is recombined as the second
species of Cyanonectria. A three gene phylogenetic analysis of multiple strains
of each morphological species using translation elongation factor 1 a (tef-1),
rpb2 and acl1 gene exons and introns confirms their status as distinct
phylogenetic species. Internal transcribed spacer of the ribosomal RNA gene
cluster and nuclear large ribosomal subunit sequences were generated as
additional DNA barcodes for selected strains. The connection of Fusarium
buxicola, often erroneously reported as the anamorph of G. desmazieri, with the
bluish black and KOH+ perithecial species C. buxi is reinstated. Most
Cyanonectria and Geejayessia species exhibit restricted host ranges on branches
or twigs of Buxus species, Celtisoccidentalis, or Staphyleatrifolia. Their
perithecia form caespitose clusters on well-developed, mostly erumpent stromata
on the bark or outer cortex of the host and are relatively thin-walled, mostly
smooth, and therefore reminiscent of the more or less astromatous, singly
occurring perithecia of Cosmospora, Dialonectria, and Microcera. The cell walls
in outer- and inner layers of the perithecial walls of Cyanonectria and
Geejayessia have inconspicuous pore-like structures, as do representative species
of Albonectria, Fusarium sensu stricto, "Haematonectria", and "Nectria" albida.
The taxonomic significance of these structures, which we call Samuels' pores, is 
discussed.

PMCID: PMC3065987
PMID: 21523191  [PubMed]


487. Pediatr Surg Int. 2011 Dec;27(12):1357-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-011-2902-8. Epub
2011 Apr 24.

Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula after thoracoscopic repair: vanishing clips
as a potential sign.

Schlesinger AE(1), Mazziotti MV, Cassady CI, Pimpalwar AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Texas Children's Hospital, 6621 Fannin St.,
MC-CC470.01, Houston, TX 77030, USA. alanschlesinger@mac.com

We present a case of a neonate who underwent surgery for esophageal atresia (EA) 
with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with an unusual finding on postoperative
chest radiographs. In retrospect, this was a clue to a recurrent TEF:
disappearance of the surgical clips from the site of surgical repair. Knowledge
of this radiographic finding could aid in the diagnosis of a recurrent fistula in
patients with previous repair of EA.

PMID: 21516499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2011 Jun;21(5):439-43. doi:
10.1089/lap.2010.0349. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Perioperative outcome of patients with esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal 
fistula undergoing open versus thoracoscopic surgery.

Szavay PO(1), Zundel S, Blumenstock G, Kirschner HJ, Luithle T, Girisch M, Luenig
H, Fuchs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Children's Hospital, Tuebingen,
Germany. philipp.szavay@med.uni-tuebingen.de

INTRODUCTION: Thoracoscopic approach for repair of esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) has become a standard procedure in many
pediatric surgical centers. Thoracoscopic surgery in a newborn is demanding from 
both the surgeon and the patient. The potential benefits for the newborn are
still discussed by neonatologists, pediatric intensive care physicians, and also 
parents. The aim of our investigation was to clearly define perioperative outcome
and complication rates in children undergoing thoracoscopic versus open surgery
for EA and TEF repair.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed the records of 68 newborns undergoing surgery
for EA and TEF between March 2002 and February 2010. Patient data of open versus 
thoracoscopic approach were compared regarding operating time, intraoperative as 
well as postoperative pCO(2)max values, postoperative ventilation time, and
complications. Specific patient data are reported with the median and range. Data
analysis was done with the JMP(®) 7.0.2 statistical software (SAS Institute,
Cary, NC).
RESULTS: For the 68 patients, the mean gestational age was 35 weeks (28-41), the 
median birth weight was 2720 g (1500-3510 g) in the thoracoscopic group and 2090 
g (780-3340 g) in the open group. There were 36 girls and 32 boys. Thirty-two
children had associated anomalies. Twenty-five children were undergoing a
thoracoscopic procedure. In 8 cases, the operation was converted to open
thoracotomy. Another 32 children received a thoracotomy. In 11 newborns, a
cervical esophagostomy was performed because of long-gap EA and these patients
were excluded from the study. Operating time was 141 minutes (77-201 minutes) in 
the thoracoscopic group and 106 minutes (48-264 minutes) in the thoracotomy
group, with significant difference (P=.014). Values of pCO(2)max during operation
were 62 mm Hg (34-101 mm Hg) in the thoracoscopic group and 48 mm Hg (28-89 mm
Hg) in the open group, with significant difference (P=.014). Postoperative
ventilation time was 3 days (1-51 days) in all groups, with no significant
difference (P=.79). Early complications were noticed in 9 children undergoing
thoracoscopy and in 8 patients of the thoracotomy group, again with no
significant difference (P>.05).
CONCLUSION: Thoracoscopic repair of EA with TEF is justified because of a
comparable perioperative outcome to open surgery, competitive operating times,
decreased trauma to the thoracic cavity, and improved cosmesis despite skeptical 
considerations. Complication rates are not higher than in children operated on
through a thoracotomy. However, a learning curve has to be taken into account and
large experience in minimal invasive surgery is mandatory for this procedure.
Larger series have to be expected for a more objective evaluation of
perioperative as well as long-term outcomes. To our opinion, the thoracoscopic
approach appears to be favorable and could be a future standard.

PMID: 21486154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Mycologia. 2011 Sep-Oct;103(5):1055-73. doi: 10.3852/10-302. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Phylogeny and systematics of the anamorphic, entomopathogenic genus Beauveria.

Rehner SA(1), Minnis AM, Sung GH, Luangsa-ard JJ, Devotto L, Humber RA.

Author information: 
(1)Systematic Mycology and Microbiology Laboratory, USDA-ARS, Beltsville, MD
20705, USA. stephen.rehner@ars.usda.gov

Beauveria is a cosmopolitan anamorphic genus of arthropod pathogens that includes
the agronomically important species, B. bassiana and B. brongniartii, which are
used as mycoinsecticides for the biological control of pest insects. Recent
phylogenetic evidence demonstrates that Beauveria is monophyletic within the
Cordycipitaceae (Hypocreales), and both B. bassiana and B. brongniartii have been
linked developmentally and phylogenetically to Cordyceps species. Despite recent 
interest in the genetic diversity and molecular ecology of Beauveria,
particularly as it relates to their role as pathogens of insects in natural and
agricultural environments, the genus has not received critical taxonomic review
for several decades. A multilocus phylogeny of Beauveria based on partial
sequences of RPB1, RPB2, TEF and the nuclear intergenic region, Bloc, is
presented and used to assess diversity within the genus and to evaluate species
concepts and their taxonomic status. B. bassiana and B. brongniartii, both which 
represent species complexes and which heretofore have lacked type specimens, are 
redescribed and types are proposed. In addition six new species are described
including B. varroae and B. kipukae, which form a biphyletic, morphologically
cryptic sister lineage to B. bassiana, B. pseudobassiana, which also is
morphologically similar to but phylogenetically distant from B. bassiana, B.
asiatica and B. australis, which are sister lineages to B. brongniartii, and B.
sungii, an Asian species that is linked to an undetermined species of Cordyceps. 
The combination B. amorpha is validly published and an epitype is designated.

PMID: 21482632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Mar 28;17(12):1649-54. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i12.1649.

Application of MPVR and TL-VR with 64-row MDCT in neonates with congenital EA and
distal TEF.

Wen Y(1), Peng Y, Zhai RY, Li YZ.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Discipline of Pediatrics (Capital Medical University), Department
of Radiology, Beijing Children's Hospital Affiliated to Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100045, China.

AIM: To assess the application of multiple planar volume reconstruction (MPVR)
and three-dimensional (3D) transparency lung volume rendering (TL-VR) with 64-row
multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) in neonates with congenital
esophageal atresia (EA) and distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: Twenty neonates (17 boys, 3 girls) with EA and distal TEF at a mean age 
of 4.6 d (range 1-16 d) were enrolled in this study. A helical scan of 64-row
MDCT was performed at the 64 mm × 0.625 mm collimation. EA and TEF were
reconstructed with MPVR and TL-VR, respectively. Initial diagnosis of EA was made
by chest radiography showing the inserted catheter in the proximal blind-ended
esophageal pouch. Manifestations of MDCT images were compared with the findings
at surgery.
RESULTS: MDCT showed the proximal and distal esophageal pouches in 20 cases. No
significant difference was observed in gaps between the proximal and distal
esophageal pouches detected by MPVR and TL-VR. The lengths of gaps between the
proximal and distal esophageal pouches detected by MPVR and TL-VR correlated well
with the findings at surgery (R = 0.87, P < 0.001). The images of MPVR revealed
the orifice of TEF in 13 cases, while TL-VR images showed the orifice of TEF in 4
cases.
CONCLUSION: EA and distal TEF can be reconstructed using MPVR and TL-VR of 64-row
MDCT, which is a noninvasive technique to demonstrate the distal esophageal
pouches and inter-pouch distance in neonates with EA and distal TEF.

PMCID: PMC3070138
PMID: 21472133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Anim Sci. 2011 Sep;89(9):2663-72. doi: 10.2527/jas.2010-3556. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Predictive markers in calpastatin for tenderness in commercial pig populations.

Nonneman D(1), Lindholm-Perry AK, Shackelford SD, King DA, Wheeler TL, Rohrer GA,
Bierman CD, Schneider JF, Miller RK, Zerby H, Moeller SJ.

Author information: 
(1)US Meat Animal Research Center, Clay Center, NE 68933, USA.
dan.nonneman@ars.usda.gov

The identification of predictive DNA markers for pork quality would allow US pork
producers and breeders to select genetically superior animals more quickly and
efficiently for the production of consistent, high-quality meat. Genome scans
have identified QTL for tenderness on SSC 2, which have been fine-mapped to the
calpastatin locus. The objectives of this study were to identify the sequence
variation in calpastatin that likely affects tenderness in commercial-level pig
populations and to develop definitive DNA markers that are predictive of pork
tenderness for use in marker-assisted selection programs. We resequenced the
calpastatin regulatory and transcribed regions in pigs with divergently extreme
shear force values to identify possible mutations that could affect tenderness. A
total of 194 SNP were identified in this sequence, and 31 SNP were found in
predicted transcription factor binding sites. We tested 131 polymorphisms in our 
research population and a subset (40) of these in samples of industry pigs for
their association with objective measures of tenderness. We identified 4 SNP that
were consistently associated with pork tenderness in all the populations studied,
representing 2,826 pigs from 4 distinct populations. Gel shift assays were
designed for these SNP and 12 other polymorphic sites. Six sites demonstrated a
gel shift when probes were incubated with nuclear extract from muscle, heart, or 
testis. Four of these sites, a specificity protein 1 (Sp1) site around
nucleotides 12978 and 12979, a potential thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef) site
at nucleotide 25587, an unknown site at nucleotide 48699, and myocyte enhancer
factor-2 (Mef-2)/TATA sites with SNP at positions 49223 and 49228 were allele
specific in binding nuclear proteins. The allele frequencies for the tender
alleles were similar (0.11 to 0.36) in the 4 different commercial populations.
These 4 SNP were not in complete linkage disequilibrium with each other and may
independently affect calpastatin expression, tenderness, or both. These markers
should be predictive of pork tenderness in industry populations.

PMID: 21454860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2011 May;268(5):747-54. doi:
10.1007/s00405-011-1558-2. Epub 2011 Mar 13.

Treatment of large pharyngotracheal fistulas after laryngectomy by a novel
customized pharyngeal stent.

Herzog M(1), Greiner I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg, Magdeburger Str. 12, 06112, Halle
(Saale), Germany. michael.herzog@medizin.uni-halle.de

Persisting tracheoesophageal (TEF) and/or tracheopharyngeal (TPF) fistulas after 
laryngectomy are incessant problems that can lead to a tremendous loss of quality
of life among patients. As soon as surgical options for closing fistulas become
impractical, then alternative approaches to stent the fistulas gain significant
value. Conventional stents seldom seal the entire fistula, might dislocate and
tend to induce tissue proliferation and cause discomfort to the patient. On the
basis of these side effects a novel customized pharyngeal stent has been
developed to completely seal the fistula without dislocation and discomfort. The 
anatomic dimensions of the neopharynx in two patients were obtained by a silicone
cast of the respective neopharynx and the stent was manufactured according to
this anatomical model. The soft silicone edges of the stent match the pharyngeal 
anatomic structures and follow the changes of the base of the tongue during the
process of swallowing. Nevertheless, the stents are rigid enough to remain in
place. The reported two patients were able to subsist by themselves orally most
of the time without any signs of leakage at all. One stent had to be explanted
after 7 months due to an enlargement of the fistula. The second stent is still in
place for 10 months up to now without any side effects.

© Springer-Verlag 2011

PMID: 21400126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Environ Sci Eng. 2010 Jul;52(3):185-92.

Assessment of PAH toxicity and mutagenicity in emissions from coal and biofuel
combustion.

Rajput N(1), Pyari AA, Saini MK, Kumari KM, Lakhani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Dayalbagh, Agra -
282 005, India.

Emissions from combustion of coal, wood and cowdung cakes in domestic cookstoves 
were sampled through a Stack Monitor on Glass Fibre thimbles. 16 PAH compounds
were quantified in the samples extracted in dichloromethane by Gas Chromatography
using FID detector. The toxic potencies of the quantified PAHs were determined by
Toxicity Equivalence (TEF) Approach and their mutagenecities were tested by using
Ames Plate Incorporation Method. All the 16 PAHs were determined in the emission 
of wood, including genotoxic compounds: carcinogens (BaA, Chy, BbF, BkF, BaP, DbA
and IP) and co-carcinogens (Fla, Pyr, BghiP). In coal smoke, only 12 compounds
were detected, while in cowdung cake 15 PAHs were detected except Phenanthrene.
Emission factors on a fuel weight basis are highest for cowdung cake (120.23
mg/kg), followed by wood (48.97 mg/kg) and coal (28.85 mg/kg). Most of the
contribution to the total PAH concentrations was from the high molecular weight
compounds. Considering the genotoxic PAHs, the emission factor ranking order was 
from cow dung cake (115.85 mg/kg) to wood (43.03 mg/kg) and lowest for coal fuel 
(25.97 mg/kg). The emission factor for BaP was highest for cowdung cake (78.83
mg/kg) followed by coal (5.53 mg/kg) and wood fuel (4.47 mg/kg). Calculation of
toxic potencies reveals that the carcinogenic contribution from low molecular
weight PAHs is relatively much lower than high molecular weight PAHs for each
tested fuel. Cow dung cake extracts did not show mutagenic activity in the Ames
Salmonella test probably due to lower concentration of the direct-mutagens like
Pyr, Chy. In contrast, the extracts of coal and wood had higher concentrations of
direct-mutagens like Pyr, Chy, so positive results were obtained.

PMID: 21391389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 15;6(2):e17080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017080.

The light responsive transcriptome of the zebrafish: function and regulation.

Weger BD(1), Sahinbas M, Otto GW, Mracek P, Armant O, Dolle D, Lahiri K, Vallone 
D, Ettwiller L, Geisler R, Foulkes NS, Dickmeis T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology,
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

Most organisms possess circadian clocks that are able to anticipate the day/night
cycle and are reset or "entrained" by the ambient light. In the zebrafish, many
organs and even cultured cell lines are directly light responsive, allowing for
direct entrainment of the clock by light. Here, we have characterized light
induced gene transcription in the zebrafish at several organizational levels.
Larvae, heart organ cultures and cell cultures were exposed to 1- or 3-hour light
pulses, and changes in gene expression were compared with controls kept in the
dark. We identified 117 light regulated genes, with the majority being induced
and some repressed by light. Cluster analysis groups the genes into five major
classes that show regulation at all levels of organization or in different subset
combinations. The regulated genes cover a variety of functions, and the analysis 
of gene ontology categories reveals an enrichment of genes involved in circadian 
rhythms, stress response and DNA repair, consistent with the exposure to visible 
wavelengths of light priming cells for UV-induced damage repair. Promoter
analysis of the induced genes shows an enrichment of various short sequence
motifs, including E- and D-box enhancers that have previously been implicated in 
light regulation of the zebrafish period2 gene. Heterologous reporter constructs 
with sequences matching these motifs reveal light regulation of D-box elements in
both cells and larvae. Morpholino-mediated knock-down studies of two homologues
of the D-box binding factor Tef indicate that these are differentially involved
in the cell autonomous light induction in a gene-specific manner. These findings 
suggest that the mechanisms involved in period2 regulation might represent a more
general pathway leading to light induced gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3039656
PMID: 21390203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Saudi Med J. 2011 Mar;32(3):305-7.

Adult congenital tracheo-esophageal fistula with esophageal dysmotility and
bronchiectasis.

El-Essawy MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging, King Khalid University
Hospital, PO Box 361680, Riyadh 11313, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
manar970@hotmail.com

Tracheo-esophageal fistulas (TEF) in adults are very rarely congenital in nature 
and most of the cases are secondary to neoplastic cause. We report a 26-year-old 
male with TEF that presented with chronic cough. An x-ray carried out for the
patient showed upper lobe bronchiectasis and massive esophageal dilatation. There
was no evidence of esophageal malignancy, achalasia, or Chagas' disease. There
was no history of trauma, infection, or intervention. The CT demonstrated a small
TEF, which was not visualized on esophagogram and confirmed by bronchoscopy. Our 
case demonstrated that idiopathic, or congenital TEF can be presented in
adulthood with esophageal dysmotility and bronchiectasis.

PMID: 21384069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2010 Nov;(559):1-174.

Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of 2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB
118) (CAS No. 31508-00-6) in female harlan Sprague-Dawley rats (gavage studies).

National Toxicology Program.

Dioxin Toxic Equivalency Factor Evaluation Overview- Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds"(DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the 
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized they
accumulate in adipose tissue resulting in chronic lifetime human exposure. Since 
human exposure to DLCs always occurs as a complex mixture, the toxic equivalency 
factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical tool to assess the 
health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The TEF methodology is 
a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity of a compound
relative to TCDD, which is the most potent congener. This allows for the
estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of chemicals, based
on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of DLCs to the AhR. 
The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation because of the
widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the adequacy of the TEF
methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. To address this, the
National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year bioassays in female
Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity
of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and mixtures of
these compounds. Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and their mixtures including
2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 118) were produced commercially before 1977 
for the electric industry as dielectric insulating fluids for transformers and
capacitors. Manufacture and use of these chemicals were stopped because of
increased PCB residues in the environment, but they continue to be released into 
the environment through the use and disposal of products containing PCBs, as
by-products during the manufacture of certain organic chemicals, during
combustion of some waste materials, and during atmospheric recycling. This PCB
118 study was conducted as part of the dioxin TEF evaluation that included
multiple 2-year rat bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic toxicity and
carcinogenicity of DLCs, structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of these
compounds. Female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats were administered PCB 118 (at least 
99% pure) in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage for 14, 31, or 53 weeks or 2
years. 2-YEAR STUDY: Groups of 80 female rats were administered 100, 220, 460,
1,000, or 4,600 g PCB 118/kg body weight in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage, 5 
days per week, for up to 105 weeks; a group of 80 vehicle control female rats
received the corn oil/acetone vehicle alone. Groups of 30 female rats received 10
or 30 g/kg for up to 53 weeks only. Up to 10 rats per group were evaluated at 14,
31, or 53 weeks. A stop-exposure group of 50 female rats was administered 4,600
g/kg PCB 118 in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage for 30 weeks then the vehicle
for the remainder of the study. Survival of all dosed groups of rats was similar 
to that of the vehicle control group. Mean body weights of 1,000 g/kg rats were
7% less than those of the vehicle controls after week 36, and those of the 4,600 
g/kg core study and stop-exposure groups were 7% less than those of the vehicle
controls after week 7. Following cessation of treatment, the body weight gain in 
the stop-exposure group was similar to that of the vehicle control group. In
general, exposure to PCB 118 lead to dose-dependent decreases in the
concentrations of serum total thyroxine (T4) and free T4 in all dosed groups.
There were no effects on triiodothyronine or thyroid stimulating hormone levels
in any dosed groups evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations.
There were increases in hepatic cell proliferation in the 4,600 g/kg group at 14,
31, and 53 weeks. Administration of PCB 118 led to dose-dependent increases in
CYP1A1-associated 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase, CYP1A2-associated
acetanilide4-hydroxylase, and CYP2B-associated pentoxyresorufin-O-deethylase
activities at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. Analysis of PCB 118 
concentrations in dosed groups showed dose- and duration of dosing-dependent
increases in fat, liver, lung, and blood. The highest concentrations were seen in
fat at 2 years with lower concentrations observed in the liver, lung, and blood. 
At the 53-week interim evaluation, three 4,600 g/kg rats had liver
cholangiocarcinoma and one had hepatocellular adenoma. At 2 years, there were
significant treatment-related increases in the incidences of cholangiocarcinoma
and hepatocellular adenoma. Four incidences of hepatocholangioma occurred in the 
4,600 g/kg core study group. At 2 years, a significant dose-related increase in
hepatic toxicity was observed and was characterized by increased incidences of
numerous lesions including hepatocyte hypertrophy, inflammation, oval cell
hyperplasia, pigmentation, multinucleated hepatocyte, eosinophilic and mixed cell
foci, diffuse fatty change, toxic hepatopathy, nodular hyperplasia, necrosis,
bile duct hyperplasia and cyst, and cholangiofibrosis. The incidences of these
lesions were often decreased in the 4,600 g/kg stop-exposure group compared to
the 4,600 g/kg core study group. In the lung at 2 years, a significantly
increased incidence of cystic keratinizing epithelioma occurred in the 4,600 g/kg
core study group compared to the vehicle control group incidence. Incidences of
bronchiolar metaplasia of the alveolar epithelium were significantly increased in
the groups administered 460 g/kg or greater, and the incidence of squamous
metaplasia was significantly increased in the 4,600 g/kg core study group. The
incidence of carcinoma of the uterus in the 4,600 g/kg stop-exposure group was
significantly greater than those in the vehicle control and 4,600 g/kg core study
groups at 2 years. A marginal increase in squamous cell carcinoma occurred in the
220 g/kg group. At 2 years, there were marginally increased incidences of
exocrine pancreatic adenoma or carcinoma in the 460, 1,000, and 4,600 g/kg core
study groups. Numerous nonneoplastic effects were seen in other organs including:
adrenal cortical atrophy and cytoplasmic vacuolization, pancreatic acinar cell
cytoplasmic vacuolization and arterial chronic active inflammation, follicular
cell hypertrophy of the thyroid gland, inflammation and respiratory epithelial
hyperplasia of the nose, and kidney pigmentation.CONCLUSIONS: Under the
conditions of this 2-year gavage study, there was clear evidence of carcinogenic 
activity of PCB 118 in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats based on increased
incidences of neoplasms of the liver (cholangiocarcinoma, hepatocholangioma, and 
hepatocellular adenoma) and cystic keratinizing epithelioma of the lung.
Occurrences of carcinoma in the uterus were considered to be related to the
administration of PCB 118. Occurrences of squamous cell carcinoma of the uterus
and acinar neoplasms of the pancreas may have been related to administration of
PCB 118. Administration of PCB 118 caused increased incidences of nonneoplastic
lesions in the liver, lung, adrenal cortex, pancreas, thyroid gland, nose, and
kidney. Synonyms: 1,1'-Biphenyl, 2,3',4,4',5-pentachloro-(9CI); 1,1'-biphenyl,
2,3',4,4',5-pentachloro-; 2,3',4,4',5-pentachloro-1,1'-biphenyl;
2,4,5,3',4'-pentachlorobiphenyl; 3,4,2',4',5'-pentachlorobiphenyl; biphenyl,
2,3',4,4',5-pentachloro-; CB 118.

PMID: 21383778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 11;6(2):e17169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017169.

A novel pathway of TEF regulation mediated by microRNA-125b contributes to the
control of actin distribution and cell shape in fibroblasts.

Gutierrez O(1), Berciano MT, Lafarga M, Fernandez-Luna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genetica Molecular, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla,
Instituto de Formacion e Investigacion Marques de Valdecilla, Servicio Cantabro
de Salud, Santander, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF), a member of the PAR bZIP family of
transcriptional regulators, has been involved in neurotransmitter homeostasis,
amino acid metabolism, and regulation of apoptotic proteins. In spite of its
relevance, nothing is known about the regulation of TEF.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: p53-dependent genotoxic agents have been shown to be much
more harmful for PAR bZIP-deficient mice as compared to wild type animals. Here
we demonstrate that TEF expression is controlled by p53 through upregulation of
microRNA-125b, as determined by both regulating the activity of p53 and
transfecting cells with microRNA-125b precursors. We also describe a novel role
for TEF in controlling actin distribution and cell shape in mouse fibroblasts.
Lack of TEF is accompanied by dramatic increase of cell area and decrease of
elongation (bipolarity) and dispersion (multipolarity). Staining of actin
cytoskeleton also showed that TEF (-/-) cells are characterized by appearance of 
circumferential actin bundles and disappearance of straight fibers.
Interestingly, transfection of TEF (-/-) fibroblasts with TEF induced a wild
type-like phenotype. Consistent with our previous findings, transfection of wild 
type fibroblasts with miR-125b promoted a TEF (-/-)-like phenotype, and a similar
but weaker effect was observed following exogenous expression of p53.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings provide the first evidence of TEF
regulation, through a miR-125b-mediated pathway, and describes a novel role of
TEF in the maintenance of cell shape in fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC3037971
PMID: 21347262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Mar;155A(3):526-33. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33705. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Grade 1 microtia, wide anterior fontanel and novel type tracheo-esophageal
fistula in methimazole embryopathy.

Gripp KW(1), Kuryan R, Schnur RE, Kothawala M, Davey LR, Antunes MJ, Reichard KW,
Schneider A, Hall BD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware, USA. kgripp@nemours.org

Carbimazole (CMZ) and its active metabolite methimazole (MMI) are antithyroid
medications, which can result in MMI/CMZ embryopathy in susceptible individuals. 
The incidence of birth defects related to MMI/CMZ embryopathy remains unclear as 
several epidemiologic studies failed to prove a correlation, despite positive
case-control studies and numerous case reports. Malformations reported in exposed
individuals and commonly recognized as MMI/CMZ embryopathy include cutis aplasia 
of the scalp, choanal atresia, esophageal atresia (EA), tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF), persistent vitelline duct, athelia/hypothelia, and subtle facial
dysmorphisms including sparse or arched eyebrows. Here, we report on individuals 
with early pregnancy exposure to MMI, with microtia and various other anomalies
associated with MMI embryopathy, suggesting that microtia is also seen with
increased frequency after prenatal MMI exposure. Additional unusual malformations
among our patients include a previously unreported type of TEF with three
separate esophageal pouches and a fistula connecting the middle pouch to the
trachea in one child, and absence of the gall bladder in another. An enlarged
anterior fontanel was seen in three patients, and clinodactyly of the fifth
finger was noted in three. The similarities between our three patients with
microtia after MMI exposure and the two previously reported with microtia after
CMZ exposure support the concept of microtia being related to the MMI/CMZ
exposure. Recognition of microtia as a manifestation of MMI/CMZ embryopathy will 
likely increase the number of diagnosed cases and thus affect ascertainment. We
propose diagnostic criteria for MMI/CMZ embryopathy, including the presence of at
least one major characteristic finding.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Persoonia. 2010 Dec;25:61-71. doi: 10.3767/003158510X550368. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Three new Graphium species from baobab trees in South Africa and Madagascar.

Cruywagen EM(1), de Beer ZW, Roux J, Wingfield MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, DST/NRF Centre of Excellence
in Tree Health Biotechnology (CTHB), Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology
Institute (FABI), Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, University of
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa;

Baobabs (Adansonia spp.) are iconic trees, known for their immense size, strange 
forms, sources of food and as the subjects of myths and mysteries. It is thus
surprising that little is known regarding the fungi that infect these trees.
During a survey to determine which wound infecting fungi occur on baobabs,
synnematous structures were observed and Graphium-like isolates were obtained.
Culture characteristics and micro-morphology, together with DNA sequence
comparisons for the SSU rRNA, rRNA-ITS and TEF-1a gene regions were used to
characterise these fungi. These data revealed three novel Graphium spp. and these
are described as G. adansoniae, G. madagascariense and G. fabiforme.

PMCID: PMC3028506
PMID: 21339967  [PubMed]


500. Fungal Biol. 2011 Feb;115(2):112-23. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2010.10.011. Epub 2010
Nov 5.

FUM cluster divergence in fumonisins-producing Fusarium species.

Stepien L(1), Koczyk G, Waskiewicz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolomics, Institute of Plant Genetics, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Strzeszynska 34, Poznan, Poland. lste@igr.poznan.pl

Fumonisins are polyketide-derived mycotoxins, produced by several Fusarium
species, and its biosynthetic pathway is controlled by the FUM cluster--a group
of genes exhibiting a common expression pattern during fumonisin biosynthesis.
The most common are the B analogues with fumonisin B(1) (FB(1)) being the most
prevalent. At least a part of the inter- and intraspecific variation in FBs
synthesis level can be explained by the sequence differences inside FUM cluster. 
The aim of our study was to evaluate the toxin production and sequence
variability in FUM genes and intergenic regions among thirty isolates of seven
species reported as potential fumonisins producers: Fusarium anthophilum,
Fusarium fujikuroi, Fusarium nygamai, Fusarium oxysporum, Fusarium proliferatum, 
Fusarium subglutinans and Fusarium verticillioides, particularly with respect to 
FBs synthesis. Fumonisins were produced in high amounts (over 1mg g(-1)) by one
isolate of F. subglutinans, three of F. verticillioides and all F. proliferatum
isolates except one, regardless of the host organism. The remaining isolates
produced low amounts of FBs and two F. verticillioides isolates didn't produce it
at all. The lowest variation in amount of toxin produced was found among F.
proliferatum isolates. Based on the translation elongation factor 1a (tef-1a)
sequence of F. fujikuroi, a species-specific marker was developed. The intergenic
region presents similar opportunity for F. nygamai identification. The
phylogenetic reconstruction based on FUM1 gene generally reflects the scenario
presented by tef-1a sequences. Although the sequence similarities for intergenic 
regions were lower than in coding regions, there are clearly conserved patterns
enabling separation of different subsets of species, including the non-producer
species.

Copyright © 2010 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 21315309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Pediatr Orthop. 2011 Mar;31(2):150-2. doi: 10.1097/BPO.0b013e3182093df1.

Bone bruises and meniscal tears on MRI in skeletally immature children with
tibial eminence fractures.

Shea KG(1), Grimm NL, Laor T, Wall E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Intermountain Orthopaedics, Boise, ID, USA.

BACKGROUND: Earlier studies have found that tibial eminence fractures (TEFs) in
children are rarely associated with additional injuries. In skeletally immature
patients with this fracture, the rate of meniscal injury is reported to be less
than 5%. Most earlier studies that evaluate TEFs are based on conventional
radiographic findings and do not address injuries to the subchondral bone and
soft tissues of the knee. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to assess
additional injuries, specifically bone bruises and meniscal tears identified by
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in skeletally immature patients who have
sustained a TEF.
METHODS: This study is a retrospective evaluation of 20 skeletally immature
children with TEFs who have undergone MRI examinations of the knee. Sixteen boys 
and 4 girls, ranging in age from 7 to 17 years (mean age, 12 y) were included.
The TEFs were classified by the modified Meyers McKeever system. The MRI
examinations were reviewed for the presence and location of associated
subchondral bone contusions and meniscal injuries.
RESULTS: Distribution of the TEF types was: type I, n=6 (30%); type II, n=3
(15%); type III, n=11 (55%); and type IV, n=0. Subchondral bone contusions were
seen in 18 children (90%). These were in the lateral femoral condyle (80%),
lateral tibial plateau (75%), medial femoral condyle (60%), and medial tibial
plateau (30%). Meniscal tears were present in 8 patients (40%), divided equally
between the medial and lateral meniscus.
CONCLUSIONS: TEFs in children are associated with a high rate of bone contusion
and meniscal injury. The pattern of injuries observed in this series suggests
that a mechanism of injury similar to that of adult anterior cruciate ligament
tears might also be responsible for TEFs in skeletally immature children. In
addition, we found that the incidence of associated meniscal injury is higher
than previously reported. MRI examinations may play an important role in the
evaluation for additional injuries in these children.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level IV-Case series.

PMID: 21307708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Toxicol Sci. 2011 May;121(1):123-31. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr032. Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands of widely different toxic equivalency factors
induce similar histone marks in target gene chromatin.

Ovesen JL(1), Schnekenburger M, Puga A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

Posttranslational histone modifications are a critical regulatory mechanism of
gene transcription. Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that
contingent on binding to its cognate promoter motifs in the Cyp1a1 gene,
activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) by benzo[a]pyrene (BaP)
treatment induces histone modifications in the Cyp1a1 promoter that are required 
for activation of gene transcription. Here, we have studied different AHR
ligands, including polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) of different toxic
equivalency factors (TEF), to determine whether changes in histone modifications 
are linked to different levels of Cyp1a1 expression or dependent on AHR-ligand
affinity. We find that all ligands lead to the same pattern of histone
modifications in a relationship that parallels the strength of their AHR-ligand
affinity. Thus, whereas PCB126 (TEF 0.1), 3-methylcholanthrene, ß-naphthoflavone,
and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) initiate a pattern of histone
marks similar to those induced by BaP, PCB77 (TEF 0.0001) causes a lower level of
change in the same marks and requires a longer activation time than PCB126, BaP, 
or TCDD. In contrast, the non-dioxin-like PCB153 recruits AHR to the Cyp1a1
enhancer causing a displacement of enhancer-associated histone H3 but does not
cause the other observed histone mark changes nor does it induce transcription.
These results indicate that AHR recruitment to the promoter is not sufficient to 
induce the histone modifications needed to activate gene expression and show that
there is a good correlation between the regulatory chromatin changes associated
with ligand-induced AHR target gene transcription and the resultant toxicity of
the ligand.

PMCID: PMC3080189
PMID: 21292640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Feb;155A(2):418-23. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33827. Epub 2011
Jan 13.

Microdeletion of 17q22q23.2 encompassing TBX2 and TBX4 in a patient with
congenital microcephaly, thyroid duct cyst, sensorineural hearing loss, and
pulmonary hypertension.

Nimmakayalu M(1), Major H, Sheffield V, Solomon DH, Smith RJ, Patil SR,
Shchelochkov OA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa
Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Microdeletions of the long arm of chromosome 17 are being reported with
increasing frequency. Deletions of 17q22q23.2 may represent a genetically
recognizable phenotype although its spectrum of genomic abnormalities, clinical
manifestations, and critical regions are not fully delineated. Isolated reports
and small case series suggest that deletions of 17q22q23.2 result in
haploinsufficiency of dosage sensitive genes NOG, TBX2, and TBX4, which may be
responsible for many aspects of the phenotype. Shared clinical features in this
group of patients include microcephaly, prenatal onset growth restriction, heart 
defects, tracheoesophageal fistula, and esophageal atresia (TEF/EA), skeletal
anomalies, and moderate to severe global developmental delay. We describe a
female patient who presented with severe congenital microcephaly, thyroglossal
duct cyst, sensorineural hearing loss, mild tracheomalacia, abnormal auricles,
pulmonary hypertension, developmental delay, and postnatal onset growth delay.
She had no TEF/EA or heart defects. Using a high density oligonucleotide
microarray, we identified a microdeletion at 17q22q23.2, resulting in the
heterozygous loss of several genes, including TBX2 and TBX4 but not NOG. The
breakpoints did not lie within known segmental duplications. This case helps to
further delineate the critical region for TEF/EA, which is likely confined to the
chromosomal region proximal to 17q23.1, and suggests that genes in 17q23.1q23.2
may be associated with thyroglossal duct cysts. The role of TBX2 and TBX4 in
pulmonary hypertension warrants investigation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21271665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Phytopathology. 2011 Jun;101(6):679-86. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-04-10-0120.

Morphological and molecular analysis of Fusarium lateritium, the cause of gray
necrosis of hazelnut fruit in Italy.

Vitale S(1), Santori A, Wajnberg E, Castagnone-Sereno P, Luongo L, Belisario A.

Author information: 
(1)CRA-PAV Centro di Ricerca per la Patologia Vegetale, Via C. G. Bertero 22,
00156 Roma, Italy.

Fusarium lateritium is a globally distributed plant pathogen. It was recently
reported as the causal agent of nut gray necrosis (NGN) on hazelnut. Isolate
characterization within F. lateritium was undertaken to investigate how
morphological and molecular diversity was associated with host and geographic
origin. Morphological studies combined with inter-simple-sequence repeat (ISSR)
analysis, and phylogenetic analyses using translation elongation factor 1a
(TEF-1a), ß-tubulin genes, and nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer 
(ITS) sequences were conducted to resolve relationships among 32 F. lateritium
isolates from NGN-affected hazelnut fruit, and 14 from other substrates or 8 from
other hosts than hazelnut. Colonies of F. lateritium from hazelnut showed dark
grayish-olive differing from the orange-yellow color of all other isolates from
other hosts. Generally, isolates from NGN-affected fruit failed to produce
sporodochia on carnation leaf agar. The influence of host and substrate on the
genetic structure of F. lateritium was supported by ISSR and analyzed with
principal coordinates analysis. A relationship between hazelnut and genetic
variation was inferred. Phylogenetic analysis of ITS provided limited resolution 
while TEF-1a and ß-tubulin analyses allowed a clear separation between the
European and non-European F. lateritium isolates retrieved from GenBank,
regardless of host. Though morphological traits of F. lateritium isolates from
hazelnut were generally uniform in defining a typical morphogroup, they were not 
yet phylogenetically defined. In contrast, the typology related to slimy deep
orange cultures, due to spore mass, grouped clearly separated from the other F.
lateritium isolates and revealed a congruence between morphology and phylogeny.

PMID: 21261470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Pediatr. 2011 Jun;158(6):973-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2010.12.006. Epub 2011 Jan
15.

Symptomatic vocal cord paresis/paralysis in infants operated on for esophageal
atresia and/or tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Morini F(1), Iacobelli BD, Crocoli A, Bottero S, Trozzi M, Conforti A, Bagolan P.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Surgery Unit, Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, Bambino
Gesù Children's Research Hospital, Rome, Italy. francesco.morini@opbg.net

OBJECTIVES: To describe the prevalence and pathogenesis of symptomatic vocal cord
paresis/paralysis (VCP) in patients treated for esophageal atresia (EA),
tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) or both.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective study of all patients treated for EA/TEF in our
center (1995 to 2009). Patients with and without symptomatic VCP were compared
for gestational age, birth weight, associated anomalies, referrals, long-gap EA
(> 3 cm or 3 vertebral bodies), cervical esophagostomy, anastomotic leakage,
length of ventilation, and major cardiac surgery. Prevalence or median (IQR) is
reported.
RESULTS: Of 174 patients, 7 (4%) had symptomatic VCP. Prevalence of referrals
(5/7 versus 21/167; P = .0009), long gap (5/7 versus 41/167; P = .0146), previous
cervical esophagostomy (5/7 versus 7/167; P < .0001), and anastomotic leakage
(3/7 versus 10/167; P = .0097) was higher, and ventilation longer (8.5 days [7.0 
to 15.5] versus 6.0 days (5.0 to 7.0); P = .0072) in patients with VCP.
CONCLUSIONS: In infants treated for EA/TEF, VCP should be ruled out in case of
persistent respiratory morbidity or, when present, cautiously monitored. Surgical
risk factors should be actively controlled. Further studies are needed to define 
the prevalence of acquired and congenital VCP in patients with EA/TEF.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21238988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Masui. 2010 Dec;59(12):1506-9.

[Case of tracheal agenesis found during surgery].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyamoto C(1), Mitsuse T, Akasaka T, Masuda K, Hashiguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Kumamoto City Hospital, Kumamoto 862-8505.

We reported a case of tracheal agenesis (TA) that was diagnosed during surgery. A
female infant, weighing 1,104 g, was born at the 29 weeks of gestation. She
showed severe respiratory distress without crying. Oxygenation was improved by
mask ventilation, but tracheal intubation was very difficult. Tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) was suspected because significant amount of air from nasogastric
tube was noticed. Physical examination and X-ray findings suggested Gross E type 
TEF, duodenal atresia and cloaca. On the second day of life, ligation of TEE
gastrostomy and colostomy were scheduled. Although operation was started without 
problems, ventilation became impossible when TEF was clamped and release of
clamping made it possible. Bronchoscopic investigation revealed that tracheal
tube was located in the esophagus. We have never doubted the esophageal
intubation, because patient was ventilated preoperatively and signs of
respiratory distress syndrome were successfully treated by the surfactant
replacement therapy through tracheal tube. Type II TA according to Floyd's
classification was diagnosed by bronchoscopic and echographic investigations.
Distal esophageal ligation, gastrostomy and esophagostomy were performed. She
died on the 12th day of life in spite of vigorous ventilatory and cardiovascular 
support.

PMID: 21229692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Protein Cell. 2010 Dec;1(12):1073-83. doi: 10.1007/s13238-010-0138-3. Epub 2011
Jan 8.

Structural and functional insights into the TEAD-YAP complex in the Hippo
signaling pathway.

Chen L(1), Loh PG, Song H.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Cell Biology Division, Institute of Molecular and
Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 61 Biopolis
Drive, Singapore 138673, Republic of Singapore.

The control of organ size growth is one of the most fundamental aspects of life. 
In the past two decades, a highly conserved Hippo signaling pathway has been
identified as a key molecular mechanism for governing organ size regulation. In
the middle of this pathway is a kinase cascade that negatively regulates the
downstream component Yes-associated protein (YAP)/transcriptional coactivator
with PDZ-binding motif (TAZ)/Yorkie through phosphorylation. Phosphorylation of
YAP/TAZ/Yorkie promotes its cytoplasmic localization, leads to cell apoptosis and
restricts organ size overgrowth. When the Hippo pathway is inactivated,
YAP/TAZ/Yorkie translocates into the nucleus to bind to the transcription
enhancer factor (TEAD/TEF) family of transcriptional factors to promote cell
growth and proliferation. In this review, we will focus on the structural and
functional studies on the downstream transcription factor TEAD and its
coactivator YAP.

PMCID: PMC4728155
PMID: 21213102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Environ Sci Technol. 2011 Feb 15;45(4):1652-8. doi: 10.1021/es102991s. Epub 2011 
Jan 4.

Evaluation of relative potencies for in vitro transactivation of the baikal seal 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor by dioxin-like compounds.

Kim EY(1), Suda T, Tanabe S, Batoev VB, Petrov EA, Iwata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Science and Department of Biology,
Kyung Hee University, Hoegi-Dong, Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul 130-701, Korea.

To evaluate the sensitivity and responses to dioxins and related compounds (DRCs)
via aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) in Baikal seals (Pusa sibirica), we
constructed an in vitro reporter gene assay system. Baikal seal AHR (BS AHR)
expression plasmid and a reporter plasmid containing CYP1A1 promoter were
transfected in COS-7 cells. The cells were treated with six representative
congeners, and dose-dependent responses were obtained for all the congeners. EC50
values of 2,3,7,8-TCDD, 1,2,3,7,8-PeCDD, 2,3,7,8-TCDF, 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF, and
PCB126 were found to be 0.021, 1.8, 0.16, 2.4, and 2.5 nM, respectively. As the
response did not reach the maximal plateau, EC50 value for PCB118 could not be
obtained. The TCDD-EC50 for BS AHR was as high as that for dioxin sensitive
C57BL/6 mouse AHR. The in vitro dose responses were further analyzed following an
established systematic framework and multiple (20, 50, and 80%) relative
potencies (REPs) to the maximum TCDD response. The estimates revealed lower REP
ranges (20-80%) of PeCDD and PeCDF for BS AHR than for mouse AHR. Average of the 
20, 50, and 80% REPs was designated as Baikal seal specific TCDD induction
equivalency factor (BS IEF). The BS IEFs of PeCDD, TCDF, PeCDF, PCB126, and
PCB118 were estimated as 0.010, 0.018, 0.0078, 0.0059, and 0.00010, respectively.
Total TCDD induction equivalents (IEQs) that were calculated using BS IEFs and
hepatic concentrations in wild Baikal seals corresponded to only 12-31% of 2005
WHO TEF-derived TEQs. Nevertheless, about 50% of Baikal seals accumulated IEQs
over the TCDD-EC50 obtained in this study. This assessment was supported by the
enhanced CYP1A1 mRNA expression found in 50% of the specimens contaminated over
the TCDD-EC50. These findings suggest that the IEFs proposed from this in vitro
assay could be used to predict AHR-mediated responses in wild seals.

PMID: 21204517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2011 Jan;21(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2011.12.009.

The role of transcription enhancer factors in cardiovascular biology.

Jin Y(1), Messmer-Blust AF, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF) multigene family is primarily
functional in muscle-specific genes through binding to MCAT elements that
activate or repress transcription of many genes in response to physiological and 
pathological stimuli. Among the TEF family, TEF-1, RTEF-1, and DTEF-1 are
critical regulators of cardiac and smooth muscle-specific genes during
cardiovascular development and cardiac disorders including cardiac hypertrophy.
Emerging evidence suggests that in addition to functioning as muscle-specific
transcription factors, members of the TEF family may be key mediators of gene
expression induced by hypoxia in endothelial cells by virtue of its multidomain
organization, potential for post-translational modifications, and interactions
with numerous transcription factors, which represent a cell-selective control
mediator of nuclear signaling. We review the recent literature demonstrating the 
involvement of the TEF family of transcription factors in the regulation of
differential gene expression in cardiovascular physiology and pathology.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3326381
PMID: 22498013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Korean J Pediatr. 2010 Jun;53(6):705-10. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2010.53.6.705. Epub
2010 Jun 23.

An 18-year experience of tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia.

Seo J(1), Kim do Y, Kim AR, Kim DY, Kim SC, Kim IK, Kim KS, Yoon CH, Pi SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ulsan University College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: To determine the clinical manifestations and outcomes of patients with
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and esophageal atresia (EA) born at a single
neonatal intensive care unit.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted for 97 patients with confirmed
TEF and EA who were admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit between 1990 and
2007.
RESULTS: The rate of prenatal diagnosis was 12%. The average gestational age and 
birth weight were 37(+2) weeks and 2.5±0.7 kg, respectively. Thirty-one infants
were born prematurely (32%). Type C was the most common. The mean gap between the
proximal and distal esophagus was 2 cm. Esophago-esophagostomy was performed in
72 patients at a mean age of 4 days after birth; gastrostomy or duodenostomy were
performed in 8 patients. Forty patients exhibited vertebral, anorectal, cardiac, 
tracheoesophageal, renal, limb (VACTERL) association with at least 2 combined
anomalies, and cardiac anomaly was the most common. The most common
post-operative complications were esophageal stricture followed by
gastroesophageal reflux. Balloon dilatation was performed for 1.3 times in 26
patients at a mean age of 3 months. The mortality and morbidity rates were 24%
and 67%, respectively, and the most common cause of death was sepsis. The weight 
of approximately 40% patients was below the 10th percentile at 2 years of age.
CONCLUSION: Mortality and morbidity rates of patients with TEF and EA are high as
compared to those of infants with other neonatal surgical diseases. Further
efforts must be taken to reduce mortality and morbidity and improve growth
retardation.

PMCID: PMC2994136
PMID: 21189942  [PubMed]


11. BMC Plant Biol. 2010 Dec 20;10:283. doi: 10.1186/1471-2229-10-283.

Distribution of short interstitial telomere motifs in two plant genomes: putative
origin and function.

Gaspin C(1), Rami JF, Lescure B.

Author information: 
(1)INRA Toulouse, UBIA & Plateforme Bioinformatique, UR 875, Chemin de Borde
Rouge, Auzeville BP 52627, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France.
Christine.Gaspin@toulouse.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: Short interstitial telomere motifs (telo boxes) are short sequences
identical to plant telomere repeat units. They are observed within the 5' region 
of several genes over-expressed in cycling cells. In synergy with various
cis-acting elements, these motifs participate in the activation of expression.
Here, we have analysed the distribution of telo boxes within Arabidopsis thaliana
and Oryza sativa genomes and their association with genes involved in the
biogenesis of the translational apparatus.
RESULTS: Our analysis showed that the distribution of the telo box (AAACCCTA) in 
different genomic regions of A. thaliana and O. sativa is not random. As is also 
the case for plant microsatellites, they are preferentially located in the 5'
flanking regions of genes, mainly within the 5' UTR, and distributed as a
gradient along the direction of transcription. As previously reported in
Arabidopsis, a conserved topological association of telo boxes with site II or
TEF cis-acting elements is observed in almost all promoters of genes encoding
ribosomal proteins in O. sativa. Such a conserved promoter organization can be
found in other genes involved in the biogenesis of the translational machinery
including rRNA processing proteins and snoRNAs. Strikingly, the association of
telo boxes with site II motifs or TEF boxes is conserved in promoters of genes
harbouring snoRNA clusters nested within an intron as well as in the 5' flanking 
regions of non-intronic snoRNA genes. Thus, the search for associations between
telo boxes and site II motifs or TEF box in plant genomes could provide a useful 
tool for characterizing new cryptic RNA pol II promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: The data reported in this work support the model previously proposed
for the spreading of telo boxes within plant genomes and provide new insights
into a putative process for the acquisition of microsatellites in plants. The
association of telo boxes with site II or TEF cis-acting elements appears to be
an essential feature of plant genes involved in the biogenesis of ribosomes and
clearly indicates that most plant snoRNAs are RNA pol II products.

PMCID: PMC3022908
PMID: 21171996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Food Microbiol. 2011 Jan 31;145(1):9-21. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.11.001. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Molecular characterization and fumonisin production by Fusarium verticillioides
isolated from corn grains of different geographic origins in Brazil.

de Oliveira Rocha L(1), Reis GM, da Silva VN, Braghini R, Teixeira MM, Corrêa B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biomedical Institute II, University of São Paulo, 
Prof Lineu Prestes, 1374 Laboratory 249, São Paulo, Brazil.
liliana_rocha@ymail.com

Gibberella moniliformis is most commonly associated with maize worldwide and
produces high levels of fumonisins, some of the most agriculturally important
mycotoxins. Studies demonstrate that molecular methods can be helpful for a rapid
identification of Fusarium species and their levels of toxin production. The
purpose of this research was to apply molecular methods (AFLP, TEF-1a partial
gene sequencing and PCR based on MAT alleles) for the identification of Fusarium 
species isolated from Brazilian corn and to verify if real time RT-PCR technique 
based on FUM1 and FUM19 genes is appropriated to estimate fumonisins B(1) and
B(2) production levels. Among the isolated strains, 96 were identified as
Fusarium verticillioides, and four as other Fusarium species. Concordant
phylogenies were obtained by AFLP and TEF-1a sequencing, permitting the
classification of the different species into distinct clades. Concerning MAT
alleles, 70% of the F. verticillioides isolates carried the MAT-1 and 30% MAT-2. 
A significant correlation was observed between the expression of the genes and
toxin production r = 0.95 and r = 0.79 (correlation of FUM1 with FB(1) and FB(2),
respectively, P < 0.0001); r = 0.93 and r = 0.78 (correlation of FUM19 with FB(1)
and FB(2), respectively, P < 0.0001). Molecular methods used in this study were
found to be useful for the rapid identification of Fusarium species. The high and
significant correlation between FUM1 and FUM19 expression and fumonisins
production suggests that real time RT-PCR is suitable for studies considering the
influence of abiotic and biotic factors on expression of these genes. This is the
first report concerning the expression of fumonisin biosynthetic genes in
Fusarium strains isolated from Brazilian agricultural commodity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21145611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Curr Biol. 2010 Dec 21;20(24):2199-206. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.11.038. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

Acute induction of Eya3 by late-night light stimulation triggers TSHß expression 
in photoperiodism.

Masumoto KH(1), Ukai-Tadenuma M, Kasukawa T, Nagano M, Uno KD, Tsujino K,
Horikawa K, Shigeyoshi Y, Ueda HR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Systems Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3 
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2011 Jan 11;21(1):R22-5.

Living organisms detect seasonal changes in day length (photoperiod) [1-3] and
alter their physiological functions accordingly to fit seasonal environmental
changes. TSHß, induced in the pars tuberalis (PT), plays a key role in the
pathway that regulates vertebrate photoperiodism [4, 5]. However, the upstream
inducers of TSHß expression remain unknown. Here we performed genome-wide
expression analysis of the PT under chronic short-day and long-day conditions in 
melatonin-proficient CBA/N mice, in which the photoperiodic TSHß expression
response is preserved [6]. This analysis identified "short-day" and "long-day"
genes, including TSHß, and further predicted the acute induction of long-day
genes by late-night light stimulation. We verified this by advancing and
extending the light period by 8 hr, which induced TSHß expression within one day.
In the following genome-wide expression analysis under this acute long-day
condition, we searched for candidate upstream genes by looking for expression
that preceded TSHß's, and we identified the Eya3 gene. We demonstrated that Eya3 
and its partner Six1 synergistically activate TSHß expression and that this
activation is further enhanced by Tef and Hlf. These results elucidate the
comprehensive transcriptional photoperiodic response in the PT, revealing the
complex regulation of TSHß expression and unexpectedly rapid response to light
changes in the mammalian photoperiodic system.

PMID: 21129973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Curr Biol. 2010 Dec 21;20(24):2193-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2010.10.048. Epub 2010
Dec 2.

A molecular switch for photoperiod responsiveness in mammals.

Dardente H(1), Wyse CA, Birnie MJ, Dupré SM, Loudon AS, Lincoln GA, Hazlerigg DG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological and Environmental Sciences, Zoology Building,
Tillydrone Avenue, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 2TZ, UK.
h.dardente@abdn.ac.uk

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2011 Jan 11;21(1):R22-5.

Seasonal synchronization based on day length (photoperiod) allows organisms to
anticipate environmental change. Photoperiodic decoding relies on circadian
clocks, but the underlying molecular pathways have remained elusive [1]. In
mammals and birds, photoperiodic responses depend crucially on expression of
thyrotrophin ß subunit RNA (TSHß) in the pars tuberalis (PT) of the pituitary
gland [2-4]. Now, using our well-characterized Soay sheep model [2], we describe 
a molecular switch governing TSHß transcription through the circadian clock.
Central to this is a conserved D element in the TSHß promoter, controlled by the 
circadian transcription factor thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef). In the PT,
long-day exposure rapidly induces expression of the coactivator eyes absent 3
(Eya3), which synergizes with Tef to maximize TSHß transcription. The pineal
hormone melatonin, secreted nocturnally, sets the phase of rhythmic Eya3
expression in the PT to peak 12 hr after nightfall. Additionally, nocturnal
melatonin levels directly suppress Eya3 expression. Together, these effects form 
a switch triggering a strong morning peak of Eya3 expression under long days.
Species variability in the TSHß D element influences sensitivity to TEF,
reflecting species variability in photoperiodic responsiveness. Our findings
define a molecular pathway linking the circadian clock to the evolution of
seasonal timing in mammals.

PMID: 21129971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Pediatr Surg. 2010 Dec;45(12):2351-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2010.08.030.

Tracheoesophageal fistula after primary repair of type C esophageal atresia in
the neonatal period: recurrent or missed second congenital fistula.

Guo W(1), Li Y, Jiao A, Peng Y, Hou D, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beijing Children's Hospital affiliated to Capital
University of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100045, People's Republic of China.
guo_weihong@163.com

PURPOSE: The aim of the study is to investigate whether a tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) found after the primary repair of type C esophageal atresia (EA) is
a recannulation of the original fistula, a missed proximal fistula, or other rare
foregut malformation.
METHODS: Between 2000 and 2009, 143 different types of patients with EA were
admitted in our hospital. Seven patients (2 from our series, 5 referred to us by 
other hospitals with the history of primary repair of type C EA) had late
presenting TEF. Esophagogram, 3-dimensional computed tomographic (CT)
reconstruction, bronchoscopy, and reoperation were performed to confirm the TEF. 
Their medical records were reviewed and summarized.
RESULTS: Persistent feeding or respiratory problems were the common symptom. The 
mean age of the first appearance was 17 ± 26 (1-63) months. Preoperative
diagnosis was made by esophagograms and bronchoscopy in 6 patients. Reoperations 
were performed in all patients through thoracotomy. Missed proximal TEF shown as 
a distinct fistula above the primary anastomosis without much adhesion was
confirmed in 5 cases. A recurrent TEF was found in 1 case. A case of
communicating bronchopulmonary foregut malformation was confirmed by
3-dimensional CT reconstruction and reoperation.
CONCLUSION: A missed proximal TEF after repair of EA may be misdiagnosed as a
recurrent TEF. Accurate preoperative diagnosis depends on combined evaluations of
radiologic contrast study, 3-dimensional CT, and bronchoscopy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21129543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Rozhl Chir. 2010 Aug;89(8):478-89.

[Possibilities and results of surgical treatment of benign tracheoesophageal
fistula].

[Article in Slovak]

Krajc T(1), Janík M, Lucenic M, Benej R, Harustiak S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika hrudníkovej chirurgie SZU a FNsP Bratislava, Slovenská republika.
tiborkrajc@gmail.com

AIM: Review of literature and a single-institution retrospective analysis of
possibilities and results of various surgical techniques in treatment of benign
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Between 1995 and 2010, 26 patients with benign
tracheoesophageal fistula of various etiology underwent surgical treatment at the
Department of Thoracic Surgery of Slovak Medical University and Faculty Hospital 
in Bratislava. The majority of patients had a postintubation TEF (21 cases), two 
fistulas were of traumatic origin, one iatrogenic, one congenital with adulthood 
manifestation and one tracheo-neoesophageal (TNEF) following an esophagectomy for
carcinoma via extended cervical approach with lymphadenectomy and sternal
retraction adpoted from transcervical extended mediastinal lymphadenectomy. We
review the possible means of surgical treatment of TEF, of which we most
frequently used segmental tracheal resection with end-to-end anastomosis and a
non-overlying suture of the esophageal defect without muscle flap interposition
(16 patients), transsection of the fistula with muscular flap interposition via
cervical (2 patients) or transthoracic (1 patient) approach; or a T-tube
insertion with (1 patient) or without (5 patients) discision and suture of the
TEF. The only tracheo-neoesophageal fistula in our experience had been treated by
neoesophagectomy, covering of tracheal defect by intercostal muscle flap and
cervical esophagostomy.
RESULTS: Short- and long-term results of TEF treatment in our institution have
been favourable, with perioperative mortality of 3.8% (the patient with
tracheo-neoesophageal fistula). Morbidity included 1 partial tracheal anastomotic
dehiscence, 3 temporary left recurrent nerve palsies, temporary deglutition
disorders (15 patients), tracheal anastomosis granulations in 1 patient and 2
wound infections. Out of 26 patients 15 (58%) are being followed-up on a regular 
basis, all with good (12 patients) or satisfactory (3 patients) functional
results.
CONCLUSION: In the paper we analyze the advantages and disadvantages of various
techniques and their alternatives in the treatment of TEF. As the most reliable
and suitable solution for patients with postintubation TEF, breathing
spontaneously and with acceptable nutritional status, we favour segmental trachea
resection with end-to-end anastomosis and esophageal suture without muscle
interposition, regardless of presence of concomitant tracheal stenosis. Fistulae 
of other etiologies require diverse approaches, especially tailored with respect 
to their location. Management of tracheo-neoesophageal fistula following
esophagectomy for carcinoma is extremely demanding. Therefore, it is crucial to
adhere to basic rules of prevention of such benign but potentially fatal entities
as TEF and TNEF.

PMID: 21121142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2010 Sep;50(9):1172-9.

[Effect of acetyl-CoA synthase gene overexpression on physiological function of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen F(1), Zhou J, Shi Z, Liu L, Du G, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Jiangnan University,
China. chenfujiang123@163.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our work is to investigate the effects of overexpression of
two acetyl-CoA synthase genes, ACS1 and ACS2, on the physiological functions of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
METHODS: We overexpressed ACS1 and ACS2 in S. cerevisiae CEN. PK2 with shuttle
vector pY26-TEF-GPD. We determined and compared the physiological parameters of
the parent strain to the ACS1/2 overexpressed strains, including the
intracellular acetyl-CoA content, ATP content, mevalonate pathway, and the
tolerance to ethanol stress.
RESULTS: Compared to the parent strain, the overexpression of ACS1 and ACS2 led
to: (1) The intracellular acetyl-CoA content increased by 2. 19-fold (ACS1) and
5.02-fold (ACS2), respectively; (2) The intracellular ATP content increased by
3.92-fold (ACS1) and 2.05-fold (ACS2), respectively; (3) The transcription levels
of the seven key genes in mevalonate pathway were upregulated, therefore, more
carbon flux was channeled into the mevalonate pathway, which could provide
precursor for terpenes synthesis; (4) The tolerance to high content of ethanol
was enhanced, especially for the ACS1 overexpression strain.
CONCLUSION: The results presented here demonstrated that the overexpression of
acetyl-CoA synthase can enhance the carbon flux into mevalonate pathway and
improve the tolerance of S. cerevisiae to high content of ethanol, which is the
main byproduct of the fermentation process with the yeast.

PMID: 21090257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Food Microbiol. 2010 Dec 15;144(2):301-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.10.013. Epub 2010 Oct 21.

The CYP51C gene, a reliable marker to resolve interspecific phylogenetic
relationships within the Fusarium species complex and a novel target for
species-specific PCR.

Fernández-Ortuño D(1), Loza-Reyes E, Atkins SL, Fraaije BA.

Author information: 
(1)Fungicide Research Group, Centre for Sustainable Pest and Disease Management, 
Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden,
Hertfordshire AL5 2JQ, United Kingdom. lola.fernandez-ortuno@bbsrc.ac.uk

Early diagnosis and control of different Fusarium species is essential for
successful management of plant disease and subsequent prevention of toxins
entering the food chain. This issue can be addressed using phylogenetic analyses 
and other molecular techniques, including the design of species-specific primers 
and corresponding PCR assays. In practice, only a few genes are sequenced for
most species and insights into the evolutionary mechanisms at the species level
usually stem from phylogenetic analyses of only one or a small number of genetic 
loci. This poses the question of whether the recovered tree accurately reflects
the relationships among species or rather more local interrelationships
particular to the genetic marker employed. This study examined if the
Fusarium-specific CYP51C gene can be used to establish evolutionary relationships
between Fusarium species and enable species-specific detection. The resolving
power of the CYP51C gene was studied for 46 Fusarium isolates representing 18
different species. The resulting phylogeny analysis showed clear and
well-structured separation of the isolates according to their species rank,
synthesised toxin and Fusarium section. Moreover, a comparison between the
individual CYP51C phylogeny and a reference tree (inferred from the concatenation
of ITS, CYP51C, ß-tubulin and TEF-1a sequences) indicated superior resolution of 
CYP51C relative to ITS and ß-tubulin sequences. In addition to its suitability as
a reliable marker for diagnosis of different toxigenic Fusarium species, we also 
show that the CYP51C gene is a promising target for development of
species-specific PCR. This was demonstrated by the specific detection of Fusarium
cerealis in grain samples of wheat.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21071105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Ayub Med Coll Abbottabad. 2009 Oct-Dec;21(4):129-33.

Factors affecting survival in patients with oesophageal atresia and
tracheo-oesophageal fistula.

Anwar-ul-Haq(1), Ubaidullah, Akhter N, Samiullah, Javeria, Jan IA, Abbasi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, The Children Hospital, Pakistan Institute of
Medical Sciences (PIMS), Islamabad. drahaq@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the various factors affecting survival in babies with
oesophageal atresia and tracheo-oesophageal fistula.
DESIGN: Descriptive study.
SETTING: The study was carried out at the Department of Paediatric Surgery, The
Children's Hospital, Pakistan Institute of Medical Sciences (PIMS), Islamabad
from March 2004 to March 2005.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All neonates with oesophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) during the study period were included in the
study. Patients having isolated EA were excluded. A total of 80 patients were
included in the study. Patients were received from the emergency department, OPD 
and Neonatal ICU. Diagnosis was confirmed by passing a radio opaque orogastric
tube. Investigations were done to look for other associations. After
stabilisation, right thoracotomy was performed, fistula was ligated and divided. 
An attempt was made to do a primary oesophago-oesopahgostomy. Nasogastric feeding
was started on 2nd post-operative day. A contrast oesophagogram was performed on 
the 7th postoperative day and having ruled out leak, oral feeding was started.
RESULTS: Out of the total, 33 (41%) survived and 47 (58%) patients died. Out of
47 deaths 20 (25%) died before surgery and 27 (34%) died after surgery. Mean
follow up period was 6 months. Sixteen (20%) patients had anastomotic leak, 24
(30%) had anastomotic stricture, and 64 (80%) patients had postoperative
pneumonia.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that proper antenatal check ups will detect the problem
early, avoid home deliveries and hence improve survival. Pneumonitis and
septicaemia significantly affect survival. Availability of ICU is one of the main
determinants of survival. The likely cause of high mortality rate in
pre-operative patients in our series is non-availability ofNICU due to limited
space in our setup.

PMID: 21067045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Br J Cancer. 2010 Dec 7;103(12):1808-14. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605981. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

BH3-only protein Bik is involved in both apoptosis induction and sensitivity to
oxidative stress in multiple myeloma.

Bodet L(1), Ménoret E, Descamps G, Pellat-Deceunynck C, Bataille R, Le Gouill S, 
Moreau P, Amiot M, Gomez-Bougie P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Thérapeutique de l'Université de Nantes, Equipe 10
labellisée Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer 2008, 8 quai Moncousu, Nantes BP70721
F-44007, France.

BACKGROUND: although gene expression profile of multiple myeloma (MM) patients
shows a wide range of Bik/Nbk expression, varying from absent to high, its
regulation and function in myeloma cells is poorly understood. Thus, we addressed
these questions in MM.
METHODS: human myeloma cell lines (HMCLs) and primary purified myeloma cells were
studied for Bcl-2 family protein expression by western blot and further
correlation analysis was performed. Correlative study between Bik and thyrotroph 
embryonic factor (TEF) transcription factor expression was analysed by PCR.
Stress oxidative response was analysed by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: a strong expression of Bik protein was found only in one out of three of
HMCL and correlated to Bcl-2 expression (P=0.0006). We demonstrated that Bik
could be regulated at the protein level by Bcl-2 and at the transcriptional level
by TEF. Bik overexpression sensitises myeloma cells to oxidative stress whereas
Bik silencing increases resistance to H(2)O(2) oxidative stress. Furthermore, Bik
ectopic expression disrupts Bim/Bcl-2 and Bim/Bcl-xL endogenous complexes
triggering Bim release that could induce Bax and Bak activation.
CONCLUSIONS: ours results suggest that Bik has a role in both, apoptosis
induction and sensitivity to oxidative stress in myeloma cells. Small BH3 mimetic
molecules should be considered for further apoptosis-based therapy in myeloma
cells expressing endogenous Bik/Bcl-2 complexes.

2010 Cancer Resaerch UK.

PMCID: PMC3008608
PMID: 21063407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Ecol. 2010 Dec;19(23):5216-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04863.x. Epub
2010 Nov 2.

Phylogenetic species delimitation in ectomycorrhizal fungi and implications for
barcoding: the case of the Tricholoma scalpturatum complex (Basidiomycota).

Jargeat P(1), Martos F, Carriconde F, Gryta H, Moreau PA, Gardes M.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, UMR5174 EDB (Laboratoire Evolution et Diversité
Biologique); 118 route de Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse, France. jargeat@cict.fr

Population studies have revealed that the fungal ectomycorrhizal morphospecies
Tricholoma scalpturatum consists of at least two genetically distinct groups that
occur sympatrically in several geographical areas. This discovery prompted us to 
examine species boundaries and relationships between members formerly assigned to
T. scalpturatum and allied taxa using phylogenetic analyses. Sequence data were
obtained from three nuclear DNA regions [internal transcribed spacer (ITS), gpd
and tef], from 101 carpophores collected over a large geographical range in
Western Europe, and some reference sequences from public databases. The ITS was
also tested for its applicability as DNA barcode for species delimitation. Four
highly supported phylogenetic clades were detected. The two previously detected
genetic groups of T. scalpturatum were assigned to the phylospecies Tricholoma
argyraceum and T. scalpturatum. The two remaining clades were referred to as
Tricholoma cingulatum and Tricholoma inocybeoides. Unexpectedly, T. cingulatum
showed an accelerated rate of evolution that we attributed to narrow host
specialization. This study also reveals recombinant ITS sequences in
T. inocybeoides, suggesting a hybrid origin. The ITS was a useful tool for the
determination of species boundaries: the mean value of intraspecific genetic
distances in the entire ITS region (including 5.8S rDNA) was <0.2%, whereas
interspecific divergence estimates ranged from 1.78% to 4.22%. Apart from giving 
insights into the evolution of the T. scalpturatum complex, this study
contributes to the establishment of a library of taxonomically verified voucher
specimens, an a posteriori correlation between phenotype and genotype, and DNA
barcoding of ectomycorrhizal fungi.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21044190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Joint Bone Spine. 2011 May;78(3):291-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.09.008. Epub
2010 Oct 23.

Evaluation of the posture and muscular strength of the trunk and inferior members
of patients with chronic lumbar pain.

Yahia A(1), Jribi S, Ghroubi S, Elleuch M, Baklouti S, Habib Elleuch M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Functional Rehabilitation, University of
the South, Habib Bourguiba University Hospital, El Ain Road, 3029 Sfax, Tunisia.

OBJECTIVE: We examine the postural profile and muscular forces of the trunk and
inferior members of patients with chronic low back pain.
METHODS: In this study, we include 60 subjects forming two groups: a first group 
(G1) of 30 patients with chronic low back pain and a second group (G2) of 30
healthy subjects. Every subject profited from an isokinetic evaluation of the
muscular forces of the trunk (at 60 and 90°.s(-1)) and knees (at 60 and
120°.s(-1)) and of a postural evaluation. The isokinetic evaluation was carried
out using Cybex(®) Norm II dynamometer with its Trunk Extension/Flexion (TEF)
module set in concentric mode. The parameter under study was the torque peak. The
postural evaluation was accomplished using the platform SATEL for the balance
analysis associated with four conditions: static on stable plan open eyes (OE)
then closed eyes (CE) and static on unstable plan OE then CE. The parameters
under study were the averages of the total lengths, total surfaces, and the X and
Y means.
RESULTS: The averages of the torque peaks of the trunk flexor and extensor
muscles at the speeds of 60 and 90°.s(-1) were inferior in group G1 as compared
to G2. The differences were statistically insignificant only for the extensor
muscles (p<0.005). The averages of the torque peaks of the knee flexors and
extensors at 60 and 120°.s(-1) were the lowest in group G1. The differences were 
significant (p<0.05). The averages of postural parameters were more important in 
group G1, indicating a postural deficit in this group.
CONCLUSION: We showed deficits of the posture and muscles of the trunk and knees 
of patients with chronic lumbar pain. The muscular deficit of the trunk
predominates on extensors.

Copyright © 2010 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 20971670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2011 Apr;46(4):348-55. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21369. Epub 2010 Oct
21.

Pulmonary function impairment after trachea-esophageal fistula: a minor role for 
gastro-esophageal reflux disease.

Peetsold MG(1), Heij HA, Nagelkerke AF, Deurloo JA, Gemke RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Long-term impairment of pulmonary function in trachea-esophageal
fistula (TEF) patients is, at least in part, commonly ascribed to
gastro-esophageal reflux disease (GERD). The objective of this study was to
examine the independent effects of the underlying condition and GERD on
cardiopulmonary function.
METHODS: Cardiopulmonary function of TEF patients, who had (severe) GERD (s-GERD)
requiring antireflux surgery (TEF<U+2009>+<U+2009>GERD, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>11) and TEF patients who did not
have s-GERD (group TEF-GERD, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>20) were compared with control patients who had 
isolated s-GERD requiring antireflux surgery (group GERD, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>13). All patients
performed spirometry, lung volume measurements, measurement of diffusion capacity
and maximal cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET).
RESULTS: Mean age of the participants was 13.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.7 (group TEF<U+2009>+<U+2009>GERD).
13.2<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.9 (group TEF-GERD), and 14.7<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.5 years (group GERD). FVC and TLC were 
significantly lower in patients with TEF (with and without s-GERD) when compared 
to patients with isolated s-GERD. Most pulmonary function parameters were
similarly affected in both TEF groups, but FEV(1) was lower in the TEF<U+2009>+<U+2009>GERD
group than in the TEF-GERD group. Cardiopulmonary exercise parameters were
similar in all groups.
CONCLUSIONS: TEF patients had restrictive lung function impairment when compared 
to patients with isolated s-GERD. This difference may be due to several causes,
including thoracotomy. FEV(1) was lower in TEF<U+2009>+<U+2009>GERD when compared to TEF-GERD
indicating that GERD may affect large airway function in TEF patients. Other
differences between TEF patients with and without s-GERD were not significant,
suggesting only a minor role for GERD.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20967841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Fungal Biol. 2010 Jan;114(1):74-81. doi: 10.1016/j.mycres.2009.10.008. Epub 2009 
Nov 10.

A molecular based strategy for rapid diagnosis of toxigenic Fusarium species
associated to cereal grains from Argentina.

Sampietro DA(1), Marín P, Iglesias J, Presello DA, Vattuone MA, Catalan CA,
Gonzalez Jaen MT.

Author information: 
(1)INQUINOA - CONICET, Facultad de Bioquímica, Química y Farmacia, Universidad
Nacional de Tucumán, España 2903, T4000INI San Miguel de Tucumán, Argentina.
dasampietro2006@yahoo.com.ar

Fusarium species are worldwide causal agents of ear rot in cereals. Their
toxigenic potential is a health risk for both humans and animals. In Argentina,
most identification of these fungi has been based on morphological and
cross-fertility criteria which are time consuming and require considerable
expertise in Fusarium taxonomy and physiology. DNA based approaches have been
reported as rapid, sensitive and specific alternatives to identify the main
fumonisin and trichothecene-producing Fusarium species. In this work, we used PCR
assays and the partial sequence of TEF1-alpha gene (Translation Elongation
Factor-1 alpha) to identify the fumonisin and trichothecene-producing species in 
Fusarium isolates from diverse regions of Argentina. The relative efficiency and 
reliability of those methods to improve mycotoxin risk prediction in this country
were also assessed. Species-specific PCR assays were targeted toward multicopy
IGS (Intergenic Spacer of rDNA units) and on the toxin biosynthetic genes FUM1
(fumonisins) and TRI13 and TRI7 genes (trichothecenes). PCR assays based on FUM1 
gene and IGS sequences allowed detection and discrimination of the fumonisin
producers Fusarium proliferatum and Fusarium verticillioides. Molecular
identification of nonfumonisin producers from Gibberella fujikuroi species
complex was possible after determination of TEF1-alplha gene sequences, which
indicated the presence of Fusarium subglutinans, Fusarium andiyazi and Fusarium
thapsinum. TEF-1 alpha gene sequences also allowed discrimination of the
different species of the Fusarium graminearum complex (F. graminearum sensu lato)
as F. graminearum sensu stricto, Fusarium meridionale and Fusarium boothii. The
last two species belonged to NIV chemotype and were detected for the first time
in the subtropical region of Argentina while F. graminearum sensu stricto was DON
producer only, which was also confirmed by specific PCR assays based on
TRI137/TRI7 genes. Our results indicated that the PCR assays evaluated in this
work are reliable diagnostic tools to detect the main toxigenic Fusarium species 
associated to cereal grains in Argentina. An extensive epidemiological survey
based on the approach presented in this work is currently in progress to know the
mycotoxigenic hazard of Fusarium species in cereal grains from the subtropical
region of Argentina.

Copyright © 2009 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 20965064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Masui. 2010 Oct;59(10):1234-40.

[Comparison of thoracoscopic and open repair of esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsunari Y(1), Kinouchi K, Ono R, Haruna J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Osaka Medical Center and Research
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi 594-1101.

BACKGROUND: With the increasing use of endoscopic surgery in children, several
papers report the comparison between the thoracoscopic and open repair of the
neonatal esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). Most of them
focus on the duration and outcome of the surgery with few focusing on the
neonatal tolerance to the thoracoscopic procedure and intraoperative anesthetic
management.
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed the repair surgery of EA/TEF performed
during 2001 and 2006 in our institution and compared thoracoscopic repair
(thoracoscopy group, n=5) with open repair (open group, n=7). The right main
bronchus was blocked with Fogarty catheter in thoracoscopic repair, but not in
open repair. Thoracoscopic repair was performed with insufflation of carbon
dioxide (3-5 mmHg).
RESULTS: The thoracoscopy group had a higher incidence of intraoperative
hypercapnia and acidosis and required higher inspired oxygen fraction. On
admission to ICU Pa(CO2) was in the normal range in both groups and there was no 
difference in the duration of mechanical ventilation and ICU stay.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypercapnia and acidosis were severer in thoracoscopy group. Careful
perioperative adjustment of inspired oxygen fraction and ventilator setting is
required.

PMID: 20960892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2011 Jan;21(1):25-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1262861. Epub 2010
Oct 15.

What is the incidence of Barrett's and gastric metaplasia in esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) patients?

Burjonrappa SC(1), Youssef S, St-Vil D.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College, Pediatric Surgery, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.
sathyabc@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: Aim of the study was to document the incidence of gastric and
intestinal metaplasia (Barrett's esophagus) in a closely followed group with
EA/TEF, determine the efficacy of pH probe studies in diagnosing reflux and,
moreover, to determine the lag period between the development of gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD) and metaplasia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients who underwent EA/TEF correction were followed up 
over an 18-year period (1990-2009) with regular pH probe and endoscopy
investigations. Biopsies were performed at 3 year intervals to evaluate for
metaplastic changes in the esophageal epithelium. The interval between esophageal
atresia correction and the development of erosive esophagitis, gastric metaplasia
and Barrett's esophagus was determined. The development of complicated GERD was
statistically correlated to age at detection.
RESULTS: 51 patients (28 male) underwent EA/TEF correction during the study
period. The ages of the children followed up ranged from 7 months to 19 years.
There were 5 Type A, 44 Type C and 2 Type D fistulas. 37 patients (5 Type A, 31
Type C, 1 Type D) had documented reflux and 14 did not. 17 (46%) of the patients 
with reflux underwent an anti-reflux operation. 4 of the 17 underwent 2 or more
anti-reflux procedures. 21 patients had pH probe studies positive for reflux, 3
had negative pH probe studies after an anti-reflux operation. 18 of the 37
patients with reflux (about 50%) needed esophageal dilatation for either
anastamotic or non-anastamotic strictures. Only 4/14 (28.5%) patients without
reflux underwent dilatations and only in their first year of life (p=NS). 15
patients had mucosal abnormalities in endoscopic biopsies. 8 patients had gastric
metaplasia and 1 patient had Barrett's esophagus. The mean age in the group with 
metaplasia (gastric and intestinal) was 13 years, which was significantly
different from the mean age of the group (5.2 years) without mucosal changes
(p<0.001). 2 patients with normal pH probe studies had metaplasia on biopsies.
CONCLUSION: Metaplasia arises in about 15% of patients with EA/TEF. The lag time 
to developing metaplasia from the time of initial surgical correction is about 10
years. Endoscopy and biopsies are the best way of detecting mucosal changes.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 20954108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mycologia. 2010 Nov-Dec;102(6):1479-96. doi: 10.3852/10-002. Epub 2010 May 26.

Systematics of genus Gnomoniopsis (Gnomoniaceae, Diaporthales) based on a three
gene phylogeny, host associations and morphology.

Walker DM(1), Castlebury LA, Rossman AY, Sogonov MV, White JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology and Pathology, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, 
New Jersey 08901, USA. dowalker@eden.rutgers.edu

Species of Gnomoniopsis are leaf- and stem-inhabiting pyrenomycetes that infect
plants in Fagaceae, Onagraceae and Rosaceae. Morphology and analyses of DNA
sequences from three ribosomal DNA and protein coding regions, namely ß-tubulin, 
translation elongation factor 1a (tef-1a) and the ITS region including ITS1, 5.8S
rDNA and ITS2, were used to define species in Gnomoniopsis. Secondary structural 
alignment of the ITS region across four genera in Gnomoniaceae was used to
increase the potential number of homologous positions in the ITS alignment.
Ascospore isolates were grown from newly collected specimens. Type specimens were
compared with these specimens to determine their identity. In this paper a recent
concept of Gnomoniopsis is confirmed with phylogenetic resolution of additional
species. Four new combinations and one new species are proposed. Nine species are
described and illustrated, and a key is provided to the 13 species currently
recognized in Gnomoniopsis.

PMID: 20943552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Fungal Biol. 2010 Sep;114(9):753-65. doi: 10.1016/j.funbio.2010.07.001. Epub 2010
Jul 15.

Fusarium culmorum is a single phylogenetic species based on multilocus sequence
analysis.

Obanor F(1), Erginbas-Orakci G, Tunali B, Nicol JM, Chakraborty S.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, 306 Carmody Road, St Lucia, Queensland 4067, Australia. 
Friday.obanor@csiro.au

Fusarium culmorum is a major pathogen of wheat and barley causing head blight and
crown rot in cooler temperate climates of Australia, Europe, West Asia and North 
Africa. To better understand its evolutionary history we partially sequenced
single copy nuclear genes encoding translation elongation factor 1-a (TEF),
reductase (RED) and phosphate permease (PHO) in 100 F. culmorum isolates with 11 
isolates of Fusarium crookwellense, Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium
pseudograminearum. Phylogenetic analysis of multilocus sequence (MLS) data using 
Bayesian inference and maximum parsimony analysis showed that F. culmorum from
wheat is a single phylogenetic species with no significant linkage disequilibrium
and little or no lineage development along geographic origin. Both MLS and TEF
and RED gene sequence analysis separated the four Fusarium species used and
delineated three to four groups within the F. culmorum clade. But the PHO gene
could not completely resolve isolates into their respective species. Fixation
index and gene flow suggest significant genetic exchange between the isolates
from distant geographic regions. A lack of strong lineage structure despite the
geographic separation of the three collections indicates a frequently recombining
species and/or widespread distribution of genotypes due to international trade,
tourism and long-range dispersal of macroconidia. Moreover, the two mating type
genes were present in equal proportion among the F. culmorum collection used in
this study, leaving open the possibility of sexual reproduction.

Copyright © 2010 The British Mycological Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 20943185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Environ Sci Health B. 2010 Nov;45(8):773-9. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2010.515166.

Effects of biosurfactants on assays of PCB congeners in transgenic arabidopsis
plants carrying a recombinant guinea pig AhR-mediated GUS reporter gene
expression system.

Shimazu S(1), Ohta M, Inui H, Nanasato Y, Ashida H, Ohkawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Green Science, Fukuyama University, Hiroshima, Japan.

The transgenic Arabidopsis plants carrying a recombinant guinea pig (g) aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated ß-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter gene
expression system were generated for assays of polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
congeners. The selected transgenic Arabidopsis plant XgD2V11-6 exhibited a
correlation between uptake of PCB126 and PCB126-induced GUS activity. Also, the
plants showed induced GUS activity towards the supplemental indole 3-acetic acid 
(IAA). Thus, the GUS assay may reflect induction by both endogenous and exogenous
AhR ligands. When biosurfactants, MEL-B, produced in the culture of yeast
isolated from plants were used for assays of PCB congeners in the transgenic
Arabidopsis plants, they showed marked PCB126 dose-dependent and toxic
equivalency factor (TEF) dependent GUS activities. The effects of biosurfactants 
were clearer when the plants were cultivated on soils containing PCB congeners
for 7 days as compared with on soils for 3 days as well as in the medium for 3
days. Therefore, it was estimated that biosurfactants form micellae with PCB
congeners, which are easily uptaken by the plants in a mode of passive diffusion,
transport into the aerial parts and then induce GUS activity.

PMID: 20936563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Environ Sci Health B. 2010 Nov;45(8):741-9. doi: 10.1080/03601234.2010.515164.

Recombinant human AhR-mediated GUS reporter gene assays for PCB congeners in
transgenic tobacco plants in comparison with recombinant mouse and guinea pig
AhRs.

Shimazu S(1), Kawabata Y, Inayoshi A, Inui H, Ashida H, Ohkawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Green Science, Fukuyama University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Four expression plasmids for recombinant human aryl hydrocarbon receptor (hAhR)
consisting of a ligand binding domain of hAhR, a DNA-binding domain of LexA and a
transactivation domain of VP16 as well as ß-glucuronidase (GUS) reporter genes
were constructed. All the expression plasmids were transformed into tobacco
plants. The selected transgenic tobacco plants were used to assay. PCB congeners 
showed GUS activity in a TEF-dependent manner. The selected transgenic tobacco
plant XhD4V17 was compared with the transgenic tobacco plants XmD4V26 and XgD2V23
containing recombinant mouse (m) AhR-mediated GUS reporter gene expression
cassette and recombinant guinea pig (g) AhR-mediated GUS reporter gene expression
cassette for PCB congener-inducible GUS activity. The data revealed that the
tobacco plant XgD2V23 was the most active in PCB congener-inducible GUS activity.
In a 1:1 mixture of PCB126 and PCB80 a reduced PCB126-induced GUS activity was
observed in plant XgD2V23, which could possibly be due to interaction between
PCB126 and PCB80.

PMID: 20936562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Food Microbiol. 2010 Nov 15;144(1):72-80. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.08.013. Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Molecular and physiological characteristics of a grape yeast strain containing
atypical genetic material.

Cappello MS(1), Poltronieri P, Blaiotta G, Zacheo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agrofood, Institute of Sciences of Food Productions, CNR,
Prov.le Lecce-Monteroni, km. 7, 73100 Lecce, Italy.
maristella.cappello@ispa.cnr.it

The knowledge about wine yeasts remains largely dominated by the extensive
studies on Saccharomyces (S.) cerevisiae. Molecular methods, allowing
discrimination of both species and strains in winemaking, can profitably be
applied for characterization of the microflora occurring in winemaking and for
monitoring the fermentation process. Recently, some novel yeast isolates have
been described as hybrid between S. cerevisiae and Saccharomyces species, leaving
the Saccharomyces strains containing non-Saccharomyces hybrids essentially
unexplored. In this study, we have analyzed a yeast strain isolated from
"Primitivo" grape (http://www.ispa.cnr.it/index.php?page=collezioni&lang=en
accession number 12998) and we found that, in addition to the S. cerevisiae
genome, it has acquired genetic material from a non-Saccharomyces species. The
study was focused on the analysis of chromosomal and mitochondrial gene sequences
(ITS and 26S rRNA, SSU and COXII, ACTIN-1 and TEF), 2D-PAGE mitochondrial
proteins, and spore viability. The results allowed us to formulate the hypothesis
that in the MSH199 isolate a DNA containing an rDNA sequence from Hanseniaspora
vineae, a non-Saccharomyces yeast, was incorporated through homologous
recombination in the grape environment where yeast species are propagated.
Moreover, physiological characterization showed that the MSH199 isolate possesses
high technological quality traits (fermentation performance) and glycerol
production, resistance to ethanol, SO2 and temperature) useful for industrial
application.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20880601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 7;5(9):e12542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012542.

Thyrotroph embryonic factor regulates light-induced transcription of repair genes
in zebrafish embryonic cells.

Gavriouchkina D(1), Fischer S, Ivacevic T, Stolte J, Benes V, Dekens MP.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Core Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Federal
Republic of Germany.

Numerous responses are triggered by light in the cell. How the light signal is
detected and transduced into a cellular response is still an enigma. Each
zebrafish cell has the capacity to directly detect light, making this organism
particularly suitable for the study of light dependent transcription. To gain
insight into the light signalling mechanism we identified genes that are
activated by light exposure at an early embryonic stage, when specialised light
sensing organs have not yet formed. We screened over 14,900 genes using
micro-array GeneChips, and identified 19 light-induced genes that function
primarily in light signalling, stress response, and DNA repair. Here we reveal
that PAR Response Elements are present in all promoters of the light-induced
genes, and demonstrate a pivotal role for the PAR bZip transcription factor
Thyrotroph embryonic factor (Tef) in regulating the majority of light-induced
genes. We show that tefbeta transcription is directly regulated by light while
transcription of tefalpha is under circadian clock control at later stages of
development. These data leads us to propose their involvement in light-induced UV
tolerance in the zebrafish embryo.

PMCID: PMC2935359
PMID: 20830285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Dec;118(2):704-15. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq262. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Analysis of the CYP1A1 mRNA dose-response in human keratinocytes indicates that
relative potencies of dioxins, furans, and PCBs are species and congener
specific.

Sutter CH(1), Bodreddigari S, Sutter TR, Carlson EA, Silkworth JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and W. Harry Feinstone Center for Genomic
Research, University of Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee 38152-3560, USA.
csutter@memphis.edu

Reports indicate that toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) based primarily on rodent 
data do not accurately predict in vitro human responsiveness to certain
dioxin-like chemicals (DLCs). To investigate this in cells responsive to dioxins 
and relevant to chloracne, normal human epidermal keratinocytes were treated with
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and several DLCs, each with a TEF
value of 0.1, representing three classes of congeners. We estimated half maximal 
effective concentration (EC50)-based donor-specific relative potency (REP) values
for cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) messenger RNA (mRNA) induction for TCDD,
1,2,3,6,7,8-hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HxCDD), 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran
(TCDF), 1,2,3,6,7,8-hexachlorodibenzofuran (HxCDF), and
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126). We also determined EC50-based
population-level REP values (n = 4) for CYP1A1 mRNA induction for TCDD, HxCDF,
and PCB 126. Furthermore, an alternative factor, the relative threshold factor
(RTF) based on the low end (threshold) of the dose-response curve, was
calculated. Our results demonstrated that HxCDF had a population-based REP value 
of 0.98, 9.8-fold higher than its assigned TEF value of 0.1. Conversely, PCB 126 
had an REP value of 0.0027 and an RTF of 0.0022, 37-fold and 45-fold less than
its assigned TEF of 0.1, respectively. The REP values for HxCDD and TCDF were
0.24 and 0.10, respectively, similar to their assigned value of 0.1. Therefore,
although the DLCs tested in the current study all possessed the same assigned TEF
value of 0.1, congener-specific differences in REPs and RTFs were observed for
human keratinocytes. These congener-specific discrepancies are likely because of 
differences in interspecies factors that have yet to be defined.

PMID: 20819910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Arch Med Sci. 2010 Aug 30;6(4):505-12. doi: 10.5114/aoms.2010.14460. Epub 2010
Sep 7.

Vitamin E reversed nicotine-induced toxic effects on bone biochemical markers in 
male rats.

Norazlina M(1), Hermizi H, Faizah O, Nazrun AS, Norliza M, Ima-Nirwana S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

INTRODUCTION: Vitamin E is beneficial in restoring bone histomorphometric
parameters in nicotine-treated rats. This study determined the effectiveness of 3
forms of vitamin E in restoring bone metabolism in nicotine-treated rats.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty-five male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into 5
groups: (1) control (C), (2) nicotine cessation (NC), (3) a-tocopherol (ATF), (4)
tocotrienol-enhanced fraction (TEF) and (5) <U+03B3>-tocotrienol (GTT). Treatment was
carried out for 4 months. The control group was administered normal saline and
olive oil throughout the treatment period while treatment for groups 2-5 was
performed in 2 phases. In the first phase, the groups received nicotine 7 mg/kg
intraperitoneally for 2 months. The following 2 months, group 2 received normal
saline and olive oil while groups 3-5 received ATF, TEF or GTT, 60 mg/kg orally. 
Pre-treatment and post-treatment serum was collected for bone biochemical marker 
measurement using the ELISA method.
RESULTS: Nicotine increased serum bone-resorbing cytokines (interleukin-1 and
interleukin-6) and the bone resorption marker pyridinoline (PYD) while reducing
the bone formation marker osteocalcin after 2 months of nicotine treatment. The
parameters failed to improve after nicotine was stopped for 2 months.
Supplementation with the 3 forms of vitamin E improved the parameters, i.e.
reduced the cytokines and pyridinoline as well as increased the osteocalcin. In
addition, the TEF and GTT groups had a higher level of osteocalcin than the
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Nicotine impaired bone metabolism and cessation of nicotine
treatment did not reverse the effects. Vitamin E, especially the tocotrienols,
restored bone metabolism that was impaired due to nicotine.

PMCID: PMC3284063
PMID: 22371792  [PubMed]


35. Ann Thorac Surg. 2010 Sep;90(3):914-8; discussion 919. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2010.05.061.

Surgical management of acquired nonmalignant tracheoesophageal and
bronchoesophageal fistulae.

Shen KR(1), Allen MS, Cassivi SD, Nichols FC 3rd, Wigle DA, Harmsen WS, Deschamps
C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Thoracic Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
USA. shen.krobert@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: Acquired nonmalignant fistulae between the airway and esophagus
(tracheoesophageal fistulae [TEF]) are rare life-threatening conditions. Several 
management approaches have been proposed, while the optimal strategy remains
controversial.
METHODS: This study is a retrospective review of all patients with TEF treated at
our institution from 1978 through 2007.
RESULTS: Thirty-five patients (22 men, 13 women) underwent surgical repair of
acquired nonmalignant TEF. Median age was 55 years (range, 5 to 78). Most common 
causes were the following: complications of esophageal surgery (11), trauma (6), 
granulomatous infection (5), stent erosion (4), and prolonged mechanical
ventilation (2). Location was proximal trachea in 7, mid-trachea in 5, and distal
trachea or bronchus in 23. Fifty-six operations were performed. Six patients had 
staged repair, with 1 patient requiring 4 operations for recurrent TEF. TEF
division and primary repair was performed in 18 patients, esophageal resection
with reconstruction in 4, and esophageal diversion in 6. Four patients had suture
closure of the esophageal or tracheal defect only, and 3 required segmental
tracheal or bronchial resection. Four patients were ventilator dependent at the
time of repair. Pedicled tissue flaps were used in 28 patients (80%). Operative
mortality was 5.7% (2 of 35). Nineteen patients (54.3%) had complications. Median
hospital stay was 14 days (range, 4 to 209). Median follow-up was 30.4 months
(range, 0.5 to 233) and complete in 34 (97.1%). Three patients (8.6%) developed
recurrent TEF. Twenty-nine patients resumed oral intake. One patient required a
permanent tracheal T tube.
CONCLUSIONS: Single-stage primary repair of both airway and esophageal defects
with tissue flap interposition can safely be performed successfully in the
majority of patients with acquired nonmalignant TEF.

2010 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20732517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2010 Aug;35(4):526-33. doi: 10.1139/H10-041.

Postprandial insulin sensitivity and thermogenesis in frail elderly women.

Goulet ED(1), Khursigara Z, Gougeon R, Morais JA.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Nutrition and Food Science Centre, McGill University Health
Center-Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, QC H3A 1A1, Canada.

The frailty syndrome is associated with inflammation, hypercortisolemia, and
cardiovascular diseases, all of which are linked with insulin resistance. But
whether frailty is characterized by insulin resistance is unclear, especially in 
the postprandial state. The prevalence of underweight with frailty is high. We
wondered whether hypermetabolism associated with inflammation and
hypercortisolemia could increase the thermic effect of food (TEF) and contribute 
to the frailty-associated body weight loss. In this study, we determined whether 
insulin sensitivity and TEF responses differ between frail and healthy elderly
persons following a meal. Ten healthy and 13 frail elderly women were recruited
and studied during the 5 h following the ingestion of a standardized liquid
mixed-meal test. Areas under the curve (AUC) for glucose and insulin, and the
product of AUC glucosexAUC insulinx10(-6) (PGI) were used as indices of insulin
sensitivity. TEF was measured by indirect calorimetry. Following the meal,
glucose and insulin AUCs and PGI were significantly higher in frail than in
healthy elderly women and, except for the insulin AUC; these differences remained
significant after adjustment for age, body weight, and physical activity.
Physical activity, determined by questionnaire, was the single best predictor of 
PGI, explaining 27% of its variance. There was no difference in TEF between
groups, and it did not correlate with any significant variable measured. Our
results suggest that postprandial insulin resistance is higher in frail than in
healthy elderly women, and TEF is similar, indicating that both processes do not 
contribute to the propensity for body weight loss.

PMID: 20725120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2011 Feb;19(2):298-304. doi: 10.1038/oby.2010.181. Epub 
2010 Aug 19.

Influence of short-term consumption of the caffeine-free,
epigallocatechin-3-gallate supplement, Teavigo, on resting metabolism and the
thermic effect of feeding.

Lonac MC(1), Richards JC, Schweder MM, Johnson TK, Bell C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Exercise Science, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.

Green tea is purported to promote weight loss. Resting metabolic rate (RMR) and
the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) are significant components of total daily
energy expenditure and are partially determined by the sympathetic nervous system
via catecholamine-mediated stimulation of ß-adrenergic receptors.
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG: the most bioactive catechin in green tea)
inhibits catechol-O-methyltransferase, an enzyme contributing to the degradation 
of catecholamines. Accordingly, we hypothesized that short-term consumption of a 
commercially available EGCG supplement (Teavigo) augments RMR and TEF. On two
separate occasions, seven placebo or seven EGCG capsules (135 mg/capsule) were
administered to 16 adults (9 males, 7 females, age 25 ± 2 years, BMI 24.6 ± 1.2
kg/m(2) (mean ± s.e.)). Capsules (three/day) were consumed over 48 h; the final
capsule was consumed 2 h prior to visiting the laboratory. Energy expenditure
(ventilated hood technique) was determined at rest and for 5 h following
ingestion of a liquid meal (caloric content: 40% RMR). Contrary to our
hypothesis, RMR was not greater (P = 0.10) following consumption of EGCG (6,740 ±
373 kJ/day) compared with placebo (6,971 ± 352). Similarly, the area under the
TEF response curve (<U+0394> energy expenditure) was also unaffected by EGCG (246,808 ± 
23,748 vs. 243,270 ± 22,177 kJ; P = 0.88). EGCG had no effect on respiratory
exchange ratio at rest (P = 0.29) or throughout the TEF measurement (P = 0.56).
In summary, together RMR and TEF may account for up to 85% of total daily energy 
expenditure; we report that short-term consumption of a commercially available
EGCG supplement did not increase RMR or TEF.

PMID: 20725062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Theor Appl Genet. 2011 Jan;122(1):77-93. doi: 10.1007/s00122-010-1424-4. Epub
2010 Aug 13.

QTL mapping for yield and lodging resistance in an enhanced SSR-based map for
tef.

Zeid M(1), Belay G, Mulkey S, Poland J, Sorrells ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Cornell University, 240 Emerson
Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Tef is a cereal crop of cultural and economic importance in Ethiopia. It is grown
primarily for its grain though it is also an important source of fodder. Tef
suffers from lodging that reduces both grain yield and quality. As a first step
toward executing a marker-assisted breeding program for lodging resistance and
grain yield improvement, a linkage map was constructed using 151 F(9) recombinant
inbred lines obtained by single-seed-descent from a cross between Eragrostis tef 
and its wild relative Eragrostis pilosa. The map was primarily based on
microsatellite (SSR) markers that were developed from SSR-enriched genomic
libraries. The map consisted of 30 linkage groups and spanned a total length of
1,277.4 cM (78.7% of the genome) with an average distance of 5.7 cM between
markers. This is the most saturated map for tef to date, and for the first time, 
all of the markers are PCR-based. Using agronomic data from 11 environments and
marker data, it was possible to map quantitative trait loci (QTL) controlling
lodging, grain yield and 15 other related traits. The positive effects of the QTL
identified from the wild parent were mainly for earliness, reduced culm length
and lodging resistance. In this population, it is now possible to combine lodging
resistance and grain yield using a marker-assisted selection program targeting
the QTL identified for both traits. The newly developed SSR markers will play a
key role in germplasm organization, fingerprinting and monitoring the success of 
the hybridization process in intra-specific crosses lacking distinctive
morphological markers.

PMID: 20706706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2010 Nov;51(5):610-7. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e3181dd9d40.

Reduction of interstitial cells of Cajal in esophageal atresia.

Midrio P(1), Alaggio R, Strojna A, Gamba P, Giacomelli L, Pizzi S,
Faussone-Pellegrini MS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatric Surgery, University of Padua, Italy.
midrio@pediatria.unipd.it

OBJECTIVES: Postrepair esophageal dysmotility and gastroesophageal reflux are
well-known consequences in patients with congenital esophageal atresia (EA) with 
or without distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The interstitial cells of
Cajal (ICC), considered the intestinal pacemaker, are altered in congenital
diseases with abnormal peristalsis, but no data are available for EA. Therefore, 
presence and maturation of ICC was verified in EA-TEF newborns.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifteen full-term neonates underwent repair of EA-TEF.
Control specimens were from 10 newborns who died of nonesophageal diseases.
Specimens from upper pouch, fistula, proximal, and distal esophagus were
processed for hematoxylin and eosin, c-kit immunohistochemistry for ICC
identification, and transmission electron microscopy. Frequency of c-kit-positive
cells was evaluated in 20 fields per slide using a visual score (absent, very
low, low, medium, high, very high). Morphocytometry and statistical analysis were
also performed.
RESULTS: In the proximal normal esophagus, ICC frequency was very high (3 cases),
high (5), and medium (2); distally, it was high (4) and medium (6). In EA-TEF
upper pouch, it was high (2) and medium (13); in the fistula, it was medium (5), 
low (6), very low (3), and absent (1). Morphocytometry confirmed these results.
Comparison between pouch and fistula versus proximal and lower esophagus,
respectively, showed statistically significant differences. Transmission electron
microscopy demonstrated ICC immaturity in EA-TEF.
CONCLUSIONS: The significant lower ICC density in EA-TEF is in favor for the
pathogenesis of esophageal dysmotility frequently observed in such patients.

PMID: 20706152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Med Syst. 2011 Dec;35(6):1503-11. doi: 10.1007/s10916-009-9427-x. Epub 2010 Feb
2.

A software tool for determination of breast cancer treatment methods using data
mining approach.

Cakir A(1), Demirel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics-Computer Education, Süleyman Demirel University,
Isparta, Turkey. cakir@tef.sdu.edu.tr

In this work, breast cancer treatment methods are determined using data mining.
For this purpose, software is developed to help to oncology doctor for the
suggestion of application of the treatment methods about breast cancer patients. 
462 breast cancer patient data, obtained from Ankara Oncology Hospital, are used 
to determine treatment methods for new patients. This dataset is processed with
Weka data mining tool. Classification algorithms are applied one by one for this 
dataset and results are compared to find proper treatment method. Developed
software program called as "Treatment Assistant" uses different algorithms (IB1, 
Multilayer Perception and Decision Table) to find out which one is giving better 
result for each attribute to predict and by using Java Net beans interface.
Treatment methods are determined for the post surgical operation of breast cancer
patients using this developed software tool. At modeling step of data mining
process, different Weka algorithms are used for output attributes. For
hormonotherapy output IB1, for tamoxifen and radiotherapy outputs Multilayer
Perceptron and for the chemotherapy output decision table algorithm shows best
accuracy performance compare to each other. In conclusion, this work shows that
data mining approach can be a useful tool for medical applications particularly
at the treatment decision step. Data mining helps to the doctor to decide in a
short time.

PMID: 20703767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Nov;118(1):286-97. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq236. Epub 2010 Aug
11.

Automated dose-response analysis and comparative toxicogenomic evaluation of the 
hepatic effects elicited by TCDD, TCDF, and PCB126 in C57BL/6 mice.

Kopec AK(1), Burgoon LD, Ibrahim-Aibo D, Burg AR, Lee AW, Tashiro C, Potter D,
Sharratt B, Harkema JR, Rowlands JC, Budinsky RA, Zacharewski TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

The toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach recommended by the World Health
Organization is used to quantify dioxin-like exposure concentrations for mixtures
of polychlorinated dibenzo-dioxins, -furans, and polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF) and
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) relative to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Whole-genome microarrays were used to
evaluate the hepatic gene expression potency of TCDF and PCB126 relative to TCDD 
with complementary histopathology, tissue level analysis, and
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) assay results. Immature ovariectomized
C57BL/6 mice were gavaged with 0.001, 0.01, 0.03, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100,
and 300 µg/kg TCDD and TEF-adjusted doses (TEF for TCDF and PCB126 is 0.1) of
TCDF or PCB126 (1, 3, 10, 30, 100, 300, 1000, and 3000 µg/kg of TCDF or PCB126)
or sesame oil vehicle and sacrificed 24 h post dose. In general, TCDD, TCDF, and 
PCB126 tissue levels, as well as histopathological effects, were comparable when 
comparing TEF-adjusted doses. Automated dose-response modeling (ToxResponse
Modeler) of the microarray data identified 210 TCDF and 40 PCB126 genes that
exhibited sigmoidal dose-response curves with comparable slopes when compared
with TCDD. These similar responses were used to calculate a median TCDF gene
expression relative potency (REP) of 0.06 and a median PCB126 gene expression REP
of 0.02. REPs of 0.02 were also calculated for EROD induction for both compounds.
Collectively, these data suggest that differences in the ability of the liganded 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor:AhR nuclear translocator complex to elicit differential
hepatic gene expression, in addition to pharmacokinetic differences between
ligands, influence their potency in immature ovariectomized C57BL/6 mice.

PMCID: PMC2955213
PMID: 20702594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Oct;299(4):R1013-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00241.2010. Epub 2010 Aug 4.

Cardiac hypertrophy, low blood pressure, and low aldosterone levels in mice
devoid of the three circadian PAR bZip transcription factors DBP, HLF, and TEF.

Wang Q(1), Maillard M, Schibler U, Burnier M, Gachon F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland.

The cardiovascular system is under the control of the circadian clock, and
disturbed circadian rhythms can induce cardiovascular pathologies. This cyclic
regulation is probably brought about by the circadian expression of genes
encoding enzymes and regulators involved in cardiovascular functions. We have
previously shown that the rhythmic transcription of output genes is, in part,
regulated by the clock-controlled PAR bZip transcription factors DBP (albumin
D-site binding protein), HLF (hepatic leukemia factor), and TEF (thyrotroph
embryonic factor). The simultaneous deletion of all three PAR bZip transcription 
factors leads to increased morbidity and shortened life span. In the present
study, we demonstrate that Dbp/Tef/Hlf triple knockout mice develop cardiac
hypertrophy and left ventricular dysfunction associated with a low blood
pressure. These dysfunctions are exacerbated by an abnormal response to this low 
blood pressure characterized by low aldosterone levels. The phenotype of PAR bZip
knockout mice highlights the importance of circadian regulators in the modulation
of cardiovascular functions.

PMID: 20686175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Hazard Mater. 2010 Nov 15;183(1-3):111-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2010.06.120.
Epub 2010 Jul 6.

Emission of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from selected processes in
steelworks.

Baraniecka J(1), Pyrzynska K, Szewczynska M, Posniak M, Dobrzynska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Warsaw, Pasteura 1, 02-093 Warsaw,
Poland.

The emission of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from selected processes in
steelworks in southern Poland was investigated. Size-segregated samples of air
particulate matter (<0.25, 0.25-0.5, 0.5-1.0, 1.0-2.5 and 2.5-10 µm) were
collected at the electric arc furnace and rolling mill. The PAHs were sampled
with the personal cascade impactor and identified by HPLC with fluorescence
detector. The obtained results showed that collected PAH contents were
significantly higher at the electric arc furnace. The highest content of total
PAHs (93 ng m(-3)) was present in the smallest particles of 0.5 µm aerodynamic
diameter or less, indicating that the ultrafine particles have a high
contribution in the overall PM(2.5) fine fraction. Concentrations of Py, CH, BbF,
BaP and BghiP came to 76% of total PAHs content in <0.25 µm fraction. The five-
and six-ring compounds (BbF, BkF, BaP, DBA, BghiP) with 4-ring chrysene presented
typical unimodal size distribution with one predominant peak for this particles' 
diameter. Phenanthrene and fluoranthene exhibited highest concentrations on
coarse particles in the range of 10-2.5 µm, decreasing with decrease of a
particle size fraction. Using the toxic equivalent factor (TEF), the mean
contributions of the carcinogenic potency of BaP to the air samples collected at 
the arc furnace and rolling mill (fraction below 0.25 µm) were determined to be
66.3% and 50.3%, respectively.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20675043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2010 Aug;6(2):177-82. doi: 10.3171/2010.5.PEDS09428.

Prevalence of tethered spinal cord in infants with VACTERL.

O'Neill BR(1), Yu AK, Tyler-Kabara EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. boneill35@gmail.com

Comment in
    J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2011 Jun;7(6):681-2.

OBJECT: The term VACTERL represents a nonrandom association of birth defects
including vertebral malformations, anal atresia, cardiac anomalies,
tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs), renal anomalies, and limb malformations.
Clinical experience and a few published case series suggest that a tethered
spinal cord (TSC) occurs commonly in children with VACTERL, but to date, no study
has defined the prevalence of TSC in patients with VACTERL. Such information
would guide decisions about the appropriateness of screening spinal imaging.
METHODS: The authors reviewed the charts of all patients discharged from the
neonatal intensive care unit at Children's Hospital Pittsburgh in the past 14
years with the diagnosis of VACTERL, TEF, or anal atresia. During that period,
the authors' protocol has been to use spinal ultrasound to screen this population
for TSC. The charts were reviewed for the presence of a TSC requiring surgery and
for the features of VACTERL.
RESULTS: Thirty-three patients with VACTERL and adequate spinal imaging studies
were identified. In 13 (39%) of these, a TSC requiring surgery was identified.
Among patients without VACTERL, the incidence of TSC was 7.9% in those with anal 
atresia and 2.4% in those with TEF. False-negative ultrasounds were identified in
21.4% of patients with TSC.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with VACTERL should undergo MR imaging screening for TSC.
In infants with anal atresia without VACTERL, the incidence of TSC is much lower 
than in those with VACTERL.

PMID: 20672940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):774-82. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085175. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

Insulin-like 3 exposure of the fetal rat gubernaculum modulates expression of
genes involved in neural pathways.

Johnson KJ(1), Robbins AK, Wang Y, McCahan SM, Chacko JK, Barthold JS.

Author information: 
(1)Nemours Biomedical Research, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, Delaware 19803, USA. johnson@medsci.udel.edu

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):687-9.

Insulin-like 3 (INSL3) signaling directs fetal gubernacular development and
testis descent, but the actions of INSL3 in the gubernaculum are poorly
understood. Using microarray gene expression profiling of fetal male rat
gubernaculum explants exposed to 10 or 100 nM INSL3, significant changes in
expression were identified for approximately 900 genes. Several of the genes
showing the largest inductions regulate neuronal development or activity,
including Pnoc (34-fold), Nptx2 (9-fold), Nfasc (4-fold), Gfra3 (3-fold), Unc5d
(3-fold), and Crlf1 (3-fold). Bioinformatics analysis revealed BMP and WNT
signaling pathways and several gene ontologies related to neurogenesis were
altered by INSL3. Promoter response elements significantly enriched in the
INSL3-regulated gene list included consensus sequences for MYB, REL, ATF2, and
TEF transcription factors. Comparing in vivo gene expression profiles of male and
female rat fetal gubernaculum showed expression of the Bmp, Wnt, and
neurodevelopmental genes induced by INSL3 was higher in males. Using quantitative
RT-PCR, the microarray data were confirmed, and the induction of Bmp3, Chrdl2,
Crlf1, Nptx2, Pnoc, Wnt4, and Wnt5a mRNA levels were examined over a range of
INSL3 concentrations (0.1-100 nM) in male and female gubernaculum. In both sexes,
an increasing gene expression response was observed between 0.1 and 10 nM INSL3. 
These data suggest that INSL3 signaling in the fetal gubernaculum induces
morphogenetic programs, including BMP and WNT signaling, and support other rodent
data suggesting a role for these pathways in development of the gubernaculum.

PMCID: PMC2959107
PMID: 20631401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2010 May;7(5):1889-900. doi:
10.3390/ijerph7051889. Epub 2010 Apr 27.

Assessment of benzo(a)pyrene-equivalent carcinogenicity and mutagenicity of
residential indoor versus outdoor polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exposing young
children in New York City.

Jung KH(1), Yan B, Chillrud SN, Perera FP, Whyatt R, Camann D, Kinney PL, Miller 
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care of Medicine, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, PH8E, New York, NY 10032, USA.
kj2237@columbia.edu

The application of benzo(a)pyrene (BaP)-toxic equivalent factor to polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) concentrations can provide a more accurate risk
assessment from environmental exposure to PAH. We hypothesized that
BaP-equivalent toxicity determined following residential air monitoring among
young urban children may vary by season. Residential indoor and outdoor air
levels of PAH measured over two-weeks in a cohort of 5-6 year old children (n =
260) in New York City were normalized to the cancer and mutagen potency
equivalent factor of BaP (BaP = 1). Data are presented as carcinogenic
equivalents (BaP-TEQ) and mutagenic equivalents (BaP-MEQ) for the sum of 8 PAH
(Sigma(8)PAH; MW >or= 228) and individual PAH and compared across heating versus 
nonheating seasons. Results show that heating compared to nonheating season was
associated significantly with higher (BaP-TEQ)(Sigma8PAH) and
(BaP-MEQ)(Sigma8PAH) both indoors and outdoors (p < 0.001). Outdoor
(BaP-TEQ)(Sigma8)(PAH) and (BaP-MEQ)(Sigma8PAH) were significantly higher than
the corresponding indoor measures during the heating season (p < 0.01). These
findings suggest that at levels encountered in New York City air, especially
during the heating season, residential exposure to PAH may pose an increased risk
of cancer and mutation.

PMCID: PMC2898023
PMID: 20622999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Gastroenterology. 2010 Oct;139(4):1385-96. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.06.069.
Epub 2010 Aug 7.

FGF receptors 1 and 2 control chemically induced injury and compound
detoxification in regenerating livers of mice.

Böhm F(1), Speicher T, Hellerbrand C, Dickson C, Partanen JM, Ornitz DM, Werner
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Cell Biology, ETH Zürich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (FGFR4) controls bile acid
metabolism and protects the liver from fibrosis, but the roles of FGFR1 and FGFR2
in the adult liver are largely unknown. We investigated the functions and
mechanisms of action of these receptors in liver homeostasis, regeneration, and
fibrosis.
METHODS: We generated mice with hepatocytes that lack FGFR1 and FGFR2 and
subjected them to acute and chronic carbon tetrachloride-induced liver injury and
partial hepatectomy; mice were also injected with FGF7. We performed histology,
histomorphometry, real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, and 
immunoblot analyses.
RESULTS: In hepatocytes, loss of FGFR1 and FGFR2 eliminated responsiveness to
FGF7 and related FGF family members but did not affect toxin-induced liver injury
and fibrosis. However, mortality after partial hepatectomy increased because of
severe hepatocyte necrosis. These effects appeared to be mediated by a failure of
hepatocytes to induce the expression of the transcriptional regulators Dbp and
Tef upon liver surgery; this affected expression of their target genes, which
encode detoxifying cytochrome P450 enzymes. We found that Dbp and Tef expression 
was directly controlled by FGFR signaling in hepatocytes. As a consequence of the
reduced expression of genes that control detoxification, the liver tissue that
remained after partial hepatectomy failed to efficiently metabolize endogenous
compounds and the drugs applied for anesthesia/analgesia.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a new, cytoprotective effect of FGFR1 and FGFR2 in the
regenerating liver and suggest the use of recombinant FGF7 to increase survival
of patients after surgical resection of large amounts of liver tissue.

Copyright © 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2949525
PMID: 20603121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Anim Sci. 2010 Oct;88(10):3296-303. doi: 10.2527/jas.2009-2668. Epub 2010 Jun
25.

Voluntary intake and digestibility of teff hay fed to horses.

Staniar WB(1), Bussard JR, Repard NM, Hall MH, Burk AO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dairy and Animal Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA. wstaniar@psu.edu

The objective of this study was to evaluate nutrient composition, voluntary DMI, 
and apparent DM digestibility of teff hay cut at 3 different stages of maturity
to evaluate its potential as a preserved forage for horses. Six mature Quarter
Horse mares (12 +/- 3 yr; 553 +/- 39 kg of BW) were used in a replicated balanced
Latin square design with 3 periods and 3 maturities of teff hay. Eragrostis tef
('Tiffany' teff) was planted in May and harvested at the boot, early-heading, or 
late-heading stage of maturity through the summer. Horses were acclimated to a
mixture of maturities of teff hay for 8 d before the beginning of the study.
After this acclimation period, each period consisted of a 9-d voluntary DMI
phase, followed by a 3-d DM digestibility phase. The percentages of nonstructural
carbohydrates (NSC) increased from 5.4% in the boot stage to 8.4% in the
late-heading stage, whereas concentrations of CP, K, Fe, and Mn decreased. The
Ca:P ratio was 2.0 ± 0.3 for all maturities. Horses had less DMI of late-heading 
teff hay (1.5% BW) than teff hay of other maturities (1.8% BW; P < 0.05),
indicating a preference for the earlier maturities. The intake and nutrient
composition of the boot and early-heading maturities was sufficient to meet 90 to
97% of the average DE of the horses and most other nutrient requirements.
Digestibility decreased from boot to late-heading teff hay for DM, CP, ADF, and
NDF (P < 0.05). Digestibility increased from boot to early-heading to
late-heading hay for nonfiber carbohydrates and water-soluble carbohydrates (P < 
0.05). For all maturities of teff hay, the NSC intake was below 10% of the total 
intake. In conclusion, the low NSC and DE of teff hay grown in central
Pennsylvania under the conditions in this study make it an appropriate forage
source for obese horses and those at risk for laminitis or other metabolic
disorders.

PMID: 20581289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Phytopathology. 2010 Jul;100(7):671-81. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-100-7-0671.

Alteration in lignin biosynthesis restricts growth of Fusarium spp. in brown
midrib sorghum.

Funnell-Harris DL(1), Pedersen JF, Sattler SE.

Author information: 
(1)Grain, Forage and Bioenergy Research Unit, United States Department of
Agriculture-Agricultural Research Service, 314 BioChem Hall, East Campus,
University of Nebraska, Lincoln 68583-0737, USA. Funnell-Harris@ars.usda.gov

To improve sorghum for bioenergy and forage uses, brown midrib (bmr)6 and -12
near-isogenic genotypes were developed in different sorghum backgrounds. The bmr6
and bmr12 grain had significantly reduced colonization by members of the
Gibberella fujikuroi species complex compared with the wild type, as detected on 
two semiselective media. Fusarium spp. were identified using sequence analysis of
a portion of the translation elongation factor (TEF) 1-alpha gene. The pathogens 
Fusarium thapsinum, F. proliferatum, and F. verticillioides, G. fujikuroi
members, were commonly recovered. Other frequently isolated Fusarium spp. likely 
colonize sorghum asymptomatically. The chi(2) analyses showed that the ratios of 
Fusarium spp. colonizing bmr12 grain were significantly different from the wild
type, indicating that bmr12 affects colonization by Fusarium spp. One F.
incarnatum-F. equiseti species complex (FIESC) genotype, commonly isolated from
wild-type and bmr6 grain, was not detected in bmr12 grain. Phylogenetic analysis 
suggested that this FIESC genotype represents a previously unreported TEF
haplotype. When peduncles of wild-type and near-isogenic bmr plants were
inoculated with F. thapsinum, F. verticillioides, or Alternaria alternata, the
resulting mean lesion lengths were significantly reduced relative to the wild
type in one or both bmr mutants. This indicates that impairing lignin
biosynthesis results in reduced colonization by Fusarium spp. and A. alternata.

PMID: 20528185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Emerg Ment Health. 2009 Fall;11(4):221-33.

A case for using biologically-based mental health intervention in post-earthquake
china: evaluation of training in the trauma resiliency model.

Leitch L(1), Miller-Karas E.

Author information: 
(1)Trauma Resource Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA.
lleitch@traumaresourceinstitute.com

Catastrophic events, such as the Sichuan Province earthquake in China on May 12, 
2008, cause massive suffering. They put a huge strain on local response
capacities because of distress of the civilian population and also death and
traumatization of local responders. Mental health approaches are needed that are 
efficient and that help provide stabilization to both responders and civilians.
The article has two goals: First, to present a rationale for the use of a
biologically-based model of mental health, the Trauma Resiliency Model (TRM), in 
post-disaster settings and, second, to present evaluation results of TRM
training, mental health training focused on the biology of threat and fear with
corresponding treatment skills provided as part of the China Earthquake Relief
Project (CHERP). TRM training was provided to a non-random sample of more than
350 doctors, nurses, teachers, and counselors during a 18 month period after the 
earthquake. TRM training was provided in six cities to expand local response
capacity by providing didactic sessions and practice in TRM's trauma treatment
skills. CHERP's focus on acquisition of practical treatment skills and local
sustainability provided TRM skills refresher training sessions over the entire
course of the project. The Training Relevance, Use, and Satisfaction Scale
(TRUSS) and the Training Evaluation Form (TEF) were used throughout the months of
training and supervised practice. Results indicate 97% believe that
biologically-oriented TRM training will be very to moderately relevant or useful 
for their work with the Chinese earthquake survivors, and about 88% report they
will use the skills very to moderately frequently during the two weeks following 
the training. Over 60% of the trainees report they will use TRM skills for their 
own self-care.

PMID: 20524507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Microb Cell Fact. 2010 May 21;9:36. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-9-36.

Quantitative evaluation of yeast's requirement for glycerol formation in very
high ethanol performance fed-batch process.

Pagliardini J(1), Hubmann G, Bideaux C, Alfenore S, Nevoigt E, Guillouet SE.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, INSA, UPS, INP, LISBP, 135 Av de Rangueil, F-31077
Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: Glycerol is the major by-product accounting for up to 5% of the
carbon in Saccharomyces cerevisiae ethanolic fermentation. Decreasing glycerol
formation may redirect part of the carbon toward ethanol production. However,
abolishment of glycerol formation strongly affects yeast's robustness towards
different types of stress occurring in an industrial process. In order to assess 
whether glycerol production can be reduced to a certain extent without
jeopardizing growth and stress tolerance, the yeast's capacity to synthesize
glycerol was adjusted by fine-tuning the activity of the rate-controlling enzyme 
glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPDH). Two engineered strains whose specific 
GPDH activity was significantly reduced by two different degrees were
comprehensively characterized in a previously developed Very High Ethanol
Performance (VHEP) fed-batch process.
RESULTS: The prototrophic strain CEN.PK113-7D was chosen for decreasing glycerol 
formation capacity. The fine-tuned reduction of specific GPDH activity was
achieved by replacing the native GPD1 promoter in the yeast genome by previously 
generated well-characterized TEF promoter mutant versions in a gpd2Delta
background. Two TEF promoter mutant versions were selected for this study,
resulting in a residual GPDH activity of 55 and 6%, respectively. The
corresponding strains were referred to here as TEFmut7 and TEFmut2. The genetic
modifications were accompanied to a strong reduction in glycerol yield on
glucose; the level of reduction compared to the wild-type was 61% in TEFmut7 and 
88% in TEFmut2. The overall ethanol production yield on glucose was improved from
0.43 g g(-1) in the wild type to 0.44 g g(-1) measured in TEFmut7 and 0.45 g
g(-1) in TEFmut2. Although maximal growth rate in the engineered strains was
reduced by 20 and 30%, for TEFmut7 and TEFmut2 respectively, strains' ethanol
stress robustness was hardly affected; i.e. values for final ethanol
concentration (117 +/- 4 g L(-1)), growth-inhibiting ethanol concentration (87
+/- 3 g L(-1)) and volumetric ethanol productivity (2.1 +/- 0.15 g l(-1) h(-1))
measured in wild-type remained virtually unchanged in the engineered strains.
CONCLUSIONS: This work demonstrates the power of fine-tuned pathway engineering, 
particularly when a compromise has to be found between high product yield on one 
hand and acceptable growth, productivity and stress resistance on the other hand.
Under the conditions used in this study (VHEP fed-batch), the two strains with
"fine-tuned" GPD1 expression in a gpd2Delta background showed slightly better
ethanol yield improvement than previously achieved with the single deletion
strains gpd1Delta or gpd2Delta. Although glycerol reduction is known to be even
higher in a gpd1Delta gpd2Delta double deletion strain, our strains could much
better cope with process stress as reflected by better growth and viability.

PMCID: PMC2887396
PMID: 20492645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Air Waste Manag Assoc. 2010 May;60(5):548-55.

Seasonal variation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure levels in Mexico
City.

Mugica V(1), Hernández S, Torres M, García R.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Azcapotzalco, Area de Química Aplicada,
México City, México. vma@correo.azc.uam.mx

This work presents the results obtained when determining the priority polycyclic 
aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) concentration contained in particulate matter 10
microm in aerodynamic diameter or less (PM10) and in the gas phase in Mexico
City's atmosphere by means of a field study conducted during 2005. PM10 and
vapor-phase PAHs were collected on prebaked quartz fiber filters and PUF-XAD-4
resin and quantified by gas chromatography (GC)-mass spectrometry. Vapor-phase
PAHs comprised 86-97% of the total PAH mass, and naphthalene was the most
abundant PAH determined, contributing 84-93% to the total mass. The
benzo[a]pyrene content was on average 7% of the PAHs' particle phase and 0.2-1%
of the gas phase. The PAH concentrations measured where large industrial areas
are located were 2-8 times greater during the fall/winter months (dry-cold
season), when winds bear north- northeasterly, than in spring and summer. In
contrast, the largest partition gas/particle ratio occurred during the dry-warm
season (March-May). The results of statistical analysis using multivariate
techniques suggest that motor vehicles are the main PAH contributors. The
toxicity equivalence factors (TEFs) related to the carcinogenic benzo[a]pyrene
potency were used for the assessment of the carcinogenic potential risk because
of the measured airborne PAHs. Benzo[a]pyrene equivalent (BAPeq) concentrations
were determined through multiplication of the individual PAH concentrations by
their corresponding TEF value. The estimated total BAPeq for the whole field
study considering only PM10 PAHs was 1085 pg m(-3). However, when taking into
account the PAHs in both phases, the estimated total BAPeq was 1250 pg m(-3); in 
either case, the values were greater than the 1000-pg m(-3) limit proposed by
European countries.

PMID: 20480854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Klin Padiatr. 2010 Sep;222(5):296-301. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1249610. Epub 2010 May
12.

Early and long term outcome in children with esophageal atresia treated over the 
last 22 years.

Lacher M(1), Froehlich S, von Schweinitz D, Dietz HG.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgical Clinic, Dr. von Haunersches Kinderspital, Ludwig Maximilian
University, München, Germany. martin.lacher@lmu.de

BACKGROUND: The survival of infants born with esophageal atresia (EA) is > 90% at
present. The purpose of this study was to evaluate early complications and long
term outcome in children with EA treated at our institution.
METHODS AND PATIENTS: Retrospective analysis of 111 children with EA undergoing
repair of EA or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Assessment of early and
intermediate complications as well as long term morbidity and mortality.
RESULTS: Primary anastomosis was performed in 90 (81%) and secondary anastomosis 
in 7 patients (6%). Gastric transposition was carried out in 14 children (13%).
The postoperative mortality was 14/111 (12.6%) and could be estimated by the
Spitz classification. At the age of 10 years, 33 patients (72%) were swallowing
without problems, 39 children (85%) were eating at least most of the time with
pleasure but 19 children (41%) had a body weight less than the 25 (th)
percentile. Staged repair by gastric transposition resulted in the least amount
of motility dysfunction. Long-term respiratory morbidity was high.
CONCLUSION: The survival of children with EA has improved in the last two
decades. For risk assessment the Spitz' classification is valid. Long term
gastrointestinal and respiratory morbidity remains high. In children with
long-gap EA gastric transposition performed as a staged procedure has
satisfactory results and seems superior to techniques preserving the native
esophagus.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart, New York.

PMID: 20464650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. HNO. 2010 May;58(5):497-505. doi: 10.1007/s00106-010-2085-y.

[Treatment of tracheoesophageal and tracheopharyngeal fistulas after
laryngectomy].

[Article in German]

Gehrking E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Hals-, Nasen- und Ohrenheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum
Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538, Lübeck,
Deutschland. Eckard.Gehrking@hno.uni-luebeck.de

Tracheoesophageal (TEF) and tracheopharyngeal fistulas (TPF) after laryngectomy
can mainly be divided into five types: "high TEF with leakage through the voice
prosthesis (VP)" (Type Ia), "high TEF with leakage around the VP" (Type Ib),
"enlarged high TEF" (Type II), "deep TEF" (Type III), "TPF" (Type IV) and "TPF
associated with pharynx stenosis" (Type V). Leakage of TEF in prosthetic voice
restoration usually responds well to conservative measures. If these measures
fail, as well as in all cases of TPF, surgical intervention is necessary for
transtracheostomal or transcervical closure with multi-layer sutures of the
esophagus and trachea. In persisting TEF/TPF after unsuccessful surgical attempts
revision surgery remains challenging. Tracheostoma transposition for dissociation
of the cranial end of the trachea and the hypopharynx and esophagus is essential 
for effective closure. In rare cases of TPF combined with pharyngoesophageal
stricture formation a resection and immediate reconstruction of the stenotic
pharyngoesophageal segment with a tube-shaped fasciocutaneous radial forearm flap
must be considered.

PMID: 20454886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dalton Trans. 2010 Apr 7;39(13):3245-55. doi: 10.1039/b922474b. Epub 2010 Feb 8.

The structures of tellurium(IV) halides in the gas phase and as solvated
molecules.

Shlykov SA(1), Giricheva NI, Titov AV, Szwak M, Lentz D, Girichev GV.

Author information: 
(1)Ivanovo State University of Chemistry and Technology, Engels av. 7, Ivanovo,
153000, Russia. shlykov@isuct.ru

The structures of molecular tellurium tetrafluoride and tellurium tetrachloride
were determined by a combination of gas-phase electron diffraction, mass
spectrometry and quantum chemical calculations. The combined GED/MS experiments
showed no evidence of decomposition of TeF(4) and TeCl(4). No ions of oligomeric 
(dimeric, trimeric, etc.) or any other composition were found in the mass
spectra. The monomeric molecules possess a pseudo trigonal bipyramidal structure 
(C(2v) symmetry) with the equatorial Te-X distances being shorter than the axial 
ones. The fluorine atoms are bent away from the lone pair resulting in
X(eq)-Te-X(eq) and X(eq)-Te-X(ax) bond angles smaller than 120 and 90 degrees,
respectively. The structure of solvates TeF(4) (THF)(2), TeF(4) (dioxane) TeF(4) 
(DME)(2), TeF(4)(Et(2)O) TeF(4)(toluene), TeCl(4)(CH(3)CN)(2), TeCl(4)(DME)(2)
and TeCl(4)(dioxane) were determined by X-ray diffraction. The structures of
tellurium tetrafluoride solvates are strongly influenced by the choice of the
solvent molecules. Monomeric TeF(4) units were obtained with THF, DME and dioxane
whereas fluoride bridged coordination polymers were formed using diethyl ether or
toluene. All tellurium tetrachloride solvates studied contain monomeric TeCl(4)
units with coordinated solvent molecules. Coordination numbers range from four in
the gas phase to eight in the TeF(4) dimethoxyethane solvate. Geometric
parameters of the TeX(4) molecules in the crystal, solvates and gas phase were
compared. DFT, MP2, CCSD, CCSD(T) methods were applied for calculation of
geometric and vibrational characteristics of free TeX(4) molecules (X = F, Cl).
The pseudorotation barriers were estimated and an NBO analysis was performed. It 
was shown that both, GED and theoretical, quantitative results are in agreement
with the qualitative results of the VSEPR model.

PMID: 20449454  [PubMed]


56. Environ Health Perspect. 2010 May;118(5):666-72. doi: 10.1289/ehp.0901312.

Generalized concentration addition predicts joint effects of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor agonists with partial agonists and competitive antagonists.

Howard GJ(1), Schlezinger JJ, Hahn ME, Webster TF.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Department, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, Massachusetts 02118 , USA.

BACKGROUND: Predicting the expected outcome of a combination exposure is critical
to risk -assessment. The toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach used for
analyzing joint effects of dioxin-like chemicals is a special case of the method 
of concentration addition. However, the TEF method assumes that individual agents
are full aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonists with parallel dose-response
curves, whereas many mixtures include partial agonists.
OBJECTIVES: We assessed the ability of generalized concentration addition (GCA)
to predict effects of combinations of full AhR agonists with partial agonists or 
competitive antagonists.
METHODS: We measured activation of AhR-dependent gene expression in H1G1.1c3
cells after application of binary combinations of AhR ligands. A full agonist
(2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p--dioxin or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran) was
combined with either a full agonist (3,3 ,4,4 ,5-penta-chloro-biphenyl), a
partial agonist (2,3,3 ,4,4 -pentachlorobiphenyl or galangin), or an antagonist
(3,3 -diindolylmethane). Combination effects were modeled by the TEF and GCA
approaches, and goodness of fit of the modeled response surface to the
experimental data was assessed using a nonparametric statistical test.
RESULTS: The GCA and TEF models fit the experimental data equally well for a
mixture of two full agonists. In all other cases, GCA fit the experimental data
significantly better than the TEF model.
CONCLUSIONS: The TEF model overpredicts effects of AhR ligands at the highest
concentration combinations. At lower concentrations, the difference between GCA
and TEF approaches depends on the efficacy of the partial agonist. GCA represents
a more accurate definition of additivity for mixtures that include partial
agonist or competitive antagonist ligands.

PMCID: PMC2866683
PMID: 20435555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Environ Sci Technol. 2010 May 15;44(10):3992-8. doi: 10.1021/es100206f.

Binary mixture effects by PBDE congeners (47, 153, 183, or 209) and PCB congeners
(126 or 153) in MCF-7 cells: biochemical alterations assessed by IR spectroscopy 
and multivariate analysis.

Llabjani V(1), Trevisan J, Jones KC, Shore RF, Martin FL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biophotonics, Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University,
Bailrigg, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, U.K.

Target organisms are continuously and variously exposed to contaminant mixtures
in the environment. We noted that treatment with brominated diphenyl ether
(BDE)47 or polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)126 (toxic equivalency factor [TEF] =
0.1) induces similar alterations in MCF-7 cells when these were determined using 
attenuated total reflection Fourier-transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy
with multivariate analysis. Because this method appears sensitive enough to
signature low-dose effects, we examined how various test agents interact in
binary mixtures to induce cell alterations. MCF-7 cells were exposed for 24 h to 
low concentrations (10(-12) M) of polybrominated diphenyl ether (PBDE) congeners 
(47, 153, 183, or 209) with or without the coplanar PCB126 or nonplanar PCB153.
Following treatment, ethanol-fixed cellular material was interrogated using
ATR-FTIR spectroscopy; derived IR spectra in the biochemical-cell fingerprint
region (1800 cm(-1)-900 cm(-1)) were then subjected to principal component
analysis-linear discriminant analysis. Assuming that if two test agents
independently induce the same cell alteration that in combination they'll give
rise to an additive effect, we examined predicted versus observed differences in 
induced alterations by binary mixtures. Compared to corresponding control
clusters, treatment with PBDE congener plus PCB126 appeared to cancel out their
respective induced alterations. However, treatment with binary mixtures including
PCB153 gave rise to an enhanced segregation. Our findings suggest that test
agents which mediate their cellular effects via similar mechanisms might result
in inhibition within a binary mixture whereas independently acting agents could
exacerbate induced alterations in overall cell status.

PMID: 20429583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2010 Jun;12(3):215-22. doi: 10.1007/s11894-010-0108-1.

Etiology of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: "mind the gap".

de Jong EM(1), Felix JF, de Klein A, Tibboel D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, PO Box
2060, 3000 CB, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. e.m.dejong@erasmusmc.nl

Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) are major congenital
malformations affecting 1:3500 live births. Current research efforts are focused 
on understanding the etiology of these defects. We describe well-known animal
models, human syndromes, and associations involving EA/TEF, indicating its
etiologically heterogeneous nature. Recent advances in genotyping technology and 
in knowledge of human genetic variation will improve clinical counseling on
etiologic factors. This review provides a clinical summary of environmental and
genetic factors involved in EA/TEF.

PMCID: PMC2874026
PMID: 20425471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg. 2009 Oct;14(4):224-5. doi: 10.4103/0971-9261.59608.

Esophageal atresia with tracheo-esophageal fistula: Accidental transtracheal
gastric intubation.

Hombalkar NN(1), Dhanawade S, Hombalkar P, Vaze D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Govt. Medical College, Miraj, Maharashtra, India.

The diagnostic feature of esophageal atresia (EA) is the inability to pass a
catheter into the stomach. EA can be ruled out if the feeding tube can be passed 
into the stomach. In EA, when a tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) is present,
theoretically the feeding tube can find its way into the stomach via tracheal
route and through the TEF. We report such a rare occurrence. In this situation,
the diagnosis and further management of EA and TEF was delayed.

PMCID: PMC2858888
PMID: 20419027  [PubMed]


60. J Med Food. 2010 Apr;13(2):364-70. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2009.1276.

The potential effects of ethyl acetate fraction from Curcuma longa L. on
lipolysis in differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Lee J(1), Yoon HG, Lee YH, Park J, You Y, Kim K, Jang JY, Yang JW, Jun W.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center, Department of Medical Nutrition, Kyung Hee
University, Yongin, Republic of Korea.

The effects of the turmeric ethyl acetate fraction (TEF) from the methanolic
extract from Curcuma longa L. on lipid metabolism and underlying mechanisms of
lipolysis were investigated in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. The intracellular lipid
droplets were stained with Oil red O dye and quantified. Compared to the control,
lipid accumulation was significantly decreased by 46.6% with treatment by TEF at 
the concentration of 20 microg/mL. The intracellular triglyceride (TG) level was 
also reduced by 37.9% at the concentration of 20 microg/mL. To determine the
mechanism for TG content reduction, levels of glucose uptake and glycerol release
were measured. Incubation of the 3T3-L1 adipocytes with TEF for 4 hours
significantly lowered the cellular level of glucose in a dose-dependent manner.
Furthermore, cellular expression of insulin-responsive glucose transporter
(GLUT)-4 was decreased by 46%, indicating that reduced glucose uptake was due to 
a decrease in cellular GLUT-4 expression. In addition, the level of free glycerol
released into the cultured medium was increased by 36.4% with the treatment by
TEF. In subsequent measurements using quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction, mRNA levels of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) and adipose TG lipase
(ATGL) were elevated by 34.8% and 16.9%, respectively, at the concentration of 20
microg/mL. These results suggest that TEF partially inhibits lipogenesis by the
suppression of glucose uptake via the decreased expression of cellular GLUT-4 and
stimulates lipolysis through the induction of HSL and/or ATGL gene expression,
resulting in the increased glycerol release.

PMID: 20412020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Psychiatry Investig. 2010 Mar;7(1):36-42. doi: 10.4306/pi.2010.7.1.36. Epub 2010 
Feb 22.

Genotyping sleep disorders patients.

Kripke DF(1), Shadan FF, Dawson A, Cronin JW, Jamil SM, Grizas AP, Koziol JA,
Kline LE.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Clinic Sleep Center, La Jolla, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The genetic susceptibility factors underlying sleep disorders might
help us predict prognoses and responses to treatment. Several candidate
polymorphisms for sleep disorders have been proposed, but there has as yet
inadequate replication or validation that the candidates may be useful in the
clinical setting.
METHODS: To assess the validity of several candidate associations, we obtained
saliva deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) samples and clinical information from 360
consenting research participants who were undergoing clinical polysomnograms. Ten
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped. These were thought to be
related to depression, circadian sleep disorders, sleep apnea, restless legs
syndrome (RLS), excessive sleepiness, or to slow waves in sleep.
RESULTS: With multivariate generalized linear models, the association of TEF
rs738499 with depressive symptoms was confirmed. Equivocal statistical evidence
of association of rs1801260 (the C3111T SNP in the CLOCK gene) with
morningness/eveningness and an association of Apolipoprotein E (APOE) rs429358
with the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) were obtained, but these associations
were not strong enough to be of clinical value by themselves. Predicted
association of SNPs with sleep apnea, RLS, and slow wave sleep were not
confirmed.
CONCLUSION: The SNPs tested would not, by themselves, be of use for clinical
genotyping in a sleep clinic.

PMCID: PMC2848776
PMID: 20396431  [PubMed]


62. J Immunoassay Immunochem. 2010;31(2):111-9. doi: 10.1080/15321811003617339.

Improvement of the long-term stability for dioxin toxicity evaluation method by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.

Sugawara Y(1), Ishizuka M, Saito K, Nakazawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Cosmo Oil Co., Ltd., Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan. yukio_sugawara@cosmo-oil.co.jp

A dioxin enzyme immunoassay (EIA) is one of the methods that may satisfy the
requirements to reduce the cost and turn around time for the dioxin analysis. We 
developed a dioxin enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to rapidly analyze
for trace levels of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in human milk. In 
this study, to aim to supply the stable assay quality, the development of
long-term stable coated plates for the ELISA system was reported. To the
conventional coated plate (wet plate), the dry plate ELISA indicated the
stability to be able to store for 1.5 years at 11 degrees C. The IC(50) of this
ELISA was 17 +/- 4 pg/well. The standard curve showed almost the same as that of 
the wet plate. A fairly good correlation between cross-reactivity of the ELISA
and WHO-TEF was achieved for environmental matrices. This ELISA should be more
practical for environmental sample monitoring.

PMID: 20391023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Environ Int. 2010 Jul;36(5):424-32. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2010.03.003. Epub 2010 
Apr 13.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) in foods and estimated PAH intake by the
population of Catalonia, Spain: Temporal trend.

Martorell I(1), Perelló G, Martí-Cid R, Castell V, Llobet JM, Domingo JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Universitat Rovira i
Virgili, IISPV, 43201 Reus, Catalonia, Spain.

The concentrations of 16 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) were determined
in various foodstuffs randomly purchased in Catalonia (Spain) during November and
December of 2008. Dietary intake of PAH was subsequently estimated according to
age and sex for the general population of Catalonia. The current results were
compared with those of previous studies performed in 2000 and 2006. The highest
PAH levels corresponded to phenanthrene (18.18 microg/kg), naphthalene (13.31
microg/kg), and pyrene (8.46 microg/kg), whereas the lowest concentrations were
those of dibenzo[a,h]anthracene (0.89 microg/kg), indeno[1,2,3-c,d]pyrene (0.94
microg/kg), and benzo[k]fluoranthene (1.00 microg/kg). With respect to the
contribution of total carcinogenic PAH, benzo[a]pyrene contributed 47.77% or
48.22%, depending on the TEF value used. By food groups, the current highest
levels of total PAH were detected in meat and meat products (38.99 microg/kg),
followed by oils and fats (18.75 microg/kg), and dairy products (7.57 microg/kg).
The highest contribution to PAH dietary intake corresponded to the group of meat 
and meat products (4.75 microg/day). The estimated mean dietary intake for a
standard male adult (70-kg body weight) was 6.72 microg/day, a lower value than
those found in our 2000 (8.42 microg/day), and 2006 surveys (12.04 microg/day).
With regard to the results of other recent studies, the current PAH
concentrations were comparatively lower.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20388572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys. 2009 Dec;80(6 Pt 2):066402. Epub 2009
Dec 2.

Plasma thermal effect on the relativistic current-filamentation and two-stream
instabilities in a hot-beam warm-plasma system.

Hao B(1), Ding WJ, Sheng ZM, Ren C, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory of Condensed Matter Physics, Institute of Physics,
CAS, Beijing, China.

Based on fully kinetic model using drift-Maxwellian distributions and taking into
account the transverse electrostatic field (TEF), it is shown that the
current-filamentation instability (CFI) grows unexpectedly with the plasma
temperature. The growth is attributed to the decreasing of the TEF as the plasma 
becomes hot. In the low-temperature plasma regime where the TEF is strong, it is 
identified that the TEF can dominate over the thermal pressure in suppressing the
CFI. Since the TEF originates from the temperature difference between the beam
and the plasma, the plasma temperature plays a significant role for the
development of the CFI and the quasistatic magnetic fields in a hot-beam
warm-plasma system. Particle-in-cell simulations verify the above results.

PMID: 20365281  [PubMed]


65. J Sci Food Agric. 2010 Apr 15;90(5):836-42. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.3893.

Fumonisin detection and analysis of potential fumonisin-producing Fusarium spp.
in asparagus (Asparagus officinalis L.) in Zhejiang Province of China.

Wang J(1), Wang X, Zhou Y, Du L, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Zhejiang University, The State Agriculture
Ministry Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality
Improvement, Hangzhou 310029, China.

BACKGROUND: Fumonisins are mycotoxins produced by a number of Fusarium species,
including several pathogens of asparagus plants. China is one of the largest
asparagus producers in the world. In this study, we analysed the contamination of
fumonisins and fumonisin-producing fungi in asparagus spear samples from Zhejiang
Province, the major asparagus production province in China.
RESULTS: The asparagus did not contain a detectable level of fumonisins. However,
the recovery of Fusarium in asparagus was 72.7%, including F. proliferatum
(40.9%), F. oxysporum (22.7%), F. acuminatum (4.55%) and F. equesti (4.55%). A
multiplex PCR targeting the internal transcribed spacer sequence (ITS),
translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF), and key biosynthetic genes FUM1 and 
FUM8, was used to simultaneously determine the identity and the biosynthetic
ability of the fungal isolates. Fungal isolates containing the FUM genes also
produced fumonisins in cultures, ranging from 28 to 4204 microg g(-1). F.
proliferatum was the only fumonisin-producing Fusarium species in asparagus.
CONCLUSION: Although no fumonisin contamination was detected in asparagus in the 
current survey, we found that the majority of samples contained Fusarium spp.
Because F. proliferatum is a high fumonisin-producing species, potential health
risks for human consumption of asparagus exist, if the appropriate environmental 
conditions are present for this fungus.

(c) 2010 Society of Chemical Industry.

PMID: 20355120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. New Phytol. 2010 May;186(3):696-707. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8137.2010.03224.x. Epub 
2010 Mar 19.

Analysing lodging of the panicle bearing cereal teff (Eragrostis tef).

van Delden SH(1), Vos J, Ennos AR, Stomph TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Crop Systems Analysis, Wageningen University, PO Box 430, NL-6700
AK Wageningen, The Netherlands. S.H.vanDelden@gmail.com

Lodging, the permanent displacement of crop plants from their vertical because of
root or shoot failure, is a major yield constraint of the gluten free, panicle
bearing cereal teff. The objective of this paper was to analyse the causes of
lodging of teff by using, modifying and validating conventional biomechanical
models. The model parameters were obtained from a field trial with two
contrasting teff cultivars, using novel in situ and laboratory measurements under
wet and dry conditions. Cross-species model validation was done with rice (Oryza 
sativa). Teff is more susceptible to root lodging than to shoot lodging, although
the data indicated that shoot strength is also insufficient. Hence,
simultaneously breeding for both improved root anchorage and shoot strength is
advocated. The study showed that the lodging model, derived for the spike-bearing
cereal wheat, needed modifications in order to be able to deal with
panicle-bearing plants such as teff and rice. Water adhering to plants owing to
rain or dew increased calculated lodging susceptibility. To prevent
underestimation of lodging susceptibility, future lodging research should be done
under completely wet conditions (water saturated soil and wetted shoots).

PMID: 20345637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. OMICS. 2010 Apr;14(2):151-6. doi: 10.1089/omi.2009.0022.

Prediction of stability upon point mutation in the context of the folding
nucleus.

Lonquety M(1), Chomilier J, Papandreou N, Lacroix Z.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Data Management Laboratory, Arizona State University, Tempe,
Arizona, USA.

Proteins come in all shapes and sizes. Although it is possible to predict with
reasonable success their structure from their sequence, the process of folding a 
chain of amino acids into its tertiary structure remains partially understood.
This article addresses several characteristics pertaining to protein folding. The
development of the Most Interacting Residues (MIR) algorithm, which dynamically
simulates the early folding events, permits a reasonable ab initio prediction of 
the deeply buried critical residues involved in the formation of the protein
core. The analysis of MIR positions with respect to protein 3D topology, in
particular, to fragments called Tightened End Fragments (TEF) that might be good 
candidate for autonomous folding units, suggests that they are also essential for
defining core stability. To validate this hypothesis, this study measures the
sensitivity of MIR residues to point mutations. It is performed on a set of 385
proteins from a database that contains stability data calculated with five
different algorithms. Tools have been developed to help the analysis and a
consensus of the five methods is proposed. It results that positions predicted
both as a MIR and a minimum of stability for the consensus are good candidates
for the folding nucleus, and consequently their mutations may be hazardous.

PMID: 20337532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Esophageal Atresia/Tracheoesophageal Fistula Overview.

Scott DA.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2009 Mar 12.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Esophageal atresia (EA) is a developmental defect of
the upper gastrointestinal tract in which the continuity between the upper and
lower esophagus is lost. EA can occur with or without tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF), an abnormal connection between the trachea and the esophagus.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: EA may be detected prenatally and postnatally by imaging
studies. EA/TEF can be isolated (not associated with other birth defects),
syndromic (associated with other birth defects comprising a specific genetic
diagnosis), or non-isolated (associated with other defects, but not a specific
genetic diagnosis). Diagnosis of syndromic EA/TEF is based on clinical findings
with or without molecular confirmation.
GENETIC COUNSELING: If an individual with EA/TEF has a specific genetic syndrome 
or an inherited or de novo chromosome abnormality, genetic counseling for that
condition is indicated. Isolated EA/TEF is generally considered to be inherited
in a multifactorial manner.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Initial postnatal intervention is aimed 
at minimizing the risk for aspiration pneumonia. Surgical repair consists of
closure of the TEF and anastomosis of the esophageal segments. Other
abnormalities are treated symptomatically.

PMID: 20301753  [PubMed]


69. Pediatr Radiol. 2010 Aug;40(8):1353-9. doi: 10.1007/s00247-010-1603-0. Epub 2010 
Mar 10.

Congenital esophageal stenosis associated with esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula: clinical and radiologic features.

Yoo HJ(1), Kim WS, Cheon JE, Yoo SY, Park KW, Jung SE, Shin SM, Kim IO, Yeon KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Institute of Radiation Medicine, 101 Daehangno, Jongno-Gu, Seoul, 110-744, South 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) can be associated with
esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). Because there are a
variety of degrees of obstruction and symptoms of CES, it is frequently difficult
to make a pre- and post-operative diagnosis of the distal CES associated with
EA/TEF.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical and radiologic features of congenital
esophageal stenosis associated with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed postoperative esophagograms
and medical records of 187 children (107 boys, 80 girls) who had primary repair
of EA/TEF from 1992 to 2009 at our institution. We evaluated the incidence of
CES, clinical findings, radiologic features and management of CES in these
children.
RESULTS: CES was diagnosed in 22 of 187 EA/TEF children (12%); one child had
double CES lesions, for a total of 23 lesions. Ten of those 22 children (45%) had
presented with significant symptoms of esophageal obstruction. The diagnosis of
CES was delayed in 10 children (45%) until 1-10 years of age. On esophagogram,
CES (n = 23) was located in the distal esophagus (n = 20, 87%) or mid-esophagus
(n = 3, 13%). The degree of stenosis was severe (n = 6, 26%), moderate (n = 10,
43%), or mild (n = 7, 30%). Eight children, including two with unsuccessful
esophageal balloon dilatation of CES, were treated surgically. Histologic
examination revealed tracheobronchial remnant (n = 7) or fibromuscular
hyperplasia (n = 1). One child with surgically treated CES developed achalasia at
the age of 3 years 9 months.
CONCLUSION: Esophagography after EA/TEF repair should be performed with a high
index of suspicion for the presence of distal CES, because the diagnosis and
adequate management of CES can often be delayed.

PMID: 20221592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Dec 15;89(46):3257-60.

[Sealing of tracheoesophageal fistula using Sigma covered mental stents].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HW(1), Luo LF, Li J, Zhou YZ, Ma HM, Zou H, Li DM.

Author information: 
(1)Minimal Invasive Tumor Therapy Center, Bejing Coal General Hospital, Bejing
100028, China. wanghongwu2003@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the possibilities and efficiency of Sigma covered stents
for the treatment of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: Between 2006 and 2009, 10 Sigma covered mental stents had been placed by
guidance of bronchoscopy and/or fluoroscopy in 8 patients with 9
tracheoesophageal fistulas. Among them, 7 fistulas were caused by cancer and 2 by
mechanical damage. Seven fistulas were located in lower part of trachea and 1
each in the middle and upper parts.
RESULTS: Six Y-shaped, 2 L-shaped and 2 I-shaped stents were placed respectively 
in 8 patients with 9 TEFs. All the TEFs were effectively sealed by the stents
except for 1 massive lower and 1 upper fistulas. One mechanical fistula was cured
within 1 year of stent placement. The mean survival period of all patients was 8 
months.
CONCLUSION: By sealing the fistula with a Sigma covered stent, severe respiratory
infection may be successfully controlled in patients with TEFs with a major
improvement of quality of life.

PMID: 20193363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Chemosphere. 2010 Apr;79(3):334-40. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2010.01.031. Epub 
2010 Feb 26.

Dietary intake of PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs of the Belgian population.

Windal I(1), Vandevijvere S, Maleki M, Goscinny S, Vinkx C, Focant JF, Eppe G,
Hanot V, Van Loco J.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Institute of Public Health, Bruxelles, Belgium.

The World Health Organization recommends assessing human exposure to contaminants
on a regular basis. In order to assess the current dietary exposure of the
Belgian adult population to PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs and to update exposure
estimates of 2000-2001, a total diet study was designed. The mean dietary intake 
of PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs in the Belgian adult population in 2008 was
estimated to be 0.72pgTEQkgbw(-1)d(-1) (middle bound concentrations, TEF of 1998)
based on occurrence data of 2008 and national food consumption data of 2004. This
value is clearly below the Tolerable Weekly Intake (TWI) of
14pgTEQkgbw(-1)week(-1) set by the Scientific Committee on Food of the European
Commission and below the provisional tolerable monthly intake of
70pgTEQkgbw(-1)month(-1) set by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food
Additives. Considering the cumulative distribution, the intake was less than
1pgTEQkgbw(-1)d(-1) for more than 80% of the population, and less than
2pgTEQkgbw(-1)d(-1) for the entire population. When using the 2005 TEF instead of
the 1998 TEF, the mean dietary intake in the Belgian adult population was
estimated to be 0.61pgTEQkgbw(-1)d(-1).

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20189220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Pediatr Surg Int. 2010 Apr;26(4):407-11. doi: 10.1007/s00383-010-2580-y. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

Mesenchymal expression of Tbx4 gene is not altered in Adriamycin mouse model.

Hajduk P(1), Murphy P, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin
12, Ireland. hajdukp@tcd.ie

PURPOSE: The Adriamycin mouse model (AMM) is a reproducible teratogenic model of 
esophageal atresia/tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA/TEF). Tbx4 is a member of the
T-box family of transcription factor genes, which is reported to play a key role 
in separation of the respiratory tract and the esophagus. Up-regulation of Tbx4
is reported to cause TEF in the chick. Optical projection tomography (OPT) is a
technique that allows three-dimensional (3D) imaging of gene expression in small 
tissue specimens in an anatomical context. The aim of this study was to
investigate the temporo-spatial expression of Tbx4 during the critical period of 
separation of the trachea and esophagus in normal and Adriamycin treated embryos 
using OPT.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Time-mated CBA/Ca mice received intraperitoneal injections
of Adriamycin (6 mg/kg) or saline on days 7 and 8 of gestation. Embryos were
harvested on days 9-12, stained following whole mount in situ hybridization with 
labeled RNA probes to detect Tbx4 transcripts (n = 5 for each treatment/day of
gestation). Immunolocalization with the endoderm marker Hnf3beta was used to
visualize morphology. Embryos were scanned by OPT to obtain 3D representations of
gene expression domains. Animal licence no. B100/4106.
RESULTS: OPT elegantly revealed Tbx4 gene expression in both controls and in the 
disorganized pulmonary mesenchyme in the treated embryos. Although characteristic
morphological abnormalities were observed in Adriamycin treated embryos, there
was no significant difference in Tbx4 transcript distribution around lung
primordia in comparison with control embryos.
CONCLUSION: Although previously reported morphological abnormalities of notochord
and esophagus were observed in AMM, Tbx4 gene expression was unaltered,
suggesting that esophageal anomalies can occur in the presence of normal Tbx4
gene expression in this model.

PMID: 20182749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Stud Mycol. 2009;64:175-209. doi: 10.3114/sim.2009.64.10.

Molecular taxonomy of bambusicolous fungi: Tetraplosphaeriaceae, a new
pleosporalean family with Tetraploa-like anamorphs.

Tanaka K(1), Hirayama K, Yonezawa H, Hatakeyama S, Harada Y, Sano T, Shirouzu T, 
Hosoya T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Agriculture & Life Sciences, Hirosaki University, Bunkyo-cho 3,
Hirosaki, Aomori 036-8561, Japan.

A new pleosporalean family Tetraplosphaeriaceae is established to accommodate
five new genera; 1) Tetraplosphaeria with small ascomata and anamorphs belonging 
to Tetraploa s. str., 2) Triplosphaeria characterised by hemispherical ascomata
with rim-like side walls and anamorphs similar to Tetraploa but with three
conidial setose appendages, 3) Polyplosphaeria with large ascomata surrounded by 
brown hyphae and anamorphs producing globose conidia with several setose
appendages, 4) Pseudotetraploa, an anamorphic genus, having obpyriform conidia
with pseudosepta and four to eight setose appendages, and 5) Quadricrura, an
anamorphic genus, having globose conidia with one or two long setose appendages
at the apex and four to five short setose appendages at the base. Fifteen new
taxa in these genera mostly collected from bamboo are described and illustrated. 
They are linked by their Tetraploa s. l. anamorphs. To infer phylogenetic
placement in the Pleosporales, analyses based on a combined dataset of small- and
large-subunit nuclear ribosomal DNA (SSU+LSU nrDNA) was carried out.
Tetraplosphaeriaceae, however, is basal to the main pleosporalean clade and
therefore its relationship with other existing families was not completely
resolved. To evaluate the validity of each taxon and to clarify the phylogenetic 
relationships within this family, further analyses using sequences from ITS-5.8S 
nrDNA (ITS), transcription elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF), and beta-tubulin
(BT), were also conducted. Monophyly of the family and that of each genus were
strongly supported by analyses based on a combined dataset of the three regions
(ITS+TEF+BT). Our results also suggest that Tetraplosphaeria (anamorph: Tetraploa
s. str.) is an ancestral lineage within this family. Taxonomic placement of the
bambusicolous fungi in Astrosphaeriella, Kalmusia, Katumotoa, Massarina,
Ophiosphaerella, Phaeosphaeria, Roussoella, Roussoellopsis, and
Versicolorisporium, are also discussed based on the SSU+LSU phylogeny.

PMCID: PMC2816973
PMID: 20169030  [PubMed]


74. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2009 Nov;30(11):3167-72.

[Gaseous polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Harbin air].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma WL(1), Li YF, Sun DZ, Qi H, Liu LY, Zhang Z, Tian CG, Shen JM.

Author information: 
(1)International Joint Research Centre for Persistent Toxic Substances
(IJRC-PTS), State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, Harbin 
Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China. mawanli002@163.com

Polyurethane foam passive air samplers (PUF PAS) were fixed at eight sampling
sites in Harbin Region concurrently to research atmospheric concentration and
distribution of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in Spring of 2007
(January to April). Results showed that the PUF PAS mostly absorbed the 3-4 ring 
PAHs, which accounted for 91.22%-96.37% comparing to total concentration. Total
PAHs concentration had obvious area difference from urban to remote areas, such
as 356.49 ng/d for urban, 162.65 ng/d for suburban, 278.35 ng/d for rural and
183.99 ng/d for background, with ratios of urban atmospheric concentration to
rural concentration more than 2, three times higher than that of remote area. The
atmospheric concentration was significantly affected by sources. Sources of PAHs 
in air of Harbin Region were investigated by diagnostic ratios, which indicated
that coal and biofuel combustion were the main sources of PAHs in air of urban
and rural area, respectively. The toxic equivalence factor (TEF) was used for
health risk assessment, with similar area difference to concentration
distribution, which implying bigger potential heath risk for urban and rural
people than other areas. Good reproducibility of PUF passive air sampler was
confirmed by one pair of passive samplers deployed at an urban site. The results 
of the study demonstrated the capability of PUF PAS to monitor atmospheric PAHs
in a city scale at the same time.

PMID: 20063724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2010 Feb;45(2):202-4. doi: 10.1002/ppul.21148.

Pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma associated with repaired congenital
tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia.

Esquibies AE(1), Zambrano E, Ziai J, Kesebir D, Touloukian RJ, Egan ME,
Reyes-Múgica M, Bazzy-Asaad A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Respiratory Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. americo.esquibies@yale.edu

We report a 19-year-old man with pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) who had 
a history of vertebral, anal, cardiac, tracheal, esophageal, renal, and radial
limb defects (VACTERL) association and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) +
esophageal atresia (EA) repair as an infant. Children that undergo TEF + EA
repair may have an increased risk for developing cancer as they reach adulthood.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20054858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2010 Mar;56(2):225-36. doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2009.12.008.
Epub 2010 Jan 1.

Development of TEFs for PCB congeners by using an alternative biomarker--thyroid 
hormone levels.

Yang JM(1), Salmon AG, Marty MA.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, California Environmental
Protection Agency, Oakland, CA 94612, USA. jyang@oehha.ca.gov

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are ubiquitous toxic contaminants. Health risk
assessment for this class of chemicals is complex: the current toxic equivalency 
factor (TEF) method covers dioxin-like (DL-) PCBs, dibenzofurans, and dioxins,
but excludes non-DL-PCBs. To address this deficiency, we evaluated published data
for several PCB congeners to determine common biomarkers of effect. We found that
the most sensitive biomarkers for DL-non-ortho-PCB 77 and PCB 126 are liver
enzyme (e.g., ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase, EROD) induction, circulating
thyroxine (T4) decrease, and brain dopamine (DA) elevation. For DL-ortho-PCB 118 
and non-DL-ortho-PCB 28 and PCB 153, the most sensitive biomarkers are brain DA
decrease and circulating T4 decrease. The only consistent biomarker for both DL- 
and non-DL-PCBs is circulating T4 decrease. The calculated TEF-(TH), based on the
effective dose to decrease T4 by 30% (ED(30)) with reference to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), is identical to both TEF-(WHO98) and 
TEF-(WHO05) for TCDD and DL-PCBs (correlation coefficients are r=1.00, P<0.001;
and r=0.99, P<0.001, respectively). We conclude that T4 decrease is a prospective
biomarker for generating a new TEF scheme which includes some non-DL-congeners.
The new TEF-(TH) parallels the TEF-(WHO) for DL-PCBs and, most importantly, is
useful for non-DL-PCBs in risk assessment to address thyroid endocrine disruption
and potentially the neurotoxic effects of PCBs.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20043972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Pol J Vet Sci. 2010;13(4):629-38.

Transcriptional pattern of TGF-beta1 inhibitory effect on mouse C2C12 myoblasts
differentiation.

Wicik Z(1), Sadkowski T, Jank M, Motyl T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776 Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of the present study was to define the effect of TGF-beta1 on C2C12
myoblasts myogenesis. TGF-beta1 together with its receptor is a negative
auto-paracrine regulator of myogenesis, which influences the proliferation,
differentiation, and functions of muscle cells. TGF-beta1 exerts highly
significant inhibitory effect on differentiation of C2C12 mouse myoblasts
manifested by the impairment of cell fusion and very low expression of myosin
heavy chain. The study of differentiating C2C12 mouse myoblasts treated with
TGF-beta1 revealed 502 genes (436 down-regulated and 66 up-regulated) with
statistically different expression. TGF-beta1-regulated genes were identified to 
be involved in 29 biological processes, 29 molecular functions groups and 59
pathways. The strongest inhibiting effect of TGF-beta1 was observed in the
cadherin and Wnt pathways. The key-genes that could play the role of TGF-beta1
targets during myoblasts differentiation was identified such as: Max, Creb1,
Ccna2, Bax, MdfL, Tef, Tubg1, Cxcl5, Rho, Calca and Lgals4.

PMID: 21370740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Pediatr. 2009;2009:695837. doi: 10.1155/2009/695837. Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Intramural ganglion structures in esophageal atresia: a morphologic and
immunohistochemical study.

Zuccarello B(1), Spada A, Turiaco N, Villari D, Parisi S, Francica I, Fazzari C, 
Pederiva F, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Policlinico Universitario G.Martino, 98125 Messina, Italy.

Introduction and Aim. Disorders of esophageal motility causing dysphagia and
gastroesophageal reflux are frequent in survivors to esophageal atresia (EA) and 
distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The aim of the present study was to
investigate the histologic and immunohistochemical features in both esophageal
atretic segments to further understand the nature of the motor disorders observed
in these patients. Material and Methods. Esophageal specimens from 12 newborns
with EA/TEF and 5 newborns dead of unrelated causes were examined. The specimens 
were fixed in 5% buffered formalin, included in paraffin and cut in 5 micron
sections that were stained with hematoxilin and eosin (H and E), and
immunohistochemical stainings for Actin, S-100 protein, Neurofilament,
Neuron-Specific-Enolase, Chromogranin A and Peripherin were evaluated under the
microscope. Results. In controls, the distribution of the neural elements was
rather homogenous at both levels of the esophagus. In contrast, the atretic
segments showed quantitative and qualitative differences between them with
sparser nervous tissue in the distal one in comparison with the proximal one and 
with controls. Conclusions. These results further support the assumption that
histomorphological alterations of the muscular and nervous elements within the
esophageal wall might contribute to esophageal dysmotility in patients surviving 
neonatal operations for EA/TEF.

PMCID: PMC2778171
PMID: 20041008  [PubMed]


79. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Dec;44(12):2278-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2009.07.047.

Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula in very low-birth-weight neonates:
improved outcomes with staged repair.

Petrosyan M(1), Estrada J, Hunter C, Woo R, Stein J, Ford HR, Anselmo DM.

Author information: 
(1)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA
90027, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The surgical management of esophageal atresia with distal
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) involves early division of the TEF and primary
esophageal anastomosis. However, in premature infants, the morbidity associated
with primary repair remains high, and the optimal surgical approach has not been 
well defined.
METHODS: Medical records of very low-birth-weight infants (<1500 g) with EA/TEF
from June 1987 to 2008 were retrospectively reviewed. Patients were separated
into 2 groups: (1) primary repair and (2) ligation and division of TEF followed
by delayed repair of EA. Demographics, anastomotic, and postoperative
complications were compared.
RESULTS: Twenty-five premature infants with EA/TEF were identified. Sixteen
patients (64%) underwent primary repair, and 9 (36%) were repaired in a staged
manner. The leak rate confirmed by esophagram was significantly higher after
primary repair (50%) compared to staged repair (0%) (P = .034). Strictures
occurred significantly more often in the primary repair (81%) vs the staged
repair (33%) group (P = .036). Postoperative pneumonia and sepsis were
significantly higher in patients treated with primary repair (P = .028).
CONCLUSION: Staged repair of EA/TEF in very low-birth-weight premature infants
results in a significantly lower rate of anastomotic complications and overall
morbidity and should be considered the preferred surgical approach in this group 
of patients.

PMID: 20006009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Nov;44(11):2107-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2009.04.036.

Tracheal diverticula after tracheoesophageal fistula repair: case series and
review of the literature.

Shah AR(1), Lazar EL, Atlas AB.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Center For Children, Goryeb Children's Hospital, Atlantic Health, 
Morristown, NJ 07962, USA. ashish.shah@atlantichealth.org

BACKGROUND: Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is the most common congenital
tracheal abnormality, frequently associated with esophageal atresia. Respiratory 
symptoms are associated with all types of TEF, even after surgical repair of the 
fistula. Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) with aspiration of gastric contents,
structural instability of the airways (tracheomalacia), abnormal respiratory
epithelium, abnormal esophageal motility, recurrent TEF, and esophageal stenosis 
contribute to postsurgical complications.
METHODS: We review 7 patients between 4 and 14 years of age with a history of TEF
repair and persistent or worsening respiratory symptoms despite conventional
airway clearance techniques and treatment of GER.
RESULTS: Bronchoscopic evaluation in all 7 patients revealed tracheomalacia and a
diverticulum on the posterior wall of the trachea at the fistula repair site.
CONCLUSION: We hypothesize that the diverticula impaired airway clearance and
contributed to persistent respiratory symptoms. Possible mechanisms for the
diverticulum contributing to poor airway clearance include facilitating the
pooling of secretions and acting as a "barrier" to the lower airway clearance
mechanism. The diagnosis of a diverticulum should be considered early in patients
with persistent respiratory symptoms after management of GER and tracheomalacia. 
Early obliteration of tracheal diverticula might improve respiratory status in
some patients.

PMID: 19944217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Thorac Dis. 2009 Dec;1(1):39-45.

Surgical Management Of 3 Cases With Huge Tracheoesophageal Fistula With Esophagus
Segment in situ As Replacement Of The Posterior Membranous Wall Of The Trachea.

He J(1), Chen M, Shao W, Li S, Yin W, Gu Y, Wang D, Tucker S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery (Drs He, Shao, Li, Yin, and Wang),
Department of Pathology (Dr Gu), the First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou
Medical College, Guangzhou Research Institute of Respiratory Disease & China
State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease (Drs He, Chen, Shao, Li, Yin, and
Wang), Centro Hospital Conde De S. Januario (Dr Chen), Pacific Cancer Centre
Singapore (Dr Tucker).

OBJECTIVE: Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is an uncommon and potentially
life-threatening complication of blunt chest trauma. The objectives of this
report are to describe our surgical experience in three patients with huge TEF
and to evaluate the short-term results of surgical management in this potentially
life-threatening complication of blunt chest trauma.
METHODS: Three patients with huge TEF (5.2-7.0 cm in diameter) after blunt chest 
trauma were kept in supine position, then the neck was excided and esophagus was 
free, double breasted suture and clench and mutilation were performed
successively over the same level of superior aperture of thorax. The thoracic
esophagus was then located in situ at the membrane portion where the trachea was 
incomplete. Meanwhile, the stomach was then freed through a middle abdominal
incision and pulled through the posterior tunnel of the sternum to the neck.
Last, an anastomosis between esophagus and tubular stomach was performed over
left neck.
RESULTS: All three patients recovered well after the operation. They were able to
take liquids and then solids beginning ten days after the procedure. One year
post-operation, they were able to resume normal activity.
CONCLUSIONS: The surgical management of patients with huge TEF by esophageal
exclusion (cervical gastroesophagostomy) and use of esophagus segment in situ as 
replacement of the posterior membranous wall of the trachea is feasible.

PMCID: PMC3256480
PMID: 22263001  [PubMed]


82. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 15;337(2):303-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.046. Epub 2009 
Nov 6.

Hippo signaling regulates Yorkie nuclear localization and activity through 14-3-3
dependent and independent mechanisms.

Ren F(1), Zhang L, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The Hippo (Hpo) signaling pathway controls cell growth, proliferation and
apoptosis in both Drosophila and vertebrates. In Drosophila, Hpo signaling
regulates gene expression by inhibiting a transcription complex consisting of the
transcriptional coactivator Yorkie (Yki) and the TEAD/TEF family of transcription
factor Scalloped (Sd). Here we provide genetic evidence that both isoforms of
14-3-3, 14-3-3varepsilon and 14-3-3zeta, regulate Yki activity through modulating
its subcellular localization. Inactivation of 14-3-3 by RNAi or genetic mutations
enhanced whereas overexpression of 14-3-3 suppressed tissue overgrowth induced by
Yki overexpression. Loss of 14-3-3 resulted in the accumulation of Yki in the
nucleus. We found that regulation of Yki by 14-3-3 was mediated by
phosphorylation of Yki at S168. In addition, we found that Hpo signaling also
inhibited Yki nuclear localization and activity by phosphorylating Yki at S111
and S250, and this inhibition appears to be independent of 14-3-3. Finally, we
provided evidence that Hpo signaling restricted Yki nuclear localization
depending on CRM1-mediated nuclear export.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2812623
PMID: 19900439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS Biol. 2009 Oct;7(10):e1000223. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000223. Epub 2009 
Oct 27.

Light directs zebrafish period2 expression via conserved D and E boxes.

Vatine G(1), Vallone D, Appelbaum L, Mracek P, Ben-Moshe Z, Lahiri K, Gothilf Y, 
Foulkes NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

For most species, light represents the principal environmental signal for
entraining the endogenous circadian clock. The zebrafish is a fascinating
vertebrate model for studying this process since unlike mammals, direct exposure 
of most of its tissues to light leads to local clock entrainment. Importantly,
light induces the expression of a set of genes including certain clock genes in
most zebrafish cell types in vivo and in vitro. However, the mechanism linking
light to gene expression remains poorly understood. To elucidate this key
mechanism, here we focus on how light regulates transcription of the zebrafish
period2 (per2) gene. Using transgenic fish and stably transfected cell line-based
assays, we define a Light Responsive Module (LRM) within the per2 promoter. The
LRM lies proximal to the transcription start site and is both necessary and
sufficient for light-driven gene expression and also for a light-dependent
circadian clock regulation. Curiously, the LRM sequence is strongly conserved in 
other vertebrate per2 genes, even in species lacking directly light-sensitive
peripheral clocks. Furthermore, we reveal that the human LRM can substitute for
the zebrafish LRM to confer light-regulated transcription in zebrafish cells. The
LRM contains E- and D-box elements that are critical for its function. While the 
E-box directs circadian clock regulation by mediating BMAL/CLOCK activity, the
D-box confers light-driven expression. The zebrafish homolog of the thyrotroph
embryonic factor binds efficiently to the LRM D-box and transactivates
expression. We demonstrate that tef mRNA levels are light inducible and that
knock-down of tef expression attenuates light-driven transcription from the per2 
promoter in vivo. Together, our results support a model where a light-dependent
crosstalk between E- and D-box binding factors is a central determinant of per2
expression. These findings extend the general understanding of the mechanism
whereby the clock is entrained by light and how the regulation of clock gene
expression by light has evolved in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC2759001
PMID: 19859524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Environ Sci Technol. 2009 Oct 1;43(19):7478-83.

Application of a bioassay using DR-EcoScreen cells to the determination of
dioxins in ambient air: a comparative study with HRGC-HRMS analysis.

Anezaki K(1), Yamaguchi K, Takeuchi S, Iida M, Jin K, Kojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Hokkaido Institute of Environmental Sciences, Kita-19, Nishi-12, Kita-ku,
Sapporo 060-0819, Japan.

There is a strong need for the development of relatively rapid and low-cost
bioassays for the determination of dioxins (polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins,
dibenzofurans, and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls) in environmental and
food samples. In this study, we applied a bioassay system using highly sensitive 
DR-EcoScreen cells (DR-cell assay) to the determination of low levels of dioxins 
in ambient air samples. The dioxins from 80 ambient air samples were extracted,
purified by cleanup procedure, and applied to both DR-cell assay and
high-resolution gas chromatography/high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRGC-HRMS) 
analysis. Interestingly, the toxic equivalents (TEQ) values obtained from the
DR-cell assay were closely correlated with those from the HRGC-HRMS analysis (r2 
= 0.957). Although the cell-based TEQ values were relatively (3.66-fold) higher
than the TEQ values from the HRGC-HRMS analysis, this discrepancy was thought to 
be due to the difference between the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) and the
relative potency (DR-REP) determined for individual dioxins. Therefore, we
multiplied the TEQ values from the DR-cell assay by a conversion coefficient
(0.273, the reciprocal of 3.66) and could approximate the values from the
HRGC-HRMS analysis. These results clearly suggest at the DR-cell assay might be a
promising method for the rapid and low-cost screening of dioxins in ambient air
samples.

PMID: 19848164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mech Dev. 2010 Jan-Feb;127(1-2):120-36. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.10.001. Epub 2009
Oct 13.

Vestigial-like 2 acts downstream of MyoD activation and is associated with
skeletal muscle differentiation in chick myogenesis.

Bonnet A(1), Dai F, Brand-Saberi B, Duprez D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR7622, Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du Développement, Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France.

The co-factor Vestigial-like 2 (Vgl-2), in association with the
Scalloped/Tef/Tead transcription factors, has been identified as a component of
the myogenic program in the C2C12 cell line. In order to understand Vgl-2
function in embryonic muscle formation, we analysed Vgl-2 expression and
regulation during chick embryonic development. Vgl-2 expression was associated
with all known sites of skeletal muscle formation, including those in the head,
trunk and limb. Vgl-2 was expressed after the myogenic factor MyoD, regardless of
the site of myogenesis. Analysis of Vgl-2 regulation by Notch signalling showed
that Vgl-2 expression was down-regulated by Delta1-activated Notch, similarly to 
the muscle differentiation genes MyoD, Myogenin,Desmin, and Mef2c, while the
expression of the muscle progenitor markers such as Myf5, Six1 and FgfR4 was not 
modified. Moreover, we established that the Myogenic Regulatory Factors (MRFs)
associated with skeletal muscle differentiation (MyoD, Myogenin and Mrf4) were
sufficient to activate Vgl-2 expression, while Myf5 was not able to do so. The
Vgl-2 endogenous expression, the similar regulation of Vgl-2 and that of MyoD and
Myogenin by Notch signalling, and the positive regulation of Vgl-2 by these MRFs 
suggest that Vgl-2 acts downstream of MyoD activation and is associated with the 
differentiation step in embryonic skeletal myogenesis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19833199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jan;37(1):629-36. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9882-y.

Investigation of LDHA and COPB1 as candidate genes for muscle development in the 
MYOD1 region of pig chromosome 2.

Qiu H(1), Xu X, Fan B, Rothschild MF, Martin Y, Liu B.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Biology and Animal Breeding, Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry of Education, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Porcine MYOD1 gene has been mapped to swine chromosome (SSC) 2p14-p17, which is
involved in the regulation of the proliferation and differentiation of skeletal
muscle cells. The LDHA (lactate dehydrogenase A) and COPB1 (coatomer protein
complex, subunit beta 1) genes, which map close to MYOD1, are involved in energy 
metabolism and protein transport processes. Both genes might play important roles
in muscle development. However, little is known about the porcine LDHA and COPB1 
genes. In the present study, the full-length cDNA of these two genes were cloned.
The mapping results demonstrated that porcine LDHA and COPB1 were all mapped to
SSC 2p14-p17. In this region, there are several QTL for growth and carcass
traits, including average backfat thickness, lean and fat percentage. The RT-PCR 
results revealed that both LDHA and COPB1 were highly expressed in porcine
skeletal muscle tissues, implying their potential regulatory function of muscle
development. LDHA and COPB1 were then mapped to the region and multipoint
analyses generated a best sex-averaged map order of each gene between linked
markers: MYOD1_75.2 cM _LDHA_79 cM _CSRP3_83.8 cM _TEF-1_86.5 cM _COPB1_90 cM.
Association analyses revealed that the substitution of c.423A>G had a significant
effect on average daily gain on test, average backfat thickness (BFT), loin
muscle area, lumbar BFT, marbling score, tenth rib BFT, average drip loss and
fiber type II ratio. The substitution of c.3096C>T had a significant effect on
average BFT, lumbar BFT, tenth rib BFT, carcass weight and last rib BFT.
Interestingly, both SNPs were all associated with average BFT, lumbar BFT and
tenth rib BFT.

PMID: 19830590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 22;106(38):16523-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904890106. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Molecular clock is involved in predictive circadian adjustment of renal function.

Zuber AM(1), Centeno G, Pradervand S, Nikolaeva S, Maquelin L, Cardinaux L, Bonny
O, Firsov D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Lausanne, 1005
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Renal excretion of water and major electrolytes exhibits a significant circadian 
rhythm. This functional periodicity is believed to result, at least in part, from
circadian changes in secretion/reabsorption capacities of the distal nephron and 
collecting ducts. Here, we studied the molecular mechanisms underlying circadian 
rhythms in the distal nephron segments, i.e., distal convoluted tubule (DCT) and 
connecting tubule (CNT) and the cortical collecting duct (CCD). Temporal
expression analysis performed on microdissected mouse DCT/CNT or CCD revealed a
marked circadian rhythmicity in the expression of a large number of genes
crucially involved in various homeostatic functions of the kidney. This analysis 
also revealed that both DCT/CNT and CCD possess an intrinsic circadian timing
system characterized by robust oscillations in the expression of circadian core
clock genes (clock, bma11, npas2, per, cry, nr1d1) and clock-controlled Par bZip 
transcriptional factors dbp, hlf, and tef. The clock knockout mice or mice devoid
of dbp/hlf/tef (triple knockout) exhibit significant changes in renal expression 
of several key regulators of water or sodium balance (vasopressin V2 receptor,
aquaporin-2, aquaporin-4, alphaENaC). Functionally, the loss of clock leads to a 
complex phenotype characterized by partial diabetes insipidus, dysregulation of
sodium excretion rhythms, and a significant decrease in blood pressure.
Collectively, this study uncovers a major role of molecular clock in renal
function.

PMCID: PMC2752602
PMID: 19805330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2010 Mar;37(3):576-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.08.023.
Epub 2009 Oct 2.

Surgical treatment of benign tracheo-oesophageal fistulas with tracheal resection
and oesophageal primary closure: is the muscle flap really necessary?

Camargo JJ(1), Machuca TN, Camargo SM, Lobato VF, Medina CR.

Author information: 
(1)R. São Francisco da California 222, Apartment 304, Higienopolis, Porto Alegre,
Rio Grande do Sul, 90550-080, Brazil.

OBJECTIVES: Nowadays, despite the advances of the low-pressure high-volume cuffs,
post-intubation tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) still poses a major challenge
to thoracic surgeons. The original technique includes interposition of muscle
flaps between suture lines to avoid recurrence. It is not clear if this manoeuvre
is indispensable and, in fact, we and others have faced problems with it. Our aim
is to present our experience with TEF management in a consecutive group with no
muscle interposition.
METHODS: From June 1992 to November 2007, we evaluated 14 patients presenting
with TEF, with a mean age of 44 years (from 18 to 79 years). Thirteen patients
had a prolonged intubation history. The remaining case was a 40-year-old male
with congenital TEF. Three patients had been previously submitted to failed
repairs in other institutions. Ten patients had associated tracheal stenosis,
which was subglottic in three of them. Regarding surgical technique, in all
cases, we performed a single-staged procedure, which consisted of tracheal
resection and anastomosis with double-layer oesophageal closure. In none of our
cases was a muscle flap interposed between suture lines.
RESULTS: All operations were performed through a cervical incision; however, in
one case, an extension with partial sternotomy was required. There was no
operative mortality. Thirteen patients were extubated in the first 24h after the 
procedure, while one patient required 48 h of mechanical ventilation. Four
complications were recorded: one each of pneumonia and left vocal cord paralysis 
and two small tracheal dehiscences managed with a T-tube and a tracheostomy tube.
After discharge, three patients returned to their native cities and were lost to 
follow-up. The remaining 11 patients have been followed up by a mean of 32 months
(from three to 108 months), with 10 presenting excellent and one good anatomic
and functional results.
CONCLUSIONS: The single-staged repair with tracheal resection and anastomosis
with oesophageal closure provides good short- and mid-term results for TEF
management. The interposition of a muscle flap between suture lines may not be
crucial to prevent recurrence.

Copyright (c) 2009 European Association for Cardio-Thoracic Surgery. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19800809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2009 Dec;9(6):983-9. doi:
10.1510/icvts.2009.213215. Epub 2009 Sep 15.

Urgent segmental resection as the primary strategy in management of benign
tracheal stenosis. A single center experience in 164 consecutive cases.

Krajc T(1), Janik M, Benej R, Lucenic M, Majer I, Demian J, Harustiak S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Faculty Hospital Bratislava, Slovak Republic. 
tiborkrajc@gmail.com

The report is a retrospective review of 238 benign tracheal stenoses of various
etiologies treated between 1995 and 2008. To show that urgent segmental resection
has complication rates similar to elective resection and, therefore, preoperative
dilation is not necessary, we analysed records of patients who underwent either
standard segmental resections with anterolateral mediastinal tracheal
mobilization, single-suture anastomosis and neck flexion; or insertion of T-tube 
with oval-shaped horizontal arm. Primary segmental resection was performed in 164
patients (68.9%), including 14 cases with concomitant tracheo-esophageal fistula 
(TEF). T-tube as an initial treatment suited 74 (31.1%) patients. We encountered 
two partial and one complete anastomotic disruptions following subglottic
resections treated by T-tube insertion and costal cartilage tracheoplasty or
permanent tracheostomy. Restenosis rate in segmental resection was 3.1%. No
difference in complication rate between urgent and elective segmental resections 
was experienced. We treated a small number of patients by endotracheal stent
insertion but the results were discouraging. Urgent segmental resection without
prior rigid bronchoscopy dilation is our strategy of choice whenever possible. As
an alternative to dilation we prefer temporary insertion of modified T-tube.
Stand-alone endoluminal dilation and stenting has yet to prove its safety and
long-term efficacy.

PMID: 19755399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2009 Oct;75(20):6441-50. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00736-09. Epub 
2009 Aug 21.

Comparison of effects of compost amendment and of single-strain inoculation on
root bacterial communities of young cucumber seedlings.

Ofek M(1), Hadar Y, Minz D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Soil, Water and Environmental Sciences, Agricultural Research
Organization of Israel, P.O. Box 6, Bet Dagan, Israel.

Compost amendment and inoculations with specific microorganisms are fundamentally
different soil treatment methods, commonly used in agriculture for the
improvement of plant growth and health. Although distinct, both methods affect
the rhizosphere and the plant roots. In the present study we used a 16S rRNA gene
approach to achieve an overview of early consequences of these treatments on the 
assemblage of plant root bacterial communities. For this purpose, cucumber
seedlings were grown, under controlled conditions, in perlite potting mix amended
with biosolid compost or straw compost, or inoculated with Streptomyces spp. A
uniform trend of response of root bacterial communities for all treatments was
observed. Root bacterial density, measured as bacterial targets per plant tef
gene by real-time PCR, was reduced in 31 to 67%. In addition, increased taxonomic
diversity accompanied shifts in composition (alpha-diversity). The magnitude of
change in these parameters relative to the perlite control varied between the
different treatments but not in relation to the treatment method (compost
amendments versus inoculations). Similarity between the compositions of root and 
of potting mix bacterial communities (beta-diversity) was relatively unchanged.
The abundance of Oxalobacteraceae was >50% of the total root bacterial community 
in the untreated perlite. Root domination by this group subsided >10-fold (straw 
compost) to >600-fold (Streptomyces sp. strain S1) after treatment. Thus, loss of
dominance appears to be the major phenomenon underlining the response trend of
the root bacterial communities.

PMCID: PMC2765130
PMID: 19700550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mycol Res. 2009 Nov;113(Pt 11):1271-82. doi: 10.1016/j.mycres.2009.08.009. Epub
2009 Aug 18.

Are the microcyclic rust species Puccinia melampodii and Puccinia xanthii
conspecific?

Seier MK(1), Morin L, van der merwe M, Evans HC, Romero A.

Author information: 
(1)CABI Europe-UK, Egham, Surrey, UK. m.seier@cabi.org

The taxonomic relationship between two microcyclic rust species, Puccinia
melampodii and Puccinia xanthii, recorded from a number of Asteraceae hosts, was 
explored by comparing teliospore morphology, host specificity and sequence data. 
Teliospore morphology varied between and within individual rust accessions but,
in general, teliospores of P. xanthii were larger than those of P. melampodii.
Field observations and cross-inoculation greenhouse studies showed that P.
melampodii accessions were highly specific to their original host species and
unable to establish compatible interactions with related Asteraceae species.
Though small amounts of genetic variation were detected between P. melampodii and
P. xanthii accessions, the ITS and TEF phylogenetic analyses comprising several
other rust species grouped these accessions within a well supported clade. Our
data indicate that despite differences between P. xanthii and P. melampodii
accessions these rusts cannot readily be separated at the species level,
supporting earlier taxonomic conclusions and the recent proposal to group them
into a morphospecies. Based on host-specificity data, the name Puccinia xanthii
var. parthenii-hysterophorae is proposed to accommodate all Mesoamerican records 
of P. melampodii associated with the host Parthenium hysterophorus.

PMID: 19695329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2009 Oct;19(5):671-4. doi: 10.1089/lap.2009.0083.

Experience with thoracoscopic tracheal surgery in infants and children.

Rothenberg SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, The Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children,
1601 East 19th Avenue, Suite 5500, Denver, CO 80218, USA. steverberg@aol.com

PURPOSE: Complex thoracoscopic procedures in infants and children, such as
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair and lung resection, have already been
shown to be safe and efficacious in infants and children. This study evaluated
the application of thoracoscopic techniques in more complex, unusual tracheal
anomalies.
METHODS: From January 2002 to October 2008, 9 patients with more rare anatomic
tracheal anomalies, between the thoracic inlet and the carina, were treated by
thoracoscopy. Ages ranged from 5 months to 8 years and weights ranged from 5.4 to
8 years and from 5.9 to 42 kg. Pathology included 3 H-type TEFs, 2 recurrent TEFs
following previous open repair of an esophageal atresia with fistula, resection
of a giant tracheal pouch, and 3 tracheobronchi with associated abnormal lung
parenchyma.
RESULTS: All procedures were successfully completed thoracoscopically. Operative 
times ranged from 60 to 130 minutes. Procedures included division and closure of 
the 3 H-type fistulas and 2 recurrent fistulas, resection of the tracheal pouch, 
2 upper lobectomies, and resection of an aberrant upper lobe segment by
segmentectomy. There were no operative or postoperative complications. Chest
tubes were left in for an average of 1 day, and hospital stay averaged 2.2 days.
CONCLUSIONS: Thoracoscopy provides an excellent technique for approaching
tracheal pathology from the level of the thoracic inlet to the carina. A
thoracoscopic approach avoids the morbidity of a major thoracotomy and virigule
or a major neck exploration while providing greater exposure, especially in the
upper thorax.

PMID: 19694569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Nov;112(1):221-8. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfp180. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

Automated dose-response analysis of the relative hepatic gene expression potency 
of TCDF in C57BL/6 mice.

Burgoon LD(1), Ding Q, N'jai A, Dere E, Burg AR, Rowlands JC, Budinsky RA,
Stebbins KE, Zacharewski TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University, 501
Biochemistry Building, Wilson Road, East Lansing, MI 48824-1319, USA.

Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) are assigned to dioxin-like chemicals based on
relative potency (REP) values of individual adaptive and toxic responses compared
to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). Agilent 4x44K oligonucleotide
microarrays were used to examine the hepatic gene expression potency of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran (TCDF), relative to TCDD with complementary
histopathology, TCDD and TCDF tissue level analysis, and
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) assay data. Immature ovariectomized C57BL/6
mice were gavaged with 0.03, 0.1, 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30, or 100 microg/kg TCDD, the
World Health Organization TEF-adjusted doses (10 x TCDD dose) of TCDF (0.3, 1, 3,
10, 30, 100, or 300 microg/kg), or sesame oil vehicle and killed at 72 h. Two
thousand two hundred eighty-eight and 1347 genes were differentially expressed
(P1(t) > 0.90) at one or more doses by TCDD and TCDF, respectively. Automated
dose-response modeling (ToxResponse Modeler) identified a total of 1027 and 837
genes with either a sigmoidal, exponential, linear, Gaussian, or quadratic
dose-response relationship 72 h after treatment in TCDD and TCDF, respectively.
Two hundred seventy genes exhibited a sigmoidal TCDD-induced dose-response
(ED(50s) from 0.08 to 42.2 microg/kg) compared to only 179 sigmoidal responsive
genes (ED(50s) from 0.74 to 299.9 microg/kg) elicited by TCDF. Of the 1027 TCDD
dose-responsive genes, 654 were not examined further due to the lack of a dose
response elicited by TCDF. Of the 373 genes that exhibited a TCDD and TCDF dose
response, REPs were calculated for the 83 genes that exhibited comparable
sigmoidal curve shapes and slopes. The median REP for these 83 genes was 0.10,
with a maximum REP of 0.56 and a minimum of 0.01. REPs of 0.04 were also
calculated for EROD and increase in relative liver weight (RLW) at 72 h.
Collectively, the lower number of TCDF-induced genes compared to TCDD and the
0.04 REPs for EROD activity and increased RLW are not consistent with the TEF of 
0.10 for the hepatotoxicity of TCDF in C57BL/6 mice at 72 h.

PMID: 19675144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Anal Sci. 2009 Aug;25(8):1029-32.

Highly sensitive reporter gene assay for dioxins in human plasma by using
cycloheximide as an enhancer substance.

Saito K(1), Matsunaga H, Ohmura A, Takekuma M, Matsuki Y, Nakazawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hoshi 
University, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan. k-saito@hoshi.ac.jp

A reporter gene assay (RGA) that uses a mouse liver recombinant Hepa1c1c7
containing the firefly luciferase gene was developed to screen for dioxins in
human plasma. For a high-sensitivity method, the addition of cycloheximide to the
culture medium brought about a fivefold increase in the sensitivity. The
detection limit was 0.1 pg/microL/well. Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) binding
affinity factors (AhR-BAF), calculated from the effect concentration 50 (EC(50)) 
value, showed approximately the same values as those in WHO-TEF (2006). A
significant correlation between RGA and the conventional gas chromatography/mass 
spectrometry (GC/MS) method was obtained.

PMID: 19667482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochimie. 2009 Nov-Dec;91(11-12):1465-74. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2009.07.016.
Epub 2009 Aug 6.

Prediction of the protein folding core: application to the immunoglobulin fold.

Prudhomme N(1), Chomilier J.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure Prediction, IMPMC, CNRS UMR 7590, Paris 6 University, 75015 
Paris, France.

We propose an algorithm that allows predicting residues important for the
formation of the structure of globular proteins. It relies on a simulation that
detects the amino acids presenting a maximum number of neighbours during the
early steps of the folding process. They have been called MIR (Most Interacting
Residues). Independently, description of the protein structures in fragments with
closed ends shows the correlation between these extremities and the core of the
globules. These fragments are of rather constant length, typically between 20 and
25 amino acids, and we have previously shown that their extremities are
preferentially occupied by MIR. Introduction of rules derived from this fragment 
analysis of tertiary structures allows to smooth the distribution of MIR, for a
better match between TEF ends and MIR. In order to assess this prediction of the 
folding core, a large family of structures has been used, with sequences as
different as possible. A dataset of 56 immunoglobulin structures of various
functions but common fold has been used in this study. This fold was chosen
because it is one of the most populated with a large amount of data available on 
its nucleus. In the immunoglobulin domain, "functional and structural load is
clearly separated: loops are responsible for binding and recognition while
interactions between several residues of the buried core provide stability and
fast folding"[1]. We then determined the positions susceptible of high importance
for the folding process to occur and compared them to published data, either to
High Throw Out Order (HTOO), Conservatism of Conservatism (CoC) or Phi value
experiments. It results a reasonable agreement between the positions that we
predict and experimental data. Besides, our prediction goes beyond the simple use
of a null solvent accessibility of amino acids as a criterion to predict the
core. We find the same quality of our prediction on the flavodoxin like
superfamily.

PMID: 19665046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nihon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 2009 Jul;110(4):179-83.

[Long-term complications of esophageal atresia].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokoi A(1), Nishijima E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kobe Children's Hospital, Kobe, Japan.

Esophageal atresia (EA) is a rather common neonatal anomaly frequently associated
with other congenital anomalies such as cardiac, genitourinary, and anorectal
malformations and chromosomal disorders. It is suggested that the abnormal
pattern of expression of the gene Sonic hedgehog is associated with failure of
tracheoesophageal separation resulting in EA in an animal model. EA with distal
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is the most common type of EA and is usually
treated successfully with division of the TEF and primary anastomosis. However,
the optimal surgical treatment for long-gap EA remains controversial. Even though
the results of delayed anastomosis with the Lividitis method or Collis-Nissen
method are mainly reported to be satisfactory, long-term results show a high
incidence of gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and esophageal dysmotility.
Replacement with the gastric tube, stomach, colon, or jejunum has been performed 
when the gap is too long to use the native esophagus. Anastomotic stricture,
obstruction due to redundancy, and adhesion of substitutes were reported in
long-term follow-up studies. Moreover, the risk of carcinogenesis in Barrett's
metaplasia, which is associated with GER, must be taken into consideration. Thus,
long-term follow-up into adulthood is warranted in patients with EA.

PMID: 19663231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 May;1164:492-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.03768.x.

Electrotactile feedback of sway position improves postural performance during
galvanic vestibular stimulation.

Wood SJ(1), Black FO, MacDougall HG, Moore ST.

Author information: 
(1)Universities Space Research Association, NASA Johnson Space Center, Houston,
Texas 77058, USA.

The purpose of this study was to assess the influence of electrotactile feedback 
on postural control performance during binaural galvanic vestibular stimulation
(GVS). Postural equilibrium was measured with a computerized hydraulic platform
in 10 healthy adults (6M, 4F, 24-65 y). Feedback of anterior-posterior (AP) and
mediallateral (ML) body sway was derived from a 2-axis linear accelerometer
mounted on a torso belt and displayed on a 144-point electrotactile array held
against the anterior dorsal tongue. Subjects were trained to use the tongue
electrotactile feedback (TEF) by voluntarily swaying to draw figures on their
tongue, both with and without GVS. Subjects performed 24 randomized trials (20-s 
duration with eyes closed, 2 trials per condition), including 4 support surface
conditions (fixed, rotational sway-referenced, translating the support surface
proportional to AP sway, and combined rotational-translational support-platform
sway referencing), and 3 feedback conditions (baseline, GVS, and GVS with TEF).
Postural performance was assessed using deviations from upright (peak-to-peak and
root-mean-square sway) and convergence toward stability limits (time and distance
to limit of support boundaries). Postural stability was impaired (with respect to
baseline) during GVS in all platform conditions, with larger decrements in
performance during trials with rotation sway-referencing. Electrotactile feedback
improved performance with GVS toward non-GVS levels, especially during trials
with rotation sway-referencing. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of
TEF in providing sensory substitution to maintain postural stability during
vestibular disturbances.

PMID: 19645956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2009 Oct;107(4):1204-12. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00344.2009. Epub 2009 Jul 23.

Rapid muscle atrophy response to unloading: pretranslational processes involving 
MHC and actin.

Giger JM(1), Bodell PW, Zeng M, Baldwin KM, Haddad F.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentof Physiology and Biophysics, Univ. of California, Irvine, D-346,
Med. Sci. I, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. jmeehan@uci.edu

Skeletal muscles, especially weight-bearing muscles, are very sensitive to
changes in loading state. The aim of this paper was to characterize the dynamic
changes in the unloaded soleus muscle in vivo following a short bout of hindlimb 
suspension (HS), testing the hypothesis that transcriptional events respond early
to the atrophic stimulus. In fact, we observed that after only 1 day of HS,
primary transcript levels of skeletal alpha-actin and type I myosin heavy chain
(MHC) genes were significantly reduced by more than 50% compared with ground
control levels. The degree of the decline for the mRNA expression of actin and
type I MHC lagged behind that of the pre-mRNA levels after 1 day of HS, but by 2 
and 7 days of HS, large decreases were observed. Although the faster MHC
isoforms, IIx and IIb, began to be expressed in soleus after 1 day of HS, a
relatively significant shift in mRNA expression from the slow MHC isoform type I 
toward these fast MHC isoforms did not emerge until 7 days of HS. One day of HS
was sufficient to show significant decreases in mRNA levels of putative signaling
factors serum response factor (SRF), suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS3), 
and striated muscle activator of Rho signaling (STARS), although transcription
factors yin-yang-1 (YY1) and transcriptional enhancing factor-1 (TEF-1) were not 
significantly affected by HS. The protein levels of actin and type I MHC were
significantly decreased after 2 days of HS, and SRF protein was significantly
decreased after 7 days HS. Our results show that after only 1 day of unloading,
pre-mRNA and mRNA expression of muscle proteins and muscle-specific signaling
factors are significantly reduced, suggesting that the downregulation of the
synthesis side of the protein balance equation that occurs in atrophying muscle
is initiated rapidly.

PMCID: PMC2763827
PMID: 19628726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Rhythms. 2009 Aug;24(4):283-94. doi: 10.1177/0748730409336579.

Clock gene modulation by TNF-alpha depends on calcium and p38 MAP kinase
signaling.

Petrzilka S(1), Taraborrelli C, Cavadini G, Fontana A, Birchler T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland.

A 24-h treatment with the cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)
suppresses transcription of E-box-driven clock genes (D-site albumin promoter
binding protein, Dbp; Tyrotroph embryonic factor, Tef ; Hepatic leukemia factor, 
Hlf; Period homolog to Drosophila 1/2/3, Per1, Per2, and Per3) by yet unknown
molecular mechanisms. The attenuation of clock genes has been suggested as a
putative cause for the development of sickness behavior syndrome in infectious
and autoimmune diseases. Here, the authors studied the effect of TNF-alpha at
early time points (<3 h) on intracellular signaling events and clock gene
expression in fibroblasts. Interaction of TNF-alpha with TNFR1 (Tnfrsf1a ,
CD120a, p55), but not TNFR2 (Tnfrsf1b, CD120b , p75), leads to fast
downregulation of gene expression of Dbp and upregulation of negative regulators 
of the molecular clock, Per1 and Per2, Cryptochrome-1 (Cry1), and Differentiated 
embryo chondrocytes-1 (Dec1). Since the decrease of Dbp is also observed in cells
deficient for Per1/Per2, Cry1/Cry2 , or Dec1, these genes are unlikely to be
responsible for inhibition of Dbp. The early effect of TNF-alpha on the clock
gene Per1 is dependent on p38, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), and/or
calcium signaling, whereas the effect on Dbp is independent of p38 MAPK, but also
involves calcium signaling. Both genes remain unaffected by the NF-kappaB and
AP-1 pathway. Taken collectively these data show p38 MAPK- and calcium-dependent 
TNFR1-mediated transient increase of the negative regulator Per1 and an
independent decrease of Dbp.

PMID: 19625730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009 Sep;36(3):600-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2009.05.047. 
Epub 2009 Jul 18.

Surgical management of huge tracheo-oesophageal fistula with oesophagus segment
in situ as replacement of the posterior membranous wall of the trachea.

He J(1), Chen M, Shao W, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, PR China.
drjianxing.he@gmail.com

Tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) is an uncommon and potentially life-threatening
complication of blunt chest trauma. We describe our surgical experience in a
patient with huge TEF (5.6 cm in diameter) and evaluate the short-term results of
surgical management by oesophageal exclusion (cervical gastro-oesophagostomy) and
show that the use of oesophagus segment in situ as replacement of the posterior
membranous wall of the trachea is feasible. Improving the nutrition status and
controlling the lung infection were critical in the perioperation period.

PMID: 19616964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Phytopathology. 2009 Aug;99(8):921-9. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-8-0921.

Differentiation of eleven Fusarium spp. isolated from sugar beet, using
restriction fragment analysis of a polymerase chain reaction-amplified
translation elongation factor 1alpha gene fragment.

Nitschke E(1), Nihlgard M, Varrelmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sugar Beet Research, Goettingen, Germany.

Sugar beet in Europe is commonly grown in wheat and maize crop rotations and
subsequently pile-stored for several weeks. Beet is threatened by the
colonization of saprophytic as well as pathogenic Fusarium spp. A tool for
reliable identification based on sequence information of the translation
elongation factor 1alpha (TEF-1alpha) gene was developed for the numerous
Fusarium spp. being isolated from sugar beets. In all, 65 isolates from different
species (Fusarium avenaceum, F. cerealis, F. culmorum, F. equiseti, F.
graminearum, F. oxysporum, F. proliferatum, F. redolens, F. solani, F.
tricinctum, and F. venenatum) were obtained from sugar beet at different
developmental stages from locations worldwide. Database sequences for additional 
species (F. sporotrichioides, F. poae, F. torulosum, F. hostae, F. sambucinum, F.
subglutinans, and F. verticillioides), isolated from sugar beets in previous
studies, were included in the analysis. Molecular sequence analysis of the
partial TEF-1alpha gene fragment revealed sufficient variability to differentiate
between the Fusarium spp., resulting in species-dependent separation of the
isolates analyzed. This interspecific divergence could be translated into a
polymerase chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism assay using
only two subsequent restriction digests for the differentiation of 17 of 18
species.

PMID: 19594311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Res Microbiol. 2009 Jul-Aug;160(6):380-8. doi: 10.1016/j.resmic.2009.06.008. Epub
2009 Jul 7.

Choice of an adequate promoter for efficient complementation in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: a case study.

Lo Presti L(1), Cerutti L, Monod M, Hauser PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois and
University of Lausanne, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.

Conservation of the function of open reading frames recently identified in fungal
genome projects can be assessed by complementation of deletion mutants of
putative Saccharomyces cerevisiae orthologs. A parallel complementation assay
expressing the homologous wild type S. cerevisiae gene is generally performed as 
a positive control. However, we and others have found that failure of
complementation can occur in this case. We investigated the specific cases of S. 
cerevisiae TBF1 and TIM54 essential genes. Heterologous complementation with
Candida glabrata TBF1 or TIM54 gene was successful using the constitutive
promoters TDH3 and TEF. In contrast, homologous complementation with S.
cerevisiae TBF1 or TIM54 genes failed using these promoters, and was successful
only using the natural promoters of these genes. The reduced growth rate of S.
cerevisiae complemented with C. glabrata TBF1 or TIM54 suggested a diminished
functionality of the heterologous proteins compared to the homologous proteins.
The requirement of the homologous gene for the natural promoter was alleviated
for TBF1 when complementation was assayed in the absence of sporulation and
germination, and for TIM54 when two regions of the protein presumably responsible
for a unique translocation pathway of the TIM54 protein into the mitochondrial
membrane were deleted. Our results demonstrate that the use of different
promoters may prove necessary to obtain successful complementation, with use of
the natural promoter being the best approach for homologous complementation.

PMID: 19589384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Chemosphere. 2009 Aug;76(6):727-33. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2009.05.034. Epub 
2009 Jul 1.

Impact of WHO 2005 revised toxic equivalency factors for dioxins on the TEQs in
serum, household dust and soil.

Hong B(1), Garabrant D, Hedgeman E, Demond A, Gillespie B, Chen Q, Chang CW,
Towey T, Knutson K, Franzblau A, Lepkowski J, Adriaens P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences and the Risk Science Center,
University of Michigan School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA.
hongbili@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: In 2005, the World Health Organization (WHO) - International
Programme on Chemical Safety reevaluated the toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for
dioxin-like compounds and made changes that affect the calculation of the total
toxic equivalent (TEQ). The impact of these changes on the TEQs for human blood
and abiotic matrices such as soil and household dust has not been widely assessed
or reported.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a major exposure study which examined blood, household
dust, and soil levels of dioxin-like compounds in several regions of Michigan, we
found the mean total TEQ was significantly reduced by 26%, 12% and 14% for serum,
household dust, and soil, respectively, when the TEQ was based on the 2005 TEFs
compared to the 1998 TEFs. The decrease in the serum total TEQ was largely due to
the down-weighting of the TEFs for the majority of mono-ortho PCBs. In contrast, 
the decrease in the soil total TEQ was mostly due to the down-weighting of the
TEF for 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF) (1998 TEF=0.5, 2005 TEF=0.3).
For household dust, the decrease in total TEQ was not due to any single TEF but
was due to small changes in a number of compounds. There was a dramatic decrease 
(-88%) in the mean and 95th percentile for mono-ortho PCB TEQ due to the 2005
TEFs.
DISCUSSION: These findings suggest that comparisons between studies based on the 
TEQ-WHO(98) and TEQ-WHO(05) may need to consider an appropriate conversion factor
to assure comparability. Furthermore, the changes in TEFs may have impact in
locations where regulations of soil contamination are triggered by specific TEQ
levels.

PMID: 19573893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 Jul;44(7):e15-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2009.04.004.

Slide tracheoplasty in infant with congenital tracheal stenosis and
tracheomalacia after esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula repair.

Le Bret E(1), Roubertie F, Roger G, Sigal-Cinqualbre A, Coblence M, Belli E,
Gharbi N, Roussin R, Garabédian EN, Serraf A.

Author information: 
(1)Service des Cardiopathies Congénitales, Centre Chirurgical Marie Lannelongue, 
92350 Le Plessis Robinson, France. e.lebret@ccml.fr

Slide tracheoplasty can be applied successfully to all types of long segment
congenital tracheal stenosis. In case of short segment tracheal stenosis, direct 
resection and anastomosis is often preferred. We report a case illustrating a new
side benefit of the slide tracheoplasty in a patient presenting a relatively
short hypoplastic tracheal segment coexisting with tracheomalacia after EA with
TEF repair.

PMID: 19573645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Clin Ultrasound. 2009 Sep;37(7):403-5. doi: 10.1002/jcu.20605.

Prenatal findings of concomitant duodenal and esophageal atresia without
tracheoesophageal fistula (Gross type A).

Mitani Y(1), Hasegawa T, Kubota A, Kawahara H, Yoneda A, Nose K, Nomura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute
for Maternal and Child Health, 840 Murodo-Cho, Izumi, Osaka 594-1101, Japan.

Prenatal diagnosis of concomitant duodenal atresia (DA) and esophageal atresia
(EA) without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) (Gross type A) is very rare. We
describe prenatal findings of one such case. Sonographic examination of a 26-week
fetus showed a double cystic structure and an intrathoracic cyst. MRI and
ultrasound at 26 weeks and 2 days' gestation showed shrinkage of the stomach and 
duodenum, massive ascites, and the presence of dilated pouch-like structure in
the thoracic inlet level, consistent with an upper pouch sign. Polyhydramnios was
detected at 30 weeks' gestation. Prenatal diagnosis was concomitant DA and an
intrathoracic anomaly such as congenital hiatal hernia, diaphragmatic hernia,
esophageal duplication or EA. A boy was delivered at 38 weeks' gestation.
Physical examination showed a markedly distended abdomen and imperforate anus.
Emergency surgery revealed existing DA and EA without TEF (Gross type A).

(c) 2009 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19572291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Dec;15(12):3889-97. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2009.0031.

Vascular smooth muscle cells as a valvular interstitial cell surrogate in heart
valve tissue engineering.

Appleton AJ(1), Appleton CT, Boughner DR, Rogers KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, The Schulich School of Medicine and
Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) are a potential autologous cell 
source for aortic valve tissue engineering, but have a phenotype that differs
from that of valvular interstitial cells in vivo. We hypothesized that combining 
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), or
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) with transforming growth factor beta-1
(TGF-beta1) would achieve a valvular interstitial cell-like phenotype of VSMCs.
METHODS: VSMC phenotype was assessed by immunofluorescence, proliferation was
measured by the tetrazolium reduction (MTT) assay, and extracellular matrix gene 
expression was determined by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Combinations of growth factors that included PDGF showed the greatest
increases in proliferation. Immunofluorescence for alpha-smooth muscle actin
demonstrated an inverse correlation between proliferation and a
myofibroblast-like phenotype, while combinations of TGF-beta1+ EGF+bFGF (TEF) and
TGF-beta1+EGF+PDGF (TEP) induced the greatest change of alpha-smooth muscle actin
expression compared to untreated controls. Finally, TEP treatment showed an
increase in versican, fibronectin, and type I collagen mRNA expression, while
decreasing matrix metalloproteinase 1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Combination of TGF-beta1 with EGF and PDGF induces VSMC
proliferation and expression of extracellular matrix constituents found in the
aortic valve. In vitro preconditioning of VSMCs provides a potentially viable
surrogate cell source for developing a valve graft.

PMID: 19563261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2009 Feb;44(2):114-7.

[Experience of diagnosis and treatment for cervical tracheoesophageal fistula
complicated with laryngotracheal stenosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen WX(1), Ruan YY, Chi PC, Gao PF, Luo JS, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology,Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710038 China. chenwx@fmmu.edu.cn

OBJECTIVE: To explore the treatment of cervical tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
with complicated or remnant laryngotracheal stenosis (LTS) and anterior neck
defect (AND).
METHODS: From 1980 to 2007, 14 patients were diagnosed as TEF. Among them, 9
patients had complicated or remnant LTS, 3 patients had complicated AND, and 2
patients had TEF which were induced by Nickel-Titanium alloy mesh stent for
treating benign esophageal stricture. All these patients were retrospectively
studied in Tangdu Hospital. Treatment consisted of conservative therapy of TEF,
staged surgical repair of TEF and laryngotracheal reconstruction according to the
dimension (small or large) of TEF and complications.
RESULTS: Four patients with small TEF (2 - 3 mm length) complicated LTS underwent
laryngotracheal reconstruction stented with silicone T tube and TEF was adopted
conservative treatment. The TEF and LTS were healed. Six patients with larger TEF
(10 - 25 mm length) were repaired by staged surgical repair of TEF and
laryngotracheal reconstruction. Among them, 3 cases had complicated LTS and AND, 
2 cases had recent LTS and 1 case had TEF without complication. Two patients had 
TEF and LTS, whose TEF healed before laryngotracheal reconstruction, the remnant 
LTS were reconstructed and healed. During the follow-up ranged from one to ten
years, 12 patients were successfully treated without complications. One patient
with TEF and LTS was treated only LTS because of a segment of esophagus was
closed and treated with esophagogastrostomy in the department of thoracic surgery
after LTS was successfully reconstructed and cured. One patient died of bleeding 
and asphyxia induced by the Nickel-Titanium alloy stent because of the stent had 
not been taken out.
CONCLUSION: The small cervical TEF complicated or remnant LTS can be treated by
laryngotracheal reconstruction and conservative treatment of TEF at the same
time. A larger TEF complicated LTS should be treated by staged repair of TEF and 
LTS.

PMID: 19558883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Fungal Genet Biol. 2009 Sep;46(9):642-56. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2009.05.005. Epub
2009 Jun 6.

A polyphasic approach to the taxonomy of the Alternaria infectoria species-group.

Andersen B(1), Sørensen JL, Nielsen KF, Gerrits van den Ende B, de Hoog S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Microbial Biotechnology (CMB), Department of Systems Biology,
Building 221, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark.
ba@bio.dtu.dk

Different taxa in the species-group of Alternaria infectoria (teleomorph Lewia
spp.) are often isolated from various cereals including barley, maize and wheat
grain, ornamental plants and skin lesions from animals and humans. In the present
study we made a polyphasic characterization of 39 strains morphologically
identifiable as belonging to the A. infectoria species-group together with 12
strains belonging to closely related species: Alternaria malorum (syn.
Cladosporium malorum), Chalastospora cetera (syn. Alternaria cetera) and
Embellisia abundans. Morphological examination separated the 51 strains in three 
groups based on conidial appearance and arrangement: the A. infectoria
species-group, E. abundans and a group containing C. cetera and A. malorum. The
metabolite analyses on three different media showed two clusters, one containing 
all 39 A. infectoria species-group strains and one containing 10 strains of E.
abundans, C. cetera and A. malorum. One E. abundans strain and one A. malorum
strain were not included due to insufficient metabolite production. The
separation of the A. infectoria species-group from E. abundans, C. cetera and A. 
malorum resulted mainly from the ability to produce altertoxins and
novae-zelandins. The metabolite analyses also showed that all 51 strains were
able to produce infectopyrones. The metabolite profiles of C. cetera and A.
malorum were very similar with several metabolites of unknown structure in
common. This is the first time that E. abundans, C. cetera and A. malorum have
been reported as producers of infectopyrones. Sequence analyses of the internal
transcribed spacer region (ITS), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (gpd)
and translocation elongation factor 1alpha (tef-1alpha) showed two clades: one
with the 39 strains from the A. infectoria species-group and one with the 12
strains of E. abundans, C. cetera and A. malorum. The polyphasic approach in this
study suggests that A. malorum var. polymorpha and the eight A. malorum strains
do not belong in Alternaria, but in Chalastospora, however, as several distinct
species. Splits Tree alignment of gpd sequences of 38 strains belonging to the A.
infectoria species-group indicates that only three strains showed signs of
recombination, while the remaining strains appeared to be clonal. Long term
incubation at 7 degrees C in the dark showed that 12 out of 33 tested strains
from the A. infectoria species-group were able to produce proascomata in axenic
culture, but with no mature ascospores after 6 months. These findings suggest
that Lewia/A. infectoria species-group must, at least in part, be homothallic.
The results presented in this study show that ITS, tef-1alpha and gpd do not
reflect ecology, secondary metabolism or morphology of the A. infectoria
species-group and that molecular cladification and phylogeny cannot predict
pathogenicity, host specificity or mycotoxin production.

PMID: 19501664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Phytopathology. 2009 Jun;99(6):721-8. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-6-0721.

Pathotypes and genetic relationship of worldwide collections of Elsinoë spp.
causing scab diseases of citrus.

Hyun JW(1), Yi SH, Mackenzie SJ, Timmer LW, Kim KS, Kang SK, Kwon HM, Lim HC.

Author information: 
(1)Citrus Experiment Station, National Institute of Subtropical Agriculture,
R.D.A. Jeju, 697-943, S. Korea.

Two scab diseases are recognized currently on citrus: citrus scab, caused by
Elsinoë fawcettii, and sweet orange scab, caused by E. australis. Because the two
species cannot be reliably distinguished by morphological or cultural
characteristics, host range and molecular methods must be used to identify
isolates. Four pathotypes of E. fawcettii and two of E. australis have been
described to date based on host range. The host specificity and genetic
relationships among 76 isolates from Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Korea, New
Zealand, and the United States were investigated. Based on pathogenicity tests on
eight differential hosts, 61 isolates were identified as E. fawcettii and 15 as
E. australis. Of 61 isolates of E. fawcettii, 24 isolates were identified as the 
Florida broad host range (FBHR) pathotype, 7 as the Florida narrow host range
(FNHR) pathotype, 10 as the Tryon's pathotype, and 3 as the "Lemon" pathotype.
Two new pathotypes, the "Jingeul" and the satsuma, rough lemon, grape-fruit,
clementine (SRGC), are described, and four isolates did not fit into any of the
known pathotypes of E. fawcettii. Of the 15 isolates of E. australis from
Argentina and Brazil, 9 belonged to the sweet orange pathotype and 6 from Korea
to the natsudaidai pathotype. E. fawcettii and E. australis were clearly
distinguishable among groups by random amplified polymorphic DNA-polymerase chain
reaction (RAPD-PCR) assays and the E. fawcettii group was divided into three
subgroups, A-1, A-2, and A-3. The A-1 group was composed of the FBHR, FNHR, and
SRGC pathotypes; some Lemon pathotypes; and the uncertain isolates. The A-2
subgroup included all of the Tryon's pathotype isolates and one of the three
Lemon pathotype isolates and the A-3 group contained the Jingeul pathotype
isolates. E. australis was differentiated into two groups: B-1, the natsudaidai
pathotype isolates, and B-2, the sweet orange pathotype isolates. Isolates of E. 
fawcettii and E. australis were clearly distinguishable by sequence analysis of
the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region and the translation elongation
factor 1 alpha (TEF) gene. There were also fixed nucleotide differences in the
ITS and TEF genes that distinguished subgroups separated by RAPD-PCR within
species. We confirmed two species of Elsinoë, two pathotypes of E. australis, and
at least six pathotypes of E. fawcettii and described their distribution in the
countries included in this study.

PMID: 19453232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2009 Sep;85(9):747-54. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20592.

Genetic and environmental factors in the etiology of esophageal atresia and/or
tracheoesophageal fistula: an overview of the current concepts.

Felix JF(1), de Jong EM, Torfs CP, de Klein A, Rottier RJ, Tibboel D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, 3000
CB Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Esophageal atresia and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) are severe
congenital anomalies. Although recent years have brought significant improvement 
in clinical treatment, our understanding of the etiology of these defects is
lagging. Many genes and genetic pathways have been implicated in the development 
of EA/TEF, but only a few genes have been shown to be involved in humans, in
animals, or in both. Extrapolating data from animal models to humans is not
always straightforward. Environmental factors may also carry a risk, but the
mechanisms are yet to be elucidated. This review gives an overview of the current
state of knowledge about both genetic and environmental risk factors in the
etiology of EA/TEF.

PMID: 19452513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Circ Res. 2009 Jun 19;104(12):1347-54. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.191726. Epub
2009 May 14.

Positive transcription elongation factor b activity in compensatory myocardial
hypertrophy is regulated by cardiac lineage protein-1.

Espinoza-Derout J(1), Wagner M, Salciccioli L, Lazar JM, Bhaduri S, Mascareno E, 
Chaqour B, Siddiqui MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, State University of New York Downstate
Medical Center, 450 Clarkson Ave, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2009 Jun 19;104(12):1327-9.

Emerging evidence illustrates the importance of the positive transcription
elongation factor (P-TEF)b in control of global RNA synthesis, which constitutes 
a major feature of the compensatory response to diverse hypertrophic stimuli in
cardiomyocytes. P-TEFb complex, composed of cyclin T and cdk9, is critical for
elongation of nascent RNA chains via phosphorylation of the carboxyl-terminal
domain of RNA polymerase (Pol) II. We and others have shown that the activity of 
P-TEFb is inhibited by its association with cardiac lineage protein (CLP)-1, the 
mouse homolog of human HEXIM1, in various physiological and pathological
conditions. To investigate the mechanism of control of P-TEFb activity by CLP-1
in cardiac hypertrophy, we used a transgenic mouse model of hypertrophy caused by
overexpression of calcineurin in the heart. We observed that the level of CLP-1
associated with P-TEFb was reduced markedly in hypertrophic hearts. We also
generated bigenic mice (MHC-cyclin T1/CLP-1(+/-)) by crossing MHC-cyclin T1
transgenic mice with CLP-1 heterozygote. The bigenic mice exhibit enhanced
susceptibility to hypertrophy that is accompanied with an increase in cdk9
activity via an increase in serine 2 phosphorylation of carboxyl-terminal domain 
and an increase in GLUT1/GLUT4 ratio. These mice have compensated systolic
function without evidence of fibrosis and reduced lifespan. These data suggest
that the reduced level of CLP-1 introduced in the background of elevated levels
of cyclin T1 elevates derepression of P-TEFb activity and emphasizes the
importance of the role of CLP-1 in the mechanism governing compensatory
hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC2774227
PMID: 19443839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Pediatr Surg. 2009 May;44(5):902-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2009.01.027.

Use of transanastomotic feeding tubes during esophageal atresia repair.

Alabbad SI(1), Ryckman J, Puligandla PS, Shaw K, Nguyen LT, Laberge JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, The Montreal Children's Hospital, Montréal,
Québec, Canada. saleh.al-abbad@mail.mcgill.ca

PURPOSE: Esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) type C
accounts for 85% of all EA. In our center, patients were previously started on
total parenteral nutrition (TPN) postoperatively and oral feedings initiated only
after a contrast esophagogram. Our aim is to assess the benefit of
intraoperatively placed transanastomotic feeding tubes (TAFTs).
METHODS: A 7-year retrospective review analyzed the outcomes of children with
EATEF type C as they relate to the use of TAFT. Demographics, associated
anomalies, operative findings, complications, duration of TPN, resumption of oral
feeding, length of stay, and follow-up were examined.
RESULTS: Twenty-one patients had EATEF type C. Eleven (55%) and 9 (45%) patients 
were identified as nonfeeding tube (NFT) and TAFT groups, respectively. There
were no differences in gestational age, birth weight, associated anomalies, and
interval to operative intervention or operative time. Excluding one patient with 
a severe cardiac malformation in the NFT group, there were no significant
differences in anastomotic leak (8% vs 22%), stenosis (36% vs 22%), TPN duration 
(20 days vs 12 days), and cholestasis (36% vs 11%).
CONCLUSION: Transanastomotic feeding tube may lead to shorter TPN duration and
decreased cholestasis, but a larger prospective study would be required to prove 
these benefits and ensure that it does not increase anastomotic leaks. This could
be done through an expanded Canadian Pediatric Surgery Network study.

PMID: 19433166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Ergonomics. 2009 Jun;52(6):735-46. doi: 10.1080/00140130802524625.

Dynamic pushing on three frictional surfaces: maximum acceptable forces,
cardiopulmonary and calf muscle metabolic responses in healthy men.

Maikala RV(1), Dempsey PG, Ciriello VM, O'Brien NV.

Author information: 
(1)Liberty Mutual Research Institute for Safety, 71 Frankland Road, Hopkinton, MA
01748, USA. rammohan.maikala@libertymutual.com

Pushing is an important materials handling activity in many occupations; however,
pushing-related physiological investigations are still in infancy. The purpose
was to evaluate maximum acceptable forces and physiological responses while
pushing on: treadmill (TREAD); plywood floor (PLY); and Teflon floor (TEF).
Acceptable forces, cardiopulmonary and calf muscle oxygenation and blood volume
responses were collected simultaneously while 12 men (age 39 +/- 13 years; height
178 +/- 6 cm; and body mass 91.5 +/- 16 kg) pushed for 2 h on each surface at
their psychophysical workload. Participants selected higher forces on the PLY,
resulting in higher pulmonary oxygen uptake compared to that of TEF (by
approximately 9%) and TREAD (by approximately 18%). Pushing on the TEF
demonstrated 50-56% lower blood volume changes and 1.5-1.8 times more
oxygenation-force ratio than that for other surfaces. It is concluded that, to
avoid a potential slip, participants were conservative in selecting acceptable
forces to push on the slippery TEF. Part of this compensatory strategy on the TEF
resulted in less muscle activity and, therefore, less demand for oxygen delivery 
to the calf muscle than for other surfaces. The present findings of significant
force- and physiological-related differences in treadmill vs. high inertia
pushcart clearly demonstrate that pushing experiments are essential to evaluate
functional abilities of the workers.

PMID: 19431004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Brain Res Bull. 2009 Aug 14;79(6):441-4. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2009.04.015.
Epub 2009 May 5.

The influences of propofol and dexmedetomidine on circadian gene expression in
rat brain.

Yoshida Y(1), Nakazato K, Takemori K, Kobayashi K, Sakamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8603, Japan. s7100@nms.ac.jp

INTRODUCTION: There are circadian genes whose expressions were affected by
sevoflurane. We hypothesized that propofol and dexmedetomidine also have
influences on the expressions of circadian genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seven-week-old rats were cannulated and propofol (600
microg/kg/min, 1 ml/h, n=6: group P6H), dexmedetomidine (1 microg/kg/min, 1 ml/h,
n=6: group D6H), 10% lipid (1 ml/h, n=6: group L) and normal saline (1 ml/h, n=6:
group N) were infused intravenously for 6h; rats were decapitated soon or 24h
after awakening from anesthesia (groups P24H n=6 and D24H n=6). Real time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed using rat whole brain and
the expressions of circadian genes were measured.
RESULTS: In the P6H group and the P24H group, the whole expressions of seven
genes were changed significantly compared with the L group. In the D6H group, the
whole expression of seven genes was changed significantly compared with the N
group. In the P6H group, all gene expressions except for Tef (thyrotroph
embryonic factor) were changed significantly compared with the L group. In this
group, the expression of Dbp (D site albumin promoter binding protein) was
increased, and the others were decreased. In the D6H group, all gene expressions 
except for Dbp and Tef were decreased significantly compared with the N group.
For the two anesthetics, the expression patterns were different only in Dbp.
CONCLUSION: We showed that propofol and dexmedetomidine have influences on the
circadian gene expressions.

PMID: 19422889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Virology. 2009 Jun 20;389(1-2):82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.04.002. Epub 2009
May 1.

Cellular factors are required to activate bovine papillomavirus-1 early gene
transcription and to establish viral plasmid persistence but are not required for
cellular transformation.

Haugen TH(1), Lace MJ, Ishiji T, Sameshima A, Anson JR, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, The Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. thomas-haugen@uiowa.edu

Transcription from the major upstream early gene promoter, P89, of bovine
papillomavirus (BPV)-1 is detectable in transfected cells lacking viral gene
products yet also responds to viral E2 proteins. In contrast to human
papillomaviruses (HPVs), the BPV upstream regulatory region (URR) functions as a 
transcriptional enhancer in epithelial cells and fibroblasts of bovine, murine or
human origin. Mutations of Sp1 and/or two novel transcriptional enhancer factor
(TEF)-1 sites within the 5' URR of the intact BPV-1 genome dramatically reduced
P89-initiated mRNA levels, leading to decreased BPV-1 plasmid amplification and
inefficient formation of transformed cell foci. However, cell lines transformed
with wt or mutant BPV-1 genomes contained similar levels of unintegrated BPV-1
DNA, P89 mRNA and E2-dependent transactivation. We conclude that cellular factors
necessary for activating viral early gene transcription, establishment of viral
plasmid replication and cell immortalization are not required during the
maintenance phase of BPV-1 infection.

PMID: 19410271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Zhongguo Gu Shang. 2009 Apr;22(4):271-3.

[Effect of total flavone of Epimedium on expression of bone OPG, OPGL mRNA in
ovariectomized rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen BL(1), Xie DH, Wang ZW, Li FB, Xu DL, Li YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, the First Affiliated Hospital of SUN Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, Guansgdong, China. berlinch2007@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanism of TFE (total flavone of
epimedium) in the treatment of osteoporosis, and then provide experimental
evidence for modernization and further development of TFE as an traditional
Chinese medicine.
METHODS: Sixty healthy female SD rats with aged 4 months were randomly divided
into three groups (including control group in which rats received sham surgery,
OVX group in which ovariectomized rats didn't give any medicine after the removal
of ovaries and TFE group in which ovariectomized rats administrated TFE), 20 rats
in each group. Compared bone mineral density (BMD) between before operation and
at 4th week after operation in order to verify the establishment of osteoporotic 
model (criteria: BMD decreased more than 20% at 4th week after operation). The
rats in TEF group were administrated total flavone of epimedium(concentration 30 
mg/ml, 10 ml/kg, qd) orally for 4 weeks. After this, killed rats to harvest the
lower part of the femur and detected BMD again. Applying the reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction technique (RT-PCR) to detect expression
of OPG, OPGL mRNA in bone tissue.
RESULTS: (1) At 4th week after ovariectomy, the mean BMD of lumbar vertebra in
TFE group fell to (0.084 +/- 0.020) g/cm2. Administrated with TFE for 4 weeks,the
BMD increased to (0.112 +/- 0.009) g/cm2. There was significant improvement
compare with the OVX group (P < 0.05). (2) Compared between OVX group and TFE
group, The OPG mRNA expression of TFE group obviously enhanced. There was
significant difference in statistics (P < 0.05). However,the promotion for OPGL
mRNA expression were detected between OVX group and TFE group,there was no
significant difference in statistics (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: This study showed that TFE could inhibit differentiation and
maturation of osteoclast through enhancing OPG mRNA expression, accordingly,to
treat osteoporosis.

PMID: 19408755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Perinatol. 2009 May;29(5):393-5. doi: 10.1038/jp.2008.198.

H-type tracheoesophageal fistula in an extremely low birth weight premature
neonate: appearance on magnetic resonance imaging.

Gunlemez A(1), Anik Y, Elemen L, Tugay M, Gökalp AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neonatology, Kocaeli University Faculty
of Medicine, Kocaeli, Turkey.

Many diagnostic methods have been used to establish the diagnosis for a suspected
H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). In case of a strong assumption of an
H-type fistula, besides all standard diagnostic work-up tools a more aggressive
combined approach is advisable. However, in a critically ill premature infant,
conventional invasive investigations could not be performed as being potentially 
hazardous and not always easy to achieve. We describe the unique imaging features
of an H-type TEF on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Our case demonstrates that 
MR images could be used for diagnosis, and localization of an H-type TEF could be
detected safely and accurately in a sick preterm infant.

PMID: 19399000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Toxicology. 2009 Apr 5;258(1):70-7.

Underlying mechanism of actions of tefluthrin, a pyrethroid insecticide, on
voltage-gated ion currents and on action currents in pituitary tumor (GH3) cells 
and GnRH-secreting (GT1-7) neurons.

Wu SN(1), Wu YH, Chen BS, Lo YC, Liu YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, National Cheng Kung University Medical College,
Tainan, Taiwan. snwu@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Tefluthrin is a synthetic pyrethroid and involved in acute neurotoxic effects.
How this compound affects ion currents in endocrine or neuroendocrine cells
remains unclear. Its effects on membrane ion currents in pituitary tumor (GH3)
cells and in hypothalamic (GT1-7) neurons were investigated. Application of Tef
(10 microM) increased the amplitude of voltage-gated Na+ current (INa), along
with a slowing in current inactivation and deactivation in GH3 cells. The
current-voltage relationship of INa was shifted to more negative potentials in
the presence of this compound. Tef increased INa with an EC50 value of 3.2 +/-
0.8 microM. It also increased the amplitude of persistent INa. Tef reduced the
amplitude of L-type Ca2+ current. This agent slightly inhibited K+ outward
current; however, it had no effect on the activity of large-conductance
Ca2+-activated K+ channels. Under cell-attached voltage-clamp recordings, Tef (10
microM) increased amplitude and frequency of spontaneous action currents, along
with appearance of oscillatory inward currents. Tef-induced inward currents were 
suppressed after further application of tetrodotoxin, riluzole or ranolazine. In 
GT1-7 cells, Tef also increased the amplitude and frequency of action currents.
Taken together, the effects of Tef and its structural related pyrethroids on ion 
currents can contribute to the underlying mechanisms through which they affect
endocrine or neuroendocrine function in vivo.

PMID: 19378468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Fungal Genet Biol. 2009 Aug;46(8):543-50. doi: 10.1016/j.fgb.2009.03.009. Epub
2009 Apr 5.

Karyotype analysis, genome organization, and stable genetic transformation of the
root colonizing fungus Piriformospora indica.

Zuccaro A(1), Basiewicz M, Zurawska M, Biedenkopf D, Kogel KH.

Author information: 
(1)Justus Liebig University Giessen, Institute of Phytopathology and Applied
Zoology (IPAZ), Giessen, Germany. alga.zuccaro@agrar.uni-giessen.de

Piriformospora indica (Basidiomycota, Sebacinales) is a root colonizing fungus
which is able to increase biomass and yield of crop plants and to induce local
and systemic resistance to fungal diseases and tolerance to abiotic stress. A
prerequisite for the elucidation of the mode of action of this novel kind of
symbiosis is knowledge of the genome organization as well as the development of
tools to study and modify gene functions. Here we provide data on the karyotype
and genetic transformation strategies. The fungus was shown to possess at least
six chromosomes and a genome size of about 15.4-24Mb. Sequences of the genes
encoding the elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF) and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) were used for genome size estimation through real-time PCR 
analysis. Chromosomal location investigated by Southern blot and expression
analysis suggested that TEF and GAPDH are single-copy genes with strong and
constitutive promoters. A genetic transformation system was established using a
fragment of the TEF promoter region for construction of vectors carrying the
selectable marker hygromycin B phosphotransferase. Results demonstrate that P.
indica can be stably transformed by random genomic integration of foreign DNA and
that it posses a relative small genome as compared to other members of the
Basidiomycota.

PMID: 19351564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2009 May;18(2):116-8. doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2009.02.011.

The pitfalls of endotracheal intubation beyond the fistula in babies with type C 
esophageal atresia.

Alabbad SI(1), Shaw K, Puligandla PS, Carranza R, Bernard C, Laberge JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill University
Health Center, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The intraoperative management of a neonate with esophageal atresia (EA) and
distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a true anesthetic challenge. Pediatric 
anesthesia textbooks recommend a distal tracheal intubation beyond the fistula
and spontaneous ventilation, if possible, until surgical control of the fistula
is achieved to minimize gastric distention. A full-term neonate with Trisomy 21
presented with an EATEF and was transferred to the operating theater for repair
after appropriate evaluation. After induction of anesthesia, a size 3.0
endotracheal tube was inserted orally with confirmation of its position by good
air entry and chest movement bilaterally. After positioning for thoracotomy, the 
patient desaturated and became bradycardic with abdominal distention. Despite
reintubation, gastric needle decompression, and bilateral pleural aspiration to
exclude pneumothorax, cardiopulmonary resuscitation was unsuccessful and the
child died. Autopsy revealed the endotracheal tube in the trachea with its distal
end passing through a large distal TEF. Preoperative bronchoscopy may help the
team to assess the size and location of the distal TEF and plan for the best
anesthetic strategy. It may also be useful to confirm tube location after
endotracheal intubation and intraoperatively in the event of cardiorespiratory
instability.

PMID: 19349003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Animal. 2009 Apr;3(4):557-67. doi: 10.1017/S1751731108003777.

Effect of feed intake on heat production and protein and fat deposition in
milk-fed veal calves.

Labussiere E(1), Maxin G, Dubois S, van Milgen J, Bertrand G, Noblet J.

Author information: 
(1)1INRA, UMR 1079, F-35000 Rennes, France.

Energy requirements for veal calves have not been updated recently despite the
increased age at slaughter and the predominance of the Prim'Holstein breed in
Europe. The objectives of this study were to determine the effects of four
feeding levels (FLs) on protein and fat deposition and heat production in
milk-fed calves at three stages of fattening and to determine energy requirements
of calves. At each stage, 16 Prim'Holstein male calves (mean body weight (BW):
73.4, 151.6 and 237.4 kg) were fed a milk replacer at 79%, 87%, 95% or 103% of a 
reference FL. Measurements for one stage were conducted over 4 successive weeks
in two open-circuit respiration chambers and consisted of a 6-day nitrogen and
energy balance followed by a fasting day for estimating fasting heat production
(FHP) of the calves. Heat production (HP) measurements were analyzed using a
modeling approach to partition it between HP due to physical activity (AHP), feed
intake (thermic effect of feeding (TEF)) and FHP. There was no effect of FL and
stage on apparent digestibility coefficients, except for a tendency for increased
digestibility coefficient of fat as animals got older. The metabolizable energy
(ME)/digestible energy (DE) ratio did not depend on FL but decreased (P < 0.01)
as animals got older in connection with marked increases in urinary glucose and
urea excretion. The AHP and TEF components of HP were not affected by stage or FL
and averaged 8.4% and 7.8% of ME intake, respectively. The FHP, expressed per kg 
BW0.85, increased with increasing FL, suggesting that also ME requirement for
maintenance (MEm) may depend on FL. For an average intake of 625 kJ ME/kg BW0.85 
per day (95% of the reference FL), FHP was 298 kJ/kg BW0.85 per day. Energy
retention as protein and fat increased with increasing FL resulted in higher BW
gain. But the rate of increase depended on stage of growth. The slope relating
protein deposition to FL was lower in the finishing phase than in the growing
phase, while the slope for lipid deposition was greater. Protein and fat contents
of BW gain were not affected by FL but increased as animals got older. From these
results, the energy requirements of veal calves are proposed according to a new
approach, which considers that MEm (expressed per kg BW0.85) depends on ME intake
(kJ/kg BW0.85) according to the following relationship: MEm = 197 + 0.25 × ME
intake. The corresponding marginal efficiencies of ME utilization for protein and
fat deposition are then 82% and 87%, respectively.

PMID: 22444380  [PubMed]


122. Pediatr Surg Int. 2009 May;25(5):423-5. doi: 10.1007/s00383-009-2354-6. Epub 2009
Mar 24.

The right-sided aortic arch in children with esophageal atresia and
tracheo-esophageal fistula: a repair through the right thoracotomy.

Bicakci U(1), Tander B, Ariturk E, Rizalar R, Ayyildiz SH, Bernay F.

Author information: 
(1)Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey.

PURPOSE: The management of the esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula 
(EA/TEF) with right-sided aortic arch (RAA) is controversial. The preoperative
diagnostic techniques may fail to show RAA associated with EA/TEF. Surgeon may
need to make a decision to change the side of thoracotomy. The aim of the current
study was to evaluate the possibility of preoperative diagnosis of RAA and the
primary anastomosis through right chest.
METHODS: A retrospective review was performed in EA/TEF patients between February
2001 and 2008. A total of 79 patients (35 female, 44 male) with EA/TEF were
reviewed. Eleven (13%) patients (5 female, 6 male) had an RAA. Echocardiography
was performed in 10 of 11 patients with RAA. The chest was accessed through the
right side in all patients.
RESULTS: The incidence of RAA was found to be higher in our study than previous
studies (13%). Right thoracotomy was performed successfully in all patients.
Three patients died due to multiple congenital anomalies and 1 patient due to
bleeding postoperatively. Five of 10 had normal echocardiography findings. Only
one patient with RAA has been successfully diagnosed by preoperative
echocardiographic examination. Seven patients had no complication after
operation. Their follow-up was uneventful.
CONCLUSION: Preoperative recognition of RAA with echocardiography is unlikely in 
patients with EA/TEF but the presence of RAA does not decrease the success rate
of EA/TEF repair through the right thoracotomy.

PMID: 19308429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Environ Sci Eng. 2008 Apr;50(2):111-4.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in ambient air at Agra: distribution and
toxicity assessment.

Rajput N(1), Khemani LD, Lakhani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dayalbagh Educational Institute, Dayalbagh, Agra-5.

Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs) are a class of organic pollutants that
are commonly found in the environment, largely due to combustion or processing of
hydrocarbon fuels. PAHs are considered highly toxic for human beings and several 
of these compounds are carcinogenic, mutagenic and teratogenic. Human exposure to
PAHs occurs principally by direct inhalation, ingestion or dermal contact as a
result of the widespread presence and persistence of PAHs in the urban
environment. With increasing awareness that PAHs are known and suspected
carcinogens, this study was undertaken to monitor PAH compounds in Total
Suspended Particulate Matter (TSPM) at the industrial site--Nunhai, Agra. For
this purpose, TSPM samples were collected on glass fibre filter papers (EPM 2000)
using High Volume Sampler (HVS 430) at Nunhai, Agra. 16 EPA priority PAH
compounds were analyzed by a Gas Chromatograph equipped with FID detector. PAHs
having high molecular weight, i.e., BghiP, BbF, DbA, BaA, BaP and IP, were the
most abundant with concentrations ranging between 0.026 to 0.56 ng m(-3). The
calculated mean TPAH value was 0.32 ng m(-3). The probably carcinogenic and
possibly carcinogenic PAH as classified by International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC) accounted for 42% and 38% respectively of the total PAH. The health
risk associated with inhalatory exposure to PAHs was assessed on the basis of
Benzo(a)pyrene concentration in air and Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) for
individual PAH. In the present study, BaP concentrations ranged from 0.005 to
0.23 ng m(-3) with a mean value of 0.04 ng m(-3). Carcinogenic potencies for DbA 
and BaP in PAH mixtures based on TEF concept were 45% and 39% respectively. This 
underlines the importance of DbA and BaPas a surrogate compound of a PAH mixture 
in our environment in assessing human health risk.

PMID: 19295093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Phytopathology. 2009 Apr;99(4):462-8. doi: 10.1094/PHYTO-99-4-0462.

Multilocus phylogenetic diversity of Fusarium avenaceum pathogenic on lisianthus.

Nalim FA(1), Elmer WH, McGovern RJ, Geiser DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park 
16802, USA. fanalim@nmsu.edu

Fusarium avenaceum is a globally distributed fungus commonly isolated from soil
and a wide range of plants. Severe outbreaks of crown and stem rot of the
flowering ornamental, lisianthus (Eustoma grandiflorum), have been attributed to 
F. avenaceum. We sequenced portions of the translation elongation factor 1-alpha 
(tef) and beta-tubulin (benA) protein coding genes as well as partial intergenic 
spacer (IGS) regions of the nuclear ribosomal genes in 37 Fusarium isolates
obtained from lisianthus and other host plants. Isolates that were previously
identified morphologically as F. acuminatum were included as an outgroup.
Phylogenetic analyses of tef, benA, and IGS sequences showed that F. avenaceum
isolates were an exclusive group with strong bootstrap support and no significant
incongruence among gene genealogies. Isolates from lisianthus were scattered
within this clade and did not form distinct groups based on host species or
locality. Pathogenicity tests of F. avenaceum isolates obtained from several
other hosts showed an ability to cause disease on lisianthus, suggesting that F. 
avenaceum may be pathogenic on lisianthus regardless of its phylogenetic origin. 
These findings have management implications and suggest that any host that
supports F. avenaceum may serve as a source of inoculum for lisianthus growers.

PMID: 19271989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Lik Sprava. 2008 Jul-Sep;(5-6):17-23.

[Effect of radio therapy on the magnitude of iodine radioisotope half-life in the
thyroid tissue remnants in patients with differentiated thyroid cancer].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Kozak OV, Trembach OM, Romanenko LV, Butrym OI.

The use of external irradiation in the treatment of patients with differentiated 
thyroid cancer is still under consideration. The aim of the study was to compare 
Tef in the thyroid remnants in patients with and without external irradiation
prior to radioiodine treatment. 70 patients with thyroid remnants after resection
of thyroid and dissection of pathological lymph nodes were treated by I-131.
Patients were divided into two groups: Group 1--with external irradiation (25-60 
Gy)-21 patient, and Group 2--patients who did not received external irradiation
prior to radioiodine treatment (49 patients). Activities administered ranged from
1000 to 4500 MBq. I-131 kinetics was followed daily during first 4 days after
activity administration on the basis of mathematical analysis of scintigraphy.
T(ef) was calculated under the assumption of exponential excretion of 131-I from 
remnants. It was shown that in Group 1 T(eff) = 3.87 +/- 2.5 days, in Group 2
T(eff) amounted to 2.9 +/- 2.2 days. Thus, external irradiation resulted in
slowing down of 131-I excretion in thyroid remnants. The probability of the full 
remnants ablation after the first course of 131-I treatment (p) has been
calculated. It was shown that p is higher in the Group 2 in every activity
interval. Teff in sequential courses of 131-I treatment has been measured at the 
same patients. Thus, external irradiation influences in different way at the
previously irradiated and not irradiated cells.

PMID: 19253734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Toxicon. 2009 Jun;53(7-8):734-42. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.02.014. Epub 2009
Feb 26.

Structural studies on minor enniatins from Fusarium sp. VI 03441: novel
N-methyl-threonine containing enniatins.

Uhlig S(1), Ivanova L, Petersen D, Kristensen R.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Institute, Oslo, Norway. silvio.uhlig@vetinst.no

A strain of a yet unidentified Fusarium sp. produced in addition to enniatins A1,
B and B1 a number of minor enniatins. The strain formed a well supported clade
with strains identified as Fusarium acuminatum (Gibberella acuminata) in
phylogenetic analyses using the TEF-1alpha gene sequences. Two of the minor
enniatins were easily recognised as hydroxylated species on the basis of their
fragment ion spectra. The hydroxylation could be traced to one of the amino acid 
moieties using multiple-stage ion trap mass spectrometry. Different approaches
for acetylation of the isolated compounds and complete hydrolysis supported the
elucidation of the amino acid moiety as 3-hydroxy-2-methylamino-butyric acid,
which is equivalent with N-methyl-threonine. The primary structures of the two
enniatins were tentatively determined to be
cyclo[Hiv-N-Me-Val-Hiv-N-Me-Val-Hiv-N-Me-Thr] and
cyclo[Hiv-N-Me-Leu-Hiv-N-Me-Val-Hiv-N-Me-Thr]. The two depsipeptides represent
new analogues and were named enniatin P1 and P2, respectively.

PMID: 19249325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Death Differ. 2009 Jun;16(6):838-46. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.13. Epub 2009 Feb
13.

PAR bZIP-bik is a novel transcriptional pathway that mediates oxidative
stress-induced apoptosis in fibroblasts.

Ritchie A(1), Gutierrez O, Fernandez-Luna JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genetica Molecular, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla,
Servicio Cantabro de Salud, Santander, Spain.

PAR bZIP (cells knockout for PAR bZIP transcription factors) proteins, thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF), albumin D-site-binding protein (DBP), and hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF), are a family of transcription factors that have been shown
to contribute to the expression of genes involved in detoxification and drug
metabolism. Recently, we showed that PAR bZIP proteins were able to regulate the 
BH3-only gene bcl-gS in tumor cells. Here, we have extended the role of these
transcription factors in the control of apoptosis executors by analyzing the
expression of BH3-only genes in PAR bZIP triple knockout mouse fibroblasts. We
found that bik was the only BH3-only gene downregulated in knockout cells.
Consistently, transfection of TEF or DBP induces the expression of endogenous
bik, regardless of the presence of active p53. Moreover, both promoter-reporter
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicate that PAR bZIP proteins activate
the bik promoter directly. Treatment with different stress stimuli reveals a
higher survival of knockout fibroblasts compared with that of wild-type cells,
especially after incubation with H(2)O(2), which suggest that PAR bZIP proteins
participate in oxidative stress-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, the apoptotic
cell death promoted by treatment with H(2)O(2) can be impaired by reducing the
expression of Bik in wild-type fibroblasts or enhanced by the overexpression of
Bik in knockout cells. These findings reveal a novel transcriptional pathway
relevant in transducing the apoptotic response to oxidative stress.

PMID: 19219069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Pediatr Surg Int. 2009 Apr;25(4):369-72. doi: 10.1007/s00383-009-2337-7. Epub
2009 Feb 12.

Modified method of primary esophageal anastomosis with improved outcome in cases 
of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Tandon RK(1), Khan TR, Maletha M, Rawat JD, Wakhlu A, Kureel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, C.S.M.M.U, Lucknow, India.

Survival rates for infants who have esophageal atresia (EA) with or without
fistula (TEF) have improved dramatically in the past 50 years. Despite excellent 
long-term survival for patients with esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA-TEF), many significant complications can occur. Anastomotic leak at
the esophagoesophagostomy site is one such problem resulting in considerable
morbidity and mortality in these patients. The methods of esophageal anastomosis 
for long period has remained the simple end to end anastomosis of esophageal ends
with various modifications described from time to time. The present study aims to
study the effect on the early postoperative complications, following horizontal
mattress suture technique on the primary esophageal anastomosis in cases of
EA-TEF. A total of 32 patients with EA-TEF, were operated by our technique during
a period of 1 year (2007-2008). The results were compared with the patients (n = 
66), who were operated by the traditional simple technique during the same
period. Among those patients in whom the esophageal anastomosis was done by
horizontal mattress suture, only one had major anastomotic leak, while two had
minor anastomotic leaks, as compared to six and nine cases correspondingly in
other patients in whom anastomosis was done by simple technique. There was single
mortality. We propose that, the utilization of our technique of horizontal
mattress suture in primary anastomosis of esophagus in cases of EA-TEF
significantly reduces the risk of anastomotic leaks and subsequent morbidity and 
mortality.

PMID: 19214535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2009 Mar;44(3):244-8. doi: 10.1002/ppul.20987.

Intermittent gaseous bowel distention: atypical sign of congenital
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Gardella C(1), Tomà P, Sacco O, Girosi D, Panigada S, Battistini E, Mattioli G,
Jasonni V, Rossi GA.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Disease Unit, Giannina Gaslini Research Institute, University of
Genova, Genova, Italy.

Three girls, 5-, 9-, and 15-year-old, were evaluated for recurrent airway
infections and pneumonia. Chest X-rays, which included the upper portion of the
abdomen, showed marked gaseous bowels distention, while computed tomography scans
of the chest demonstrated the presence of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF),
confirmed by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. Abdominal gaseous distension, a known
possible clinical manifestation of TEF in the neonatal period generated by
airflow through the fistula into the oesophagus, has not been reported as a clue 
to the diagnosis in older children. When detected in patients with recurrent
respiratory infection, should raise the suspicion of unrecognized TEF.

PMID: 19205051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Eur J Pediatr. 2009 Oct;168(10):1281-4. doi: 10.1007/s00431-009-0926-z. Epub 2009
Feb 5.

Near-missed upper tracheoesophageal fistula in esophageal atresia.

Shoshany G(1), Vatzian A, Ilivitzki A, Smolkin T, Hakim F, Makhoul IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Meyer Children's Hospital, Rambam Health Care
Campus, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Bat-Galim, Haifa 31096, Israel. 
g_shoshany@rambam.health.gov.il

Upper pouch tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) accompanying esophageal atresia (EA) 
occurs in less than 1% of all EA/TEF variants and could be easily missed after
birth. To confront such diagnostic inaccuracy, perioperative tracheobronchoscopy 
(TBS) and preoperative upper pouch esophagogram (UPEG) have been proposed but are
still controversial. We describe the role of UPEG and TBS, used early after
birth, in two cases of EA/TEF with upper pouch TE fistulas with unusual high
location (one intrathoracic, one subglotic). These upper TE fistulas were almost 
missed but ultimately detected very early while employing both UPEG and TBS,
wherein UPEG was for the diagnosis of TEF and TBS for both intraoperative
diagnostic confirmation and aid in TEF identification. We conclude that UPEG and 
TBS are complementary in detecting near-missed upper TE fistula accompanying EA. 
Such approach ensures early and accurate diagnosis of EA/TEF variants, thus
preventing the complications of a missed congenital upper pouch TE fistula.

PMID: 19194723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Circadian Rhythms. 2009 Jan 23;7:2. doi: 10.1186/1740-3391-7-2.

Circadian polymorphisms associated with affective disorders.

Kripke DF(1), Nievergelt CM, Joo E, Shekhtman T, Kelsoe JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry 0939, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093-0939, USA. DKripke@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Clinical symptoms of affective disorders, their response to light
treatment, and sensitivity to other circadian interventions indicate that the
circadian system has a role in mood disorders. Possibly the mechanisms involve
circadian seasonal and photoperiodic mechanisms. Since genetic susceptibilities
contribute a strong component to affective disorders, we explored whether
circadian gene polymorphisms were associated with affective disorders in four
complementary studies.
METHODS: Four groups of subjects were recruited from several sources: 1) bipolar 
proband-parent trios or sib-pair-parent nuclear families, 2) unrelated bipolar
participants who had completed the BALM morningness-eveningness questionnaire, 3)
sib pairs from the GenRed Project having at least one sib with early-onset
recurrent unipolar depression, and 4) a sleep clinic patient group who frequently
suffered from depression. Working mainly with the SNPlex assay system, from 2 to 
198 polymorphisms in genes related to circadian function were genotyped in the
participant groups. Associations with affective disorders were examined with TDT 
statistics for within-family comparisons. Quantitative trait associations were
examined within the unrelated samples.
RESULTS: In NR1D1, rs2314339 was associated with bipolar disorder (P = 0.0005).
Among the unrelated bipolar participants, 3 SNPs in PER3 and CSNK1E were
associated with the BALM score. A PPARGC1B coding SNP, rs7732671, was associated 
with affective disorder with nominal significance in bipolar family groups and
independently in unipolar sib pairs. In TEF, rs738499 was associated with
unipolar depression; in a replication study, rs738499 was also associated with
the QIDS-SR depression scale in the sleep clinic patient sample.
CONCLUSION: Along with anti-manic effects of lithium and the antidepressant
effects of bright light, these findings suggest that perturbations of the
circadian gene network at several levels may influence mood disorders, perhaps
ultimately through regulation of MAOA and its modulation of dopamine
transmission. Twenty-three associations of circadian polymorphisms with affective
symptoms met nominal significance criteria (P < 0.05), whereas 15 would be
expected by chance, indicating that many represented false discoveries (Type II
errors). Some evidence of replication has been gathered, but more studies are
needed to ascertain if circadian gene polymorphisms contribute to susceptibility 
to affective disorders.

PMCID: PMC2661876
PMID: 19166596  [PubMed]


132. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;42(12):911-8.

[Levels of PCDD/Fs, PCBs and PBDEs compounds in human placenta tissue].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang JQ(1), Sun XK, Jiang YS, Zhou J, Wang LB, Ye ZY, Fang DK, Wang GB.

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Shenzhen 518020, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the methods of Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-Dioxins and
Dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) compounds determination by isotope dilution HRGC/HRMS
simultaneously in human placenta tissue from mothers, and assess the human
exposure risk to dioxins and PBDEs in study.
METHODS: Concentrations of 17 PCDD/Fs and 12 dioxin-like PCBs as well as 7 PBDEs 
were measured in human placenta tissue samples by isotope dilution HRGC/HRMS.
SigmaTEQ (PCDD + PCDFs + PCBs) concentration using WHO-TEF factor and PBDEs
concentration was calculated respectively. Risk assessment of mother exposure to 
dioxins and PBDEs was evaluated.
RESULTS: Median of SigmaTEQ (PCDD + PCDFs + PCBs) concentration for six samples
was 18.15 WHO-TEQ pg/g lipid, ranging from 5.14 - 67.01 WHO-TEQ pg/g lipid.
Although the median of SigmaTEQ (PCDD + PCDFs + PCBs) was lower than that of
human blood of EU and Japan, and close to that of Korea and Taiwan non-exposure
as reported in the literatures, the highest SigmaTEQ (PCDD + PCDFs + PCBs)
concentration of placenta sample exceeded the value of high dioxins exposure area
subjects in Taiwan. The dominant contributor congener for WHO-TEQ were 2, 3, 4,
7, 8-PeCDF, 1, 2, 3, 7, 8-PeCDD, PCB126, totally accounted for 65 percent of
SigmaWHO-TEQ. Median and average of PBDE concentration for six samples were 2.73 
ng/g lipid and 7.17 ng/g lipid, respectively, ranging from 0.95 - 25.99 ng/g
lipid. BDE47 was the dominant contributor congener for the total concentration,
accounted for 35 percent.
CONCLUSION: The methods of PCDD/Fs, PCBs and PBDEs compounds determined by
isotope dilution HRGC/HRMS simultaneously in human placenta tissue from mothers
were established successfully, and the human exposure risk to PCDD/Fs, PCBs and
PBDEs should be surveyed for the donor with the highest SigmaTEQ (PCDD + PCDFs + 
PCBs) and PBDEs concentration of placenta sample in the future.

PMID: 19141227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2008 Dec;117(12):896-901.

Vocal fold paralysis in infants with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Oestreicher-Kedem Y(1), DeRowe A, Nagar H, Fishman G, Ben-Ari J.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Otolaryngology Unit, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv Sourasky
Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv,
Israel. dkyo@013.net

OBJECTIVES: We describe the clinical characteristics and management of vocal fold
paralysis in infants who were born with a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: This retrospective case series included all infants born with TEFs who
presented to our pediatric otolaryngology unit and intensive care unit because of
dyspnea or aphonia in the years 2005 and 2006, and who were found to have vocal
fold paralysis.
RESULTS: Five boys and 1 girl were studied. One infant had stridor before TEF
repair, and 5 after it. All children underwent flexible
laryngotracheobronchoscopy and were treated in the pediatric intensive care unit 
before diagnosis of the vocal fold paralysis (5 bilaterally and 1 unilaterally)
was made. The ages at diagnosis of paralysis ranged between 14 days and 14
months. Five infants required tracheostomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Vocal fold paresis in infants is difficult to diagnose. The risk for
recurrent laryngeal nerve injury associated with TEF and TEF repair should be
emphasized in these children. We recommend that all newborns with TEF should be
examined by an otolaryngologist before operation to confirm the mobility of the
vocal folds and to rule out other associated airway malformations, and examined
after operation if respiratory difficulties develop.

PMID: 19140535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2008 Dec;37(6):794-8.

Microscopic transtracheal repair of migrating tracheoesophageal fistula.

Ali MS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, East Surrey Hospital, Surrey, United Kingdom.
msamomar@yahoo.co.uk

OBJECTIVE: The repair of a persistently leaking migrating tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) represents a particular challenge owing to the low site of the
fistula down to the tracheoesophageal septum (TES). A simple microscopic approach
to repair a migrating TEF is described.
DESIGN: A description of five cases of migrating TEF. The repair technique and
surgical outcome are described in detail.
SETTING: Tertiary care referral hospital.
METHODS: Excision of the fistula tract was done under local anesthesia and
microscopic vision using microlaryngoscopic instruments followed by one-layer
repair without soft tissue interposition. This technique was used in one patient 
with a leaking migrating TEF when planned dissection through the TES was
abandoned. Subsequently, the technique was employed in four other patients with a
similar TEF.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Evidence of complete closure of the fistula was assessed
clinically 1 week postoperatively. This was followed by methylene blue and
Gastrografin swallowing tests. The methylene blue test was repeated after 6
months to exclude recurrence of the fistula and confirm persistent closure.
RESULT: Complete closure of the fistulae was achieved when assessed clinically
and by methylene blue and Gastrografin tests. All patients were discharged on a
normal diet. Stable closure was confirmed by the methylene blue test after 6
months. The microlaryngoscopic instruments and surgical microscope have greatly
facilitated access and dissection of the migrating fistula with minimum soft
tissue loss.
CONCLUSION: The described technique is simple, relatively safe, and reproducible 
for closure of a small migrating TEF. It can also be used to repair small,
nonmigrating TEF.

PMID: 19128706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2009 Feb;18(1):12-9. doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2008.10.003.

Esophageal atresia repair with thoracotomy: the Cincinnati contemporary
experience.

Mortell AE(1), Azizkhan RG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) repair using an open
muscle-sparing thoracotomy has been the standard approach used in our
institution. Whereas perioperative mortality is now very uncommon, short- and
long-term morbidity is very common in these patients. However, the complexity of 
the esophageal anatomy and significant comorbidities appear to be important
contributors to significant complications in these patients. At least 30% of the 
EA/TEF patients required esophageal dilatations for anastomotic stricture; this
increased to 50% for patients with pure EA. Gastroesophageal reflux requiring an 
antireflux procedure was performed 23% of the time for EA/TEF and 30% for EA
patients. In addition, there were a few complications, such as winging of the
scapula and scoliosis, that were attributed in part to the utilization of a
nonmuscle-sparing thoracotomy. The standard muscle-sparing thoracotomy remains a 
very versatile and useful approach to repairing esophageal atresia, and it is the
standard for repairing more complex anatomical variants. The self-reported
long-term quality of life in these patients is very good, except for a few
individuals with protracted feeding disorders and severe dysphagia.

PMID: 19103416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Bioorg Khim. 2008 Nov-Dec;34(6):799-807.

[FLASH-PCR diagnostics of toxigenic fungi of the genus Fusarium].

[Article in Russian]

Riazantsev DIu(1), Abramova SL, Evstratova SV, Gagkaeva TIu, Zavriev SK.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, ul. Miklukho-Maklaya 16/10, Moscow, 117997 Russia.

A test system for the diagnostics and identification of seven toxigenic fungi
causing fusarioses of cereals (Fusarium graminearum, F. culmorum, F. poae, F.
sporotrichioides, F. langsethiae, F. avenaceum, and F. tricinctum) was developed 
using PCR. The identification of pathogen is based on the specific amplification 
of a DNA fragment of the gene of translation elongation factor 1 alpha
(tef-1alpha) and subsequent detection of the results by the fluorescent
amplification-based specific hybridization method. The system was tested on 38
isolates of different fungi of the genus Fusarium.

PMID: 19088754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jan;34(1):161-72.

Profiling of transcripts and proteins modulated by K-ras oncogene in the lung
tissues of K-ras transgenic mice by omics approaches.

Lee S(1), Kang J, Cho M, Seo E, Choi H, Kim E, Kim J, Kim H, Kang GY, Kim KP,
Park YH, Yu DY, Yum YN, Park SN, Yoon DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Gwangjin-gu,
Seoul 143-701, Korea.

The mutated K-ras gene is involved in approximately 30% of human cancers. In
order to search for K-ras oncogene-induced modulators in lung tissues of K-ras
transgenic mice, we performed microarray and proteomics (LC/ESI-MS/MS) analysis. 
Genes (RAB27b RAS family, IL-1RA, IL-33, chemokine ligand 6, epiregulin, EGF-like
domain and cathepsin) related to cancer development (Wnt signaling pathway) and
inflammation (chemokine/cytokine signaling pathway, Toll receptor signaling) were
up-regulated while genes (troponin, tropomodulin 2, endothelial lipase, FGFR4,
integrin alpha8 and adenylate cyclase 8) related to the tumor suppression such as
p53 pathway, TGF-beta signaling pathway and cadherin signaling pathway were
down-regulated by K-ras oncogene. Proteomics approach revealed that up-regulated 
proteins in lung adenomas of K-ras mice were classified as follows: proteins
related to the metabolism/catabolism (increased from 7 to 22% by K-ras gene),
proteins related to translation/transcription and nucleotide (from 4 to 6%),
proteins related to signal transduction (from 3 to 5%), proteins related to
phosphorylation (from 1 to 2%). ATP synthase, Ras oncogene family, cytochrome c
oxidase, flavoprotein, TEF 1, adipoprotein A-1 BP, glutathione oxidase, fatty
acid BP 4, diaphorase 1, MAPK4 and transgelin were up-regulated by K-ras
oncogene. However, integrin alpha1, Ras-interacting protein (Rain),
endothelin-converting enzyme-1d and splicing factor 3b were down-regulated. These
studies suggest that genes related to cancer development and inflammation were
up-regulated while genes related to the tumor suppression were down-regulated by 
K-ras, resulting in the tumor growth. Putative biomarkers such as cell cycle
related genes (Cdc37), cancer cell adhesion (Glycam 1, integrin alpha8, integrin 
alphaX and Clec4n), signal transduction (Tlr2, IL-33, and Ccbp2), migration
(Ccr1, Ccl6, and diaphorase 1 (Cyb5r3) and cancer development (epiregulin) can be
useful for diagnosis and as prognosis markers and some of the target molecules
can be applied for prevention of cancer.

PMID: 19082487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Head Neck. 2009 Jun;31(6):838-42. doi: 10.1002/hed.20971.

Closure of tracheoesophageal fistula with prefabricated revascularized bilaminar 
radial forearm free flap.

Wreesmann VB(1), Smeele LE, Hilgers FJ, Lohuis PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery and Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare but serious complication
associated with high mortality rates. Traditional management of TEF includes
primary closure with or without interposition of regional tissue flaps but is
associated with a significant recurrence risk, especially in case of larger
fistulas. Application of microvascular free flap reconstruction is an emerging
alternative in the surgical management of large TEFs, but may be limited by
issues of flap bulkiness and requirement for neoepithelialization across the
large inner flap surface.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we report prefabrication of a bilaminar radial forearm
free flap to successfully close a large recurrent TEF that occurred years after
tracheoesophageal puncture-based voice rehabilitation in a laryngectomized
patient.
CONCLUSION: The bilaminar radial forearm free flap may prove to be an important
adjunct to the closure of large TEFs.

(c) 2008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 19073008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):4786-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-181743.

GATA-1: one TEF customer.

Brandt SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt University, USA.

Comment on
    Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):4884-94.

PMID: 19064734  [PubMed]


140. Pediatr Surg Int. 2009 Jan;25(1):121-2. doi: 10.1007/s00383-008-2291-9. Epub 2008
Dec 4.

Search for the azygos: a lesson learnt from a case with left superior vena cava, 
esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Arbell D(1), Golender J, Khalaileh A, Gross E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hadassah-Hebrew University Hospital, 91120,
Jerusalem, Israel. arbell@hadassah.org.il

The azygos vein is of superior importance during the operation for esophageal
atresia with tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA; TEF). Its location helps the surgeon
to locate the fistula. Newborns with persistent left superior vena cava (LSVC)
may have alterations in the location of the azygos, and since LSVC is not
uncommon in EAs with fistulae, it is important to locate the azygos during a
pre-operative echocardiogram. Foreknowledge of a possible absent azygos may avoid
morbidity while trying to locate the fistula. We present a case of a newborn with
EA, TEF, and LSVC in which the azygos vein was absent.

PMID: 19052754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Air Waste Manag Assoc. 2008 Nov;58(11):1401-6.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon emission profiles and removal efficiency by
electrostatic precipitator and wetfine scrubber in an iron ore sintering plant.

Guerriero E(1), Lutri A, Mabilia R, Scianò MC, Rotatori M.

Author information: 
(1)Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto sull'Inquinamento Atmosferico,
Monterotondo Scalo, Italy. guerriero@iia.cnr.it

A monitoring campaign of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans,
polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and polychlorinated biphenyl was carried out in
an Italian iron ore sintering plant by sampling the combustion gases at the
electrostatic precipitator (ESP) outlet, at the Wetfine scrubber (WS) outlet, and
by collecting the ESP dust. Few data are available on these micropollutants
produced in iron ore sintering plants, particularly from Italian plants. This
study investigates the PAH emission profiles and the removal efficiency of ESPs
and WS. PAHs were determined at the stack, ESP outlet flue gases, and in ESP dust
to characterize the emission profiles and the performance of the ESP and the WS
for reducing PAH emission. The 11 PAHs monitored are listed in the Italian
legislative decree 152/2006. The mean total PAH sum concentration in the stack
flue gases is 3.96 microg/N x m3, in ESP outlet flue gases is 9.73 microg/N x m3,
and in ESP dust is 0.53 microg/g. Regarding the emission profiles, the most
abundant compound is benzo(b)fluoranthene, which has a relative low BaP toxic
equivalency factors (TEF) value, followed by dibenzo(a,l)pyrene, which has a very
high BaP(TEF) value. The emission profiles in ESP dust and in the flue gases
after the ESP show some changes, whereas the fingerprint in ESP and stack flue
gases is very similar. The removal efficiency of the ESP and of WS on the total
PAH concentration is 5.2 and 59.5%, respectively.

PMID: 19044155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Paediatr Child Health. 2006 Sep;11(7):395-9.

Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula and coordination of care: Expectations and
realities.

Bjornson CL(1), Mitchell I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Paediatrics, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta.

BACKGROUND: Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare congenital anomaly with
chronic morbidities. Aside from health care costs, the authors suspected that
additional burden rests on the family due to hospitalizations, radiological and
surgical procedures, and frequent outpatient visits. It was speculated that this 
complex care is poorly coordinated. The objective of the present study was to
document utilization and coordination of health care services for children with
TEF at the Alberta Children's Hospital (Calgary, Alberta).
METHODS: Medical records of children with TEF (primary surgical repair at Alberta
Children's Hospital between April 1994 and September 1999) were reviewed for
demographics, TEF type, associated anomalies, age at diagnosis and repair, health
services utilization data, and radiological and surgical procedures.
RESULTS: Twenty-two children were identified, of whom 18 survived beyond one
year. Ten of these 18 children were male. Average gestational age and birth
weight were 37.4 weeks (range 32 to 42 weeks) and 2512 g (range 780 g to 3950 g),
respectively. Seventy-eight per cent of children had at least one associated
anomaly. Median initial hospital and intensive care unit stays were 27.5 days and
12 days, respectively. During year 1 of life, there was a median of 31
radiological examinations, five surgical procedures, 2.5 hospital admissions and 
five outpatient clinic visits. Coordination of procedures and outpatient visits
was poor. In year 2 of life, children had fewer procedures, admissions and
outpatient visits; between years 2 and 5, procedures or admissions were rare.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with TEF endure multiple procedures and lengthy hospital
admissions in early life. There was easy access to, but minimal coordination of, 
subspecialist care, procedures and admissions. A dedicated multidisciplinary
clinic for children with TEF should improve care.

PMCID: PMC2528634
PMID: 19030308  [PubMed]


143. Calcif Tissue Int. 2009 Jan;84(1):65-74. doi: 10.1007/s00223-008-9190-x. Epub
2008 Nov 20.

Beneficial effects of tocotrienol and tocopherol on bone histomorphometric
parameters in sprague-dawley male rats after nicotine cessation.

Hermizi H(1), Faizah O, Ima-Nirwana S, Ahmad Nazrun S, Norazlina M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia,
Jalan Raja Muda Abdul Aziz, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

This study was conducted to determine the effectiveness of three forms of vitamin
E supplements following nicotine treatment on bone histomorphometric parameters
in an adult male rat model. Rats were divided into seven groups: baseline (B,
killed without treatment), control (C, normal saline for 4 months), nicotine (N, 
nicotine for 2 months), nicotine cessation (NC), tocotrienol-enhanced fraction
(TEF), gamma-tocotrienol (GTT), and alpha-tocopherol (ATF). Treatments for the
NC, TEF, GTT, and ATF groups were performed in two phases. For the first 2 months
they were given nicotine (7 mg/kg), and for the following 2 months nicotine
administration was stopped and treatments with respective vitamin E preparations 
(60 mg/kg) were commenced except for the NC group, which was allowed to recover
without treatment. Rats in the N and NC groups had lower trabecular bone volume, 
mineral appositional rate (MAR), and bone formation rate (BFR/BS) and higher
single labeled surface and osteoclast surface compared to the C group. Vitamin E 
treatment reversed these nicotine effects. Both the TEF and GTT groups, but not
the ATF group, had a significantly higher trabecular thickness but lower eroded
surface (ES/BS) than the C group. The tocotrienol-treated groups had lower ES/BS 
than the ATF group. The GTT group showed a significantly higher MAR and BFR/BS
than the TEF and ATF groups. In conclusion, nicotine induced significant bone
loss, while vitamin E supplements not only reversed the effects but also
stimulated bone formation significantly above baseline values. Tocotrienol was
shown to be slightly superior compared to tocopherol. Thus, vitamin E, especially
GTT, may have therapeutic potential to repair bone damage caused by chronic
smoking.

PMID: 19020790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Jan;20(1):256-69. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-03-0288. Epub 2008 Nov
5.

Alternative requirements for Vestigial, Scalloped, and Dmef2 during muscle
differentiation in Drosophila melanogaster.

Deng H(1), Hughes SC, Bell JB, Simmonds AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Department of Biological Sciences, and Department 
of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Vertebrate development requires the activity of the myocyte enhancer factor 2
(mef2) gene family for muscle cell specification and subsequent differentiation. 
Additionally, several muscle-specific functions of MEF2 family proteins require
binding additional cofactors including members of the Transcription Enhancing
Factor-1 (TEF-1) and Vestigial-like protein families. In Drosophila there is a
single mef2 (Dmef2) gene as well single homologues of TEF-1 and vestigial-like,
scalloped (sd), and vestigial (vg), respectively. To clarify the role(s) of these
factors, we examined the requirements for Vg and Sd during Drosophila muscle
specification. We found that both are required for muscle differentiation as loss
of sd or vg leads to a reproducible loss of a subset of either cardiac or somatic
muscle cells in developing embryos. This muscle requirement for Sd or Vg is cell 
specific, as ubiquitous overexpression of either or both of these proteins in
muscle cells has a deleterious effect on muscle differentiation. Finally, using
both in vitro and in vivo binding assays, we determined that Sd, Vg, and Dmef2
can interact directly. Thus, the muscle-specific phenotypes we have associated
with Vg or Sd may be a consequence of alternative binding of Vg and/or Sd to
Dmef2 forming alternative protein complexes that modify Dmef2 activity.

PMCID: PMC2613084
PMID: 18987343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Nov;82(11):776-84. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20529.

Maternal periconceptional exposure to cigarette smoking and alcohol and
esophageal atresia +/- tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Wong-Gibbons DL(1), Romitti PA, Sun L, Moore CA, Reefhuis J, Bell EM, Olshan AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal atresia (EA) is a moderately frequent birth defect that
often occurs with tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF). Etiologic studies for
EA+/-TEF have produced inconsistent results.
METHODS: This study used data from the National Birth Defects Prevention Study
(NBDPS) to examine the association between maternal periconceptional exposure to 
cigarette smoking and alcohol and EA+/-TEF. Cases of EA+/-TEF and unaffected
controls with an estimated date of delivery from October 1997 through December
2003 were identified, and telephone interview reports for smoking and alcohol
exposure were obtained from birth mothers of 334 cases and 4,967 controls. Odds
ratios (OR)s and 95% confidence intervals (CI)s, adjusted for several covariates,
were calculated to assess associations.
RESULTS: ORs were near unity for all EA+/-TEF cases combined and any
periconceptional exposure to cigarette smoking (OR = 1.1; CI = 0.8,1.6) or
alcohol (OR = 1.2; CI = 0.8,1.8). For cigarette smoking, some elevated ORs were
found but varied by type of smoking exposure. No consistent patterns were
identified for number of cigarettes smoked per day. For alcohol, ORs were weak to
moderately elevated with increasing number of drinks consumed and for binge
drinkers compared to non-binge drinkers. ORs were further elevated among mothers 
who reported active+passive exposure to cigarette smoking and alcohol (OR = 2.5; 
CI = 1.1,5.6). For both exposures, ORs were higher for cases with additional
major defects compared to isolated cases.
CONCLUSIONS: These results, based on one of the largest published samples of
EA+/-TEF cases, suggest a role for these exposures in the etiology of EA+/-TEF,
although further study is needed to replicate the observed associations.

PMID: 18985694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2009 Apr;19 Suppl 1:S19-22. doi:
10.1089/lap.2008.0139.

Thoracoscopic repair of tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia.

Patkowsk D(1), Rysiakiewicz K, Jaworski W, Zielinska M, Siejka G, Konsur K,
Czernik J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery and Urology, Medical University of
Wroclaw,Wroclaw, Poland. dpat@chdz.am.wroc.pl

PURPOSE: To evaluate the safety and efficacy of the thoracoscopic repair of
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF).
METHODS: From August 2005 to March 2008, 23 consecutive patients (16 boys, 7
girls) weighing 1,070 to 3,390 g underwent thoracoscopic EA/TEF repair. Nine
cases had associated malformations. Two 5-mm and one 2.5-mm trocars were placed. 
The 5-mm 25- to 30-degree telescope was preferred. A pneumothorax was maintained 
with 5 to 6 mm Hg. The azygos vein was never divided. The TEF was closed with
5-mm titanic clips mainly.The esophageal anastomosis was made over 6-French
nasogastric tube by three to seven simple stitches of 5-0Vicryl. The 8-French
chest tube was left without suction. The enteral feeding was usually started on
postoperative day 3 or 4. Barium swallow was performed on postoperative day 5 or 
6, then the chest tube was removed.
RESULTS: All procedures were successfully completed without conversion. The
average operative time was 131 minutes (range, 55-245 minutes) with significant
improvement after gaining experience (mean, 171 minutes for first 10 cases and 98
minutes for last 13 cases). There were two cases of accidental tracheal opening. 
The anastomotic leak rate was 13% (three cases), and all were healed on
conservative treatment. Four cases required one to three courses of anastomotic
stricture dilatations. There were three deaths (13%) of causes not related with
performed operation.
CONCLUSIONS: The thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF is effective method, and based on
our experience, it is the procedure of choice if performed by an experienced
endoscopic pediatric surgeon. The intraoperative complications observed if
properly managed have a good prognosis.

PMID: 18976149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Ecol Resour. 2008 Nov;8(6):1178-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-0998.2008.02280.x.
Epub 2008 Aug 20.

Exploring the species diversity of Trichoderma in Norwegian drinking water
systems by DNA barcoding.

Hageskal G(1), Vrålstad T, Knutsen AK, Skaar I.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Mycology, National Veterinary Institute, PO Box 750 Centrum, 0106
Oslo, Norway.

A total of 123 Trichoderma strains were isolated from Norwegian surface-sourced
drinking water. The water samples included raw water, treated water, and water
from private homes and hospital installations. Trichoderma species are difficult 
to differentiate morphologically, but recent molecular identification tools,
including DNA barcoding, successfully distinguish between closely related
species. The diversity of Trichoderma spp. was explored by DNA sequencing of
internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and translation elongation factor 1 alpha
(TEF-1a). Sequence identification was performed in the TrichOKEY version 2.0
barcode program and in the multilocus similarity search database TrichoBLAST,
combined with traditional blast searches in the EMBL/GenBank. A total of 11 known
Trichoderma/Hypocrea species were identified. In addition, one group of
unidentified Trichoderma strains was found to represent a separate, strongly
supported subclade within the Pachybasium'A'/Hamatum clade, based on their TEF-1a
haplotypes. Trichoderma viride comprised 49% of the identified strains, and was
represented by four and eight slightly different ITS and TEF-1a haplotypes,
respectively. Approximately 22% of the surface-derived water samples were
positive for T. viride, and the species was frequently isolated throughout the
surface-sourced drinking water distribution system. The results indicate that a
broad range of Trichoderma species are present in Norwegian surface-sourced
drinking. Water treatment has minor effect in removing Trichoderma from raw
water, and active growth in the water distribution system is likely to occur.

© 2008 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2008 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21586005  [PubMed]


148. Talanta. 2004 Aug 8;63(5):1255-9. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2004.05.029.

Importance of REP values when comparing the CALUX bioassay results with
chemoanalyses results Example with spiked vegetable oils.

Carbonnelle S(1), Loco JV, Overmeire IV, Windal I, Wouwe NV, Leeuwen SV, Goeyens 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Institute of Public Health, Rue J. Wytsman 14, B-1050 Brussels,
Belgium.

Differences between chemical activated luciferase gene expression (CALUX)
bioassay and chemoanalyses results are observed. This paper shows that
calculations of the TEQ values using REP values instead of WHO TEF values give
different results. The REP values do affect the results obtained by the CALUX
technique. These differences are more marked for the dioxin like PCB compounds
(CALUX TEQ values are lower than WHO TEQ values) than for the dioxin compounds
(CALUX TEQ values are higher than WHO TEQ values). The CALUX results were
compared with the concentrations of the congeners' spiked into the oil.

PMID: 18969555  [PubMed]


149. Talanta. 2004 Aug 8;63(5):1193-202. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2004.05.037.

DR-CALUX((R)) screening of food samples: evaluation of the quantitative approach 
to measure dioxin, furans and dioxin-like PCBs.

Scippo ML(1), Eppe G, De Pauw E, Maghuin-Rogister G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Liège, CART (Centre of Analyses in Traces), Bd de Colonster 20, 
4000 Liege, Belgium.

European legislation laid down maximum tolerable levels of dioxin in feed and
food as well as analytical method requirements. In order to face with large
monitoring programs, it was foreseen in the EU strategy to integrate screening
methods, using either a qualitative (screening) approach, or a quantitative
approach. In this study, dioxin results obtained using the Dioxin Responsive
Chemical-Activated LUciferase gene eXpression (DR-CALUX((R))) cell-based assay
(quantitative approach), were compared with gas chromatography-high resolution
mass spectrometry (GC-HRMS) analyses data. Instead of using World Health
Organization-toxic equivalent factor (WHO-TEF), the comparison was based on the
assessment of relative effective potencies (REPs) for each congener of the 17
toxic 2,3,7,8-polychlorodibenzo-p-dioxins/furans (PCDD/Fs) and 12 dioxin-like
polychlorobiphenyls (DL-PCBs). According to published data, DR-CALUX((R))-REP
evaluated here appear similar to WHO-TEF for PCDD/Fs while lower values were
observed for DL-PCBs. We analyzed two "home made" contaminated fat samples,
displaying both the same WHO-toxic equivalent quantities (WHO-TEQ) concentration 
(12pgWHO-TEQg(-1)). They were spiked with either a low or a high amount of
DL-PCBs. In both cases, the DR-CALUX((R)) measured concentration (picogram
2,3,7,8 tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) eq.g(-1)) corresponded to the PCDD/Fs 
WHO-TEQ concentration only. A good agreement was nevertheless found between the
DR-CALUX((R)) measurements and the recalculated DR-CALUX((R))-TEQ contents (using
DR-CALUX((R))-REP instead of WHO-TEF), demonstrating that the observed response
was due, in both cases, to the addition of the responses of the standards added
to the fat. By contrast, in real contaminated samples (feed or cod liver
samples), DR-CALUX((R)) measured concentrations were similar to WHO-TEQ GC-HRMS
measured concentrations. But, depending on the PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs congener
content, the DR-CALUX((R)) measured concentrations were either lower or higher
than calculated DR-CALUX((R))-TEQ contents, demonstrating that possible
co-extracted contaminants contributed to the CALUX response. Owing to these
divergences, the quantitative determination of dioxin-like content in food and
feed using CALUX as screening method is questionable, except for samples
displaying constant congener patterns, in which cases, correction factors could
be applied.

PMID: 18969548  [PubMed]


150. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jan;37(Database issue):D374-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn704.
Epub 2008 Oct 22.

SPROUTS: a database for the evaluation of protein stability upon point mutation.

Lonquety M(1), Lacroix Z, Papandreou N, Chomilier J.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Data Management Laboratory, Arizona State University, Tempe AZ
85282-5706, USA.

SPROUTS (Structural Prediction for pRotein fOlding UTility System) is a new
database that provides access to various structural data sets and integrated
functionalities not yet available to the community. The originality of the
SPROUTS database is the ability to gain access to a variety of structural
analyses at one place and with a strong interaction between them. SPROUTS
currently combines data pertaining to 429 structures that capture representative 
folds and results related to the prediction of critical residues expected to
belong to the folding nucleus: the MIR (Most Interacting Residues), the
description of the structures in terms of modular fragments: the TEF (Tightened
End Fragments), and the calculation at each position of the free energy change
gradient upon mutation by one of the 19 amino acids. All database results can be 
displayed and downloaded in textual files and Excel spreadsheets and visualized
on the protein structure. SPROUTS is a unique resource to access as well as
visualize state-of-the-art characteristics of protein folding and analyse the
effect of point mutations on protein structure. It is available at
http://bioinformatics.eas.asu.edu/sprouts.html.

PMCID: PMC2686433
PMID: 18945702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Middle East J Anaesthesiol. 2008 Oct;19(6):1241-54.

Anesthetic considerations for the neonate with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Gayle JA(1), Gómez SL, Baluch A, Fox C, Lock S, Kaye A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Tulane Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana,
USA.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and associated esophageal atresia (EA) in the
neonate, presents during the first week of life. This congenital defect can be
complicated by aspiration, respiratory distress, and other congenital anomalies. 
The knowledge and ability of the anesthesiologist to anticipate the challenges in
managing neonates presenting for repair, plays an important role in their
treatment and survival. Also, it is not uncommon for anesthesiologist to care for
a patient later in life following repair of TEF. A familiarity with the immediate
complications and long-term outcome and sequelae after TEF repair is important to
ensure the best patient outcome.

PMID: 18942242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Malar J. 2008 Oct 14;7:208. doi: 10.1186/1475-2875-7-208.

Sickness behaviour pushed too far--the basis of the syndrome seen in severe
protozoal, bacterial and viral diseases and post-trauma.

Clark IA(1), Budd AC, Alleva LM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Australian National University, 
Canberra, Australia. ian.clark@anu.edu.au

Certain distinctive components of the severe systemic inflammatory syndrome are
now well-recognized to be common to malaria, sepsis, viral infections, and
post-trauma illness. While their connection with cytokines has been appreciated
for some time, the constellation of changes that comprise the syndrome has simply
been accepted as an empirical observation, with no theory to explain why they
should coexist. New data on the effects of the main pro-inflammatory cytokines on
the genetic control of sickness behaviour can be extended to provide a rationale 
for why this syndrome contains many of its accustomed components, such as
reversible encephalopathy, gene silencing, dyserythropoiesis, seizures,
coagulopathy, hypoalbuminaemia and hypertriglyceridaemia. It is thus proposed
that the pattern of pathology that comprises much of the systemic inflammatory
syndrome occurs when one of the usually advantageous roles of pro-inflammatory
cytokines--generating sickness behaviour by moderately repressing genes (Dbp,
Tef, Hlf, Per1, Per2 and Per3, and the nuclear receptor Rev-erbalpha) that
control circadian rhythm--becomes excessive. Although reversible encephalopathy
and gene silencing are severe events with potentially fatal consequences, they
can be viewed as having survival advantages through lowering energy demand. In
contrast, dyserythropoiesis, seizures, coagulopathy, hypoalbuminaemia and
hypertriglyceridaemia may best be viewed as unfortunate consequences of extreme
repression of these same genetic controls when the pro-inflammatory cytokines
that cause sickness behaviour are produced excessively. As well as casting a new 
light on the previously unrationalized coexistence of these aspects of systemic
inflammatory diseases, this concept is consistent with the case for a primary
role for inflammatory cytokines in their pathogenesis across this range of
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2576339
PMID: 18854046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Am J Clin Nutr. 2008 Oct;88(4):906-12.

Long-term persistence of adaptive thermogenesis in subjects who have maintained a
reduced body weight.

Rosenbaum M(1), Hirsch J, Gallagher DA, Leibel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Columbia University College of Physicians & Surgeons, New York Presbyterian
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. mr475@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: After weight loss, total energy expenditure -- in particular, energy 
expenditure at low levels of physical activity -- is lower than predicted by
actual changes in body weight and composition. An important clinical issue is
whether this reduction, which predisposes to weight regain, persists over time.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine whether this disproportionate reduction in
energy expenditure persists in persons who have maintained a body-weight
reduction of > or =10% for >1 y.
DESIGN: Seven trios of sex- and weight-matched subjects were studied in an
in-patient setting while receiving a weight-maintaining liquid formula diet of
identical composition. Each trio consisted of a subject at usual weight
(Wt(initial)), a subject maintaining a weight reduction of > or =10% after recent
(5-8 wk) completion of weight loss (Wt(loss-recent)), and a subject who had
maintained a documented reduction in body weight of >10% for >1 y
(Wt(loss-sustained)). Twenty-four-hour total energy expenditure (TEE) was
assessed by precise titration of fed calories of a liquid formula diet necessary 
to maintain body weight. Resting energy expenditure (REE) and the thermic effect 
of feeding (TEF) were measured by indirect calorimetry. Nonresting energy
expenditure (NREE) was calculated as NREE = TEE - (REE +TEF).
RESULTS: TEE, NREE, and (to a lesser extent) REE were significantly lower in the 
Wt(loss-sustained) and Wt(loss-recent) groups than in the Wt(initial) group.
Differences from the Wt(initial) group in energy expenditure were qualitatively
and quantitatively similar after recent and sustained weight loss.
CONCLUSION: Declines in energy expenditure favoring the regain of lost weight
persist well beyond the period of dynamic weight loss.

PMID: 18842775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34159-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806338200. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Transcription enhancer factor 3 (TEF3) mediates the expression of Down syndrome
candidate region 1 isoform 1 (DSCR1-1L) in endothelial cells.

Liu X(1), Zhao D, Qin L, Li J, Zeng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The Down syndrome candidate region 1 gene (DSCR1) can be expressed as four
isoforms, one of which is the well-studied isoform 4 (DSCR1-4) that is induced by
VEGF-A(165) to provide a negative feedback loop in the VEGF-A(165)-induced
angiogenesis. We reported previously that another DSCR1 isoform, DSCR1-1L, was
also up-regulated by VEGF-A(165) in cultured endothelial cells and in several in 
vivo models of pathological angiogenesis and that different from DSCR1-4,
DSCR1-1L overexpression alone induced cultured endothelial cell proliferation and
promoted angiogenesis in Matrigel assays. It was reported recently that tumor
growth was greatly repressed in DSCR1 knock-out mice. Although DSCR1-4
transcription was primarily regulated by NFAT, the mechanism regulating DSCR1-1L 
expression was still unknown. We developed human DSCR1-1L promoter-driven
luciferase system and found that deletion of a putative conserved M-CAT site
located 1426-bp upstream of the translation start site blunted promoter activity.
We further showed that knockdown of TEF3, not other members of TEF family
inhibited VEGF-A(165)-induced DSCR1-1L expression. We also demonstrated that TEF3
directly interacted with the putative M-CAT site in the DSCR1-1L promoter in
vitro and in vivo. Finally, overexpression of TEF3 isoform 1, not isoform 3, in
HUVEC was sufficient to induce DSCR1-1L expression even in the absence of
VEGF-A(165) stimulation. Taken together, we elucidated a novel function of
transcriptional factor TEF3. TEF3 was required for DSCR1-1L expression through
binding to the M-CAT site in its promoter and could be an attractive target for
anti-angiogenesis therapy.

PMCID: PMC2662233
PMID: 18840614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Acta Biol Hung. 2008 Sep;59(3):365-83. doi: 10.1556/ABiol.59.2008.3.10.

Molecular phylogenetic and scanning electron microscopical analyses places the
Choanephoraceae and the Gilbertellaceae in a monophyletic group within the
Mucorales (Zygomycetes, Fungi).

Voigt K(1), Olsson L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Pilz-Referenz-Zentrum,
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Neugasse 24, D-07743 Jena, Germany.
Kerstin.Voigt@uni-jena.de

A multi-gene genealogy based on maximum parsimony and distance analyses of the
exonic genes for actin (act) and translation elongation factor 1 alpha (tef), the
nuclear genes for the small (18S) and large (28S) subunit ribosomal RNA
(comprising 807, 1092, 1863, 389 characters, respectively) of all 50 genera of
the Mucorales (Zygomycetes) suggests that the Choanephoraceae is a monophyletic
group. The monotypic Gilbertellaceae appears in close phylogenetic relatedness to
the Choanephoraceae. The monophyly of the Choanephoraceae has moderate to strong 
support (bootstrap proportions 67% and 96% in distance and maximum parsimony
analyses, respectively), whereas the monophyly of the
Choanephoraceae-Gilbertellaceae clade is supported by high bootstrap values (100%
and 98%). This suggests that the two families can be joined into one family,
which leads to the elimination of the Gilbertellaceae as a separate family. In
order to test this hypothesis single-locus neighbor-joining analyses were
performed on nuclear genes of the 18S, 5.8S, 28S and internal transcribed spacer 
(ITS) 1 ribosomal RNA and the translation elongation factor 1 alpha (tef) and
beta tubulin (betatub) nucleotide sequences. The common monophyletic origin of
the Choanephoraceae-Gilbertellaceae clade could be confirmed in all gene trees
and by investigation of their ultrastructure. Sporangia with persistent, sutured 
walls splitting in half at maturity and ellipsoidal sporangiospores with striated
ornamentations and polar ciliate appendages arising from spores in persistent
sporangia and dehiscent sporangiola represent synapomorphic characters of this
group. We discuss our data in the context of the historical development of their 
taxonomy and physiology and propose a reduction of the two families to one
family, the Choanephoraceae sensu lato comprising species which are facultative
plant pathogens and parasites, especially in subtropical to tropical regions.

PMID: 18839703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Int Surg. 2008 May-Jun;93(3):141-4.

Coexisting congenital diaphragmatic hernia, esophageal atresia, and
tracheoesophageal fistula: a case report and review of the literature.

Al-Salem AH(1), Alkhuwaher H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department Of Surgery, Qatif Central Hospital, 
Qatif, Saudi Arabia. asalem56@hotmail.com

Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and
congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) are two relatively common neonatal
conditions. The coexistence of the two conditions in the same newborn is
extremely rare. This is a case report of a newborn with CDH and concurrent EA and
TEF. Aspects of diagnosis and the literature on the subject are also reviewed.

PMID: 18828268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2008 Oct;18(5):753-6. doi: 10.1089/lap.2007.0220.

Thoracoscopic versus open repair of tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal
atresia.

Lugo B(1), Malhotra A, Guner Y, Nguyen T, Ford H, Nguyen NX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027,
USA. blugo@uci.edu

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Recent studies show the minimally invasive approach to the 
repair of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is
feasible. This study aimed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of the
thoracoscopic versus open techniques.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of EA/TEF cases from June 2000 to
July 2006. Patient characteristics, operative time, blood loss, duration of
narcotic usage, time to extubation, time to first oral feeding, length of stay,
complications, and follow-up were analyzed.
RESULTS: Thirty-five type-C EA/TEF patients were evaluated. Two patients with
excessively long gaps who required esophageal "bougienage" stretching were
excluded. Twenty-five patients underwent traditional repair through thoracotomy. 
There were 8 thoracoscopic attempts, 7 of which were successfully completed
without a conversion. The mean operative time was 130 minutes (range, 75-240) for
the thoracoscopic approach, compared to 123 (range, 82-205) for the thoracotomy; 
mean duration of narcotic use was 5 days (range, 1-12), as compared to 23 (range,
2-190); the mean time to extubation was 4.6 days (range, 1-12), compared to 19
(range, 3-150); the mean days to per os feeding were 9.8 days (range, 7-17)
versus 37 (range, 7-360); and the mean length of stay was 21.8 days (range,
11-38), compared to 66 (range, 8-280). There were no intraoperative complications
or deaths in either group. The anastomotic leak rate was 14 versus 20%, whereas
the stricture rate was 14 versus 50% for the closed and open techniques,
respectively. Of the thoracoscopic group, 87.5% had at least one major associated
anomaly, compared with 70% of patients undergoing thoracotomy. Follow-up for the 
thoracoscopic and open groups were 18 and 28 months, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the outcomes of the thoracoscopic technique 
are comparable to that of the open technique. However, the number is small, and
more data are needed to further evaluate the procedure.

PMID: 18803521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess. 2008 Sep;25(9):1167.

3rd IUPAC Symposium on Trace Elements in Food (TEF-3).

[No authors listed]

PMID: 18798042  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


159. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2009 Apr;41(4):599-606. doi: 10.1007/s11250-008-9230-6.
Epub 2008 Sep 7.

Feed intake, digestibility, body weight and carcass parameters of Afar rams fed
tef (Eragrostis tef) straw supplemented with graded levels of concentrate mix.

Hagos T(1), Melaku S.

Author information: 
(1)Alamata Agricultural Research Center, P.O. Box 56, Alamata, Tigray, Ethiopia.

The experiment was conducted at Alamata Agricultural Research Center, Ethiopia
using 20 Afar rams with an initial body weight (BW) of 18.2 +/- 1.76 (mean +/-
SD) kg. The objectives were to study the effect of supplementation with
concentrate mix consisting of wheat bran (WB), noug seed cake (NSC) and sesame
seed cake (SSC) at the ratio of 2:1:1 on dry matter (DM) basis, respectively on
feed intake, digestibility, BW gain and carcass parameters of Afar rams fed tef
(Eragrostis tef) straw basal diet. The experiment was arranged with four
treatments and five replications in a randomized complete block design. The
treatments included feeding sole tef straw (T1, control), and daily
supplementation with the concentrate mix offered at 150 (T2, low), 250 (T3,
medium) and 350 (T4, high) g DM per head. Total DM intake, crude protein (CP)
digestibility, daily BW gain (P < 0.001), DM and organic matter (OM)
digestibility, and carcass parameters (P < 0.05) were higher in the supplemented 
than in the control treatment. Intake of tef straw reduced as the level of
supplementation increased, whereas the contrary was true for CP intake.
Performance in carcass parameters was better for the medium compared to the low
level of concentrate mix supplementation. Moreover, the medium level of
supplementation did not substitute tef straw intake. Therefore, it is concluded
that the medium level of concentrate mix supplement maintained the utilization of
the roughage feed and resulted in better carcass parameters.

PMID: 18777140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Cases J. 2008 Aug 29;1(1):134. doi: 10.1186/1757-1626-1-134.

Pneumothorax, pneumomediastinum, tracheo-esophageal fistula presenting with
endotracheal intubation in post-cesarean period: A case report.

Oksuz H(1), Senoglu N, Zencirci B, Ezberci M, Yuzbasioglu MF.

Author information: 
(1)Kahramanmaras Sutcu Imam University Medical Faculty, Department of
Anesthesiology and Reanimation, Kahramanmaras, Turkey. drhoksuz@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The non-malignant, acquired tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF),
resulting from tracheal intubation are usually iatrogenic lesions. Tracheal
lesions resulting from intubation may occur and pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax
or subcutaneous emphysema may develop due to the stream of air.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a-39-year old, Caucasian patient, developing severe
hypoxia fallowing cesarean section under general anesthesia. The findings of the 
patient were diffuse subcutaneous emphysema; together with pneumothorax and
pneumomediastinum TEF was diagnosed in the patient by bronchoscopy and
eusophagoscopy performed due to cough and difficulty in swallowing developing
after extubation.
CONCLUSION: It is important to the clinicians to be aware of the TEF can be
accompanied to the traumatic intubation and urgent endoscopy or water-soluble
contrast radiography may be prudent.

PMCID: PMC2543003
PMID: 18759991  [PubMed]


161. J Virol. 2008 Nov;82(21):10724-34. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00921-08. Epub 2008 Aug 27.

Functional mapping of the human papillomavirus type 16 E1 cistron.

Lace MJ(1), Anson JR, Turek LP, Haugen TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa, Roy J and Lucille A Carver
College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Replication of the double-stranded, circular human papillomavirus (HPV) genomes
requires the viral DNA replicase E1. Here, we report an initial characterization 
of the E1 cistron of HPV type 16 (HPV-16), the most common oncogenic mucosal HPV 
type found in cervical and some head and neck cancers. The first step in HPV DNA 
replication is an initial burst of plasmid viral DNA amplification.
Complementation assays between HPV-16 genomes carrying mutations in the early
genes confirmed that the expression of E1 was necessary for initial HPV-16
plasmid synthesis. The major early HPV-16 promoter, P97, was dispensable for E1
production in the initial amplification because cis mutations inactivating P97
did not affect the trans complementation of E1- mutants. In contrast, E1
expression was abolished by cis mutations in the splice donor site at nucleotide 
(nt) 226, the splice acceptor site at nt 409, or a TATAA box at nt 7890. The
mapping of 5' mRNA ends using rapid amplification of cDNA ends defined a promoter
with a transcription start site at HPV-16 nt 14, P14. P14-initiated mRNA levels
were low and required intact TATAA (7890). E1 expression required the HPV-16
keratinocyte-dependent enhancer, since cis mutations in its AP-2 and TEF-1 motifs
abolished the ability of the mutant genomes to complement E1- genomes, and it was
further modulated by origin-proximal and -distal binding sites for the viral E2
gene products. We conclude that P14-initiated E1 expression is critical for and
limiting in the initial amplification of the HPV-16 genome.

PMCID: PMC2573179
PMID: 18753208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Pediatr Surg Int. 2008 Oct;24(10):1153-6. doi: 10.1007/s00383-008-2222-9.

Esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula associated with coarctation of 
the aorta, CHARGE association, and DiGeorge syndrome: a case report and
literature review.

Lee KD(1), Okazaki T, Kato Y, Lane GJ, Yamataka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric General and Urogenital Surgery, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

CHARGE association and DiGeorge syndrome (DGS) rarely occur together and only
eight cases have been reported in the English literature. Two were associated
with esophageal atresia (EA) and severe congenital heart anomalies. We report a
third case of EA with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) associated with
coarctation of the aorta (CoA), CHARGE association, and DGS. The challenge for
management in this complicated case is the background DGS which influences
surgical outcome because of Ca++ imbalance and immune deficiency that can be
life-threatening and require bone marrow transplantation.

PMID: 18696080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Aug;43(8):e1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2008.04.015.

Tracheal agenesis and esophageal atresia with proximal and distal
bronchoesophageal fistulas.

Demircan M(1), Aksoy T, Ceran C, Kafkasli A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Inonu University, Medical School, 44315
Malatya, Turkey.

Tracheal agenesis (TA) is an extremely rare, typically fatal congenital tracheal 
malformation. Lack of prenatal symptoms and emergent presentation usually lead to
a failure to arrive at the correct diagnosis and manage the airway properly
before the onset of irreversible cerebral anoxia. Esophageal atresia (EA)
encompasses a group of congenital anomalies comprising an interruption of the
continuity of the esophagus with or without a persistent communication with the
trachea. In 86% of cases, there is a distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF); in
7%, there is no fistulous connection, whereas in 4%, there is a TEF without
atresia. We report the case of an infant born with TA and EA with proximal and
distal bronchoesophageal fistulas. During 3 consecutive antenatal ultrasound
examinations, there had been polyhydramniosis, difficulty visualizing the
stomach, and dilatation of proximal esophagus, leading to a presumptive diagnosis
of EA. The clinical presentation, embryology, classification, and surgical
management are discussed.

PMID: 18675618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Surg Endosc. 2008 Oct;22(10):2214-9. doi: 10.1007/s00464-008-0025-7. Epub 2008
Jul 23.

Minimally invasive surgery in infants less than 5 kg: experience of 649 cases.

Ponsky TA(1), Rothenberg SS.

Author information: 
(1)Rocky Mountain Hospital for Children, Denver, CO, USA.

INTRODUCTION: With the development of advanced skills and the introduction of
miniature laparoscopic tools, endoscopic procedures in infants and small children
have become possible. This report documents our experience in minimally invasive 
surgery (MIS) in infants under 5 kg.
METHODS: A retrospective database review was performed from September 1993 to
September 2007. All children weighing 5 kg or less that underwent a laparoscopic 
or thoracoscopic procedure were included.
RESULTS: A total of 649 cases were attempted. 43 different procedures were
performed, the most common being Nissen fundoplication (310 cases, average
operating room (OR) time 43 min, average time to full feeds 2 days),
pyloromyotomy (104 cases, average OR time 12.5 min, average hospital days<1),
patent ductus arteriosum (PDA) ligation (26 cases, average OR time 31 min,
average hospital days<1), tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair (22 cases,
average OR time 83 min, average time to full feeds 7.8 days), duodenoduodenostomy
(20 cases, average OR time 76 min, average time to full feeds 8.6 days), colonic 
pull-through for Hirschsprung's disease (18 cases, average OR time 109.6 min,
average time to full feeds 3 days), colonic pull-through for imperforate anus (10
cases, average OR time 103 min, average hospital days 2), lung resection (12
cases, average OR time 66.8 min, average hospital days 1.75), congenital
diaphragmatic hernia repair (10 cases, average OR time 62.5 min, average time to 
full feeds 4.75 days). There were no surgery-related deaths. The conversion rate 
to open was 1.2% (n=8). There were six intraoperative complication rate (0.9%)
and the overall complication rate was 3% (20 complications overall).
CONCLUSIONS: The development of modern low-flow CO2 insufflators, smaller
instruments and telescopes, as well as advanced techniques, has made MIS in
neonates feasible and safe. The greatest challenge remains performing intestinal 
anastomosis in these confined spaces, and further technical advances will be
required to make these techniques universally adopted.

PMID: 18649102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Food Addit Contam Part A Chem Anal Control Expo Risk Assess. 2008
Oct;25(10):1225-36. doi: 10.1080/02652030802130025.

Organophosphorus pesticide residues in Greek virgin olive oil: levels, dietary
intake and risk assessment.

Tsoutsi CS(1), Konstantinou IK, Hela DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Ioannina, Ioannina 45110, Greece.

The occurrence of organophosphorus pesticide (OPs) and their metabolite residues 
was investigated in 167 samples of Greek virgin olive oil during a 2-year
(2004-2005) sampling campaign. A total of 30.5% of samples contained detectable
residues, although only one sample contained dimethoate residues above the
maximum residue limit. Among the seven detected OPs, fenthion and fenthion
sulfoxide residues were detected in 10.8 and 14.4% of the samples, respectively, 
at levels of 0.003-0.61 mg kg(-1). Dimethoate was detected in 10.2% of the
samples at 0.003-0.057 mg kg(-1). The acute dietary risk assessment was
undertaken by determining the national estimated short-term intake (NESTI); for
chronic dietary risk assessment, the national theoretical maximum daily intake
(NTMDI) and national estimated daily intake (NEDI) were calculated. The estimated
intakes (NESTI and NEDI) of each pesticide were <7 and <0.86% of the
corresponding acute reference doses (ARfDs) and acceptable daily intakes (ADIs), 
respectively. A cumulative risk assessment was performed using the hazard index
(HI) and toxicity equivalence factor (TEF), taking into account that OPs share
the same toxicological mechanism. The determined HI and TEF values were found to 
represent only a small portion of the respective ADIs or ARfDs. These results
indicate that there is neither acute nor chronic risk for the Greek population
through olive oil consumption.

PMID: 18636365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Aug;18(4):230-2. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1038396. Epub 2008 
Jul 15.

Colon patch esophagoplasty: an alternative to total esophagus replacement?

Raboei EH(1), Luoma R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, King Fahd Armed Forces Hospital, Jeddah,
Saudi Arabia. enaamraboei@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Resistant benign esophageal strictures (ES) are likely to require
esophageal replacement. The use of colon patch esophagoplasty (CPE) was
originally described for the correction of long segment esophageal stenosis,
however it was thought that the length of the stricture would limit the use of
the patch technique. We performed CPE on 3- to 4-inch strictures with a good
outcome.
AIM: We report here on our results of the use of CPE for long and short ES.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective study was carried out on patients operated 
for resistant ES using a vascularized colonic patch. The technique used was the
same as described by Hecker and Hollmann with a few modifications. We used the
right colon. Instead of passing the patch through the hiatus we placed it in the 
right pleural cavity through a small incision in the diaphragm. An appropriately 
sized patch was sewn to a generous longitudinal esophagotomy extending well
beyond the stricture using running 4/0 polydiaxone sutures.
RESULTS: Four patients underwent CPE, three because of an extensive caustic
stricture and one with a stricture after failed atresia repair. All four patients
were males. They were almost the same age except for the one with
post-tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair stricture. The site of the stricture 
was the mid esophagus in three and the lower esophagus in one. Three patients had
an anastomatic leak which was treated conservatively and one patient required a
postoperative fundoplication 10 days post-CPE to stop the leak. The first patient
developed a patch diverticulum, which was resected 12 years after CPE. All had
fundoplication pre-, intra- or post-CPE. The follow-up period ranged from 4 - 20 
years. All patients are eating and growing normally after surgery. No malignant
changes were seen in the older patient.
CONCLUSIONS: The length of the stricture is not a problem in CPE. Our results are
encouraging on the use of CPE as an alternative to esophageal replacement. We
suggest using CPE even for an entire scarred esophagus. A postoperative leak due 
to a long suture line can be overcome by fundoplication and supportive therapy.

PMID: 18629764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. DNA Cell Biol. 2008 Jul;27(7):367-76. doi: 10.1089/dna.2008.0754.

Myocyte-specific M-CAT and MEF-1 elements regulate G-protein gamma 3 gene
(gamma3) expression in cardiac myocytes.

McWhinney C(1), Robishaw JD.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Department, New York College of Osteopathic Medicine, Old 
Westbury, New York 11568-8000, USA. cmcwhinn@nyit.edu

Little is known regarding the mechanisms that control the expression of G-protein
alpha, beta, and gamma subtypes. We have previously shown that the G-protein
gamma(3) gene is expressed in the heart, brain, lung, spleen, kidney, muscle, and
testis in mice. We have also reported that the G-protein gamma(3) subunit is
expressed in rat cardiac myocytes, but not in cardiac fibroblasts. Other studies 
have shown that the gamma(3) subunit couples to the angiotensin A1A receptor in
portal vein myocytes, and has been shown to mediate beta-adrenergic
desensitization in cardiac myocytes treated with atorvastatin. In the present
study, we evaluated G-protein gamma(3) promoter-luciferase reporter constructs in
primary myocytes to identify key regulatory promoter regions. We identified two
important regions of the promoter (upstream promoter region [UPR] and downstream 
promoter region [DPR]), which are required for expression in cardiac myocytes. We
observed that removal of 48 bp in the UPR diminished gene transcription by 75%,
and that the UPR contains consensus elements for myocyte-specific M-CAT and
myocyte enhancer factor 1 (MEF-1) elements. The UPR and DPR share transcription
factor elements for myocyte-specific M-CAT element. We observed that cardiac
myocyte proteins bind to gamma(3) oligonucleotides containing transcription
factor elements for myocyte-specific M-CAT and MEF-1. Myocyte-specific M-CAT
proteins were supershifted with transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1)
antibodies binding to the gamma(3) M-CAT element, which is in agreement with
reports showing that the M-CAT element binds the TEF-1 family of transcription
factors. The 150 bp DPR contains three M-CAT elements, an INR element, an
upstream stimulatory factor 1 element, and the transcription start site. We have 
shown that myocyte gamma(3) gene expression is regulated by myocyte-specific
M-CAT and MEF-1 elements.

PMCID: PMC2980780
PMID: 18613791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Pediatr Surg Int. 2008 Aug;24(8):965-9. doi: 10.1007/s00383-008-2192-y. Epub 2008
Jun 28.

Achalasia-like findings in a case with delayed diagnosis of H-type
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Boybeyi O(1), Köse M, Ersöz DD, Haliloglu M, Karnak I, Senocak ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine,
Sihhiye, 06100, Ankara, Turkey.

H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) may lead to chronic respiratory disease if
the diagnosis is delayed. Long-standing fistula causes esophageal distention
which is named as pneumoesophagus or megaesophagus and possibly affects the
motility of the esophageal body which may also be encountered as a part of
tracheoesophageal anomalies. Both dysmotility and megaesophagus may mimic
achalasia radiologically and the patient may be advised an unnecessary
esophagocardiomyotomy. The authors report a 15-year-old adolescent with H-type
TEF who has been diagnosed during investigations for chronic respiratory disease 
due to presumptive diagnosis of achalasia. The authors emphasize that a complete 
anatomical and functional evaluation of the upper gastrointestinal tract should
be done before recommending operation for achalasia in patients with chronic
respiratory disease. H-type TEF should be investigated to avoid unnecessary
cardiomyotomy.

PMID: 18587587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Chemosphere. 2008 Aug;73(1):92-6. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.04.088. Epub
2008 Jun 27.

TEQ(S) and body burden for PCDDs, PCDFs, and dioxin-like PCBs in human adipose
tissue.

La Rocca C(1), Alivernini S, Badiali M, Cornoldi A, Iacovella N, Silvestroni L,
Spera G, Turrio-Baldassarri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Safety and Veterinary Public Health, Istituto Superiore di 
Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. cinzia.larocca@iss.it

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs),
mono-ortho and non-ortho polychlorinated biphenyls (dioxin-like PCBs) were
determined in samples of human fat tissue from nine Italian obese patients. The
toxicity equivalent (TEQ) values ranged from 9 to 25 pg TEQ g(-1) lipid (WHO-TEF 
values, 2005 [Van den Berg, M., Birnbaum, L.S., Denison, M., De Vito, M.,
Farland, W., Feeley, M., Fiedler, H., Hakansson, H., Hanberg, A., Haws, L., Rose,
M., Safe, S., Schrenk, D., Tohyama, C., Tritscher, A., Tuomisto, J., Tysklind,
M., Walker, N., Peterson, R.E., 2006. The 2005 World Health Organization
reevaluation of human and mammalian Toxic Equivalency Factors for dioxins and
dioxin-like compounds. Toxicol. Sci. 93, 223-241]), the contribution of
dioxin-like PCBs was more than 30% of the total TEQ values. The obese body
burdens varied from 6 to 11 ng TEQ kg(-1) body weight (BW), exceeding the
estimated steady-state body burden 5 ng TEQ kg(-1) BW, based on lipid adjusted
serum concentrations from several populations in the mid-1990s, calculated in the
risk assessment US EPA document.

PMID: 18585755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2008;71(16):1073-84. doi: 10.1080/15287390802114337.

Using quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) to predict toxic
endpoints for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).

Bruce ED(1), Autenrieth RL, Burghardt RC, Donnelly KC, McDonald TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas,
USA. ericabruce@verizon.net

Quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) offer a reliable,
cost-effective alternative to the time, money, and animal lives necessary to
determine chemical toxicity by traditional methods. Additionally, humans are
exposed to tens of thousands of chemicals in their lifetimes, necessitating the
determination of chemical toxicity and screening for those posing the greatest
risk to human health. This study developed models to predict toxic endpoints for 
three bioassays specific to several stages of carcinogenesis. The ethoxyresorufin
O-deethylase assay (EROD), the Salmonella/microsome assay, and a gap junction
intercellular communication (GJIC) assay were chosen for their ability to measure
toxic endpoints specific to activation-, induction-, and promotion-related
effects of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH). Shape-electronic, spatial,
information content, and topological descriptors proved to be important
descriptors in predicting the toxicity of PAH in these bioassays. Bioassay-based 
toxic equivalency factors (TEF(B)) were developed for several PAH using the
quantitative structure-toxicity relationships (QSTR) developed. Predicting
toxicity for a specific PAH compound, such as a bioassay-based potential potency 
(PP(B)) or a TEF(B), is possible by combining the predicted behavior from the
QSTR models. These toxicity estimates may then be incorporated into a risk
assessment for compounds that lack toxicity data. Accurate toxicity predictions
are made by examining each type of endpoint important to the process of
carcinogenicity, and a clearer understanding between composition and toxicity can
be obtained.

PMID: 18569619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Jun;43(6):E33-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2008.02.009.

Staged esophageal lengthening with internal and subsequent external traction
sutures leads to primary repair of an ultralong gap esophageal atresia with upper
pouch tracheoesophagel fistula.

Till H(1), Muensterer OJ, Rolle U, Foker J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital of Leipzig, Women's and
Children's Hospital, 04317 Leipzig, Germany. holger.till@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Primary repair of very long gap esophageal atresia (EA) with almost complete
absence of thoracic esophagus has usually been thought impossible. Thus,
esophageal replacement with colon or gastric interposition seemed inevitable. In 
contrast, J. Foker described a technique of lengthening the pouches with traction
sutures and making primary repair possible. To contribute clinical experience to 
this discussion, we report about esophageal elongation in a child with long gap
EA and an upper pouch tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The patient presented as a
preterm baby with a long gap EA of almost 9 vertebral bodies (7 cm) and
additionally TEF on the upper pouch. Initially, he was treated with a gastrostomy
and replogle suction of the upper pouch. Tracheoesophageal fistula was repaired, 
and the upper pouch brought from the neck into the thoracic inlet. At the same
time thoracotomy was performed, and the lower esophageal segment mobilized and
fixed to the prevertebral fascia under moderate tension. The tension reduced the 
gap between both pouches to about 3.5 cm. After 4 weeks, both pouches were
mobilized further. However, the remaining gap did not allow primary anastomosis
at that time, so the traction sutures were reconfigured and brought out
externally through the skin above and below the incision. Daily increases in
tension resulted in the ends virtually touching within 10 days. Now a contrast
study showed the two lumens within 5 mm of each other, and primary anastomosis
was completed without difficulty. Postoperative diagnosed gastroesophageal reflux
and anastomotic stricture were controlled by a Thal hemifundoplication and
dilatations. In conclusion, staged esophageal lengthening may be considered for a
primary repair of EA even in cases with ultralong gap and TEF.

PMID: 18558163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008 Aug;51(3):278-87. doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2008.04.010.
Epub 2008 Apr 24.

Dietary exposure to dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs in The Netherlands anno 2004.

De Mul A(1), Bakker MI, Zeilmaker MJ, Traag WA, Leeuwen SP, Hoogenboom RL, Boon
PE, Klaveren JD.

Author information: 
(1)RIKILT-Institute of Food Safety, Wageningen University and Research Centre,
P.O. Box 230, Bornsesteeg 45, AE Wageningen, The Netherlands.

In this study, representative occurrence data for PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs in
food were obtained and used to estimate dietary exposure of the Dutch population.
Food composite samples were analyzed as well as single fish and vegetables
samples. Total dioxin concentrations in animal products ranged from 0.05 pg TEQ/g
product in poultry to 2.5 pg TEQ/g product (using TEF(2006)) in fish (shrimp),
with 0.12pg TEQ/g product being the lowest concentrations measured in fish
(tuna). In vegetable products, concentrations ranged from 0.00002 pg TEQ/g
product (white kale) to 0.19 pg TEQ/g (oils and fats). A long-term dietary
exposure distribution was calculated using Monte Carlo Risk Assessment software. 
The lower bound median exposure of the Dutch population to PCDD/Fs and
dioxin-like PCBs was estimated at 0.8 pg WHO-TEQ/kgbw/d, half of which were
dioxin-like PCBs. Dairy was the main source (38%) due to its high consumption.
Time-trend analysis shows that the exposure to dioxins has further decreased by
35% over the past five years. This is due to lower levels of dioxin-like
compounds in most of the foods, mainly influenced by lower levels in meat and
milk. The use of the new TEFs gives an exposure reduction of 10% with respect to 
TEF(1998). Still, 4% of the Dutch population exceeds the exposure limit of 14
pg/kgbw/week as set by the EU.

PMID: 18554765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Aug;16(8):1749-54. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.304. Epub 
2008 Jun 12.

Influence of ascorbic acid on the thermic effect of feeding in overweight and
obese adult humans.

Newsom SA(1), Paxton RJ, Rynn GM, Bell C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Exercise Science, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, CO, USA.

The thermic effect of feeding (TEF: increase in energy expenditure following
acute energy intake) is an important physiological determinant of total daily
energy expenditure and thus energy balance. Approximately 40% of TEF is believed 
to be mediated by sympathoadrenal activation and consequent beta-adrenergic
receptor stimulation of metabolism. In sedentary adults, acute administration of 
ascorbic acid, a potent antioxidant, augments the thermogenic response to
beta-adrenergic stimulation. We hypothesized that acute ascorbic acid
administration augments TEF in sedentary overweight and obese adults. Energy
expenditure was determined (ventilated hood technique) before and 4 h after
consumption of a liquid-mixed meal (caloric equivalent 40% of resting energy
expenditure (REE)) in 11 sedentary, overweight/obese adults (5 men, 6 women; age:
24 +/- 2 years; BMI: 28.5 +/- 1.0 kg/m(2) (mean +/- s.e.)) on two separate,
randomly ordered occasions: during continuous intravenous administration of
saline (placebo control) and/or ascorbic acid (0.05 g/kg fat-free mass). Acute
ascorbic acid administration prevented the increase in plasma concentration of
oxidized low-density lipoprotein in the postprandial state (P = 0.04), but did
not influence REE (1,668 +/- 107 kcal/day vs.1,684 +/- 84 kcal/day; P = 0.91) or 
the area under the TEF response curve (33.4 +/- 2.4 kcal vs. 30.5 +/- 3.6 kcal; P
= 0.52) (control vs. ascorbic acid, respectively). Furthermore, acute ascorbic
acid administration had no effect on respiratory exchange ratio, heart rate, or
arterial blood pressure in the pre- and postabsorptive states (all P > 0.64).
These data imply that the attenuated TEF commonly observed with sedentary
lifestyle and obesity is not modulated by ascorbic acid-sensitive oxidative
stress.

PMID: 18551121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mcgill J Med. 2007 Jul;10(2):96-8.

Barrett's esophagitis related bronchoesophageal fistula--the diagnostic value of 
persistent air leak in the ventilated setting.

Halaweh O, Usmani SZ, Abouasaleh R.

A case of acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is presented in a 44-year-old 
female who presented with acute respiratory failure due to bilateral aspiration
pneumonia. The patient had persistent air leak while on mechanical ventilation
and underwent bronchoscopy which revealed the above etiology. Histopathology
showed Barrett's esophagitis. The patient underwent primary closure followed by a
short course of proton pump inhibitors. There are only two prior reported cases
of acquired TEF associated with Barrett's esophagitis. This condition should be
taken under consideration when investigating of an explained persistent air leak 
in a mechanically ventilated patient.

PMCID: PMC2323478
PMID: 18523545  [PubMed]


175. J Chem Phys. 2008 May 28;128(20):204304. doi: 10.1063/1.2928806.

Interatomic contributions to high-energy electron-molecule scattering.

McCaffrey PD(1), Dewhurst JK, Rankin DW, Mawhorter RJ, Sharma S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Chemistry, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JJ, United
Kingdom.

Within the independent atom scattering model, we derive an approximate formula
for the rotationally and vibrationally averaged three-atom terms in the series
expansion of the electron scattering cross section. This formula uses the atomic 
scattering factors as well as the atomic scattered wavefunctions as input, and
rotational averaging is performed numerically. We compare our results to previous
theoretical multiple scattering approaches for the molecules F(3), F(4), and
SF(6) and to experimental data for TeF(6). Our results are consistent with those 
of previous calculations and inclusion of the three-atom term produces a
dramatically better least squares fit of the TeF(6) data. The algorithm presented
here is sufficiently fast and simple to be incorporated easily into existing
electron diffraction codes.

PMID: 18513016  [PubMed]


176. Chemosphere. 2008 Aug;73(1 Suppl):S261-77. doi:
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2007.08.074. Epub 2008 Jun 3.

Total TEQ reference range (PCDDs, PCDFs, cPCBs, mono-PCBs) for the US population 
2001-2002.

Patterson DG Jr(1), Turner WE, Caudill SP, Needham LL.

Author information: 
(1)Organic Analytical Toxicology Branch, Division of Laboratory Sciences,
National Center for Environmental Health, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 4770 Buford Highway, NE, Mail Stop F-17, Atlanta, GA 30341, United
States. donpatt@etcmail.com

We report reference ranges for the total toxic equivalency (TEQ) and TEQ
sub-fractions of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), dibenzofurans
(PCDFs), coplanar biphenyls (cPCBs), and mono-ortho-substituted biphenyls (mPCBs)
in a statistically designed sampling of the US population in 2001-2002. The TEQ
and TEQ sub-fractions have been stratified by age, sex, and race/ethnicity. The
TEQ levels are lower using the 2005 toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) compared to 
using the 1998 TEF values, principally due to the much lower 2005 TEF values
assigned to the mPCBs. Mexican Americans (MA) have significantly lower TEQ levels
than both non-Hispanic whites (NHW) and non-Hispanic blacks (NHB). Using the 1998
or 2005 TEF values, males and females have nearly the same distribution of TEQ
sub-fractions. We found a significant increase in TEQ levels with age for males, 
females, and NHW. About 80-90% of the total TEQ can be estimated by using seven
congeners, namely 2,3,7,8-TCDD, 1,2,3,7,8-PeCDD, 1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDD,
2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF, PCB-126, PCB-118, and PCB-156. We also measured geometric mean
TEQ levels in pooled samples from the US population. The geometric mean TEQ
levels also increase with age. In the youngest age group (12-19 years), the TEQ
levels were higher in males than in females while females had higher TEQ levels
than males in all older age groups. In the pools, as age increases the percent
contribution of the PCDD TEQ levels increases while the percent contribution of
the PCDF TEQ levels decreases for all race/ethnicity and sex strata.

PMID: 18511103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Ann Thorac Surg. 2008 Jun;85(6):1968-72; discussion 1973. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2008.01.095.

Polyflex expandable stents in the treatment of esophageal disease: initial
experience.

Pennathur A(1), Chang AC, McGrath KM, Steiner G, Alvelo-Rivera M, Awais O,
Gooding WE, Christie NA, Gilbert S, Landreneau RJ, Luketich JD.

Author information: 
(1)Heart, Lung, and Esophageal Surgery Institute, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

BACKGROUND: The new generation of expandable plastic esophageal stents (Polyflex;
Boston Scientific, Natick, MA), combine the features of plastic and
self-expanding metallic stents. The main objective of this study is to evaluate
our initial experience with Polyflex expandable stents in the treatment of
esophageal disease from two institutions.
METHODS: A total of 58 Polyflex stents were placed in 38 patients over a two-year
period. There were 24 men and 14 women, with a median age of 63 years (range, 25 
to 83). The most common indication for placement was an esophageal stricture in
25 patients (66%); other causes included leak in 8 (21%) and tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) in 5 (13%). We evaluated the hospital course, complications, and
outcomes.
RESULTS: The median postoperative stay was one day. Complications included
migration in 38 stents (63%) (28 patients; 73%), retrosternal chest discomfort in
nine, reflux in four, airway obstruction in one, and food impaction in three.
Continued leak or a persistent TEF occurred in five patients (38%).
Reintervention was required predominantly due to migration of the stent at a mean
interval of 46 days (range, 1 to 353). Patients with dysphagia improved
significantly with dysphagia scores (1 = no dysphagia; 5 = unable to swallow
saliva) improving from 3.44 to 2.15 (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Polyflex stents were effective in the relief of dysphagia due to
strictures. They were less effective in esophageal perforations or leaks. Their
primary disadvantage is a high migration rate and further improvements in design 
are required to decrease this high incidence of migration.

PMID: 18498804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Stud Mycol. 2008;60:1-66. doi: 10.3114/sim.2008.60.01.

A monograph of the entomopathogenic genera Hypocrella, Moelleriella, and
Samuelsia gen. nov. (Ascomycota, Hypocreales, Clavicipitaceae), and their
aschersonia-like anamorphs in the Neotropics.

Chaverri P(1), Liu M, Hodge KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howard University, 415 College Street NW, Washington
D.C. 20059, U.S.A.

The present taxonomic revision deals with Neotropical species of three
entomopathogenic genera that were once included in Hypocrella s. l.: Hypocrella
s. str. (anamorph Aschersonia), Moelleriella (anamorph aschersonia-like), and
Samuelsia gen. nov (anamorph aschersonia-like). Species of Hypocrella,
Moelleriella, and Samuelsia are pathogens of scale insects (Coccidae and
Lecaniidae, Homoptera) and whiteflies (Aleyrodidae, Homoptera) and are common in 
tropical regions. Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences from nuclear ribosomal
large subunit (28S), translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF 1-alpha), and RNA
polymerase II subunit 1 (RPB1) and analyses of multiple morphological characters 
demonstrate that the three segregated genera can be distinguished by the
disarticulation of the ascospores and shape and size of conidia. Moelleriella has
filiform multi-septate ascospores that disarticulate at the septa within the
ascus and aschersonia-like anamorphs with fusoid conidia. Hypocrella s. str. has 
filiform to long-fusiform ascospores that do not disarticulate and Aschersonia s.
str. anamorphs with fusoid conidia. The new genus proposed here, Samuelsia, has
filiform to long-fusiform ascospores that do not disarticulate and
aschersonia-like anamorphs with small allantoid conidia. In addition, the present
study presents and discusses the evolution of species, morphology, and ecology in
Hypocrella, Moelleriella, and Samuelsia based on multigene phylogenetic analyses.

PMCID: PMC2275321
PMID: 18490956  [PubMed]


179. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 May;43(5):810-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.12.018.

Eosinophilic esophagitis and intermediate esophagitis after tracheoesophageal
fistula repair: a case series.

Oliveira C(1), Zamakhshary M, Marcon P, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 1X8.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EE) is often missed or underdiagnosed in
children, particularly in the setting of reflux disease associated with
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Intermediate esophagitis (IE) is a recently
described condition, which includes characteristics of gastroesophageal reflux
disease and EE but does not present with enough eosinophils on biopsy to diagnose
EE. Here we present a case series of EE and IE associated with TEF, and their
clinical manifestations.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis including clinical presentation, endoscopic and
pathologic findings, and treatment of 4 patients with EE and 4 patients with IE
who presented between 2003 and 2007 was performed.
RESULTS: Male dominance was found equally in both groups (75%), and most patients
had a personal history of atopy (87.5%). Food allergies were seen mainly in the
EE group (75%). The most frequent primary symptoms in both groups were dysphagia 
for solids (75%) and for liquids (25%). The median age at diagnosis was 9.8 vs
11.2 years in the EE and IE groups, respectively. On endoscopy, both groups had
similar findings including furrows (EE, 75%; IE, 66.6%) and white plaques (EE,
50%; IE, 33.3%). In both groups, almost all patients had basal cell hyperplasia
on biopsy (EE, 100%; IE, 75%). Degranulated surface eosinophils (50%) and
eosinophilic abscess (25%) were found in the EE group only. Elongated rete
papillae were more often seen in EE biopsies (50%) compared with IE biopsies
(25%). Peripheral serum eosinophilia was seen in all EE patients and in 33% of
the IE patients. The only effective treatment with complete resolution of the
symptoms was the topical or systemic application of steroids.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of EE and IE is frequently missed or delayed.
Eosinophilic esophagitis should be suspected in reflux disease refractory to
conventional treatment, particularly in the setting of TEF. Intermediate
esophagitis represents an entity that includes findings of gastroesophageal
reflux disease and EE. Endoscopic biopsies are diagnostic for both conditions and
allow institution of specific medical treatment.

PMID: 18485944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 May;43(5):805-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.12.015.

Thoracoscopic repair of tracheoesophageal fistulas: a case-control matched study.

Al Tokhais T(1), Zamakhshary M, Aldekhayel S, Mandora H, Sayed S, AlHarbi K,
Alqahtani AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, King Saud University, College of Medicine, Riyadh
11671, Saudi Arabia.

INTRODUCTION: To date, there is no comparative study of thoracoscopic repair (TR)
vs conventional open repair (COR) for tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The aim of
the study was to compare the 2 techniques in neonates with TEF.
METHODS: A multi-institutional case-control study of cases of TEF was undertaken.
The minimum follow-up was 6 months. Patients were considered for TR based on
surgeon's preference. Cases were frequency matched on a 1:1 ratio based on
gestational age and weight. Outcomes of interest were operative time,
postoperative leaks, and postoperative stricture development. Statistical
analysis using univariate analysis was performed.
RESULTS: Twenty-three neonates underwent TR. There were no differences between TR
and COR groups with regard to weight and gestational age. The distribution of
associated anomalies was similar in both groups. The mean operative time was
149.4 and 179 minutes in TR and COR, respectively (P = .18). Three patients were 
converted to COR. There were 4 leaks in TR and 3 in COR (P = .728). Inversely, 2 
patients in the TR group developed a stricture necessitating dilation as compared
with 4 patients in the COR group (P = .414).
CONCLUSION: Thoracoscopic repair of TEF is safe and comparable with conventional 
open repair.

PMID: 18485943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biomed Environ Sci. 2008 Feb;21(1):45-52. doi: 10.1016/S0895-3988(08)60006-9.

Using support vector machine to predict eco-environment burden: a case study of
Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.

Li XM(1), Zhou JX, Yuan SH, Zhou XP, Fu Q.

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, China. xmli2001@tom.com

OBJECTIVE: The human socio-economic development depends on the planet's natural
capital. Humans have had a considerable impact on the earth, such as resources
depression and environment deterioration. The objective of this study was to
assess the impact of socio-economic development on the ecological environment of 
Wuhan, Hubei Province, China, during the general planning period 2006-2020.
METHODS: Support vector machine (SVM) model was constructed to simulate the
process of eco-economic system of Wuhan. Socio-economic factors of urban total
ecological footprint (TEF) were selected by partial least squares (PLS) and
leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV). Historical data of socio-economic factors
as inputs, and corresponding historical data of TEF as target outputs, were
presented to identify and validate the SVM model. When predicted input data after
2005 were presented to trained model as generalization sets, TEFs of 2005,
2006,..., till 2020 were simulated as output in succession.
RESULTS: Up to 2020, the district would have suffered an accumulative TEF of
28.374 million gha, which was over 1.5 times that of 2004 and nearly 3 times that
of 1988. The per capita EF would be up to 3.019 gha in 2020.
CONCLUSIONS: The simulation indicated that although the increase rate of GDP
would be restricted in a lower level during the general planning period, urban
ecological environment burden could not respond to the socio-economic
circumstances promptly. SVM provides tools for dynamic assessment of regional
eco-environment. However, there still exist limitations and disadvantages in the 
model. We believe that the next logical step in deriving better dynamic models of
ecosystem is to integrate SVM and other algorithms or technologies.

PMID: 18478978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Chemosphere. 2008 Jul;72(8):1188-92. doi: 10.1016/j.chemosphere.2008.03.012. Epub
2008 May 8.

Development of human dermal epithelial cell-based bioassay for the dioxins.

Yang JH(1), Lee HG, Park KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu, 
3056-6 Daemyong-4-dong, Namgu, Daegu 705-718, Republic of Korea. yangjh@cu.ac.kr

None of bioassays is complete for assessing biological impact in humans upon the 
xenobiotic exposure due to species and organ-specific responsiveness. Thus, it is
speculated that the human cell-based bioassay may be more appropriate system
because of its direct relevance to humans. Here, we have developed a human
epidermal cell-based bioassay for the dioxins and related compounds. The
AD12-SV40-immortalized human keratinocyte cell line was stably transfected with a
recombinant expression vector which contains the luciferase gene under
dioxin-inducible control of four DREs. The tansfectants showed a consistent
dose-response of luciferase activity upon dioxin exposure even after 120
passages. The maximal half effective dose (EC50) was 200 pM with a maximum of
32-fold induction of luciferase activity at 5 nM. The minimum detection limit was
10 pM. Optimal exposure time for the assay was 24h. When cells were treated with 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists of different toxic equivalent factor (TEF)
values, the shape of the dose-response curve for each compound was parallel to
that of TCDD and the maximum response was similar, indicating that this bioassay 
system can be applied to generate the total toxic equivalency (TEQ) estimate from
the samples. When relative induction potency of luciferase activities for each
compound was calculated, it was similar to WHO-TEF values within an order of
magnitude. This human cell system can be used as an efficient screening tool to
quantify the TEQ values of dioxin-like chemicals in the samples and may help
understand the interspecies difference between humans and animals.

PMID: 18471855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Genome. 1997 Dec;40(6):815-21.

Variation of nuclear ribosomal RNA genes in Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter.

Pillay M.

Variation in the ribosomal RNA genes (rDNA) was examined to assess the genetic
variability among 314 plants representing 28 accessions of Eragrostis tef, an
important food crop. A restriction site map was constructed for the species by
localization of the BamHI, BglII, DraI, EcoRI, EcoRV, NdeI, SacI, SpeI, XbaI, and
XhoI sites. A comparison of this map with those of other grasses showed
conservation of sites, especially in the coding region. However, a unique EcoRI
site combined with a BamHI site in the 18S region may be of diagnostic value for 
the species. A BamHI fragment that spans the intergenic spacer was used as an
indicator of length variation of rDNA repeat units. rDNA repeat units in E. tef
ranged in size from 8.4 to 11.07 kbp. Considerable size variation of rDNA repeats
was present among accessions, between individual plants within some accessions,
and within single plants. A total of 19 spacer length (sl) phenotypes was
observed in 16 accessions in which 11-42 plants were analyzed. A single
restriction site polymorphism was detected in PI442115 that was also
distinguished by having a single sl variant. Variation in the rRNA genes is a
useful indicator of genetic diversity in E. tef germplasm.

PMID: 18464867  [PubMed]


184. Environ Health Prev Med. 2008 May;13(3):169-80. doi: 10.1007/s12199-008-0026-0.
Epub 2008 Mar 29.

Learning behavior in rat offspring after in utero and lactational exposure to
either TCDD or PCB126.

Hojo R(1), Kakeyama M, Kurokawa Y, Aoki Y, Yonemoto J, Tohyama C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Environmental Risk, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba, 305-8506, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: We studied and compared the possible effects of in utero and
lactational exposure to 2, 3, 7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) or 3, 3',
4, 4', 5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) on learning behavior in offspring.
METHODS: Pregnant Long-Evans Hooded rats were administered either TCDD (50, 200, 
or 800 ng/kg) or PCB126 (500, 2,000 or 8,000 ng/kg) on gestational day 15. A
procedure of schedule-controlled operant behavior was applied to examine learning
behavior in the male and female offspring at 11 weeks of age for 30 days. Three
indices, namely, response rates in a fixed ratio (FR) and in a differential
reinforcement of low rates (DRL), and reward rate in the DRL component in
multiple FR 20 DRL 20 s (mult-FR 20 DRL 20-s) test sessions, were used for the
evaluation of learning behavior.
RESULTS: Toxic effects on learning behavior in male and female pups following in 
utero and lactational exposure to TCDD or PCB126 were observed mainly in the FR
learning component. However, no linear dose-dependent effects of either of the
two compounds were observed for the above three indices. The response rates of
animals in the low-dose TCDD and PCB126 groups decreased and those in medium-dose
TCDD and PCB126 groups appeared to induce hyperactive behavior. The high dose of 
PCB126 appeared to have a distinct toxicity from that of TCDD in terms of the
acquisition of learning behavior.
CONCLUSIONS: Toxicities of PCB126 and TCDD in learning behavior might be similar 
to each other and the current toxic equivalency factor (TEF) of 0.1 for PCB126
can be considered to be appropriate for this endpoint.

PMCID: PMC2698261
PMID: 19568902  [PubMed]


185. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Apr;18(2):131-3. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-965768.

Prenatal diagnosis and management of congenital subglottic stenosis associated
with congenital esophageal atresia type C.

Sato T(1), Nio M, Tanaka H, Ohi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
tom-sato@ped-surg.med.tohoku.ac.jp

Most patients with congenital esophageal atresia (EA) have congenital
tracheobronchial abnormalities, which may cause respiratory distress, be
difficult to treat and have a poor prognosis. The authors report a neonate with
EA and congenital subglottic stenosis (SGS) who exhibited severe respiratory
distress immediately after birth. After emergency endotracheal intubation with a 
narrow endotracheal tube, the authors performed total correction of EA and
anterior cricoid split (ACS) on day 1 of age. The postoperative course was
uneventful. Some reports have stated that it is difficult to make a prenatal
diagnosis when SGS is associated with EA and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The
anterior cricoid split technique may be suitable for managing moderate SGS even
in neonates with EA. Partial resection of the hypertrophic cricoid cartilage is
considered effective in preventing restenosis.

PMID: 18437663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Agric Food Chem. 2008 May 28;56(10):3569-73. doi: 10.1021/jf073541h. Epub 2008 
Apr 25.

Citrantifidiene and citrantifidiol: bioactive metabolites produced by Trichoderma
citrinoviride with potential antifeedant activity toward aphids.

Evidente A(1), Ricciardiello G, Andolfi A, Sabatini MA, Ganassi S, Altomare C,
Favilla M, Melck D.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze del Suolo, della Pianta, dell'Ambiente e delle
Produzioni Animali, Università di Napoli Federico II, Via Università 100, 80055
Portici, Italy. evidente@unina.it

Two novel metabolites with potential antifeedant activity were isolated from
cultures of the fungus Trichoderma citrinoviride strain ITEM 4484 grown in
solid-state fermentation on sterile rice kernels. The producing strain was
identified at species level by sequence analysis of the internal transcribed
spacer regions ITS-1 and ITS-2 of the nuclear rDNA and a fragment of the
translation elongation factor gene TEF-1alpha. Fractionation by column
chromatography and TLC of the culture organic extract, followed by feeding
preference tests on the aphid pest Schizaphis graminum (Rondani), allowed the
purification of 5.8 and 8.9 mg/kg of culture of two bioactive metabolites, which 
were named citrantifidiene and citrantifidiol ( 1 and 2). Citrantifidiene and
citrantifidiol, whose structures were determined by spectroscopic methods (NMR
and MS) are a symmetrical disubstituted hexa-1,3-dienyl ester of acetic acid and 
a tetrasubstituted cyclohexane-1,3-diol, respectively. The pure metabolites
influenced the feeding preference of S. graminum restraining individuals from
feeding on wheat leaves dipped in 5% aqueous methanol solution containing 0.57
mg/mL of citrantifidiene or 0.91 mg/mL of citrantifidiol.

PMID: 18435538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Pediatr Surg Int. 2008 Jul;24(7):815-7. doi: 10.1007/s00383-008-2158-0. Epub 2008
Apr 22.

Oesophageal atresia with cleft lip and palate: a marker for associated lethal
anomalies?

Mullassery D(1), Llewellyn RS, Almond SL, Jesudason EC, Losty PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Division of Child Health, The Royal
Liverpool Children's Hospital (Alder Hey), University of Liverpool, Eaton Road,
Liverpool L12 2AP, UK. mdhanya@liverpool.ac.uk

An adverse association between oesophageal atresia (OA) and cleft lip-palate (3% 
incidence) has been reported. The present study analyses outcomes of this rare
association at a UK paediatric surgical centre. Hospital charts of newborns
diagnosed with OA were reviewed. Demographics, associated anomalies and
prognostic classification (after Spitz 1994) were recorded. Mortality rates and
causes of death were examined in OA babies with cleft lip-palate. Of 152 patients
treated for OA, five babies (3%) had cleft lip-palate. All of these newborns had 
common variant OA-TEF and were Spitz group II category. Deaths occurred in 3 of 5
patients (60%) in the OA-cleft group compared to only 8 of 147 patients (5%)
without clefts (p < 0.005; Fisher's exact test). OA-cleft non-survivors succumbed
to tetralogy of Fallot (n = 2) and trisomy 18 (n = 1; treatment withdrawn). Both 
survivors with cleft lip-palate had features of the VACTERL sequence: one baby
also had Goldenhaar syndrome, the other aortic coarctation. These children now
attend mainstream school. Although high-quality survival is possible in OA with
cleft lip-palate, this rare phenotype is associated with a substantially
decreased survival. Rather than causing death directly, the combination of OA and
cleft lip-palate appears to be a marker for further lethal anomalies.

PMID: 18427812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Apr;43(4):597-601. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.12.001.

Long gap esophageal atresia: an Australian experience.

Al-Shanafey S(1), Harvey J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia.
saud132@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of long gap esophageal atresia (LGEA) may preclude
immediate primary anastomosis. We reviewed our experience with this entity for a 
period of 10 years.
METHODS: A retrospective review was undertaken of the medical records of all
patients managed for esophageal atresia (EA)/tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
during the period from 1991 to 2001 at the Children's Hospital at Westmead,
Sydney, Australia. Esophageal atresia was defined as long gap when primary repair
was considered technically impossible by the surgeon. Also, a questionnaire was
sent to all the general pediatric surgeons in Australia to explore their attitude
toward LGEA management.
RESULTS: One hundred three patients with EA were managed for that period, 17
(16%) of them were defined as LGEA, with mean gap of 5 cm (SD, 1cm). Eight
patients (47%) had TEF. Sixteen patients had gastrostomy tube (GT) insertion at a
mean age of 4 days. Six patients had esophagostomy at a mean age of 27 days.
Thirteen patients had EA repair at a mean age of 146 days. Four patients died
before repair and 2 after repair secondary to associated anomalies. Fifty percent
of Australian Pediatric Surgeons (APS) responded to the questionnaire. Forty
percent defined LGEA as a gap more than 3 to 4 vertebral bodies, whereas 24%
considered the absence of TEF as an indication of LGEA. Fifty-six percent of APS 
will measure the gap on preoperative chest x-rays, and 80% will assess the gap at
thoracotomy for ligation of TEF. Ninety-two will measure the gap by inserting a
bougie into the upper pouch and into the lower esophagus via the GT. If LGEA was 
diagnosed, all APS will perform GT with delayed repair. Seventy-two percent of
APS will attempt delayed primary repair within 3 to 6 months of age. Seventy-six 
percent will perform hiatal dissection, and 48% will use upper pouch myotomies.
Forty-eight percent will perform gastric pull up, and 32% will use gastric tube
for esophageal replacement.
CONCLUSIONS: Long gap esophageal atresia represents a surgical challenge.
Mortality rate is high secondary to associated anomalies. There is no consensus
among APS regarding the definition of LGEA. In general, the consensus of APS
would be that the preservation of the patient's own esophagus should be attempted
before considering the use of an esophageal replacement.

PMID: 18405702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Physiol Genomics. 2008 May 13;33(3):361-72. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00139.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 1.

Liver gene expression analysis reveals endoplasmic reticulum stress and metabolic
dysfunction in SCD1-deficient mice fed a very low-fat diet.

Flowers MT(1), Keller MP, Choi Y, Lan H, Kendziorski C, Ntambi JM, Attie AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA. mflowers@biochem.wisc.edu

We previously reported that mice deficient in stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (Scd1)
and maintained on a very low-fat (VLF) diet for 10 days developed severe loss of 
body weight, hypoglycemia, hypercholesterolemia, and many cholestasis-like
phenotypes. To better understand the metabolic changes associated with these
phenotypes, we performed microarray analysis of hepatic gene expression in chow- 
and VLF-fed female Scd1+/+ and Scd1-/- mice. We identified an extraordinary
number of differentially expressed genes (>4,000 probe sets) in the VLF Scd1-/-
relative to both VLF Scd1+/+ and chow Scd1-/- mice. Transcript levels were
reduced for genes involved in detoxification and several facets of fatty acid
metabolism including biosynthesis, elongation, desaturation, oxidation,
transport, and ketogenesis. This pattern is attributable to the decreased mRNA
abundance of several genes encoding key transcription factors, including
LXRalpha, RXRalpha, FXR, PPARalpha, PGC-1beta, SREBP1c, ChREBP, CAR, DBP, TEF,
and HLF. A robust induction of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is indicated by 
enhanced splicing of XBP1, increased expression of the stress-induced
transcription factors CHOP and ATF3, and elevated expression of several genes
involved in the integrated stress and unfolded protein response pathways. The
gene expression profile is also consistent with induction of an acute
inflammatory response and macrophage recruitment. These results highlight the
importance of monounsaturated fatty acid synthesis for maintaining metabolic
homeostasis in the absence of sufficient dietary unsaturated fat and point to a
novel cellular nutrient-sensing mechanism linking fatty acid availability and/or 
composition to the ER stress response.

PMID: 18381840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Jun;103(2):285-97. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn053. Epub 2008 Mar
14.

Comparative temporal toxicogenomic analysis of TCDD- and TCDF-mediated hepatic
effects in immature female C57BL/6 mice.

N'Jai A(1), Boverhof DR, Dere E, Burgoon LD, Tan YS, Rowlands JC, Budinsky RA,
Stebbins KE, Zacharewski TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Temporal analyses were performed on hepatic tissue from immature female C57BL/6
mice in order to compare the gene expression profiles for
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibzofuran
(TCDF). Time course studies conducted with a single oral dose of 300 microg/kg
TCDF or 30 microg/kg TCDD were used to compare differential gene expression on
complementary DNA microarrays containing 13,361 features, representing 8194 genes
at 2, 4, 8, 12, 24, 72, 120, and 168 h. One hundred and ninety-five genes were
identified as differentially regulated by TCDF, of which 116 genes were in common
with TCDD, with 109 exhibiting comparable expression profiles (correlation
coefficients > 0.3). In general, TCDF was less effective in eliciting hepatic
vacuolization, and differential gene expression compared with TCDD when given at 
an equipotent dose based on a toxic equivalence factor (TEF) of 0.1 for TCDF,
especially 72-h postadministration. For example, the induction of Cyp1a1
messenger RNA by TCDF was less when compared TCDD. Moreover, TCDF induced less
severe hepatocyte cytoplasmic vacuolization consistent with lower lipid
accumulations which significantly subsided by 120 and 168 h when compared with
TCDD. TCDF-elicited responses correlated with their hepatic tissue levels which
gradually decreased between 18 and 168 h. Although both compounds elicited
comparable gene expression profiles, especially at early time points, the TCDF
responses were generally weaker. Collectively, these results suggest that the
weaker TCDF responses could be attributed to differences in pharmacokinetics.
However, more comprehensive dose-response studies are required at optimal times
for each end point of interest in order to investigate the effect of
pharmacokinetic differences on relative potencies that are important in
establishing TEFs.

PMID: 18343893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Environ Int. 2008 Oct;34(7):915-21. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2008.02.001. Epub 2008 
Mar 14.

Converting Toxic Equivalents (TEQ) of dioxins and dioxin-like compounds in fish
from one Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) scheme to another.

Bhavsar SP(1), Reiner EJ, Hayton A, Fletcher R, MacPherson K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Monitoring and Reporting Branch, Ontario Ministry of the
Environment, 125 Resources Road, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M9P 3V6.
s.bhavsar@utoronto.ca

Toxic Equivalency Factors (TEFs) are an essential part of the Toxic Equivalent
(TEQ) concept and have evolved for dioxins/dioxin-like compounds over the last
two and half decades. Therefore, it is difficult to compare past and current TEQs
that are reported using different TEFs without explicitly mentioning underlying
congener concentrations. Using what likely is the largest known dioxin/furan
(PCDD/F) and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyl (dl-PCB or DLP) fish database, 
here we present regression models that can facilitate conversion of a fish TEQ
from an old to a newer TEF scheme. The results show that the mammalian PCDD/F-TEQ
based on the latest TEF(WHO-05) is about 7.5% lower than that based on
TEF(WHO-98). The mammalian DLP-TEQ(WHO-05) is on average 25-26% lower than almost
identical DLP-TEQ(WHO-94) and DLP-TEQ(WHO-98). Total-TEQ(WHO-05) is on average
22% lower than Total-TEQ(WHO-98). According to the current toxicological
standards for dioxins/furans, all previous major TEF schemes except
TEF(Germany-85) and TEF(USEPA-87) were conservative (i.e., higher) in estimating 
TEQs. The major (> 75%) contribution to PCDD/F-TEQ(WHO-05) is from 2,3,7,8-TCDD
(33%), 1,2,3,7,8-PCDD (26%), 2,3,7,8-TCDF (10%), and 2,3,4,7,8-PCDF (9%). The
DLP-TEQ(WHO-05) is dominated by PCB-126 which on average contributes about 88%.
The DLP-TEQ generally contribute > 70% of Total-TEQ. When reporting TEQs, we
recommend that the underlying congener specific concentrations are presented, TEF
scheme used is clearly stated, names of compounds included are explicitly
expressed, and TEQs are identified accordingly (e.g., DLP-TEQ, PCDD/F-TEQ,
Total-TEQ).

PMID: 18342938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(10):3177-89. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01759-07. Epub 2008 Mar 
10.

Redundant roles of Tead1 and Tead2 in notochord development and the regulation of
cell proliferation and survival.

Sawada A(1), Kiyonari H, Ukita K, Nishioka N, Imuta Y, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Four members of the TEAD/TEF family of transcription factors are expressed widely
in mouse embryos and adult tissues. Although in vitro studies have suggested
various roles for TEAD proteins, their in vivo functions remain poorly
understood. Here we examined the role of Tead genes by generating mouse mutants
for Tead1 and Tead2. Tead2(-/-) mice appeared normal, but Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-) 
embryos died at embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) with severe growth defects and
morphological abnormalities. At E8.5, Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-) embryos were already
small and lacked characteristic structures such as a closed neural tube, a
notochord, and somites. Despite these overt abnormalities, differentiation and
patterning of the neural plate and endoderm were relatively normal. In contrast, 
the paraxial mesoderm and lateral plate mesoderm were displaced laterally, and a 
differentiated notochord was not maintained. These abnormalities and defects in
yolk sac vasculature organization resemble those of mutants for Yap, which
encodes a coactivator of TEAD proteins. Moreover, we demonstrated genetic
interactions between Tead1 and Tead2 and Yap. Finally, Tead1(-/-); Tead2(-/-)
embryos showed reduced cell proliferation and increased apoptosis. These results 
suggest that Tead1 and Tead2 are functionally redundant, use YAP as a major
coactivator, and support notochord maintenance as well as cell proliferation and 
survival in mouse development.

PMCID: PMC2423158
PMID: 18332127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):315-6. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.02.010.

Yorkie and Scalloped: partners in growth activation.

Bandura JL(1), Edgar BA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):388-98.
    Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):377-87.

The Hippo (Hpo) signaling pathway limits organ growth in organisms from
Drosophila to mammals by suppressing the activity of the transcriptional
coactivator Yorkie (Yki)/YAP. The TEAD/TEF factor Scalloped (Sd) has been
identified as the first known transcription factor to partner with Yki as a
downstream target of Hpo signaling.

PMID: 18331708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 May;72(5):699-706. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2008.01.015. Epub 2008 Mar 7.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula following disc-battery ingestion: can we watch
and wait?

Grisel JJ(1), Richter GT, Casper KA, Thompson DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, United States.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) are rare but dangerous complications of
disc-battery ingestion. Management approaches include endoscopic or open surgical
repair. Unfortunately, these procedures can be complicated by high rates of
recurrent laryngeal nerve injury, tracheal stenosis, recurrent fistula and
significant patient mortality. Thus, several authors have advocated the use of
esophageal rest as conservative management of acquired TEF to permit closure by
secondary intention. This study describes a patient with spontaneous closure of
an acquired TEF following disc-battery ingestion. The late recurrence of the TEF 
following conservative management, and endoscopic and radiographic evidence of
closure, illustrates the importance of long term evaluation before assuming
fistula resolution. Practitioners must carefully weigh the risks and benefits
before deciding surgical versus conservative management of TEF. An extended
follow-up of at least 6 months should be instituted with a high index of
suspicion if conservative management is utilized. Transtracheal repair using an
imbricated suture technique is a good surgical option when conservative
management fails.

PMID: 18316130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Prenat Diagn. 2008 Jul;28(7):667-75. doi: 10.1002/pd.1938.

Current status of prenatal diagnosis, operative management and outcome of
esophageal atresia/tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Houben CH(1), Curry JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Hospitals for Sick Children, Great Ormond
Street, London WC1N 3JH, UK.

Ultrasonographic features suggestive of esophageal atresia with or without
tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA/TEF) are only in a small minority of fetuses with 
EA/TEF (<10%) identifiable on prenatal scans.The prenatal diagnosis of EA/TEF
relies in principle, on two nonspecific signs: polyhydramnios and absent or small
stomach bubble. Polyhydramnios is associated with a wide range of fetal
abnormalities, but most commonly it pursues a benign course. Similarly the
sonographic absence of a stomach bubble may point to a variety of fetal
anomalies.The combination of polyhydramnios and absent stomach bubble in two
small series offers a modest positive predictive value of 44 and 56%
respectively. Prenatal scanning for EA/TEF identifies a larger proportion of
fetuses with Edwards syndrome; there is also a higher proportion of isolated EA
in comparison to postnatal studies.Current ultrasound technology does not allow
for a definite diagnosis of EA/TEF and therefore, counseling of parents should be
guarded.Postnatal diagnosis of EA is confirmed by the failure to pass a firm
nasogastric tube into the stomach; on chest X-ray, the tube is seen curling in
the upper esophageal pouch. Corrective surgery for EA/TEF is well established and
survival rates of over 90% can be expected.

PMID: 18302317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2008 Apr;50(3):366-75. doi: 10.1016/j.yrtph.2008.01.003.
Epub 2008 Jan 26.

Modeling of DR CALUX bioassay response to screen PCDDs, PCDFs, and dioxin-like
PCBs in farm milk from dairy herds.

Fochi I(1), Brambilla G, De Filippis SP, De Luca S, Diletti G, Fulgenzi A, Gallo 
P, Iacovella N, Scortichini G, Serpe L, Vinci F, di Domenico A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Toxicological Chemistry Unit, Viale Regina
Elena, 299 I-00161 Rome, Italy. igor.fochi@iss.it

A recent issue in the EU legislation is the evaluation of the
toxicologically-equivalent contribution of dioxin-like polychlorobiphenyls
(DL-PCBs) in addition to that coming from polychlorodibenzodioxins (PCDDs) and
polychlorodibenzofurans (PCDFs) as contaminants in foods for a total of 29
congeners. This fact is determining the need to revise analytical criteria both
for confirmatory and screening analysis. In this work, a modeling was developed
to check the reliability of the outcomes of the DR CALUX bioassay when applied to
farm milk samples characterized by large differences in congener patterns. To
reproduce some field conditions where DL-PCB contributions up to 90% of total
WHO-TEQs (HRGC-HRMS assessment) were recorded in dairy products, goat milk
samples from a common bulk were fortified at different TEQ levels with mixtures
containing either PCDDs and PCDFs or non-ortho substituted DL-PCBs. Fortification
ranged approximately 4.5-15 pgWHO-TEQ/g fat. Based on the results, DR CALUX
relative potency value (REP) of DL-PCB 126 was estimated 0.061 against the
canonical WHO-TEF of 0.1. The value of 0.061 together with the other DR CALUX
REPs from the literature for the remaining 28 congeners were used to model DR
CALUX response (C-TEQs) in milk samples with different congener patterns. The
theoretical underestimation of DR CALUX data could be mitigated by correcting the
latter with the linear correlation experimentally obtained between C-TEQs and the
WHO-TEQs. Under these conditions, the use as calibrants of reference samples with
different analytical patterns could help those laboratories involved in a high
throughput routine to set the most appropriate decision limits to optimize
screening output.

PMID: 18295947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Sci Total Environ. 2008 May 1;394(1):39-51. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2008.01.012.
Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Determination of dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls in breast milk, maternal
blood and cord blood from residents of Tohoku, Japan.

Nakamura T(1), Nakai K, Matsumura T, Suzuki S, Saito Y, Satoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
2-1 Seiryo, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. nakamura@ehs.med.tohoku.ac.jp

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) 
and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are bioaccumulative chemicals that are
considered to be toxic contaminants based on several epidemiological studies. To 
elucidate exposure levels of these chemicals in the present study, concentrations
of PCDD/DFs, dioxin-like PCBs (DL-PCBs) and PCBs in breast milk, maternal blood
and cord blood obtained from the same participants registered in a birth cohort
study in Tohoku, Japan, were measured. Congener-specific analysis revealed
several differences in minor congeners of these compounds among the three
specimen types, although major congeners were detected in the specimens. The
toxicity equivalence quantity concentrations (1998 WHO-TEF) and PCBs in breast
milk, maternal blood and cord blood on the whole and on a lipid basis were in the
order of breast milk > maternal blood > cord blood. Pearson's correlation
coefficients of TEQs and total PCBs among the three specimens were high, with the
correlation coefficient of TEQ between breast milk and maternal blood being the
highest (r=0.94, p<0.001). On the other hand, the TEQ between breast milk and
cord blood was the lowest (r=0.79, p<0.001). Pearson's correlation coefficient
between the TEQ and PCBs in each specimen was also high (r=0.82-0.95, p<0.001).
The associations of chemical concentrations with maternal age, parity, fish
intake, BMI and the rate of body weight increase during pregnancy were analyzed
with multiple linear regression analysis. TEQ concentrations and PCBs were
negatively associated with parity (p<0.05), and maternal age was positively
associated with PCBs (p<0.05). However, the associations with BMI and fish intake
during pregnancy were not significant. These results suggest that parity is an
important factor affecting the concentrations of dioxins and PCBs in these
specimens.

PMID: 18291442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2008 Feb;18(1):131-5. doi: 10.1089/lap.2007.0154.

Current application of thoracoscopy in children.

Tsao K(1), St Peter SD, Sharp SW, Nair A, Andrews WS, Sharp RJ, Snyder CL, Ostlie
DJ, Holcomb GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: The safety and efficacy of thoracoscopy for thoracic lesions and
conditions in children is evolving. Our experience with thoracoscopy has expanded
in recent years. Therefore, we reviewed our most recent 7-year experience to
examine the current applications for thoracoscopy in children.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all patients undergoing a thoracoscopic
operation at Children's Mercy Hospital (Kansas City, MO) between January 1, 2000,
and June 18, 2007, was performed. Data points reviewed included patient
demographics, type of operation, final diagnosis, complications, and recovery.
RESULTS: During the study period, 230 children underwent 231 thoracoscopic
procedures. The mean age was 9.6 +/- 6.1 years with a mean weight of 36.6 +/-
24.1 kg. Fifty percent of the patients were male. The thoracoscopic approach was 
used for decortication and debridement for empyema in 79 patients, wedge
resection for lung lesions in 37, exposure for correction of scoliosis in 26,
excision or biopsy of an extrapulmonary mass in 26, operation for spontaneous
pneumothorax in 25, lung biopsy for a diffuse parenchymal process in 15,
lobectomy in 9, repair of esophageal atresia with a tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA-TEF) in 8, clearance of the pleural space for hemothorax or effusion in 3,
diagnosis for trauma in 1, and repair of bronchopleural fistula in 1. Conversion 
was required in 3 patients, all of whom were undergoing a lobectomy. Two of these
were right upper lobectomies and the other was a left lower lobectomy with severe
infection and inflammation. The mean time of chest tube drainage (excluding
scoliosis and EA-TEF patients) was 2.9 +/- 2.0 days. There were no major
intraoperative thoracoscopic complications. A correct diagnosis was rendered in
all patients undergoing a biopsy. One patient required a second thoracoscopic
biopsy to better define a mediastinal mass. Two patients developed postoperative 
atelectasis after scoliosis procedures. One patient had a small persistent
pneumothorax after a bleb resection for a spontaneous pneumothorax. This
subsequently resolved.
CONCLUSIONS: In pediatric patients with thoracic pathology, thoracoscopy is
highly effective for attaining the goal of the operation, with a low rate of
conversion and complications.

PMCID: PMC3082471
PMID: 18266592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2008 Mar;43(3):277-82. doi: 10.1080/00365520701714871.

Tef in the diet of celiac patients in The Netherlands.

Hopman E(1), Dekking L, Blokland ML, Wuisman M, Zuijderduin W, Koning F,
Schweizer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dietetics and Nutrition, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. G.D.Hopman@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: Celiac disease (CD) is a multifactorial disease with a strong genetic 
association. It is caused by a T-cell-mediated immune response to wheat gluten.
The treatment is a strict gluten-free diet (GFD). The purpose of this study was
to investigate whether the naturally gluten-free cereal Eragrostis tef (tef) is
associated with health problems when used by CD patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In March 2006, all 7990 members of the Dutch Celiac Disease
Society were invited to complete a questionnaire on tef use and the development
of symptoms after tef consumption. Respondents and their family members willing
to participate were sent an extended questionnaire on the use of commercially
available tef products and on the character of their subsequent symptoms.
RESULTS: Thirty-six percent responded to the first questionnaire of whom 53%
consumed tef and 15% reported complaints. For the second questionnaire, out of
the 1828 participants willing to complete it, 1545 had biopsy-proven CD (median
duration GFD: 6.5 years (range: 0-66.5 years)). Of these, 66% used tef (median
duration 1.4 years (range: 0.1-5 years)) and 17% reported symptoms after
consumption. The percentage for symptoms was significantly lower than that in
patients without tef consumption reporting on their regular GFD (17% versus 61%; 
p = 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Tef is frequently used by Dutch CD patients and a wide majority can 
consume tef without experiencing any clinical symptoms. CD patients using tef
reported a significant reduction in symptoms, possibly related to a reduction in 
gluten intake or to an increase in fiber intake. Hence, tef can be a valuable
addition to the GFD of CD patients.

PMID: 18266174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):388-98. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.01.007. Epub 2008 Feb
7.

The TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped mediates transcriptional output of the
Hippo growth-regulatory pathway.

Wu S(1), Liu Y, Zheng Y, Dong J, Pan D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):315-6.

The Hippo (Hpo) kinase cascade restricts tissue growth by inactivating the
transcriptional coactivator Yorkie (Yki), which regulates the expression of
target genes such as the cell death inhibitor diap1 by unknown mechanisms. Here
we identify the TEAD/TEF family protein Scalloped (Sd) as a DNA-binding
transcription factor that partners with Yki to mediate the transcriptional output
of the Hpo growth-regulatory pathway. The diap1 (th) locus harbors a minimal
Sd-binding Hpo Responsive Element (HRE) that mediates transcriptional regulation 
by the Hpo pathway. Sd binds directly to Yki, and a Yki missense mutation that
abrogates Sd-Yki binding also inactivates Yki function in vivo. We further
demonstrate that sd is required for yki-induced tissue overgrowth and target gene
expression, and that sd activity is conserved in its mammalian homolog. Our
results uncover a heretofore missing link in the Hpo signaling pathway and
provide a glimpse of the molecular events on a Hpo-responsive enhancer element.

PMID: 18258486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):377-87. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.01.006. Epub 2008 Feb
7.

The TEAD/TEF family of transcription factor Scalloped mediates Hippo signaling in
organ size control.

Zhang L(1), Ren F, Zhang Q, Chen Y, Wang B, Jiang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):315-6.

The Hippo (Hpo) signaling pathway governs cell growth, proliferation, and
apoptosis by controlling key regulatory genes that execute these processes;
however, the transcription factor of the pathway has remained elusive. Here we
provide evidence that the TEAD/TEF family transcription factor Scalloped (Sd)
acts together with the coactivator Yorkie (Yki) to regulate Hpo
pathway-responsive genes. Sd and Yki form a transcriptional complex whose
activity is inhibited by Hpo signaling. Sd overexpression enhances, whereas its
inactivation suppresses, tissue overgrowth caused by Yki overexpression or tumor 
suppressor mutations in the Hpo pathway. Inactivation of Sd diminishes Hpo target
gene expression and reduces organ size, whereas a constitutively active Sd
promotes tissue overgrowth. Sd promotes Yki nuclear localization, whereas Hpo
signaling retains Yki in the cytoplasm by phosphorylating Yki at S168. Finally,
Sd recruits Yki to the enhancer of the pathway-responsive gene diap1, suggesting 
that diap1 is a direct transcriptional target of the Hpo pathway.

PMCID: PMC2292673
PMID: 18258485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2008 Apr;64(1):90-105. doi:
10.1111/j.1574-6941.2007.00443.x. Epub 2008 Jan 31.

Fungal root endophytes from natural vegetation in Mediterranean environments with
special reference to Fusarium spp.

Maciá-Vicente JG(1), Jansson HB, Abdullah SK, Descals E, Salinas J, Lopez-Llorca 
LV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Pathology, Department of Marine Sciences and Applied
Biology, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain.

Surveys (in 2002 and 2003) were performed for fungal endophytes in roots of 24
plant species growing at 12 sites (coastal and inland soils, both sandy soils and
salt marshes) under either water or salt stress in the Alicante province
(Southeast Spain). All plant species examined were colonized by endophytic fungi.
A total of 1830 fungal isolates were obtained and identified by morphological and
molecular [internal transcribed spacer (ITS) and translation elongation
factor-1alpha gene region (TEF-1alpha) sequencing] techniques. One hundred and
forty-two fungal species were identified, belonging to 57 genera. Sterile mycelia
were assigned to 177 morphospecies. Fusarium and Phoma species were the most
frequent genera, followed by Aspergillus, Alternaria and Acremonium. Fungal root 
endophytic communities were influenced by the soil type where their respective
host plants grew, but not by location (coastal or inland sites). Fusarium
oxysporum, Aspergillus fumigatus and Alternaria chlamydospora contributed most to
the differences found between endophytic communities from sandy and saline soils.
Host preference was found for three Fusarium species studied. Fusarium oxysporum 
and Fusarium solani were especially isolated from plants of the family
Leguminosae, while Fusarium equiseti showed a preference for Lygeum spartum
(Gramineae). In some cases, specificity could be related to intra-specific
variability as shown by sequencing of the TEF-1alpha in the genus Fusarium.

PMID: 18248439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008 Mar;33(3):451-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcts.2007.12.020. 
Epub 2008 Jan 24.

Stent placement in the management of oesophageal leaks.

Zisis C(1), Guillin A, Heyries L, Lienne P, D'Journo XB, Doddoli C, Giudicelli R,
Thomas PA.

Author information: 
(1)University of the Mediterranean, Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Marseille,
Marseille, France. chzisis@hol.gr

OBJECTIVE: To examine retrospectively the patients of our department who had a
self-expandable totally covered metal stent placed for oesophageal leak.
METHODS: Patients hospitalised in our department for oesophageal cancer and/or
oesophageal perforation between 2004 and 2006. All medical records were
retrospectively reviewed. Seventy-two patients underwent oesophageal resection
for oesophageal cancer and 16 were managed for oesophageal perforations.
RESULTS: Eight out of 72 patients submitted to resection for oesophageal cancer
had postoperative leaks, while one patient developed tracheo-oesophageal fistula 
(TEF) due to prolonged mechanical ventilation. Six of them had stent placement in
first intention, whereas two received the procedure after an unsuccessful repeat 
operation. The mean stent placement time was 18.4 days (SD=15.2 days), whereas
the median was 14 days. The leak was managed efficiently by the stent in seven
patients, whereas two patients needed repeat operations (one with TEF). The mean 
stent removal time was 56.8 days (SD=30.5 days) and the median was 40 days. None 
developed anastomotic stricture. On the other hand, three out of 16 patients with
perforation had a stent, two of them for Boerhaave syndrome and one for
iatrogenic rupture after bariatric surgery. One of them required the stent 17
days after surgical repair with excellent results, while the other two patients
had the stent placed immediately, but still needed thoracotomy to control the
leak.
CONCLUSIONS: Stent placement can prove very useful in the management of
post-oesophagectomy anastomotic leaks, but its contribution needs to be evaluated
with caution in cases of oesophageal perforations or TEF. Larger series and
prospective comparative clinical trials could eventually clarify the role of
stents in clinical practice of surgical patients.

PMID: 18221881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl. 2005 Apr-Jun;16(2):198-200.

Tuberculous tracheo-esophageal fistula in a renal transplant patient.

Samhan M(1), Al-Mousawi M, Halim M, Nampoory M.

Author information: 
(1)Hamed Al-Essa Organ Transplantation Center, Kuwait.

The incidence of mycobacterial infection (TB) is significantly higher in patients
with end-stage renal disease and renal transplant recipients than in normal
individuals. Tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) resulting from Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection are uncommon. We describe a 44-year old renal transplant
recipient with such a lesion that had typical clinical presentation and
radiological appearance of TEF and was successfully treated conservatively.

PMID: 18202498  [PubMed]


205. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 15;227(3):477-84. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2007.11.018. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

Relative potency based on hepatic enzyme induction predicts immunosuppressive
effects of a mixture of PCDDS/PCDFS and PCBS.

Smialowicz RJ(1), DeVito MJ, Williams WC, Birnbaum LS.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Toxicology Division, National Health, and Environmental Effects, 
Research Laboratory, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina 27711, USA.

The toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach was employed to compare immunotoxic
potency of mixtures containing polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, polychlorinated
dibenzofurans and polychlorinated biphenyls relative to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), using the antibody response to sheep 
erythrocytes (SRBC). Mixture-1 (MIX-1) contained TCDD,
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (PeCDD), 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran
(TCDF), 1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (1-PeCDF),
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (4-PeCDF), and
1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9-octachlorodibenzofuran (OCDF). Mixture-2 (MIX-2) contained MIX-1 
and the following PCBs, 3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl (IUPAC No. 77),
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (126), 3,3',4,4',5,5N-hexachlorobiphenyl (169),
2,3,3',4,4'-pentachlorobiphenyl (105), 2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (118), and
2,3,3',4,4',5-hexachlorobiphenyl (156). The mixture compositions were based on
relative chemical concentrations in food and human tissues. TCDD equivalents
(TEQ) of the mixture were estimated using relative potency factors from hepatic
enzyme induction in mice [DeVito, M.J., Diliberto, J.J., Ross, D.G., Menache,
M.G., Birnbaum, L.S., 1997. Dose-response relationships for polyhalogenated
dioxins and dibenzofurans following subchronic treatment in mice. I .CYP1A1 and
CYP1A2 enzyme activity in liver, lung and skin. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 130,
197-208; DeVito, M.J., Menache, G., Diliberto, J.J., Ross, D.G., Birnbaum L.S.,
2000. Dose-response relationships for induction of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 enzyme
activity in liver, lung, and skin in female mice following subchronic exposure to
polychlorinated biphenyls. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 167, 157-172] Female mice
received 0, 1.5, 15, 150 or 450 ng TCDD/kg/day or approximately 0, 1.5, 15, 150
or 450 ng TEQ/kg/day of MIX-1 or MIX-2 by gavage 5 days per week for 13 weeks.
Mice were immunized 3 days after the last exposure and 4 days later, body,
spleen, thymus, and liver weights were measured, and antibody response to SRBCs
was observed. Exposure to TCDD, MIX-1, and MIX-2 suppressed the antibody response
in a dose-dependent manner. Two-way ANOVA indicated no differences in the
response between TCDD and the mixtures for body weight, spleen/body weight and
decreased antibody responses. The results support the use of the TEF methodology 
and suggest that immune suppression by dioxin-like chemicals may be of concern at
or near background human exposures.

PMID: 18190939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Feb;82(2):92-7. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20437.

Non-VACTERL-type anomalies are frequent in patients with esophageal
atresia/tracheo-esophageal fistula and full or partial VACTERL association.

de Jong EM(1), Felix JF, Deurloo JA, van Dooren MF, Aronson DC, Torfs CP, Heij
HA, Tibboel D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC - Sophia Children's Hospital,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The VACTERL association is the nonrandom co-occurrence of Vertebral
anomalies, Anal atresia, Cardiovascular malformations, Tracheo-esophageal fistula
(TEF) and/or Esophageal atresia (EA), Renal anomalies, and/or Limb-anomalies. The
full phenotype of patients with EA/TEF and other anomalies of the VACTERL
spectrum of defects association is not well described in the literature.
METHODS: Data on patients with EA/TEF seen in two pediatric surgical centers in
the Netherlands between January 1988 and August 2006 were evaluated for defects
of the VACTERL spectrum as well as non-VACTERL-type defects. The presence of two 
or more defects of the VACTERL spectrum in addition to EA/TEF was the criterion
for inclusion in this study. A detailed description was made of all defects.
RESULTS: Of 463 patients with EA and/or TEF, 107 (23.1%) fulfilled the inclusion 
criterion, of which seventeen cases had a recognized etiology and were excluded, 
leaving 90 cases (19.4%) for analysis. Other than the esophagus and the trachea, 
the vertebrae/ribs and the cardiovascular system were most commonly affected
(68.9 and 65.6%, respectively). Interestingly, 70% of cases had additional
non-VACTERL-type defects, with high occurrences for single umbilical artery
(20%), genital defects (23.3%), and respiratory tract anomalies (13.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Many patients with EA/TEF and at least two other defects of the
VACTERL spectrum also display non-VACTERL-type congenital anomalies.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18186125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. FEBS Lett. 2008 Jan 23;582(2):391-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2007.12.033. Epub
2008 Jan 3.

Transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1/TEAD1) mediates activation of IFITM3
gene by BRGl.

Cuddapah S(1), Cui K, Zhao K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The interferon inducible transmembrane (IFITM) proteins mediate several cellular 
processes such as homotypic cell adhesion functions of interferons (IFNs) and
cellular anti-proliferative activities. We show that the BAF complex-mediated
induction of IFITM3 is dependent on binding of the transcriptional enhancer
factor 1 (TEF-1/TEAD1) to the M-CAT like elements of its promoter. TEF-1
knock-down reduced the BAF complex-mediated activation of IFITM3 promoter. In the
absence of the BAF complex, TEF-1 is repressive to IFITM3 expression. The
regulation of IFITM3 by TEF-1 demonstrates that TEF-1 dependent regulation is
more widespread than its previously established role in the expression of muscle 
specific genes.

PMCID: PMC2278002
PMID: 18177740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Mar;29(3):500-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgm292. Epub 2008 Jan
3.

Terfenadine-induced apoptosis in human melanoma cells is mediated through Ca2+
homeostasis modulation and tyrosine kinase activity, independently of H1
histamine receptors.

Jangi SM(1), Ruiz-Larrea MB, Nicolau-Galmés F, Andollo N, Arroyo-Berdugo Y,
Ortega-Martínez I, Díaz-Pérez JL, Boyano MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of the Basque Country, Leioa E-48940, Bizkaia, Spain.

In our previous works, we have demonstrated that terfenadine (TEF) induces DNA
damage and apoptosis in human melanoma cell lines. In this present work, we have 
studied the effect of histamine on viability of A375 human melanoma cells and the
cell-signalling pathways through which TEF may induce its apoptotic effect. We
have found that exogenous histamine stimulates A375 melanoma cell proliferation
in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Moreover, TEF-induced apoptosis seems to
occur via other cellular pathways independent of the histamine-signalling system 
since co-treatment of histamine with TEF did not protect melanoma cells from the 
cytotoxic effect of TEF, and alpha fluoromethylhistidine did not induce the same 
cytotoxic effect of TEF. In addition, we have observed that knocking down the H1 
histamine receptor (HRH1) by small interference RNA approach protects melanoma
cells only slightly from TEF-induced apoptosis. To explore the molecular
mechanisms responsible for histamine and TEF effect on the cell growth, we
analysed intracellular cyclic nucleotides and Ca(2+) levels. TEF did not modify
intracellular levels of cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate and cyclic guanine
3',5'-monophosphate; however, TEF induced a very sharp and sustained increase in 
cytosolic Ca(2+) levels in A375 melanoma cells. On the contrary, histamine did
not modulate intracellular Ca(2+). TEF-induced Ca(2+) rise and apoptosis appear
to be phospholipase C (PLC) dependent since neomycin and U73122, two inhibitors
of PLC, abolished cytosolic Ca(2+) increase and protected the cells completely
from cell death. Furthermore, inhibition of tyrosine kinase activity by genistein
blocked cytosolic Ca(2+) rise and TEF-induced apoptosis. These results suggest
that TEF modulates Ca(2+) homeostasis and induces apoptosis through other
cellular pathways involving tyrosine kinase activity, independently of HRH1.

PMID: 18174239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Feb;82(2):98-105. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20423.

Environmental factors in the etiology of esophageal atresia and congenital
diaphragmatic hernia: results of a case-control study.

Felix JF(1), van Dooren MF, Klaassens M, Hop WC, Torfs CP, Tibboel D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC - Sophia Children's Hospital,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

Comment in
    Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Sep;82(9):652; author reply 653.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF)
and congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) are severe congenital anomalies. Their 
etiologies are mostly unknown and are thought to be multifactorial. No specific
environmental factors have consistently been described as risk factors.
METHODS: In a study conducted during the years 2000 to 2004 in a pediatric
surgical referral center in the Netherlands, parents of children with EA/TEF or
with CDH of the Bochdalek type and parents of a group of children without major
birth defects filled out a questionnaire about possible exposure to environmental
risk factors during the period from 1 month before conception to the end of the
first trimester of pregnancy. Children with chromosomal anomalies were excluded.
RESULTS: Questionnaires were returned for 47 out of 64 cases (73%) with EA/TEF,
for 63 out of 77 cases (82%) with CDH, and for 202 out of 243 controls (83%). In 
EA/TEF, maternal age was borderline significantly higher than in controls (32.2
vs. 30.6 years, p = .05). Contact with herbicides or insecticides was associated 
with EA/TEF in univariate analysis (OR 2.0; 95% CI: 1.0-4.1) and in multivariate 
analysis, although of borderline significance. In univariate analysis, CDH was
significantly associated with maternal use of alcohol (OR 2.9; 95% CI: 1.6-5.2).
CONCLUSIONS: We found a significant association between maternal alcohol use
around the time of conception and CDH. A possible explanation might be the effect
of alcohol on the retinoic acid pathway. An association was found between contact
with herbicides or insecticides and EA/TEF.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18172903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Indian Assoc Pediatr Surg. 2008 Jan;13(1):2-6. doi: 10.4103/0971-9261.42564.

Esophageal atresia: Factors influencing survival - Experience at an Indian
tertiary centre.

Tandon RK(1), Sharma S, Sinha SK, Rashid KA, Dube R, Kureel SN, Wakhlu A, Rawat
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Neonatology, King George's Medical
University, Lucknow -226 003, India.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical profile of the cases of esophageal atresia (EA) 
and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and various factors affecting the surgical
and early postoperative management and their outcome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A prospective analysis of 127 cases of EA from February
2004 to May 2006 was performed. Waterston prognostic criteria were used for
grading.
RESULTS: EA with TEF was the commonest type in 117 cases (92%). Associated
congenital anomalies were present in 52 (41%) patients, the commonest being the
cardiac anomalies, which was followed by the gastrointestinal anomalies. VACTERL 
was found in 6 (5%) cases. Prematurity, associated congenital anomalies, gap
between esophageal ends and preoperative respiratory status were the significant 
factors affecting the survival (P = < 0.001). Primary extrapleural repair was the
surgical approach in most of the patients. Azygos vein was preserved in 46 cases 
and no retropleural drainage was used in 27 cases. Staged procedures were
performed in 19 cases, including 6 cases of isolated esophageal atresia.
Pneumonitis and sepsis were the most common early postoperative complications
(42%). Hypoxia and cardiorespiratory arrest were the most common causes of
mortality (11 cases). Anastomotic leak complicated 13 cases, including 9 major
and 4 minor leaks. Major leak followed by sepsis caused 7 deaths. Survival as per
Waterston criteria was 100% in group A, 83% in group B and 22% in group C.
CONCLUSION: Factors affecting the survival are major or life-threatening
associated anomalies, long gap, pneumonia and sepsis at presentation or that
acquired during hospitalization and major leaks. The high incidence of low birth 
weight, delayed diagnosis, poor referral, low-socio economic status and lack of
advanced neonatological back up are important contributory factors to poor
outcome.

PMCID: PMC2810819
PMID: 20177477  [PubMed]


211. Toxicol Pathol. 2007 Dec;35(7):865-79.

A critical comparison of murine pathology and epidemiological data of TCDD,
PCB126, and PeCDF.

Yoshizawa K(1), Heatherly A, Malarkey DE, Walker NJ, Nyska A.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicologic Pathology, Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Astellas Pharma
Inc., Yodogawa, Osaka, Japan.

2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD, or dioxin) and dioxin-like compounds
(DLCs) induce numerous toxicities, including developmental, endocrine,
immunological, and multi-organ carcinogenic, in animals and/or humans. Multiple
studies completed by the National Toxicology Program (NTP) focused on the effects
caused in Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats by specific DLCs, among them the
prototypical dioxin, TCDD. Because humans are exposed daily to a combination of
DLCs, primarily via ingestion of food, the Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) was
developed in order to evaluate health hazards caused by these mixtures. Herein we
review the pathological effects reported in humans exposed to TCDD;
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126); and 2,3,4,7,8,-pentachlorodibenzofuran
(PeCDF) and compare them to similar changes seen in NTP murine studies performed 
with the same compounds. While there were differences in specific pathologies
observed, clear consistency in the target organs affected (liver, oral cavity,
cardiovascular system, immune system, thyroid, pancreas, and lung) could be seen 
in both human studies and rodent toxicity and carcinogenicity investigations.

PMCID: PMC2623249
PMID: 18098033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Mar;102(1):187-95. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Modeling and assaying dioxin-like biological effects for both dioxin-like and
certain non-dioxin-like compounds.

Wilkes JG(1), Hass BS, Buzatu DA, Pence LM, Archer JC, Beger RD, Schnackenberg
LK, Halbert MK, Jennings L, Kodell RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Systems Toxicology, Department of Biostatistics, University of
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock 72205-7199, USA.
jone.wilkes@fda.hhs.gov

13C NMR data have been correlated to Toxic Equivalency Factors (TEFs) of the 29
PCDDs, PCDFs, or PCBs for which non-zero TEFs have been defined. Such
correlations are called quantitative spectrometric data-activity relationship
(QSDAR) models. An improved QSDAR model predicted TEFs of 0.037 and 0.004,
respectively, for 1,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and
1,2,3,4,7-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (PeCDD), both among the 390 congeners for
which zero value TEFs are assumed. A QSDAR model of Relative Potency (REP) values
estimated the corresponding values as 0.115 and 0.020. Results from both models
indicated that these two congeners may exhibit significant dioxin-like toxicity. 
If other such congeners have non-zero toxicity, TEF-based risk assessments of
some dioxin-, furan-, or PCB-contaminated sites or foods may underestimate
toxicity. Both models were extensively cross-validated and the TEF model was
externally validated. We confirmed the predictions by an independent in vitro
method, a luciferase gene expression assay based on mouse liver cells that found 
REPs of 0.027 and 0.013, respectively, for 1,3,7,8-TCDD and 1,2,3,4,7-PeCDD. The 
QSDAR-estimated and gene-expression assayed values agreed. The models were used
to predict activity for an applicability domain including 108 non-2,3,7,8 dioxin,
furan, or PCB congeners and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorophenothiazine, a dioxin analog
proposed as a drug candidate. This study showed that QSDAR prediction followed by
a relatively inexpensive in vitro assay could be used to nominate a few
candidates among hundreds for further investigation. It suggested that in silico 
and in vitro nomination protocols may facilitate practical risk assessment when
chemical family members exhibit different degrees of toxicity operating via a
common mechanism.

PMID: 18065775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2008 Feb;33(2):276-83. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Tracheo-carinal reconstructions using extrathoracic muscle flaps.

Ris HB(1), Krueger T, Cheng C, Pasche P, Monnier P, Magnusson L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. hans-beat.ris@chuv.ch

OBJECTIVES: Prospective evaluation of tracheo-carinal airway reconstructions
using pedicled extrathoracic muscle flaps for closing airway defects after
non-circumferential resections and after carinal resections as part of the
reconstruction for alleviation of anastomotic tension.
METHODS: From January 1996 to June 2006, 41 patients underwent tracheo-carinal
airway reconstructions using 45 extrathoracic muscle flaps (latissimus dorsi,
n=25; serratus anterior, n=18; pectoralis major, n=2) for closing airway defects 
resulting from (a) bronchopleural fistulas (BPF) with short desmoplastic
bronchial stumps after right upper lobectomy (n=1) and right-sided (pleuro)
pneumonectomy (n=13); (b) right (n=9) and left (n=3) associated with partial
carinal resections for pre-treated centrally localised tumours; (c) partial
non-circumferential tracheal resections for pre-treated tracheal tumours,
tracheo-oesophageal fistulas (TEF) and chronic tracheal injury with
tracheomalacia (n=11); (d) carinal resections with the integration of a muscle
patch in specific parts of the anastomotic reconstruction for alleviation of
anastomotic tension (n=4). The airway defects ranged from 2 x 1 cm to 8 x 4 cm
and involved up to 50% of the airway circumference. The patients were followed by
clinical examination, repeated bronchoscopy, pulmonary function testing and CT
scans. The minimum follow-up time was 6 months.
RESULTS: Ninety-day mortality was 7.3% (3/41 patients). Four patients (9.7%)
sustained muscle flap necrosis requiring re-operation and flap replacement
without subsequent mortality, airway dehiscence or stenosis. Airway dehiscence
was observed in 1/41 patients (2.4%) and airway stenosis in 1/38 surviving
patients (2.6%) responding well to topical mitomycin application. Follow-up on
clinical grounds, by CT scans and repeated bronchoscopy, revealed airtight,
stable and epithelialised airways and no recurrence of BPF or TEF in all
surviving patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Tracheo-carinal airway defects can be closed by use of pedicled
extrathoracic muscle flaps after non-circumferential resections and after carinal
resections with the muscle patch as part of the reconstruction for alleviation of
anastomotic tension.

PMID: 18054833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Int Soc Sports Nutr. 2007 Dec 5;4:24.

Onset of the Thermic Effect of Feeding (TEF): a randomized cross-over trial.

Scott CB(1), Fernandes J, Lehman M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern Maine; Exercise, Health and Sports Sciences, Gorham,
ME, USA. cscott@usm.maine.edu.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this investigation was to identify the onset of the
thermic effect of feeding (TEF) after ingestion of a high carbohydrate (CHO) and 
a high protein (PRO) 1255 kJ (300 kcal) drink.
METHODS: Resting metabolic rate (RMR) and TEF were measured over 30-minute
periods via indirect calorimetry using a ventilated hood technique. Eighteen
subjects (7 men and 11 women) completed two randomized, double-blind trials. Data
were collected in 1-minute measurement intervals. RMR was subtracted from TEF and
the time of onset was obtained when two consecutive data points exceeded 5% and
10% of resting metabolic rate.
RESULTS: At 5% above RMR the onset of TEF for CHO was 8.4 +/- 6.2 minutes and was
not different as compared to PRO, 8.6 +/- 5.2 minutes (p = 0.77). Likewise, no
differences were found with a 10% increase above RMR: CHO, 14.1 +/- 7.5 min; PRO,
16.7 +/- 6.7 min (p = 0.36). Several subjects did not show a 10% increase within 
30-min.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the onset of TEF is variable among subjects but is
initiated within about 5 to 20-min for most subjects after ingestion of a 1255 kJ
liquid meal. No differences were found between CHO or PRO liquid meals.

PMCID: PMC2221871
PMID: 18053263  [PubMed]


215. Toxicol Sci. 2008 Mar;102(1):61-75. Epub 2007 Nov 27.

Comparative toxicogenomic examination of the hepatic effects of PCB126 and TCDD
in immature, ovariectomized C57BL/6 mice.

Kopec AK(1), Boverhof DR, Burgoon LD, Ibrahim-Aibo D, Harkema JR, Tashiro C,
Chittim B, Zacharewski TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Integrative
Toxicology, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824-1319, USA.

Polychlorinated biphenyls are persistent environmental pollutants that elicit a
wide range of effects in humans and wildlife, mediated by the aryl hydrocarbon
receptor. 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) is the most potent congener
with relative effect potencies ranging from 0.0026 to 0.857, and a toxic
equivalency factor (TEF) of 0.1 set by an expert panel of the World Health
Organization. In this study, the hepatic effects elicited by 300 microg/kg PCB126
were compared with 30 microg/kg 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in
immature, ovariectomized female C57BL/6 mice. Comprehensive hepatic gene
expression analyses with complementary histopathology, high-resolution gas
chromatograph/high-resolution mass spectrometer tissue analysis, and clinical
chemistry were examined. For temporal analysis, mice were orally gavaged with
PCB126 or sesame oil vehicle and sacrificed after 2, 4, 8, 12, 18, 24, 72, 120,
or 168 h. In the dose-response study, mice were gavaged with 0.3, 1, 3, 10, 30,
100, 300, 1000 microg/kg PCB126, 30 or 100 microg/kg TCDD and sacrificed after 72
h. 251 and 367 genes were differentially expressed by PCB126 at one or more time 
points or doses, respectively, significantly less than elicited by TCDD. In
addition, there was less vacuolization and necrosis, and no immune cell
infiltration, despite comparable or higher TEF-adjusted hepatic PCB126 levels.
The functional annotation of differentially expressed genes was consistent with
the observed histopathology. Collectively, the data indicate that 300 microg/kg
PCB126 elicited a subset of weaker effects compared with 30 microg/kg TCDD in
immature, ovariectomized C57BL/6 mice.

PMID: 18042819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Metabolism. 2007 Dec;56(12):1699-707.

Greater resting energy expenditure and lower respiratory quotient after 1 week of
supplementation with milk relative to supplementation with a sugar-only beverage 
in children.

St-Onge MP(1), Claps N, Heshka S, Heymsfield SB, Kosteli A.

Author information: 
(1)Obesity Research Center, St Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, NY
10032, USA. ms2554@columbia.edu

Previous studies have linked overweight to lower milk and calcium consumption and
have proposed a role of milk consumption on energy expenditure (EE). The goal of 
this study was to compare EE and food intake after a meal of either
mixed-nutrient or single-nutrient beverage and examine whether supplementation
with that beverage for 1 week will impact EE. This was a randomized, controlled
crossover study testing the effect of 2 beverages, milk or fruit-flavored
beverage, before and after a supplementation period of 1 week on EE. Food intake 
at a meal after a snack intake of each beverage was assessed at the end of each
measurement period. Ten children, aged 9 to 10 years, participated in all of the 
testing sessions in the study. There was a significant beverage by testing day
interaction on daily EE and thermic effect of food (TEF), whereby EE was greater 
with milk consumption relative to the fruit-flavored beverage on day 8 (P =
.0014) and with fruit-flavored beverage consumption on day 1 vs day 8 (P = .01). 
Similarly, the TEF was greater with milk compared with fruit-flavored beverage
consumption on day 8 (P = .0007) and with fruit-flavored beverage consumption on 
day 1 relative to day 8 (P = .0097). The TEF declined more rapidly during 6 hours
after a fruit-flavored beverage than a milk meal (P = .0018). Food intake did not
differ after snack consumption of each beverage before and after milk and
fruit-flavored beverage supplementation periods. Over the longer term,
consumption of milk beverages may have more favorable effects on energy balance
in children than consumption of fruit-flavored beverages.

PMID: 17998024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Environ Monit Assess. 2008 Aug;143(1-3):303-11. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons study and toxic equivalency factor (TEFs) in
Tehran, Iran.

Halek F(1), Nabi G, Kavousi A.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental group, Department of Energy, Materials and Energy Research
Center, Tehran, Iran. f-halek@merc.ac.ir

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are toxic pollutants released by various 
urban combustion sources. Benzo[a]pyrene (BaP) is a representative member of the 
class of PAHs. Health risk assessment associated with inhalatory PAHs uptake is
often estimated on the basis of the BaP concentrations in air. Atmospheric
particulate PAHs concentrations were measured at five locations in Tehran, Iran. 
Sixteen PAHs were extracted from the airborne particles and analyzed by HPLC.
Total PAHs concentrations (16 compounds) at five station Arjanteen, Enghelab,
Azadi, Bahman, Haft Houz were respectively, 70.2, 96.5, 130, 79.1, 44.1 ng/m(3). 
The information obtain from the present study indicated that mean of human
carcinogens are: benzo[a]antheracene (0.17-4.76 ng/m(3)), chrysene (1.74-3.62
ng/m(3)), benzo[b]fluoranthene (0-5.25 ng/m(3)), benzo[k]fluoranthene (0.32-1.72 
ng/m(3)), benzo[a]pyrene (1.41-3.82 ng/m(3)), dibenzo[a,h]anthracene (0.33-2.13
ng/m(3)), and indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene (0.25-11.08 ng/m(3)). The development and
the establishment of a toxicity equivalency factor (TEF) are used in the
assessment of mixtures containing PAHs. The contribution of the carcinogenic
potency of BaP alone is in the range of 49.6-76.3% of the total carcinogenic
activity. The annual number of lung cancer cases (persons per million) among
Tehran residents (population = 10 millions) attributable to these carcinogenic
PAHs compounds in 2005 was estimated at 58 persons per million. In Tehran urban
areas vehicular emission are the primary contributor to PAHs concentrations, with
additional local contributors like industrials emissions.

PMID: 17987396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Diabetes Care. 2008 Feb;31(2):301-5. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Transplant estimated function: a simple index to evaluate beta-cell secretion
after islet transplantation.

Caumo A(1), Maffi P, Nano R, Bertuzzi F, Luzi L, Secchi A, Bonifacio E, Piemonti 
L.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan,
Italy.

OBJECTIVE: The beta-score is a highly regarded approach to the assessment of
transplant functionality. Our aim was to develop an index of beta-cell function
that hinges on the pillars of the beta-score (daily insulin requirement and A1C),
has a straightforward physiological interpretation, and does not require the
execution of an insulin stimulation test.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The new index is denoted transplant estimated
function (TEF) and is obtained from the daily insulin requirement and A1C. TEF
estimates the amount of insulin secreted daily and can be normalized to the
number of transplanted islets, thus permitting evaluation of the
cost-effectiveness of the transplant. TEF was compared with the area under the
curve of C-peptide [AUC(C-pep)] concentration over 24 h, as well as the acute
insulin response to intravenous glucose (AIR(glu)) and to arginine (AIR(arg)).
The association between TEF and beta-score was also investigated.
RESULTS: The correlation of TEF with 24-h AUC(C-pep) was r = 0.73 (P < 0.005),
whereas that for beta-score versus 24-h AUC(C-pep) was r = 0.33 (NS). The
correlation of TEF with AIR(glu) was r = 0.59 (P < 0.001) and close to that for
beta-score versus AIR(glu) (r = 0.65, P < 0.001). The correlation of TEF with
AIR(arg) was r = 0.33 (P < 0.005) and was similar to that for beta-score versus
AIR(arg) (r = 0.34, P < 0.005). TEF and beta-score were correlated well (r =
0.69, P < 0.0001) and showed similar time profiles.
CONCLUSIONS: TEF estimates daily insulin secretion, it is simpler than the
beta-score, and its performance against reference indexes of beta-cell secretion 
is in line with that exhibited by beta-score. TEF can be normalized to the number
of transplanted islets and thereby provides a benchmarking tool to evaluate the
cost-effectiveness of the transplant.

PMID: 17977937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):856-8.

mCAT got youR TEF?

Herring BP, Zhou J.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):883-92.

PMID: 17967794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 Dec;23(12):1215-8. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Azygos vein preservation in primary repair of esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Sharma S(1), Sinha SK, Rawat JD, Wakhlu A, Kureel SN, Tandon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, King George Medical Uinversity, Lucknow,
226003, India. drsatendra_sharma@yahoo.com

The aim of this study is to report a series of patients with the Azygos vein
preserved during the surgery for esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA&TEF), highlighting the advantages in terms of survival and prevention
of anastomotic leak. Ninety-six neonates with EA&TEF, admitted to the Department 
of Pediatric Surgery, King George Medical University between 2004 and 2006, were 
reviewed prospectively; the babies were randomly allocated to two groups: Group A
(n = 46) in which the Azygos vein was preserved and Group B (n = 50), wherein it 
was ligated. The two groups were comparable in respect to sex, weight,
prematurity, associated anomalies, Waterston classification, Spitz classification
and distance between the pouches after mobilization. Anastomotic leak occurred in
three cases (6%) in Group A and ten cases (20%) in Group B and was responsible
for mortality in one (2%) case in Group A and six cases (12%) in Group B.
Preservation of Azygos vein resulted in significant reduction in the number of
anastomotic leaks. We propose that preservation of the Azygos vein prevents early
postoperative edema of the esophageal anastomosis by maintaining the venous
drainage and thus may form an additional protective factor against anastomotic
leaks.

PMID: 17965863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Pediatr Surg Int. 2008 Jan;24(1):95-100.

Intrinsic esophageal innervation in esophageal atresia without fistula.

Pederiva F(1), Burgos E, Francica I, Zuccarello B, Martinez L, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Paseo de la
Castellana, 261, Madrid, Spain.

Esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA + TEF) are often associated
with malformations of neural crest origin. Esophageal innervation is also derived
from the neural crest and it is abnormal in EA + TEF in which there is motor
dysfunction. Our aim was to examine the intrinsic esophageal innervation in
children with isolated EA in which different embryogenic mechanisms might be
involved. Specimens from the proximal and distal esophageal segments of 6/35
patients who had esophageal replacement for isolated EA between 1965 and 2006
were suitable for the study. They were sectioned and immunostained with
anti-neurofilament (NF) and anti-S-100 antibodies. The muscle and neural surfaces
on each section were measured with the assistance of image processing software.
The surface of the ganglia and the number of neurons per ganglion were determined
at high power microscopy. The findings were compared with those of six autopsy
specimens from newborns dead of other diseases by means of standard statistical
tests and a significance threshold of P < 0.05. Unmatched age/size of babies in
isolated EA and control groups precluded comparison of the relative surfaces
occupied by neural elements. Patients with pure EA had denser fibrilar network
and larger ganglia than controls. The number of neurons/ganglion were similar in 
both groups although the cells from EA patients were larger. The findings were
similar at both esophageal levels studied. In spite of methodologic biases, it
seems that intrinsic esophageal fibrilar network is denser and the intramural
ganglia larger with larger cells in patients with pure EA than in controls on
both esophageal ends of the organ. These neural anomalies are only in part
reminiscent of those described in regular EA/TEF but may as well explain
esophageal dysfunction in patients with repaired isolated EA.

PMID: 17962964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):8-17. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

MCAT elements and the TEF-1 family of transcription factors in muscle development
and disease.

Yoshida T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, MR5 Room 1226, 415 Lane Road, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
ty2c@virginia.edu

MCAT elements are located in the promoter-enhancer regions of cardiac, smooth,
and skeletal muscle-specific genes including cardiac troponin T, beta-myosin
heavy chain, smooth muscle alpha-actin, and skeletal alpha-actin, and play a key 
role in the regulation of these genes during muscle development and disease. The 
binding factors of MCAT elements are members of the transcriptional enhancer
factor-1 (TEF-1) family. However, it has not been fully understood how these
transcription factors confer cell-specific expression in muscle, because their
expression patterns are relatively broad. Results of recent studies revealed
multiple mechanisms whereby TEF-1 family members control MCAT element-dependent
muscle-specific gene expression, including posttranslational modifications of
TEF-1 family members, the presence of muscle-selective TEF-1 cofactors, and
cell-selective control of TEF-1 accessibility to MCAT elements. In addition, of
particular interest, recent studies regarding MCAT element-dependent
transcription of the myocardin gene and the smooth muscle alpha-actin gene in
muscle provide evidence for the transcriptional diversity among distinct cell
types and subtypes. This article summarizes the role of MCAT elements and the
TEF-1 family of transcription factors in muscle development and disease, and
reviews recent progress in our understanding of the transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms involved in MCAT element-dependent muscle-specific gene expression.

PMID: 17962623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Dev Biol. 2007;51(8):745-52.

Differential expression of two TEF-1 (TEAD) genes during Xenopus laevis
development and in response to inducing factors.

Naye F(1), Tréguer K, Soulet F, Faucheux C, Fédou S, Thézé N, Thiébaud P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 5164, Universite Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.

Transcription enhancer factors 1 (TEF-1 or TEAD) make a highly conserved family
of eukaryotic DNA binding proteins that activate not only viral regulatory
elements but muscle specific genes and are involved in several developmental
processes. In this study, we report the identification and the expression pattern
of NTEF-1 (TEAD1) and DTEF-1 (TEAD3), two members of this family in Xenopus
laevis. Both X. laevis NTEF-1 (XNTEF-1 or XTEAD1) and DTEF-1 (XDTEF-1 or XTEAD3) 
possess a 72 amino acid TEA domain characteristic of TEF-1 proteins. XNTEF-1 is a
426 amino acid protein that has 96% identity with the avian or the mammalian
NTEF-1 proteins while XDTEF-1 is a 433 amino acid protein with 77 to 80% identity
with the avian and mammalian DTEF-1 sequences respectively. Temporal expression
analysis by RT-PCR indicated that the two genes are expressed maternally and
throughout embryonic development. In the adult, the two genes are broadly
expressed although they showed differences of expression between tissues. Spatial
expression analysis by whole mount in situ hybridization showed that the XNTEF-1 
and XDTEF-1 mRNAS were predominantly detected in eye, embryonic brain, somites
and heart. In animal cap assay, the two genes are activated by bFGF but are
differently regulated by BMP4, and the muscle regulatory factor Mef2d.

PMID: 17939122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. World J Surg. 2007 Dec;31(12):2412-5.

Role of fibrin glue as a sealant to esophageal anastomosis in cases of congenital
esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Upadhyaya VD(1), Gopal SC, Gangopadhyaya AN, Gupta DK, Sharma S, Upadyaya A,
Kumar V, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu 
University, Lanka, Varanasi, UP, India. upadhyayavj@rediffmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to characterize a successful approach for
the management of infants with long-gap esophageal atresia (EA) with
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The goal was to preserve the native esophagus
and minimize the incidence of esophageal anastomotic leaks using fibrin glue as a
sealant over the esophageal anastomosis.
METHOD: A total of 52 patients were evaluated in this study. Only patients in
whom, gap between the two ends of the esophagus was > or = 2 cm were selected
during January 2005 to January 2007. Patients were divided in two groups on the
basis of block randomization. Group A comprised the patients in whom fibrin
sealant was used as reinforcement on a primary end-to-end esophageal anastomosis;
in group B, fibrin glue was not used. The two groups were compared in terms of
esophageal anastomotic leak (EL), postoperative esophageal stricture (ES), and
mortality. The statistical analysis was done using Fisher's exact test and the
chi-squared test.
RESULT: The number of anastomotic leaks in group A (glue group) was about
one-fifth that in group B (no glue group). The incidence of ES was almost twice
as high in group B as in group A. The mortality rate was almost threefold higher 
in group B (no-glue group). The higher incidence of EL and ES in group B compared
to group A was statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Thus, fibrin glue when used as an adjunct to esophageal anastomosis
for primary repair of long-gap EA with TEF appears safe in the clinical setting
and may lower the chances of esophageal leak and anastomosis-site strictures.
Hence, it can diminish the mortality and morbidity of these patients.

PMID: 17917772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Oct;7(8):827-36. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

Vestigial-like-2b (VITO-1b) and Tead-3a (Tef-5a) expression in zebrafish skeletal
muscle, brain and notochord.

Mann CJ(1), Osborn DP, Hughes SM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology and Randall Division for Cell and
Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The vestigial gene has been shown to control skeletal muscle formation in
Drosophila and the related Vestigial-like 2 (Vgl-2) protein plays a similar role 
in mice. Vgl-family proteins are thought to regulate tissue-specific gene
expression by binding to members of the broadly expressed Scalloped/Tef/TEAD
transcription factor family. Zebrafish have at least four Vgl genes, including
two Vgl-2s, and at least three TEAD genes, including two Tead3s. We describe the 
cloning and expression of one member from each family in the zebrafish. A novel
gene, vgl-2b, with closest homology to mouse and human vgl-2, is expressed
transiently in nascent notochord and in muscle fibres as they undergo terminal
differentiation during somitogenesis. Muscle cells also express a TEAD-3
homologue, a possible partner of Vgl-2b, during myoblast differentiation and
early fibre assembly. Tead-3a is also expressed in rhombomeres, eye and epiphysis
regions.

PMCID: PMC3360971
PMID: 17916448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Expo Sci Environ Epidemiol. 2008 Jul;18(4):369-80. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

AH receptor agonist activity in human blood measured with a cell-based bioassay: 
evidence for naturally occurring AH receptor ligands in vivo.

Connor KT(1), Harris MA, Edwards MR, Budinsky RA, Clark GC, Chu AC, Finley BL,
Rowlands JC.

Author information: 
(1)Geomatrix Consultants, Folsom, California 95680, USA.

In the present study, an aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-driven reporter gene
bioassay was used to measure the activity, measured as an induction equivalent
(IEQ) as compared to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), or IEQ
concentration in human blood samples from 10 volunteers under different dietary
regimens. Blood concentrations of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins/furans
(PCDD/Fs) and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), as determined by analytical
chemistry (HR-GC/MS), and expressed as toxic equivalents (TEQs) with the use of
TCDD equivalency factors (TEFs), were within a range that has been reported in
the general US population, ranging from 0.022 to 0.119 ppt (whole blood basis).
However, the human blood IEQ measured directly via bioassay ranged from 13.4 to
218 ppt (whole blood basis). These order of magnitude greater IEQs compared to
the TEQs for dioxins, furans, and certain PCBs suggests that human blood contains
a relatively high level of AHR agonists able to activate the CYP1A1 dioxin
response element (DRE)-linked reporter gene bioassay and that this AHR activity
is not accounted for by PCDDs/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs based on standard HR-GC/MS 
and TEF analysis. When study participants switched from a "baseline" to a
high-vegetable diet, increases in bioassay IEQ were observed that were
statistically significant (P<0.05). In addition, IEQ activity was elevated above 
levels observed following dietary intervention in two subjects given
indole-3-carbinol (I3C) supplements. We conclude that a substantial portion of
the IEQ activity occurred as a result of the increased intake of natural AHR
agonists (NAHRAs) present in many fruits, vegetables. and herbs. Our findings
also suggest that dietary NAHRAs constitute a substantial daily dietary intake of
AHR-active compounds, and these NAHRAs could influence AHR status in humans and
play a role in a basal level of AHR activation.

PMID: 17912254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 1;67(19):9055-65.

High cancer-specific expression of mesothelin (MSLN) is attributable to an
upstream enhancer containing a transcription enhancer factor dependent MCAT
motif.

Hucl T(1), Brody JR, Gallmeier E, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Farrance IK, Kern SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Identification of genes with cancer-specific overexpression offers the potential 
to efficiently discover cancer-specific activities in an unbiased manner. We
apply this paradigm to study mesothelin (MSLN) overexpression, a nearly
ubiquitous, diagnostically and therapeutically useful characteristic of
pancreatic cancer. We identified an 18-bp upstream enhancer, termed CanScript,
strongly activating transcription from an otherwise weak tissue-nonspecific
promoter and operating selectively in cells having aberrantly elevated
cancer-specific MSLN transcription. Introducing mutations into CanScript showed
two functionally distinct sites: an Sp1-like site and an MCAT element. Gel
retardation and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed the MCAT element to
be bound by transcription enhancer factor (TEF)-1 (TEAD1) in vitro and in vivo.
The presence of TEF-1 was required for MSLN protein overexpression as determined 
by TEF-1 knockdown experiments. The cancer specificity seemed to be provided by a
putative limiting cofactor of TEF-1 that could be outcompeted by exogenous TEF-1 
only in a MSLN-overexpressing cell line. A CanScript concatemer offered enhanced 
activity. These results identify a TEF family member as a major regulator of MSLN
overexpression, a fundamental characteristic of pancreatic and other cancers,
perhaps due to an upstream and highly frequent aberrant cellular activity. The
CanScript sequence represents a modular element for cancer-specific targeting,
potentially suitable for nearly a third of human malignancies.

PMID: 17909009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Dec;49(3):195-202. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Combining perfluoroalkane acid exposure levels for risk assessment.

Scialli AR(1), Iannucci A, Turim J.

Author information: 
(1)Sciences International, Inc., 1800 Diagonal Road, Suite 500, Alexandria, VA
22314, USA. ascilli@sciences.com

Perfluoroalkane acids are present in biologic samples from >90% of people in the 
developed world. Because people may be exposed to multiple perfluoroalkane acids,
it is reasonable to consider whether the exposure levels of these agents can be
combined for risk assessment purposes. To investigate this possibility, we
considered whether the literature on perfluoroalkane acids could be used to
justify a scaling system analogous to the Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) system
used for polychlorinated biphenyls, polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, and
polychlorinated dibenzofurans. We evaluated pairs of studies performed with
different perfluoroalkane acids in the same species using the same design and
found that endpoints for perfluorooctanesulfonate (PFOS), perfluorooctanoic acid 
(PFOA), perfluorobutanesulfonate (PFBS), and perfluorodecanoic acid (PFDA) could 
be discordant. We evaluated pairs of rat studies of PFOS, PFOA, and PFBS
performed with the same design for which dose-response curves could be modeled
for the concordant endpoints, but we were unable to identify a scaling system
that gave values consistently within an order of magnitude for the same
compounds. Currently available data do not support the combining of exposure
levels of perfluoroalkane acids for risk assessment, although re-evaluation after
additional data are available is recommended.

PMID: 17904261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Environ Pollut. 2008 May;153(2):424-31. Epub 2007 Sep 27.

Bioaccumulation of polychlorinated biphenyls in the eel (Anguilla anguilla) at
the Camargue Nature Reserve - France.

Oliveira Ribeiro CA(1), Vollaire Y, Coulet E, Roche H.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal do Paraná, Departamento de Biologia Celular, Caixa Postal
19031, CEP: 81.531-990 Curitiba, PR, Brazil. ciro@ufpr.br

Fish consumption is a potential source of human exposure to pollutants. Here, we 
study residue levels of PCBs in the eel, Anguilla anguilla, from the Nature
Camargue Reserve in southern France. Chromatographic analysis (GC-ECD) found
seventy identifiable congeners, among which, 10 are considered as dioxin-like
PCBs, such as the non-ortho PCB 81 and the mono-ortho chlorobiphenyls PCB105,
114, 118, 123, 156, 157, 167, 170, 180. Toxic Equivalents (TEQ, WHO 2005
TEF-Toxic Equivalent Factors) varied among sites with a maximum in eels from
Mornès (29.6pgg(-1) dry weight). Indicator PCBs (28, 52, 101, 118, 138, 153 and
180) were 22% and 29% of the total PCBs in livers and muscles respectively.
Greater homogeneous bioaccumulation in muscle than that in liver suggests an
increase risk for humans due to fish consumption.

PMID: 17900770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Sep;42(9):E1-3.

Feingold syndome: a rare but important cause of syndromic tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Layman-Pleet L(1), Jackson CC, Chou S, Boycott KM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Ottawa Medical School, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) are common congenital
malformations and are associated with additional anomalies in approximately half 
of cases. Feingold syndrome is an important genetic cause of syndromic EA-TEF to 
consider in patients with associated microcephaly and digital anomalies. We
present a case report of a male infant with EA-TEF, microcephaly, subtle facial
dysmorphism, dysplastic kidney, short fifth fingers, second finger clinodactyly, 
and increased spacing between the first and second toes bilaterally. His clinical
presentation was suggestive of Feingold syndrome, and genetic testing of the MYCN
gene confirmed the diagnosis. Feingold syndrome is an autosomal dominant
condition, and therefore, the diagnosis has important implications for genetic
counseling.

PMID: 17848225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Laryngoscope. 2007 Nov;117(11):1943-51.

Classification and management of tracheoesophageal and tracheopharyngeal fistulas
after laryngectomy.

Gehrking E(1), Raap M, Sommer KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Plastic Head and Neck Surgery, University
Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
eckard.gehrking@hno.uni-luebeck.de

Comment in
    Laryngoscope. 2008 May;118(5):944; author reply 944.

OBJECTIVES: Tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) and tracheopharyngeal fistulas (TPF)
are intentionally created for prosthetic or surgical voice restoration after
laryngectomy or can develop after radiotherapy or surgical interventions. If the 
fistula does not shrink or close spontaneously or does not respond to
conservative measures, surgical closure of the fistula is indicated.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective study of 177 patients.
METHODS: Data of 168 laryngectomy patients who needed a voice prosthesis (VP)
replacement were obtained. Our experiences with nine severe TEF/TPF were
analyzed, and a classification of these fistulas depending on the anatomic and
clinical appearance was developed.
RESULTS: TEF/TPF can be divided into five types: high TEF with leakage through
the VP (type Ia), high TEF with leakage around the VP (type Ib), enlarged high
TEF (type II), deep TEF (type III), TPF (type IV), and TPF associated with
pharynx stenosis (type V). Persisting TEF/TPF after unsuccessful attempts at
surgical closure in four patients and the surgical solutions and procedures in
these rare cases are discussed in detail.
CONCLUSIONS: Leakage of TEF in prosthetic voice restoration usually responds well
to conservative measures. If these measures fail, and in all cases of TPF,
surgical intervention is necessary for transtracheostomal or transcervical
closure with multilayer sutures of the esophagus and trachea. Persisting TEF/TPF 
after unsuccessful surgical attempts at revision surgery remain challenging. Our 
experiences show that tracheostoma transposition for dissociation of the cranial 
end of the trachea and the hypopharynx and esophagus is essential for effective
closure. In rare cases of TPF combined with pharyngoesophageal stricture
formation, a resection and immediate reconstruction of the stenotic
pharyngoesophageal segment with a tube-shaped fasciocutaneous radial forearm flap
must be considered.

PMID: 17828044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):883-92. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Smooth muscle cells and myofibroblasts use distinct transcriptional mechanisms
for smooth muscle alpha-actin expression.

Gan Q(1), Yoshida T, Li J, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Oct 26;101(9):856-8.

There has been considerable controversy regarding the lineage relationship
between smooth muscle cells (SMCs) and myofibroblasts, because they express a
number of common cell-selective markers including smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin.
We have shown previously that MCAT elements within the SM alpha-actin promoter
confer differential activity in cultured SMCs versus myofibroblasts. In the
present study, to determine the role of MCAT elements in vivo, we generated
transgenic mice harboring an SM alpha-actin promoter-enhancer-LacZ reporter gene 
containing MCAT element mutations and compared transgene expression patterns with
wild-type SM alpha-actin promoter-enhancer-LacZ transgenic mice. Results showed
no differences in LacZ expression patterns in adult SMC-containing tissues.
However, of interest, mutations of MCAT elements selectively abolished transgene 
expression in myofibroblasts within granulation tissue of skin wounds. In
addition, mutations of MCAT elements caused a delay in the induction of transgene
expression in SMCs, as well as loss of expression in cardiac and skeletal muscles
during embryogenesis. Results of small interfering RNA-induced knockdown
experiments showed that RTEF-1 regulated SM alpha-actin transcription in
myofibroblasts, but not in differentiated SMCs. Moreover, quantitative chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that RTEF-1 bound to the MCAT
element-containing region within the SM alpha-actin promoter in myofibroblasts,
whereas transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 was bound to the same region in
differentiated SMCs. These results provide novel evidence that, although both
SMCs and myofibroblasts express SM alpha-actin, they use distinct transcriptional
control mechanisms for regulating its expression. Results also indicate that the 
MCAT element-mutated SM alpha-actin promoter-enhancer is a useful tool to direct 
gene expression selectively in differentiated SMCs.

PMID: 17823374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Environ Sci Technol. 2007 Aug 1;41(15):5231-6.

Influence of the large grid size used in a multimedia mass balance model (POPsME)
on the exposure assessment of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans.

Lee Y(1), Cho G, Lee DS, Lee JY, Kim YK, Kim DW, Kim SJ, Kim K, Jang G, Choi S.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Planning Institute, Graduate School of Environmental Studies,
Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

A multimedia mass balance model (MMM), POPsME, was evaluated for its performance 
to assess the fate and transport of 2,3,7,8-substituted PCDD/Fs in Seoul and a
neighboring area (150 km x 150 km) in Korea. As part of the evaluation, the
effects of the grid size with the homogeneous mixing assumption were estimated on
the sign and magnitude of the prediction bias. The prediction compared with the
monitoring data generally within 1 order of magnitude. In the presence of a
concentration gradient within individual cells of 30 km x 30 km,the prediction
bias for air and soil tended to increase with the distance from the sources. It
was observed that the ratio of the predicted to the measured values could vary
more than 4 times with the location of the monitoring site. Use of the large grid
size in POPsME (and perhaps other MMMs) resulted in overpredictions for a major
portion of the model domain at the cost of underprediction for limited areas
nearthe sources. Beyond the source areas, a substantial contribution of the total
prediction bias originated from the congeners with a large atmospheric loss rate 
and small TEF value. On a TEQ basis, therefore, the magnitude of the
overpredictions could be significantly reduced as compared to that of the
underprediction for the source areas.

PMID: 17822084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Aug;17(4):236-40.

Is ligation of azygos vein necessary in primary repair of tracheoesophageal
fistula with esophageal atresia?

Upadhyaya VD(1), Gangopadhyaya AN, Gopal SC, Upadhyaya A, Sharma SP, Gupta DK,
Kumar V, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery IMS, BHU, Varanasi, India.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia (TEF
with EA) is not an uncommon disease of newborns. Classical approach for primary
repair of TEF with EA is right thoracotomy with extrapleural approach, ligation
of the azygos vein, identification and ligation of tracheoesophageal fistula,
identification of upper esophageal pouch and end-to-end anastomosis. This study
was conducted to evaluate if the ligation of the azygos vein is a must during
primary repair of TEF with EA.
METHOD: We studied 50 randomly selected cases in the last two years (Jan 2003 -
Jan 2005). In 25 babies (group A), primary repair was done with preservation of
the azygous vein while 25 babies (group B) were operated with a classical
approach with ligation and division of the azygos vein. The postoperative result 
was comparative in both cases.
RESULT: Postoperative pneumonitis was higher in the babies operated with the
classical approach (56 % in group B and 12 % in group A) and was found to be
statistically significant. In postoperative complication, anastomotic leak was
slightly higher in group B but was not statistically significant. Mortality rate 
was similar in both groups. Babies in group A were hemodynamically more stable in
comparison to group B.
CONCLUSION: Preservation of the azygos vein maintains the normal venous drainage 
of mediastinum and hence decreases the postoperative chest congestion and
pneumonitis in the postoperative period in cases of congenital esophageal atresia
with tracheoesophageal fistula, so it should be preserved whenever possible.

PMID: 17806018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Int J Oncol. 2007 Oct;31(4):693-703.

Expression of connective tissue growth factor in pancreatic cancer cell lines.

Kwon S(1), Munroe X, Crawley SC, Lee HY, Spong S, Bradham D, Gum JR Jr,
Sleisenger MH, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA 94132, USA.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF/CCN2) is thought to play a role in normal
wound repair and bone remodeling, but also promotes fibrosis in several disease
processes including diabetic nephropathy, sclerodoma and pancreatitis. A
contribution to desmoplasia associated with pancreatic cancer progression has
also been proposed. CTGF is induced by TGFbeta in diverse cell types, but TGFbeta
receptor mediated signaling is impaired in pancreatic cancers and cell lines,
usually due to DPC4/Smad4 mutations which arise during the later stages of
intraepithelial neoplastic progression. Therefore, in order to define signaling
pathways that mediate basal and TGFbeta-induced CTGF expression in normal and
transformed cells, we compared CTGF gene regulation in pancreatic cancer cells
and fibroblasts by measuring the effects of small molecule inhibitors and
dominant negative mutants of signaling proteins on CTGF promoter reporter
activity, message, and protein expression. We determined that the previously
identified TEF-1 cis element is essential for CTGF promoter reporter activity in 
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Whereas p38 mediated CTGF induction by TGFbeta in
fibroblasts, MEK/ERK signaling mediated TGFbeta-induced CTGF expression in
pancreatic cancer cells and was also responsible for basal CTGF expression in
pancreatic cancer cell lines with defective Smad signaling. Since activating Ras 
mutations occur in the earliest stages of pancreatic cancer, CTGF may be induced 
independent of Smad4 in pancreatic cancer cells.

PMID: 17786299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Surg Educ. 2007 Jul-Aug;64(4):237-40.

Review of tracheo-esophageal fistula associated with endotracheal intubation.

Mooty RC(1), Rath P, Self M, Dunn E, Mangram A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Methodist Health Systems, Dallas, Texas 75203, USA.
mooty.c@lycos.com

Tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) formation is a rare complication of either
endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy. This complication is generally thought
to be iatrogenic and occurs in less than 1% of patients. High-volume,
low-pressure cuffs have made TEFs an infrequent occurrence; however, it still
poses as a potential life-threatening condition. Evaluation and close monitoring 
of endotracheal tube (ETT) cuff pressures is an area of significance commonly
overlooked and/or underemphasized by surgical residents. To illustrate and review
this clinical problem, a case of an iatrogenic TEF as a consequence of excessive 
endotracheal cuff pressures is reported.

PMID: 17706579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Aug;42(8):1433-8.

The structural characteristics and expression of neuropeptides in the esophagus
of patients with congenital esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Li K(1), Zheng S, Xiao X, Wang Q, Zhou Y, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital, Medical Center of Fudan University
(Former Shanghai Medical University), Shanghai 200032, PR China.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to investigate the structural characteristics 
and the expression of a group of neuropeptides in the esophagus of patients with 
congenital esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF), as well to 
elucidate the roles of these neuropeptides in the pathogenesis of postoperative
incoordination of esophagus after successful surgical repair of EA-TEF.
METHODS: Twenty-four specimens from distal tracheoesophageal fistulas of patients
with EA-TEF (EA-TEF group) and 10 esophageal specimens from neonates who died of 
nonesophageal diseases (control group) were studied. All of the specimens were
subjected to routine pathologic study, ultrastructural observation, and
immunohistochemical staining for neuron-specific enolase, substance P, vasoactive
intestinal polypeptide, and nitric oxide synthase.
RESULTS: In the EA-TEF group, mitochondria were distributed along the membrane of
smooth muscle cell, whereas mitochondria in the control group were distributed
along the karyotheca of the smooth muscle cells. The ratio of granulated vesicles
to clear vesicles in the varicosity of the intramuscular motor nerve ending of
the EA-TEF group (0.520 +/- 0.137) was much higher than that in the control group
(0.192 +/- 0.020, P < .05). The percentages of specimens shown to have positive
expression of neuron-specific enolase and substance P in the EA-TEF group (20.8% 
and 12.5%, respectively) were significantly lower than those in the control group
(90% and 80% respectively, P < .05). The percentages of specimens shown to have
positive expression of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and nitric oxide
synthase in the EA-TEF group (83.3% and 75%, respectively) were significantly
higher than that in the control group (30% and 10% respectively, P < .05).
CONCLUSION: Imbalance of neurotransmitters excretion in nerve vesicle, abnormal
intrinsic dysplasia of nerve plexus and increased expression of certain
neuropeptides were the main characteristics of esophagus with abnormal intrinsic 
innervation, which may be responsible for the postoperative esophageal
dysfunction of EA-TEF.

PMID: 17706510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 5;361(4):1022-6. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

A Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy-associated missense mutation in mouse Tead1
affects its interaction with the co-factors YAP and TAZ.

Kitagawa M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.
kitagawa@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

Sveinsson's chorioretinal atrophy (SCRA) is an autosomal dominant eye disease
characterized by bilateral chorioretinal degeneration. A missense mutation in the
gene encoding the transcription factor TEAD1/TEF-1 (Y421H) is genetically linked 
to SCRA, but the mechanisms of pathology remain unclear. To study the molecular
mechanisms underlying SCRA, a missense mutation corresponding to Y421H in human
TEAD1 was introduced into mouse Tead1 (Y410H), and a functional analysis of the
mutant protein was performed in RPE-J cells. The missense mutation reduced the
ability of Tead1 to interact with the co-factors YAP and TAZ, but not with the
co-factors Vgl-1, -2, and -3, in a mammalian two-hybrid assay. A GST pull-down
assay showed that the direct interaction between Tead1 and YAP or TAZ was lost
owing to the mutation. Amino acid substitutions at position 410 of Tead1 revealed
the essentiality of this tyrosine residue to the interaction. The Y410H mutation 
also abolished the transcriptional activity of Tead1 under the co-expression of
YAP or TAZ. These results suggest that SCRA pathogenesis may be due to a
loss-of-function of TEAD1 affecting the regulation of its target genes.

PMID: 17689488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2007 Jul;26(7):1386-98.

Risk assessment of great horned owls (Bubo virginianus) exposed to
polychlorinated biphenyls and DDT along the Kalamazoo River, Michigan, USA.

Strause KD(1), Zwiernik MJ, Im SH, Bradley PW, Moseley PP, Kay DP, Park CS, Jones
PD, Blankenship AL, Newsted JL, Giesy JP.

Author information: 
(1)Zoology Department, Center for Integrative Toxicology, National Food Safety
and Toxicology Center, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan 48823,
USA.

The great horned owl (GHO; Bubo virginianus) was used in a multiple lines of
evidence study of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and
p,p'-dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) exposures at the Kalamazoo River
Superfund Site (KRSS), Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA. The study examined risks from
total PCBs, including 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin equivalents (TEQWorld
Health Organization [WHO]-Avian Toxicity Equivalency Factor [TEF]), and total
DDTs (sum of DDT, dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene [DDE], and
dichlorodiphenyldichloroethane [DDD]; sigmaDDT) by measuring concentrations in
eggs and nestling blood plasma in two regions of the KRSS (upper, lower) and an
upstream reference area (RA). An ecological risk assessment compared
concentrations of the contaminants of concern (COCs) in eggs or plasma to
toxicity reference values. Productivity and relative abundance measures for KRSS 
GHOs were compared with other GHO populations. Egg shell thickness was measured
to assess effects of p,p'-DDE. The concentrations of PCBs in eggs were as great
as 4.7 x 10(2) and 4.0 x 10(4) ng PCB/g, wet weight at the RA and combined KRSS
sites, respectively. Egg TEQ(WHO-Avian) calculated from aryl hydrocarbon
receptor-active PCB congeners and WHO TEFs ranged to 8.0 and 1.9 x 10(2) pg
TEQ(WHO-Avian)/g, (wet wt) at the RA and combined KRSS, respectively. Egg
sigmaDDT concentrations were as great as 4.2 x 10(2) and 5.0 x 10(3) ng
sigmaDDT/g (wet wt) at the RA and combined KRSS, respectively. Hazard quotients
(HQs) for the upper 95% confidence interval (UCI) (geometric mean) and least
observable adverse effect concentration (LOAEC) for COCs in eggs were < or = 1.0 
for all sites. Hazard quotient values based on the no observable adverse effect
concentration (NOAEC) 95% UCI in eggs were < or = 1.0, except at the LKRSS (PCB
HQ = 3.1; TEQ(WHO-Avian) HQ = 1.3). Productivity and relative abundance measures 
indicated no population level effects in the UKRSS.

PMID: 17665678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mycol Res. 2007 Jul;111(Pt 7):832-9. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Characterization of Fusarium circinatum from Pinus spp. in northern Spain.

Pérez-Sierra A(1), Landeras E, León M, Berbegal M, García-Jiménez J, Armengol J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Agroforestal Mediterráneo, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia,
Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain. aperesi@eaf.upv.es

Pitch canker caused by Fusarium circinatum was recently reported on Pinus spp. in
Spain. In this study, a collection of 157 isolates of F. circinatum obtained from
different geographical origins and hosts in northern Spain were identified and
characterized by cultural and morphological features, PCR-RFLPs of the histone H3
gene, IGS region, and the translation elongation factor 1-alpha gene (TEF).
Mating types were determined by multiplex PCR and sexual compatibility was
performed under laboratory conditions. Both mating types were present in Spain
and were able to form the teleomorph Gibberella circinata. Morphological
differences between mating types, not previously reported, were observed: MAT-1
isolates showed clear, coiled, sterile hyphae characteristic of F. circinatum,
whereas MAT-2 isolates presented sterile hyphae but not coiled. Virulence of
representative isolates was tested on seven to eight-month-old P. nigra, P.
pinaster and P. sylvestris seedlings. All isolates tested were pathogenic to
these pine species, MAT-1 isolates being more virulent than MAT-2 isolates.

PMID: 17662589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 31;104(31):12843-8. Epub 2007 Jul 23.

TNF-alpha suppresses the expression of clock genes by interfering with
E-box-mediated transcription.

Cavadini G(1), Petrzilka S, Kohler P, Jud C, Tobler I, Birchler T, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, University Hospital Zurich, Haeldeliweg 4,
CH-8044 Zurich, Switzerland.

Production of TNF-alpha and IL-1 in infectious and autoimmune diseases is
associated with fever, fatigue, and sleep disturbances, which are collectively
referred to as sickness behavior syndrome. In mice TNF-alpha and IL-1 increase
nonrapid eye movement sleep. Because clock genes regulate the circadian rhythm
and thereby locomotor activity and may alter sleep architecture we assessed the
influence of TNF-alpha on the circadian timing system. TNF-alpha is shown here to
suppress the expression of the PAR bZip clock-controlled genes Dbp, Tef, and Hlf 
and of the period genes Per1, Per2, and Per3 in fibroblasts in vitro and in vivo 
in the liver of mice infused with the cytokine. The effect of TNF-alpha on clock 
genes is shared by IL-1beta, but not by IFN-alpha, and IL-6. Furthermore,
TNF-alpha interferes with the expression of Dbp in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
and causes prolonged rest periods in the dark when mice show spontaneous
locomotor activity. Using clock reporter genes TNF-alpha is found here to inhibit
CLOCK-BMAL1-induced activation of E-box regulatory elements-dependent clock gene 
promoters. We suggest that the increase of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta, as seen in
infectious and autoimmune diseases, impairs clock gene functions and causes
fatigue.

PMCID: PMC1937554
PMID: 17646651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Chemosphere. 2007 Oct;69(8):1188-94. Epub 2007 Jul 23.

Determination of PCDD/Fs and dioxin-like PCBs in fish oils for feed ingredients
by congener-specific chemical analysis and CALUX bioassay.

Hasegawa J(1), Guruge KS, Seike N, Shirai Y, Yamata T, Nakamura M, Handa H,
Yamanaka N, Miyazaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Safety Research Team, National Institute of Animal Health, Kannondai 3-1-5,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0856, Japan.

The present research was intended to determine the suitability of the CALUX assay
as a screening method for dioxins in fish oil used as a feed ingredient in Japan.
Alteration of TEQ in fish oil according to newly proposed toxic equivalency
factors (TEF) is also discussed. In the analysis, polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) and dioxin-like polychlorinated
biphenyls (DL-PCBs) in 41 fish oil samples were determined by using
high-resolution gas chromatography/high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRGC/HRMS) 
and CALUX bioassay. The mean TEQ values derived from 1998 WHO-TEF of PCDD/Fs and 
DL-PCBs were 2.6 and 9.9 pg g(-1) (ww), respectively. The levels of TEQ derived
from the recently re-evaluated 2005 WHO-TEF were slightly lower than those of the
former in both groups. Notably, the contribution of mono-ortho DL-PCBs to total
2005 WHO-TEQ was considerably decreased compared to the case of 1998 WHO-TEQ,
resulting from the reduction in its TEF values, while the non-ortho DL-PCBs
contribution was increased. The mean TEQ determined by CALUX assay for PCDD/Fs
was approximately three times higher, whereas DL-PCBs was approximately two times
lower than WHO-TEQ determined by HRGC/HRMS; the sum of PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs was
very similar by both methods. The correlation coefficients of TEQ between the
CALUX assay and HRGC/HRMS analysis were 0.84, 0.89, and 0.90 for PCDD/Fs,
DL-PCBs, and the sum, respectively. These results suggest that the CALUX assay is
a very useful method for the screening of dioxin-related compounds in fish oils.

PMID: 17643474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Chemosphere. 2007 Oct;69(8):1287-94. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

Agreement between breast milk dioxin levels by CALUX bioassay and chemical
analysis in a population survey in Hong Kong.

Hui LL(1), Hedley AJ, Nelson EA, Malisch R, Wong TW, Cowling BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 5/F, William
M.W. Mong Block, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Chemically-activated luciferase gene expression (CALUX) bioassay and gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) are used to determine dioxin levels in
food and humans. Valid measures of the agreement between the two methods would
improve interpretation of bioassay results. Paired breast milk samples from 250
mothers, as 11 pooled samples, were analysed by GC/MS for total WHO-TEQ (7
polychlorinated dibenzo-para-dioxins, 10 polychlorinated dibenzofurans and 12
dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls) and as individual samples by CALUX. Mean
difference between total WHO-TEQ (weighted by TEF system derived in 1997) and
mean CALUX-TEQ in each pool was 1.6 pg/g fat (95% CI: 0.7, 2.4), indicating a
statistically significant overestimation of CALUX-TEQ compared to WHO-TEQ,
probably due to the presence of Ah-receptor agonists. CALUX estimated toxicity of
13 pg/g fat was greater than the WHO-TEQ by 0.9, 3.1 and 0.3 pg/g fat for mothers
from Hong Kong, mainland China and overseas territories, respectively. When the
2005 TEF system was applied, a reduction of 14-26% in the WHO-TEQ and a larger
but less disperse discrepancy between WHO-TEQ and CALUX-TEQ (3.9 pg/g fat, 95%
CI: 3.5, 4.4) were observed. Our study suggested that the mothers' place of
residence explained the discrepancy between CALUX-TEQ and WHO-TEQ and should be
considered in inter-country comparisons for CALUX-TEQ. For regulatory purposes
bioassays for detecting quantitative dioxin contents in any setting must be
combined with adequate extraction, clean-up and validation with WHO-TEQs. The
larger difference between the two measurements after using the new TEF system
warrants further investigation.

PMID: 17618674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 Aug;23(8):767-71. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

Prognosis of congenital tracheoesophageal fistula with esophageal atresia on the 
basis of gap length.

Upadhyaya VD(1), Gangopadhyaya AN, Gupta DK, Sharma SP, Kumar V, Pandey A,
Upadhyaya AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, IMS, BHU, Varanasi 221005, Uttar Pradesh,
India.

Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with esophageal atresia (EA) is not an
uncommon disease of newborns. Several classifications have been advocated for
predicting the outcomes of these patients but all are physiological and
concentrated on associated medical condition that influences survival. We
emphasize a new classification on the basis of gap between two esophageal pouches
to define the magnitude of surgical problems in the primary repair and correlate 
them with the outcomes in terms of anastomotic leak, esophageal stricture and
mortality, keeping other prognostic factors constant. A total of 50 cases of
congenital TEF with EA were included and all underwent primary esophageal
anastomosis after the ligation of TEF. The gap between the two pouches was
meticulously measured intraoperatively using a vernier caliper before the
ligation of TEF, and patients were divided into four groups on the basis of gap
length. Group A, where gap length was >3.5 cm (ultralong), group B where gap
length was 2.1-3.5 cm (long gap), group C where gap length was >1 cm but not more
than 2 cm (intermediate group) and group D, where the gap between two esophageal 
pouches was 1 cm or less (short gap). The incidence of anastomotic leak was 80,
50, 28, 10.5% and the incidence of esophageal stricture was 100, 75, 22.5, 19%
after successful primary repair, respectively, in groups A, B, C and D. The
mortality was highest in group A (80%) followed by group B (50%) and 22% in group
C and least 15.6% in group D. The incidences of esophageal leak and mortality
were found to be statistically significant. This classification which is based on
easily measurable criteria provides a useful method to predict morbidity,
long-term outcome and mortality of EA with TEF surgery.

PMID: 17579871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A. 2007 Jun;17(3):380-2.

The use of biosynthetic mesh to separate the anastomoses during the thoracoscopic
repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

St Peter SD(1), Calkins CM, Holcomb GW 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri 64108,
USA.

Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula following the repair of esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is a difficult complication to manage,
which makes prevention the dominant concern of surgeons performing the primary
repair. To this end, the surrounding pleural tissues are usually brought over the
tracheal closure to prevent the development of a recurrence during the open
repair. This maneuver is not usually feasible when using the thoracoscopic
approach. Therefore, in this paper, we describe a case in which we interposed a
biosynthetic mesh between the esophageal and tracheal suture lines during the
thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF on a 2.9-kg newborn girl.

PMID: 17570793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Food Chem Toxicol. 2007 Oct;45(10):2069-71. Epub 2007 May 22.

Comparison of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) between smoked marc spirits
and whiskies.

Da Porto C(1), Moret S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze degli Alimenti, Università di Udine, Via Marangoni 97,
33100 Udine, Italy. carla.daporto@uniud.it

The presence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in three brands of smoked
marc spirits, the only actually on the market, was studied and compared with
literature PAHs concentrations reported for whiskies. In two brands of smoked
marc spirit the higher-molecular-weight PAHs concentrations (5 and 6 rings PAHs) 
resulted higher (0.09-0.3 microg L (-1)) than in whiskies (0.00-0.02 microg
L(-1)) and consequently higher resulted the carcinogenic potential expressed
using the toxicity equivalent factor (TEF).

PMID: 17566624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. BMC Plant Biol. 2007 Jun 12;7:30.

QTL mapping of agronomic traits in tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc) Trotter].

Yu JK(1), Graznak E, Breseghello F, Tefera H, Sorrells ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA. ju-kyung.yu@syngenta.com

BACKGROUND: Tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] is the major cereal crop in
Ethiopia. Tef is an allotetraploid with a base chromosome number of 10 (2n = 4x =
40) and a genome size of 730 Mbp. The goal of this study was to identify
agronomically important quantitative trait loci (QTL) using recombinant inbred
lines (RIL) derived from an inter-specific cross between E. tef and E. pilosa
(30-5).
RESULTS: Twenty-two yield-related and morphological traits were assessed across
eight different locations in Ethiopia during the growing seasons of 1999 and
2000. Using composite interval mapping and a linkage map incorporating 192 loci, 
99 QTLs were identified on 15 of the 21 linkage groups for 19 traits. Twelve QTLs
on nine linkage groups were identified for grain yield. Clusters of more than
five QTLs for various traits were identified on seven linkage groups. The largest
cluster (10 QTLs) was identified on linkage group 8; eight of these QTLs were for
yield or yield components, suggesting linkage or pleotrophic effects of loci.
There were 15 two-way interactions of loci to detect potential epistasis
identified and 75% of the interactions were derived from yield and shoot biomass.
Thirty-one percent of the QTLs were observed in multiple environments; two yield 
QTLs were consistent across all agro-ecology zones. For 29.3% of the QTLs, the
alleles from E. pilosa (30-5) had a beneficial effect.
CONCLUSION: The extensive QTL data generated for tef in this study will provide a
basis for initiating molecular breeding to improve agronomic traits in this
staple food crop for the people of Ethiopia.

PMCID: PMC1913516
PMID: 17565675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Jun;42(6):915-26.

Stephen L. Gans Distinguished Overseas Lecture. The neural crest in pediatric
surgery.

Tovar JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 28046
Madrid, Spain. jatovar.hulp@salud.madrid.org

AIM: This review highlights the relevance of the neural crest (NC) as a
developmental control mechanism involved in several pediatric surgical conditions
and the investigative interest of following some of its known signaling pathways.
METHODS: The participation of the NC in facial clefts, ear defects, branchial
fistulae and cysts, heart outflow tract and aortic arch anomalies, pigmentary
disorders, abnormal enteric innervation, neural tumors, hemangiomas, and vascular
anomalies is briefly reviewed. Then, the literature on clinical and experimental 
esophageal atresia-tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) and congenital
diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is reviewed for the presence of associated NC defects.
Finally, some of the molecular signaling pathways involved in both conditions
(sonic hedgehog, Hox genes, and retinoids) are summarized.
RESULTS: The association of facial, cardiovascular, thymic, parathyroid, and
C-cell defects together with anomalies of extrinsic and intrinsic esophageal
innervation in babies and/or animals with both EA-TEF and CDH strongly supports
the hypothesis that NC is involved in the pathogenesis of these malformative
clusters. On the other hand, both EA-TEF and CDH are observed in mice mutant for 
genes involved in the previously mentioned signaling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The investigation of NC-related molecular pathogenic pathways
involved in malformative associations like EA-TEF and CDH that are induced by
chromosomal anomalies, chemical teratogens, and engineered mutations is a
promising way of clarifying why and how some pediatric surgical conditions occur.
Pediatric surgeons should be actively involved in these investigations.

PMID: 17560195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Jun;42(6):E1-3.

Triple fistula: management of a double tracheoesophageal fistula with a third
H-type proximal fistula.

Kane TD(1), Atri P, Potoka DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine and Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15213-2583, USA. timothy.kane@chp.edu

Esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a
relatively common congenital condition in which there have been several described
anatomical variants. The most common type, EA with distal TEF, comprises more
than 75% of cases in many reports. Less commonly, a smaller proximal pouch
fistula (H-type) will be associated with this most common variant in 1.4% of
these cases. Only 2% of all cases of EA/TEF will have 2 large fistulas between
the trachea and esophagus in which the end of the upper esophageal pouch connects
terminally to the midtrachea and the distal esophagus arises from the trachea
near the carina. Here we describe the management of an infant with this type of
EA/TEF who was also found to have an H-type TEF of the proximal trachea. The
combination of this type of EA/TEF with an associated H-type TEF or "triple
fistula" has been previously described in the literature in only 1 other patient.

PMID: 17560187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Environ Sci Technol. 2007 May 15;41(10):3684-8.

On-line monitoring system of P5CDF homologues in waste incineration plants using 
VUV-SPI-IT-TOFMS.

Tsuruga S(1), Suzuki T, Takatsudo Y, Seki K, Yamauchi S, Kuribayashi S, Morii S.

Author information: 
(1)Yokohama Research & Development Center, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Ltd.,
1-8-1 Sachiura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, 236-8515, Japan.
shigenori_tsuruga@mhi.co.jp

It usuallytakes a few weeks to analyze dioxin concentrations and dioxin-TEQ
(toxicity equivalency quantity) in fluegases from municipal solid waste (MSW)
incinerators by a standard method provided by Japanese industrial standard (JIS
0311). To reduce the required time for analysis, we have developed a new on-line 
measuring system for furans homologues. This system is composed of a sensitive
and robust vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) single-photon ionization (SPI) ion trap (IT) 
time-of-flight mass spectrometer (VUV-SPI-IT-TOFMS) and automatic
sampling/concentrating process. In this work, pentachloro-dibenzofuran (P5CDF)
was selected as an index homologue in chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin/ furan
homologues (DXNs) because its concentration and I-TEF (international toxicity
equivalency factor), which are 2,3,4,7,8-P5CDF is 0.5 and 1,2,3,7,8-P5CDF is
0.05, are high and the concentration correlates closely with the total amount of 
dioxin-TEQ. The lowest detectable limit, 1 pg (0.001 ng-TEQ/m3 N) was
demonstrated by laboratory tests. This system underwent a field test at several
actual MSW plants and the tests revealed the following: (a) This system is
applicable for dioxin-TEQ evaluation from actual MSW incinerators. (b) It can
continuously monitor P5CDF in a fluegas for 7 months. (c) The frequency of the
measurements is once every 2-6 h, depending on the concentration of P5-CDF.

PMID: 17547197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. World J Surg. 2007 Jul;31(7):1512-7. Epub 2007 May 30.

Reduced neuronal innervation in the distal end of the proximal esophageal atretic
segment in cases of esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula.

Boleken M(1), Demirbilek S, Kirimiloglu H, Kanmaz T, Yucesan S, Celbis O, Uzun I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Harran University, Sanliurfa 3300, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal dysmotility is a common occurence after surgical repair of
proximal esophageal atresia (EA) and distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The 
etiology of this motility disorder, however, remains controversial. Esophageal
dysmotility also is present in isolated TEF or EA before surgery, suggesting a
congenital cause. However, there is no information available in the literature
with regard to the intramural nervous system of the human esophagus in EA-TEF.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined the distal end of proximal esophageal atretic
segment of neonates undergoing EA-TEF repair for intrinsic neuronal innervation. 
Using specific antibodies, we studied neuronal markers of specimens from nine
cases of EA-TEF and 9 cases of normal esophagus by immunohistochemistry using
neurofilament (NF), synaptophysin (SY), S100, and glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF).
RESULTS: In the atretic segment, specimens staining with hematoxylin and eosin
showed that there were marked hypoganglionosis and immature ganglion cells in the
myenteric plexus. GDNF immunoreactivity in the atretic esophagus were markedly
reduced in both the muscular layer and myenteric plexus. SY and NF-immunorective 
nerve fibers were distributed throughout the myenteric plexus of the normal
esophagus, but the scarcity of these immunoreactive nerve fibers in the atretic
esophagus was apparent. In contrast, the density of immunorective nerve fibers
for S100 in the myenteric plexus and muscular layer was increased in the distal
end of the atretic esophagus.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that the distribution of ganglion cells and some nerve
fibers in the distal end of the atretic esophageal segment is deficient.
Inadequate and abnormal neuronal innervation of the esophagus could be related to
the esophageal dysmotility seen in EA. Because GDNF is a survival factor for
central and peripheral neurons, defective expression of GDNF could have an
important role in the defective and/or abnormal neuronal innervation of atretic
esophageal segment.

PMID: 17534555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Development. 2007 Jul;134(13):2521-31. Epub 2007 May 23.

Multiple dose-dependent roles for Sox2 in the patterning and differentiation of
anterior foregut endoderm.

Que J(1), Okubo T, Goldenring JR, Nam KT, Kurotani R, Morrisey EE, Taranova O,
Pevny LH, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

Sox2 is expressed in developing foregut endoderm, with highest levels in the
future esophagus and anterior stomach. By contrast, Nkx2.1 (Titf1) is expressed
ventrally, in the future trachea. In humans, heterozygosity for SOX2 is
associated with anopthalmia-esophageal-genital syndrome (OMIM 600992), a
condition including esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), 
in which the trachea and esophagus fail to separate. Mouse embryos heterozygous
for the null allele, Sox2(EGFP), appear normal. However, further reductions in
Sox2, using Sox2(LP) and Sox2(COND) hypomorphic alleles, result in multiple
abnormalities. Approximately 60% of Sox2(EGFP/COND) embryos have EA with distal
TEF in which Sox2 is undetectable by immunohistochemistry or western blot. The
mutant esophagus morphologically resembles the trachea, with ectopic expression
of Nkx2.1, a columnar, ciliated epithelium, and very few p63(+) basal cells. By
contrast, the abnormal foregut of Nkx2.1-null embryos expresses elevated Sox2 and
p63, suggesting reciprocal regulation of Sox2 and Nkx2.1 during early
dorsal/ventral foregut patterning. Organ culture experiments further suggest that
FGF signaling from the ventral mesenchyme regulates Sox2 expression in the
endoderm. In the 40% Sox2(EGFP/COND) embryos in which Sox2 levels are
approximately 18% of wild type there is no TEF. However, the esophagus is still
abnormal, with luminal mucus-producing cells, fewer p63(+) cells, and ectopic
expression of genes normally expressed in glandular stomach and intestine. In all
hypomorphic embryos the forestomach has an abnormal phenotype, with reduced
keratinization, ectopic mucus cells and columnar epithelium. These findings
suggest that Sox2 plays a second role in establishing the boundary between the
keratinized, squamous esophagus/forestomach and glandular hindstomach.

PMCID: PMC3625644
PMID: 17522155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Paediatr Anaesth. 2007 Jun;17(6):557-62.

Tracheoscopy assisted repair of tracheo-esophageal fistula (TARTEF): a 10-year
experience.

Deanovic D(1), Gerber AC, Dodge-Khatami A, Dillier CM, Meuli M, Weiss M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesia, University Children's Hospital, Zurich,
Switzerland. dubravka.deanovic@kispi.unizh.ch

BACKGROUND: Fiberoptic tracheoscopy assisted repair of tracheoesophageal fistula 
(TARTEF) has been reported to be useful for the surgeon with regards to
identification of the fistula and proper fistula ligation. The aim of this
article is to report our 10-year experience using TARTEF with intermittent
positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) during tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
repair in newborns.
METHODS: With ethical committee approval, we included all patients undergoing
TARTEF from 1995-2005. Variables of interest were (1) respiratory deterioration
caused by gastric inflation because of IPPV during surgery and endoscopy; (2)
detection of additional airway anomalies; (3) success of intubation of the
fistula; (4) other side effects or adverse events. Data are given in median and
range.
RESULTS: Forty-seven neonates with TARTEF were included. Mean gestational age was
37 weeks (31-42) and mean weight was 2.5 kg (1.1-3.8). The patients were
intubated with tracheal tubes size 2.5-3.5 mm ID. Appropriately sized fiberoptic 
bronchoscopes with an outer diameter of 2.0, 2.4 and 2.8 mm were used; passed
through the lumen of the tracheal tube (TT) thereby requiring the use of IPPV to 
ensure adequate ventilation. No respiratory deterioration was noted as a
consequence of intraoperative fiberoptic manipulation within the trachea or
because of gastric hyperinflation with IPPV. In all patients, the TEF was
successfully penetrated with the fiberscope and this clearly helped the surgeon
to rapidly identify and dissect the fistula. In two patients a tracheal bronchus 
was identified. In two patients accidental extubation occurred during endoscopic 
confirmation of successful fistula repair.
CONCLUSIONS: While fiberoptic TARTEF through the tracheal tube with IPPV did
expedite and facilitate surgery, it did not cause clinically relevant impairment 
of ventilation. Careful manipulation during fiberoptic assessment is required to 
avoid tube displacement.

PMID: 17498018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mycologia. 2006 Nov-Dec;98(6):1076-87.

An overview of the systematics of the Sordariomycetes based on a four-gene
phylogeny.

Zhang N(1), Castlebury LA, Miller AN, Huhndorf SM, Schoch CL, Seifert KA, Rossman
AY, Rogers JD, Kohlmeyer J, Volkmann-Kohlmeyer B, Sung GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, NYSAES, Cornell University, Geneva, New York
14456, USA.

The Sordariomycetes is one of the largest classes in the Ascomycota, and the
majority of its species are characterized by perithecial ascomata and
inoperculate unitunicate asci. It includes more than 600 genera with over 3000
species and represents a wide range of ecologies including pathogens and
endophytes of plants, animal pathogens and mycoparasites. To test and refine the 
classification of the Sordariomycetes sensu Eriksson (2006), the phylogenetic
relationship among 106 taxa from 12 orders out of 16 in the Sordariomycetes was
investigated based on four nuclear loci (nSSU and nLSU rDNA, TEF and RPB2), using
three species of the Leotiomycetes as outgroups. Three subclasses (i.e.
Hypocreomycetidae, Sordariomycetidae and Xylariomycetidae) currently recognized
in the classification are well supported with the placement of the Lulworthiales 
in either a basal group of the Sordariomycetes or a sister group of the
Hypocreomycetidae. Except for the Microascales, our results recognize most of the
orders as monophyletic groups. Melanospora species form a clade outside of the
Hypocreales and are recognized as a distinct order in the Hypocreomycetidae.
Glomerellaceae is excluded from the Phyllachorales and placed in
Hypocreomycetidae incertae sedis. In the Sordariomycetidae, the Sordariales is a 
strongly supported clade and occurs within a well supported clade containing the 
Boliniales and Chaetosphaeriales. Aspects of morphology, ecology and evolution
are discussed.

PMID: 17486982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007 Jul;48(2):148-70. Epub 2007 Mar 31.

Development of a neurotoxic equivalence scheme of relative potency for assessing 
the risk of PCB mixtures.

Simon T(1), Britt JK, James RC.

Author information: 
(1)Ted Simon, LLC, 4184 Johnston Road, Winston, GA 30187, USA. simonfam@dscga.com

PCBs produce adverse effects in humans and animals by several modes of action.
The first mode of action is binding of coplanar or mono-ortho-PCBs to the aryl
hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor leading to effects associated with the activation of
this receptor. The remaining PCB congeners do not activate this receptor and have
different modes of action underlying their toxic effects. One mode of action that
has been shown for di-ortho-substituted non-coplanar PCBs (PCB congeners with two
or more chlorines in the ortho-positions) is the interference with intracellular 
signaling pathways dependent on Ca(2+) homeostasis and the resulting cellular,
organ-level and organismal effects. The ortho-substituted non-coplanar congeners 
produce other cellular or organ-level effects including changes in protein kinase
C translocation, changes in cellular dopamine (DA) uptake, formation of reactive 
oxygen species, and thyroid effects. Here, we propose a scheme for developing
relative potency estimates (REP) for the PCB congeners not considered in the TEF 
scheme used to assess the toxicity of coplanar and mono-ortho-PCBs and
chlorinated dioxins and furans. Because a number of the modes of action listed
here for the ortho-substituted non-coplanar PCB congeners have been implicated in
the neurotoxic effects of these PCBs congeners, this relative potency scheme is
referred to here as the Neurotoxic Equivalent (NEQ) scheme for estimating
toxicity of PCB mixtures. The Neurotoxic Equivalent (NEQ) values are developed in
a way similar in concept to the derivation of the well-known TEF congener values.
Although this scheme is in its infancy and the set of NEQ values are limited by
the current data, there are several compelling reasons for proposing such a
scheme now. First, it should open discussions as to how different modes of action
can be utilized to predict congener potency differences for the effects they
produce. Second, consideration and evaluation of the ability of the proposed NEQ 
scheme to predict the toxicity of PCB mixtures will assist in the identification 
of the specific modes of action relevant to the effects produced by non-coplanar 
PCBs. If other modes of action are suggested and subsequently identified, then
other schemes of relative potency could be developed specifically for those modes
of action, distinct from either the TEF scheme or the NEQ scheme. Knowing these
other modes of action and the relative toxicity of the various congeners would
advance our understanding of PCB toxicology and thereby ultimately improve our
ability to estimate the toxic potency of PCB mixtures for each identified mode of
action. Third, a quantitative scheme for assessing the toxicity of the
non-coplanar PCB congeners present in a mixture has the potential to improve
significantly future risk assessments of PCB mixtures.

PMID: 17475378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Environ Sci Health A Tox Hazard Subst Environ Eng. 2007 May;42(6):697-706.

Comparing deterministic and probabilistic risk assessments for sites contaminated
by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs).

Bruce ED(1), Abusalih AA, McDonald TJ, Autenrieth RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Civil Engineering, Division of Environmental and Water Resources
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-3136, USA.
erica-bruce@tamu.edu

Deterministic risk assessments provide a single point estimate of risk at a site 
of concern, while probabilistic risk assessment methods generate a range of
values from probability distribution functions (PDFs). This study compares
deterministic and probabilistic risk assessment methods for two different sites
using uncertainty analysis and evaluates the use of toxic equivalency factors
(TEFs) for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in each method. The use of
TEFs allowed more of the PAHs to be included which resulted in higher risk
estimates for both adults and children at both study sites. Exposure factor
variability generated greater uncertainty in risk estimates than sample
heterogeneity or toxicity estimates. TEFs allowed for a more complete
representation of the toxicity contributions from PAH species present at the
study sites. Exposure factor distributions together with TEF estimations for
toxicity of PAH species provide an assessment that can reduce and account for
uncertainty. Probabilistic risk estimates provide a sensible improvement to
deterministic risk estimates by generating a range of risk values, along with an 
average estimate and the degree of conservatism of those estimates.

PMID: 17473995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Neurosurg. 2007 Mar;106(3 Suppl):201-4.

Tethered spinal cord and VACTERL association.

Kuo MF(1), Tsai Y, Hsu WM, Chen RS, Tu YK, Wang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei.

OBJECT: Vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiovascular anomalies,
tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs), renal anomalies, and limb defects (most often 
of the radius) are commonly associated and known collectively by the acronym
VACTERL. The authors studied these nonrandomly associated birth defects to
determine if a further relationship exists between VACTERL association and the
presence of a tethered spinal cord (TSC).
METHODS: From 2001 to 2004, 12 patients with VACTERL association who were treated
operatively by a single pediatric surgeon underwent magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging to evaluate the intraspinal abnormalities that may cause tethering. Three
patients were excluded from the study due to complications after surgery for TEF.
Coincidentally, these three patients did not have imperforate ani. In the
remaining nine patients, seven had associated urogenital anomalies, and six of
these also had high-type imperforate ani. Five of the six patients and the one
patient with low-type imperforate anus and a urogenital anomaly were found to
have TSCs. In the remaining two patients without urogenital anomalies there was a
high-type imperforate anus without a TSC in one patient and a low-type
imperforate anus with a TSC in the other. All seven patients with TSCs underwent 
successful untethering. The lesions contributing to TSC included terminal filum
lipomas (TFLs) in five patients, an intramedullary ependymal cyst in one patient,
and a lipo-meningomyelocele in another patient.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors found that in patients with VACTERL association there
was a high incidence of TSC (seven of nine patients) if an imperforate anus was
present as one of the anomalies. In patients with VACTERL association and
urogenital anomalies, the incidence of TSC was even higher (86%). Five of the
seven cases of TSC in the present study were caused by a TFL, a lesion that can
be easily and safely managed surgically. The authors conclude that MR imaging is 
essential for ruling out the possibility of a TSC in patients with VACTERL
association combined with urogenital anomalies or an imperforate anus.

PMID: 17465385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2007 Aug;103(2):616-22. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

Thermic effect of food and beta-adrenergic thermogenic responsiveness in
habitually exercising and sedentary healthy adult humans.

Stob NR(1), Bell C, van Baak MA, Seals DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO,
USA.

The thermic effect of food (TEF) is an important physiological determinant of
total daily energy expenditure (EE) and energy balance. TEF is believed to be
mediated in part by sympathetic nervous system activation and consequent
beta-adrenergic receptor (beta-AR) stimulation of metabolism. TEF is greater in
habitually exercising than in sedentary adults, despite similar postprandial
sympathetic nervous system activation. We determined whether augmented TEF in
habitually exercising adults is associated with enhanced peripheral thermogenic
responsiveness to beta-AR stimulation. In separate experiments in 22 sedentary
and 29 habitually exercising adults, we measured the increase in EE (indirect
calorimetry, ventilated hood) during beta-AR stimulation (intravenous
isoproterenol: 6, 12, and 24 ng x kg fat-free mass(-1) x min(-1)) and EE before
and after a liquid meal (40% of resting EE; 53% carbohydrate, 32% fat, 15%
protein). The increase in EE during incremental isoproterenol administration was 
greater (P = 0.01) in habitual exercisers (0.34 +/- 0.03, 0.54 +/- 0.04, 0.81 +/-
0.05 kJ/min; means +/- SE) than in sedentary adults (0.26 +/- 0.03, 0.40 +/-
0.03, 0.64 +/- 0.04 kJ/min). The area under the TEF response curve was also
greater (P = 0.04) in habitual exercisers (160 +/- 9 kJ) than in sedentary adults
(130 +/- 11 kJ) and was positively related to beta-AR thermogenic responsiveness 
(r = 0.32, P = 0.02). We conclude that TEF is related to beta-AR thermogenic
responsiveness and that the greater TEF in habitual exercisers is attributable in
part to their augmented beta-AR thermogenic responsiveness. Our results also
suggest that peripheral thermogenic responsiveness to beta-AR stimulation is a
physiological determinant of TEF and hence energy balance in healthy adult
humans.

PMID: 17463294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2007 Feb;17(1):1-13.

Thermic and glycemic responses to bread and pasta meals with and without prior
low-intensity exercise.

Warwick PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological, Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, University of New
England, Armidale, NSW, Australia.

The purpose of the study was to investigate thermic and glycemic responses to
conventional meals with and without prior low-intensity exercise. Fourteen
healthy volunteers (7 men, 7 women) undertook 4 treatments, 2 bread and 2 pasta
meals, either with (E) or without (NE) prior exercise (a 45-min treadmill walk). 
Meals provided 58 g carbohydrate and 2360 kJ. Energy expenditure and
blood-glucose concentrations were measured before and for 3 h after the meals.
The thermic effect of food (TEF) was lower after pasta (121 +/- 32 kJ/3 h) than
after bread (154 +/- 62 kJ/3 h), P=0.009, but was not affected by exercise.
Glycemic responses were lower after E (155 +/- 113 mmol x L(-1) x 3 h(-1)) than
NE (199 +/- 97 mmol x L(-1) x 3 h(-1)) after pasta (P=0.020) but not after bread.
TEF was lower after pasta than bread but was not affected by prior low-intensity 
exercise. The effects of exercise on glycemic responses to meals were
inconsistent.

PMID: 17460329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Food Chem Toxicol. 2007 Sep;45(9):1752-6. Epub 2007 Mar 19.

DNA solution(R) in cigarette filters reduces polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
(PAH) levels in mainstream tobacco smoke.

Lodovici M(1), Akpan V, Caldini S, Akanju B, Dolara P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Florence, Viale Pieraccini 6, 50139 
Florence, Italy. maura.lodovici@unifi.it

Comment in
    Food Chem Toxicol. 2008 Dec;46(12):3851-2.
    Food Chem Toxicol. 2010 Oct;48(10):3028-9; author reply 3030.

Tobacco consumption represents a major health hazard to humans and, despite
anti-smoking campaigns, the number of smokers remains high; thus the reduction of
toxic compounds from tobacco smoke may reduce the health hazards of smoking. In
the last 25 years cigarette manufacturers have introduced a variety of filter
designs to reduce toxic and carcinogenic substances in tobacco smoke (normal
filters, NF). However, large quantities of harmful constituents are inefficiently
retained by commonly used cigarette filters. Following a patented method we
modified commercial cigarette filters (modified filter, MF) by injecting a DNA
solution into the filter tips; we then evaluated the reduced polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbon (PAH) levels in mainstream tobacco smoke of MF relative to NF. The
PAH measured were: fluoranthene (FLUO), pyrene (PY), benzo(a)anthracene (B(a)A), 
chrysene (CRY), benzo(a)pyrene (B(a)P), benzo(b)fluoranthene (B(b)F),
benzo(k)fluoranthene (B(k)F), benzo(g,h,i)perylene (BGP), dibenzo(a,h)anthracene 
(DBA). The levels of PAH in cigarette smoke after MF were significantly reduced
(P<0.001) compared to NF, using a variety of cigarette brands in a smoking
machine (44.5%+/-8.4 % and 41.8%+/-5% for total and carcinogenic PAH,
respectively, means+/-SE). Using B(a)P(TEF) values the reduction in PAH
concentrations were similar for all cigarette brands with the exception of Camel,
where the reduction was lower considering B(a)P(TEF) values. Amongst carcinogenic
PAH, B(a)A, B(b)F and B(k)F) were reduced by 50-58%, CRY, B(a)P and DBA by about 
40%. In conclusion MF filters treated with DNA have the potential of decreasing
the exposure to PAH in cigarette smoke. Since, unlike some previously proposed
biological filters MF do not retain additional nicotine, the main addictive
compound of tobacco smoke, these filters may not induce increased smoking to
compensate for the reduction in the nicotine delivery to smokers.

PMID: 17459554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Toxicology. 2007 Jun 3;235(1-2):39-51. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Differences in acute toxicity syndromes of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
and 1,2,3,4,7,8-hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in rats.

Niittynen M(1), Simanainen U, Syrjälä P, Pohjanvirta R, Viluksela M, Tuomisto J, 
Tuomisto JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, National Public Health Institute, PO Box
95, FI-70701 Kuopio, Finland. marjo.niittynen@ktl.fi

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is the most potent congener of
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins. The potency of
1,2,3,4,7,8-hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HxCDD) is only 10% of that of TCDD for
typical aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR)-mediated effects. Acute lethality,
macroscopic effects, and liver toxicity of TCDD and HxCDD were compared in male
rats of the strain Han/Wistar (Kuopio; H/W), and of the lines A and B. The latter
two rat lines originate from crossbreeding of H/W and Long-Evans (Turku/AB) rats.
H/W and line A rats are highly resistant to acute toxicity of TCDD due to an
altered AHR, while line B rats are moderately resistant due to H/W-type alleles
of another, yet unidentified gene contributing to TCDD resistance ("gene B"). The
rats received 200-10,000 microg/kg of either TCDD or HxCDD intragastrically and
were monitored for 46 days. In all rats, the highest dose of HxCDD (10,000
microg/kg) reduced body weight more effectively than an identical dose of TCDD.
Only HxCDD (10,000 microg/kg) caused gastrointestinal hemorrhage, pale (fatty)
livers and death by day 15 in H/W and line A rats. In line B rats, HxCDD caused
pronounced hepatic fatty degeneration, whereas TCDD induced hepatic accumulation 
of biliverdin and its derivatives. Both congeners induced sinusoidal distension
in liver. In H/W and line A rats, the estimated LD(50) values were >10,000
microg/kg and 2000-10,000 microg/kg for TCDD and HxCDD, respectively; for line B 
rats they were 480 microg/kg and 1000-2000 microg/kg, respectively. Thus, HxCDD
was more potent than TCDD in inducing acute mortality in H/W and line A rats,
contrary to what is predicted by toxic equivalency factor (TEF) values. In line
B, the expected rank order of potencies prevailed. These findings suggest that in
addition to the canonical AHR-mediated toxic pathways, HxCDD possesses an
AHR-independent mechanism of toxicity, whose main manifestations are rapid body
weight loss, mortality, fatty liver and gastrointestinal hemorrhage.

PMID: 17448584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 Jun;23(6):533-7. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Congenital esophageal stenosis associated with esophageal atresia: new concepts.

Ibrahim AH(1), Al Malki TA, Hamza AF, Bahnassy AF.

Author information: 
(1)Armed Forces Hospital, Southern Region, King Faisal Military City, P. O. Box: 
5062, Khamis Mushait, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. ash_ib@hotmail.com

Congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) is suspected by a fixed intrinsic narrowing 
of the esophagus that affects the normal swallowing mechanism. The diagnosis is
only confirmed by histopathologic picture, which may show fibromuscular disease
(FMD) or tracheobronchial remnants (TBR). The latter involves ciliated pseudo
stratified columnar epithelium, seromucous glands or cartilage each alone or in
combination. The aim of this study is to document the usefulness of histologic
picture of surgical specimens obtained from the lower esophageal pouch (LEP)
during primary repair in detecting cases of CES associated with esophageal
atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Over an 8-year
period, 57 consecutive cases operated upon for EA with or without TEF were
subjected for histologic examination of surgical specimens obtained from the tip 
of the LEP. Cases that histologically showed FMD or TBR were included. The
usefulness of this histologic picture as a diagnostic and therapeutic aid is
assessed. Methods of treatment and outcome were also reviewed. Eight patients out
of 57 (14%) had a histologic picture suggestive of CES, two with FMD, four with
TBR without cartilage and two with cartilage. Out of 57 patients, 23 developed
strictures, six of them had positive biopsies suggestive of CES. One patient with
TBR without cartilage did not have stricture. Another case of pure atresia had
LEP resection and gastric pull up showed cartilage involving the whole lower
esophagus. Excluding the case of pure EA with gastric pull up, all patients
suffered from feeding problems and recurrent aspiration. Fluoroscopic barium
studies showed late onset minor dysmotility in five patients and late onset major
dysmotility in two. All cases studied showed significant gastro-esophageal reflux
(GER). Stricture was seen at the anastomotic site extending distally in the two
fibromuscular cases and one case with cartilage, at the anastomotic site in three
cases with TBR without cartilage. Anti reflux surgical procedures were performed 
in four patients without benefit in two patients with major dysmotility.
Dilatation was successful in the three patients with TBR without cartilage. One
patient with cartilage had resection of the anastomotic site and required
frequent dilatations and is now doing well. A case of FMD did not improve after
frequent dilatations and myotomy together with Nissen's fundoplication and
required resection while the other case of FMD responded partially to
dilatations. Cartilage in cases of CES requires surgical resection. Those with
TBR without cartilage may not develop stricture. If stricture develops, it
responds well to dilatation and patients have good clinical outcomes. Unlike
isolated CES, GER is a significant feature in CES with EA. Anti reflux procedures
should be avoided before definitive surgery for the stricture and if necessary a 
partial wrap with gastrostomy is recommended. CES should be considered in the
etiology of anastomotic stricture. Taking a surgical specimen routinely from the 
tip of the LEP during primary esophageal repair for histologic studies is highly 
recommended.

PMID: 17437115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2007 May;71(5):691-7. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Endoscopic management of recurrent congenital tracheoesophageal fistula: a review
of techniques and results.

Meier JD(1), Sulman CG, Almond PS, Holinger LD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a difficult problem in
both diagnosis and management. Revision open repair with thoracotomy is
challenging and has a significant associated morbidity. Because of the technical 
difficulty and the substantial morbidity, several authors have suggested and
implemented endoscopic management. This paper reviews and describes the
endoscopic techniques and management of recurrent TEF.
METHODS: This retrospective study evaluates three patients who underwent
endoscopic (bronchoscopic) management of recurrent TEF at Children's Memorial
Hospital in Chicago, Illinois. Median follow-up is 48 months. A current
literature review is presented with a synthesis of the data on techniques and
results.
RESULTS: Two of the three patients had successful bronchoscopic closure using
fibrin adhesive. The mean number of procedures required was two. Including these 
patients, 62 patients with endoscopic closure of congenital TEF have been
reported in the literature. The overall success rate is 60% with a mean of 2.1
procedures per patient. Of the obliterating agents described, tissue adhesive and
fibrin adhesive have been employed most frequently with success rates of 48 and
55%, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Endoscopic repair of recurrent TEF is an effective and safe
alternative to second thoracotomy and open surgical repair. More than one
endoscopic procedure is usually necessary for successful closure.

PMID: 17408757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Monaldi Arch Chest Dis. 2006 Dec;65(4):225-7.

Tracheoesophageal fistula managed with tracheal stent through flexible
bronchoscopy without fluoroscopy.

Stratakos G(1), Zisis C, Bellenis I, Filaditaki V, Liapikou A, Zakynthinos S,
Roussos C.

Author information: 
(1)Critical Care and Pulmonary Medicine Division, University of Athens, Greece.
grstrat@hotmail.com

Inoperable malignant tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is characterised by an
extremely poor prognosis. Tracheal or double (tracheal-esophageal) stenting
through rigid bronchoscopy has been suggested as a valuable therapeutic option.
We report on a patient with a large TEF successfully sealed by deployment of a
self-expandable stent through flexible bronchoscopy (FB) without fluoroscopy.
Dramatically improved health status permitted him to undergo radiation, attaining
further clinical improvement. Four months after stent placement no sequelae were 
observed. During the fifth month a new fistula developed distally to the stent
finally leading to death from septic complication. Palliative management of
inoperable malignant TEF by tracheal stent placement through FB without
fluoroscopy, is feasible, safe and rewarding leading to important clinical
improvement.

PMID: 17393669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2007 Jun;271(1):27-32. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Species-specific primers for Fusarium redolens and a PCR-RFLP technique to
distinguish among three clades of Fusarium oxysporum.

Bogale M(1), Wingfield BD, Wingfield MJ, Steenkamp ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Forestry and Agricultural Biotechnology Institute,
University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa. mesfin.bogale@fabi.up.ac.za

The currently available morphological and molecular diagnostic techniques for
Fusarium redolens and the three phylogenetic clades of Fusarium oxysporum are
problematic. Aligned translation elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF-1 alpha) gene
sequences from these species and their close relatives were used to design F.
redolens-specific primers, and to identify restriction sites that discriminate
among the three clades of F. oxysporum. The F. redolens-specific primers
distinguished this species from all others included in the study. There were
three TEF-1 alpha-RFLP patterns among formae speciales of F. oxysporum. These
PCR-RFLP patterns corresponded with the three clades. These techniques provide
simple and inexpensive diagnostic methods for the identification of F. redolens
and members of the three clades of F. oxysporum.

PMID: 17391363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Appl Microbiol. 2007 Apr;102(4):1060-70.

DNA microarray to detect and identify trichothecene- and moniliformin-producing
Fusarium species.

Kristensen R(1), Gauthier G, Berdal KG, Hamels S, Remacle J, Holst-Jensen A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Feed and Food Microbiology, National Veterinary Institute, Oslo,
Norway.

AIMS: To develop a DNA microarray for easy and fast detection of trichothecene-
and moniliformin-producing Fusarium species.
METHOD AND RESULTS: A DNA microarray was developed for detection and
identification of 14 trichothecene- and moniliformin-producing species of the
fungal genus Fusarium. The array could also differentiate between four species
groups. Capture probes were designed based on recent phylogenetic analyses of
translation elongation factor-1 alpha (TEF-1alpha) sequences. Particular emphasis
was put on designing capture probes corresponding to groups or species with
particular mycotoxigenic synthetic abilities. A consensus PCR amplification of a 
part of the TEF-1alpha is followed by hybridization to the Fusarium chip and the 
results are visualized by a colorimetric Silverquant detection method. We
validated the Fusarium chip against five naturally infected cereal samples for
which we also have morphological and chemical data. The limit of detection was
estimated to be less than 16 copies of genomic DNA in spiked commercial wheat
flour.
CONCLUSIONS: The current Fusarium chip proved to be a highly sensitive and fast
microarray for detection and identification of Fusarium species. We postulate
that the method also has potential for (semi-)quantification.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The Fusarium chip may prove to be a very
valuable tool for screening of cereal samples in the food and feed production
chain, and may facilitate detection of new or introduced Fusarium spp.

PMID: 17381750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Cell Signal. 2007 Jun;19(6):1101-12. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Regulation of SRC family coactivators by post-translational modifications.

Li S(1), Shang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Peking University Health
Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan Road, Beijing 100083, PR China.

Initially identified as a group of auxiliary protein factors involved in
transcriptional regulation by steroid hormone receptors as well as by other
members of the nuclear receptor superfamily, the steroid receptor coactivators
(SRCs) have since then been implicated in the transcriptional regulation of other
transcription factors which are important components of very different signaling 
pathways. Members of the SRC family have been shown to interact with myogenin,
MEF-2, transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF), NF-kappaB, AP-1, STAT, p53, and
E2F1, suggesting that SRC coactivators participate in diverse cellular processes.
Recent evidence indicates that various post-translational modifications play
critical roles in determining the final transcriptional output and specificity of
SRC coactivators. In this review, we summarized the current knowledge concerning 
post-translational modifications, dynamic interplay between different
modifications, and patho-physiological relevance of the modifications of SRC
proteins.

PMID: 17368849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2007 May;210(3-4):335-9. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

The 2005 World Health Organization re-evaluation of TEFs for dioxins and
dioxin-like compounds--what are the consequences for German human background
levels?

Wittsiepe J(1), Fürst P, Wilhelm M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hygiene, Social and Environmental Medicine, Ruhr-Universtity
Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, 44801 Bochum, Germany. wittsiepe@hygiene.rub.de

In 2005 the World Health Organization (WHO) re-evaluated toxicity equivalency
factors (TEFs) for dioxins and dioxin-like compounds. WHO 2005 toxicity
equivalent (TEq) levels were calculated based on our data on German background
levels of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), dibenzofurans (PCDF) and
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) in human blood and milk of the Duisburg birth
cohort study. Levels of WHO 2005 TEq (PCDD/F+PCB) were in the range of 3.77-63.6 
pg/g(lipid base) (n=226, median: 19.38, arithmetic mean: 20.86) for blood, or
2.62-59.2 pg/g(lipid base) (n=176, median: 19.78, arithmetic mean: 20.57) for
milk, respectively. Compared to WHO 1998 TEq values WHO 2005 TEq levels were
about 25% lower in both matrices. The shares of PCB (31% blood, 43% milk),
especially of mono-ortho-substituted PCB (4% blood and milk), on total WHO 2005
TEq has become lower. If similar congener patterns can be assumed for certain
matrices, appropriate multiplication factors can be used to convert TEq values of
other TEF models sufficiently to WHO 2005 TEq values.

PMID: 17363326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 Nov;(531):1-218.

Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of a binary mixture of
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) (Cas No. 57465-28-8) and
2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 118) (Cas No. 31508-00-6) in female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats (gavage studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized they
accumulate in body tissue, mainly adipose, resulting in chronic lifetime human
exposure. Since human exposure to DLCs always occurs as a complex mixture, the
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical
tool to assess the health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The 
TEF methodology is a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity 
of a compound relative to TCDD, which is the most potent congener. This allows
for the estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of
chemicals, based on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of 
DLCs to the AhR. The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation
because of the widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the
adequacy of the TEF methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. 
To address this, the National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year
bioassays in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity
and carcinogenicity of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and mixtures of these compounds. Mixtures of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) including 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) and
2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 118) were produced commercially before 1977 
for the electric industry as dielectric insulating fluids for transformers and
capacitors. Manufacture and use of these chemicals were stopped because of
increased PCB residues in the environment, but they continue to be released into 
the environment through the use and disposal of products containing PCBs, as
by-products during the manufacture of certain organic chemicals, during
combustion of some waste materials, and during atmospheric recycling. This PCB
mixture study was conducted as part of the dioxin TEF evaluation that includes
conducting multiple 2-year rat bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic
toxicity and carcinogenicity of DLCs, structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of 
these compounds. This study was originally a study of PCB 118 alone. However,
midway through the study PCB 126 was identified as one of the minor contaminants 
(0.622%) of the bulk PCB 118 (98.5% pure). Given the 1,000-fold higher potency of
PCB 126 for inducing dioxin-like effects (based on the TEFs for PCB 126 and PCB
118 of 0.1 and 0.0001, respectively), it was expected that the effects of
administration of this compound would be due to the combined dioxin-like effects 
of both PCB 126 and PCB 118. Therefore, this study was reclassified as a mixture 
study of PCB 126 and PCB 118. 2-YEAR STUDY: Groups of female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats were administered the PCB mixture containing PCB 126 and PCB 
118 by gavage in corn oil:acetone (99:1) or vehicle alone, 5 days per week for up
to 104 weeks. Dose groups are referred to by the total levels of TCDD toxic
equivalents (TEQ) provided by the PCBs in the mixture in each dose group. Groups 
of 81 female rats were administered 7, 22, 72, or 216 ng TEQ/kg; a group of 86
female rats was administered 360 ng TEQ/kg; and a group of 81 female rats was
administered the corn oil:acetone vehicle alone. Up to 10 rats per group were
evaluated at 14, 31, or 53 weeks. No animals in the 360 ng TEQ/kg group were
examined at 53 weeks. A group of 50 female rats was administered 360 ng TEQ/kg
for 30 weeks and then the vehicle alone for the remainder of the study. Nominal
doses of PCB 118 and levels of PCB 126 in each dose group used were: 7 ng TEQ/kg 
dose group: 62 ng/kg PCB 126 and 10 microg/kg PCB 118 7 ng TEQ/kg dose group: 62 
ng/kg PCB 126 and 10 microg/kg PCB 118 22 ng TEQ/kg dose group: 187 ng/kg PCB 126
and 30 microg/kg PCB 118 72 ng TEQ/kg dose group: 622 ng/kg PCB 126 and 100
microg/kg PCB 118 216 ng TEQ/kg dose group: 1,866 ng/kg PCB 126 and 300 microg/kg
PCB 118 360 ng TEQ/kg dose group: 3,110 ng/kg PCB 126 and 500 microg/kg PCB 118
No animals in the 216 or 360 ng TEQ/kg core study groups survived to the end of
the study, and survival in the 360 ng TEQ/kg stop-exposure group was
significantly less than in the vehicle control group. Mean body weights of 72 ng 
TEQ/kg rats were less than those of the vehicle controls after week 33 of the
study, and mean body weights of the 216 and 360 ng TEQ/kg core study rats and the
360 ng TEQ/kg stop-exposure group rats were less than those of the vehicle
controls throughout most of the study. Clinical findings related to the
administration of the binary mixture of PCB 126 and PCB 118 included abnormal
breathing, thinness, and ruffled hair. Thyroid Hormone Concentrations:
Alterations in serum thyroid hormone levels were evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and
53-week interim evaluations. Total thyroxine (T4) and free T4 were significantly 
lower in most dose groups than in vehicle controls at the 14- and 31-week interim
evaluations. Serum T3 was significantly lower in the 360 ng TEQ/kg group compared
to vehicle controls at 31 weeks only. TSH levels were higher in the 216 and 360
ng TEQ/kg groups than in vehicle controls at 31 weeks only. Hepatic Cell
Proliferation Data To evaluate hepatocyte replication, analysis of labeling of
replicating hepatocytes with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine was conducted at the 14-,
31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. Labeling indices were elevated at doses
above 216 ng TEQ/kg at 31 weeks and at doses above 72 ng TEQ/kg at 53 weeks.
Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Activities: CYP1A1-associated
7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) and CYP1A2-associated
acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H) activities were evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and
53-week interim evaluations to evaluate the expression of known dioxin-responsive
genes. In addition, CYP2B-associated pentoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (PROD)
activity was also analyzed. Hepatic and pulmonary EROD (CYP1A1) activity, hepatic
A4H (CYP1A2) activity, and hepatic PROD (CYP2B1) activity were significantly
greater in all dosed groups compared to the vehicle controls at weeks 14, 31, and
53. Determinations of PCB 126 and PCB 118 Concentrations in Tissues: The tissue
disposition of PCB 126 and PCB 118 was analyzed in the liver, lung, fat, and
blood of up to 10 rats in each group at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim
evaluations, except for the 360 ng TEQ/kg group at 53 weeks. The tissue
disposition of PCB 126 and PCB 118 was also analyzed in 10 rats per group at the 
end of the 2-year study in the vehicle control, 7, 22, and 72 ng TEQ/kg core
study groups and the 360 ng TEQ/kg stop-exposure group. Detectable concentrations
of PCB 126 and PCB 118 were observed in the liver, fat, lung, and blood. The
highest levels of PCB 126 were seen in the liver whereas the highest levels of
PCB 118 were seen in the fat. In general, tissue concentrations increased with
increasing doses of the mixture and increasing duration of exposure. Hepatic
levels of PCB 126 and PCB 118 in the 72 ng TEQ/kg group at the end of the 2-year 
study were 284 ng/g and 3,769 ng/g, respectively. On a TCDD equivalents basis
this corresponds to 28 ng TEQ/g and 0.4 ng TEQ/g for PCB 126 and PCB 118,
respectively. Cessation of administration of the mixture in the stop-exposure
group led to declines in the tissue concentrations of both PCB 126 and PCB 118 to
levels comparable to those observed in the 7 ng TEQ/kg group at the end of the
2-year study. Pathology and Statistical Analyses: At 14, 31, and 53 weeks, liver 
weights were significantly increased in treated groups with more pronounced
effects occurring in the higher dose groups. At 14 weeks, hepatocyte hypertrophy 
and pigmentation were seen at doses less than 72 ng TEQ/kg. Exposure to the PCB
mixture led to significant toxicity in the liver. At higher doses, the incidences
of toxic hepatopathy were increased as indicated by increased incidences of
multinucleated hepatocytes and diffuse fatty change. At 31 weeks, most rats in
the 216 and 360 ng TEQ/kg groups had multiple hepatic nonneoplastic lesions. At
53 weeks all animals administered 216 ng TEQ/kg had multiple nonneoplastic
lesions. The spectrum of effects and the severity of effects at the interim and
2-year time points increased with dose and duration of exposure. At the end of
the 2-year study in all dosed groups, there were significantly increased
incidences and severity of toxic hepatopathy characterized by hepatocyte
hypertrophy, multinucleated hepatocytes, pigmentation, toxic hepatopathy, diffuse
fatty change, nodular hyperplasia, centrilobular fibrosis, cholangiofibrosis,
oval cell hyperplasia, bile duct cyst, bile duct hyperplasia, and portal
fibrosis. There were also increased incidences of hepatocyte glandular
structures, necrosis, centrilobular degeneration, eosinophilic focus, and
metaplasia. The incidences of cholangiocarcinoma (multiple and/or single) were
significantly increased in groups administered 22 ng TEQ/kg or greater at 2
years. The incidences of hepatocellular adenoma were also significantly increased
in the 216 and 360 ng TEQ/kg core study groups. In addition, single occurrences
of hepatocholangioma, cholangioma, or hepatocellular carcinoma were observed in
some dosed groups administered 72 ng TEQ/kg or greater. In the lung at 53 weeks, 
the incidences of cystic keratinizing epithelioma and bronchiolar metaplasia were
significantly increased in the 216 ng TEQ/kg group. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED).

PMID: 17342196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 Sep;(526):1-180.

Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of a mixture of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) (Cas No. 1746-01-6),
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF) (Cas No. 57117-31-4), and
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) (Cas No. 57465-28-8) in female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats (gavage studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized, they
accumulate in body tissues, mainly adipose, resulting in chronic lifetime human
exposure. Since human exposure to DLCs always involves a complex mixture, the
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical
tool to assess the health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The 
TEF methodology is a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity 
of a compound relative to TCDD, which is the most potent congener. This allows
for the estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of
chemicals, based on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of 
DLCs to the AhR. The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation
because of the widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the
adequacy of the TEF methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. 
To address this, the National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year
bioassays in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity
and carcinogenicity of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and mixtures of these compounds. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF), and
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) are not manufactured commercially other
than for scientific research purposes. The main sources of TCDD and PeCDF
releases into the environment are from metal smelting, refining, and processing; 
combustion and incineration sources; chemical manufacturing and processing;
biological and photochemical processes; and existing reservior sources that
reflect past releases. PCB mixtures were commercially produced and used in the
electric power industry as dielectric insulating fluids in transformers and
capacitors and used in hydraulic fluids, plastics, and paints. TCDD, PeCDF, and
PCB 126 were selected for study by the National Toxicology Program as part of the
dioxin TEF evaluation to assess the cancer risk posed by complex mixtures of
polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs),
and PCBs. The dioxin TEF evaluation includes conducting multiple 2-year rat
bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity of DLC's,
structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of these compounds. Female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats were administered a mixture of TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126
(henceforth referred to as the TEF mixture) in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage 
for 14, 31, or 53 weeks or 2 years. While one of the aims of the dioxin TEF
evaluation was a comparative analysis across studies, in this Technical Report
only the results of the present study of the mixture of TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126 
are presented and discussed. 2-YEAR STUDY: Groups of 81 female rats were
administered 10, 22, 46, or 100 ng toxic equivalents (TEQ)/kg body weight in corn
oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage, 5 days per week, for up to 105 weeks; a group of 81
vehicle control female rats received the corn oil/acetone vehicle alone. Actual
doses used for each compound in the mixture were: for 10 ng TEQ/kg: 3.3 ng/kg
TCDD, 6.6 ng/kg PeCDF, and 33.3 ng/kg PCB 126; for 22 ng TEQ/kg: 7.3 ng/kg TCDD, 
14.5 ng/kg PeCDF, and 73.3 ng/kg PCB 126; for 46 ng TEQ/kg: 15.2 ng/kg TCDD, 30.4
ng/kg PeCDF, and 153 ng/kg PCB 126; and for 100 ng TEQ/kg: 33 ng/kg TCDD, 66
ng/kg PeCDF, and 333 ng/kg PCB 126. Up to 10 rats per group were evaluated at 14,
31, or 53 weeks. Survival of all dosed groups of rats was similar to that of the 
vehicle control group. Mean body weights of the 22 and 46 ng TEQ/kg groups were
less than those of the vehicle control groups after week 69 of the study. Mean
body weights of the 100 ng TEQ/kg group were less than those of the vehicle
control group after week 37 of the study. Thyroid Hormone Concentrations:
Alterations in serum thyroid hormone concentrations were evaluated at the 14-,
31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. At 14, 31, and 53 weeks, there were
dose-dependent reductions in total serum and free thyroxine concentrations. There
were dose-dependent increases in serum triiodothyronine concentrations at 14 and 
31 weeks. No changes in serum thyroid stimulating hormone concentrations were
observed at any time point. Hepatic Cell Proliferation Data: To evaluate
hepatocyte replication, analysis of labeling of replicating hepatocytes with
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine was conducted at the interim evaluations. At 14 weeks, no
effects on the hepatocellular labeling index were observed in the dosed groups
compared to the vehicle controls. At 31 and 53 weeks, the hepatocellular labeling
index was significantly higher in the 46 and 100 ng TEQ/kg groups compared to the
vehicle controls. Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Activities: To evaluate the expression
of known dioxin-responsive genes, CYP1A1-associated
7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity and CYP1A2-associated
acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H) activity were evaluated at the interim time
points. Liver and lung EROD (CYP1A1) activities and hepatic A4H (CYP1A2)
activities were significantly greater in all dosed groups than in the vehicle
controls at all interim evaluations (14, 31, and 53 weeks). Determinations of
TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126 Concentrations in Tissues: Tissue concentrations of
TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126 were analyzed in the fat, liver, lung, and blood at each
interim evaluation and at the end of the 2-year study (105 weeks). The highest
concentrations of TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126 were observed in the liver followed by
fat. Liver and fat concentrations of TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126 at each interim
evaluation and at 105 weeks were higher in groups with increasing doses of the
mixture and generally increased with duration of dosing. In the lung, PeCDF was
present at detectable concentrations in the 46 and 100 ng TEQ/kg groups at 14 and
31 weeks. Measurable concentrations of TCDD and PCB 126 were observed at 14 and
31 weeks in the lung of rats in all dosed groups with the highest concentrations 
observed in the 100 ng TEQ/kg group. At 53 weeks, concentrations of TCDD, PeCDF, 
and PCB 126 in the lung generally increased with increasing dose. At 105 weeks,
detectable concentrations of TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 126 in the lung were observed
in all dosed groups. In blood, TCDD and PCB 126 concentrations at 14 and 31 weeks
generally increased with increasing dose. Blood concentrations of PeCDF were
detectable in the 46 and 100 ng TEQ/kg groups at 14 weeks and at 22 ng TEQ/kg or 
greater at 31 weeks. At 53 and 105 weeks, concentrations of TCDD, PeCDF, and PCB 
126 in blood generally increased with increasing dose and duration of dosing.
Pathology and Statistical Analyses: Relative liver weights were significantly
increased in all dosed groups at 14, 31, and 53 weeks and correlated with
increased incidences of hepatocellular hypertrophy. Increasing duration of
exposure led to an increase in the spectrum, incidence, and severity of
nonneoplastic effects. The only significant effect at 14 weeks was increased
incidences of hepatocellular hypertrophy. At 53 weeks, there was a significant
effect on the incidences of hepatocellular hypertrophy, multinucleated
hepatocytes, pigmentation, focal fatty change, bile duct hyperplasia, and toxic
hepatopathy. At 2 years, there were significant increases in the incidences of
hepatocellular adenoma and cholangiocarcinoma of the liver. There was an increase
in hepatic toxicity characterized by increases in the incidences of numerous
nonneoplastic lesions including hepatocyte hypertrophy, multinucleated
hepatocytes, pigmentation, inflammation, diffuse fatty change, bile duct
hyperplasia, oval cell hyperplasia, nodular hyperplasia, eosinophilic focus,
cholangiofibrosis, bile duct cysts, necrosis, portal fibrosis, mixed cell focus, 
and toxic hepatopathy. In the lung, there were dose-dependent increases in the
incidences of bronchiolar metaplasia of the alveolar epithelium at 53 weeks and
at 2 years and squamous metaplasia at 2 years. At 2 years, there was a
dose-dependent increase in the incidences of cystic keratinizing epithelioma. In 
the pancreas, there were increases in the incidences of numerous nonneoplastic
lesions including arterial chronic active inflammation, acinar cytoplasmic
vacuolization, acinar atrophy, chronic active inflammation, and duct dilatation. 
At 2 years, incidences of acinar adenoma or acinar carcinoma that exceeded the
historical control ranges were seen in all dosed groups except the 100 ng TEQ/kg 
group. Treatment-related increases in the incidences of nonneoplastic lesions
were seen in other organs including hyperplasia, cystic degeneration, atrophy,
and cytoplasmic vacuolization of the adrenal cortex; gingival squamous
hyperplasia of the oral mucosa; squamous metaplasia of the uterus; atrophy of the
thymus (incidence and severity); chronic active inflammation of the ovary;
nephropathy of the kidney (incidence and severity); cardiomyopathy; bone marrow
hyperplasia; transitional epithelium of the urinary bladder; chronic active
inflammation of the mesenteric artery; and follicular cell hypertrophy of the
thyroid gland. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED).

PMID: 17342195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May;92(5):1623-9. Epub 2007 Mar 6.

Hormonal and psychological factors linked to the increased thermic effect of food
in malnourished fasting anorexia nervosa.

Rigaud D(1), Verges B, Colas-Linhart N, Petiet A, Moukkaddem M, Van Wymelbeke V, 
Brondel L.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie et Nutrition, Hôpital Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Le Bocage, 21079 Dijon Cedex, France. daniel.rigaud@chu-dijon.fr

OBJECTIVES: In patients with anorexia nervosa (AN), weight gain is lower than
that expected from the energy content of the meals. Thus we investigated the
thermic effect of food (TEF) in relation to subjective feelings and plasma
hormone levels in a group of AN patients.
METHODS: TEF, feelings (14 items), and plasma release of beta-endorphin, ACTH,
cortisol, dopamine, and catecholamines were evaluated in 15 AN patients (body
mass index, 13.6 +/- 1.2 kg.m(-2)) and in 15 healthy women after three gastric
loads (0, 300, 700 kcal) infused by a nasogastric tube in a blind design.
RESULTS: In AN, the blind loads induced an energy-dependent increase in TEF (P < 
0.001), which was higher than that observed in healthy women (P < 0.001). Only in
AN, a load-dependent decline in the high basal plasma level of beta-endorphin (P 
< 0.01), an increase in plasma ACTH (P < 0.02) after the two caloric loads, and
an increase in cortisol, norepinephrine, and dopamine levels after the 700-kcal
load only (P < 0.05) were noted. A calorie-dependent (P < 0.001) increase in
nausea, abdominal discomfort, and fear of being fat ratings and a decrease in
liking to eat (P < 0.001) and body image were observed in AN patients (P < 0.05).
TEF correlated with ratings on satiation, nausea, uncomfortable abdominal
swelling, body image, and fear of being fat (for all, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: In AN women, blindly infused loads induced a dose-dependent increase 
in TEF, which correlated with the increase in plasma cortisol, ACTH, and
catecholamines as in unpleasant sensations, fear of being fat, and anxiety as
well as a decline in elevated basal beta-endorphin. These results could explain
the difficulty for AN patients in gaining weight.

PMID: 17341571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Indian J Pediatr. 2007 Feb;74(2):195-6.

Traumatic pharyngeal pseudodiverticulum mimicking esophageal atresia.

Pal K(1), Alwabari A, Abdulatif M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Maternity and Children Hospital, Al Ahsa,
Saudi Arabia. kamalesh_pal@yahoo.com

Obstruction of passage of a catheter through esophagus in a newborn is mostly
diagnosed as esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheo esophageal fistula
(TEF). Rarely a traumatic instrumentation may produce pharyngeal or upper
esophageal perforation and attempt at passage of a catheter may produce a false
passage submucosally called pseudodiverticulum. Here it is present the case of a 
extremely premature (28 wk) and low birth weight (950 gms) newborn with traumatic
laceration and pharyngeal pseudodiverticulum mimicking EA. The authors discuss
the diagnostic characteristics and management of such a situation.

PMID: 17337834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Mar;42(3):576-7.

A gasless abdomen does not exclude distal tracheoesophageal fistula: the value of
a repeat x-ray.

Gedicke MM(1), Gopal M, Spicer R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, BS2 8BJ
Bristol, UK.

A "gasless abdomen" in babies with esophageal atresia (EA) has traditionally been
thought to imply absence of a distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). We present 
3 neonates with a provisional diagnosis of EA, who had a gasless abdomen on an
initial x-ray taken within the first 4 hours of life. These children were
subsequently shown to have gas in the stomach associated with a distal TEF. Two
children were examined on subsequent repeat x-ray of the abdomen, when gas was
demonstrated in the stomach. Another child had a laparotomy for a gastrostomy
when a distended stomach was found. This baby went on to have a thoracotomy and a
routine repair of the distal TEF and an esophageal anastamosis. Based on our data
of 65 cases of EA and distal TEF, it is recommended that an x-ray of the abdomen 
is repeated before surgery is undertaken if the gasless abdomen is documented
during the first 4 hours of life.

PMID: 17336205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Environ Qual. 2007 Mar 1;36(2):568-79. Print 2007 Mar-Apr.

The disposal of a lime water treatment residue on soil and spoil material from a 
coalmine: a glasshouse investigation.

Titshall LW(1), Hughes JC, Morris CD, Zacharias PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Soil Science, School of Environmental Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal,
Private Bag X01, Scottsville, 3209, South Africa.

Eragrostis tef (Zucc.), Cenchrus ciliaris L., and Digitaria eriantha Steud. were 
grown in a soil (Psammentic Haplustalf) and spoil material from a coalmine both
treated with a lime water treatment residue (WTR) at rates of 0, 50, 100, 200,
and 400 g kg(-1). The yield of the grasses, from the sum of the three harvests,
and concentrations of B, Ca, Cu, K, Fe, Mg, Mn, N, Na, P, and Zn in foliage from 
the second harvest were determined. The yield of grasses grown in the soil
decreased exponentially as WTR application increased. The yields of C. ciliaris, 
D. eriantha, and E. tef (in the 400 g kg(-1) WTR treated soil) decreased by 74.4,
78.7, and 59.8%, respectively, when compared with the control treatments. In the 
spoil, the yield of E. tef and D. eriantha decreased by 13.6% and and D. eriantha
by 23.9%, while an increase was observed for C. ciliaris (45.4%), at the highest 
WTR application rate. No relationship existed between yield of E. tef and WTR
application rate when grown in the spoil, while a weak negative linear
relationship (p < 0.05) was found for D. eriantha and a positive linear
relationship existed for C. ciliaris. Magnesium concentrations of the grasses
were positively correlated to WTR application rate. Grasses grown in the soil had
higher Na concentrations, while those grown in the spoil typically had higher B, 
N, and Zn concentrations. The decreases in yield were attributed to nutrient
deficiencies (notably Zn), induced by high WTR application rates that led to high
substrate pH. Disposal of high rates of WTR on the mine materials was not
recommended.

PMID: 17332261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Can J Anaesth. 2007 Mar;54(3):223-6.

Case report: Use of two balloon-tipped catheters during thoracoscopic repair of a
type C tracheoesophageal fistula in a neonate.

Ho AM(1), Wong JC, Chui PT, Karmakar MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Prince of Wales Hospital,
Shatin, NT, Hong Kong SAR. hoamh@cuhk.edu.hk

PURPOSE: To describe a novel airway management technique for thoracoscopic repair
of a type C tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in a neonate.
CLINICAL FEATURES: A full-term neonate with a type C TEF presented for
thoracoscopic repair. The fistula was at the level of the carina, making its
isolation from positive pressure ventilation using traditional techniques
difficult. In addition, non-ventilation of the right lung was required. The use
of two Fogarty type balloon-tipped embolectomy catheters placed alongside the
endotracheal tube successfully achieved the goal of blocking ventilation of the
fistula and the right lung. The use of fibreoptic bronchoscopy greatly
facilitated placement of the blockers. The patient made an uneventful recovery.
CONCLUSION: Placing two balloon-tipped blockers, one in the TEF and the other in 
the right mainstem bronchus, is a viable technique for thoracoscopic fistula
repair when the fistula is at or very close to the level of the carina.

PMID: 17331935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2007 Apr;71(4):527-31. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Management of symptomatic tracheal pouches.

Johnson LB(1), Cotton RT, Rutter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Acquired tracheal pouches arise following tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) repair, but are usually asymptomatic. Symptomatic tracheal pouches are
rare, and the optimal management strategy debated. The evolution of our
management to this challenging problem is presented.
DESIGN: A case series over a 5-year period.
SETTING: A tertiary care pediatric hospital.
PATIENTS: Children with a past history of TEF repair in whom severity of
pouch-related respiratory symptomatology warranted surgical intervention.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Symptomatology, bronchoscopic findings, number and type of
surgical interventions required, complications, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Eleven patients required surgical intervention for a symptomatic
tracheal pouch. Symptoms were due to stasis of secretions with associated
pulmonary soiling in three children, severe tracheomalacia in six children, and
respiratory obstruction related to the tip of a tracheotomy tube or endotracheal 
tube being displaced intermittently into the pouch in six children. Surgical
management of the pouch included one fulguration with the CO(2) laser, one with
microlaryngeal instruments, Bugbee cautery in two, open resection in one, and
transcervical division in another. The final five children had endoscopic pouch
division with Clickline biopsy forceps. All children have had resolution of their
pouch-related symptoms, although two remain tracheotomy-dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: Symptomatic tracheal pouches are rare. Surgical intervention to
divide the common party wall between the trachea and the pouch may alleviate
associated respiratory symptomatology. The Clickline biopsy forceps is a safe,
rapid, and effective method of dividing a tracheal pouch.

PMID: 17289165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Environ Toxicol Chem. 2007 Jan;26(1):13-23.

Predicting World Health Organization toxic equivalency factor dioxin and
dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyl levels in farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo
salar) based on known levels in feed.

Berntssen MH(1), Giskegjerde TA, Rosenlund G, Torstensen BE, Lundebye AK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Nutrition and Seafood Research, P.O. Box 2029, Nordnes
5817, Bergen, Norway. marc.berntssen@nifes.no

Assimilation and elimination rate constant of dietary polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs) and dioxin-like polychlorinated
biphenyls (DLPCBs) with a World Health Organization toxic equivalency factor
(WHO-TEF) were estimated in market-size Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) using fish 
that were previously fed vegetable oil-based (low in PCDD/Fs and DLPCBs) or fish 
oil-based (high in PCDD/Fs and PCBs) diets. At the start of the kinetic trial,
half the fish that were fed fish oils were fed vegetable oil feeds and inverted
(cross-over design) for five months. The assimilation efficiencies of the PCDD/F 
congeners were more variable (3-89%) and, generally, were lower than those of the
DLPCBs (70-80%). Among the PCDD/F congeners, the assimilation efficiency of the
most toxic tetra- and pentachlorinated PCDD/Fs was greater than that of
higher-chlorinated PCDD/Fs. Elimination rates for DLPCBs were higher than those
for PCDD/Fs. Lower-chlorinated PCDDs had a lower elimination rate than the
higher-chlorinated PCDDs, but no differences were observed among PCDF congeners
or DLPCB congeners. Kinetic parameters were used to predict the level of WHO-TEF 
dioxins and DLPCBs in Atlantic salmon reared in a large-scale facility under
commercial conditions. Predictions were based on preanalyzed levels of these
organochlorines in feeds with three different replacement levels (0, 30, and 60%)
of vegetable oil. A simple one-compartmental, first-order kinetic model was used 
to predict the level of sum WHO toxic equivalents for PCDD/Fs and DL-PCBs. The
predicted values varied by 0 to 11% from the measured values in the commercially 
reared salmon.

PMID: 17269455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Dev Dyn. 2007 Mar;236(3):746-54.

Aberrant Bmp signaling and notochord delamination in the pathogenesis of
esophageal atresia.

Li Y(1), Litingtung Y, Ten Dijke P, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Human foregut malformation known as esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA/TEF) occurs in 1 in 4,000 live births with unknown etiology. We found
that mice lacking Noggin (Nog(-/-)) displayed Type C EA/TEF, the most common form
in humans, and notochordal defects strikingly similar to the adriamycin-induced
rat EA/TEF model. In accord with esophageal atresia, Nog(-/-) embryos displayed
reduction in the dorsal foregut endoderm, which was associated with reduced
adhesion and disrupted basement membrane. However, significant apoptosis in the
Nog(-/-) dorsal foregut was not observed. Instead, non-notochordal, likely
endodermal, cells were found in Nog(-/-) notochord, suggesting that Noggin
function is required in the notochordal plate for its proper delamination from
the dorsal foregut. Notably, ablating Bmp7 function in Nog(-/-) embryos rescued
EA/TEF and notochord branching defects, establishing a critical role of
Noggin-mediated Bmp7 antagonism in EA/TEF pathogenesis.

PMID: 17260385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Chemosphere. 2007 Apr;67(9):S1-15. Epub 2007 Jan 22.

PCDD/Fs, dioxin-like PCBs and marker PCBs in eggs of peregrine falcons from
Germany.

Malisch R(1), Baum F.

Author information: 
(1)State Institute for Chemical and Veterinary Analysis of Food (CVUA),
Bissierstrasse 5, D-79114 Freiburg, Germany. Rainer.Malisch@cvuafr.bwl.de

Thirty one egg samples of peregrine falcons were collected in different regions
of Germany (South-West, North and East) and analysed for PCDD/Fs, PCBs and marker
PCBs. Altogether, 37 PCB congeners were determined, allowing a more detailed
discussion of different aspects of the relative importance of these individual
congeners. For comparison with dioxin data from other studies, differences
between toxic equivalency factors (TEF) have to be taken into consideration. The 
results of this study are discussed on the basis of WHO-TEFs for birds published 
in 1998. All samples showed high levels of PCDD/Fs (median of all samples: 368 pg
WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ/g fat; range 137-1453) and even higher levels of PCBs (median 967 
pg WHO-PCB-TEQ/g fat; range 243-7482). The upper range of these levels reach
concentrations found at the beginning of the Belgian dioxin crisis when a
significant reduction in hens' egg hatchability was observed. The relative
contribution of PCBs to the total TEQ is on average 71% (range 55-92%) with a
tendency to higher values in South-West Germany compared to different sites in
East Germany or one site in northern Germany. Within a region, a wide range of
contamination can be found. Even in the same cities (Stuttgart and Ludwigshafen),
results derived from eggs collected in the same year (2003) varied by factors
5-10. These findings show the high degree of variation occurring even within the 
same kind of biological matrix. Therefore, to allow for comparison of regions or 
time trends, a considerable number of samples has to be analysed.

PMID: 17240424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Pediatr Int. 2006 Dec;48(6):616-21.

Study of 24 cases with congenital esophageal atresia: what are the risk factors?

Sugito K(1), Koshinaga T, Hoshino M, Inoue M, Goto H, Ikeda T, Hagiwara N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Nihon University School 
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. ksugito@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Recovery from esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) has improved markedly over the years. But postoperative complications,
however, have remained. This study evaluates recovery, preoperative, and
postoperative status of patients with EA/TEF.
METHODS: A retrospective study review was undertaken in 24 patients with EA/TEF
after primary anastomosis (January 1975 through September 2003).
RESULTS: There were no patients who had major cardiac anomalies or trisomy 18. In
total, 17 of 24 (70.8%, group A) patients have survived and seven (29.2%, group
B) have died. Birthweight and Apgar Scores in group A were significantly higher
than in group B. The ratio of GAP (the distance of the location of the blind
pouch from the ends of the upper and lower esophagus) to body length in group B
was significantly higher than in group A. The birthweight and Apgar Scores in
group A were significantly higher than in group B. When the authors compared
their sample of cases by means of the Waterston classification, the Montreal
classification and the Spitz classification, there were statistically significant
differences between the results using the Waterston classification and the
results using to the Spitz classification.
CONCLUSION: For the cases of EA surgery that were examined, the authors concluded
that bodyweight at birth and the existence of pre-surgery respiratory system
complications have a significant effect on post-surgery recovery, and that
results appear to indicate the importance of classification using the Waterston
classification and Spitz classification as a means of assessing the degree of
risk. Results also appeared to indicate that the control of Respiratory Distress 
Syndrome throughout both the pre-surgery and post-surgery periods is critical.

PMID: 17168984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2007 May;61(5):597-604. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Effects of meals with high soluble fibre, high amylose barley variant on glucose,
insulin, satiety and thermic effect of food in healthy lean women.

Keogh JB(1), Lau CW, Noakes M, Bowen J, Clifton PM.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition, CSIRO, Adelaide, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of barley flour (barley cultivar, Hordeum
Vulgare var Himalaya 292) incorporated into breakfast and lunch compared with
otherwise identical meals containing white wheat flour on the thermic effect of
food (TEF), subsequent food intake and metabolic parameters.
DESIGN: Randomized single blinded crossover study.
SETTING: Outpatient setting.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Fourteen healthy women consumed a test breakfast at 0700 h.
Energy expenditure, respiratory quotient (RQ), appetite ratings using a visual
analogue scale (VAS), insulin and glucose levels were measured before and after a
test lunch at 1330 h. Food intake was recorded for the remainder of the day.
RESULTS: The TEF was 5% for both test lunches and meal type did not affect any
variable measured by the VAS. There was an increase in post-prandial RQ above
baseline (0.80) independent of treatment (0.88 and 0.90 for barley and
wheat-containing meals, respectively, P<0.001). Mean area under the glycaemic
response curve (AUC) for wheat-containing meals was 4.68+/-1.67 mmol/l/h, 22%
higher than for the barley-containing meals (3.67+/-1.91 mmol/l/h), P=0.05. AUC
of insulin in response to wheat-containing meals (78.1+/-35.3 mIU/l/h) was 32%
greater than barley-containing meals (52.8+/-24.7 mU/l/h), P<0.02. Ad libitum
food intake over the next 10 h was reduced by 23% (9.6 vs 11.0 MJ, P<0.05) after 
the wheat-containing meals compared to the barley-containing glycaemic index
meals.
CONCLUSION: Inclusion of an ingredient containing increased soluble fibre and
amylose did not reduce spontaneous food intake but rather was associated with
higher subsequent energy intakes despite its reduced glycaemic and insulinemic
effects.
SPONSORSHIP: CSIRO, Human Nutrition, Adelaide, Australia.

PMID: 17164830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 Aug;(530):1-258.

Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of a binary mixture of
3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) (Cas No. 57465-28-8) and
2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB 153) (CAS No. 35065-27-1) in female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats (gavage studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bio-concentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized they
accumulate in body tissues, mainly adipose, resulting in chronic lifetime human
exposure. Since human exposure to DLCs always occurs as a complex mixture, the
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical
tool to assess the health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The 
TEF methodology is a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity 
of a compound relative to TCDD, the most potent congener. This allows for the
estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of chemicals, based
on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of DLCs to the AhR. 
The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation because of the
widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the adequacy of the TEF
methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. To address this, the
National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year bioassays in female
Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity
of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and mixtures of
these compounds. 2-YEAR STUDY: The 2-year study of a binary mixture of PCB 126
and PCB 153 was designed to assess the carcinogenicity of a constant ratio
mixture of PCB 126 and PCB 153. In addition, varying ratio mixture groups were
used to assess the impact of increasing PCB 153 on the carcinogenicity of PCB
126. Dose groups were divided into two study arms (Figure 1). TCDD equivalent
(TEQ) doses are based on the PCB 126 doses after adjustment for the PCB 126 TEF
of 0.1. Groups of 81 (Groups 2, 3, 5, and 7) or 80 (Groups 4 and 6) female rats
received a mixture of PCB 126 and PCB 153 in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage 5 
days per week for up to 105 weeks; a group of 81 female rats received the corn
oil:acetone (99:1) vehicle only and served as the vehicle control (Group 1). Up
to 10 rats per group were evaluated at 14, 31, and 53 weeks. Survival of all
dosed groups was similar to that of the vehicle controls. The mean body weights
of Groups 4 and 5 were generally less than those of the vehicle controls after
week 25. The mean body weights of Group 6 were less after week 12, and those of
Group 7 were less after week 8. Thyroid Hormone Concentrations: Alterations in
serum thyroid hormone levels were evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim 
evaluations. In the constant ratio groups, serum total thyroxine (T(4)) and free 
T(4) generally showed a treatment-related decrease relative to controls. Serum
total triiodothyronine (T(3)) exhibited a treatment-related increase at the 14-, 
31-, and 53-week interim evaluations, but serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
levels were increased at the 14-week time point only. In the varying ratio
groups, the decrease in total and free T(4) was more pronounced in those groups
dosed with the increasing proportion of PCB 153 at the 31- and 53-week time
points. Hepatic Cell Proliferation Data: To evaluate hepatocyte replication,
analysis of labeling of replicating hepatocytes with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine was 
conducted at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. At 31 and 53 weeks, a
significant increase in the hepatocellular labeling index occurred in Group 7. In
the varying ratio groups, the labeling index at the 53-week interim time point
was significantly higher in Group 6, which had the highest proportion of PCB 153 
compared to the other varying ratio groups. Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Activities: To
evaluate the expression of known PCB 126-responsive genes, CYP1A1-associated
7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) and CYP1A2-associated
acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H) activities were evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and
53-week interim evaluations. In addition, PCB 153-inducible CYP2B-associated
7-pent-oxyresorufin-O-dealkylase (PROD) activity was analyzed. In the constant
ratio Groups 2, 3, 5, and 7, hepatic and pulmonary EROD (CYP1A1) activities,
hepatic A4H (CYP1A2) activities, and hepatic PROD (CYP2B) activities were
significantly greater in all dosed groups compared to the vehicle controls at
weeks 14, 31, and 53. In the varying ratio groups, hepatic EROD, A4H, and PROD
activities at 14 weeks were higher in groups receiving a greater proportion of
PCB 153 in the PCB mixture. At 31 and 53 weeks, hepatic CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 enzyme 
activities in Group 6 were generally lower than in Groups 4 and 5. Determinations
of PCB 126 and PCB 153 Concentrations in Tissues: Concentrations of PCB 126 and
PCB 153 were determined in fat, liver, lung, and blood at the 14-, 31-, and
53-week interim evaluations and at the end of the 2-year study (105 weeks). PCB
126 was not detectable in vehicle control animals, but increased with increasing 
dose of PCB 126 and duration of exposure; the highest concentrations were found
in liver and fat, and lower levels were seen in lung and blood. Increasing the
proportion of PCB 153 in the mixture relative to PCB 126 led to a general
decrease in the amount of PCB 126 in liver and lung at the later time points,
whereas in fat and blood, there was generally either no effect of PCB 153 on the 
disposition of PCB 126, or there was an increase in the amount of PCB 126 in the 
tissue. In vehicle control animals, PCB 153 was detectable in the fat at all time
points, in the lung at all time points except 53 weeks, and in the liver and
blood at 2 years. PCB 153 was measurable in all examined tissues of treated
animals, with the highest concentrations found in fat at the end of the 2-year
study in groups administered the highest doses of PCB 153. Pathology and
Statistical Analyses -- Constant Ratio Mixture of PCB 126 and PCB 153: At 14, 31,
and 53 weeks, the absolute and relative liver weights of all dosed groups were
generally greater than those of the vehicle controls. Exposure to the PCB mixture
led to significant toxicity in the liver. At 14 weeks, the incidences of several 
nonneoplastic liver lesions were increased compared to the vehicle controls
including hepatocyte hypertrophy, pigmentation, multinucleated hepatocytes, and
diffuse fatty change. The spectrum and severity of effects increased with dose
and duration of exposure. At the end of the 2-year study, there were
significantly increased incidences and severities of toxic hepatopathy
characterized by hepatocyte hypertrophy, multinucleated hepatocytes,
pigmentation, diffuse and focal fatty change, eosinophilic focus, nodular
hyperplasia, cholangiofibrosis, oval cell hyperplasia, bile duct cysts, bile duct
hyperplasia, necrosis, and portal fibrosis. Significantly increased incidences of
hepatocellular adenoma, cholangiocarcinoma, and hepatocholangioma were observed
in the study. In addition, two animals in the highest dose group had
hepatocellular carcinoma. The incidences of these lesions generally exceeded the 
historical vehicle control ranges. At 2 years, a significantly increased
incidence of cystic keratinizing epithelioma of the lung was observed in Group 7.
In addition, single occurrences of squamous cell carcinoma were seen in the top
two dose groups. Nonneoplastic effects whose incidences were increased in the
lung included bronchiolar metaplasia of the alveolar epithelium and squamous
metaplasia. Significantly increased incidences of squamous cell carcinoma
(gingival) of the oral mucosa were seen at the end of the 2-year study and were
accompanied by increased incidences of gingival squamous hyperplasia. In the
pancreas at 53 weeks, the incidence of acinar cytoplasmic vacuolization was
significantly increased in the highest dose group. At 2 years, increased
incidences of acinar atrophy and acinar cytoplasmic vacuolization were seen in
addition to pancreatic acinar neoplasms in dosed groups. In Groups 5 and 7, these
incidences exceeded the historical vehicle control ranges. In the uterus at 2
years, there was a marginal increase in the incidence of squamous cell carcinoma 
in Group 5. Numerous nonneoplastic effects were seen in other organs at the
interim time points including atrophy of the thymus and follicular cell
hypertrophy of the thyroid gland. These responses were also affected by
administration of the mixture of PCB 126 and PCB 153 at the end of the 2-year
study and were accompanied by additional nonneoplastic responses in numerous
organs including atrophy of the adrenal cortex and cortical hyperplasia, severity
of nephropathy, and incidences of pigmentation of the kidney. Other nonneoplastic
lesions that were treatment related were forestomach hyperplasia, hyperplasia of 
the nasal respiratory epithelium, metaplasia of the olfactory epithelium, and
ectasia of the mandibular lymph node. Varying Ratio Mixture of PCB 126 and PCB
153: An effect of increasing the proportion of PCB 153 in the PCB mixture was
seen in several tissues, most notably in the liver. Treatment-related
nonneoplastic effects seen across the varying ratio groups were generally the
same as those seen in the constant ratio groups. In general there was a positive 
effect of PCB 153 in the mixture on the incidences and severities of these
lesions with higher incidences and higher severities being seen in Group 6, which
had the highest proportion of PCB 153. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED).

PMID: 17160104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 Sep;(525):1-198.

Toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran
(PeCDF) (Cas No. 57117-31-4) in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats (gavage
studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized they
accumulate in human tissues, mainly adipose, resulting in chronic lifetime human 
exposure. Since human exposure to DLCs always involves a complex mixture, the
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical
tool to assess the health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The 
TEF methodology is a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity 
of a compound relative to TCDD, which is the most potent congener. This allows
for the estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of
chemicals, based on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of 
DLCs to the AhR. The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation
because of the widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the
adequacy of the TEF methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. 
To address this, the National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year
bioassays in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity
and carcinogenicity of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and mixtures of these compounds. 2,3,4,7,8-Pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF)
is not manufactured commercially other than for scientific research purposes. The
main sources of PeCDF releases into the environment are from combustion and
incineration sources. PeCDF was selected for study by the National Toxicology
Program as a part of the dioxin TEF evaluation to assess the cancer risk posed by
complex mixtures of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated
dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and PCBs. The dioxin TEF evaluation includes conducting
multiple 2-year rat bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic toxicity and
carcinogenicity of DLCs, structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of these
compounds. While one of the aims of the dioxin TEF evaluation was a comparative
analysis across studies, in this Technical Report only the results of the present
PeCDF study are presented and discussed. Female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats were
administered PeCDF (at least 97% pure) in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage for
14, 31, or 53 weeks or 2 years. 2-YEAR STUDY: Groups of 81 female rats were
administered 6, 20, 44, 92, or 200 ng PeCDF/kg body weight in corn oil:acetone
(99:1) by gavage, 5 days per week, for up to 105 weeks; a group of 81 vehicle
control female rats received the corn oil/acetone vehicle alone. Up to 10 rats
per group were evaluated at 14, 31, and 53 weeks. A stop-exposure group was
administered 200 ng/kg PeCDF in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage for 30 weeks
and then the vehicle for the remainder of the study. The PeCDF in this study was 
at least 97% pure. Survival of dosed groups was similar to that of the vehicle
control group. Mean body weights of the 200 ng/kg core and stop-exposure groups
were less than those of the vehicle controls during year 2 of the study. Thyroid 
Hormone Concentrations: Alterations in serum thyroid hormone levels were
evaluated at the 14-, 31- and 53-week interim evaluations. There were significant
decreases in total serum thyroxine (T(4)) levels at the 14-week interim
evaluation. There were no significant differences observed in serum free T(4),
total triiodothyronine (T(3)), or thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) at 14 weeks. 
At both 31 and 53 weeks, there were treatment-related decreases in free and total
T(4) concentrations and increases in serum T(3) levels. Serum TSH levels in dosed
groups at 31 and 53 weeks were not significantly different than in the vehicle
controls. Hepatic Cell Proliferation Data: To evaluate hepatocyte replication,
analysis of labeling of replicating hepatocytes with 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine
(BrdU) was conducted at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. At 14 and 
53 weeks, hepatocyte BrdU-labeling indices were significantly higher in the 200
ng/kg groups compared to time-matched vehicle controls. No significant
differences were observed between the dosed groups and vehicle controls at 31
weeks. Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Activities: To evaluate the expression of known
dioxin-responsive genes, CYP1A1-associated 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) 
activity and CYP1A2-associated acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H) activity were
evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. Hepatic EROD and A4H 
activities were significantly higher in all groups administered PeCDF relative to
the vehicle controls at all three interim evaluations. Pulmonary EROD was also
significantly higher in all dosed groups compared to vehicle controls at 14, 31, 
and 53 weeks. Determinations of PeCDF Concentrations in Tissues: The tissue
disposition of PeCDF was analyzed in the liver, lung, fat, and blood of all
animals at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations, and in 10 animals per
group at the end of the 2-year study (105 weeks). In the liver of vehicle
controls, PeCDF concentrations were detectable at 105 weeks. Measurable
concentrations of PeCDF were not detected in fat or lung from vehicle control
rats at any of the interim evaluations or at 105 weeks. Hepatic and fat
concentrations were higher in groups with increasing doses of PeCDF,
demonstrating a dose-related increase in tissue burden of PeCDF at each time
point. No measurable concentrations of PeCDF were detected in the lungs of
vehicle controls or any of the dosed groups at 14 weeks or in the lungs of the
vehicle control group at 31, 53, and 105 weeks, or the 6 ng/kg group at 31 and 53
weeks. In groups with measurable levels, PeCDF concentrations were higher with
respect to increasing doses. Mean levels of PeCDF in the liver, fat, lung, and
blood in the 200 ng/kg group at the end of the 2-year study were 500 ng/g, 7.75
ng/g, 0.28 ng/g and 0.04 ng/mL, respectively. Negligible PeCDF concentrations
were observed in blood of the 200 ng/kg group at 53 weeks and the 92 and 200
ng/kg groups at 105 weeks. In liver and fat from the stop-exposure group, the
PeCDF concentrations were between the levels observed in the 6 and 20 ng/kg
groups. In the stop-exposure group, PeCDF concentration in lung was comparable to
levels observed in the 6 ng/kg group. No measurable concentrations were observed 
in blood from the stop-exposure group. Pathology and Statistical Analyses: There 
were dose-dependent increases in both absolute and relative liver weights at 4,
31, and 53 weeks, and these tended to correlate with increased incidences of
hepatocellular hypertrophy. In the liver at 14 weeks, the only significant effect
was an increase in the incidences of hepatocellular hypertrophy. At 53 weeks,
there were significant increases in the incidences of hepatocellular hypertrophy 
and pigmentation. At 2 years, there were significant dose-dependent trends for
increased incidences of hepatocellular adenoma and cholangiocarcinoma of the
liver. A significant dose-dependent increase in hepatic toxicity was observed and
was characterized by increased incidences of numerous nonneoplastic lesions
including hepatocellular hypertrophy, multinucleated hepatocytes, oval cell
hyperplasia, diffuse fatty change, pigmentation, nodular hyperplasia,
eosinophilic foci, hepatocellular necrosis, bile duct hyperplasia, bile duct
fibrosis, cholangiofibrosis, and toxic hepatopathy. At 2 years, three gingival
squamous cell carcinomas of the oral mucosa were seen in the 200 ng/kg core and
stop-exposure groups, two occurred in the 6 ng/kg group, and one occurred in each
of the vehicle control, 20 ng/kg, and 92 ng/kg groups. Gingival squamous
hyperplasia occurred in all groups including the vehicle controls, with
increasing incidences in groups administered 44 ng/kg or greater. The incidence
of carcinoma of the uterus was marginally increased in the 92 ng/kg group at 2
years. Increased incidences of chronic active inflammation of the uterus were
observed in all dosed groups, and the incidence in the 200 ng/kg stop-exposure
group was greater than those in the vehicle control and 200 ng/kg core study
groups. Increased incidences of squamous metaplasia of the uterus occurred in all
dosed groups. In the 200 ng/kg stop-exposure group, the incidence of squamous
metaplasia was significantly greater than that in the vehicle controls, but was
lower than that in the 200 ng/kg core study group. At 14-weeks, lung weights were
significantly increased in the 200 ng/kg group compared to the vehicle controls. 
A single occurrence of a multiple cystic keratinizing epithelioma of the lung was
observed in the 200 ng/kg core study group. There were increases in the
incidences of bronchiolar metaplasia of the alveolar epithelium and sporadic
incidences of squamous metaplasia. One pancreatic acinar adenoma and one
pancreatic acinar carcinoma were each observed in the 92 ng/kg group and in the
200 ng/kg stop-exposure group at 2 years. Significantly increased incidences of
acinar cytoplasmic vacuolization and arterial chronic active inflammation and
increased severity of chronic active inflammation were observed in the 200 ng/kg 
core study group. Numerous nonneoplastic effects were seen in other organs
including thyroid follicular cell hypertrophy, thymic atrophy, adrenal cortex
cystic degeneration, nephropathy, cardiomyopathy, and squamous hyperplasia of the
forestomach.

PMID: 17160103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Chromatogr A. 2007 Jan 19;1139(2):285-300. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Comparison of a variety of gas chromatographic columns with different polarities 
for the separation of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans by
high-resolution mass spectrometry.

Fishman VN(1), Martin GD, Lamparski LL.

Author information: 
(1)The Dow Chemical Company, Midland, MI 48667, USA. sfishman@dow.com

The applicability of 13 different GC columns (Agilent HP-5MS, Restek Rtx-5MS,
Rtx-Dioxin2, Supelco Equity 5, SP-2331, Varian VF-5MS, CP-Sil 8 CB LowBleed/MS,
J&W Scientific DB-5, DB-225, DB-XLB, DB-5MS, Phenomenex ZB-5MS, and ZB-5UMS) for 
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) methods 1613b, 8290 and European
Standard Method EN 1948 for measurement of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins
(PCDDs) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) has been evaluated for the
separation of all International Toxic Equivalent Factor (I-TEF) isomers (tetra-
through octachlorinated at 2,3,7,8 positions) from closely eluting isomers using 
high-resolution gas chromatography/high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRGC/HRMS).
The relative performance data are compared based on mass chromatograms using a
"visualization approach", absolute retention times, 2,3,7,8-substituted, total
dioxins and furans concentrations, as well as TEQ comparisons. None of the
columns tested were able to separate all 17 I-TEFs from other co-eluted isomers. 
Our data indicate that all I-TEFs isomers can be fully differentiated from
closely eluting isomers using either of two sets of non-polar and polar
stationary phase combinations. One set consists of DB-5 (HP-5MS, Rtx-5MS,
Equity-5) and DB-225 GC columns and another set would have a combination of
DB-5MS (ZB-5MS, VF-5MS, CP-Sil 8 CB LowBleed/MS) with SP-2331. However, depending
on the source of PCDDs/PCDFs a laboratory could choose a single GC column that
separates the 2,3,7,8-substituted congeners that contribute most significantly to
the overall TEQ. These data are the most comprehensive to date, provide a
valuable addition to operational criteria for the standard EPA methods 1613b,
8290, European Standard Method EN 1948 and will allow researches to compare data 
generated according to the different compliance analytical procedures.

PMID: 17157304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Phytother Res. 2007 Mar;21(3):220-5.

Antiinflammatory and antiulcer properties of tannins from Myracrodruon urundeuva 
Allemão (Anacardiaceae) in rodents.

Souza SM(1), Aquino LC, Milach AC Jr, Bandeira MA, Nobre ME, Viana GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysiology, Faculty of Medicine of Juazeiro do Norte, Av.
Tenente Raimundo Rocha, s/n, Juazeiro do Norte, CE 63040-000, Brazil.

Myracrodruon urundeuva Allemão is a plant utilized in Northeast Brazil as an
antiinflammatory, wound healing and in gynecological illnesses. The objectives of
the present study were to evaluate the antiinflammatory and antiulcer properties 
of the tannin-enriched fraction (TEF) isolated from the stem bark of M.
urundeuva, in the formalin test, in mice, and in carrageenan-induced paw edema
and gastric ulcer models, in rats. The results showed that TEF dose-dependently
inhibited both phases of the formalin test. However, the effect was predominant
in the 2nd phase of the response where inhibitions of 47%, 76% and 85% were
observed, with doses of 5, 10 and 50 mg/kg, i.p. In the carrageenan-induced paw
edema, significant inhibitions were observed at 3 h (44%) and 4 h (28%), with a
dose of 10 mg/kg, i.p. TEF also significantly decreased by 37%, 43% and 57%
gastric ulceration induced by indomethacin, at doses of 10, 20 and 50 mg/kg p.o. 
In the ethanol-induced gastric ulcer model, TEF was less effective, and
significant inhibitions (42% to 46%) were observed only with doses of 100 and 200
mg/kg, p.o., respectively. In conclusion, it was shown that TEF presents
antiinflammatory and antiulcer effects, partly due to its antioxidant action,
known to be present in polyphenols, including tannins.

PMID: 17154231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Gene. 2007 Jan 15;386(1-2):218-23. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

Xenobiotic- and vitamin D-responsive induction of the steroid/bile
acid-sulfotransferase Sult2A1 in young and old mice: the role of a gene enhancer 
in the liver chromatin.

Seo YK(1), Chung YT, Kim S, Echchgadda I, Song CS, Chatterjee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, Texas 78245, USA.

The xenobiotic-activated nuclear receptors PXR (pregnane X receptor) and CAR
(constitutive androstane receptor) and the vitamin D(3)-activated nuclear
receptor VDR regulate steroid and xenobiotic metabolism by inducing the phase I
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases, phase II conjugating transferases, and the phase 
III transporters, which mediate the efflux of water-soluble lipid metabolites
from cells. Metabolic stress due to the deviant expression of steroid- and
xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes is known to have severe health consequences
including accelerated aging, and increased expression of these enzymes is
associated with extended longevity [Gachon, F, Olela, FF, Schaad, O, Descombes, P
and Schibler, U, 2006. The circadian PAR-domain basic leucine zipper
transcription factors DBP, TEF, and HLF modulate basal and inducible xenobiotic
detoxification. 4, 25-36.; McElwee, JJ, Schuster, E, Blanc, E, Thomas, JH and
Gems, D, 2004. Shared Transcriptional Signature in Caenorhabditis elegans Dauer
Larvae and Long-lived daf-2 Mutants Implicates Detoxification System in Longevity
Assurance. J. Biol. Chem., 279, 44533-43.]. Information on the similarities and
dissimilarities in drug metabolism between the young and old, as may be uncovered
by studying aging regulation of the genes relevant to steroid and xenobiotic
metabolism, is likely to have clinical significance. In this report, we examined 
the VDR- and PXR-mediated gene induction of the phase II sulfotransferase Sult2A1
in the livers of 4-month- and 20-month-old mice. Sult2A1 converts bile acids,
steroids and a number of drugs to the corresponding sulfated metabolites, which
are readily eliminated from the body due to increased water solubility. In RT-PCR
assay, aging did not change the induction of Sult2A1 mRNAs by the hormonally
active vitamin D(3) and the catatoxic synthetic steroid PCN
(pregnenolone-16alpha-carbonitrile). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) from
liver nuclei showed that aging had no effect on the activity of an IR0 enhancer
in the Sult2A1 chromatin to recruit VDR, RXR-alpha (retinoid X receptor) and PXR 
in mice injected with D(3) or PCN. Thus, mice in late life are as competent as
those in early life in responding to the hormonal and xenobiotic signaling for
Sult2A1 induction. This is the first report describing the role of aging in the
functional response of an enhancer in the liver chromatin to the nuclear
receptor-dependent signaling.

PMCID: PMC1888572
PMID: 17123747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2006 Jun;77(2):86-9.

Confirmed Datura poisoning in a horse most probably due to D. ferox in
contaminated tef hay.

Gerber R(1), Naudé TW, de Kock SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Tshwane
University of Technology, Private Bag X680, Pretoria 0001, South Africa.

Two out of a group of 23 mares exposed to tef hay contaminated with Datura ferox 
(and possibly D. stramonium) developed colic. The 1st animal was unresponsive to 
conservative treatment, underwent surgery for severe intestinal atony and had to 
be euthanased. The 2nd was less seriously affected, responded well to analgesics 
and made an uneventful recovery. This horse exhibited marked mydriasis on the
first 2 days of being poisoned and showed protracted, milder mydriasis for a
further 7 days. Scopolamine was chemically confirmed in urine from this horse for
3 days following the colic attack, while atropine could just be detected for 2
days. Scopolamine was also the main tropane alkaloid found in the contaminating
plant material, confirming that this had most probably been a case of D. ferox
poisoning. Although Datura intoxication of horses from contaminated hay was
suspected previously, this is the 1st case where the intoxication could be
confirmed by urine analysis for tropane alkaloids. Extraction and detection
methods for atropine and scopolamine in urine are described employing enzymatic
hydrolysis followed by liquid-liquid extraction and liquid chromatography tandem 
mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS).

PMID: 17120625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Cardiovasc Eng. 2006 Dec;6(4):159-70.

Estimation of forward and backward mitral flow using indicator dilution
technique: a theoretical feasibility study.

Herman B(1), Barnea O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978, 
Israel.

A new theoretical algorithm is presented for high-resolution mitral flow
determination based on the indicator dilution principle. The algorithm allows
forward as well as backward time-dependent mitral flow estimation with a
beat-to-beat resolution. Indices of normal/subnormal left heart functioning,
including total stroke volume (TSV), cardiac output (CO), total ejection fraction
(TEF), mitral regurgitation volume (MRV) and mitral regurgitation fraction (MRF),
are determined. Knowledge of left atrium and ventricle indicator concentration
versus time dependencies and the end systolic left atrium and ventricle volumes
are sufficient to determine the mitral flow pattern. However, the non-dimensional
index of the total ejection fraction can be calculated on the basis of only the
indicator concentration. The algorithm was validated by applying it to blood
flows and heart chamber volumes derived from a computer simulation of the
cardiovascular circulation. First left heart concentrations versus time data were
obtained by determining the distribution over a cardiovascular tract of an ideal 
indicator, a bolus of which was intravenously injected into one of the arms. Then
the backward problem of finding mitral flow was solved. The accuracy of the
mitral flow estimation depends on the accuracy of end systolic left atrium and
ventricle volume data. The method is applicable over a wide range of aortic
regurgitation, up to 20% of cardiac output, suggesting that the algorithm might
become a robust technique of non-invasive mitral flow assessment, replacing
traditional techniques such as nuclear radiography.

PMID: 17120144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Appl Opt. 2006 Dec 10;45(35):8916-31.

Thin-film coatings--a transmission ellipsometric function approach: I.
Nonnegative transmission systems, polarization devices, coatings, and closed-form
design formulas.

Zaghloul AR(1), Elshazly-Zaghloul M, Berzett WA, Keeling DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Ellipsometry Research and
Applications Laboratories, Georgia Institute of Technology, Savannah, Georgia
31407, USA. arzaghloul@gatech.edu

The transmission ellipsometric function (TEF) of a film-substrate system relates 
the polarization change, upon transmission, of an electromagnetic wave obliquely 
incident on, and transmitted through, a film-substrate system. The behavior of
the TEF depends on the category of the film-substrate system: negative, zero, or 
positive. The category is determined by the sign of [equation in text]: negative 
for a negative film-substrate system, zero for a zero system, and positive for a 
positive system. We discuss the behavior of the TEFs of the two transparent
nonnegative film-substrate systems, zero and positive. We describe the TEF as two
successive transformations and analyze its behavior as the angle of incidence and
film thickness of the film-substrate system are changed. We use the
constant-angle-of-incidence contours and constant- thickness contours to analyze 
and utilize that behavior. From the analysis and understanding of the behavior of
the TEF, and from the definition of a polarization device as a film-substrate
system that introduces prescribed polarization changes, we discuss the design of 
all possible types of polarization devices using either of the two systems. We
present a design formula for each. We also present a general formula that is used
for the design of any of the devices. Thin-film coatings are treated as
polarization devices for the purposes of our discussion. We conclude with a brief
discussion of suggested practical modifications to, and simplifications of,
ellipsometric memory, which is an interesting application of polarization devices
for which there is a patent pending.

PMID: 17119592  [PubMed]


290. Zoolog Sci. 2006 Oct;23(10):903-8.

Adaptive changes in TEF-1 gene expression during cold acclimation in the medaka.

Yamasaki Y(1), Komoike Y, Higashinakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Education, Waseda University, Shinjuku,
Tokyo, Japan.

How animals adaptively respond to a cold or hot environment has been questioned
for a long time. Recently, with the aid of microarray analysis, various
temperature-sensitive genes have been identified in several species. However, a
definitive hypothesis regarding the mechanism of adaptation has not been
proposed. In the present study, we surveyed, in medaka (Oryzias latipes), genes
for which the level of expression changes depending on the surrounding
temperature. A messenger RNA differential display of medaka muscle total RNA
revealed one such gene encoding transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). In
medaka muscle, the TEF-1 gene produces two splicing variants, TEF-1A and TEF-1B
mRNAs. During cold acclimation, the mRNA level of TEF-1A decreased, whereas that 
of TEF-1B increased. We also found that three putative downstream genes of TEF-1,
two for myosin heavy chain (MyHC) and one for troponin T (TnT), a specific group 
of muscle proteins, were transcribed in a temperature-dependent manner. These
results suggest that the transcription of MyHC and/or TnT is regulated by TEF-1
and that these molecules participate in muscle reconstruction during temperature 
adaptation in fish.

PMID: 17116993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Nov;41(11):e29-32.

Congenital laryngeal atresia associated with esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula: a case of long-term survival.

Okuyama H(1), Kubota A, Kawahara H, Oue T, Tazuke Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka Medical Center for Maternal and Child
Health, Osaka 594-1101, Japan. okuyama@mch.pref.osaka.jp
<okuyama@mch.pref.osaka.jp>

Congenital laryngeal atresia (LA) is a life-threatening anomaly in which
appropriate perinatal management is essential for survival. The authors report a 
neonate with LA associated with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) who was successfully resuscitated by emergent tracheostomy. Before 
birth, the patient had a diagnosis of EA based on the findings of polyhydramnios 
and absent stomach bubble. Immediately after birth, severe respiratory distress, 
cyanosis, and sternal retraction were evident. Because either endotracheal or
esophageal intubation was unsuccessful, an emergent tracheostomy was performed. A
direct laryngoscope revealed a subglottic atresia with normal appearance of the
vocal cords. Repair of EA with TEF was performed on the third day of life, and
the postoperative course was uneventful. In 2 years follow-up, the patient has no
mental retardation nor central nervous impairment. Because of the presence of
TEF, the antenatal ultrasonogram did not demonstrate the characteristic findings 
of the congenital high airway obstruction syndrome. This case represents one of
the very few reported cases of successful resuscitation of a neonate with an
unanticipated LA in which emergent airway management is required immediately
after birth.

PMID: 17101343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 14;103(46):17225-30. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Insights into transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) activity from the solution 
structure of the TEA domain.

Anbanandam A(1), Albarado DC, Nguyen CT, Halder G, Gao X, Veeraraghavan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 is essential for cardiac, skeletal, and smooth
muscle development and uses its N-terminal TEA domain (TEAD) to bind M-CAT
elements. Here, we present the first structure of TEAD and show that it is a
three-helix bundle with a homeodomain fold. Structural data reveal how TEAD binds
DNA. Using structure-function correlations, we find that the L1 loop is essential
for cooperative loading of TEAD molecules on to tandemly duplicated M-CAT sites. 
Furthermore, using a microarray chip-based assay, we establish that known binding
sites of the full-length protein are only a subset of DNA elements recognized by 
TEAD. Our results provide a model for understanding the regulation of genome-wide
gene expression during development by TEA/ATTS family of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1859914
PMID: 17085591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Math Biosci. 2007 Mar;206(1):128-33. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

On a periodic-like behavior of a delayed density-dependent branching process.

Fujimagari T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematics, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
tef@kenroku.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Most of natural populations seem to be regulated in their sizes in complex ways. 
Particularly, the sizes of some populations change in time or generation roughly 
periodically. There are many theoretical studies on such population dynamics.
This paper develops stochastic population models for a periodic-like population
dynamics. To see the nature of such mechanism, we consider simple models of a
delayed density-dependent branching process, and present by numerical simulations
how such a branching process shows periodic population changes. The effects of
randomly changing stationary environments on the population dynamics are also
considered.

PMID: 17070864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 15;281(50):38351-7. Epub 2006 Oct 20.

A novel role for proline- and acid-rich basic region leucine zipper (PAR bZIP)
proteins in the transcriptional regulation of a BH3-only proapoptotic gene.

Benito A(1), Gutierrez O, Pipaon C, Real PJ, Gachon F, Ritchie AE, Fernandez-Luna
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genetica Molecular, Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla,
Servicio Cantabro de Salud, 39008 Santander, Spain.

Proline- and acid-rich (PAR) basic region leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins
thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF), D-site-binding protein (DBP), and hepatic
leukemia factor have been involved in neurotransmitter homeostasis and amino acid
metabolism. Here we demonstrate a novel role for these proteins in the
transcriptional control of a BH3-only gene. PAR bZIP proteins are able to
transactivate the promoter of bcl-gS. This promoter is particularly responsive to
TEF activation and is silenced by NFIL3, a repressor that shares the consensus
binding site with PAR bZIP proteins. Consistently, transfection of TEF induces
the expression of endogenous bcl-gS in cancer cells, and this induction is
independent of p53. A naturally occurring variant of DBP (tDBP), lacking the
transactivation domain, has been identified and shown to impede the formation of 
active TEF dimers in a competitive manner and to reduce the TEF-dependent
induction of bcl-gS. Of note, treatment of cancer cells with etoposide induces
TEF activation and promotes the expression of bcl-gS. Furthermore, blockade of
bcl-gS or TEF expression by a small interfering RNA strategy or transfection with
tDBP significantly reduces the etoposide-mediated apoptotic cell death. These
findings represent the first described role for PAR bZIP proteins in the
regulation of a gene involved in the execution of apoptosis.

PMID: 17057225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Rev Med Suisse. 2006 Sep 13;2(78):2076.

[Circadian metabolism of medicaments: an important Geneva discovery].

[Article in French]

Schibler U.

PMID: 17019847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mycol Res. 2006 Oct;110(Pt 10):1165-71. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Expression of genes involved in germination, conidiogenesis and pathogenesis in
Metarhizium anisopliae using quantitative real-time RT-PCR.

Fang W(1), Bidochka MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Brock University, St Catharines, Ontario,
Canada.

Characterization of genes involved in germination, conidiogenesis and insect
pathogenesis is an important step in identifying methods to increase the efficacy
of Metarhizium anisopliae, a commercially important entomopathogenic fungus.
Real-time RT-PCR is a sensitive, reproducible and quantitative method to study
gene expression. However, it requires reliable reference gene transcripts for
normalization. In this study, six putative housekeeping genes (act, gpd, 18sRNA, 
tef, try and ubi) were investigated as reliable reference genes. Transcripts from
tef, gpd and try were found to be the most suitable reference genes for real-time
RT-PCR analysis of genes expressed during germination, conidiogenesis and
pathogenesis. Using these as reference genes, the relative expression levels of a
virulence gene, a subtilisin-like protease (pr1), a regulator of G protein
signaling gene involved in conidiogenesis (cag8), the nitrogen response regulator
gene (nrr1), and a hydrophobin gene (ssga) were studied. None of these
transcripts could be detected in the early stages of insect pathogenesis. The
nitrogen response regulator, nrr1, was consistently expressed during all
developmental stages. Expression levels of cag8 increased significantly in the
later stages of conidiogenesis on insect cadavers. The expression level of ssga
during conidiogenesis was significantly higher than that in mycelia during
vegetative growth in nutrient rich media. The pr1 gene was expressed during
fungal conidiation on the insect cadaver. This study acts as a foundation for
investigating the transcriptional levels of genes expressed during germination,
conidiogenesis and pathogenesis of M. anisopliae using real-time RT-PCR.

PMID: 17010593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Vet Res Commun. 2006 Oct;30(7):807-22.

Chronic vanadium poisoning in calves and its treatment with calcium disodium
ethylenediaminetetraacetate.

Gummow B(1), Botha CJ, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Production Animal Studies, University of Pretoria,
Onderstepoort, South Africa. Bruce.Gummow@up.ac.za

Sixteen Friesland heifer calves aged between 96 and 157 days were removed from a 
dairy farm that had been polluted with vanadium and randomly allocated into two
equal groups (n = 8). The objective of the trial was to determine whether calcium
disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetate (CaNa(2)EDTA) could be used as a treatment
for cattle running in environments high in background vanadium. The treatment
group received 80 mg CaNa(2)EDTA per kg body weight intraperitonealy (i.p.) twice
a week over a 10-week period. The control group received normal saline i.p. over 
the same period. During the trial calves were exposed to a daily intake of
vanadium in the form of contaminated tef hay derived from the farm of origin. In 
addition, the total mixed ration was spiked with a further 20 mg V(2)O(5)/kg feed
to compensate for possible on-farm inhalation exposure. A stochastic model was
used to estimate daily intake of vanadium as a distribution function. The model
estimated that the daily intake of vanadium varied between an absolute minimum of
33 mg/day to an absolute maximum of 124 mg/day. The average intake of vanadium
was 71.8 mg per day per calf. Various chemical pathology parameters were measured
throughout the trial as well as urine excretion rates of vanadium and lymphocyte 
stimulation counts. All calves were slaughtered and necropsied in cohorts of 4-6 
animals at monthly intervals after completion of the trial and withdrawal of
vanadium from the ration. Tissue concentrations of vanadium were determined and
necropsy findings were noted. The study found that CaNa(2)EDTA appears to enhance
the excretion of vanadium in calves, but could not prove that the treatment had a
protective effect against vanadium exposure. Calves were able to tolerate the
prolonged treatment with CaNa(2)EDTA without side-effects.

PMID: 17004042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 10;281(45):34406-20. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Transcription enhancer factor-1-dependent expression of the alpha-tropomyosin
gene in the three muscle cell types.

Pasquet S(1), Naye F, Faucheux C, Bronchain O, Chesneau A, Thiébaud P, Thézé N.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 441, Avenue du Haut-Lévêque, 33600 Pessac, France.

In vertebrates, the actin-binding proteins tropomyosins are encoded by four
distinct genes that are expressed in a complex pattern during development and
muscle differentiation. In this study, we have characterized the transcriptional 
machinery of the alpha-tropomyosin (alpha-Tm) gene in muscle cells. Promoter
analysis revealed that a 284-bp proximal promoter region of the Xenopus laevis
alpha-Tm gene is sufficient for maximal activity in the three muscle cell types. 
The transcriptional activity of this promoter in the three muscle cell types
depends on both distinct and common cis-regulatory sequences. We have identified 
a 30-bp conserved sequence unique to all vertebrate alpha-Tm genes that contains 
an MCAT site that is critical for expression of the gene in all muscle cell
types. This site can bind transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) present in
muscle cells both in vitro and in vivo. In serum-deprived differentiated smooth
muscle cells, TEF-1 was redistributed to the nucleus, and this correlated with
increased activity of the alpha-Tm promoter. Overexpression of TEF-1 mRNA in
Xenopus embryonic cells led to activation of both the endogenous alpha-Tm gene
and the exogenous 284-bp promoter. Finally, we show that, in transgenic embryos
and juveniles, an intact MCAT sequence is required for correct temporal and
spatial expression of the 284-bp gene promoter. This study represents the first
analysis of the transcriptional regulation of the alpha-Tm gene in vivo and
highlights a common TEF-1-dependent regulatory mechanism necessary for expression
of the gene in the three muscle lineages.

PMID: 16959782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Dtsch Tierarztl Wochenschr. 2006 Aug;113(8):292-7.

[Impacts and impact mechanisms of "dioxins" in humans and animals].

[Article in German]

Nau H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Lebensmitteltoxikologie und Chemische Analytik,
Lebensmitteltoxikologie, Stiftung Tierärztliche Hochschule Hannover.
Heinz.Nau@tiho-hannover.de

"Dioxins" are used to specify polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD),
dibenzo-furanes (F) and dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's). Many of
the congeners proved to be highly toxic; 2,3,7,8-tetrachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) is the most toxic congener, and probably the most toxic compound ever
synthesized by man (the natural occurance of this substance is very low). The
total concentration/-toxicity of a mixture of congeners (WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ, or
including the PCB's WHO-PCDD/F-PCB-PCB-TEQ) is calculated by addition of the
individual concentrations multiplied by respective toxicity equivalence factors
TEF; the most toxic congener TCDD is defined as 1. The tolerable weekly intake
TWI set by the European Commission is 14pg WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ/kg bw. The "body
burden" of adults in industrial countries is about 2-6 ng WHO-PCDD/F-TEQ/kg bw., 
or about double this value if PCB's are also considered. There is a very broad
range of toxic effects of "dioxins". Many of the congeners can induce toxic
responses at very low "body burdens". The most sensitive effects are
immunosuppression, developmental and reproductive toxicity, as well as
neurological behavioral effects. These effects occur at "body burdens" whih are
close to background exposure of the human. Cancerogenic effects are induced at
higher exposure (Seveso, industrial exposure). TCDD was considered a "complete
carcinogen" by the IARC (Group 1). There is a broad range of carcinogenic
effects, and there is no "hallmark" effect. Most toxic effects induced by TCDD
are mediated by binding to the Ah-receptor (Ah-R) which binds together with a
second protein, ARNT, to the respone elements of a number of target genes, and
thus modulates gene expression. "Dioxins" are strong promotors, but weak
initiators. The multitude of interactions of the Ah-R and ARNT ("receptor
cross-talk") results in numerous molecular and cellular effects. The TCDD-Ah-R
complex can also bind to the response element of the estrogen receptor, and thus 
can block the effects of es-trogens. This explains the fact that TCDD can be an
estrogen antagonist reducing or preventing mamma carcinoma. Other Ah-R ligands
occur in vegetables (e.g. indoles, flavones) and will possibly be developed in
the future as functional substances. PCB's have similar properties to TCDD if
they can exist in a planar configuration (dioxin-like PCB's). The non-dioxin-like
PCB's always occur together with "dioxins"; their toxixty cannot be adequately
determined although they occur in high concenrations. The consumption of food
contaminated with "dioxins" need not directly lead to a toxic effect. Due to the 
continous cumulation of "dioxins" repeated ingestion of contaminated food could
result in an increase of the "body burden" and thus chronic toxicity. This shows 
that the exposure of the human to dioxins should be minimized wherever possible.

PMID: 16955640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Differentiation. 2006 Sep;74(7):422-37.

Morphogenesis of the trachea and esophagus: current players and new roles for
noggin and Bmps.

Que J(1), Choi M, Ziel JW, Klingensmith J, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The development of the anterior foregut of the mammalian embryo involves changes 
in the behavior of both the epithelial endoderm and the adjacent mesoderm.
Morphogenetic processes that occur include the extrusion of midline notochord
cells from the epithelial definitive endoderm, the folding of the endoderm into a
foregut tube, and the subsequent separation of the foregut tube into trachea and 
esophagus. Defects in foregut morphogenesis underlie the constellation of human
birth defects known as esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF). Here, we review what is known about the cellular events in foregut
morphogenesis and the gene mutations associated with EA and TEF in mice and
humans. We present new evidence that about 70% of mouse embryos homozygous null
for Nog, the gene encoding noggin, a bone morphogenetic protein (Bmp) antagonist,
have EA/TEF as well as defects in lung branching. This phenotype appears to
correlate with abnormal morphogenesis of the notochord and defects in its
separation from the definitive endoderm. The abnormalities in foregut and lung
morphogenesis of Nog null mutant can be rescued by reducing the gene dose of Bmp4
by 50%. This suggests that normal foregut morphogenesis requires that the level
of Bmp4 activity is carefully controlled by means of antagonists such as noggin. 
Several mechanisms are suggested for how Bmps normally function, including by
regulating the intercellular adhesion and behavior of notochord and foregut
endoderm cells. Future research must determine how Noggin/Bmp antagonism fits
into the network of other factors known to regulate tracheal and esophagus
development, both in mouse or humans.

PMID: 16916379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Chin Med Assoc. 2006 Jul;69(7):317-21.

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula: ten years of experience in an 
institute.

Yang CF(1), Soong WJ, Jeng MJ, Chen SJ, Lee YS, Tsao PC, Hwang B, Wei CF, Chin
TW, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal atresia (EA), tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), or both is 
a complicated problem. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the outcomes and
postoperative complications in patients with EA/TEF who were admitted to our
hospital.
METHODS: In total, 15 patients were enrolled from 1994 to 2003, including 8 males
and 7 females. Patient demographics, associated anomalies, and outcomes were
analyzed.
RESULTS: The most common variant was EA with a distal TEF (type C), which
occurred in 12 patients (80%). The latter had associated congenital anomalies,
and cardiac anomalies were the most frequent, occurring in 8 patients (53.3%). Of
the 6 cases who had life-threatening anomalies, 4 (66.7%) died, and of the 9
cases who had no life-threatening-anomalies, 2 (22.2%) died. Tracheomalacia
and/or stenosis were diagnosed in 8 patients (66.7%) postoperatively. Though 3 of
the 4 cases who suffered from dying spell received intratracheal stent
implantation, 2 cases still died.
CONCLUSION: The survival rate of the patients with EA/TEF is influenced mainly by
associated life-threatening anomalies. TMS combined with a history of dying spell
may be the major fatal complication.

PMID: 16903645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Environ Sci Technol. 2006 Jul 15;40(14):4394-9.

Exposure to PBDEs and PCDEs associated with the consumption of edible marine
species.

Domingo JL(1), Bocio A, Falcó G, Llobett JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Rovira i Virgili
University, San Lorenzo 21, 43201 Reus, Spain. joseluis.domingo@urv.net

In the present study, the concentrations of PBDEs and PCDEs were determined in 14
edible marine species widely consumed by the population of Catalonia (Spain). The
daily intake of PBDEs and PCDEs associated with this consumption was also
determined. A total of 42 composite samples were analyzed by HRGC/HRMS. The
highest PBDE levels (ng/kg wet weight) were found in salmon (2015) followed by
mackerel, swordfish, and red mullet (1124, 978, and 769, respectively), while
those of PCDEs (ng/kg wet weight) were detected in red mullet (7088) followed by 
sardine (1829), anchovy (1606), tuna (1292), and mackerel (1031). For a standard 
male adult, total PBDE and PCDE intakes through edible marine species were 20.8
and 39.4 ng/ day, respectively. The highest contributions to these intakes
(ng/day) corresponded to the consumption of tuna (5.7), salmon (3.6), and hake
(3.5) for PBDEs, and tuna (13.1), hake (7.3), and sardine (6.9) for PCDEs.
Although currently there is not evidence of the dioxin-like behavior of PBDEs,
further research is necessary to assess if long-term exposure to PBDEs, mainly
through the diet, may mean adverse effects to humans. With respectto PCDE
congeners, to establish TEF values would be of great value to evaluate human
health risks.

PMID: 16903276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Theor Appl Genet. 2006 Oct;113(6):1093-102. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

A genetic linkage map for tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter].

Yu JK(1), Kantety RV, Graznak E, Benscher D, Tefera H, Sorrells ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Cornell University, 240 Emerson
Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

Tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] is the major cereal crop in Ethiopia. Tef is
an allotetraploid with a base chromosome number of 10 (2n = 4x = 40) and a genome
size of 730 Mbp. Ninety-four F(9) recombinant inbred lines (RIL) derived from the
interspecific cross, Eragrostis tef cv. Kaye Murri x Eragrostis pilosa (accession
30-5), were mapped using restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP), simple
sequence repeats derived from expressed sequence tags (EST-SSR), single
nucleotide polymorphism/insertion and deletion (SNP/INDEL), intron fragment
length polymorphism (IFLP) and inter-simple sequence repeat amplification (ISSR).
A total of 156 loci from 121 markers was grouped into 21 linkage groups at LOD 4,
and the map covered 2,081.5 cM with a mean density of 12.3 cM per locus. Three
putative homoeologous groups were identified based on multi-locus markers.
Sixteen percent of the loci deviated from normal segregation with a predominance 
of E. tef alleles, and a majority of the distorted loci were clustered on three
linkage groups. This map will be useful for further genetic studies in tef
including mapping of loci controlling quantitative traits (QTL), and comparative 
analysis with other cereal crops.

PMID: 16900349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2006 Nov;41(11):1049-52.

The etiology of tracheal mucosal injury in proximal esophageal atresia plus
distal tracheoesophageal fistula: an animal study.

Ates O(1), Hakgüder G, Olguner M, Ozer E, Akgür FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dokuz Eylül University Medical School, Izmir,
Turkey. oguz.ates@deu.edu.tr

Tracheal mucosal damage has been reported in autopsy specimens of cases with
proximal esophageal atresia and distal tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) (Gross 
classification type C). Such changes have not been reported for isolated EA
(Gross classification type A). Our hypothesis is that passage of amniotic fluid
(AF) through fistula via larynx and trachea may damage tracheal mucosa. An
experimental study was conducted to investigate this hypothesis in the
Adriamycin-induced EA-TEF model. In the first stage of the study, we tested
whether the fetuses with EA-TEF associated with pyloric atresia cannot swallow AF
whereas the fetuses EA-TEF without intestinal atresia can swallow AF. Carbon
solution was injected into the AF for this purpose. In the second stage of study,
at the 21st day of their gestation, fetuses were extirpated and dissected under
microscope. In both stages, fetuses were divided into four groups as control,
fetuses without tracheoesophageal abnormalities, fetuses with EA-TEF only,
fetuses with pyloric atresia associated with EA-TEF. Lungs and tracheas of the
all fetuses were removed for histopathological examination. While carbon
particles were present in the trachea, stomachs of the fetuses without
tracheoesophageal anomalies, with EA-TEF only and control fetuses, carbon
particles were absent in both trachea and stomachs of the fetuses with pyloric
atresia associated with EA-TEF. Histopatological examination of the tracheal
mucosa showed damage throughout the trachea in the fetuses with EA-TEF only
group. Tracheal mucosa was found to be normal in other groups. Bronchial mucosa
and lung tissues were found to be normal in all groups. Amniotic fluid swallowed 
through the TEF causes histopathological changes in the tracheal mucosa of the
fetuses with EA-TEF only group. These findings may also contribute to the
development of new fetal treatment modalities.

PMID: 16871620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Clin Nucl Med. 2006 Aug;31(8):451-3.

A premature infant with h-type tracheoesophageal fistula demonstrated by
scintigraphic technique.

Vatansever U(1), Acunas B, Salman T, Altun G, Duran R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Trakya University, Faculty of Medicine, Edirne,
Turkey. uvatansever@trakya.edu.t

PURPOSE: Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) without esophageal atresia is
commonly known as "H" type. This is extremely rare in infants. The rarity of the 
condition, its nonspecific symptomatology, and limitations in its demonstration
by contrast radiology and endoscopy contribute to delays between first
presentation and confirmation of the diagnosis. Our aim was to demonstrate a
congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistula by using Tc-99m sulfur colloid
scintigraphy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A case report.
RESULTS: A preterm female infant was born by cesarean section at 34 weeks
gestation. After many attempts of feeding, she developed apnea, resolving
spontaneously, peroral cyanosis, pallor, hypersalivation, and abdominal
distension, even when she was being fed by an orogastric tube. With this complex 
symptomatology, she was suspected to have an H-type TEF. Because of prematurity
and recurrent respiratory problems of the infant and the high risk of aspiration 
of contrast material during a cineradiographic procedure, and also because of the
invasive nature of the endoscopic procedure as well as the requirement of general
anesthesia, the diagnosis was made by using Tc-99m sulfur colloid scintigraphy
and confirmed at operation.
CONCLUSION: Demonstrating a congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistula by using 
radionuclide imaging is an easily applicable technique.

PMID: 16855428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Asia Pac J Clin Nutr. 2006;15(3):307-16.

Use of [14C]-sodium bicarbonate/urea to measure total energy expenditure in
overweight men and women before and after low calorie diet induced weight loss.

Luscombe ND(1), Tsopelas C, Bellon M, Clifton PM, Kirkwood I, Wittert GA.

Author information: 
(1)University of Adelaide, Department of Medicine, Royal Adelaide Hospital,
Adelaide SA 5000.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the use of the [14C]-sodium
bicarbonate/urea technique to measure the change in total energy expenditure
after weight loss and a period of weight maintenance. Eleven healthy subjects (6 
men and 5 women aged 50 +/- 3 yrs, BMI 34.1 +/-2.1 kg/ m2, body fat 38.7 +/-3%)
underwent 8 weeks of energy restriction using a combination of "Modifast" formula
and one small meal per day (approximately 3.3 MJ/day). For an additional 2 weeks,
subjects resumed a solid food diet that contained enough energy to stabilize body
weight at the newly reduced level. Body composition, total energy expenditure
(TEE), resting energy expenditure (REE) and the thermic effect of a 2.7 MJ test
meal (TEF) were measured at both weeks 0 and 10. At week 10 as compared to week
0, body weight decreased by 12.2+/-1.6 kg (12.5%)(P<0.001). Total fat and lean
mass decreased by 8.4+/-1.0 kg (20.4%) and 3.8+/-0.7 kg (6.7%), respectively (P< 
0.001). REE decreased by 500+/-128 kJ/day (5.6+/-1.3%)(P<0.002). Decreases in the
TEE (0.18 +/-;3.7%)and TEF(1.4+/-0.9%) were not significant. In conclusion,
although [14C]-sodium bicarbonate/urea was well tolerated and did not interfere
with normal daily activities, it did not have sufficient sensitivity to
accurately measure weight loss induced changes in TEE in the range of 0.1-10%.

PMID: 16837421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 May;(529):4-168.

NTP technical report on the toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of
2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB 153) (CAS No. 35065-27-1) in female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats (Gavage studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized, they
accumulate in body tissue, mainly adipose, resulting in chronic lifetime human
exposure. Since human exposure to DLCs always involves a complex mixture, the
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical
tool to assess the health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The 
TEF methodology is a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity 
of a compound relative to TCDD, which is the most potent congener. This allows
for the estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of
chemicals based on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of
DLCs to the AhR. The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation
because of the widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the
adequacy of the TEF methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. 
To address this, the National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year
bioassays in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity
and carcinogenicity of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and mixtures of these compounds. 2,2',4,4',5,5'-Hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB
153) was produced as a component of some commercial PCB mixtures before 1977 for 
the electric industry as a dielectric insulating fluid for transformers and
capacitors. Manufacture and use of the chemical was stopped due to increased PCB 
residues in the environment, but it continues to be released into the environment
through the use and disposal of products containing PCBs, as by-products during
the manufacture of certain organic chemicals, and during the combustion and
biodegradation of some waste materials. Bioaccumulation of PCB 153 results in
persistent levels in animal and human tissues. PCB 153 was selected for study by 
the National Toxicology Program as a part of the dioxin TEF evaluation to assess 
the cancer risk posed by complex mixtures of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins
(PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs). The dioxin TEF evaluation includes conducting multiple 2-year rat
bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity of DLCs, 
structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of these compounds. PCB 153 was included 
since it is present at the highest PCB concentrations in human samples on a molar
basis. PCB 153 was also included in a mixture study with PCB 126, since previous 
studies have demonstrated interactions between PCB 153 and DLCs on
pharmacokinetic and biological effects. While one of the aims of this study was a
comparative analysis of effects seen with PCB 126 and the mixture of PCB 126 and 
PCB 153, in this Technical Report only the results of the present study of PCB
153 are presented and discussed. 2-YEAR STUDY: Female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats 
were administered PCB 153 (greater than 99% pure) in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by
gavage for 14, 31, or 53 weeks or 2 years. Groups of 80 (3,000 microg PCB 153/kg 
body weight), 81 (100, 300, and 1,000 microg/kg), or 82 (10 microg/kg) female
rats received PCB 153 in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage at doses of 10, 100,
300, 1,000, or 3,000 microg/kg 5 days per week for up to 105 weeks; a group of 81
female rats received the corn oil:acetone (99:1) vehicle alone. A stop-exposure
group of 50 female rats was administered 3,000 microg/kg for 30 weeks and then
the vehicle for the remainder of the study. Dose selection for the PCB 153 study 
was based on the range of PCB 153 doses used in the mixture study of PCB 126 and 
PCB 153 (10 to 3,000 microg/kg). Survival of dosed groups was similar to that of 
the vehicle control group. Mean body weights of 3,000 microg/kg core study rats
were less than those of the vehicle controls after week 69 of the study. Thyroid 
Hormone Concentrations: Serum total thyroxine (T4), free T4, and total
triiodothyronine (T3) concentrations in the 3,000 microg/kg group were
significantly lower than those in the vehicle controls at the 14-week interim
evaluation. At the 31-week interim evaluation, no significant differences were
observed in serum total T4, free T4, T3, or thyroid stimulating hormone
concentrations. At the 53-week interim evaluation, serum total T4 and free T4
concentrations in the 3,000 microg/kg group were significantly lower than in the 
vehicle controls. Hepatic Cell Proliferation Data: No significant differences in 
hepatocellular labeling index were observed between the vehicle control and dosed
groups at any of the interim evaluations. Cytochrome P450 Enzyme Activities
Hepatic pentoxyresorufin-O-deethylase activities were highly and significantly
elevated relative to the vehicle control groups. Maximum increases over controls 
at 14, 31, and 53 weeks were 136-, 140-, and 40-fold, respectively. Hepatic
7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) and acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H)
activities were significantly elevated over controls at 14 and 31 weeks;
increases were less than twofold. At 14 weeks, EROD activities in the lung were
dose-dependently reduced compared to vehicle controls. Determinations of PCB 153 
Concentrations in Tissues: In the fat from vehicle controls, detectable levels of
PCB 153 were observed at 14, 31, and 53 weeks and at the end of the 2-year study.
Fat concentrations of PCB 153 increased with increasing doses of PCB 153 and
tended to increase with the longer exposure durations. In the fat of the 3,000
microg/kg stop-exposure group, PCB 153 concentrations were between the levels
observed in the 300 and 1,000 microg/kg groups. In the liver of vehicle controls,
no measurable concentrations of PCB 153 were observed at any time point. In dosed
groups, hepatic concentrations of PCB 153 increased with increasing dose and
longer exposure duration. Measurable concentrations of PCB 153 were observed in
the lungs of vehicle control rats at 31 and 53 weeks and at 2 years. At all time 
points, PCB 153 lung and blood concentrations increased with increasing dose, and
blood concentrations increased with duration of exposure. In liver, lung, and
blood of rats from the 3,000 microg/kg stop-exposure group, PCB 153
concentrations were slightly above or below the levels observed in the 1,000
microg/kg group. Organ Weights: Absolute liver weights of 1,000 microg/kg rats
and absolute and relative liver weights of 3,000 microg/kg rats were
significantly greater than those of vehicle controls at week 14. At week 31,
relative liver weights of 1,000 microg/kg rats and absolute and relative liver
weights of 3,000 microg/kg rats were significantly greater than those of vehicle 
controls. At week 53, absolute and relative liver weights were significantly
greater in rats administered 100 microg/kg or greater compared to vehicle
controls. Absolute kidney weights of all exposed groups and the relative kidney
weight of 3,000 microg/kg rats were significantly increased at week 53. Pathology
and Statistical Analyses: The incidences of hepatocyte hypertrophy were
significantly increased in the 1,000 and 3,000 microg/kg groups at 14 weeks and
in all groups administered 300 microg/kg or greater at 31 and 53 weeks. At 2
years, the incidences of hepatocyte hypertrophy were significantly increased in
all dosed groups. The incidences of diffuse fatty change in the 300 microg/kg or 
greater groups and bile duct hyperplasia of the liver in 300 microg/kg and 3,000 
microg/kg (core and stop-exposure) groups were significantly increased. The
incidences of oval cell hyperplasia and pigmentation of the liver were
significantly increased in the 3,000 microg/kg core study group. At 2 years, two 
cholangiomas were seen in the 1,000 microg/kg group and two cholangiomas were
seen in the 3,000 microg/kg stop-exposure group. A single hepatocellular adenoma 
was observed in the 3,000 microg/kg core study group. At 53 weeks, sporadic
incidences of minimal to mild follicular cell hypertrophy of the thyroid gland
occurred in all groups (except 10 microg/kg). At 2 years, the incidences of
minimal to mild follicular cell hypertrophy were significantly increased in the
300 microg/kg and 3,000 microg/kg (core and stop-exposure) groups. At 2 years,
significantly increased incidences of chronic active inflammation in the ovary
and oviduct occurred in the 1,000 and 3,000 microg/kg core study groups.
Incidences of suppurative inflammation of the uterus in the 1,000 microg/kg group
and chronic active inflammation in the 3,000 microg/kg core study group were
significantly greater than those in the vehicle control group.CONCLUSIONS: Under 
the conditions of this 2-year gavage study there was equivocal evidence of
carcinogenic activity of PCB 153 in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats based on
the occurrences of cholangioma of the liver. PCB 153 administration caused
increased incidences of nonneoplastic lesions of the liver, thyroid gland, ovary,
oviduct, and uterus in female rats.

PMID: 16835634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 Apr;(521):4-232.

NTP technical report on the toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) (CAS No. 1746-01-6) in female Harlan
Sprague-Dawley rats (Gavage Studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized, they
accumulate in body tissue, mainly adipose, resulting in chronic lifetime human
exposure. Since human exposure to DLCs always involves a complex mixture, the
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical
tool to assess the health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The 
TEF methodology is a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity 
of a compound relative to TCDD, which is the most potent congener. This allows
for the estimation of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of
chemicals based on a common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of
DLCs to the AhR. The toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation
because of the widespread human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the
adequacy of the TEF methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. 
To address this, the National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year
bioassays in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity
and carcinogenicity of DLCs and structurally related polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and mixtures of these compounds. TCDD is not manufactured commercially
other than for scientific research purposes. The main sources of TCDD releases
into the environment are from combustion and incineration; metal smelting,
refining, and processing; chemical manufacturing and processing; biological and
photochemical processes; and existing reservoir sources that reflect past
releases. TCDD (dioxin) was selected for study by the National Toxicology Program
as a part of the dioxin TEF evaluation to assess the cancer risk posed by complex
mixtures of polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans
(PCDFs), and PCBs. The dioxin TEF evaluation includes conducting multiple 2-year 
rat bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity of
DLCs, structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of these compounds. While one of
the aims of the dioxin TEF evaluation was a comparative analysis across studies, 
in this Technical Report, only the TCDD results are presented and discussed. TCDD
was included because it is the reference compound for the dioxin TEF methodology.
Female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats were administered TCDD (at least 98% pure) in
corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage for 14, 31, or 53 weeks or 2 years. Genetic
toxicology studies were conducted in Salmonella typhimurium, L5178Y mouse
lymphoma cells, cultured Chinese hamster ovary cells, Drosophila melanogaster,
and mouse bone marrow cells. 2-YEAR STUDY: Groups of 81 or 82 female rats were
administered 3, 10, 22, 46, or 100 ng TCDD/kg body weight in corn oil:acetone
(99:1) by gavage, 5 days per week, for up to 105 weeks; a group of 81 vehicle
control female rats received the corn oil/acetone vehicle alone. Up to 10 rats
per group were evaluated at 14, 31, or 53 weeks. A stop-exposure group of 50
female rats was administered 100 ng/kg TCDD in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage 
for 30 weeks and then just the vehicle for the remainder of the study. Survival
of dosed groups was similar to that of the vehicle control group. Mean body
weights of 100 ng/kg core study and stop-exposure groups were less than those of 
the vehicle control group after week 13 of the study. Mean body weights of 46
ng/kg rats were less than those of the vehicle controls during year 2 of the
study, and those of 22 ng/kg rats were less than those of the vehicle controls
the last 10 weeks of the study. THYROID HORMONE CONCENTRATIONS: Alterations in
serum thyroid hormone levels were evaluated at the 14-, 31- and 53-week interim
evaluations. At 14 weeks, there were significant decreases in serum total and
free thyroxine (T4) levels and increases in serum total triiodothyronine (T3) and
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). At 31 weeks, there were significant decreases 
in serum total and free T4 levels and increases in serum total T3 but no
significant effect on TSH. At 53 weeks, there were significant decreases in serum
total T4 levels and increases in serum total T3. There were no significant
effects on total T4 or TSH levels. HEPATIC CELL PROLIFERATION DATA: To evaluate
hepatocyte replication, analysis of labeling of replicating hepatocytes with
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine was conducted at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim
evaluations. The hepatocellular labeling index was significantly higher in the 22
ng/kg group compared to vehicle controls at 14 weeks. At the 31-week interim
evaluation, the labeling indices in hepatocytes were significantly higher in all 
dosed groups than in the vehicle controls. At 53 weeks, labeling indices were
significantly higher in the 46 and 100 ng/kg groups than in the vehicle controls.
CYTOCHROME P450 ENZYME ACTIVITIES: To evaluate the expression of known
dioxin-responsive genes, CYP1A1-associated 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) 
activity and CYP1A2-associated acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H) activity were
evaluated at 14, 31, and 53 weeks. In addition, pentoxyresorufin-O-deethylase
(PROD) activity was analyzed. Hepatic EROD, PROD, and A4H activities were
significantly higher in all dosed groups relative to vehicle controls at the 14-,
31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. Pulmonary EROD was also significantly
higher in all dosed groups compared to vehicle controls at 14, 31, and 53 weeks. 
DETERMINATIONS OF TCDD CONCENTRATIONS IN TISSUES: The tissue disposition of TCDD 
was analyzed in the liver, lung, fat, and blood of all animals in each group at
the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations and in 10 animals per group at the 
end of the 2-year study (105 weeks). The highest concentrations of TCDD were
observed in the liver, followed by fat tissue. Liver and fat tissue
concentrations of TCDD increased with increasing doses of TCDD. No measurable
concentrations of TCDD were observed in blood from vehicle control or treated
rats at any of the interim evaluations. Mean levels of TCDD in the liver and fat 
in the 100 ng/kg group at the end of the 2-year study were 9.3 and 3.2 ng/g,
respectively. In liver tissue from the stop-exposure group, TCDD concentrations
were slightly higher than those observed in the 3 ng/kg group. In the
stop-exposure group, TCDD concentrations in fat were below the limits of
quantitation. PATHOLOGY AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES: Absolute and/or relative liver 
weights were increased at 14, 31, and 53 weeks, with more severe effects
occurring in the higher dosed groups. Increased liver weights correlated with
increased incidences of hepatocyte hypertrophy at 14, 31, and 53 weeks. Exposure 
led to a treatment-related increase in hepatic toxicity with a broad spectrum of 
lesions. Incidences and severities of lesions increased at higher doses and
longer durations of exposure. The earliest effects were increased incidences and 
severities of hepatocyte hypertrophy at 14 weeks. At 2 years, there was a
significant increase in toxic hepatopathy characterized by increased incidences
of numerous nonneoplastic liver lesions including hepatocyte hypertrophy,
multinucleated hepatocytes, altered hepatocellular foci, inflammation,
pigmentation, diffuse fatty change, necrosis, portal fibrosis, oval cell
hyperplasia, bile duct hyperplasia, bile duct cysts, cholangiofibrosis, and
nodular hyperplasia At 2 years, the incidence of hepatocellular adenoma was
significantly increased in the 100 ng/kg core study group. Dose-related increased
incidences of cholangiocarcinoma were seen in core study rats administered 22
ng/kg or greater. The highest incidence of cholangiocarcinoma was seen in the 100
ng/kg core study group and included a significant number of animals with multiple
cholangiocarcinomas. Two cholangiocarcinomas and two hepatocellular adenomas were
seen in the 100 ng/kg stop-exposure group. Two hepatocholangiomas were seen in
the 100 ng/kg core study group, and one cholangioma was seen in the 100 ng/kg
stop-exposure group. In the lung, the incidence of cystic keratinizing
epithelioma of the lung was significantly increased at 2 years in the 100 ng/kg
core study group. Nonneoplastic effects in the lung included increased incidences
of bronchiolar metaplasia. The incidence of gingival squamous cell carcinoma of
the oral mucosa was significantly increased in the 100 ng/kg core study group at 
2 years and was accompanied by an increased incidence of gingival squamous
hyperplasia. At 2 years, the incidence of squamous cell carcinoma of the uterus
in the 46 ng/kg group was significantly increased, and there were two squamous
cell carcinomas in the 100 ng/kg stop-exposure group. At 2 years, one acinar
adenoma and two acinar cell carcinomas of the pancreas were seen in the 100 ng/kg
core study group; one acinar carcinoma was seen in the 100 ng/kg stop-exposure
group. The incidences of acinar cell adenoma or carcinoma (combined) exceeded the
historical vehicle control range. Nonneoplastic effects in the lung included
acinar cytoplasmic vacuolization, chronic active inflammation, acinar atrophy,
and arterial chronic active inflammation. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 16835633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Plant Cell Rep. 2006 Dec;25(12):1287-93. Epub 2006 Jul 11.

Gynogenic plant regeneration from unpollinated flower explants of Eragrostis tef 
(Zuccagni) Trotter.

Gugsa L(1), Sarial AK, Lörz H, Kumlehn J.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, Corrensstrasse 3,
06466, Gatersleben, Germany.

Tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] is the most important cereal in Ethiopia. In
its wild relative E. mexicana, regeneration of six green plants resulted from
culture of 121 non-pollinated immature pistils. In the allotetraploid crop
species tef, however, only callus and root formation was obtained by this method.
By contrast, immature spikelets and panicle segments of E. tef proved amenable to
gynogenic plant regeneration. Upon step-wise optimization of the protocol,
efficient plant formation was achieved in all three cultivars tested. In cv.
DZ-01-196, culture of 1305 immature spikelets resulted in formation of 159 green 
plants. Flow cytometric analysis revealed (di)haploid, triploid, tetraploid and
octoploid regenerants, from which the vast majority was tetraploid. Tef-breeding 
programs will likely benefit substantially from efficient generation of
true-breeding plants.

PMID: 16832620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mycopathologia. 2006 Jul;162(1):57-63.

Natural occurrence of mycotoxins in staple cereals from Ethiopia.

Ayalew A(1), Fehrmann H, Lepschy J, Beck R, Abate D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, Alemaya University, P.O. Box 241, Alemaya,
Ethiopia. amareayalew@yahoo.com

The occurrence of mycotoxins in barley, sorghum, teff (Eragrostis tef) and wheat 
from Ethiopia has been studied. Samples were analyzed for aflatoxin B(1) (AFB1), 
ochratoxin A (OTA), deoxynivalenol (DON), nivalenol (NIV) and zearalenone (ZEN)
using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and for fumonisins (FUM)
using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). AFB1 and OTA were detected in
samples of all the four crops. AFB1 was detected in 8.8% of the 352 samples
analyzed at concentrations ranging from trace to 26 microg kg(-1). OTA occurred
in 24.3% of 321 samples at a mean concentration of 54.1 microg kg(-1) and a
maximum of 2106 microg kg(-1). DON occurred in barley, sorghum and wheat at
40-2340 microg kg(-1) with an overall incidence of 48.8% among the 84 mainly
'suspect' samples analyzed; NIV was co-analyzed with DON and was detected at 40
microg kg(-1) in a wheat sample and at 50, 380, and 490 microg kg(-1) in three
sorghum samples. FUM and ZEN occurred only in sorghum samples with low
frequencies at concentrations reaching 2117 and 32 microg kg(-1), respectively.
The analytical results indicate higher mycotoxin contamination in sorghum, which 
could be related to the widespread storage of sorghum grain in underground pits
leading to elevated seed moisture contents. This is the first report on the
occurrence of OTA in teff.

PMID: 16830193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Toxicol Sci. 2006 Oct;93(2):223-41. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

The 2005 World Health Organization reevaluation of human and Mammalian toxic
equivalency factors for dioxins and dioxin-like compounds.

Van den Berg M(1), Birnbaum LS, Denison M, De Vito M, Farland W, Feeley M,
Fiedler H, Hakansson H, Hanberg A, Haws L, Rose M, Safe S, Schrenk D, Tohyama C, 
Tritscher A, Tuomisto J, Tysklind M, Walker N, Peterson RE.

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for Research on Environmental
Health Risk Assessment and Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences, Science and
University Medical Center, Universiteit Utrecht, The Netherlands.
m.vandenberg@iras.uu.nl

In June 2005, a World Health Organization (WHO)-International Programme on
Chemical Safety expert meeting was held in Geneva during which the toxic
equivalency factors (TEFs) for dioxin-like compounds, including some
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), were reevaluated. For this reevaluation
process, the refined TEF database recently published by Haws et al. (2006,
Toxicol. Sci. 89, 4-30) was used as a starting point. Decisions about a TEF value
were made based on a combination of unweighted relative effect potency (REP)
distributions from this database, expert judgment, and point estimates. Previous 
TEFs were assigned in increments of 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, etc., but for this
reevaluation, it was decided to use half order of magnitude increments on a
logarithmic scale of 0.03, 0.1, 0.3, etc. Changes were decided by the expert
panel for 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF) (TEF = 0.3),
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF) (TEF = 0.03),
octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and octachlorodibenzofuran (TEFs = 0.0003),
3,4,4',5-tetrachlorbiphenyl (PCB 81) (TEF = 0.0003),
3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB 169) (TEF = 0.03), and a single TEF value 
(0.00003) for all relevant mono-ortho-substituted PCBs. Additivity, an important 
prerequisite of the TEF concept was again confirmed by results from recent in
vivo mixture studies. Some experimental evidence shows that non-dioxin-like aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor agonists/antagonists are able to impact the overall toxic
potency of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related compounds, and 
this needs to be investigated further. Certain individual and groups of compounds
were identified for possible future inclusion in the TEF concept, including
3,4,4'-TCB (PCB 37), polybrominated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, mixed
polyhalogenated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, polyhalogenated
naphthalenes, and polybrominated biphenyls. Concern was expressed about direct
application of the TEF/total toxic equivalency (TEQ) approach to abiotic
matrices, such as soil, sediment, etc., for direct application in human risk
assessment. This is problematic as the present TEF scheme and TEQ methodology are
primarily intended for estimating exposure and risks via oral ingestion (e.g., by
dietary intake). A number of future approaches to determine alternative or
additional TEFs were also identified. These included the use of a probabilistic
methodology to determine TEFs that better describe the associated levels of
uncertainty and "systemic" TEFs for blood and adipose tissue and TEQ for body
burden.

PMCID: PMC2290740
PMID: 16829543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Genetics. 2006 Sep;174(1):125-34. Epub 2006 Jul 2.

Molecular characterization of teflon, a gene required for meiotic autosome
segregation in male Drosophila melanogaster.

Arya GH(1), Lodico MJ, Ahmad OI, Amin R, Tomkiel JE.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of North Carolina, Greensboro, North Carolina
27420, USA.

Drosophila melanogaster males lack recombination and have evolved a mechanism of 
meiotic chromosome segregation that is independent of both the chiasmatic and
achiasmatic segregation systems of females. The teflon (tef) gene is specifically
required in males for proper segregation of autosomes and provides a genetic tool
for understanding recombination-independent mechanisms of pairing and segregation
as well as differences in sex chromosome vs. autosome segregation. Here we report
on the cloning of the tef gene and the molecular characterization of tef
mutations. Rescue experiments using a GAL4-driven pUAS transgene demonstrate that
tef corresponds to predicted Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project (BDGP) gene
CG8961 and that tef expression is required in the male germ line prior to
spermatocyte stage S4. Consistent with this early prophase requirement,
expression of tef was found to be independent of regulators of meiotic M phase
initiation or progression. The predicted Tef protein contains three C2H2
zinc-finger motifs, one at the amino terminus and two in tandem at the carboxyl
terminus. In addition to the zinc-finger motifs, a 44- to 45-bp repeat is
conserved in three related Drosophila species. On the basis of these findings, we
propose a role for Tef as a bridging molecule that holds autosome bivalents
together via heterochromatic connections.

PMCID: PMC1569773
PMID: 16816414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):25-36.

The circadian PAR-domain basic leucine zipper transcription factors DBP, TEF, and
HLF modulate basal and inducible xenobiotic detoxification.

Gachon F(1), Olela FF, Schaad O, Descombes P, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, National Center of Competence in Research
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):3-4.

The PAR-domain basic leucine zipper (PAR bZip) transcription factors DBP, TEF,
and HLF accumulate in a highly circadian manner in several peripheral tissues,
including liver and kidney. Mice devoid of all three of these proteins are born
at expected Mendelian ratios, but are epilepsy prone, age at an accelerated rate,
and die prematurely. In the hope of identifying PAR bZip target genes whose
altered expression might contribute to the high morbidity and mortality of PAR
bZip triple knockout mice, we compared the liver and kidney transcriptomes of
these animals to those of wild-type or heterozygous mutant mice. These
experiments revealed that PAR bZip proteins control the expression of many
enzymes and regulators involved in detoxification and drug metabolism, such as
cytochrome P450 enzymes, carboxylesterases, and constitutive androstane receptor 
(CAR). Indeed, PAR bZip triple knockout mice are hypersensitive to xenobiotic
compounds, and the deficiency in detoxification may contribute to their early
aging.

PMID: 16814730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):3-4.

Xenobiotic metabolism in the fourth dimension: PARtners in time.

Green CB(1), Takahashi JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia
22904, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2006 Jul;4(1):25-36.

A significant portion of the transcriptome in mammals, including the PAR bZIP
transcription factors DBP, HLF, and TEF, is under circadian clock control. In
this issue of Cell Metabolism, Gachon and colleagues (Gachon et al., 2006) show
that disruption of these three genes in mice alters gene expression patterns of
many proteins involved in drug metabolism and in liver and kidney responses to
xenobiotic agents. Triple mutant mice have severe physiological deficits,
including increased hypersensitivity to xenobiotic agents and premature aging,
highlighting the profound effect the circadian clock has on this important
response system.

PMCID: PMC3760144
PMID: 16814725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Indian J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2006 Jul;58(3):300-2. doi:
10.1007/BF03050850.

Tracheoesophageal fistula: New option in management.

Singhal SK(1), Virk RS, Dass A, Sandhu BS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine Department of Otolaryngology & Medicine, Government Medical 
College & Hospital, 160 030 Chandigarh, India.

Tracheoesophageal fistula is a life threatening condition. Patients not managed
surgically ultimately die of their disease. Surgical management is the treatment 
of choice. We present a case of a patient that developed a tracheoesophageal
fistula after tracheostomy. Surgical repair was done which failed due to
infection. The patient was managed with the help of an esophageal stent and
Trichloroacetic Acid cautery. This approach can be used in selected patients,
depending upon the size and site of TEE Larger fistulae and those situated lower 
down e.g. supra carinal cannot be managed by this technique.

PMCID: PMC3450399
PMID: 23120323  [PubMed]


316. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2006 Oct;386(4):791-806. Epub 2006 Jun 23.

Advances in analytical techniques for polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins,
polychlorinated dibenzofurans and dioxin-like PCBs.

Reiner EJ(1), Clement RE, Okey AB, Marvin CH.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Ministry of the Environment, Toronto, ON, Canada.
eric.reiner@ene.gov.on.ca

Analytical techniques for the determination of polychorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins
(PCDD), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF) and dioxin-like PCBs (DLPCB) are
reviewed. The focus of the review is on recent advances in methodology and
analytical procedures. The paper also reviews toxicology, the development of
toxic equivalent factors (TEF) and the determination of toxic equivalent quantity
(TEQ) values. Sources, occurrence and temporal trends of PCDD/PCDF are summarized
to provide examples of levels and concentration ranges for the methods and
techniques reviewed.

PMCID: PMC1764597
PMID: 16794816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2006 Nov;60(11):1337-40. Epub 2006 Jun 14.

Factorial estimation of daily energy expenditure using a simplified method was
improved by adjustment for excess post-exercise oxygen consumption and thermic
effect of food.

Warwick PM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, University of New
England, Armidale, New South Wales, Australia. pwarwick@une.edu.au

This study validated a simplified factorial method for measuring energy
expenditure (EE) against EE measured by doubly labelled water (DEE), and
investigated whether adjustment for excess post-exercise oxygen consumption
(EPOC) and thermic effect of food (TEF) as described by Institute of Medicine
(2002) improved the factorial measure. Seventeen normal weight subjects (10
females, seven males) were recruited from among university staff and students.
Factorial EE was measured using a 16-activity-category method, published energy
costs of activities and measured basal metabolic rate, before (FEE) and after
(FEE(adj)) adjustment for EPOC and TEF, and by DEE. FEE underestimated daily EE
by 14.6% relative to DEE (P = 0.000), but this underestimate was improved to 5.1%
(P = 0.071) when FEE was adjusted for EPOC and TEF. Individual differences
between DEE and FEE(adj) ranged from -20.2 to 17.6%, with 88% of subjects showing
differences of less than +/-12%.

PMID: 16775582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Chemosphere. 2006 Nov;65(9):1470-80. Epub 2006 Jun 12.

PCDD/F and "Dioxin-like" PCB emissions from iron ore sintering plants in the UK.

Aries E(1), Anderson DR, Fisher R, Fray TA, Hemfrey D.

Author information: 
(1)Corus Research, Development and Technology, Swinden Technology Centre,
Moorgate, Rotherham S60 3AR, South Yorkshire, UK. eric.aries@corusgroup.com

Investigations have been carried out at the three Corus UK sinter plants over the
period 2002-2004 to characterise the emissions of both 2,3,7,8-PCDD/Fs and WHO-12
PCBs, to estimate annual mass releases of these organic micro-pollutants using
the I-TEF and WHO-TEF schemes, and to investigate the formation of PCBs in the
iron ore sintering process. Results showed that the sintering of iron ore
produces a characteristic WHO-12 PCB and PCDD/F congener pattern that is
substantially the same for all UK sinter plants. With regard to WHO-12 PCBs, the 
most abundant congeners were typically PCBs 118 (6-9 ngNm(-3)), 105 (2-4
ngNm(-3)) and 77 (2-3 ngNm(-3)). All other WHO-12 PCBs were also detected at
concentrations around 1 ngNm(-3). All sinter plants investigated exhibited very
similar TEQ concentrations. WHO-12 PCB emissions were in the range 0.042-0.111
ngWHO-TEQNm(-3), whereas PCDD/F emissions ranged from 0.39 to 1.62
ngWHO-TEQNm(-3). PCDF congeners were the main contributors to the overall TEQ in 
sintering emissions (ca. 85%). Amongst WHO-12 PCBs, PCB 126 was the only
noteworthy contributor to total TEQ (ca. 5-7%), a similar contribution to that
from PCDDs. Based on the measurements that Corus UK has undertaken at these three
sinter plants, annual mass releases of WHO-12 PCBs and PCDD/Fs have been
calculated. For UK sinter plants, a total mass release of 29.5 g WHO-TEQ per
annum [WHO-12 PCBs+PCDD/Fs] has been estimated, representing 9% of the total
PCDD/F emissions to the UK atmosphere. Measurements were also carried out at a UK
sinter plant to determine the windleg emission profile of WHO-12 PCBs. Results
showed that WHO-12 PCBs were formed in the same regions of the sinter strand as
2,3,7,8-PCDD/Fs, indicating that there was a strong correlation between the
formation of WHO-12 PCBs and PCDD/Fs in the iron ore sintering process.

PMID: 16765418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Ann Saudi Med. 2006 Mar-Apr;26(2):116-9.

Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula: success and failure
in 94 cases.

Al-Salem AH(1), Tayeb M, Khogair S, Roy A, Al-Jishi N, Alsenan K, Shaban H, Ahmad
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Maternity and Children Hospital, Dammam,
Saudi Arabia. ahalsalem@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The management of newborns with esophageal atresia (EA) with or
without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) has evolved considerably over the years. 
Currently an overall survival of 85% to 90% has been reported from developed
countries. In developing countries, several factors contribute to higher
mortality rates. We describe our experience with 94 consecutive cases of EA with 
or without TEF.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We retrospectively studied 94 patients with EA with or
without TEF treated at our hospital over a period of 15 years. Medical records
were reviewed for age at diagnosis, sex, birth weight, associated anomalies,
aspiration pneumonia, method of diagnosis, treatment, postoperative complications
and outcome.
RESULTS: Ninety-four newborns (55 males and 39 females) with EA/TEF were treated 
at our hospital. Their mean birth weight was 2.2 kg (700 g to 3800 g). Age at
diagnosis ranged from birth to 7 days. At the time of admission 37 (39.4%) had
aspiration pneumonia. Associated anomalies were seen in 46 (49%) patients.
Thirteen patients had major associated anomalies that contributed to mortality.
Postoperative complications were similar to those from developed countries but
overall operative mortality (30.8%) was high.
CONCLUSIONS: The overall mortality was high but excluding major congenital
malformations, sepsis was the most frequent cause of death. Factors contributing 
to mortality included prematurity, delay in diagnosis with an increased incidence
of aspiration pneumonia and a shortage of qualified nurses. To improve overall
outcome, factors contributing to sepsis should be evaluated and efforts should be
made to overcome them.

PMID: 16761448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Toxicol Lett. 2006 Sep 10;165(3):230-41. Epub 2006 May 3.

Determination of in vitro relative potency (REP) values for mono-ortho
polychlorinated biphenyls after purification with active charcoal.

Peters AK(1), Leonards PE, Zhao B, Bergman A, Denison MS, Van den Berg M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Risk Assessment Sciences (IRAS), Utrecht University, PO Box
80176, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands. L.Peters@iras.uu.nl

The TEF system for dioxin-like compounds has included assignment of TEF values
for mono-ortho polychlorinated biphenyls (MO-PCBs). Small traces of aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-active impurities could result in artifactually higher
relative potency (REP) values. MO-PCBs -105, -118, -156, and -167 were purified
on an active charcoal column to remove AhR agonists that could be present as
impurities. Activation or inhibition of AhR-dependent gene expression by purified
MO-PCBs was studied in stably transfected cell lines (H1G1.1c3 mouse, H4G1.1c2
rat hepatoma), containing an AhR-responsive (AhR-EGFP) reporter gene. In
addition, EROD activity was used as marker for CYP1A1 activity in these cell
lines. MO-PCBs -105, -118, -156 induced AhR-EGFP expression in both rodent cell
lines, with PCB-156 (10microM) being most effectively; inducing gene expression
to approximately 27% of TCDD (mouse cells) and 62.5+/-3.4% (rat cells) of TCDD.
This concurred with increased EROD activity in both cell lines to maxima of
20.5+/-1.5% and 68+/-3.2% of TCDD, respectively. No induction was observed for
PCB-167. In the H1G1.1c3 mouse cells, PCB-105, -118 and -156 (10microM)
significantly reduced TCDD-induced AhR-EGFP expression to 50.9+/-2.9%,
58.3+/-2.2% and 70.8+/-1.3% of TCDD. Reduced EROD activity was also observed, of 
39.3+/-2.8%, 67+/-5% and 48.3+/-4% compared to TCDD. PCB-167 did not result in
significant reduction. In rat cells, only PCB-156 resulted in significant
decrease in TCDD-induced AhR-EGFP expression of 35%, suggesting species
differences play a role. Our results suggest that purification of MO-PCBs is an
essential step in determining accurate REP values, and could very likely lead to 
lower TEF values than those presently assigned by the WHO.

PMCID: PMC3032053
PMID: 16750337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2006 May;69(10):907-17.

Relative cancer potencies of selected dioxin-like compounds on a body-burden
basis: comparison to current toxic equivalency factors (TEFs).

Gray MN(1), Aylward LL, Keenan RE.

Author information: 
(1)AMEC Earth & Environmental, Inc., Portland, Maine, USA.

Recent National Toxicology Program (NTP) cancer bioassay data for
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran
(4-PeCDF), 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126), and a mixture of these
three compounds offer opportunities to assess the accuracy of current World
Health Organization (WHO) 1998 toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for these
compounds under a variety of assumptions. An evaluation of the current TEF values
for these compounds using body burden in nanograms per kilogram as the dose
metric is presented. Average lifetime body burdens were estimated for all
compounds at all dose groups based on measured tissue concentrations at 4 time
points during the 2-yr NTP studies. Poly-3 adjusted tumor incidences for
hepatocellular adenomas, cholangiocarcinomas, and the two tumors combined were
modeled using a quantal multistage model and the Hill model with lifetime average
body burden as the dose metric. Benchmark doses for a 10% response (BMD10) for
each compound and the mixture were estimated. With TCDD as the reference
standard, relative potency (REP) estimates were derived from ratios of the BMD10 
estimates for PCB 126, 4-PeCDF, and for the toxic equivalent (TEQ) mixture. On a 
body-burden basis, PCB 126 and 4-PeCDF were 2- to 3-fold and 10- to 12-fold less 
potent than predicted based on the WHO TEFs, respectively, while the TEQ mixture 
was approximately 3- to 5-fold less potent than predicted by the TEFs. The
current WHO TEF values, which were derived from data on noncancer endpoints
evaluated on an administered dose basis, overpredict the carcinogenic potency of 
these compounds on a body-burden basis compared to TCDD.

PMID: 16728370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Struct Biol. 2006 Aug;155(2):130-9. Epub 2006 May 6.

Experimental identification of homodimerizing B-ZIP families in Homo sapiens.

Acharya A(1), Rishi V, Moll J, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bldg. 37, Rm. 3128, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

B-ZIP transcription factors dimerization is mediated by a parallel coiled-coil
termed the leucine zipper. We have evaluated the dimerization specificity of the 
seven coiled-coil B-ZIP proteins (ATF6, XBP, LZIP, NFIL3, TEF, CREB, and
C/EBPalpha) with themselves and each other. To do this, we designed dominant
negative proteins, termed A-ZIPs, that contain the leucine zipper dimerization
domain of a B-ZIP protein and an acidic amphipathic N-terminal extension. The
A-ZIPs heterodimerize with B-ZIP proteins in a leucine zipper-dependent manner.
The acidic N-terminal extension is hypothesized to form an heterodimeric
coiled-coil structure with the basic region, essentially zippering the leucine
zipper into the basic region. We now present a new acidic extension design that
stabilizes heterodimerization with B-ZIP proteins up to 11 kcal mol(-1). We have 
used these A-ZIP proteins in a competition EMSA to evaluate which A-ZIP can
prevent DNA binding of which B-ZIP domain. Inhibition of DNA binding is
interpreted to indicate that the A-ZIP is forming a heterodimer with the B-ZIP
domain and thus prevents the B-ZIP from binding to DNA. All leucine zippers
examined can homodimerize and two pairs (CREB & NFIL3 and ATF6 & XBP) can
heterodimerize. We discuss these results with reference to the amino acid
sequence of the leucine zipper region. These A-ZIP reagents may be of value in
biological systems to inhibit the DNA binding and transcriptional potential of
specific B-ZIP families.

PMID: 16725346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mycologia. 2005 Nov-Dec;97(6):1225-37.

Regiocrella, a new entomopathogenic genus with a pycnidial anamorph and its
phylogenetic placement in the Clavicipitaceae.

Chaverri P(1), Bischoff JF, Evans HC, Hodge KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853,
USA. pchaverri@howard.edu

A new genus, Regiocrella, is described with two species, R. camerunensis and R.
sinensis, based on specimens collected in Cameroon and China. Both species are
parasitic on scale insects (Coccidae, Homoptera). Morphological and molecular
evidence place the new genus in the Clavicipitaceae (Hypocreales), despite its
combination of characters that are atypical of that family; Regiocrella is
characterized by having perithecia partly immersed in a subiculum, noncapitate
asci, unicellular fusiform ascospores and pycnidial-acervular conidiomata. The
two new species, R. camerunensis and R. sinensis, are distinguished based on
ascospore and perithecium size. Morphological characters were evaluated and
compared to other genera in the Clavicipitaceae, especially those parasitic on
scale insects or with pycnidial-acervular anamorphs or synanamorphs (i.e.
Aschersonia, Ephelis or Sphacelia): Atkinsonella, Balansia, Claviceps, Epichlöe, 
Hypocrella, Myriogenospora and Neoclaviceps. The phylogenetic relationships of
Regiocrella were examined with three gene loci: large subunit nuclear ribosomal
DNA (LSU), translation elongation factor 1-alpha (TEF), and RNA polymerase II
subunit 1 (RPB1). The results of this study confirm that Regiocrella is distinct 
from other genera in the Clavicipitaceae and that its two species form a
monophyletic group. Regiocrella is shown to be closely related to the scale
insect pathogen Hypocrella and the plant-associated genera Balansia, Claviceps,
Epichlöe, Myriogenospora and Neoclaviceps. This study also provides insights into
the evolution of pycnidial-acervular conidiomata and scale insect parasitism
within the Clavicipitaceae. Plant-associated genera form a monophyletic group
correlated with Clavicipitaceae subfamily Clavicipitoideae sensu Diehl. We also
demonstrate that scale insect parasites have multiple evolutionary origins within
the family and genera with pycnidial-acervular anamorphs or synanamorphs have a
single origin.

PMID: 16722216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2006 Jul;41(7):688-9.

Complication of mediastinal mass: acquired tracheoesophageal fistula associated
with T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma.

Moree JS, Bhakta MG, Ledbetter J.

The occurrence of a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in the setting of lymphoma
has only rarely been reported in the world literature. Most cases reported were
associated with radiation therapy vs. chemotherapy alone. This report presents
one case illustrating the difficulty encountered managing a TEF that developed
while undergoing chemotherapy for T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma.

PMID: 16703600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Genome. 2006 Apr;49(4):365-72.

Expressed sequence tag analysis in tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc) Trotter).

Yu JK(1), Sun Q, Rota ML, Edwards H, Tefera H, Sorrells ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY
14853, USA.

Tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter) is the most important cereal crop in
Ethiopia; however, there is very little DNA sequence information available for
this species. Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) were generated from 4 cDNA
libraries: seedling leaf, seedling root, and inflorescence of E. tef and seedling
leaf of Eragrostis pilosa, a wild relative of E. tef. Clustering of 3603
sequences produced 530 clusters and 1890 singletons, resulting in 2420 tef
unigenes. Approximately 3/4 of tef unigenes matched protein or nucleotide
sequences in public databases. Annotation of unigenes associated 68% of the
putative tef genes with gene ontology categories. Identification of the
translated unigenes for conserved protein domains revealed 389 protein family
domains (Pfam), the most frequent of which was protein kinase. A total of 170
ESTs containing simple sequence repeats (EST-SSRs) were identified and 80 EST-SSR
markers were developed. In addition, 19 single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and 
(or) insertion-deletion (indel) and 34 intron fragment length polymorphism (IFLP)
markers were developed. The EST database and molecular markers generated in this 
study will be valuable resources for further tef genetic research.

PMID: 16699556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Paediatr Anaesth. 2006 May;16(5):588-90.

Anesthetic management of tracheoesophageal fistula repair in a newborn with
hypoplastic left heart syndrome.

Saade E(1), Setzer N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston and
Driscoll Children's Hospital, Corpus Christi, TX, USA. edouardsaade@comcast.net

We present a case of a newborn with hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The anesthesia management for the repair of the 
TEF is presented and the management of the unique pathophysiology of the HLHS
circulation is discussed.

PMID: 16677272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biomed Environ Sci. 2006 Feb;19(1):53-60.

Abnormal expression of eukaryotic translation factors in malignant transformed
human bronchial epithelial cells induced by crystalline nickel sulfide.

Lei YX(1), Chen XM, Wu GR, Chen JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the oncogenic potential of mouse translation initiation
factor 3 (TIF3) and elongation factor-1delta (TEF-1delta) in malignant
transformed human bronchial epithelial cells induced by crystalline nickel
sulfide (NiS).
METHODS: Abnormal expressions of human TIF3 and TEF-1delta genes in two kinds of 
NiS-transformed cells and NiS-tumorigenic cell lines were investigated and
analyzed by the reverse transcript polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
fluorescent quantitative polymerase chain reaction (FQ-PCR), respectively.
RESULTS: RT-PCR analysis primarily showed that both human TIF3 and TEF-1delta
mRNA expressions in two kinds of NiS-transformed cells and NiS-tumorigenic cell
lines were increased as compared with controls. FQ-PCR assay showed that the
levels of TIF3 expressions in the transformed cells and tumorigenic cells were 3 
and 4 times higher respectively, and the elevated expressions of TEF-1delta cDNA 
copies were 2.7- to 3.5-fold in transformed cells and 4.1- to 5.2-fold in
tumorigenic cells when compared with non-transformed cells, indicating that the
over-expressions of human TIF3 and TEF-1delta genes were related to malignant
degree of the cells induced by nickel.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that there are markedly abnormal
expressions of TIF3 and TEF-1delta genes during malignant transformation of human
bronchial epithelial cell lines induced by crystalline NiS. They seem to be the
molecular mechanisms potentially responsible for human carcinogensis due to
nickel.

PMID: 16673819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Natl Toxicol Program Tech Rep Ser. 2006 Jan;(520):4-246.

NTP toxicology and carcinogenesis studies of 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB
126) (CAS No. 57465-28-8) in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats (Gavage Studies).

National Toxicology Program.

DIOXIN TOXIC EQUIVALENCY FACTOR EVALUATION OVERVIEW: Polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons such as 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have the ability 
to bind to and activate the ligand-activated transcription factor, the aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR). Structurally related compounds that bind to the AhR
and exhibit biological actions similar to TCDD are commonly referred to as
"dioxin-like compounds" (DLCs). Ambient human exposure to DLCs occurs through the
ingestion of foods containing residues of DLCs that bioconcentrate through the
food chain. Due to their lipophilicity and persistence, once internalized they
accumulate in adipose tissue resulting in chronic lifetime human exposure. Since 
human exposure to DLCs always occurs as a complex mixture, the Toxic Equivalency 
Factor (TEF) methodology has been developed as a mathematical tool to assess the 
health risk posed by complex mixtures of these compounds. The TEF methodology is 
a relative potency scheme that ranks the dioxin-like activity of a compound
relative to TCDD that is the most potent congener. This allows for the estimation
of the potential dioxin-like activity of a mixture of chemicals, based on a
common mechanism of action involving an initial binding of DLCs to the AhR. The
toxic equivalency of DLCs was nominated for evaluation, because of the widespread
human exposure to DLCs and the lack of data on the adequacy of the TEF
methodology for predicting relative potency for cancer risk. To address this, the
National Toxicology Program conducted a series of 2-year bioassays in female
Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats to evaluate the chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity
of DLCs and structurally-related polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and mixtures of
these compounds. 3,3',4,4',5-Pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) was produced
commercially before 1977 for the electric industry as a dielectric insulating
fluid for transformers and capacitors. Manufacture and use of the chemical was
stopped because of increased PCB residues in the environment, but it continues to
be released into the environment through the use and disposal of products
containing PCBs, as by-products during the manufacture of certain organic
chemicals, and during combustion of some waste materials. Bioaccumulation of PCB 
126 results in persistent levels in animal and human tissues and the biological
responses to PCB 126 are similar to those of TCDD, a known human carcinogen. PCB 
126 was selected for study by the National Toxicology Program as a part of the
dioxin TEF evaluation to assess the cancer risk posed by complex mixtures of
polychlorinated dibenzodioxins (PCDDs), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs),
and PCBs. The dioxin TEF evaluation includes conducting multiple 2-year rat
bioassays to evaluate the relative chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity of DLCs, 
structurally related PCBs, and mixtures of these compounds. PCB 126 was included 
since this is the most potent coplanar PCB that has dioxin-like activities. While
one of the aims of the dioxin TEF evaluation was a comparative analysis across
studies, in this Technical Report only the results of the PCB 126 study are
presented and discussed. Female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats were administered PCB 
126 (99% pure) in corn oil with acetone by gavage for 14, 31, or 53 weeks or 2
years. 2-YEAR STUDY: Groups of 81 female rats were administered 30, 100, 175,
300, 550, or 1,000 ng PCB 126/kg body weight in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by
gavage, 5 days per week, for up to 104 weeks; a group of 81 vehicle control
female rats received the corn oil/acetone vehicle alone. A group of 28 rats
received 10 ng/kg for up to 53 weeks only. Up to 10 rats per group were evaluated
at 14, 31, or 53 weeks. A stop-exposure group of 50 female rats was administered 
1,000 ng/kg PCB 126 in corn oil:acetone (99:1) by gavage for 30 weeks then the
vehicle for the remainder of the study. Mean body weights of 30 and 100 ng/kg
rats were similar to those of the vehicle controls during most of the study, mean
body weights of 175 and 300 ng/kg rats were less than those of the vehicle
controls during year 2 of the study, and mean body weights of 550 ng/kg, 1,000
ng/kg core study, and 1,000 ng/kg stop-exposure rats were less than those of the 
vehicle controls after week 17. THYROID HORMONE CONCENTRATIONS: Alterations in
serum thyroid hormone levels were evaluated at the 14-, 31- and 53- week interim 
evaluations. In the 550 and 1,000 ng/kg rats, total thyroxine (T4) and free T4
were significantly lower than vehicle controls and serum triiodothyronine (T3)
and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) levels were significantly higher than
vehicle controls at the 14-week interim evaluation. Serum T3 was also
significantly higher in the 300 ng/kg rats compared to vehicle controls at 14
weeks. At 31 weeks, T3 was significantly higher at doses of 100 ng/kg or greater 
compared to vehicle controls. TSH levels were higher in 550 and 1,000 ng/kg rats 
than in vehicle controls. At 53 weeks, significantly lower serum concentrations
of total T4 and free T4 were observed compared to vehicle controls in groups
administered 175 ng/kg or greater and 30 ng/kg or greater, respectively. Serum T3
levels were significantly higher at doses of 175 ng/kg or greater compared to
vehicle controls. No changes in TSH were observed between vehicle controls and
dosed rats at 53 weeks. HEPATIC CELL PROLIFERATION DATA: To evaluate hepatocyte
replication, analysis of labeling of replicating hepatocytes with
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine was conducted at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim
evaluations. The hepatocellular labeling index was significantly higher at doses 
of 300 ng/kg or greater at 14 weeks and 175 ng/kg or greater at 31 weeks compared
to vehicle controls. No statistically significant differences were observed
between vehicle controls and PCB 126 dosed rats at 53 weeks. However at 53 weeks,
a 5.8-fold increase above the vehicle controls was observed in the 1,000 ng/kg
group. CYTOCHROME P450 ENZYME ACTIVITIES: To evaluate the expression of known
dioxin-responsive genes, CYP1A1 associated 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) 
activity and CYP1A2-associated acetanilide 4-hydroxylase (A-4-H) activity were
evaluated at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week interim evaluations. In addition, CYP2B
associated pentoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (PROD) activity was also analysed.
Hepatic PROD (CYP2B1) and hepatic and pulmonary EROD (CYP1A1) activity were
significantly greater in all dosed groups than in vehicle controls at weeks 14,
31, and 53. Hepatic A-4-H (CYP1A2) activity was significantly greater in the 30, 
100, 175, 300, 550, and 1,000 ng/kg groups compared to vehicle controls at weeks 
14, 31, and 53. DETERMINATIONS of PCB 126 CONCENTRATIONS IN TISSUES: The tissue
disposition of PCB 126 was analyzed in the liver, lung, fat, and blood of all
rats in vehicle controls and all dosed groups at the 14-, 31-, and 53-week
interim evaluations and in 10 rats per group including vehicle controls at the
end of the 2-year study (104 weeks). Detectable concentrations of PCB 126 were
observed in the liver, fat, lung, and blood. Measurable concentrations of PCB 126
were present in the liver and fat at weeks 31, 53, and 104. Hepatic and fat
concentrations increased with increasing doses of PCB 126. Measurable
concentrations of PCB 126 were present in vehicle control lung tissue at 53 and
104 weeks. No PCB 126 was observed in the blood from the vehicle control rats.
Lung and blood concentrations tended to increase with increasing doses of PCB
126, with a few exceptions. In the stop-exposure group, PCB 126 concentrations in
liver and fat were lower than the levels observed in the 30 ng/kg group. In the
stop-exposure group, lung tissue PCB 126 concentrations were equivalent to the
levels observed in the 30 ng/kg group. In blood from the stop-exposure group, PCB
126 concentrations were equivalent to the levels observed in the 100 ng/kg group.
PATHOLOGY AND STATISTICAL ANALYSES: Absolute and relative liver weights were
significantly increased at all time points and correlated with increased
incidences of hepatocellular hypertrophy. At 2 years, there were significant
treatment-related increases in the incidences of cholangiocarcinoma and
hepatocellular adenoma. Three hepatocholangiomas were seen in the 1,000 ng/kg
core study group and a single incidence of cholangioma each occurred in the 550
and 1,000 ng/kg core study groups. At 2 years, a significant dose-related
increase in hepatic toxicity was observed and was characterized by increased
incidences of numerous lesions including hepatocyte hypertrophy, multinucleated
hepatocytes, diffuse fatty change, bile duct hyperplasia, bile duct cyst, oval
cell hyperplasia, necrosis, pigmentation, inflammation, nodular hyperplasia,
portal fibrosis, cholangiofibrosis, and toxic hepatopathy. The incidences of
these lesions were generally decreased in the 1,000 ng/kg stop-exposure group
compared to the 1,000 ng/kg core study group. The lung weights of 1,000 ng/kg
rats were generally significantly increased at weeks 14, 31, and 53. At 2 years, 
treatment related increases in the incidences of cystic keratinizing epithelioma 
and squamous cell carcinomas were observed. In addition, dose-related increases
in the incidences of bronchiolar metaplasia of the alveolar epithelium and
squamous metaplasia were also observed. The incidence of gingival squamous cell
carcinoma of the oral mucosa was significantly increased in the 1,000 ng/kg core 
study group at 2 years. Gingival squamous cell carcinoma, although reduced in
incidence as compared to the 1,000 ng/kg core study group, was still present in
the 1,000 ng/kg stop-exposure group. At 2 years, adenomas and/or carcinomas were 
present in the adrenal cortex of most core study groups and in the 1,000 ng/kg
stop-exposure group. Dose-related effects on the incidences of adrenal cortex
atrophy and cytoplasmic vacuolization were also seen. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 16628245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Ann Bot. 2006 Jun;97(6):985-91. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Drought tolerance of selected Eragrostis species correlates with leaf tensile
properties.

Balsamo RA(1), Willigen CV, Bauer AM, Farrant J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Villanova University, PA 19085, USA.
ronald.balsamo@villanova.edu

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Previous studies on grass leaf tensile properties (behaviour
during mechanical stress) have focused on agricultural applications such as
resistance to trampling and palatability; no investigations have directly
addressed mechanical properties during water stress, and hence these are the
subject of this study.
METHODS: Critical (lethal) relative water contents were determined for three
species of grass in the genus Eragrostis varying in their tolerance to drought.
Measurements were taken for leaf tensile strength, elastic modulus, toughness and
failure load under different conditions of hydration, and light microscopy and
histochemical analyses were undertaken.
KEY RESULTS: Leaf tensile strength of fully hydrated leaves for the
drought-intolerant E. capensis, the moderately drought-tolerant E. tef and the
drought-tolerant E. curvula correlated well with drought tolerance (critical
relative water content). Eragrostis curvula had higher tensile strength values
than E. tef, which in turn had higher values than E. capensis. Measurements on
the drought-tolerant grass E. curvula when fully hydrated and when dried to below
its turgor loss point showed that tensile strength, toughness and the elastic
modulus all increased under conditions of turgor loss, while the failure load
remained unchanged. Additional tests of 100 mm segments along the lamina of E.
curvula showed that tensile strength, toughness and the elastic modulus all
decreased with distance from the base of the lamina, while again the failure load
was unaffected. This decrease in mechanical parameters correlated with a
reduction in the size of the vascular bundles and the amount of lignification, as
viewed in lamina cross-sections.
CONCLUSIONS: The results confirm that leaf mechanical properties are affected by 
both water status and position along the lamina, and suggest a positive
correlation between leaf internal architecture, tensile strength, cell wall
chemistry and tolerance to dehydration for grasses.

PMCID: PMC2803393
PMID: 16621860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Carcinogenesis. 2006 Sep;27(9):1787-96. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

H1 histamine receptor antagonists induce genotoxic and caspase-2-dependent
apoptosis in human melanoma cells.

Jangi SM(1), Díaz-Pérez JL, Ochoa-Lizarralde B, Martín-Ruiz I, Asumendi A,
Pérez-Yarza G, Gardeazabal J, Díaz-Ramón JL, Boyano MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of the Basque Country, Leioa E-48940, and Department of Dermatology,
Cruces Hospital, Vizcaya, Spain.

Previously, we found that the H1 histamine receptor antagonist diphenhydramine
induces apoptosis in human acute T-lymphocytic leukemia cells. Since histamine
has been shown to act as a growth factor in malignant melanoma cells, we decided 
to evaluate the in vitro effect of diphenhydramine and other H1 histamine
receptor antagonists, such as terfenadine, astemizol and triprolidine on four
malignant human melanoma cell lines. These antagonists were found to induce
apoptotic cell death in all four melanoma cell lines. Apoptosis was determined by
assessment of phosphatidylserine exposure on the surface of the cells and nuclear
fragmentation. Importantly, H1 antagonist treatments did not adversely affect the
viability of human melanocytes and murine fibroblasts at the same doses and
duration of exposure. Treatment of melanoma cells with terfenadine induced DNA
damage and caspases 2, 3, 6, 8 and 9 activation. Furthermore, the general caspase
inhibitor (z-VAD-FMK) and a selective inhibitor of caspase-2 (z-VDVAD-FMK)
protected melanoma cells from terfenadine-induced apoptosis. In contrast, the
caspase-8 inhibitor (z-IETD-FMK) was ineffective. In addition, we found that
mitochondria are involved in TEF-induced apoptosis, characterized by the
dissipation of the mitochondrial transmembrane potential, the release of
cytochrome c into the cytosolic compartment and caspase-9 activation. On the
basis of these results we conclude that H1 histamine receptor antagonists induce 
apoptosis in human melanoma cells but not in normal melanocytes and embryonic
murine fibroblasts; this apoptosis appears to be caspase-2-dependent and involves
the mitochondrial pathway. The present results may contribute to the elaboration 
of novel therapeutic strategies for the treatment of malignant human melanoma.

PMID: 16569656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Mar 7;12(9):1476-8.

Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula successfully diagnosed by CT esophagography.

Nagata K(1), Kamio Y, Ichikawa T, Kadokura M, Kitami A, Endo S, Inoue H, Kudo SE.

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Disease Center, Showa University Northern Yokohama Hospital, 35-1
Chigasaki-chuo, Yokohama 224-8503, Japan. nagata7@aol.com

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) or bronchoesophageal fistula may be congenital,
inflammatory, neoplastic, or secondary to trauma. Congenital TEF or
bronchoesophageal fistula is usually associated with esophageal atresia and is
readily diagnosed in infancy. But if it is not associated with esophageal
atresia, it may persist until adulthood. Some theories have been proposed to
explain this delay in diagnosis. We present a case of a 70-year-old man with
congenital TEF. The TEF was successfully diagnosed by multidetector-row CT
esophagography.

PMCID: PMC4124334
PMID: 16552825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mar Pollut Bull. 2006 Sep;52(9):1066-76. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

Organohalogen and organotin compounds in killer whales mass-stranded in the
Shiretoko Peninsula, Hokkaido, Japan.

Kajiwara N(1), Kunisue T, Kamikawa S, Ochi Y, Yano S, Tanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies, Ehime University, 2-5 Bunkyo-cho,
Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan.

Blubber and liver samples were obtained for analysis of wide ranges of
contaminants from killer whales (Orcinus orca) which were locked away in drifting
sea ice on the coast of Rausu, the Shiretoko Peninsula in Eastern Hokkaido, Japan
in February 2005. Among the organohalogen compounds analyzed, DDTs were the
predominant contaminants with concentrations ranging from 28 to 220 microg/g on a
lipid-weight basis followed by PCBs and other organochlorine pesticides. PBDEs
levels were two or three orders of magnitude lower than those of PCBs and DDTs.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin toxic equivalents (TEQs) derived by WHO
mammal-TEF in killer whales were in the range of 110-440 pgTEQ/g. Mono-ortho
coplanar PCBs contributed to 75-98% of total TEQs, indicating coplanar PCBs are
significant contaminants for risk assessment in this species. The fact that
hepatic residue levels of butyltins (from 13 to 770 ng/g wet weight) were much
higher than those of phenyltins may be reflecting extensive use of tributyltin as
antifouling paint.

PMID: 16540125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Med Invest. 2006 Feb;53(1-2):153-8.

Relationships between thermic effect of food, insulin resistance and autonomic
nervous activity.

Watanabe T(1), Nomura M, Nakayasu K, Kawano T, Ito S, Nakaya Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive and Cardiovascular Medicine, Institute of Health
Biosciences, The University of Tokushima Graduate School, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The thermic effect of food (TEF) is higher in lean than in obese
human subjects.
OBJECTIVE: Relationships between TEF and insulin resistance during meals, from
the point of view of autonomic nervous activity, were evaluated.
METHODS: Autonomic nervous activity was evaluated in 20 young adults using the
spectral analysis of heart rate variability from one hour before to two hours
after a meal. Heart rate data were analyzed based on low frequency components (LF
power, 0.04-0.15 Hz), high frequency components (HF power, 0.15-0.40 Hz), and
LF/HF ratios. Energy expenditure and the TEF were measured 30 min after a meal.
Homeostasis model of insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) was also measured.
RESULTS: The LF/HF ratio was significantly increased 30 min after a meal
(p<0.05). No correlation between LF power and HF power with TEF was found, but
the LF/HF ratio was significantly and positively correlated with TEF (r=+0.56,
p<0.05). Moreover, a significant negative correlation was found between the
HOMA-IR and TEF (r=-0.601, p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that a reduction in insulin sensitivity induces
a poor response of sympathetic nervous activity in the postprandial phase and a
reduction in postprandial energy expenditure.

PMID: 16538009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Mar;41(3):530-2.

Babies with esophageal and duodenal atresia: a 30-year review of a multifaceted
problem.

Ein SH(1), Palder SB, Filler RM.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of General Surgery, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8. a_ein@istar.ca

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to review newborns with esophageal atresia
(EA) with and without distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) combined with
duodenal atresia (DA) or duodenal stenosis (DS) (web, windsock, diaphragm) to
determine which clinical features and treatments give the best results.
METHODS: Twenty-four newborns were reviewed from 1971 to 2000 inclusive. Seven
had EA and 17 had EA with TEF; 15 had DA and 9 had DS. One died after receiving
only a gastrostomy. Seven underwent repair of both defects in 1 stage, whereas 16
were repaired separately.
RESULTS: Eighteen of 24 (75%) survived. The EA or EA with TEF was repaired first 
in 5, but the DA or DS was initially overlooked in 4 and 2 died. The DA or DS was
repaired first in 11, and all survived. Of the 7 in whom both repairs were done
at same setting, 4 survived. Of 6 nonsurvivors, 5 were repaired. Mortality from
EA was greater than EA with TEF, and DA was greater than DS. Associated anomalies
in 18 (75%) of 24 did not affect survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Staged repair (ideally within 1 week) is a safe suitable method of
management. In EA, the coexistence of DA or DS must be considered because delay
in diagnosis may adversely affect outcome. Mortality is a multifactorial
phenomenon.

PMID: 16516629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Mar;41(3):479-83.

The effect of a right-sided aortic arch on outcome in children with esophageal
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Allen SR(1), Ignacio R, Falcone RA, Alonso MH, Brown RL, Garcia VF, Inge TH,
Ryckman FC, Warner BW, Azizkhan RG, Tiao GM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric and Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Oct;41(10):1788-90.

During repair of an esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF), a
right-sided aortic arch (RAA) presents a technical challenge. We reviewed our
experience with EA/TEF focusing on the impact of RAA.METHODS: A retrospective
review of patients with EA/TEF at our institution from 1990 to 2004 was
performed. Of 61 patients, 53 had a left aortic arch (LAA) and 8 had RAA.
RESULTS: The mean gestational age and birth weight were similar between patients 
with LAA and RAA. There were more vascular rings in patients with RAA than with
LAA (37.5% vs 3.8%, P = .009). A preoperative echocardiogram correctly identified
the location of the arch in all with LAA but only 62.5% of those with RAA.
Operative complications occurred in 25% of patients with RAA and 11% of patients 
with LAA.
CONCLUSIONS: Management of a child with RAA and EA/TEF is technically
challenging. Preoperative identification of the great vessel anomalies may impact
operative decision making. Therefore, careful diagnostic evaluation of a patient 
with an aortic arch that cannot be easily defined by ECHO should be considered
before definitive repair.

PMID: 16516619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Doc Ophthalmol. 2005 Jul;111(1):23-31. Epub 2006 Feb 25.

The decline of the photopic negative response (PhNR) in the rat after optic nerve
transection.

Li B(1), Barnes GE, Holt WF.

Author information: 
(1)Alcon Research Ltd., Fort Worth, TX 76134, USA. Bing.Li@alconlabs.com

PURPOSE: To investigate the contribution to the photopic negative response (PhNR)
of the electroretinogram (ERG) by retinal ganglion cells (RGCs). The PhNR was
assessed longitudinally following optic nerve transection (ONTx).
METHODS: Photopic ERGs were recorded from each eye of an anesthetized
(ketamine/xylazine, 60 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg) Brown Norway rat using custom made
electrodes (PT-IR Tef., A-M System Inc). ERGs were elicited using green Ganzfeld 
flashes (11.38 scd/m(2), 22.76 cds/m(2)) and a rod suppressing green-background
(40 cd/m(2)). PhNRs were compared before and after optic nerves were transected. 
Cresyl violet stained retinal flatmounts were used to estimate cell loss in the
ganglion cell layer 3 and 15 weeks after optic nerve transection. The
pharmacological effect of 1.3 microM intravitreal TTX on the PhNR was also
evaluated.
RESULTS: There was a significant loss (p <0.05) in the PhNR of 20, 36, 34, 35,
48, 48 and 56% for ONTx eye versus the contralateral eye, at post ONTx times of
24 h, 1, 2, 3, 4, 8 and 15 weeks. B-wave amplitudes of ONTx eyes were not
significantly different from the control eyes. In ONTx eyes, mean cell loss in
the retinal ganglion cell layer was 27 and 55% at the 3 week and 15 week time
periods. In the eyes with ONTx, the decline of PhNR amplitudes was correlated
positively with RGC loss (r = 0.98; p < 0.01). Thirty minutes after intravitreal 
TTX injection, the PhNR was significantly reduced (57%, p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: There was a time-dependent decline in the PhNR after ONTx, as
exemplified by a 35% reduction from 1-3 weeks, a 48% decline for 4-8 weeks and a 
56% decline after 15 weeks. The correlation between the decline in the PhNR and
retinal ganglion cell loss suggests that the PhNR depends on inner retina
integrity and the PhNR may be important biological signal or detecting
glaucomatous damage and the monitoring of RGC function changes in early glaucoma.

PMID: 16502304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biochem J. 2006 May 15;396(1):163-72.

TEF-1 and C/EBPbeta are major p38alpha MAPK-regulated transcription factors in
proliferating cardiomyocytes.

Ambrosino C(1), Iwata T, Scafoglio C, Mallardo M, Klein R, Nebreda AR.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

p38 MAPKs (mitogen-activated protein kinases) play important roles in the
regulation of cellular responses to environmental stress. Recently, this
signalling pathway has also been implicated in the regulation of processes
unrelated to stress, for example, in T lymphocytes and cardiomyocytes. In order
to identify molecular targets responsible for the housekeeping functions of p38
MAPKs, we have analysed the differences in the transcriptomes of normally
proliferating wild-type and p38alpha knockout immortalized embryonic
cardiomyocytes. Interestingly, many potential components of the myocardium
extracellular matrix were found to be upregulated in the absence of p38alpha.
Further analysis of the microarray data identified TEF-1 (transcriptional
enhancer factor-1), a known regulator of heart-specific gene expression, and
C/EBPbeta (CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta), as the two transcription factors
the binding sites of which were most enriched in the promoters of
p38alpha-regulated genes. We have focused on the study of the extracellular
matrix component COL1A1 (alpha1 chain of type I collagen) and found evidence for 
the involvement of both TEF-1 and C/EBPbeta in the p38alpha-dependent inhibition 
of COL1A1 transcription. Our data therefore show that p38 MAPKs regulate TEF-1
and C/EBPbeta transcriptional activity in the absence of environmental stress and
suggests a role for p38alpha in the expression of extracellular matrix components
that maintain organ architecture.

PMCID: PMC1449985
PMID: 16492136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. West Afr J Med. 2005 Oct-Dec;24(4):311-5.

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula and early postoperative
mortality.

Al-Malki TA(1), Ibrahim AH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine & Medical Sciences, Taif University-Taif and Department of
Pediatric Surgery, Aseer Central Hospital, Abha, Saudi Arabia. taam_tm@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Several recent reports showed that associated anomalies represent the
main cause of postoperative mortality in infants born with esophageal atresia
(EA) and/ or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) Our observations present additional 
causes of mortality to the above mentioned. The aim of this study is to identify 
the major causes of early postoperative mortality in cases of EA and/or TEF in
our setup. The ongoing preoperative classifications predicting mortality will be 
also used for comparison.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We reviewed 101 charts of all cases with EA and/or TEF in a
period of 11 years from 1990 to 2000. Morbidity and causes of postoperative
mortality during the first admissions were identified. The factors predicting
mortality were documented. Patients were classified according to Waterston,
Montreal and Spitz classifications.
RESULTS: Thirty-one patients (30.7%) died. Two main groups of post operative
mortality were identified. The first group included the possibly avoidable causes
of mortality which were primary sepsis (n=10, 32.3%), technical problems (n=8,
25.8%) and severe pneumonia (n=5, 16.1%). The unavoidable causes of mortality
included major congenital anomalies (n=6, 19.3%) and anomalies incompatible with 
life (n=2, 6.5%).
CONCLUSION: Primary sepsis and sepsis due to technical problems were the main
causes of mortality in our series. Factors predicting mortality were pneumonia at
presentation, sepsis at presentation or that acquired during hospitalization,
major or life threatening anomalies, long gaps and major leaks. The Waterston
classification was statistically the best applicable in this study.

PMID: 16483047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2005;95:357-61.

Innovative non-invasive method for absolute intracranial pressure measurement
without calibration.

Ragauskas A(1), Daubaris G, Dziugys A, Azelis V, Gedrimas V.

Author information: 
(1)Kaunas University of Technology, Kaunas, Lithuania. telematics@tef.ktu.lt

A new absolute ICP (aICP) measurement method was designed which does not need
calibration. In this study we compared a new method with invasive aICP method in 
ICU on the patients with closed severe traumatic brain injury. A new method is
based on two-depth TCD technique for aICP and external absolute pressure aPe
comparison using the eye artery (EA) as natural "balance". The intracranial
segment of EA is compressed by aICP and the extracranial segment is compressed by
aPe applied to the tissues surrounding the eye. The blood flow parameters in both
EA segments are approximately the same when aPe = aICP. Two-depth TCD device is
used as an indicator of balance aPe = aICP when the pulsatility index of blood
flow velocity waveform in intracranial and extracranial segments are the same.
Fifty seven simultaneous invasive and non-invasive aICP measurements were
performed in aICP range from 3.0 to 37.0 mmHg. Bland Altman plot of the
differences between simultaneous invasive and non-invasive aICP measurements
shows the negligible mean difference (mean = 0.94 mmHg) with a standard deviation
of 6.18 mmHg. This validation study shows that it is possible to measure aICP
non-invasively without calibration of the system with 95% confidence interval of 
12 mmHg.

PMID: 16463881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2006 Apr;44(3):219-25. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Uncertainties related to the assignment of a toxic equivalency factor for
1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9-octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.

Sutter CH(1), Rahman M, Sutter TR.

Author information: 
(1)W. Harry Feinstone Center for Genomic Research, University of Memphis,
Memphis, TN, USA.

The Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) approach is a methodology that assigns
relative toxicity values to structurally related chemicals in comparison to a
reference chemical. For the polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), the
reference is the most potent congener, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD). Here, we critically review the literature on the effects of a weak PCDD, 
1,2,3,4,6,7,8,9-octachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (OCDD), and describe the uncertainties
of assigning its TEF. PCDDs, including OCDD, are less potent in human cell models
compared to the rat models from which the TEF are estimated. This lack of
concordance is even more pronounced with the weaker congeners such as OCDD.
Furthermore, OCDD is also likely to compete with TCDD for binding to cytochrome
P4501A2 (CYP1A2), effectively decreasing the hepatic tissue/fat ratio of TCDD.
Overall, the predictive value of TEFs would be improved by incorporating into
this number the relative sensitivity of human cell responses compared to rodent
responses, by determining the toxicological effects of altering the tissue
distribution of dioxin-like compounds through competition for CYP-binding sites, 
and by understanding the mechanism of cancer causation of any dioxin and whether 
this mechanism is conserved in humans and at equivalent doses.

PMID: 16460856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Toxicol Sci. 2006 May;91(1):275-85. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Recommended relative potency factors for 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran: the
impact of different dose metrics.

Budinsky RA(1), Paustenbach D, Fontaine D, Landenberger B, Starr TB.

Author information: 
(1)The Dow Chemical Company, Midland, Michigan 48674, USA. rabudinsky@dow.com

The recent National Toxicology Program (NTP) cancer bioassays for
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran 
(4-PeCDF) permit a reevaluation of the current TEF value of 4-PeCDF. The data
also allow for the derivation of relative potency factors (RPFs) for cancer,
which are based not only on administered dose but also on potentially more
informative dose metrics, such as liver concentration, area under the liver
concentration curve, and lifetime average body burden. Our analyses of these data
indicate that chi-squared tests of observed versus predicted liver tumor
incidence for 4-PeCDF reject the current TEF value of 0.5 value as too high.
4-PeCDF RPFs were derived using estimation methods that either did or did not
assume parallelism of the 4-PeCDF and TCDD dose-response curves. The resulting
parallelism-based RPFs for administered dose, liver concentration at terminal
sacrifice, liver concentration AUC, and lifetime average body burden are 0.26,
0.014, 0.021, and 0.036, respectively. The administered dose RPF estimate is
approximately one-half the current TEF value of 0.5. However, the use of
administered dose fails to take into account pharmacokinetic differences between 
congeners and the generally acknowledged belief that body burden or some other
measure of cumulative dose is more appropriate for estimating the health risk
posed by persistent chemicals. The other three dose metrics do account for these 
important factors, and the corresponding RPFs are at least 10-fold lower than the
current TEF for 4-PeCDF. In summary, our analyses support an administered dose
TEF no greater than 0.25 and one in the 0.05-0.1 range for internal dose metrics 
such as lifetime average liver concentration or body burden.

PMID: 16455694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006 Sep;72(3):521-8. Epub 2006 Jan 10.

Development of an expression vector for Metarhizium anisopliae based on the
tef-1alpha homologous promoter.

Nakazato L(1), Dutra V, Broetto L, Staats CC, Vainstein MH, Schrank A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biotecnologia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, P.O. Box
15005, CEP 91501-970, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

The high-conserved translation elongation factor 1 alpha (tef-1alpha) gene from
the enthomopathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae was characterized to select
the promoter region. A 640-bp DNA fragment upstream to the start codon was
employed to drive the expression of the reporter protein sGFP or a dominant
selectable marker, the gene bar (resistance to ammonium glufosinate).
Transformants carrying this homologous promoter system showed no difference in
virulence bioassays against the cattle tick Boophilus microplus comparing to the 
M. anisopliae wild-type strain. Moreover, GFP fluorescence was detected during
tick infection bioassay.

PMID: 16402168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005 Dec;71(12):8466-71.

Gibberella xylarioides sensu lato from Coffea canephora: a new mating population 
in the Gibberella fujikuroi species complex.

Lepoint PC(1), Munaut FT, Maraite HM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Phytopathologie, Université catholique de Louvain, Croix du Sud 2/3, 
B-1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. lepoint@fymy.ucl.ac.be

Gibberella xylarioides Heim & Saccas (presumed anamorph, Fusarium xylarioides
Steyaert) is the causal agent of coffee wilt disease, an economically important
tracheomycosis in Africa. In vitro crosses carried out with Congolese, Ugandan,
and Tanzanian single-ascospore/conidial isolates originating from diseased Coffea
canephora/excelsa demonstrated a heterothallic mating system, controlled by a
single locus with two alleles, MAT-1 and MAT-2. Compatible isolates produced
fertile perithecia within 2 to 8 weeks after mating. Mating type (MAT) was
characterized by PCR with primer pairs previously developed for the Gibberella
fujikuroi species complex (GFC) and for Fusarium oxysporum. All strains analyzed 
were morphologically identical and corresponded to Booth's description of the
"female" F. xylarioides strain. Based on crossing results and MAT-2/translation
elongation 1-alpha (tef) sequence data, G. xylarioides, as currently understood, 
is demonstrated to encompass at least three "groups": G. xylarioides sensu
strictu Ia, defined hitherto by two "historical" West African strains originating
from the severe 1930s to 1950s epidemic (CBS 25852 and CBS 74979); G. xylarioides
sensu strictu Ib, defined by two "historical" Central African lowland strains
(DSMZ 62457 and ATCC 15664); and G. xylarioides sensu lato II, containing
Congolese, Ugandan, and Tanzanian C. canephora/excelsa isolates. Infertility of
crosses between the coffee wilt pathogen and known GFC mating populations
demonstrates that G. xylarioides sensu lato constitutes a new biological species 
within the G. fujikuroi complex. MUCL 44532/MUCL 43887 and MUCL 35223/MUCL 44549 
are proposed as G. xylarioides sensu lato II MAT-1/MAT-2 reference mating type
tester strains.

PMCID: PMC1317314
PMID: 16332836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Hazard Mater. 2006 May 20;133(1-3):53-9. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Concentration and congener patterns of polychlorinated biphenyls in industrial
and municipal waste incinerator flue gas, Korea.

Shin SK(1), Kim KS, You JC, Song BJ, Kim JG.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Research, Kyoungseo-dong, Seo-gu, Incheon,
Korea.

In the present study, individual PCB congeners were determined in the flue gases 
of 10 industrial and 5 municipal solid waste incinerators using HRGC/HRMS. The
total PCBs concentration of all congeners (168 tetra to deca-chlorinated
congeners) ranged from 26 to 343 ng/Nm(3), and from 36 to 1095 ng/Nm(3) in
industrial waste incinerators (IWI) and municipal solid waste incinerators
(MSWI), respectively. The total TEQ concentrations of PCBs, calculated using
WHO-TEF values, varied from 0.001 to 0.55 ng-TEQ/Nm(3) and from 0.001 to 8.29
ng-TEQ/Nm(3) in the industrial waste incinerators and municipal solid waste
incinerators, respectively. In all samples, the contribution of PCB 126 to total 
TEQ of PCBs was higher than 87%. The homologue pattern of PCBs in the incinerator
flue gas samples was generally dominated by tetra- and penta-CBs. The
distribution of other homologues was less than 15% in most of the incinerators.
The fraction of co-PCBs against to total PCBs ranged from 1% to 19% and from 2%
to 31% in IWI and MSWI flue gas samples. Results of the present study reveal that
the presence of non-ortho PCB congeners in the flue gas originated form the
combustion process.

PMID: 16325998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2006 May;70(5):925-30. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

Endoscopic treatment of congenital H-Type and recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula
with electrocautery and histoacryl glue.

Tzifa KT(1), Maxwell EL, Chait P, James AL, Forte V, Ein SH, Friedburg J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5G 1X8.
CTZIFA@aol.com

OBJECTIVE: Congenital H-Type tracheoesophageal fistulae (H-Type TEF) and
recurrent fistulae after primary repair of esophageal atresia represent a
difficult problem in diagnosis and management. The treatment traditionally
involved an open technique via a cervical or thoracic route, approaches with high
morbidity and mortality rates of up to 50%. Endoscopic closure of fistulae has
been reported with various techniques such as tissue adhesives, electrocautery,
sclerosants and laser. However, the published case series contain a small number 
of patients with usually short-term follow-up. The aim of this paper is to
present the experience of a decade at Toronto's Hospital for Sick Children, using
diathermy and histoacryl tissue adhesive and discuss the indications and
limitations of this technique.
METHODS: Since 1995, 192 patients have been managed in this institution with
tracheoesophageal fistulae of which 10 patients have been treated endoscopically.
The fistulae were both of H-Type and recurrent tracheoesophageal fistulae
following surgery for esophageal atresia and fistula division. One fistula
occurred following trauma. The procedure was undertaken under general anesthesia 
in the image guided therapy suite under fluoroscopic control. Flexible ball
electrocautery and injection of histoacryl glue were used either on their own or 
in combination.
RESULTS: Fistula closure was achieved in 9 out of 10 fistulae. Four patients had 
a second endoscopic procedure. No major respiratory or other complications were
encountered in association with the procedure. Follow-up has been between 3
months and 9 years.
CONCLUSION: We conclude, endoscopic treatment of tracheoesophageal fistulae with 
electrocautery and histoacryl glue has been a safe and successful technique of
managing H-Type and recurrent tracheoesophageal fistulae. In this paper, we
discuss the indications and the surgical steps of the procedure. We highlight
that diathermy should be carefully controlled and applied preferably in the small
non-patulous fistulae. A fistula that has not closed after two endoscopic
attempts is not suitable for further endoscopic treatment and therefore an
external approach should be recommended.

PMID: 16325276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Pediatr Surg Int. 2006 Feb;22(2):154-7. Epub 2005 Nov 29.

Bone morphogenetic protein expression patterns in human esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Crowley AR(1), Mehta SS, Hembree MJ, Preuett BL, Prasadan KL, Sharp SW, Yew H,
McFall CR, Benjes CL, Tulachan SS, Gittes GK, Snyder CL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy
Hospital, 2401 Gillham Road, Kansas City, MO, 64108, USA.

The organogenesis of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF)
remains unknown. The fistula tract appears to develop from a non-branching
trifurcation of the embryonic lung bud. The non-branching growth of the fistula
differs from the other lung buds and suggests a deficiency in bone morphogenetic 
protein (BMP) signaling, since BMPs are critical to proper lung development and
branching. With IRB approval, portions of newborn human proximal esophageal pouch
and distal fistula samples were recovered at the time of surgical repair of
EA/TEF. The tissues were processed for immunohistochemistry. Commercially
available fetal tissues were used as controls. In control tissues, BMP ligands
(BMP 2, 4, and 7) were all present in the esophagus but absent in the trachea.
BMPRIA was absent in both tissues. BMPRIB was detected in trachea but not in
esophagus and BMPRII was detected in esophagus but not in trachea. In the EA/TEF 
specimens, all BMP ligands were present in the proximal esophageal pouch but
absent in the fistula tract. BMPRIA and BMPRIB were not detected in either
tissue. However, BMPRII was found in both fistula tract and proximal pouch. The
submucosa of the fistula appears to maintain a mixed (identical neither to lung, 
esophagus, or trachea) BMP signaling pattern, providing one mechanism which could
potentially explain the esophageal dismotility and lack of lung branching seen in
the fistula/distal esophagus.

PMID: 16315037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Physiol Meas. 2005 Dec;26(6):1019-32. Epub 2005 Oct 31.

The clinical application of non-invasive intracranial blood volume pulse wave
monitoring.

Chambers IR(1), Daubaris G, Jarzemskas E, Fountas K, Kvascevicius R, Ragauskas A,
Rocka S, Robinson JS, Sitkauskas A.

Author information: 
(1)Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. telematics@tef.ktu.lt

An ultrasonic method was used to non-invasively measure intracranial blood volume
(IBV) pulse waveforms. This technology has previously shown a strong association 
between invasively recorded ICP pulse waves and non-invasively recorded IBV pulse
waves. The objective of the present study was to investigate the diagnostic value
of non-invasively measured IBV pulse waves in the cases of different pathologies.
A total of 75 patients were examined and these included cases of acute, chronic
and stabilized hydrocephalus, spinal cord injury and terminal blood flow. These
were compared to a control group of 53 healthy volunteers. The object of
comparison was normalized and averaged IBV pulse waves. Pathological IBV pulse
waveforms were compared with IBV pulse waveforms of the normal group using
sub-wave values, the area under waveform curve and the Euclidean distance
calculation. The non-invasively measured IBV pulse waveform is not significantly 
dependent on acoustic path, gender or age. A detectable change in IBV pulse
waveform shape was observed in situations when disturbance in intracranial
hydrodynamics was present, e.g. during hypoventilation tests, in cases of
terminal blood flow and hydrocephaly, depicting the level of hydrocephalus
activity and the patient's compensatory capabilities as well as the effect of
treatment.

PMID: 16311449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2005 Nov;12(6):347-60.

Endocrine disruption of water and sediment extracts in a non-radioactive dot
blot/RNAse protection-assay using isolated hepatocytes of rainbow trout.

Hollert H(1), Dürr M, Holtey-Weber R, Islinger M, Brack W, Färber H, Erdinger L, 
Braunbeck T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
henner.hollert@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

GOAL, SCOPE AND BACKGROUND: In order to evaluate the estrogenic activity of
sediments and XAD water extracts of selected sites of the catchment area of the
River Neckar, a river system in Southern Germany, an integrative assessment
approach was used to assess the ecological hazard potential of
endocrine-disrupting compounds in sediment and water.
METHODS: The approach is based on estrogen receptor-mediated vitellogenin
synthesis induced in isolated hepatocytes of rainbow trout and quantified in a
non-radioactive dot blot/RNAse protection-assay in parallel to comprehensive
chemical analyses of estrogenic substances.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Numerous investigated extracts revealed an estrogen
activity comparable to that of the positive control (1 nM 17beta-estradiol
corresponding to 270 ng/L in the test medium). Based on a concentration factor of
30 in the extracts and a recovery of XAD resins of approximately 80%,
17beta-estradiol equivalent concentrations between 20 and 26.7 ng/L could be
calculated downstream of a sewage treatment plant (< 0.1 ng/L for a reference
site). A comparison of the bioassay-derived Bio-TEQs (toxicity equivalents) and
the Chem-TEQs revealed a high correlation with a Pearson coefficient of 0.85,
indicating that the same ranking of the samples could be obtained with respect to
the endocrine disrupting potential with both chemical and bioanalytical analysis.
However, the TEQ concentrations computed from chemical analyses were
significantly lower than the bioassay-derived TEQ concentrations. In fact, in
none of the samples, more than 14% of the vitellogenin-inducing potency could be 
attributed to the substances (steroids, alkylphenols, bisphenol A,
diethylstilbestrol) analyzed. A comparison of the endocrine disrupting potential 
of sediments extracted by the solvents acetone and methanol revealed lower
biological effects for acetone-extracted samples. Possible reasons may be a
masking of endocrine effects in acetone extracts by cytotoxicity, a low
extraction efficiency of the solvent acetone, or anti- estrogen potencies of some
extracted sediment compounds. Using a mass balance approach, the contribution of 
the compounds analyzed chemically (Chem-TEQs) to the total endocrine activity
(Bio-TEQs) was calculated. Based on the very low detection limits, particularly
of the steroids with their high TEF factors, results revealed that a calculation 
of the Chem-TEQs is associated with considerable scale inaccuracy: Whereas only
7-15% of the biological effectiveness (Bio-TEQs) could be explained by endocrine 
substances identified above the detection limits, the assumption of
concentrations slightly below the given detection limits would result in a
significant over estimation (137-197%) of the Bio-TEQs. Even the interassay
variation of the dot blot assay with different fish donors for primary hepatocyte
(factor 2-2.5) is relatively low, when compared to the large range of the
Chem-TEQ concentrations (factor 20) obtained when applying different modes of
calculation.
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK: Overall, only a minor portion of the endocrine activity 
detected by bioassays could be linked to compounds identified by chemical
analysis. In vitro assays for assessment of endocrine activities are useful as
sensitive integrating methods that provide quantitative estimates of the total
activity of particular receptor-mediated responses. Although discrepancies may
also result from different bioanalytical approaches, it is overall likely that
bioanalytical and not chemical analytical approaches give the correct estimate of
endocrine disrupting potencies in environmental samples. As a conclusion,
assessment of endocrine disruption based on chemical analysis alone does not
appear sufficient and further research into the spectrum of substances with
potential endocrine activity as well as into additive or even synergistic effects
in complex environmental samples is urgently needed.

PMID: 16305141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2006 Apr;70(4):677-82. Epub 2005 Nov 8.

The KTP laser: an emerging tool in pediatric otolaryngology.

Ishman SL(1), Kerschner JE, Rudolph CD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology, Department of Otolaryngology, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: To report the frequency and spectrum of use of the potassium titanyl
phosphate (KTP) laser in a tertiary referral pediatric otolaryngology practice
and to focus on a novel use for the KTP laser which has not previously been
described in the literature.
DESIGN: A retrospective chart review of the operative log database of a pediatric
otolaryngologist in a tertiary referral setting over a seven year period.
RESULTS: Out of 2886 cases, a total of 49 (1.7%) involved the use of the KTP
laser. These included 7 otologic cases, 3 laryngeal cases, 31 subglottic/tracheal
cases, 1 esophageal case and 7 nasal cases. One of these cases involved a
previously unreported use of the KTP laser, closure of a tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF).
CONCLUSION: The KTP laser is an important operative tool in pediatric
otolaryngology and new uses for this laser continue to emerge. One of these, KTP 
closure of a TEF offers pediatric otolaryngologists the potential for significant
changes in management of this congenital problem with reduced surgical morbidity.
Familiarity with the KTP laser and expertise in its use and applications is
essential in providing state-of-the-art care to pediatric otolaryngology patients
in a tertiary referral center.

PMID: 16280173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2005 Oct;15(5):354-7.

Esophageal atresia with double tracheoesophageal fistula--a case report and
review of the literature.

Katsura S(1), Shono T, Yamanouchi T, Taguchi T, Suita S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
shunsaku@pedsurg.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Esophageal atresia with double tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a very rare
anomaly, and the accurate preoperative diagnosis of proximal TEF is very
difficult. This paper describes a baby girl who presented with esophageal atresia
with double, proximal, and distal TEF. The distal TEF was diagnosed before
operation, whereas the proximal TEF was found intraoperatively. Overlooking the
presence of proximal TEF can lead to increased morbidity and mortality due to
severe respiratory infection and the necessity of a second operation. Great care 
must therefore be taken to not overlook the presence of proximal TEF in patients 
with this anomaly.

PMID: 16254849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. N Engl J Med. 2005 Oct 20;353(16):1748-9.

The Ethiopian cereal tef in celiac disease.

Spaenij-Dekking L, Kooy-Winkelaar Y, Koning F.

PMID: 16236752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Chemosphere. 2006 Apr;63(4):570-80. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans and 'dioxin-like' PCBs in flue
gas emissions from municipal waste management plants.

Abad E(1), Martínez K, Caixach J, Rivera J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dioxins, Department of Ecotechnologies, IIQAB-CSIC, Jordi Girona
18, E-08034 Barcelona, Spain.

The aim of this work is to give representative data on polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCBs) from stack gas emissions of an urban solid waste 
management plant which has to comply with the limit of 0.1 ng I-TEQ/Nm3. In
particular, the study is focused on 29 target compounds, the seventeen
2,3,7,8-PCDDs/Fs, four non-ortho PCBs and eight mono-ortho PCBs which configure
so-called 'dioxin-like' PCBs (DL-PCBs). To this end, emission measurements were
performed during one year over the three operating combustion lines in a selected
waste management plant. In general, accurate methodology allowed characterizing
all target compounds in almost all the samples analyzed. In addition, a typical
pattern for DL-PCBs is reported. The pattern presented PCB #118 to be the
highest, nevertheless the figures demonstrated DL-PCBs contribution to the total 
TEQ around 3% being PCB #126 the most important congener due to its TEF of 0.1.
Finally, remarkable differences were achieved in comparison with both
environmental and biological samples such as soils, sediments, human milk or fish
since these matrices may present DL-PCB contribution to the total TEQ up to 77%.

PMID: 16216299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Anesth Analg. 2005 Oct;101(4):1000-2, table of contents.

Successful thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula in a newborn with single ventricle physiology.

Mariano ER(1), Chu LF, Albanese CT, Ramamoorthy C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, University of California at San Diego School of
Medicine, San Diego, California 92103-8770, USA. ermariano@ucsd.edu

A neonate with VACTERL association including tricuspid atresia was scheduled for 
thoracoscopic esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) repair
and laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. In addition to standard noninvasive 
monitoring, arterial blood pressure, central venous pressure, and cerebral oxygen
saturation were monitored. Gastric distension resulting from positive pressure
ventilation prevented laparoscopic gastrostomy tube placement. Thoracoscopy with 
a CO2 insufflation pressure of 6 mm Hg at low flow (1 L/min) was well tolerated
hemodynamically despite hypercarbia and cerebral oxygen saturation was
maintained. Careful monitoring and good communication were critical to the safe
management of this single ventricle patient during thoracoscopic EA/TEF
repair.IMPLICATIONS: Esophageal and tracheoesophageal fistula in conjunction with
single ventricle physiology carries a significant risk of mortality. We present
the anesthetic management of a neonate with unpalliated tricuspid atresia who
underwent thoracoscopic tracheoesophageal fistula repair.

PMID: 16192508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Pediatr Surg Int. 2005 Oct;21(10):780-5. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Proposal of a novel method to evaluate anastomotic tension in esophageal atresia 
with a distal tracheoesophageal fistula.

Nagaya M(1), Kato J, Niimi N, Tanaka S, Iio K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Central Hospital, Aichi Prefectural Colony,
713-8 Kamiya, Kasugai, 480-0392 Aichi, Japan. mnagaya@fujita-hu.ac.jp

Anastomotic tension with the potential to lead to post-operative complication is 
usually evaluated using gap length before anastomosis in patients with esophageal
atresia and a distal tracheoesophageal fistula (EA with a TEF). However a
uniform, accurate measurement of gap length is not possible and estimation of the
length the delicate distal esophageal stump is stretched by the anastomosis may
have greater utility. The aim of this paper was to propose a novel method to
evaluate the anastomotic tension in EA with a TEF. Forty consecutive patients
having EA with a TEF were studied. Primary anastomosis without gastrostomy was
performed in all cases. When the TEF was cut off, the most proximal site of the
tracheal side was marked using a tiny metallic clip. When anastomosis was
completed, the distance from the clip to the anastomotic site was measured as the
stretched length. On the esophagram taken subsequently, the same distance was
measured, together with the distance from the clip to the esophago-cardiac
junction as the original distal esophageal length. The stretching ratio was
calculated by dividing the former by the latter. The stretched length on
esophagram (median: 3.0 mm, range: -12 to 21) was significantly correlated with
that measured during surgery (median: 2.3 mm, range; -14 to 15) (r = 0.96, P <
0.0001). The median of original distal esophageal lengths was 60.0 mm (range:
35-80). The stretching ratio was significantly correlated with the stretched
length, and the number of the stretching ratio as a percentage corresponded to
about double the number of the stretched length on esophagram in millimeters (y =
1.91x + 0.58, r = 0.98, P<0.0001). Anastomotic leakage and recurrence of TEF were
not experienced. In patients complicated with gastroesophageal reflux (GER), the 
site of TEF was significantly more distal as compared with the other cases
[median (range): 5.0th (4.0-6.0) vs 3.5th (1.5-5.0) thoracic vertebral level,
P<0.009]. The stretched length and the stretching ratio were also longer and
larger, respectively [median (range): 10.0 mm (6-21) vs 2.0 (-12 to 14) mm,
P<0.008, 17.3% (12.7-47.7) vs 2.9% (-16.4 to 29.8)%, P<0.018). Similar tendencies
were observed for patients complicated with stricture. Estimation of the
stretched length of the distal esophageal stump is useful to evaluate the
anastomotic tension. If the stretched length is more than 10 mm, it will be
necessary to consider the possibility that stricture or GER may arise afterwards.

PMID: 16177921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Toxicol Sci. 2005 Dec;88(2):384-99. Epub 2005 Sep 21.

Induction of cytochrome P450 1A5 mRNA, protein and enzymatic activities by
dioxin-like compounds, and congener-specific metabolism and sequestration in the 
liver of wild jungle crow (Corvus macrorhynchos) from Tokyo, Japan.

Watanabe MX(1), Iwata H, Okamoto M, Kim EY, Yoneda K, Hashimoto T, Tanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Marine Environmental Studies (CMES), Ehime University, Matsuyama,
Japan.

This study presents concentrations of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), 
dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and dioxin-like coplanar PCBs (Co-PCBs) in the liver and
breast muscle of jungle crows (JCs; Corvus macrorhynchos) collected from Tokyo,
Japan. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin toxic equivalents (TEQs) derived by
WHO bird-TEF were in the range of 23 to 280 pg/g (lipid) in the liver, which are 
lower or comparable to the lowest-observed-effect-level of CYP induction in
chicken, and 5.6-78 pg/g (lipid) in the pectoral muscle. Cytochrome P450 (CYP)
1A-, 2B-, 2C-, and 3A-like proteins were detected using anti-rat CYP polyclonal
antibodies in hepatic microsomal fractions. Significant (p < 0.05) positive
correlations between hepatic TEQs and CYP1A or CYP3A-like protein expression
levels were noticed, implying induction of these CYP isozymes by TEQs. On the
other hand, there was no significant positive correlation between muscle TEQ and 
any one of analyzed CYP isozyme expression levels. CYP1A- and CYP3A-like protein 
expression levels represented better correlations with pentoxy- and
benzyloxyresorufin-O-dealkylase activities rather than methoxy- and
ethoxyresorufin-O-dealkylase activities, indicating unique catalytic functions of
these CYPs in JCs. Furthermore, we succeeded in isolating CYP1A5 cDNA from the
liver of JC, having an open reading frame of 531 amino acid residues with a
predicted molecular mass of 60.3 kDa. JC CYP1A5 mRNA expression measured by
real-time RT-PCR had a significant positive correlation with hepatic TEQs,
suggesting induction of CYP1A5 at the transcriptional level. Ratios of several
Co-PCB congeners to CB-169 in the liver of JCs revealed significant negative
correlations with CYP1A protein or CYP1A5 mRNA expression levels, implying
metabolism of these congeners by the induced CYP1A. The liver/breast muscle
concentration (L/M) ratios of PCDDs/DFs and CB-169 increased with an increase in 
hepatic CYP1A protein or CYP1A5 mRNA expression levels, suggesting
congener-specific hepatic sequestrations by the induced CYP1A. The present study 
provides insights into the propensity of CYP1A induction to the exposure of
dioxin-like chemicals, and unique metabolic and sequestration capacities of CYP1A
in JC.

PMID: 16177242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Paediatr Anaesth. 2005 Oct;15(10):862-9.

Tracheoesophageal fistula and associated congenital heart disease: implications
for anesthetic management and survival.

Diaz LK(1), Akpek EA, Dinavahi R, Andropoulos DB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiovascular Anesthesiology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, TX 77030, USA. lkdiaz@bcm.tmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Infants with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and/or esophageal
atresia (EA) frequently have other associated congenital anomalies which can have
a significant impact on their anesthetic care and survival to discharge.
METHODS: A medical record review and retrospective data analysis were performed
in a university affiliated children's hospital of all infants undergoing TEF/EA
repair between January 1998 and July 2004. The incidence of intraoperative
complications during the TEF repair and overall survival to hospital discharge
was compared in two groups of infants: 26 patients with TEF/EA and coexisting
congenital heart disease (CHD), and 27 patients with TEF/EA and no CHD.
RESULTS: The overall incidence of intraoperative critical events during repair of
TEF/EA was significantly higher in infants with associated cardiac pathology (P =
0.003). Six of 53 infants died during hospitalization (overall mortality, 11.3%) 
and all had associated cardiac pathology. In comparison with nonductal-dependent 
lesions, the presence of a ductal-dependent cardiac lesion appeared to
significantly increase patient mortality (57% vs. 10%, P = 0.028).
CONCLUSIONS: Low birth weight (<1500 g) and associated cardiac pathology were
found to be independent predictors of mortality in infants undergoing surgery for
TEF/EA repair. The presence of a ductal-dependent cardiac lesion further
increased the risk of morbidity and mortality, in addition to necessitating
special anesthesia considerations.

PMID: 16176315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. East Afr Med J. 2005 Jul;82(7):353-6.

Staple Ethiopian diet and cancer of the oesophagus.

Mengesha B(1), Ergete W.

Author information: 
(1)Mexico Higher Clinic, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

Comment in
    East Afr Med J. 2006 May;83(5):292.

BACKGROUND: Previous reports from Ethiopia suggest that oesophageal cancers are
due to thermal injury of hot food and beverages. However, in most other countries
diet plays an important role.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the association of diet and incidence of carcinoma of 
oesophagus in Ethiopia.
DESIGN: A prospective study.
SETTING: All adult patients, who were either referred or self referred from other
health institutions, were investigated in Mexico Higher Clinic, Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia.
SUBJECTS: All patients who presented for endoscopy for the duration of one year, 
February 1st to January 2002, were included in the study.
RESULTS: There were 902 adult patients of whom 596 (66%) were male and 306 (34%) 
were female. The age range was 16 to 81 with a mean of 37 and the male to female 
ratio was 1.95:1. Christians out-numbered Muslims. There were more merchants than
office workers or peasants. Those who came from Addis Ababa were 600 (66%) and
the rural patients were 302 (34%). The ethnic groupings indicated Amhara, Gurage 
and Oromo to be the predominant ones. Six hundred sixty two patients ate tef, 140
ate wheat and 100 ate kocho (Qocho). There were 27 specimens, which had malignant
cells. Thirteen specimens failed to show malignant cells. Thirteen (13%) Qocho
eaters had cancer of oesophagus, nine (6.5%) wheat eaters had cancer and only
five of tef eaters (0.70%) were affected. Dysphagia was the single most common
symptom with which patients presented in cases of cancer of oesophagus. Cancer of
oesophagus was located in upper, middle and EG junctional area in 5, 12 and 10
patients respectively. There were 16 cases of squamous cells and 11 cases of
adenocarcinoma of a total of 40 specimen taken. Thirteen specimens failed to show
malignant cells.
CONCLUSION: Kocho (Qocho) eating appearsto be associated with developing cancer
of the oesophagus.

PMID: 16167708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2006 Jun;71(1):46-52. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Expression of alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase gene from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae in Ashbya gossypii.

Kato T(1), Park EY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology, Department of Applied Biological Chemistry,
Faculty of Agriculture, Shizuoka University, 836 Ohya, Shizuoka, 422-8529, Japan.

Two plasmids containing an autonomously replicating sequence from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae were constructed. Using these vectors, the AGX1 gene encoding
alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase (AGT) from S. cerevisiae, which converts
glyoxylate into glycine but is not present in Ashbya gossypii, was expressed in
A. gossypii. Geneticin-resistant transformants with the plasmid having the
kanamycin resistance gene under the control of the translation elongation factor 
1 alpha (TEF) promoter and terminator from A. gossypii were obtained with a
transformation efficiency of approximately 10-20 transformants per microgram of
plasmid DNA. The specific AGT activities of A. gossypii pYPKTPAT carrying the
AGX1 gene in glucose- and rapeseed-oil-containing media were 40 and 160 mU mg-1
of wet mycelial weight, respectively. The riboflavin concentrations of A.
gossypii pYPKTPAT carrying AGX1 gene in glucose- and rapeseed-oil-containing
media were 20 and 150 mg l-1, respectively. In the presence of 50 mM glyoxylate, 
the riboflavin concentration and the specific riboflavin concentration of A.
gossypii pYPKTPAT were 2- and 1.3-fold those of A. gossypii pYPKT without the
AGX1 gene.

PMID: 16158286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Ann Surg. 2005 Sep;242(3):422-8; discussion 428-30.

Thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: a
multi-institutional analysis.

Holcomb GW 3rd(1), Rothenberg SS, Bax KM, Martinez-Ferro M, Albanese CT, Ostlie
DJ, van Der Zee DC, Yeung CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA. 
gholcomb@cmh.edu

OBJECTIVES: For the past 60 years, successful repair of esophageal atresia (EA)
and distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) has been performed via a thoracotomy. 
However, a number of reports have described adverse musculoskeletal sequelae
following thoracotomy in infants and young children. Until now, only a few
scattered case reports have detailed an individual surgeon's success with
thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF. This multi-institutional review represents the
largest experience describing the results with this approach.
METHODS: A cohort of international pediatric surgeons from centers that perform
advanced laparoscopic and thoracoscopic operations in infants and children
retrospectively reviewed their data on primary thoracoscopic repair in 104
newborns with EA/TEF. Newborns with EA without a distal TEF or those with an
isolated TEF without EA were excluded.
RESULTS: In these 104 patients, the mean age at operation was 1.2 days (+/-1.1), 
the mean weight was 2.6 kg (+/-0.5), the mean operative time was 129.9 minutes
(+/-55.5), the mean days of mechanical ventilation were 3.6 (+/-5.8), and the
mean days of total hospitalization were 18.1 (+/-18.6). Twelve (11.5%) infants
developed an early leak or stricture at the anastomosis and 33 (31.7%) required
esophageal dilatation at least once. Five operations (4.8%) were converted to an 
open thoracotomy and one was staged due to a long gap between the 2 esophageal
segments. Twenty-five newborns (24.0%) later required a laparoscopic
fundoplication. A recurrent fistula between the esophagus and trachea developed
in 2 infants (1.9%). A number of other operations were required in these
patients, including imperforate anus repair in 10 patients (7 high, 3 low),
aortopexy (7), laparoscopic duodenal atresia repair (4), and various major
cardiac operations (5). Three patients died, one related to the EA/TEF on the
20th postoperative day.
CONCLUSIONS: The thoracoscopic repair of EA/TEF represents a natural evolution in
the operative correction of this complicated congenital anomaly and can be safely
performed by experienced endoscopic surgeons. The results presented are
comparable to previous reports of babies undergoing repair through a thoracotomy.
Based on the associated musculoskeletal problems following thoracotomy, there
will likely be long-term benefits for babies with this anomaly undergoing the
thoracoscopic repair.

PMCID: PMC1357750
PMID: 16135928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Toxicol Sci. 2006 Jan;89(1):4-30. Epub 2005 Aug 24.

Development of a refined database of mammalian relative potency estimates for
dioxin-like compounds.

Haws LC(1), Su SH, Harris M, Devito MJ, Walker NJ, Farland WH, Finley B, Birnbaum
LS.

Author information: 
(1)ChemRisk, 8024 Mesa Dr., #126, Austin, Texas 78731, USA. lhaws@chemrisk.com

The toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach has been widely accepted as the most 
feasible method available at present for evaluating potential health risks
associated with exposure to mixtures of dioxin-like compounds (DLCs). The current
mammalian TEFs for the DLCs were established by the World Health Organization
(WHO) following the meeting of an international expert panel in June of 1997. The
TEFs recommended by WHO were determined based on a consensus of scientific
judgment and were presented as point estimates. However, the relative potency
estimates (REPs) underlying the TEFs were derived from a heterogeneous data set
and often span several orders of magnitude. In this article, we present a refined
database of mammalian REPs that we believe will facilitate better
characterization of the variability and uncertainty inherent in the data. The
initial step involved reviewing the REP database used by the WHO panel during its
review in 1997. A set of criteria was developed to identify REPs that were
determined to be the most representative measure of a biological response and of 
adequate quality for use in quantitative analyses. REPs were determined to be
inappropriate for use in quantitative analyses if any of the established
exclusion criteria were met. Comparison of data records to the established
exclusion criteria resulted in the identification of a substantial number of REPs
believed to be inappropriate for use in quantitative analyses. Next, studies
published after 1997 were added to the database. The availability of such a
refined database will improve risk assessment for this class of compounds by
including additional information from new studies and facilitating the use of
quantitative approaches in the further development of TEFs.

PMID: 16120753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2005 Jun;76(2):107-12.

Datura contamination of hay as the suspected cause of an extensive outbreak of
impaction colic in horses.

Naudé TW(1), Gerber R, Smith RJ, Botha CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Toxicology, Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of
Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, Private Bag X04, Onderstepoort, 0110,
South Africa. theuns.naude@up.ac.za

Datura poisoning of horses is extensively reviewed. An outbreak of intractable
impaction colic affecting 18 of 83 horses was stopped by withdrawing dried tef
hay contaminated with young Datura plants. The dried, botanically identified
Datura stramonium and D. ferox contained respectively 0.15% mass/mass (m/m)
hyoscyamine as well as 0.16% m/m hyoscine (scopolamine) and only hyoscine at a
concentration of 0.11% m/m. Immature, unidentifiable plants resembling D.
stramonium, contained 0.14% m/m and 0.12% m/m of the 2 respective tropane
alkaloids. The outbreak was characterised by protracted and repeated colic
attacks due to impaction of the large colon and/or caecum without any other
anti-muscarinic signs. Comparative analyses of single specimens of dried seed of 
the 2 species collected from both fertilised and waste areas revealed that young 
South African Datura spp. had levels of tropane alkaloids comparable to those in 
the well-known toxic seed and were, consequently, equally toxic. The inherent
danger of tef hay being contaminated with Datura is emphasised. To our knowledge 
this is the 1st field case of poisoning in horses ascribed to the vegetative
parts of Datura spp.

PMID: 16108531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Obes Res. 2005 Jul;13(7):1187-94.

Increase in the thermic effect of food in women by adrenergic amines extracted
from citrus aurantium.

Gougeon R(1), Harrigan K, Tremblay JF, Hedrei P, Lamarche M, Morais JA.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Nutrition and Food Science Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital, 687 Pine
Avenue West, H6.61, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A1, Canada.
rejeanne.gougeon@muhc.mcgill.ca

OBJECTIVE: To compare the thermic response to a meal between men and women of
varied body composition and to determine whether adrenergic amines extracted from
citrus aurantium (CA) induce an increase in metabolic rate and enhance the
thermic response to the meal.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: In 30 healthy weight-stable subjects (17 women, 
13 men; BMI: 20 to 42 kg/m2), body composition was determined by bioimpedance
analysis followed by resting energy expenditure for 20 minutes, and the thermic
effect of food (TEF) of a 1.7-MJ, 30-gram protein meal was determined
intermittently for 300 minutes by indirect calorimetry. In a subset of 22
subjects, the TEFs of CA alone and when added to the same 1.7-MJ meal were
determined. Blood pressure and pulse before and throughout the studies and
catecholamine excretion were determined.
RESULTS: TEF was significantly lower in women than men (152 +/- 7 vs. 190 +/- 12 
kJ and 8.8 +/- 0.4% vs. 11.0 +/- 0.7% of meal), independently of age and
magnitude of adiposity. The thermic response to CA alone was higher in men, but, 
when added to the meal, CA increased TEF only in women and to values no longer
different from men. CA had no effect on blood pressure and pulse rate but
increased epinephrine excretion by 2.4-fold.
DISCUSSION: A 20% lower TEF in women suggests a diminished sympathetic nervous
system response to meals, because with CA, TEF increased by 29% only in women.
However, this acute response may not translate into a chronic effect or a
clinically significant weight loss over time.

PMID: 16076988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005 Dec;289(6):C1522-34. Epub 2005 Jul 27.

Divergent transcriptional enhancer factor-1 regulates the cardiac troponin T
promoter.

Azakie A(1), Lamont L, Fineman JR, He Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Univ. of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA.

MCAT elements are essential for cardiac gene expression during development. Avian
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) proteins are muscle-enriched and
contribute to MCAT binding activities. However, direct activation of MCAT-driven 
promoters by TEF-1-related proteins has not been uniformly achieved. Divergent
TEF (DTEF)-1 is a unique member of the TEF-1 multigene family with abundant
transcripts in the heart but not in skeletal muscle. Herein we show that DTEF-1
proteins are highly expressed in the heart. Protein expression is activated at
very early stages of chick embryogenesis (Hamburger-Hamilton stage 4, 16-18 h),
after which DTEF-1 becomes abundant in the sinus venosus and is expressed in the 
trabeculated ventricular myocardium and ventricular outflow tracts. By chromatin 
immunoprecipitation, DTEF-1 interacts with the cardiac troponin T (cTnT) promoter
in vivo. DTEF-1 also interacts with MEF- 2 by coimmunoprecipitation and
independently or cooperatively (with MEF-2) trans-activates the cTnT promoter.
DTEF-1 isoforms do not activate the cTnT promoter in fibroblasts or skeletal
muscle. DTEF-1 expression occurs very early in chick embryogenesis (16-18 h),
preceding sarcomeric protein expression, and it activates cardiac promoters. As
such, DTEF-1 may be an early marker of the myocardial phenotype. DTEF-1
trans-activates the cTnT promoter in a tissue-specific fashion independent of
AT-rich, MEF-2, or GATA sites. The observed spatial pattern suggests decreasing
levels of expression from the cardiac inlet to the ventricular outflow tracts,
which may mark a cardiogenic or differentiation pathway that parallels the
direction of flow through the developing chick heart.

PMID: 16049055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Food Addit Contam. 2005 May;22(5):472-81.

Determination of dioxins (PCDDs/PCDFs) and PCBs in food and feed using the DR
CALUX bioassay: results of an international validation study.

Gizzi G(1), Hoogenboom LA, Von Holst C, Rose M, Anklam E.

Author information: 
(1)European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Institute for Reference Materials 
and Measurements, Food Safety and Quality Unit, Geel, Belgium.

Maximum levels for dioxins in food and feedstuffs have been recently established 
by the European Commission through two regulations. Dioxin-monitoring programmes 
of food and feedstuffs will therefore be undertaken by the European Member States
to implement these regulations, which would be facilitated by fast and low-cost
screening methods. Commission Directives 2002/70/EC and 2002/69/EC describe
specific characteristics for such screening methods. In the present study, the
performance characteristics of the DR CALUX method from BioDetection Systems were
established in a validation study with 14 participants. The study was based on
two materials (fish oil and feed), each containing four different levels of
dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs around the current limits. The results demonstrate
that the test is very promising but that in particular the clean-up procedure was
a source of variation and requires further optimization and standardization. In
addition the quantification is improved by the use of control samples to correct 
for background contamination, recovery and differences between the TEF values and
REP (relative potency) factors in the test.

PMID: 16019820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Injury. 2005 Aug;36(8):897-9.

Repair of postintubation tracheoesophageal fistula in polytrauma patients.

Athanassiadi K(1), Gerazounis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, General Hospital of Nikea-Piraeus, 34A
Konstantinoupoleos str., 15562 Holargos, Athens, Greece. kallatha@otenet.gr

OBJECTIVE: We present our modest experience in treating tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) in polytrauma patients where tracheal resection turns to be risky due to
the size of the fistula and to the general condition of the patient.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Four polytrauma patients, three male and one female were
treated at our department due to postintubation TEF. Confirmation was obtained
endoscopically and radiologically. Surgical treatment consisted of identification
and dissection of the fistulous tract and closure of the tracheal defect by
transposing strap muscles and suturing them to the defect. Finally, the
oesophageal defect was closed and a flap of sternocleidomastoid muscle was
interposed between oesophagus and trachea.
RESULTS: There was no intraoperative mortality. Three of our patients had an
excellent result. The one who unfortunately returned to mechanical ventilation
due to respiratory insufficiency developed a recurrent fistula.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Repair of postintubation TEF should be delayed until the patient
is fully stabilised and weaned from ventilation. (2) Indirect closure of the
tracheal defect with strap muscle transposition and sternocleidomastoid muscle
interposition between oesophagus and trachea can be lifesaving.

PMID: 16002070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Ann Oncol. 2005 Oct;16(10):1609-17. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Dose-finding study of weekly docetaxel, anthracyclines plus fluoropyrimidines as 
first-line treatment in advanced breast cancer.

Pagani O(1), Sessa C, Nolè F, Munzone E, Crivellari D, Lombardi D, Thürlimann B, 
Hess D, Graffeo R, Ruggeri M, Longhi S, Goldhirsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oncology of Southern Switzerland (IOSI), Ospedale S. Giovanni,
Bellinzona, Switzerland. opagani@siak.ch

BACKGROUND: The efficacy and safety of prolonged fluoropyrimidines, either
intravenously or orally, prompted their integration with taxanes and
anthracyclines in the treatment of advanced breast cancer (ABC). We conducted
three subsequent dose-finding studies on first-line chemotherapy in ABC with
anthracyclines, either epirubicin (E) or doxorubicin (A), and docetaxel (T), both
given on days 1 and 8 every 3 weeks, plus continuous infusion (CI) 5-fluorouracil
(F) or capecitabine (X).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Sixty-two patients (37% dominant visceral disease, 48%
locally advanced disease, 45% two or more sites involved), received different
doses of T (60--80 mg/m(2)), A (40--50 mg/m(2)) or E (60--90 mg/m(2)) and X
(1,650 and 2,000 mg/m(2)), or CI F at a fixed daily dose of 200 mg/m(2). Cardiac 
function was monitored at baseline and then every four cycles by
echocardiography.
RESULTS: The median number of cycles per patient with all regimens was four
(range one to eight). Haematological and gastrointestinal toxicity defined the
maximum tolerated doses, at T-80/E-90 mg/m(2) with TEF, T-70/A50/X-2,000 mg/m(2) 
with TAX and T-70/E-80/X-1,650 mg/m(2) with TEX. Two patients treated with TEF
developed transient cardiac toxicity (dilatative cardiomyopathy and coronary
subtotal stenosis requiring stenting) after cumulative E doses of 400 mg and
1,100 mg/m(2), respectively. Fifty-nine patients were evaluable for response; the
overall response rates (ORR) were comparable between regimens (54% with TEF, 71% 
with TAX and 86% with TEX), with an 81% ORR in 31 patients with locally advanced 
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of fluoropyrimidines to weekly, intermittent ET is well
tolerated and active in ABC.

PMID: 15994176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Pediatr Surg. 2005 Jun;40(6):901-3.

Infants with repaired esophageal atresia and distal tracheoesophageal fistula
with severe respiratory distress: is it tracheomalacia, reflux, or both?

Nasr A(1), Ein SH, Gerstle JT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, M5G
1X8, Canada.

AIM OF STUDY: Infants with repaired esophageal atresia and distal
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) are at risk for severe respiratory distress,
which is related to tracheomalacia (TM), gastroesophageal reflux, or both. This
usually mandates an operation for TM and/or a fundoplication procedure (FP).
METHODS: We retrospectively performed a 26-year review of 288 patients with
repaired EA/TEF. Research Ethic Board approval was obtained.
RESULTS: Postoperatively, 22 (7.6%) infants with EA/TEF developed severe
respiratory distress. Thirteen infants had an initial TM procedure and symptoms
improved in 7 (54%). The 6 (46%) remaining patients with ongoing respiratory
symptoms required an FP. Nine infants had an initial FP and the symptoms improved
in 6 (67%). The remaining 3 (33%) patients with ongoing respiratory symptoms
required a TM procedure. All patients improved with the second procedure. Several
clinical parameters were assessed among the 4 patient groups (FP only, FP
followed by TM procedure, TM procedure only, and TM procedure followed by FP);
there were no significant differences noted.
CONCLUSIONS: Whereas 54% to 67% of infants improved with a TM procedure or FP,
33% to 46% required both surgical procedures. No clinical parameters were
identified that could predict which procedure should be performed first.

PMID: 15991167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Saudi Med J. 2005 May;26(5):781-5.

Gastroesophageal reflux following repair of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Banjar HH(1), Al-Nassar SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
PO Box 3354, MBC-58, Riyadh 11211, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. hanaa@kfshrc.edu.sa

OBJECTIVE: This study represents the experience of a tertiary care center in the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) on the long-term effect on the lungs of esophageal 
atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula repair (TEF), and to emphasize the
magnitude of gastroesophageal reflux (GER) post-EA or post-TEF repair.
METHODS: A retrospective review of all patients referred to the pulmonary clinic 
with EA/TEF or re-operative evaluations from the period 1993-2004 at King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, KSA.
RESULTS: Forty-one patients with confirmed EA/TEF (26 males and 15 females) were 
included in the study. Congenital anomalies were associated in 28 (68%).
Gastroesophageal reflux developed in 39 (95%) of patients, 24 (59%) needed Nissen
fundoplication. Esophageal stricture that required more than 3 dilations
developed in 16 (46%) patients, esophageal dysmotility in 37 (90%) and hiatal
hernia in 11 (27%). Pulmonary complications developed in >70% of the patients
including persistent atelectasis, chronic aspiration pneumonia, asthma and
chronic lung disease that required oxygen for more than one month. Tracheomalacia
in 12 (29%) and bronchiectasis in 7 (17%). Eighty-eight percent of patients who
were able to do pulmonary function test showed abnormal values of moderate
obstructive and restrictive lung disease.
CONCLUSION: Pulmonary complications cause significant and prolonged morbidities
post EA/TEF repair. Gastroesophageal reflux is a common complication after EA/TEF
repair and causes significant morbidity that needs a prolonged follow up.
Patients with GER may need Nissen fundal plication to improve respiratory
problems.

PMID: 15951870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Pediatr Surg Int. 2005 Aug;21(8):684-6. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

Congenital diaphragmatic hernia associated with esophageal atresia,
tracheoesophageal fistula, and truncus arteriosus in a premature newborn.

Cunát V(1), Stranák Z, Pýcha K, Tláskal T, Melichar J, Miletín J, Janota J,
Kucera J, Velebil P.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Institute for the Care of Mother and Child,
Podolské nábrezí 157, Praha 4, Prague 14710, Czech Republic. je-tento@volny.cz

The occurrence of coexisting congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) and esophageal
atresia (EA) with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is extremely rare and is
considered highly lethal. The combination of CDH with EA/TEF and truncus
arteriosus communis (TAC) has not been reported in the literature to date. The
authors describe a premature neonate with this association.

PMID: 15933889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2005 May;14(4):311-5.

Dioxin and furan levels found in tampons.

Archer JC(1), Mabry-Smith R, Shojaee S, Threet J, Eckert JJ, Litman VE.

Author information: 
(1)Food and Drug Administration, Arkansas Regional Laboratory, Jefferson,
Arkansas, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human exposure to dioxins and furans through diet and other sources
has been of concern for many years. One specific concern, related to exposure in 
women's health, is the possible link to endometriosis. Although there are
differences in opinion about this link, the concern from the public is real.
Congressional interest has prompted investigations to determine the amounts of
dioxins and furans present in feminine hygiene products available within the
United States.
METHODS: Tampon samples were analyzed via Gas Chromatography/High Resolution Mass
Spectrometry (GC/HRMS) using a Micromass AutoSpec Ultima high resolution mass
spectrometer at 10,000 mass resolution. As data were confirmed and quantified
using direct isotope dilution, only the 17 2,3,7,8-chlorine-containing dioxin and
furan concentrations were calculated from these analyses.
RESULTS: A total toxic equivalence (TEQ), using the World Health Organization's
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) values, was calculated for each sample. The
calculated TEQs for samples were not statistically different from those of the
calculated TEQs using the average limit of detection (LOD) values.
CONCLUSIONS: Data show results similar to those reported by DeVito and Schecter
(Environ Health Perspect 2002;110:23) in that most of the dioxins and furans were
below the detection limit or estimated detection limits (EDLs).

PMID: 15916504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Pediatr Surg. 2005 Apr;40(4):719-20.

Are patients who have had a tracheoesophageal fistula repair during infancy at
risk for esophageal adenocarcinoma during adulthood?

Alfaro L(1), Bermas H, Fenoglio M, Parker R, Janik JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Maine Medical Center, Yarmouth, ME 04096, USA.

The authors present a case of a 46-year-old woman who had esophageal
adenocarcinoma after having had a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair as an
infant. A Medline search, which identified 2 other patients in the world
literature who developed esophageal cancer (squamous cell carcinoma [J Pediatr
Surg 36(4) (2001) 629-630] and adenocarcinoma [J Pediatr Surg 24(8) (1989)
741-744]) after TEF repair, was performed. As such patients reach middle age, it 
is possible that they are at increased risk for the development of esophageal
cancer. Practitioners should be aware of the possibility of increased risk in
this population and perhaps the need for a study to screen patients who have had 
a TEF repair to assess the incidence of cancer.

PMID: 15852288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Anticancer Drugs. 2005 Jun;16(5):501-6.

Evaluation of cisplatin and a novel platinum polymer conjugate for drug toxicity 
and drug distribution in mice.

Smit T(1), Snyman JR, Neuse EW, Bohm L, van Rensburg CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Pretoria, Pretoria 0001, South Africa.

The toxicity and distribution of cisplatin and two novel platinum (Pt) polymer
conjugates (Pt-6 and Pt-7) were determined in serum and tissue of BALB/c mice at 
specific time points after i.p. administration of a drug bolus containing
identical Pt concentrations. Pt concentrations were determined in serum, liver
and kidney at 5 and 15 min, respectively, after drug administration by
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. It was found that the Pt polymer
Pt-7 gave rise to a considerably lower Pt concentration in serum and considerably
higher concentration in liver and kidney than cisplatin. LD25 measurements
indicated that the Pt-7 polymer is considerably less toxic than cisplatin. In
vitro experiments and determination of IC50 values in a variety of human tumor
cell lines, normal lymphocytes and fibroblasts confirmed that Pt-6 and Pt-7
polymers are 40-500 times more toxic for tumor cells than for normal cells,
perhaps reflecting preferential uptake. The toxicity of cisplatin was found to be
only 1.6-40 times more effective in tumor cells. These inter-relationships are
supported by the observation that the tumor enrichment factor (TEF) for cisplatin
is only in the region of 6, and much lower than for Pt-6 and Pt-7, where TEFs are
in the region of 40 and 150, respectively. These results demonstrate that the Pt 
polymer conjugates exhibit greater tumor specificity than cisplatin, killing
tumor cells more effectively while being considerably less toxic for normal
cells. It is concluded that the Pt polymer conjugates may be superior for cancer 
therapy and warrant further testing to assess their full clinical potential.

PMID: 15846115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mycol Res. 2005 Feb;109(Pt 2):173-86.

Phylogeny and toxigenic potential is correlated in Fusarium species as revealed
by partial translation elongation factor 1 alpha gene sequences.

Kristensen R(1), Torp M, Kosiak B, Holst-Jensen A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Food and Feed Microbiology, National Veterinary Institute, N-0033
Oslo, Norway.

Partial translation elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF-1alpha) gene and intron
sequences are reported from 148 isolates of 11 species of the anamorph genus
Fusarium; F. avenaceum (syn. F. arthrosporioides), F. cerealis, F. culmorum, F.
equiseti, F.flocciferum, F. graminearum, F. lunulosporum, F. sambucinum, F.
torulosum, F. tricinctum and F. venenatum. The sequences were aligned with
TEF-1alpha sequences retrieved from 35 isolates of F. kyushuense, F. langsethiae,
F. poae and F. sporotrichioides in a previous study, and 39 isolates of F.
cerealis, F. culmorum, F. graminearum and F. pseudograminearum retrieved from
sequence databases. The 222 aligned sequences were subjected to phylogenetic
analyses using maximum parsimony and Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo maximum
likelihood statistics. Support for internal branching topologies was examined by 
Bremer support, bootstrap and posterior probability analyses. The resulting trees
were largely congruent. The taxon groups included in the sections Discolor,
Gibbosum and Sporotrichiella sensu Wollenweber & Reinking (1935) all appeared to 
be polyphyletic. All species were monophyletic except F. flocciferum that was
paraphyletic, and one isolate classified as F. cfr langsethiae on the basis of
morphology that grouped with F. sporotrichioides. Mapping of toxin profiles, host
preferences and geographic origin onto the DNA based phylogenetic tree structure 
indicated that in particular the toxin profiles corresponded with phylogeny, i.e.
phylotoxigenic relationships were inferred. A major distinction was observed
between the trichothecene and non-trichothecene producers, and the trichothecene 
producers were grouped into one clade of strictly type A trichothecene producers,
one clade of strictly type B trichothecene producers and one clade with both type
A and type B trichothecene producers. Furthermore, production of the type A
trichothecenes T-2/HT-2 toxins are associated with a lineage comprising F.
langsethiae and F. sporotrichioides. The ability to produce zearalenone was
apparently gained parallel to the ability to produce trichothecenes, and later
lost in a derived sublineage. The ability to produce enniatins is a shared
feature of the entire study group, with the exception of the strict trichothecene
type B producers and F. equiseti. The ability to produce moniliformin seems to be
an ancestral feature of members of the genus Fusarium which seems to have been
lost in the clades consisting of trichothecene/zearalenone producers. The aims of
the present study were to determine the phylogenetic relationships between the
different species of Fusarium commonly occurring on Norwegian cereals and some of
their closest relatives, as well as to reveal underlying patterns such as the
ability to produce certain mycotoxins, geographic distribution and host
preferences. Implications for a better classification of Fusarium are discussed
and highlighted.

PMID: 15839101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Regul Pept. 2005 Jun 30;128(3):169-76.

Determinants of inducible brain natriuretic peptide promoter activity.

Ma KK(1), Banas K, de Bold AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Endocrinology Laboratory, University of Ottawa Heart Institute,
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Canada.

Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) are
polypeptide hormones belonging to the cardiac-derived mammalian natriuretic
peptide system. These hormones share the same biological properties and receptors
and both play important roles in the maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance
and in cardiovascular growth. Most hemodynamic and neurohumoral stimuli can
coordinately increase ANF and BNP gene expression. However, instances of
discoordinated ANF and BNP gene expression have been described, providing an
opportunity for investigating the mechanisms that differentially regulate the
expression of the natriuretic peptide genes. For example, exposure of cardiocytes
in culture to certain pro-inflammatory cytokines and conditioned medium from
mixed lymphocyte cultures upregulate BNP but not ANF gene expression. BNP
promoter activity is also upregulated under these conditions but the cis-acting
elements involved in this phenomenon are not known. In comparison to the ANF
gene, less is known about BNP promoter consensus elements that regulate gene
expression by mechanical or neurohumoral agonists. A number of cis-acting
elements for GATA, Nkx2.5, NF-kappaB and TEF transcription factors have recently 
been identified within the BNP promoter that regulate BNP expression in response 
to specific agonists. This review focuses on the information available regarding 
cis-acting determinants responsible for inducible BNP transcription.

PMID: 15837525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Metabolism. 2005 Apr;54(4):430-8.

The effect of a high-carbohydrate meal on postprandial thermogenesis and
sympathetic nervous system activity in boys with a recent onset of obesity.

Nagai N(1), Sakane N, Hamada T, Kimura T, Moritani T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Applied Physiology, Graduate School of Human and Environmental
Studies, Kyoto University, Japan.

The purpose of the present study was to investigate the thermic effect of food
(TEF) and sympathetic nervous system (SNS) activity in obese boys. Ten obese
(9.2+/-0.4 years) and 13 lean boys (8.8+/-0.4 years) were examined for energy
expenditure and fat oxidation measured via indirect calorimetry for 3 hours after
a high-carbohydrate (HC; 70% carbohydrate, 20% fat, and 10% protein) or a
high-fat (HF; 20% carbohydrate, 70% fat, and 10% protein) meal served on 2
different days at random. The activity of the SNS was assessed by means of a
power spectral analysis of the heart rate variability. The TEF, expressed as a
percentage of the consumed energy, was significantly lower in obese boys than in 
lean boys after the HC meal; however, such a difference was not observed after
the HF meal. Multiple regression analysis revealed that obesity was a significant
variable contributing to the variances in the TEF induced by the HC meal.
Moreover, after the HC meal, the boys with a recent onset of obesity (duration,
<3 years) manifested a lower TEF as well as a reduced very low frequency
component of the heart rate variability, an index of thermoregulatory SNS
functions, compared with the remaining obese and lean boys. In conclusion, obese 
boys possessed normal metabolic and sympathetic responses to the HF meal but
showed a diminished thermogenic response to the HC meal, especially during the
early phase of obesity.

PMID: 15798947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Pediatr Surg Int. 2005 Apr;21(4):308-10. Epub 2005 Mar 24.

Extrapleural thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Tsao K(1), Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Fetal Treatment Center, University of California San Francisco, 513 Parnassus 
Avenue, HSW-1601, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Traditionally, open repair of esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) required thoracotomy. Innovations in minimal access surgery have
created a thoracoscopic technique resulting in violation of the pleural space.
Most pediatric surgeons favor an extrapleural approach for open repair. We
present a novel minimal access, extrapleural technique for repairing EA with TEF.
A 2-day-old infant with EA and distal TEF underwent thoracoscopic extrapleural
repair that utilized three ports. Initial creation of the extrapleural space was 
achieved through one of the port sites and was completed thoracoscopically. A
thoracoscopic repair of EA with distal TEF was achieved within the extrapleural
space. A small tear in the pleura was inadvertently created during the
dissection. The child began feeding normally. At 1 year of age, the patient had
dysphagia requiring a single esophageal dilatation. This is the first known
report of an extrapleural thoracoscopic repair of EA with TEF. Although
thoracoscopic repairs of EA/TEF have been previously reported, these were all
done transpleurally. Many pediatric surgeons favor the extrapleural approach for 
two reasons: (1) containment of a potential leak within the extrapleural space,
avoiding an empyema, and (2) easier transpleural access for future thoracic
procedures.

PMID: 15789240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Dis Esophagus. 2005;18(1):57-9.

Lymphoma and tracheoesophageal fistula: Indication for a removable esophageal
stent.

Bernal AB(1), Rochling FA, DiBaise JK.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, USA.

Mediastinal lymphoma is a rare cause of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). While
most reports described in the literature have been related to prior or concurrent
chemoradiation therapy, TEF has rarely been reported as the initial presentation 
of lymphoma. We report on a young woman found to have Hodgkin's disease
complicated by TEF that required emergent placement of an esophageal stent. The
lymphoma was successfully treated and, due to stent-related symptoms, removal was
desired but not technically possible. We discuss options that may prevent this
predicament in the future.

PMID: 15773844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Pediatr Surg. 2005 Feb;40(2):307-12.

Health-related quality of life in adult patients with esophageal atresia--a
questionnaire study.

Koivusalo A(1), Pakarinen MP, Turunen P, Saarikoski H, Lindahl H, Rintala RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, 
00290 Helsinki, Finland. antti.koivusalo@hus.fi

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Long-term sequelae caused by associated anomalies or
respiratory and gastrointestinal disorders are common after the repair of
esophageal atresia (EA). The aim of this study was to assess the effect of these 
sequelae on the health-related quality of life (HRQoL) of patients with EA.
METHODS: A questionnaire including a 36-item Gastrointestinal Quality of Life
Index, a 15-item Respiratory Symptoms-Related Quality of Life Index, and a
36-item psychosocial survey and a symptoms query was sent to 159 patients with EA
with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), who were operated on between
1949 and 1979, and to 400 healthy control subjects. A 36-item Health Survey Form 
was sent to patients with EA only and the results were compared with values of
the general Finnish population.
RESULTS: A total of 128 patients with EA (80%) and 162 control subjects (41%)
returned the questionnaire. Median age [patients with EA, 38 (range, 24-54)
years; control subjects, 36 (20-56) years] and sex distribution (M/F of patients 
with EA, 57:70; control subjects, 63:99) were comparable. Of the 128 patients,
115 (91%) had EA with a distal TEF, 8 (6%) had EA without TEF, 3 (2%) had EA with
proximal and distal TEF, and 2 (1%) had TEF without EA. The types of esophageal
repair were distributed as follows: primary end-to-end anastomosis (n = 112),
colon interposition (n = 10), gastric tube (n = 3), thoracic skin tube (n = 1),
and fistula closure only (n = 2). Thirty-eight patients had significant
associated anomalies. Gastrointestinal Quality of Life Index scores did not
differ statistically between patients with EA and control subjects. However, the 
incidence of regurgitation (17% vs 10%) and dysphagia (10% vs 2%) was
significantly higher in patients with EA (P < .5). Low Respiratory
Symptoms-Related Quality of Life Index was found in 10 of 128 patients with EA
and in 3 of 163 control subjects (P < .05). Psychosocial survey scores and the
incidence of acquired diseases did not differ between the groups (P = NS). The
36-item Health Survey Form indicated low HRQoL in 19 (15%) of patients with EA
(expected value, 16%). Of the 19 patients with EA with low HRQoL, 8 (42%) had
significant congenital or EA-associated diseases and 11 (58%) had acquired
diseases. The type of EA or esophageal conduit was not related to HRQoL.
CONCLUSIONS: Most adult survivors of EA or TEF repair have a normal quality of
life. Morbidity from esophageal functional disorders and respiratory disorders
with or without acquired diseases impairs HRQoL in 15% of patients with EA.

PMID: 15750920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2005 Feb;53(1):65-7.

Full thickness skin graft as an adjunct in the repair of a recurrent benign
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Huang PM(1), Lee YC, Huang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. e370089@ha.mc.ntu.edu.tw

Recurrent nonmalignant tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare problem and is
usually associated with high postoperative death. Operative closure of TEF should
be attempted in each case, because spontaneous closure is rare. Due to the rarity
of these lesions, there are no data on the superiority of the various surgical
options in repairing recurrent TEF. The management of this complication is
particularly difficult since there is no adequate muscle to separate the tracheal
wall and the esophageal suture to help prevent recurrent TEF. We describe a
treatment modality of repair of a recurrent postintubation TEF treated by a full 
thickness skin graft between the trachea and esophagus. This technique yields
good clinical results and warrants consideration for the treatment of TEF when
other conventional techniques cannot be used.

PMID: 15692923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Blood. 2005 Jun 1;105(11):4437-44. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

TEF, an antiapoptotic bZIP transcription factor related to the oncogenic E2A-HLF 
chimera, inhibits cell growth by down-regulating expression of the common beta
chain of cytokine receptors.

Inukai T(1), Inaba T, Dang J, Kuribara R, Ozawa K, Miyajima A, Wu W, Look AT,
Arinobu Y, Iwasaki H, Akashi K, Kagami K, Goi K, Sugita K, Nakazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Yamanashi, 1110
Shimokato, Tamaho-cho, Nakakoma-gun, Yamanashi 409-3898, Japan.
tinukai@yamanashi.ac.jp

Gain and/or loss of function mediated by chimeric transcription factors generated
by nonrandom translocations in leukemia is a key to understanding oncogenesis.
E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (HLF), a chimeric basic region/leucine zipper (bZIP) 
transcription factor expressed in t(17;19)-positive leukemia cells, contributes
to leukemogenesis through its potential to inhibit apoptosis. To identify
physiologic counterparts of this chimera, we investigated the function of other
bZIP factors that bind to the same DNA sequence recognized by E2A-HLF. Here, we
show that thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF), which shares a high level of
sequence identity with HLF and recognizes the same DNA sequence, is expressed in 
a small fraction of each subset of hematolymphoid progenitors. When TEF was
introduced into FL5.12 interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent cells, TEF protected the
cells from apoptosis due to IL-3 deprivation. Unexpectedly, TEF also almost
completely down-regulated expression of the common beta (betac) chain of cytokine
receptors. Consequently, TEF-expressing cells accumulated in G(0)/G(1) phase
without undergoing apoptosis. These findings suggest that TEF is one of the
apoptotic regulators in hematopoietic progenitors and controls hematopoietic-cell
proliferation by regulating the expression of the betac chain. In contrast,
E2A-HLF promoted cell survival more efficiently than TEF but did not
down-regulate betac chain expression, suggesting that E2A-HLF retains ideal
properties for driving leukemic transformation.

PMID: 15665112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jan 12;33(1):272-9. Print 2005.

Inferring combinatorial regulation of transcription in silico.

Blüthgen N(1), Kielbasa SM, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Humboldt University, Institute for Theoretical Biology Invalidenstrasse 43,
10115 Berlin, Germany.

In this paper, we propose a functional view on the in silico prediction of
transcriptional regulation. We present a method to predict biological functions
regulated by a combinatorial interaction of transcription factors. Using a
rigorous statistic, this approach intersects the presence of transcription factor
binding sites in gene upstream sequences with Gene Ontology terms associated with
these genes. We demonstrate that for the well-studied set of skeletal
muscle-related transcription factors Myf-2, Mef and TEF, the correct functions
are predicted. Furthermore, starting from the well-characterized promoter of a
gene expressed upon lipopolysaccharide stimulation, we predict functional targets
of this stimulus. These results are in excellent agreement with microarray data.

PMCID: PMC546154
PMID: 15647509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biochem J. 2005 May 15;388(Pt 1):217-25.

The transcriptional co-activator TAZ interacts differentially with
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family members.

Mahoney WM Jr(1), Hong JH, Yaffe MB, Farrance IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Members of the highly related TEF-1 (transcriptional enhancer factor-1) family
(also known as TEAD, for TEF-1, TEC1, ABAA domain) bind to MCAT (muscle C, A and 
T sites) and A/T-rich sites in promoters active in cardiac, skeletal and smooth
muscle, placenta, and neural crest. TEF-1 activity is regulated by interactions
with transcriptional co-factors [p160, TONDU (Vgl-1, Vestigial-like protein-1),
Vgl-2 and YAP65 (Yes-associated protein 65 kDa)]. The strong transcriptional
co-activator YAP65 interacts with all TEF-1 family members, and, since YAP65 is
related to TAZ (transcriptional co-activator with PDZ-binding motif), we wanted
to determine if TAZ also interacts with members of the TEF-1 family. In the
present study, we show by GST (glutathione S-transferase) pull-down assays, by
co-immunoprecipitation and by modified mammalian two-hybrid assays that TEF-1
interacts with TAZ in vitro and in vivo. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays
with purified TEF-1 and GST-TAZ fusion protein showed that TAZ interacts with
TEF-1 bound to MCAT DNA. TAZ can interact with endogenous TEF-1 proteins, since
exogenous TAZ activated MCAT-dependent reporter promoters. Like YAP65, TAZ
interacted with all four TEF-1 family members. GST pull-down assays with
increasing amounts of [35S]TEF-1 and [35S]RTEF-1 (related TEF-1) showed that TAZ 
interacts more efficiently with TEF-1 than with RTEF-1. This differential
interaction also extended to the interaction of TEF-1 and RTEF-1 with TAZ in
vivo, as assayed by a modified mammalian two-hybrid experiment. These data show
that differential association of TEF-1 proteins with transcriptional
co-activators may regulate the activity of TEF-1 family members.

PMCID: PMC1186710
PMID: 15628970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Environ Health Perspect. 2005 Jan;113(1):43-8.

Dose-additive carcinogenicity of a defined mixture of "dioxin-like compounds".

Walker NJ(1), Crockett PW, Nyska A, Brix AE, Jokinen MP, Sells DM, Hailey JR,
Easterling M, Haseman JK, Yin M, Wyde ME, Bucher JR, Portier CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27705, USA. walker3@niehs.nih.gov

Use of the dioxin toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach in human risk
assessments assumes that the combined effects of dioxin-like compounds in a
mixture can be predicted based on a potency-adjusted dose-additive combination of
constituents of the mixture. In this study, we evaluated the TEF approach in
experimental 2-year rodent cancer bioassays with female Harlan Sprague-Dawley
rats receiving 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 3,3 ,4,4
,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB-126), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF), or a
mixture of the three compounds. Statistically based dose-response modeling
indicated that the shape of the dose-response curves for hepatic, lung, and oral 
mucosal neoplasms was the same in studies of the three individual chemicals and
the mixture. In addition, the dose response for the mixture could be predicted
from a combination of the potency-adjusted doses of the individual compounds.
Finally, we showed that use of the current World Health Organization dioxin TEF
values adequately predicted the increased incidence of liver tumors
(hepatocellular adenoma and cholangiocarcinoma) induced by exposure to the
mixture. These data support the use of the TEF approach for dioxin cancer risk
assessments.

PMCID: PMC1253708
PMID: 15626646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Surg Today. 2005;35(1):80-1.

Appendiceal mass in a neonate after surgery for esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula: report of a case.

Karaman A(1), Cavusoglu YH, Erdogan D, Karaman I, Cakmak O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dr. Sami Ulus Children's Hospital, Ankara,
Turkey.

A 23-day-old girl presented with abdominal distension and vomiting. She had been 
previously operated on for esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA/TEF) when she was 2 days old. An immediate laparotomy revealed an appendiceal
mass caused by perforated appendicitis. The occurrence of appendicitis and an
appendiceal mass is extremely rare in neonates and this may be the first such
report in the world literature.

PMID: 15622470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Twin Res. 2004 Dec;7(6):603-6.

A quantitative trait locus on 13q14.2 for trunk strength.

Huygens W(1), Thomis MA, Peeters MW, Aerssens J, Janssen RG, Vlietinck RF, Beunen
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sport and Movement Sciences, Faculty of Kinesiology and
Rehabilitation Sciences, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.

Previous findings show strong evidence for the role of retinoblastoma (Rb) in
myoblast proliferation and differentiation. However, it is not known whether
variation in the retinoblastoma gene (RB1 ) is responsible for normal variation
in human muscle strength. Therefore, a linkage analysis for quantitative traits
was performed on 329 young male siblings from 146 families with muscle strength, 
using a polymorphic marker in RB1 (D13S153 on 13q14.2). Trunk strength, a general
strength indicator that requires activation of large muscle groups, was measured 
on a Cybex TEF isokinetic dynamometer. We found evidence for linkage between
locus D13S153 at 13q14.2 and several measurements of trunk flexion with LOD
scores between 1.62 and 2.78 (.002< p <.0002). No evidence for linkage was found 
with trunk extension. This first exploration of the relationship between RB1 and 
human muscle strength through linkage analysis warrants efforts for further fine 
mapping of this region.

PMID: 15607011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2005 Jan;73(1):53-7.

The co-occurrence of congenital diaphragmatic hernia, esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula, and lung hypoplasia.

van Dooren M(1), Tibboel D, Torfs C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC Sophia, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Two severe birth defects, congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) and
esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), have
traditionally been analyzed separately in epidemiological studies. Lung
hypoplasia (LH), part of the CDH spectrum, is not usually associated with EA/TEF,
yet both are foregut malformations.
METHODS: We conducted an epidemiological study of two combinations of the defects
in the population of 3,318,966 live births and stillbirths monitored from 1983 to
1996 by the California Birth Defects Monitoring Program (CBDMP).
RESULTS: A total of 433 cases had a Bochdalek type CDH/LH (0.13 per 1000 births),
893 had EA/TEF (0.27 per 1000 births), and 646 had LH (0.19 per 1000 births).
Among them, 18 cases had CDH/LH with EA/TEF (0.005 per 1000 births), and 53 had
EA/TEF and LH (0.02 per 1000 births); both prevalences are significantly higher
than expected. Sixteen of 17 cases of CDH/LH with EA/TEF, and 34 of 40 cases of
EA/TEF with LH were stillborn or died; 72% and 74%, respectively, had an autopsy.
The male to female sex ratios were 1.43 and 1.13, respectively. In both groups,
infants had similar proportions of additional severe defects, except for
genitourinary and anal defects and syndromes/associations, which were more
prevalent in the EA/TEF with LH group. We reviewed human studies and experimental
animal models for factors reported to cause any combination of the defects.
CONCLUSIONS: Several genetic and environmental factors could affect the
significant co-occurrence of the defects. Future studies should include storage
of patients' biological materials for DNA analysis, karyotyping, and
environmental exposure evaluation.

PMID: 15602760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Mar;90(3):1475-82. Epub 2004 Dec 14.

The role of energy expenditure in the differential weight loss in obese women on 
low-fat and low-carbohydrate diets.

Brehm BJ(1), Spang SE, Lattin BL, Seeley RJ, Daniels SR, D'Alessio DA.

Author information: 
(1)R.D., University of Cincinnati, P.O. Box 210038, Cincinnati, Ohio 45221-0038, 
USA. bonnie.brehm@uc.edu

We have recently reported that obese women randomized to a low-carbohydrate diet 
lost more than twice as much weight as those following a low-fat diet over 6
months. The difference in weight loss was not explained by differences in energy 
intake because women on the two diets reported similar daily energy consumption. 
We hypothesized that chronic ingestion of a low-carbohydrate diet increases
energy expenditure relative to a low-fat diet and that this accounts for the
differential weight loss. To study this question, 50 healthy, moderately obese
(body mass index, 33.2 +/- 0.28 kg/m(2)) women were randomized to 4 months of an 
ad libitum low-carbohydrate diet or an energy-restricted, low-fat diet. Resting
energy expenditure (REE) was measured by indirect calorimetry at baseline, 2
months, and 4 months. Physical activity was estimated by pedometers. The thermic 
effect of food (TEF) in response to low-fat and low-carbohydrate breakfasts was
assessed over 5 h in a subset of subjects. Forty women completed the trial. The
low-carbohydrate group lost more weight (9.79 +/- 0.71 vs. 6.14 +/- 0.91 kg; P < 
0.05) and more body fat (6.20 +/- 0.67 vs. 3.23 +/- 0.67 kg; P < 0.05) than the
low-fat group. There were no differences in energy intake between the diet groups
as reported on 3-d food records at the conclusion of the study (1422 +/- 73 vs.
1530 +/- 102 kcal; 5954 +/- 306 vs. 6406 +/- 427 kJ). Mean REE in the two groups 
was comparable at baseline, decreased with weight loss, and did not differ at 2
or 4 months. The low-fat meal caused a greater 5-h increase in TEF than did the
low-carbohydrate meal (53 +/- 9 vs. 31 +/- 5 kcal; 222 +/- 38 vs. 130 +/- 21 kJ; 
P = 0.017). Estimates of physical activity were stable in the dieters during the 
study and did not differ between groups. These results confirm that short-term
weight loss is greater in obese women on a low-carbohydrate diet than in those on
a low-fat diet even when reported food intake is similar. The differential weight
loss is not explained by differences in REE, TEF, or physical activity and likely
reflects underreporting of food consumption by the low-fat dieters.

PMID: 15598683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Chromatogr A. 2004 Nov 19;1057(1-2):151-61.

Comparison of series 5 gas chromatography column performances from a variety of
manufacturers for separation of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans
using high-resolution mass spectrometry.

Fishman VN(1), Martin GD, Lamparski LL.

Author information: 
(1)The Dow Chemical Company, Midland, MI 48667, USA. sfishman@dow.com

An extended study of seven fused silica capillary gas chromatographic (GC)
columns has been conducted with regard to separation of international toxic
equivalent factor (I-TEF) isomers (tetra- through octa-chlorinated at 2,3,7,8
positions) of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans
(PCDDs/PCDFs) from closely co-eluted other isomers using high-resolution gas
chromatography-high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRGC-HRMS). The data are
explicated in mass chromatograms of Series 5 GC columns from a variety of
manufacturers (Varian CP-Sil 8 CB LowBleed/MS, Phenomenex ZB-5UMS, Agilent
HP-5MS, Restek Rtx-5MS, Supelco Equity-5, J&W Scientific DB-5 and DB-5MS),
according to relative retention times, and 2,3,7,8-substituted isomer
concentrations for each of the columns tested. Results showed differences between
5% phenyl methyl silicone and 5% silphenylene (Si-arylene) silicone polymer type 
GC stationary phases in separation of 2,3,7,8-substituted PCDDs/PCDFs from
closely co-eluted isomers. The separation differences for Si-arylene type columns
resulted in lower toxic equivalence (TEQ) values compared to the siloxane-based
columns. Because of differences in product nomenclature and manufacturing
practices by various manufacturers, incorrect assumptions and comparisons may be 
made regarding the interchangeability of these columns for PCCD/PCDF separations.
The data presented are the most comprehensive to date and provide a valuable
addition to operational criteria for the standard US Environmental Protection
Agency methods 1613b and 8290.

PMID: 15584234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Dec;89(12):5993-7.

Relationship between ghrelin and energy expenditure in healthy young women.

St-Pierre DH(1), Karelis AD, Cianflone K, Conus F, Mignault D, Rabasa-Lhoret R,
St-Onge M, Tremblay-Lebeau A, Poehlman ET.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Métabolique, Département de Nutrition, Faculté de Médicine, Université
de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Ghrelin is a novel peptide that has been isolated from human and rat stomach
tissues. Despite its known stimulatory effects on appetite and eating behavior,
little information is available regarding its relationship with energy
expenditure in normal-weight humans. To address this issue, we examined the
relationship between serum ghrelin and resting metabolic rate (RMR), the thermic 
effect of food (TEF), fasting and postprandial respiratory quotient, physical
activity level, peak aerobic capacity (VO(2 peak)), energy intake, and
psychological measures of feeding behavior. We recruited 65 young healthy women
and determined RMR and TEF by indirect calorimetry after a 12-h fast. Physical
activity was determined by a leisure time physical activity questionnaire; VO(2
peak) was determined by bicycle ergometer test to exhaustion; energy intake was
determined by a 24-h dietary recall; and food behavior was determined by a
three-factor eating questionnaire. Our cohort showed a broad range of body mass
index (range, 16.8-28.3 kg/m2), RMR (range, 820-1550 kcal/d), TEF (range,
74.4-136.5 kcal/d), and percent body fat (range, 14.0-37.7%). We noted
significant inverse correlations between ghrelin and RMR (r = -0.350, P = 0.004) 
and TEF (r = -0.396, P = 0.001). These inverse correlations persisted after
statistical control for both fat-free mass and fat mass (ghrelin vs. RMR partial,
r = -0.284, P = 0.024; and ghrelin vs. TEF partial, r = -0.329, P = 0.01) and
insulin levels (ghrelin vs. RMR partial, r = -0.255, P = 0.046; and ghrelin vs.
TEF partial, r = -0.287, P = 0.024) using partial correlation analysis. We also
observed a significant inverse correlation between ghrelin and daily caloric
intake (r = -0.266, P = 0.032), but ghrelin levels were not significantly
correlated with fasting (r = -0.002), postprandial respiratory quotient (r =
-0.016), leisure time physical activity (r = 0.104), VO(2 peak) (r = 0.138),
dietary disinhibition (r = -0.071), dietary restraint (r = 0.051), or feeling of 
general hunger (r = -0.028). These results suggest that higher levels of ghrelin 
are associated with low levels of resting and postprandial thermogenesis, which
is independent of individual differences in fat-free mass and fat mass. Although 
speculative, serum ghrelin may play a role in the regulation of energy
homeostasis by acting as a hormonal marker of increased energy efficiency.

PMID: 15579749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):6204-14. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

Cell cycle-mediated regulation of smooth muscle alpha-actin gene transcription in
fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells involves multiple adenovirus
E1A-interacting cofactors.

Wang SX(1), Elder PK, Zheng Y, Strauch AR, Kelm RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont, 208 South Park Dr., Burlington,
VT 05405, USA.

Expression of smooth muscle alpha-actin in growth factor-induced myofibroblasts
and in differentiated vascular smooth muscle cells is transcriptionally
controlled by multiple positive or negative trans-acting factors interacting with
distinct cis-elements in the 5'-flanking region of the gene. Because none of the 
transcriptional regulators reported to date is smooth muscle cell- or
myofibroblast-specific per se, the dynamic interplay among many factors
interacting at specific sites along the promoter appears to be a signature
feature of smooth muscle alpha-actin gene regulation in these cell types. Herein,
the ability of the adenovirus E1A 12 S protein to bind and functionally
inactivate specific cell regulatory factors has been exploited to identify
several previously unknown coactivators of the mouse smooth muscle alpha-actin
promoter in rodent fibroblasts and vascular smooth muscle cells. In transient
cotransfection assays, ectopic expression of wild type E1A suppressed promoter
activity in a dose- and cis-element-dependent manner. In asynchronous cells,
N-terminal E1A mutants defective in CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300 binding
capacity exhibited markedly reduced inhibitory activity toward a smooth muscle
alpha-actin promoter driven by a composite TEF-1-, SRF-, and Sp1/3-regulated
enhancer. In synchronized cells, however, a more complex mutant E1A inhibitory
pattern indicated that collaboration between CBP/p300 and the retinoblastoma
family of pocket proteins was required to produce a fully functional enhancer.
Cotransfection experiments conducted with Rb(-/-) fibroblasts demonstrated the
necessity of pRB in augmenting smooth muscle alpha-actin enhancer/promoter
activity. Physical interaction studies with the use of purified wild type and
mutant E1A proteins confirmed that CBP, p300, and pRB were targets of E1A binding
in nuclear extracts of vascular smooth muscle cells and/or fibroblasts.
Collectively, these results suggest that a repertoire of E1A-interacting
proteins, namely CBP/p300 and pRB, serve to integrate the activities of multiple 
trans-acting factors to control smooth muscle alpha-actin gene transcription in a
cell type- and cell cycle-dependent manner.

PMID: 15576380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Nov;39(11):1648-50.

Image-guided percutaneous gastrostomy in neonates with esophageal atresia.

Aziz D(1), Chait P, Kreichman F, Langer JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Neonates with esophageal atresia may require a gastrostomy before
definitive repair. Most surgeons do this procedure using the Stamm technique
through a laparotomy. The authors describe a new technique for percutaneous
placement of a gastrostomy in these infants and report their preliminary results.
METHODS: For children with esophageal atresia and a tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF), the air-filled stomach is localized fluoroscopically and accessed using a 
standard percutaneous technique. For those with pure esophageal atresia, a
transhepatic needle is used to instil air into the stomach. Once the stomach is
distended, the gastrostomy tube is inserted under fluoroscopy.
RESULTS: Fourteen neonates with esophageal atresia had a percutaneous gastrostomy
tube placed. Eleven had esophageal atresia and a TEF, and 3 had pure esophageal
atresia with a gasless abdomen requiring the transhepatic approach. There were no
intraoperative or major postoperative complications, but there were 5 minor early
postoperative complications and 2 minor late postoperative complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Percutaneous gastrostomy insertion is a safe technique for neonates 
with esophageal atresia and can be used even in children with pure esophageal
atresia who have a gasless abdomen. This technique does not require laparotomy
and appears to be associated with a low rate of complications.

PMID: 15547827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Pediatr Surg Int. 2004 Oct;20(10):757-61.

Evaluation of neonates with esophageal atresia using chest CT scan.

Ratan SK(1), Varshney A, Mullick S, Saxena NC, Kakkar S, Sodhi PK.

Author information: 
(1)E-13/13 Khirki Extension, Malviya Nagar, New Delhi PIN 110017, India.
drjohnsimmi@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Pediatr Surg Int. 2006 Mar;22(3):300-1.

Recent literature stresses various factors that influence outcome in neonates
with esophageal atresia (EA), including associated congenital anomalies,
ventilator dependency, and gap length. Although the existing modalities can
fairly accurately assess the first two factors, a comparable modality for
assessing the interpouch gap in a natural unstretched position preoperatively is 
lacking. A technique of direct sagittal computed tomography (CT) scanning of the 
chest, initially employed by Tam et al. in 1987, was found to provide fairly
accurate information on the level of origin of the fistula and the interpouch
distance, with pouches in natural, unstretched positions, in two neonates with EA
and distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). However, no further studies were
reported using this technique. We studied 10 neonates with EA and distal TEF, the
most common variant, using this technique. The addition of axial cuts was done in
the event of a short upper pouch or suboptimally-clear anatomical details in
sagittal chest CT films. The preoperative information in our study subjects was
found to corroborate well with operative findings except in the one patient with 
laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC). Prior information of a left
bronchoesophageal fistula in two of the neonates with dextrocardia greatly helped
us in saving operative time and difficulties and postoperative hassles. The chest
CT scan proved to be a noninvasive and quick means for investigating neonates
with the most common variant of EA. CT scanning could be extended for routine
preoperative evaluation of neonates with EA to prepare for intraoperative
problems, besides helping prognostication.

PMID: 15517291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Am Chem Soc. 2004 Nov 3;126(43):14166-75.

Organotellurium(VI) azides and halides.

Klapötke TM(1), Krumm B, Polborn K, Schwab I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilian University of
Munich, Butenandtstr. 5-13(D), D-81377 Munich, Germany. tmk@cup.uni-muenchen.de

The reaction of azide with organotellurium(VI) halides Ph(5)TeBr and
cis-(biphen)(2)TeF(2) (biphen = 2,2'-biphenyldiyl) resulted in the formation and 
isolation of Ph(5)TeN(3) (1) and cis-(biphen)(2)Te(N(3))(2) (2), which are the
first tellurium(VI)-azide species. In addition to spectroscopic data, both
crystal structures have been determined. Furthermore, the stability of possible
Te(VI) species with higher azide contents Ph(x)()Te(N(3))(6)(-)(x)() and
Me(x)()Te(N(3))(6)(-)(x)() as well as the syntheses and properties of their
Ph/Me(x)()TeF(y)() precursors was investigated, including the crystal structure
determination of trans-Ph(2)TeF(4) (3). Ab initio and density functional studies 
of all molecules regarding the structures and electronic populations were
performed.

PMID: 15506782  [PubMed]


394. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2004 Oct 29;226(1-2):59-66.

Circadian regulation of islet genes involved in insulin production and secretion.

Allaman-Pillet N(1), Roduit R, Oberson A, Abdelli S, Ruiz J, Beckmann JS,
Schorderet DF, Bonny C.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Medical Genetics and Unit of Molecular Genetics, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), CH-1011 Lausanne, Switzerland.
Nathalie.Pillet@chuv.hospvd.ch

Both transcription factors albumin site d-binding protein (DBP) and thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF) are elements of the "cell-clock". Their circadian
accumulation in suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and peripheral tissues such as
liver, kidney and lung is thought to participate in controlling circadian
regulation of downstream genes. TEF and DBP control elements have never been
investigated in the insulin-secreting cells, but impairment of the circadian
rhythm of the beta-cells might be involved in the development of diabetic state
as type 2 diabetics have lost daily temporal variations of insulin secretion. We 
investigated the expression pattern of TEF and DBP in insulin-secreting cells.
TEF and DBP transcripts are expressed at extremely high levels in human
pancreatic islets compared to other tissues, suggesting a potentially important
circadian regulation of these cells. Both TEF and DPB accumulate in a circadian
way in insulin-secreting cells after a serum shock known to restore circadian
rhythms in cultured cells. In addition, the expression of islet-specific genes
involved in glucose sensing (glucose transporter 2 (Glut2), glucokinase), insulin
production (insulin) and secretion (migration inhibitory factor (MIF),
somatostatin and syntaxin 1A) were modulated in the same daily rhythm as well.
The circadian deregulation of these genes could therefore participate in the
diabetic state development.

PMID: 15489006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Environ Sci Technol. 2004 Sep 15;38(18):4734-8.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin/polychlorinated dibenzofuran releases into the
atmosphere from the use of secondary fuels in cement kilns during clinker
formation.

Abad E(1), Martínez K, Caixach J, Rivera J.

Author information: 
(1)Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Department of Ecotechnologies, IIQAB-CSIC, Jordi
Girona 18-26, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of using waste materials,
such as tires or meat meal, as a secondary fuel during clinker production on the 
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxin (PCDD)/polychlorinated dibenzofuran (PCDF)
emission levels to the atmosphere. For this purpose, three different cement
plants in Spain were chosen to conduct the project in different sampling
episodes. Different materials were separately evaluated in each plant: the first 
plant included the addition of meat meal in the kiln, the second plant used
rejected tires, and the third plant used a mixture of both. In all cases, PCDD/F 
emission values remained below the limit established by the European Union
Directive of 0.1 ng I-TEQ/Nm3, with values ranging from 0.001 to 0.042 ng
I-TEQ/Nm3. The major contribution to total TEQ in the majority of cases came from
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran owing to its relatively higher levels and
2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran because of its TEF of 0.5. The remaining 15
toxic congeners collectively provided only a minor contribution to TEQ.
Furthermore, no marked differences were found compared with reported data
obtained from Spanish cement kiln plants using conventional fuel. This fact
indicates that the addition of used tires or meat meals had no effect on
PCDD/PCDF emission levels.

PMID: 15487780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Oct;39(10):1568-70.

Thoracoscopic repair of H-type tracheoesophageal fistula in the newborn: a
technical case report.

Allal H(1), Montes-Tapia F, Andina G, Bigorre M, Lopez M, Galifer RB.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Chirurgie Viscérale Pediatrique, Hôpital Lapeyronie, Montpellier,
France.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2006 Jan;41(1):287; author reply 287.

H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (H-TEF) without esophageal atresia makes up 4%
to 5% of esophageal congenital abnormalities. The authors present the
thoracoscopic treatment of a 2.47-kg newborn boy with a fistula between the
second and third thoracic vertebrae diagnosed by esophagography. Four trocars
were used for fistula closure, and tracheal and esophageal suturing were
accomplished without intraoperative incident. Five days after surgery, results of
a barium swallow excluded anastomotic leaks. The chest tube was removed, and oral
feeding was initiated.

PMID: 15486907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Oct;89(10):5138-44.

Role of sympathetic neural activation in age- and habitual exercise-related
differences in the thermic effect of food.

Jones PP(1), Van Pelt RE, Johnson DG, Seals DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Colorado 80309-0354, USA.

The thermic effect of food (TEF) declines with advancing age in adult humans but 
is enhanced in the habitually exercising state. The responsiveness of the
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) has been implicated in these differences in TEF.
We tested the hypotheses that 1) the reduction in TEF with aging is associated
with an attenuated SNS response to acute energy intake; and 2) the greater TEF
observed in endurance exercise-trained adults is associated with an augmented SNS
response. Four groups of healthy men were studied: 16 young and 11 older
sedentary men and nine young and 10 older habitually exercising men. Metabolic
rate (indirect calorimetry, ventilated hood), skeletal muscle sympathetic nerve
activity (MSNA; peroneal microneurography), and plasma norepinephrine and plasma 
epinephrine concentrations were measured before and for up to 4 h after ingestion
of a carbohydrate drink (2.5 g/kg fat-free mass). TEF was approximately 50%
greater in young compared with older men (P < 0.05) and approximately 25% greater
in exercising compared with sedentary men (P < 0.05). In contrast, the MSNA,
plasma norepinephrine, and plasma epinephrine responses were not different among 
the four groups. Covarying for MSNA did not significantly alter the observed
differences in TEF. Habitual exercise status did not affect the age-associated
decline in TEF. These findings demonstrate that altered postprandial whole-body
and skeletal muscle SNS activation is not an important mechanism mediating either
the reduction in TEF with aging or the augmented TEF associated with the
exercise-trained state in healthy men. Differences in beta-adrenergic
responsiveness to postprandial sympathoadrenal stimulation and/or nonsympathetic 
adrenergic influences likely explain the age- and habitual exercise-related
differences in TEF.

PMID: 15472218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Dysphagia. 2004 Spring;19(2):83-6.

CD4 lymphocyte count and CD4/CD8 ratio in elderly long-term care patients with
oropharyngeal dysphagia: comparison between oral and tube enteral feeding.

Leibovitz A(1), Sharon-Guidetti A, Segal R, Blavat L, Peller S, Habot B.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Medical Center, Shmuel Harofeh Hospital, Affiliated with the Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Beer-Yaakov, Israel.
shmuelh@nervision.net.il

Many institutionalized elderly patients are at risk of undernutrition as a result
of oropharyngeal dysphagia (OD) that possibly affects their immunological status.
Tube enteral fed (TEF) patients on controlled intake of nutrients enables us to
evaluate the effect of inadequate nutrition on the immune system in the orally
fed elderly with OD. The aim of our study was to compare CD4 lymphocyte count and
CD4/CD8 ratio between these two differently fed groups. Twenty-eight orally fed
patients with OD in the Functional Outcome Swallowing Scale (FOSS) stage 2 (group
A) and 17 TEF subjects (group B) were studied. CD4 and CD8 counts were determined
by flow cytometry. Nutritional markers (albumin, hemoglobin, and basal metabolic 
index) were recorded for each group. The Charlson index was used for comparison
of comorbidity between the two patient groups. The average count of CD4
lymphocytes was significantly lower in group A than in group B (754 +/- 365 vs.
1032 +/- 404 cells/ml, p < 0.01). Six patients in group A (21%) had a CD4 count
of less than 400 cells/ml (lower threshold) while all the patients in group B had
a CD4 count of over 500 cells/ml (p < 0.001). The CD4/CD8 average ratio was also 
significantly lower in group A (p < 0.008). Nutritional markers were within
normal limits with no difference between the groups. These results confirm our
presumption that a low CD4 lymphocyte count and a low CD4/CD8 ratio could prevail
among elderly frail patients with dysphagia. This supports the view that under an
apparently satisfactory nutritional profile these patients may be in a state of
undernutrition that negatively influences their immunodefense.

PMID: 15382795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Toxicology. 2004 Nov 1;204(1):51-60.

Evaluation of relative potencies of PCB126 and PCB169 for the immunotoxicities in
ovalbumin (OVA)-immunized mice.

Pan X(1), Inouye K, Ito T, Nagai H, Takeuchi Y, Miyabara Y, Tohyama C, Nohara K.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences Division, National Institute for Environmental
Studies, Tsukuba 305-8506, Japan.

Dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) exert their toxicities by activating
the arylhydrocarbon receptor (AhR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor, in a
similar manner to the most toxic dioxin, 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD). In the present study, we re-evaluated the relative potency (REP) of the
toxic members of dioxin-like PCBs, PCB126 (toxic equivalency factor, TEF 0.1) and
PCB169 (TEF 0.01) relative to TCDD, focusing our attention on their effects on
the immune reactions of mice immunized with ovalbumin (OVA). Thymus involution,
IgM production, and IL-5 produced by the splenocytes were examined in addition to
CYP1A1 induction, the established index of AhR-activation, in the spleen. PCB126 
had an REP value of 0.1 because of its effects on thymus, IgM, IL-5, and CYP1A1
induction in the spleen, although its effect on IgG1 production was weaker. On
the other hand, PCB169 had a smaller REP value estimated at less than 0.01 with
regard to CYP1A1 induction in the spleen and all examined immunological effects, 
except for IgM production. The tissue concentrations of PCB169 and TCDD could not
explain the reason for the smaller potency of PCB169, since the spleen contained 
a higher proportion of PCB169 to TCDD than dosed. These results indicate that
dioxin-like PCBs, especially PCB169, shows deviating REPs against immune
reactions, and also suggest that PCB169-liganded AhR behaves differently from
TCDD-liganded AhR in immune cells.

PMID: 15369848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Chest. 2004 Sep;126(3):915-25.

Long-term complications of congenital esophageal atresia and/or tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Kovesi T(1), Rubin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, University
of Ottawa, 401 Smyth Rd, Ottawa, ON, Canada. kovesi@cheo.on.ca

Congenital esophageal atresia (EA) and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) are
common congenital anomalies. Respiratory and GI complications occur frequently,
and may persist lifelong. Late complications of EA/TEF include tracheomalacia, a 
recurrence of the TEF, esophageal stricture, and gastroesophageal reflux. These
complications may lead to a brassy or honking-type cough, dysphagia, recurrent
pneumonia, obstructive and restrictive ventilatory defects, and airway
hyperreactivity. Aspiration should be excluded in children and adults with a
history of EA/TEF who present with respiratory symptoms and/or recurrent lower
respiratory infections, to prevent chronic pulmonary disease.

PMID: 15364774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Dis Esophagus. 2004;17(3):266-9.

Tracheoesophageal fistula secondary to chemotherapy for malignant B-cell lymphoma
of the thyroid: successful surgical treatment with jejunal interposition and
mesenteric patch.

Hosoya Y(1), Yokoyama T, Arai W, Hyodo M, Nishino H, Sugawara Y, Yasuda Y, Nagai 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery Jichi Medical School, Minami-Kawachi, Tochigi, Japan.
hosoyo@ichi.ac.jp

We report a case of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) secondary to chemotherapy for
primary thyroid lymphoma. A 65-year-old man with a short history of a rapidly
enlarging neck mass was diagnosed as having thyroid lymphoma of diffuse, large
B-cell type. The TEF occurred during the first course of chemotherapy including
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone. After placing a
feeding gastrostomy without oral intake, eight cycles of chemotherapy were
completed and complete remission was achieved. Although the cervical mass
disappeared, TEF and esophageal stenosis persisted. Total thyroidectomy and
resection of the stenotic cervical esophagus were carried out followed by
interposition of the revascularized jejunum and its mesenteric patch to cover the
TEF. This seems to be the first report of a TEF caused by chemotherapy for
primary thyroid B-cell lymphoma. A variety of treatments for TEF including simple
closure, tracheal resection, colonic bypass and muscle flap have been reported
with low success rates. Our procedure using a jejunal mesenteric patch seems to
be unique and may be a new treatment strategy for TEF.

PMID: 15361103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2004 Apr;55(4):198-200.

[Incompetent tracheoesophageal fistula following phonatory puncture. Surgical
resolution].

[Article in Spanish]

Ferrer Ramírez MJ(1), Estellés Ferriol E, Plá Mocholí A, Dalmau Galofre J, López 
Martínez R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Otorrinolaringología, Hospital Universitario Dr. Peset, Valencia. 
mferrerr@comv.es

Large tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) following a total laryngectomy are rare.
Most often are associated with the creation of a surgical speech fistula or
puncture. We describe the surgical technique used in 3 patients with large TEF
after a total laryngectomy and the creation of a speech fistula with a voice
prosthesis, followed by radiation therapy. Pertinent literature is reviewed.

PMID: 15359668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Sep;39(9):1386-9.

Robotically assisted esophago-esophagostomy in newborn pigs.

Lorincz A(1), Langenburg SE, Knight CG, Gidell K, Rabah R, Klein MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Wayne State University School of Medicine and
Children's Hospital of Michigan, Maxine and Stuart Frankel Foundation
Computer-Assisted Robot-Enhanced Surgery Program, Children's Research Center of
Michigan, Detroit, MI, USA.

PURPOSE: Repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in the 
newborn is challenging when done as an open procedure but only a few surgeons
have attempted this with minimally invasive surgery (MIS). Surgical robots that
hold MIS instruments have wrists and provide tremor filtration and motion
scaling, which might be expected to facilitate complex procedures in small spaces
such as an esophageal anastomosis in a newborn.
METHODS: Seven newborn pigs weighing 2 to 3 kg were used as a model. The authors 
performed an esophageal resection and end-to-end anastomosis using the Zeus
Microwrist Robotic Surgical System. The authors monitored the following data-Zeus
robotic set-up time, operating time, esophageal dissection time, and anastomosis 
time. After 1 month, the animals were anesthetized to perform esophagram and than
were killed.
RESULTS: In these very small animals the space available for performing an
anastomosis is very limited, approximately 2 cm3. Two pigs each died 18 days
postoperatively. One animal could not eat and died during esophageal dilation.
The second pig died of unrelated enteritis. Neither had evidence of anastomotic
leak at autopsy. The esophagram of the 5 pigs that survived for 30 days showed no
narrowing or proximal dilation in 2. In 3 there was some stenosis requiring
dilation. Histopathology was done on each operated animal. Two of the anastomoses
were well healed, and 5 showed only focal small ulceration.
CONCLUSIONS: Robotic assistance facilitates an MIS approach to the upper
esophagus even in the limited space of the infant chest.

PMID: 15359395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Aug;14(4):274-8.

Tracheoesophageal fistula due to disc-battery ingestion.

Alkan M(1), Büyükyavuz I, Dogru D, Yalçin E, Karnak I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey.

Ingestion of a disc battery can lead to hazardous complications including
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), especially when the battery is impacted in the
esophagus. Urgent esophagoscopic removal of the battery is essential in all
cases. Persisting respiratory symptoms and/or feeding difficulty after removal
should alert the surgeon to evaluate for TEF. Esophagography and/or esophagoscopy
should be performed. Once the TEF is identified, conservative management is the
initial treatment of choice. Delayed primary repair can be tried if spontaneous
closure does not occur. The authors present a case of TEF secondary to
disc-battery ingestion with review of the current literature and discuss the
management of this rare but potentially life-threatening complication.

PMID: 15343469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Pediatr Surg Int. 2004 Aug;20(8):602-8. Epub 2004 Aug 26.

Esophageal atresia and other visceral anomalies in a modified Adriamycin rat
model and their correlations with amniotic fluid volume variations.

França WM(1), Gonçalves A, Moraes SG, Pereira LA, Sbragia L.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Surgery Division/Department of Surgery of the Medical Science
Faculty, Universidade Estadual de Campinas-UNICAMP, R. da Pavuna, 20 Souzas
Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. willy@proinfancia.com.br

The Adriamycin rat model (ARM) has been used to produce visceral malformations in
fetuses to explain the mechanisms of foregut division. The models vary in the
dosage of Adriamycin (ADR) and in the number of applications. Our study of a
modified ARM using 2.2 mg/kg of ADR for 2 days only, intraperitoneally in
pregnant rats, is presented. A total of 81 fetuses were obtained with this model 
from the ADR group, 74 (91%) alive. Uretero-hydronephrosis (UHN) was observed in 
70 fetuses (95%), esophageal atresia (EA) in 68 (92%), duodenal atresia (DA) in
68 (92%), bladder hypoplasia (BH) in 67 (90%), plus other malformations. In
evaluating amniotic fluid (AF) volume of the fetuses with EA with
tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) (group I) and EA without TEF (group II), both
associated with bilateral UHN when compared with the control group (group III),
groups I and II showed higher AF volume in groups I and II than the control group
(group III) did ( p=0.0001). In conclusion, ARM was adequate to produce EA and
other visceral malformations. The use of ADR in a higher dosage for a shorter
period of time produced better results than those presented in previous
literature. The increase of AF volume obtained in fetuses presenting EA plus
bilateral UHN strongly suggests, despite ureteral dilatation (urinary
obstruction), that a malformed communication may exist between the urinary system
and the amniotic cavity, permitting the existence of polyhydramnios that is due
to digestive obstruction such as EA and DA.

PMID: 15338172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Bioinformatics. 2005 Feb 1;21(3):307-13. Epub 2004 Aug 19.

Similarity of position frequency matrices for transcription factor binding sites.

Schones DE(1), Sumazin P, Zhang MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, 1 Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, 
USA. dschones@cshl.edu

MOTIVATION: Transcription-factor binding sites (TFBS) in promoter sequences of
higher eukaryotes are commonly modeled using position frequency matrices (PFM).
The ability to compare PFMs representing binding sites is especially important
for de novo sequence motif discovery, where it is desirable to compare putative
matrices to one another and to known matrices.
RESULTS: We describe a PFM similarity quantification method based on product
multinomial distributions, demonstrate its ability to identify PFM similarity and
show that it has a better false positive to false negative ratio compared to
existing methods. We grouped TFBS frequency matrices from two libraries into
matrix families and identified the matrices that are common and unique to these
libraries. We identified similarities and differences between the
skeletal-muscle-specific and non-muscle-specific frequency matrices for the
binding sites of Mef-2, Myf, Sp-1, SRF and TEF of Wasserman and Fickett. We
further identified known frequency matrices and matrix families that were
strongly similar to the matrices given by Wasserman and Fickett. We provide
methodology and tools to compare and query libraries of frequency matrices for
TFBSs.
AVAILABILITY: Software is available to use over the Web at
http://rulai.cshl.edu/MatCompare
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Database and clustering statistics, matrix families
and representatives are available at
http://rulai.cshl.edu/MatCompare/Supplementary.

PMID: 15319260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Genesis. 2004 Aug;39(4):273-9.

Transcription cofactor Vgl-2 is required for skeletal muscle differentiation.

Chen HH(1), Maeda T, Mullett SJ, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

TEF-1 transcription factors regulate gene expression in skeletal muscle but are
not muscle-specific. Instead, TEF-1 factors rely on the muscle-specific cofactor 
Vestigial-like 2 (Vgl-2), a protein related to Drosophila vestigial. Previously, 
we showed that Vgl-2 promotes skeletal muscle differentiation and activates
muscle-specific promoters. However, the mechanism whereby Vgl-2 regulates TEF-1
factors and the requirement for Vgl-2 for muscle-specific gene expression were
not known. In Drosophila, vestigial alters DNA binding specificity of the TEF-1
homolog scalloped to drive wing and flight muscle-specific gene expression. Here,
gel mobility shift assays show that Vgl-2 differentially affects DNA binding of
different TEF-1 factors. Using an antisense morpholino, we blocked the expression
of Vgl-2 and a muscle-specific gene in the myogenic C2C12 cell line and in chick 
embryos by electroporation. These results demonstrate that Vgl-2 is required for 
muscle gene expression, in part by switching DNA binding of TEF-1 factors during 
muscle differentiation.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15287000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Am Diet Assoc. 2004 Aug;104(8):1251-7.

The Yale Physical Activity Survey for older adults: predictions in the energy
expenditure due to physical activity.

Kruskall LJ(1), Campbell WW, Evans WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 89154-3026,
USA. lkruskall@ccmail.nevada.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the accuracy of the Yale Physical Activity Survey (YPAS)
for older adults.
DESIGN: Fourteen-week strictly controlled diet study.
SUBJECTS/SETTING: Eleven men and 17 women, age range 55 to 78 years, spent 10
weeks in an outpatient setting and 4 weeks in an inpatient setting at the General
Clinical Research Center, Noll Physiological Research Center, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park.
INTERVENTION: Subjects were provided dietary energy to maintain body weight
within +/-0.5 kg of baseline weight. The daily menus contained 0.8 g protein per 
kilogram body weight and nonprotein energy as 60% carbohydrate and 40% fat.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Metabolizable energy intake (MEI) was measured at week 14 
from the gross energy contents of food, urine, and feces, with corrections for
any body composition changes during the last 6 weeks of weight maintenance.
Resting energy expenditure (REE) was determined using indirect calorimetry. The
thermic effect of feeding (TEF) was estimated to be 10% of the MEI. The energy
expenditure due to physical activity (EEPA) was derived by the formula:
EEPA=MEI-REE-TEF. This value was compared with the EEPA estimated from the YPAS. 
Statistical analyses performed Two-factor analysis of variance with repeated
measures and paired t tests.
RESULTS: At week 14, after a minimum of 6 weeks of sustained weight stability,
the derived EEPA was not different from that estimated using the YPAS for the men
and the men and women combined, while the YPAS estimate was more than the
measured mean value for the women (P<.05). There was wide variability in the
accuracy of the EEPA prediction for individual subjects (range=-637 to 794 kcal).
APPLICATIONS/CONCLUSIONS: The YPAS may be used, with caution, to estimate the
EEPA for groups of older individuals, and may provide inaccurate estimates of the
EEPA in older individuals.

PMID: 15281043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Chromatogr A. 2004 Jun 4;1038(1-2):189-99.

Separation of seventeen 2,3,7,8-substituted polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
dibenzofurans and 12 dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls by comprehensive
two-dimensional gas chromatography with electron-capture detection.

Korytár P(1), Danielsson C, Leonards PE, Haglund P, de Boer J, Brinkman UA.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Fisheries Research, P.O. Box 68, 1970 AB IJmuiden,
The Netherlands. peter.korytar@wur.nl

Comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatography (GC x GC) with electron-capture 
detection (ECD) has been optimized for the separation of seventeen
2,3,7,8-substituted polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans and 12
dioxin-like polychlorinated biphenyls, with emphasis on the selection of the
first- and second-dimension, commercially available, columns. When eight
second-dimension columns were subsequently combined with a 100%
methylpolysiloxane stationary phase (DB-1) in the first dimension to create
orthogonal conditions, a complete separation of all congeners with different TEF 
values was obtained with two column combinations, DB-1 x VF-23 and DB-1 x LC-50. 
When other types of first-dimension columns were used (and orthogonality was
partly sacrificed), a DB-XLB column combined with 007-65HT, VF-23 and LC-50 was
found to provide a complete separation of all 29 priority congeners. Next, the
potential of these three column combinations for real-life analysis was
preliminarily studied. With a spiked and fractionated milk extract, DB-XLB x
LC-50 was found to be the most powerful column combination, because of the good
separation of the 29 priority congeners from each other as well as from the
matrix constituents. Quantitative performance (close to three-order linearity;
LODs, 30-150 fg injected; R.S.D.s, 1.5-6.5% (n = 10)) was satisfactory.

PMID: 15233534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Jun;39(6):1002.

A 2-year-old boy, born with polysplenia syndrome, esophageal atresia, and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).

Shaw A, Ko C, Tomlinson J.

PMID: 15224683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Jul;39(7):1084-90.

Long gap esophageal atresia and esophageal replacement: moving toward a
separation?

Bagolan P(1), Iacobelli Bd Bd, De Angelis P, di Abriola GF, Laviani R, Trucchi A,
Orzalesi M, Dall'Oglio L.

Author information: 
(1)Neonatal Surgery Unit Department of Medical and Surgical Neonatology, Bambino 
Gesú Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Treatment of long gap esophageal atresia (EA) is still a
major challenge. Gastric transposition and colon interposition are the 2 most
popular choices for esophageal replacement, but there is general agreement that
the child's own esophagus is the best. The aim of the study was to critically
evaluate the feasibility and outcome of primary repair of long gap EA with or
without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) by direct esophago-esophageal anastomosis
as the only technique.
METHODS: Seventy-one neonates with EA+/-TEF were considered. Nineteen cases were 
classified as long gap (> or =3 cm). All infants underwent either primary or
shortly delayed repair. In the latter group, a gastrostomy was performed along
with an x-ray evaluation of the gap a few days before surgery (mean age, 46.4
days). To avoid disruptive anastomotic force, all infants were kept paralyzed and
mechanically ventilated for an additional 6 days after esophageal anastomosis.
Before starting feeding, postoperative esophagogram was done on day 7. Endoscopy 
was done routinely, starting 1 month after surgery; pH monitoring was
conventionally performed at 1 year of age or even earlier, should
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) be suspected. Follow-up ranged from 11
months to 7 years.
RESULTS: In all 19 long gap EA infants an esophago-esophageal anastomosis was
performed. Six of them (31%) required an anterior esophageal flap to bridge
residual gap. Complications included minor anastomotic leak in 2 cases and
anastomotic stricture (<5mm) in 12 (80%) cases, which were treated with an
average of 5 dilatations (1 of which with resection of the stricture). GERD
occurred in 8 cases (53.3%), of which, 3 required fundoplication. None of the
patients had esophageal swallowing difficulties or persistent dysphagia. Two
children experienced food aversion. Mean hospital stay was 66.2 (22 to 230) days.
There were 4 deaths (very low birth weight, 1; associated anomalies, 1; and late 
sepsis, 2).
CONCLUSIONS: Considering heat gap determination remains imprecise, it seems
possible to conclude that in a well-established tertiary care level referral
center: (1) long gap EA could be treated successfully with primary repair and
anastomosis; (2) strictures and GER represent the most frequent postoperative
problem, but additional procedures required seem "acceptable" to maintain the
patient's own esophagus and avoid replacement; (3) esophageal substitution in
long gap EA should be reserved for cases in which a previous attempt of
esophageal reconstruction failed.

PMID: 15213904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Cancer Res. 2004 Jun 15;64(12):4105-11.

A mouse mammary tumor virus-like long terminal repeat superantigen in human
breast cancer.

Wang Y(1), Jiang JD, Xu D, Li Y, Qu C, Holland JF, Pogo BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;65(3):1112; author reply 1112-3.

We previously reported a 660-bp mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV)-like env gene
sequence in approximately 38% of human breast cancer DNA, but not in normal
breasts or other tumors. This MMTV-like env gene sequence was expressed in 66% of
the env gene-positive human breast cancers. An entire proviral structure was
identified in human breast cancer DNA with high homology to MMTV and low homology
to known human endogenous retrovirus. MMTV-like long terminal repeat (LTR)
sequences were also detected in 41.5% of human breast cancers. They contain
hormone-responsive elements, TEF-1 family elements, and the open reading frame
for the superantigen (SAg). We have now amplified and sequenced MMTV-like sag
sequences from 10 human breast cancers, and we found that they are highly
homologous to those of MMTV. However, deletions and insertions at the
COOH-terminal of sag were observed. The immune function of the human MMTV-like
LTR SAg was also investigated. The sag gene was cloned and expressed in a human
B-cell line (Ramos). T-cell proliferation and cytokine releasing assays were
performed after cocultivation of T cells with irradiated Ramos SAg-expressing
cells. The results indicate that expression of the human SAg stimulates T-cell
activation in vitro, as the mouse SAg does. Because the T-cell responses in vitro
are considered similar to those in vivo, these results suggest that the human LTR
SAg might also play a role in human breast carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15205319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Genes Dev. 2004 Jun 15;18(12):1397-412. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

The loss of circadian PAR bZip transcription factors results in epilepsy.

Gachon F(1), Fonjallaz P, Damiola F, Gos P, Kodama T, Zakany J, Duboule D, Petit 
B, Tafti M, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, National Center of Competence Research
Frontiers in Genetics, Sciences III, University of Geneva, CH-1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

DBP (albumin D-site-binding protein), HLF (hepatic leukemia factor), and TEF
(thyrotroph embryonic factor) are the three members of the PAR bZip (proline and 
acidic amino acid-rich basic leucine zipper) transcription factor family. All
three of these transcriptional regulatory proteins accumulate with robust
circadian rhythms in tissues with high amplitudes of clock gene expression, such 
as the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) and the liver. However, they are expressed
at nearly invariable levels in most brain regions, in which clock gene expression
only cycles with low amplitude. Here we show that mice deficient for all three
PAR bZip proteins are highly susceptible to generalized spontaneous and
audiogenic epilepsies that frequently are lethal. Transcriptome profiling
revealed pyridoxal kinase (Pdxk) as a target gene of PAR bZip proteins in both
liver and brain. Pyridoxal kinase converts vitamin B6 derivatives into pyridoxal 
phosphate (PLP), the coenzyme of many enzymes involved in amino acid and
neurotransmitter metabolism. PAR bZip-deficient mice show decreased brain levels 
of PLP, serotonin, and dopamine, and such changes have previously been reported
to cause epilepsies in other systems. Hence, the expression of some
clock-controlled genes, such as Pdxk, may have to remain within narrow limits in 
the brain. This could explain why the circadian oscillator has evolved to
generate only low-amplitude cycles in most brain regions.

PMCID: PMC423191
PMID: 15175240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Environ Health Perspect. 2004 Jun;112(8):903-9.

Exocrine pancreatic pathology in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats after chronic 
treatment with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and dioxin-like compounds.

Nyska A(1), Jokinen MP, Brix AE, Sells DM, Wyde ME, Orzech D, Haseman JK, Flake
G, Walker NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pathology, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health/DHHS, PO Box 12233, Research
Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. nyska@niehs.nih.gov

We evaluated the effect of chronic exposure to dioxin and dioxin-like compounds
on the pancreas in female Harlan Sprague-Dawley rats. This investigation
represents part of an ongoing National Toxicology Program initiative to determine
the relative potency of chronic toxicity and carcinogenicity of polychlorinated
dioxins, furans, and biphenyls. Animals were treated by gavage for up to 2 years 
with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 3,3,4,4,5-pentachlorobiphenyl
(PCB-126), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF), or a
toxic-equivalency-factor (TEF) mixture of these agents; control animals received 
corn oil-acetone vehicle alone. A complete necropsy was performed on all animals,
and a full complement of tissues was collected and examined microscopically.
Administration of each of the four compounds was associated with increased
incidences of several nonneoplastic changes in the exocrine pancreas, including
cytoplasmic vacuolation, chronic active inflammation, atrophy, and arteritis. Low
incidences, but higher than those in the historical database, of pancreatic
acinar adenoma and carcinoma were seen in the TCDD, PeCDF, and TEF-mixture
groups. These results indicate that the pancreatic acini are target tissues for
dioxin and certain dioxin-like compounds. Key words: carcinogenesis, dioxin,
furans, inflammation, pancreas, polychlorinated biphenyls.

PMCID: PMC1242020
PMID: 15175180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Nutr. 2004 Jun;134(6):1412-6.

Energy expenditure is very high in extremely obese women.

Das SK(1), Saltzman E, McCrory MA, Hsu LK, Shikora SA, Dolnikowski G, Kehayias
JJ, Roberts SB.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Mayer U.S. Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on
Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA. sai.das@tufts.edu

To test the hypothesis that total energy expenditure (TEE) and resting energy
expenditure (REE) are low in extremely obese individuals, factors that could
contribute to maintenance of excess weight, a cross-sectional study was conducted
in 30 weight stable, extremely obese women [BMI (mean +/- SEM) 48.9 +/- 1.7
kg/m(2)]. TEE was measured over 14 d using the doubly labeled water method, REE
and the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) were measured using indirect calorimetry,
and activity energy expenditure (AEE) was calculated as TEE - (REE + TEF). Body
composition was determined using a 3-compartment model. Subjects were divided
into tertiles of BMI (37.5-45.0; 45.1-52.0; and 52.1-77.0 kg/m(2)) for data
analysis. TEE and REE increased with increasing BMI tertile: TEE, 12.80 +/- 0.5, 
14.67 +/- 0.5, and 16.10 +/- 0.9 MJ/d (P < 0.01); REE, 7.87 +/- 0.2, 8.78 +/-
0.3, and 9.94 +/- 0.6 MJ/d (P < 0.001), and these values were 29-38% higher than 
published means of measured TEE in nonobese individuals. No significant
differences were observed among BMI tertiles for AEE, TEF, or physical activity
level (PAL = TEE/REE, overall mean 1.64 +/- 0.16). The Harris-Benedict and WHO
equations provided the closest estimates of REE (within 3%), whereas the
obese-specific equations of Ireton-Jones overpredicted (40%) and Bernstein
underpredicted (21%) REE. Extremely obese individuals have high absolute values
for TEE and REE, indicating that excess energy intake contributes to the
maintenance of excess weight. Standard equations developed for nonobese
populations provided the most accurate estimates of REE for the obese individuals
studied here. REE was not accurately predicted by equations developed in obese
populations.

PMID: 15173405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Pediatr Surg Int. 2004 Apr;20(4):292-4. Epub 2004 May 18.

Acquired tracheo-esophageal fistulas caused by button battery lodged in the
esophagus.

Imamoglu M(1), Cay A, Kosucu P, Ahmetoglu A, Sarihan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Karadeniz Technical University, Faculty of
Medicine, 61080 Trabzon, Turkey. mimamoglu61@yahoo.com

Esophageal impacting of button batteries must be distinguished from impacting of 
other foreign bodies because of their severe complications. We present a
2.5-year-old girl who had an acquired tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) caused by 
a calculator battery lodged in her esophagus. We also review the literature and
assess the applicability of multislice CT and its possible advantages in children
with acquired TEF.

PMID: 15148613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30800-6. Epub 2004 May 12.

Vgl-4, a novel member of the vestigial-like family of transcription cofactors,
regulates alpha1-adrenergic activation of gene expression in cardiac myocytes.

Chen HH(1), Mullett SJ, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15213, USA.

Cardiac and skeletal muscle genes are regulated by the transcriptional enhancer
factor (TEF-1) family of transcription factors. In skeletal muscle, TEF-1 factors
interact with a skeletal muscle-specific cofactor called Vestigial-like 2 (Vgl-2)
that is related to the Drosophila protein Vestigial. Here, we characterize Vgl-4,
the only member of the Vestigial-like family expressed in the heart. Unlike other
members of the Vgl family that have a single TEF-1 interaction domain called the 
tondu (TDU) motif, Vgl-4 has two TDU motifs in its carboxyl-terminal domain. Like
other Vgl factors, Vgl-4 physically interacts with TEF-1 in an
immunoprecipitation assay. Vgl-4 functionally interacts with TEF-1 and also with 
myocyte enhancer factor 2 in a mammalian two-hybrid assay. Overexpression of
Vgl-4 in cardiac myocytes interfered with the basal expression and
alpha1-adrenergic receptor-dependent activation of a TEF-1-dependent skeletal
alpha-actin promoter. In cardiac myocytes cultured in serum and in serum-free
medium, a myc-tagged Vgl-4 protein was located in the nucleus and cytoplasm but
was exported from the nucleus when cells were treated with alpha1-adrenergic
receptor agonist. A chimeric nuclear-retained Vgl-4 protein inhibited
alpha1-adrenergic receptor-dependent activation. In contrast, deletion of the TDU
motifs of Vgl-4 prevented Vgl-4 nuclear localization, relieved Vgl-4 interference
of basal activity, and enhanced alpha1-adrenergic up-regulation of the skeletal
alpha-actin promoter. Nuclear export of Vgl-4 is dependent on the nuclear
exportin CRM-1. These results suggest that Vgl-4 modulates the activity of TEF-1 
factors and counteracts alpha1-adrenergic activation of gene expression in
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 15140898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Pediatr Surg Int. 2004 May;20(5):378-9. Epub 2004 May 11.

Tracheoesophageal fistula and amastia with other anomalies: an unusual
association.

Kumar V(1), Apte AV, Gangopadhyay AN, Singh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu 
University, 221005 Varanasi, India.

An unusual association of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) with left amastia and multiple congenital anomalies is presented because of
its rarity and successful management. The other associated congenital anomalies
included a high variety of anorectal malformation (high-ARM), hypospadias and
absent left pectoral muscles with weak shoulder girdle. This case was
successfully managed by multi-staged operations to tackle the various associated 
congenital anomalies. Such a rare association has not been reported previously in
the literature.

PMID: 15138786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Aug;18(8):2049-60. Epub 2004 May 6.

Transcription enhancer factor-5 and a GATA-like protein determine
placental-specific expression of the Type I human 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase gene, HSD3B1.

Peng L(1), Huang Y, Jin F, Jiang SW, Payne AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, California
94305-5317, USA.

The enzyme 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase (3betaHSD) is required
for the biosynthesis of all active steroid hormones. It exists as multiple
isoforms in humans and rodents, each a product of a distinct gene. Two isoforms, 
3betaHSD I and II, are expressed in a tissue-specific manner in humans. 3betaHSD 
I is the only isoform expressed in the placenta, where it is required for the
biosynthesis of progesterone and thus essential for the maintenance of pregnancy.
We recently identified two transcription factors, activating protein-2gamma
(AP-2gamma) and the homeodomain protein, distaless-3 (Dlx-3), that are expressed 
in both human and mouse trophoblast cells that were shown to be required for
trophoblast-specific expression of the orthologous murine 3betaHSD, 3betaHSD VI. 
Although we identified specific binding sites for AP-2gamma and Dlx-3 in the
distal promoter of the human 3betaHSD I gene, HSD3B1, it was found that these
transcription factors were not involved in determining placental-specific
expression of human 3betaHSD I. Instead, a 53-bp placental-specific enhancer
element located between -2570 and -2518 of the HSD3B1 promoter was identified.
Within this 53-bp element, two potential placental transcription factor binding
sites were found. EMSAs with a 20-bp oligonucleotide containing these two
potential placental-specific binding sites identified one of the binding sites
specific for the transcription enhancer factor (TEF)-5, which is highly expressed
in human placenta and in placental choriocarcinoma-derived JEG-3 cells and the
other overlapping binding site, specific for a GATA-like protein. Site-specific
mutations in either the TEF-5 binding site or in the GATA binding site, each
resulted in complete loss of enhancer activity. The data indicate that TEF-5 and 
the GATA-like protein act in a coordinate manner to determine the
placental-specific expression of the human 3betaHSD I enzyme and therefore are
critical for placental progesterone production required for the maintenance of
pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3273420
PMID: 15131259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genetics. 2004 Apr;166(4):1833-43.

Molecular and functional analysis of scalloped recessive lethal alleles in
Drosophila melanogaster.

Srivastava A(1), Simmonds AJ, Garg A, Fossheim L, Campbell SD, Bell JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2E9, Canada.

The Drosophila melanogaster scalloped (sd) gene is a homolog of the human TEF-1
gene and is a member of the TEA/ATTS domain-containing family of transcription
factors. In Drosophila, sd is involved in wing development as well as neural
development. Herein, data are presented from a molecular analysis of five
recessive lethal sd alleles. Only one of these alleles complements a viable
allele associated with an sd mutant wing phenotype, suggesting that functions
important for wing development are compromised by the noncomplementing alleles.
Two of the wing noncomplementing alleles have mutations that help to define a
VG-binding domain for the SD protein in vivo, and another noncomplementing allele
has a lesion within the TEA DNA-binding domain. The VG-binding domain overlaps
with a domain important for viability of the fly, since two of the sd lethal
lesions are located there. The fifth lethal affects a yet undefined motif lying
just outside the VG-binding domain in the C-terminal direction that affects both 
wing phenotype and viability. This is the first example linking mutations
affecting specific amino acids in the SD protein with phenotypic consequences for
the organism.

PMCID: PMC1470810
PMID: 15126402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Environ Pollut. 2000 Jul;109(1):61-7.

Organochlorine contamination in bird's eggs from the Danube Delta.

Aurigi S(1), Focardi S, Hulea D, Renzoni A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Ambientale, via delle Cerchia 3, 53100 Siena, Italy.

In this study we report the levels of organochlorine compounds in eggs of aquatic
birds from the Danube Delta, a major European wetland. The eggs were collected in
1997 and belonged to the following species: the mallard (Anas platyrhynchos), the
greylag goose (Anser anser), the mute swan (Cygnus olor), the coot (Fulica atra),
the glossy ibis (Plegadis falcinellus), the spoonbill (Platalea leucorodia), the 
little egret (Egretta garzetta), the night heron (Nycticorax nycticorax), the
grey heron (Ardea cinerea), the great white egret (Egretta alba), the red-necked 
grebe (Podiceps griseus), the Dalmatian pelican (Pelecanus crispus), the Pygmy
cormorant (Phalacrocorax pygmaeus) and the common cormorant (Phalacrocorax
carbo). Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) levels were higher in eggs of the
little egret, the great white egret, the cormorant and the Pygmy cormorant with
respect to the other species (48,399, 13,613, 12,400 and 10,417 ng/g dry wt.,
respectively). Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) levels were lower than 1393 ng/g dry wt.
in all species while polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) concentrations in the Pygmy
cormorant (2565 ng/g dry wt.) were higher than in the other species. The toxicity
evaluation was based on 2,3,7,8-TCDD toxic equivalent factors (TEF) and non-ortho
PCB congeners contributed much more than mono-ortho PCBs in most of species. A
further aim of this study was to evaluate the possible differences of
organochlorine levels in bird eggs collected in the same area in 1982 and in
1997; generally speaking the levels detected in the latter period were lower than
those detected in the earlier one.

PMID: 15092913  [PubMed]


422. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2004 May;28(5):653-60.

Decreased thermic effect of food after an irregular compared with a regular meal 
pattern in healthy lean women.

Farshchi HR(1), Taylor MA, Macdonald IA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrated Systems Biology and Medicine, Institute of Clinical
Research and School of Biomedical Sciences, Queen's Medical Centre, University of
Nottingham, Nottingham, UK. mbxhrf@nottingham.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the impact of irregular meal frequency on body weight,
energy intake, appetite and resting energy expenditure in healthy lean women.
DESIGN: Nine healthy lean women aged 18-42 y participated in a randomised
crossover trial consisting of three phases over a total of 43 days. Subjects
attended the laboratory at the start and end of phases 1 and 3. In Phase 1 (14
days), subjects were asked to consume similar things as normal, but either on 6
occasions per day (regular meal pattern) or follow a variable predetermined meal 
frequency (between 3 and 9 meals/day) with the same total number of meals over
the week. In Phase 2 (14 days), subjects continued their normal diet as a
wash-out period. In Phase 3 (14 days), subjects followed the alternative meal
pattern to that followed in Phase 1. Subjects recorded their food intake for
three predetermined days during the irregular period when they were eating 9, 3
and 6 meals/day. They also recorded their food intake on the corresponding days
during the regular meal pattern period. Subjects fasted overnight prior to each
laboratory visit, at which fasting resting metabolic rate (RMR) was measured by
open-circuit indirect calorimetry. Postprandial metabolic rate was then measured 
for 3 h after the consumption of a milkshake test meal (50% CHO, 15% protein and 
35% fat of energy content). Subjects rated appetite before and after the test
meal.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in body weight and 3-day mean
energy intake between the regular and irregular meal pattern. In the irregular
period, the mean energy intake on the day when 9 meals were eaten was
significantly greater than when 6 or 3 meals were consumed (P=0.0001). There was 
no significant difference between the 3 days of the regular meal pattern.
Subjective appetite measurement showed no significant differences before and
after the test meal in all visits. Fasting RMR showed no significant differences 
over the experiment. The overall thermic effect of food (TEF) over the 3 h after 
the test meal was significantly lower after the irregular meal pattern (P=0.003).
CONCLUSION: Irregular meal frequency led to a lower postprandial energy
expenditure compared with the regular meal frequency, while the mean energy
intake was not significantly different between the two. The reduced TEF with the 
irregular meal frequency may lead to weight gain in the long term.

PMID: 15085170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Arch Surg. 2004 Apr;139(4):371-4; discussion 374.

Thirty-five-year institutional experience with end-to-side repair for esophageal 
atresia.

Touloukian RJ(1), Seashore JH.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, and Yale-New
Haven Children's Hospital, New Haven, Conn. 06520, USA.
robert.touloukian@yale.edu

HYPOTHESIS: End-to-side repair (ES) with ligation of the tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) reduces the risks of stricture and gastroesophageal reflux disease 
requiring operation compared with the end-to-end repair of esophageal atresia and
distal TEF.
DESIGN: Case series with institutional and historical control subjects.
SETTING: Referral children's hospital.
PATIENTS: One hundred thirty-four infants diagnosed as having esophageal atresia 
and distal TEF between June 30, 1968, and July 1, 2003.
INTERVENTIONS: Ninety-six infants having ES and 38 having end-to-end repair.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Patients were studied for overall survival, surgical
complications, and well-being during the first year of life.
RESULTS: Survival was 95% vs 90% (patients undergoing ES vs end-to-end repair).
Complications included anastomotic leak, 8% vs 13%; recurrent TEF, 7% vs 3%, with
only 1 recurrence in the last 28 patients having ES; anastomotic stricture
(requiring dilatation), 5% vs 13%; gastroesophageal reflux disease requiring
operation, 6% vs 18%; and esophageal dysmotility, which was present following
nearly all ES and end-to-end procedures. Tracheomalacia-related respiratory
symptoms following ES decreased from 50% to 11% at 1 year of age. Age-appropriate
diet following ES was achieved in 93% by 1 year; 5% experienced occasional
dysphagia or choking episodes.
CONCLUSIONS: The ES operation is accompanied by a reduced rate of stricture and
gastroesophageal reflux disease requiring operation compared with end-to-end
repair. Earlier concerns regarding an unacceptable risk of recurrent TEF were not
substantiated.

PMID: 15078702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 11;279(24):25010-6. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

RTEF-1, a novel transcriptional stimulator of vascular endothelial growth factor 
in hypoxic endothelial cells.

Shie JL(1), Wu G, Wu J, Liu FF, Laham RJ, Oettgen P, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an angiogenic growth factor known to
be up-regulated in ischemic heart and hypoxic endothelial cells. However, the
transcriptional regulation of VEGF in hypoxia-induced angiogenesis is not fully
understood. Transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) is a transcriptional factor
family that can regulate many genes expressed in cardiac and skeletal muscle
cells by binding to myocyte-specific chloramphenicol acetyltransferase heptamer
elements in the promoters of these genes. In this study, we demonstrated that
related TEF-1 (RTEF-1), a member of the TEF-1 family, is up-regulated in hypoxic 
endothelial cells. Overexpression of RTEF-1 increases VEGF promoter activity and 
VEGF expression. Sequential deletion and site-directed mutation analyses of the
VEGF promoter demonstrated that a GC-rich region containing four Sp1 response
elements, located between -114 and -50, was essential for RTEF-1 function. This
region is beyond the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha binding site and does not
consist of M-CAT-related elements. By electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
RTEF-1 was found to interact with the first Sp1 residue (-97 to -87) of the four 
consecutive Sp1 elements. Binding activity of RTEF-1 to VEGF promoter is also
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. In addition, induction of VEGF
promoter activity by RTEF-1 results in an increase of angiogenic processes
including endothelial cells proliferation and vascular structure formation. These
results indicate that RTEF-1 acts as a transcriptional stimulator of VEGF by
regulating VEGF promoter activity through binding to Sp1 site. In addition,
RTEF-1-induced VEGF promoter activity was enhanced in a hypoxic condition,
indicating that RTEF-1 may play an important role in the regulation of VEGF under
hypoxia.

PMID: 15073166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Apr;39(4):537-9.

Aberrant fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 signalling in esophageal atresia
with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Spilde TL(1), Bhatia AM, Mehta SS, Hembree MJ, Preuett BL, Ostlie DJ, Prasadan K,
Li Z, Snyder CL, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Mercy Hospital Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, Kansas City, 
MO 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although the pathogenesis of esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) remains unknown, it has been shown that
despite its esophageal appearance, the fistula tract originates from respiratory 
epithelium. The authors now hypothesize that defects in fibroblast growth factor 
(FGF) signaling contribute to the esophaguslike phenotype of the fistula tract.
FGF2R is critical to normal lung morphogenesis and occurs in 2 isoforms
(FGF2RIIIb and FGF2RIIIc), each with different ligand-binding specificity. To
characterize FGF signaling in the developing EA/TEF, the authors analyzed levels 
of FGF2R splice variants in experimental EA/TEF.
METHODS: The standard Adriamycin-induced EA/TEF model in rats was used.
Individual foregut components from Adriamycin-treated and control embryos were
processed for real-time, fluorescence-activated semiquantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction on gestational days 12.5 and 13.5.
RESULTS: Both fistula tract and Adriamycin-treated or normal esophagus showed
significantly lower levels of FGF2RIIIb than either Adriamycin-treated lung buds 
(E12.5, P =.02; E13.5, P <.005) or normal lung buds (E12.5, P <.005; E13.5, P
<.01). At E13.5, the fistula tract had lower levels of FGF2RIIIc than either
treated (P <.01) or normal lung (P <.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of FGF2R in the developing fistula tract resemble that of
distal esophagus rather than developing lung. This defect in FGF2RIIIb signaling 
may account for the nonbranching, esophaguslike phenotype of the fistula, despite
its respiratory origin.

PMID: 15065023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Hereditas. 2003;139(3):174-83.

Inter simple sequence repeat (ISSR) analysis of genetic diversity in tef
[Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter].

Assefa K(1), Merker A, Tefera H.

Author information: 
(1)Debre Zeit Agricultural Research Center, Debre Zeit, Ethiopia.
kebebew@hotmail.com

The DNA polymorphism among 92 selected tef genotypes belonging to eight origin
groups was assessed using eight inter simple sequence repeat (ISSR) primers. The 
objectives were to examine the possibility of using ISSR markers for unravelling 
genetic diversity in tef, and to assess the extent and pattern of genetic
diversity in the test germplasm with respect to origin groups. The eight primers 
were able to separate or distinguish all of the 92 tef genotypes based on a total
of 110 polymorphic bands among the test lines. The Jaccard similarity coefficient
among the test genotypes ranged from 0.26 to 0.86, and at about 60 % similarity
level the clustering of this matrix using the unweighted pair-group method based 
on arithmetic average (UPGMA) resulted in the formation of six major clusters of 
2 to 37 lines with further eight lines remaining ungrouped. The standardized Nei 
genetic distance among the eight groups of origin ranged between 0.03 and 0.32.
The UPGMA clustering using the standardized genetic distance matrix resulted in
the identification of three clusters of the eight groups of origin with bootstrap
values ranging from 56 to 97. The overall mean Shannon Weaver diversity index of 
the test lines was 0.73, indicating better resolution of genetic diversity in tef
with ISSR markers than with phenotypic (morphological) traits used in previous
studies. This can be attributed mainly to the larger number of loci generated for
evaluation with ISSR analysis as compared to the few number of phenotypic traits 
amenable for assessment and which are further greatly affected by environment and
genotype x environment interaction. Analysis of variance of mean Shannon Weaver
diversity indices revealed substantial (P < or = 0.05) variation in the level of 
diversity among the eight groups of origin. In conclusion, our results indicate
that ISSR can be useful as DNA-based molecular markers for studying genetic
diversity and phylogenetic relationships, DNA fingerprinting for the
identification of varieties or cultivars, and also for genome mapping in tef.

PMID: 15061798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2004 Jan-Feb;19(1):31-4.

Attitudes of relatives and nursing staff toward tuboenteral feeding in severely
demented patients.

Lubart E(1), Leibovitz A, Habot B.

Author information: 
(1)Shmuel Harofe Hospital, Geriatric Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

Elderly patients with advanced dementia present a challenge with respect to
efficient nutrition and hydration because of oropharyngeal dysphagia and lack of 
patient cooperation. For increasing numbers of patients, long-term tuboenteral
feeding (TEF) is an alternative for providing food and fluids, with the hope of
reducing the risk of aspiration. The purpose of this study is to learn about the 
opinions and the attitudes of relatives and nursing staff regarding patients on
TEF for at least one year. The study included all the demented patients on TEF in
four skilled nursing facilities and four nursing wards. Researchers retrieved
clinical data from patients' medical records and prepared a questionnaire to
survey the opinions of relatives and staff members. The study included 111
patients: 89 on nasogastric tube (NGT) feeding and 22 on percutaneous endoscopic 
gastrostomy (PEG) feeding. The clinical condition of both groups was
satisfactory, as reflected by albumin, hemoglobin, and Body Mass Index (BMI).
Relatives of the demented patients as well as the staff members were ambivalent
toward TEF. Although most of them called it an essential procedure for delivering
food and fluids for life support, about the same number expressed concerns that
TEF prolonged a life of suffering. Nevertheless, most relatives and staff members
were resistant to the idea of withholding TEF. The data show that TEF does
provide efficient nutrition and hydration to patients with advanced dementia, and
it is used in accordance with the will of the relatives. Any change in the
present approach regarding TEF in these patients should be preceded by
discussions with their relatives.

PMID: 15002342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Pediatr Surg Int. 2004 Apr;20(4):276-82. Epub 2004 Feb 18.

Increased fibronectin expression in developing embryos is associated with
abnormal notochord in the Adriamycin rat model.

Mortell A(1), O'Donnell AM, Giles S, Bannigan J, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children,
Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: The VACTERL association is a spectrum of clinical conditions,
including esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), which
affects approximately 1 in 5,000 live human births. The administration of
intraperitoneal Adriamycin to pregnant rats reliably induces anomalies, such as
EA and TEF, in their offspring, in what is known as the Adriamycin rat model
(ARM). In affected embryos the presence of gross notochord abnormalities is
commonly found, with typical features being ectopic ventral branches and
adherence of the notochord to the foregut. Fibronectin (FN) is an extracellular
matrix (ECM) glycoprotein present on most cell surfaces, in extracellular fluids 
and in plasma. FN is involved in various functions, including cell adhesion, cell
motility and wound healing. Previous studies in rats have shown that a single
dose of Adriamycin can produce an appreciable rise in FN levels in various organs
such as kidney and heart. We hypothesised that Adriamycin administration could
promote upregulation of FN expression contributing to increased gut-notochord
adherence and the development of abnormal ventral notochordal branching in the
ARM. This study was designed to investigate FN expression in ARM embryos.
METHODS: Adriamycin (1.75 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally to pregnant
rats on days 7,8 and 9 of gestation (E7, E8 and E9 respectively). Control animals
were given saline. Embryos recovered on E10-E14 were fixed, embedded in paraffin 
and sectioned. Immunohistochemistry using an anti-FN rabbit polyclonal antibody
was performed.
RESULTS: FN expression in both Adriamycin and control embryos on E10, E11 and E12
was comparable. However, the levels of FN expression in Adriamycin embryos on E13
and E14 were significantly greater in embryos with abnormal notochords than in
equivalent control embryos.
CONCLUSION: Adriamycin-induced increased expression of FN, in the ARM, may
contribute to abnormal notochord development leading to the VACTERL association.

PMID: 14986037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Cell Biochem. 2004 Jan;255(1-2):93-101.

Up-regulation of expression of translation factors--a novel molecular mechanism
for cadmium carcinogenesis.

Joseph P(1), Lei YX, Ong TM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch,
Health Effects Laboratory Division, National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA. pcj5@cdc.gov

The molecular mechanisms potentially responsible for cadmium carcinogenesis were 
investigated by differential gene expression analysis of Balb/c-3T3 cells
morphologically transformed with cadmium chloride. Differential display analysis 
of gene expression revealed overexpression of mouse Translation Initiation Factor
3 (TIF3; GenBank Accession Number AF 271072) and Translation Elongation
Factor-1delta (TEF-1delta; GenBank Accession Number AF 304351) in the transformed
cells compared with the control cells. The full length cDNAs for TIF3 and
TEF-1delta were cloned and sequenced. Transfection of mammalian cells with an
expression vector containing either TIF3 or TEF-1delta cDNA resulted in
overexpression of the encoded protein. Overexpression of the cDNA-encoded TIF3
and TEF-1delta proteins in NIH3T3 cells was oncogenic as evidenced by the
appearance of transformed foci capable of anchorage-independent growth on soft
agar and tumorigenesis in nude mouse. Blocking the translation of TIF3 and
TEF-1delta proteins using the corresponding antisense mRNA resulted in a
significant reversal of the oncogenic potential of cadmium transformed Balb/c-3T3
cells as evidenced from the suppression of anchorage-independent growth on soft
agar and diminished tumorigenesis in nude mouse. These findings demonstrate that 
the up-regulation of expression of TIF3 and TEF-1delta is a novel molecular
mechanism responsible, at least in part, for cadmium carcinogenesis.

PMID: 14971650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 3;32(2):791-802. Print 2004.

VITO-1 is an essential cofactor of TEF1-dependent muscle-specific gene
regulation.

Günther S(1), Mielcarek M, Krüger M, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiological Chemistry, University of Halle-Wittenberg,
Hollystrasse 1, 06097 Halle, Germany.

The expression of several muscle-specific genes is partially or completely
regulated by MCAT elements, which bind members of the TEF family of transcription
factors. TEF1 itself is unable to activate reporter plasmids bearing TEF1-binding
sites, suggesting that additional bridging or co-activating factors are necessary
to allow interaction of TEF1 with the transcriptional machinery. In addition,
none of the known TEF genes are exclusively expressed in the cardiac or skeletal 
muscle lineage to account for the muscle-specific expression of MCAT-dependent
genes. Here we describe that VITO-1, a new SID (scalloped interaction
domain)-containing protein, binds to TEF1 in vitro and strongly stimulates
transcription of a MCAT reporter plasmid together with TEF-1. Since VITO-1 is
predominantly expressed in the skeletal muscle lineage, it might serve as an
essential transcriptional intermediary factor to promote muscle-specific
expression via MCAT cis-regulatory elements. Although VITO-1 alone is not
sufficient to initiate myogenic conversion of 10T1/2 fibroblastic cells, it
enhanced MyoD-mediated myogenic conversion. In addition, interference with VITO-1
expression by siRNA attenuated differentiation of C2C12 muscle cells and
MyoD-dependent myogenesis in 10T1/2 cells. We conclude that VITO-1 is a crucial
new cofactor of the muscle regulatory programme.

PMCID: PMC373362
PMID: 14762206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2004 Jan 15;194(2):156-68.

Evaluation of toxic equivalency factors for induction of cytochromes P450 CYP1A1 
and CYP1A2 enzyme activity by dioxin-like compounds.

Toyoshiba H(1), Walker NJ, Bailer AJ, Portier CJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 27709, Durham, NC, USA

The toxic equivalency factor (TEF) method has been used to characterize the
toxicity of human mixtures of dioxin-like compounds and is being considered for
use with other classes of potentially toxic agents. TEFs are estimated by
examining the relative potencies of the various congeners for a series of
biological and toxicological effects. In this paper, we consider changes in
activity for two enzymes, cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1)-associated
7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) and CYP1A2-associated
acetanilide-4-hydroxylase (A4H) activity, resulting from exposure to
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl
(PCB), 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran (PeCDF) or a mixture of these agents.
The ratio of median effective dose (ED50) is one way to estimate the relative
potencies, especially for gene expression and protein endpoints. ED50's were
estimated with a nonlinear regression model in which dose-related changes in mean
responses are described by a Hill function. ED50's along with other model
parameters were estimated by fitting this model to a given data set. Significant 
differences in estimated model parameters were tested by likelihood ratio
methods. The estimated parameters indicated that congener-specific dose-response 
shapes were significantly different, that additivity failed for these congeners, 
and that the ratios of ED50's did not predict the response seen for the mixture. 
These results indicate that for some biological responses, the use of a single
relative potency factor (RPF) is not appropriate for the comparison of the dose
response behavior of different dioxin-like congeners.

PMID: 14736496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Ann Thorac Surg. 2004 Jan;77(1):328-9.

Closure of an iatrogenic tracheo-esophageal fistula with bronchoscopic gluing in 
a mechanically ventilated adult patient.

Scappaticci E(1), Ardissone F, Baldi S, Coni F, Revello F, Filosso PL, Ruffini E.

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Diseases, Ospedale San Giovanni Battista, and University of
Torino, Torino, Italy.

Management of acquired nonmalignant tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) in
mechanically ventilated patients is controversial. Surgical correction is often
contraindicated because the high operative risk and spontaneous closure is
unlikely due to the positive pressure ventilation. We present a case of
successful closure of an iatrogenic TEF in a mechanically ventilated patient with
bronchoscopic application of fibrin glue. The technique may be proposed in
high-risk patients as either an alternative to surgery or as a first-line attempt
before surgical correction.

PMID: 14726094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 16;279(16):15929-37. Epub 2004 Jan 26.

Activation of the smooth muscle-specific telokin gene by thyrotroph embryonic
factor (TEF).

Zhou J(1), Hoggatt AM, Herring BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, USA.

Transcription of the telokin gene is restricted to smooth muscle cells throughout
development, making this gene an excellent model for unraveling the mechanisms
that regulate gene expression in smooth muscle tissues. To identify proteins that
bind to the telokin promoter, the AT-rich/CArG core of the promoter was used as a
probe to perform a Southwestern screen of a mouse bladder cDNA library. Four
clones corresponding to two distinct isoforms of mouse thyrotroph embryonic
factor (TEFalpha and TEFbeta) were identified from this screen. The two TEF
isoforms differ from each other at their amino termini and result from
alternative promoter usage. An RNase protection assay showed that both TEF
isoforms are expressed at high levels in mouse lung, bladder, kidney, gut, and
brain. Gel mobility shift assays demonstrated that purified TEF protein can
specifically bind to an AT-rich region within the core of the telokin promoter.
Furthermore, when overexpressed in 10T1/2 cells, TEF significantly increased the 
activity of a telokin promoter-reporter gene; this activation was further
augmented by elevated intracellular calcium levels. In contrast, overexpression
of TEF had no effect on reporter genes driven by SM22alpha, smooth muscle
alpha-actin, or smooth muscle myosin heavy chain promoters. Consistent with these
results, overexpression of TEFalpha and TEFbeta in A10 cells, using adenoviral
vectors, increased expression of endogenous telokin without altering expression
of myosin light chain 20, SM22alpha, smooth muscle alpha-actin, or calponin.
These findings suggest that TEF factors contribute to the activation of the
telokin promoter in smooth muscle cells in a calcium-dependent manner. These data
also suggest that distinct transcription factors are required to control the
expression of different smooth muscle genes in a single tissue.

PMID: 14702338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Jan;39(1):100-2.

Diagnosis of a proximal tracheoesophageal fistula using three-dimensional CT
scan: a case report.

Islam S(1), Cavanaugh E, Honeke R, Hirschl RB.

Author information: 
(1)CS Mott Children's Hospital, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0245,
USA.

Missed proximal tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) after repair of an esophageal
atresia (EA) with distal TEF are rare. The diagnosis usually is made on the basis
of bronchoscopy and esophagoscopy, which can be inaccurate. Recent advances in
computerized tomography (CT) have allowed saggital, coronal, and 3-dimensional
reconstruction of any structure or organ. The authors report a case in which
3-dimensional CT was used to assist in the diagnosis of a missed proximal TEF in 
a 16-year-old girl.

PMID: 14694382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2004 Jan;25(1):127-30.

Tracheal stenosis complicated with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Fiala P(1), Cernohorský S, Cermák J, Pátek J, Krepela E, Moucková M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Pneumology and Thoracic Surgery, 3rd Medical Faculty of the Charles 
University, University Hospital Bulovka, Budínova 2, 180 81 Prague 8, Czech
Republic. fialap@fnb.cz

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate the results of surgical
treatment in patients with simultaneous occurrence of postintubation tracheal
stenosis (TS) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: In the group of 51 patients with postcannulation tracheal stenosis who
underwent segmental resection, TEF was identified simultaneously in five (10%) of
them. The mean age of the TS-TEF patients was 43 years (range 35-60 years). The
patients underwent a single-stage operation during which TEF was sealed and
resection of the stenotic tracheal segment was performed.
RESULTS: The cause of TEF and of TS was artificial pulmonary ventilation by
tracheostomy tube (n=4) or by endotracheal tube (n=1) with a simultaneous
insertion of nasogastric tube. In one of the patients with tracheostomy the
fistula resulted from an injury to the pars membranacea tracheae and the
esophageal wall during tracheostomy. All the patients were respiring
spontaneously before the surgical treatment. The mean length of the fistula was
24.0 mm (range 15-30 mm), the fistulae were located at the junction of the upper 
and middle third of the trachea. The mean length of the resected tracheal segment
was 29.6 mm (range 26-32 mm). Postoperative complications were not observed in
the group of the TS-TEF patients, none of them died.
CONCLUSIONS: The method of choice of the surgical treatment of TEF associated
with TS is a single-stage procedure in the patient who respires spontaneously.

PMID: 14690744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Waste Manag. 2004;24(1):9-18.

Emissions from a controlled fire in municipal solid waste bales.

Nammari DR(1), Hogland W, Marques M, Nimmermark S, Moutavtchi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Technology, University of Kalmar, Kalmar, SE-391 82, Sweden.
diauddin.nammari@hik.se

Environmental and safety aspects of seasonal storage of baled municipal solid
waste to be used as fuel for energy production (waste fuel), was investigated and
experiments were carried out on burning of bales. The flammability, combustion
processes and emissions were studied by simulating, in small-scale, potential
effects of a possible fire in full-scale bale storage area. Despite the high
water content and the high density of the bales, after setting fire, the bales
burned well, even though no risk for self-ignition exists. The following
parameters of the combustion product were measured continuously: O2, CO2, CO,
SO2, NO, NO2, NOx, THC, smoke gas rate and the temperature of the smoke. Soot
particles in the smoke were collected and analysed for Hg, Pb, Cd, As, Ni, Cr,
Mn, Cu, Co, Sb and V concentrations. The analysis of the moisture content,
concentrations of Hg, Cd, HCl, HF, HBr, NH3, polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH),
chlorinated and brominated dioxins (PCDD/F and PBrDD/F, respectively) were
carried out. It was found that the PCDD/F levels (TEQs) varied according to the
system used: 12.53 ng (I-TEF-88)/Nm3; 14.09 ng (I-TEF-99)/Nm3; 13.86 ng
(Eadons)/Nm3. The PAH concentration was 3.04 microg/Nm3. The contents of the
metals in the smoke (with the exceptions of Pb and Cd with mean values of 1.74
and 0.36 mg/m3, respectively) were below the limit values established by the
Swedish Ministry of Environment for emissions from incineration plants [Swedish
Ministry of Environment, (2002:1060), Förordning 2002:1060 om avfallsförbränning.
Available from http://www.notisum.se/rnp/SLS/LAG/20021060.HTM]/EU-directive
[(2000/76/EC), Directive 2000/76/EC, of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 4 December 2000 on the Incineration of Waste. http://www.Scotland.
gov.uk/library5/environment/iecda.pdf]. The HCl concentration was 10 times higher
than the limit value (mean value of 99 mg/m3).

PMID: 14672722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2003 Sep;13(3):396-402.

The effect of resistance exercise on the thermic effect of food.

Denzer CM(1), Young JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV
89154-3034, USA.

PURPOSE: The thermic effect of food (TEF) is the increment in energy expenditure 
above resting metabolic rate associated with the cost of absorption and
processing of food for storage. Previous studies have shown that TEF is enhanced 
by aerobic endurance exercise of sufficient duration and intensity. The purpose
of this study was to determine if a similar effect occurs with a single bout of
resistance exercise (weightlifting).
METHODS: VO2 was measured in 9 healthy volunteers (3 males and 6 females) for 2
hours after ingestion of a 2760 kJ (660 kcal) carbohydrate meal with and without 
prior completion of a resistance training regimen (2 sets of 10 repetitions of 10
different exercises).
RESULTS: The meal caused an immediate and persistent thermic effect in both the
control and the exercise trial. Mean oxygen consumption over baseline increased
20% in the control trial and 34% in the exercise trial. TEF calculated from VO2
and RER (total area under the response curve above baseline) was 73% greater in
the exercise trial compared with the control trial (159 +/- 18 vs. 92 +/- 14 KJ/2
hrs, p < .02).
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that TEF in response to a carbohydrate meal is
enhanced following a single bout of resistance exercise.

PMID: 14669938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Dec;38(12):1726-9.

Outcomes in esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Konkin DE(1), O'hali WA, Webber EM, Blair GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, British Columbia's Children's Hospital, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The purpose of this analysis was to investigate outcomes in
newborns with esophageal atresia (EA) or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with
respect to prognostic classifications and complications.
METHODS: Charts of all 144 infants with EA/TEF treated at British Columbia
Children's Hospital (BCCH) from 1984 to 2000 were reviewed. Patient demographics,
frequency of associated anomalies, and details of management and outcomes were
examined.
RESULTS: Applying the Waterston prognostic classification to our patient
population, survival rate was 100% for class A, 100% for class B, and 80% for
class C. The Montreal classification survival rate was 92% for class I and 71%
for class II (P =.08). Using the Spitz classification, survival rate was 99% for 
type I, 84% for type II, and 43% for type III (P <.05). The Bremen classification
survival rate was 95% "without complications" and 71% "with complications."
Complications included stricture (52%), gastroesophageal reflux (31%),
anastomotic leakage (8%), recurrent fistula (8%), and pneumonia (6%). Seventeen
patients underwent fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux, 16 pre-1992 and
one post-1992.
CONCLUSIONS: Comparing the major prognostic classifications, the Spitz
classification scheme was found to be most applicable. In our institution, the
trend in management of gastroesophageal reflux after repair of EA/TEF has moved
away from fundoplication toward medical management.

PMID: 14666453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Hereditas. 2003;138(3):228-36.

Multivariate analysis of diversity of tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter)
germplasm from western and southern Ethiopia.

Assefa K(1), Merker A, Tefera H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop Science, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences,
Alnarp, Sweden. kababew.assefa@vv.slu.se

Sixty tef germplasm populations consisting of 3,000 panicle-derived lines from
six western and southern regions of Ethiopia were evaluated for 17 pheno-morphic 
and agronomic traits on pellic Vertisols at Debre Zeit Agricultural Research
Center during the 1999 main season. The objectives were to study the extent and
pattern of variation of the germplasm with respect to regions and altitude zones,
to classify the populations into relatively homogenous groups and to identify the
major traits contributing to the overall diversity of the populations. At 75 %
similarity level, the 60 populations aggregated into nine complexes of two to 10,
with 12 populations remaining un-grouped. Five principal components (PC)
extracted about 81 % of the gross variance among the populations. About 40 % of
the variance accounted for by the first PC alone resulted largely from variations
in diameters of the two basal culm internodes, grain yield and number of
spikelets/panicle, shoot phytomass and grain yield/plant, and number of culm
internodes. The entire regional as well as the clinal (altitude zone) variation
was explained by five and two PCs, respectively. The discriminant analyses
depicted about 77 % correct grouping of the 47 populations into nine clusters and
about 62 % and 68 % correct origin-based classification of the germplasm in terms
of altitude zones and regions, respectively. In general, the study demonstrated
the existence of regional and clinal (altitude zone) variation patterns in the
tef germplasm populations. The broad trait variation in the germplasm implies
ample opportunities for genetic improvement of tef through selection and
hybridization.

PMID: 14641488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2003 Nov;127(11):1523-4.

Pathologic quiz case: a woman with dysphagia and unusual histologic findings in
the esophagus. Residual tracheobronchial remnants, consistent with the history of
TEF. Tracheoesophageal fistula.

Moatamed NA(1), Kiyabu MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, USA. moatamed@ucla.edu

PMID: 14567747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Cir Pediatr. 2003 Jul;16(3):112-5.

[Early esophageal replacement in patients with esophageal atresia].

[Article in Spanish]

Hernández F(1), Rivas S, Avila LF, Luis AL, Martínez L, Lassaletta L, Murcia FJ, 
Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Infantil La Paz, Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Paseo de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid. Pacohern73@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: When primary anastomosis is not feasible in esophageal atresia
esophageal replacement is one of the possible options. We report our experience
with this approach in patients with long-gap esophageal atresia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: From 1991 to 2002 we treated 50 children with esophageal
atresia. Nine required esophageal replacement because of long-gaps. Six were boys
and three girls. Six had isolated atresia, and three had regular atresia with
TEF. Associated malformations in 8 patients were: cardiovascular (2), anorectal
(2), urogenital (5), intestinal duplication (1), and costovertebral (1). The
weight at birth ranged from 1.2 to 3.95 kg (median 2.3). Patients with type I
atresia had immediate gastrostomy accompanied by esophagostomy in one. Esophageal
anastomosis was impossible or failed in 3 patients with type III EA, who had
fistula ligation and esophagostomy. Esophageal replacement was performed at a
median age of 4.95 months (range 2.3 to 18), with a median weight of 5.33 (range 
2.89 to 11.5 kg.). We used gastric pull-up in 2 cases and colonic transposition
in 7 with isoperistaltic left transverse colon in retromediastinal-transhiatal
(6) or restrosternal (1) position. Two patients had extramucosal piloromyotomy
and 4 had piloroplasty.
RESULTS: All patients survive and have functional grafts. Postoperative
complications were: pneumonia (1), wound dehiscence with evisceration (2) and
salivary fístula (2) which closed spontaneously. In the long range, one patient
was operated three times for hernia through the enlarged hiatus, one had one
episode of intestinal subobstruction successfully managed with nasogastric
aspiration and another one had dumping syndrome for several months. After a
median follow-up of 3.15 years (range 1.6 to 6.9) all patients eat normal diets
per os.
CONCLUSIONS: Esophageal replacement for the treatment of infants with long-gap EA
has been in our hands as good as any other option with 100% survival and good
functional results. The operation can be safely performed in the first months
provided that associated malformations are under control. However, like other
options, this approach is not devoid of complications.

PMID: 14565089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Environ Sci Technol. 2003 Sep 15;37(18):4148-56.

Assessing influence of experimental parameters on formation of PCDD/F from ash
derived from fires of CCA-treated wood.

Tame NW(1), Dlugogorski BZ, Kennedy EM.

Author information: 
(1)Process Safety and Environment Protection Group, School of Engineering, The
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales 2308, Australia.

Ash residues from fires of radiata pine timber, both untreated and treated with
chromated copper arsenate (CCA), were analyzed for the presence of
polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDD/F).
Fire conditions were simulated using a cone calorimeter. The sensitivity of the
magnitude and profile of PCDD/F in the ash under controlled experimental
conditions were examined to gain an insight into the formation of PCDD/F in a
system containing CCA. The total amount of PCDD/F increased from 2.0 ng/kg of ash
(0.05 ng of TE/kg of ash, using WHO-TEF) for untreated radiata pine to a maximum 
of 2700 ng/kg of ash (78 ng of TE/kg of ash) for 0.94% CCA. Ash containing CCA
showed a distinct preference for formation of PCDFs, particularly the tetrachloro
homologue. It is concluded that PCDD/F formation predominantly occurred via de
novo synthesis during smoldering of the char rather than during the initial
flaming and pyrolysis. Furthermore, the composition of the CCA constituents
present in the timber was controlled to assess whether the physical presence of
Cu, a known catalyst in PCDD/F production, was sufficient to account for the
formation of PCDD/F in fires of timber impregnated with CCA.

PMID: 14524447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Food Addit Contam. 2003 Aug;20(8):776-85.

Cumulative risk assessment of the intake of organophosphorus and carbamate
pesticides in the Danish diet.

Jensen AF(1), Petersen A, Granby K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Food Safety and Nutrition, Danish Veterinary and Food
Administration, Søborg, Denmark.

The aim of the study is to evaluate the potential cumulative effects of
organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides that act through a common mechanism of 
toxicity, and to assess the long- and short-term risks for the Danish population.
The intake estimates are based on dietary intake data collected in the Danish
nation-wide food consumption survey in 1995. The pesticide data are based on the 
Danish pesticide residue-monitoring programme from 1996-2001. The amount of 35
organophosphorus pesticides and carbamates were included in the cumulative risk
assessment. Processing factors, such as reduction of pesticide levels by rinsing 
and peeling, were applied in the exposure assessment. The "Toxicity Equivalence
Factor" (TEF) approach was used to normalise the toxicity of the different
organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides. Cumulative chronic exposure of
organophosphorus and carbamates pesticides via fruit, vegetables and cereals is
for adults 0.8-2% of the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) in chlorpyrifos
equivalents, and 0.03-11% of the ADI in methamidophos equivalents; and for
children 2-5% of the ADI in the chlorpyrifos equivalents, and 0.07-27% of the ADI
in methamidophos equivalents. Neither Acute Reference Dose (ARfD) nor ADI was
exceeded for any of the compounds studied. The results indicate that the Danish
population is neither exposed to any cumulative chronic risk, nor at risk of
acute exposure, from consumption of organophosphorus and carbamate pesticides
from fruit, vegetables and cereals.

PMID: 13129794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Surgery. 2003 Aug;134(2):345-50.

Defective sonic hedgehog signaling in esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Spilde TL(1), Bhatia AM, Mehta S, Ostlie DJ, Hembree MJ, Preuett BL, Prasadan K, 
Li Z, Snyder CL, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, The Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas
City, MO 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula 
(EA/TEF) remains unknown. We have found previously that an initial esophageal
atresia, followed by an abnormal (absent) branching pattern of the middle branch 
of a trifurcation of the lung/tracheal bud, leads to the neonatal finding of TEF.
Mice null mutant for hedgehog signaling can experience the development of EA/TEF,
but the mechanism for this development is also unknown. Given that EA/TEF in
humans appears not to be due to genetic defects, a hedgehog mutation cause seems 
very unlikely. However, defective hedgehog signaling that is caused by
environmental effects in the human embryo likely could be implicated. We studied 
a teratogen-induced model of EA/TEF to determine the mechanism by which defective
hedgehog signaling may lead to EA/TEF.
METHODS: We injected Adriamycin into pregnant rats to induce EA/TEF in rat
embryos. We first quantified sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway molecule
expression using real-time, semiquantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction for Shh, Shh receptors (patched and smoothened), and downstream
intracellular targets of those receptors (Gli family members). On the basis of
these findings, we then developed an in vitro culture system for the day-12
embryonic TEF and manipulated Shh signaling using either exogenous Shh or Shh
inhibitors.
RESULTS: By reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, a unique difference 
between the fistula tract and control tissues was that Gli-2 (downstream
signaling molecule of Shh) messenger RNA levels were much lower in the fistula
tract than in the adjacent esophagus (P =.002). Surprisingly, in the culture
experiments, the fistula tract was induced to branch by exogenous Shh. Such
branching of the fistula was unexpected and further supports the presumed
respiratory origin of the fistula tract because the normal lung, but not normal
esophagus, branched in response to Shh. The Shh inhibitor had no effect, which
indicated that defective signaling, rather than hyperfunctioning Shh, is critical
to the nonbranching phenotype of the fistula tract in TEF.
CONCLUSIONS: The recapitulation of respiratory developmental morphogenesis by the
fistula tract of TEF in the presence of exogenous Shh, together with the
quantitative reduction in normal, endogenous levels of Gli-2, strongly suggests
that 1 mechanism for the formation of the fistula tract is the lack of proper Shh
signaling because of Gli-2 deficiency, with subsequent straight, nonbranching
caudal growth of the fistula tract. This deficiency can be rescued by excess
exogenous Shh, thus reestablishing respiratory morphogenesis.

PMID: 12947339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Med Eng Phys. 2003 Oct;25(8):667-78.

Implementation of non-invasive brain physiological monitoring concepts.

Ragauskas A(1), Daubaris G, Ragaisis V, Petkus V.

Author information: 
(1)Kaunas University of Technology, Telematics Scientific Laboratory, Studentu 50
448, Kaunas 3031, Lithuania. telematics@tef.ktu.lt

The paper presents innovative methods and technology for non-invasive
intracranial hemodynamics monitoring based on the measurement of brain parenchyma
acoustic properties. The clinical investigation of new technology shows the
similarity between the invasively recorded intracranial pressure (ICP) and
non-invasively recorded intracranial blood volume (IBV) pulse waves, slow waves
and slow trends under intensive care unit (ICU) conditions. Also, the
applicability of the non-invasive IBV slow wave monitoring technique for
cerebrovascular autoregulation non-invasive long-term monitoring is demonstrated 
by theoretical and experimental studies.

PMID: 12900182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Analyst. 2003 Jul;128(7):986-93.

Effective pretreatment of human serum samples for dioxin analysis by solid phase 
extraction and blue-chitin column cleanup.

Kitamura K(1), Nagao M, Choi JW, Hashimoto S, Ito H, Morita M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Environmental Studies, 16-2 Onogawa, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8506, Japan.

For the analysis of dioxins, polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins/dibenzofurans
(PCDDs/Fs) and coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls (Co-PCBs), devising simple and 
economical methods is important, especially for mass screening of human exposure.
Pretreatment of samples, namely the extraction and cleanup methods that are
widely used at present, needs to be improved for savings in time, manpower, and
solvent consumption. In the present study, we applied solid phase extraction
(SPE) using octadecyl (C18) and a blue-chitin column in place of liquid-liquid
extraction (LE) and an active-carbon column with serum samples, frequently used
for assessment of human exposure. Efficacy of the new pretreatment methods was
demonstrated by successful high resolution gas chromatography-high resolution
mass spectrometry (HRGC-HRMS) of the major 17 PCDDs/Fs and 12 Co-PCBs that are on
the list of WHO/IPCS (1997) hazardous dioxins with toxic equivalent factor (TEF) 
values. SPE is timesaving and requires less manpower and organic solvent as
compared with the LE that is presently widely used. Concerning cleanup with
blue-chitin, the amount of toluene applied as eluent could be reduced to 1/3, as 
compared with the active-carbon case. The combination of SPE and blue-chitin for 
pretreatment of serum saves time and manpower, is accurate and uses less organic 
solvent than LE with active carbon cleanup.

PMID: 12894843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Aug;38(8):E21-3.

Esophageal atresia and tracheo-esophageal fistula in a patient with Digeorge
syndrome.

Kilic SS(1), Gurpinar A, Yakut T, Egeli U, Dogruyol H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Uludag University School of
Medicine, Bursa, Turkey.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2004 Aug;39(8):1301; author reply 1301-2.

DiGeorge Syndrome (DGS) is a congenital disorder that affects the thymus,
parathyroid glands, and heart and brain. Thymus involvement in DGS may vary
between absence/hypoplasia of thymus to various forms of reduced T cell function.
TBX1 deficiency causes a number of distinct vascular and heart defects,
suggesting multiple roles in cardiovascular development, specifically, formation 
and growth of the pharyngeal arch arteries, growth and septation of the outflow
tract of the heart, interventricular septation, and conal alignment. Here the
authors describe a case of DGS presenting with severe combined immunodeficiency, 
esophageal atresia, and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). DGS is an important
differential diagnosis in TEF.

PMID: 12891520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Virus Genes. 2002 Dec;25(3):241-53.

A TEF-1-element is required for activation of the promoter of pseudorabies virus 
glycoprotein X gene by IE180.

Ou CJ(1), Wong ML, Chang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, National
Chung-Hsing University, Taichung 402, Taiwan, ROC.

The pseudorabies virus (PRV) immediate-early regulatory protein IE180 is able to 
transactivate the viral early and late genes. Using chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) assay, we investigated the transactivation function of
IE180 to the promoter of PRV glycoprotein X (gX) gene, and our results showed
that IE180 could significantly increase the expression of CAT gene which was
under the control of gX promoter. To further identify the activation domains of
IE180 protein that interact with the gX promoter sequences, various truncated
mutants of IE180 gene and gX promoter gene were constructed and analyzed by CAT
and gel retardation assay. Results revealed that the N-terminal amino acid
residues from 133 to 736 of IE180 could interact with the binding site of
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) that resides in the gX promoter.
Formation of protein-DNA complexes between the IE180 protein and the TEF-1
element of the gX promoter was observed using electrophoretic mobility shift
assay (EMSA) as well as Southwestern blot analysis. These results indicated that 
a direct interaction occurred between IE180 and the TEF-1 element; and this
interaction was abolished if the TEF-1 element was mutated. The association of
IE180 with the TEF-1 element was further confirmed by the supershift of EMSA
complexes using IE180 specific antibody. Taken together, our results suggested
that formation of a complex between the IE180 protein and TEF-1 element in the gX
promoter region was involved in the transcriptional regulation of the gX gene.

PMID: 12881636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Comput Biol Med. 2003 Nov;33(6):455-71.

Application of classical and model-based spectral methods to ophthalmic arterial 
Doppler signals with uveitis disease.

Güler I(1), Ubeyli ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, 06500 Teknikokullar, Ankara, Turkey.
iguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this study, Doppler signals recorded from ophthalmic artery of 75 subjects
were processed by PC-computer using classical and model-based methods. The
classical method (fast Fourier transform) and three model-based methods (Burg
autoregressive, moving average, least-squares modified Yule-Walker autoregressive
moving average methods) were selected for processing ophthalmic arterial Doppler 
signals with uveitis disease. Doppler power spectra of ophthalmic arterial
Doppler signals were obtained by using these spectrum analysis techniques. The
variations in the shape of the Doppler spectra as a function of time were
presented in the form of sonograms in order to obtain medical information. These 
Doppler spectra and sonograms were then used to compare the applied methods in
terms of their frequency resolution and the effects in determination of uveitis
disease.

PMID: 12878231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):41519-27. Epub 2003 Jul 15.

Genome-wide expression analysis of mouse liver reveals CLOCK-regulated circadian 
output genes.

Oishi K(1), Miyazaki K, Kadota K, Kikuno R, Nagase T, Atsumi G, Ohkura N, Azama
T, Mesaki M, Yukimasa S, Kobayashi H, Iitaka C, Umehara T, Horikoshi M, Kudo T,
Shimizu Y, Yano M, Monden M, Machida K, Matsuda J, Horie S, Todo T, Ishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Clock Cell Biology Research Group, Institute for Biological Resources and
Functions, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology,
Central 6, 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8566, Japan.

CLOCK is a positive component of a transcription/translation-based negative
feedback loop of the central circadian oscillator in the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
in mammals. To examine CLOCK-regulated circadian transcription in peripheral
tissues, we performed microarray analyses using liver RNA isolated from Clock
mutant mice. We also compared expression profiles with those of Cryptochromes
(Cry1 and Cry2) double knockout mice. We identified more than 100 genes that
fluctuated from day to night and of which expression levels were decreased in
Clock mutant mice. In Cry-deficient mice, the expression levels of most
CLOCK-regulated genes were elevated to the upper range of normal oscillation.
Most of the screened genes had a CLOCK/BMAL1 binding site (E box) in the
5'-flanking region. We found that CLOCK was absolutely concerned with the
circadian transcription of one type of liver genes (such as DBP, TEF, and Usp2)
and partially with another (such as mPer1, mPer2, mDec1, Nocturnin, P450
oxidoreductase, and FKBP51) because the latter were damped but remained rhythmic 
in the mutant mice. Our results showed that CLOCK and CRY proteins are involved
in the transcriptional regulation of many circadian output genes in the mouse
liver. In addition to being a core component of the negative feedback loop that
drives the circadian oscillator, CLOCK also appears to be involved in various
physiological functions such as cell cycle, lipid metabolism, immune functions,
and proteolysis in peripheral tissues.

PMID: 12865428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Jul;38(7):E25-7.

A new variant of esophageal atresia with distal tracheo-antral fistula associated
with congenital intrathoracic stomach and situs inversus.

Luo CC(1), Lin JN, Lien R, Chu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Chang Gung Children's Hospital, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.

Esophageal atresia (EA) with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is the most
common anatomic pattern within congenital anomalies of the esophagus. Also, more 
than 50% of the infants with esophageal atresia have other congenital
malformations. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of EA with distal 
tracheo-antral fistula associated with congenital intrathoracic stomach and situs
inversus (SI).

PMID: 12861598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Jul;38(7):1112-3.

A technique using a rectus abdominis muscle flap in the treatment of adult
congenital tracheoesophageal fistulas.

Suzuki T(1), Masuda M, Mori T, Hirai Y, Sanada Y, Chiba M, Sumiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Showa University Fujigaoka 
Hospital, Yokohama, Japan.

The authors successfully treated an adult with congenital tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) Gross-C type by the addition of an effective pedicled muscle flap. 
This patient had undergone 2 thoracotomies when he was an infant at another
hospital; however, the fistula recurred. After transection and closure of the
fistula, a right rectus abdominis muscle flap between the 2 stumps was
interposed. The current case followed a favorable postoperative course; neither
fistula nor abdominal hernia occurred.

PMID: 12861554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(15):5143-64.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 binds multiple muscle MEF2 and A/T-rich elements 
during fast-to-slow skeletal muscle fiber type transitions.

Karasseva N(1), Tsika G, Ji J, Zhang A, Mao X, Tsika R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, 1600 Rollins Road, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

In adult mouse skeletal muscle, beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) gene
expression is primarily restricted to slow type I fibers; however, its expression
can be induced in fast type II fibers in response to a sustained increase in
load-bearing work (mechanical overload [MOV]). Our previous betaMyHC transgenic
and protein-DNA interaction studies have identified an A/T-rich element
(betaA/T-rich -269/-258) that is required for slow muscle expression and which
potentiates MOV responsiveness of a 293-bp betaMyHC promoter (beta293wt). Despite
the GATA/MEF2-like homology of this element, we found binding of two unknown
proteins that were antigenically distinct from GATA and MEF2 isoforms. By using
the betaA/T-rich element as bait in a yeast one-hybrid screen of an MOV-plantaris
cDNA library, we identified nominal transcription enhancer factor 1 (NTEF-1) as
the specific betaA/T-rich binding factor. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
analysis confirmed that NTEF-1 represents the enriched binding activity obtained 
only when the betaA/T-rich element is reacted with MOV-plantaris nuclear extract.
Moreover, we show that TEF proteins bind MEF2 elements located in the control
region of a select set of muscle genes. In transient-coexpression assays using
mouse C2C12 myotubes, TEF proteins transcriptionally activated a 293-bp betaMyHC 
promoter devoid of any muscle CAT (MCAT) sites, as well as a minimal thymidine
kinase promoter-luciferase reporter gene driven by three tandem copies of the
desmin MEF2 or palindromic Mt elements or four tandem betaA/T-rich elements.
These novel findings suggest that in addition to exerting a regulatory effect by 
binding MCAT elements, TEF proteins likely contribute to regulation of skeletal, 
cardiac, and smooth muscle gene networks by binding select A/T-rich and MEF2
elements under basal and hypertrophic conditions.

PMCID: PMC165722
PMID: 12861002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Environ Int. 2003 Sep;29(6):861-77.

Brominated dioxin-like compounds: in vitro assessment in comparison to classical 
dioxin-like compounds and other polyaromatic compounds.

Behnisch PA(1), Hosoe K, Sakai S.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Research Laboratories, Kaneka Corporation, 1-8 Miyamae-Machi,
Hyogo Takasago 676-8688, Japan. peterbehnisch@aol.com

Recently, several countries agreed to adopt the Stockholm convention on
persistent organic pollutants (POPs). One future obligation will be to add other 
POPs as new evidence becomes available. In vitro cell-based bioassays offer a
rapid, sensitive, and relatively inexpensive solution to screen possible POP
candidates. In the present study, we investigated the aryl hydrocarbon
(Ah)-receptor activity of several dioxin-like POPs by using the Micro-EROD
(Ethoxy-Resorufin-O-Deethylase) and DR-CALUX (Dioxin-Responsive-Chemical
Activated Luciferase gene eXpression) bioassays, which are two state-of-the-art
methods. The Micro-EROD system used in our study utilizes a wild-type rat liver
cell line (rat liver H4IIEC3/T cells), while the DR-CALUX bioassay consists of a 
genetically modified rat hepatoma H4IIE cell line that incorporates the firefly
luciferase gene coupled to dioxin-responsive elements (DREs) as a reporter gene. 
In the case of the DR-CALUX bioassay, we used an exposure time of 24 h, whereas
we used a 72-h exposure time in the Micro-EROD bioassay. The aim of this study
was to compare conventional dioxin-like POPs (such as polychlorinated
dibenzodioxins and -furans, PCDD/Fs and coplanar polychlorinated biphenyls, PCBs)
with several other classes of possible candidates to be added to the current
toxicity equivalent factor (TEF) model in the future. Therefore, this study
compares in vitro CYP1A1 (Micro-EROD bioassay) and firefly luciferase induction
(DR-CALUX bioassay) in several mixed polyhalogenated dibenzodioxins and -furans
(PXDD/Fs; X=Br, Cl, or F), alkyl-substituted polyhalogenated dibenzodioxins and
-furans (PMCDD/Fs; M=methyl), polyhalogenated biphenyls (PXBs, X=Br, Cl ),
polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs), pentabromophenols (PBPs), and
tetrabromobisphenol-A (TBBP-A). We also evaluate congener-specific relative
potencies (REPs) and efficacies (% of TCDD(max)) and discuss the dose-response
curves of these compounds, as well as the dioxin-like potency of several other
Ah-receptor agonists, such as those of the polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and
polychlorinated naphthalenes (PCNs). The highest REP values were found for
several PXDD/F congeners, followed by some coplanar PXBs, trichlorinated PCDD/Fs,
PAHs, PBDE-126, 1-6-HxCN, and some brominated flame retardants (TBBP-A). These in
vitro investigations indicate that further research is necessary to evaluate more
Ah-receptor agonists for dioxin-like potency.

PMID: 12850102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Acta Paediatr. 2003 Apr;92(4):467-72.

Concentrations of dioxins and other organochlorines (PCBs, DDTs, HCHs) in human
milk from Seveso, Milan and a Lombardian rural area in Italy: a study performed
25 years after the heavy dioxin exposure in Seveso.

Weiss J(1), Päpke O, Bignert A, Jensen S, Greyerz E, Agostoni C, Besana R, Riva
E, Giovannini M, Zetterström R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Chemistry, Stockholm University, Sweden.

AIM: To investigate whether those who were exposed to high levels of the dioxin
TCDD 25 years ago in Seveso, northern Italy still have higher than the expected
levels of dioxins in their fat stores, and to investigate the concentrations of
dioxins in the breast milk of mothers in Seveso and in two other regions in
Italy. The load of vertically transmitted dioxins to the next generation, if
being breastfed, was also investigated.
METHODS: As there may be a synergistic effect of mixtures of organic chlorines,
the concentrations of pesticides such as DDTs and PCBs have also been studied in 
the same human milk samples. Breast milk from 12 mothers from Seveso, Central
Milan and a Lombardian village was collected for analysis during the first week
and 1 and 3 mo after delivery. Individual samples were used for the analysis of
pesticides and PCBs, whereas dioxins were analysed in pooled samples from all 12 
mothers on each occasion.
RESULTS: In human milk from Seveso, the TCDD concentration in fat calculated on a
fresh weight basis was more than twice as high as the level in the other two
regions, whereas the concentrations of investigated other toxins were lower in
Seveso possible due to induction of the enzyme cytochrome P4501A, which means
that the total level of dioxins was the same in all three locations. The congener
profile, measured as mean toxic equivalency (TEQ) values, was the same in the
Italian samples as previously reported from Stockholm. The calculations are based
on the most recent WHO TCDD equivalency factors (TEF). The DDE concentration was 
higher in the samples from Milan than in the samples from the other two Italian
regions, which may be due to the fact that, to a greater extent than in the other
regions, Milanese food is imported from countries where DDT is still used as a
pesticide.
CONCLUSION: Twenty-five years after the dioxin catastrophe, human milk from
mothers in Seveso has concentrations of the highly toxic dioxin congener TCDD
that are more than twice as high as those in central Milan and a Lombardian
village. This means that breastfed infants in Seveso still store an appreciable
amount of TCDD in their body fat. The health consequences of this fact remain to 
be elucidated. The effect of the high load of DDTs in central Milan also has to
be considered

PMID: 12801115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mech Dev. 2003 May;120(5):587-96.

Further developmental roles of the Vestigial/Scalloped transcription complex
during wing development in Drosophila melanogaster.

Srivastava A(1), Bell JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Alberta, Edmonton,
Canada T6G 2E9.

The Drosophila homologue of the human TEF-1 gene, scalloped (sd), is required for
wing development. The SD protein forms part of a transcriptional activation
complex with the protein encoded by vestigial (vg) that, in turn, activates
target genes important for wing formation. One sd function involves a regulatory 
feedback loop with vg and wingless (wg) that is essential in this process. The
dorsal-ventral (D/V) margin-specific expression of wg is lost in sd mutant wing
discs while the hinge-specific expression appears normal. In the context of wing 
development, a VG::sdTEA domain fusion produces a protein that mimics the
wild-type SD/VG complex and restores the D/V boundary-specific expression of wg
in a sd mutant background. Further, targeted expression of wg at the D/V boundary
in the wing disc was able to partially rescue the sd mutant phenotype. This
infers that sd could function in either the maintenance or induction of wg at the
D/V border. Another functional role for sd is the establishment of sensory organ 
precursors (SOP) of the peripheral nervous system at the wing margin. Thus, the
relationship between sd and senseless (sens) in the development of these cells is
also examined, and it appears that sd must be functional for proper sens
expression, and ultimately, for sensory organ precursor development.

PMID: 12782275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Jun;38(6):852-6.

Long-term analysis of children with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Little DC(1), Rescorla FJ, Grosfeld JL, West KW, Scherer LR, Engum SA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: For children with esophageal atresia (EA) or
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), the first years of life can be associated with
many problems. Little is known about the long-term function of children who
underwent repair as neonates. This study evaluates outcome and late sequelae of
children with EA/TEF.
METHODS: Medical records of infants with esophageal anomalies (May 1972 through
December 1990) were reviewed. Study parameters included demographics, dysphagia, 
frequent respiratory infections (> 3/yr), gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD),
frequent choking, leak, stricture, and developmental delays (weight, height <
25%, < 5%, respectively).
RESULTS: Over 224 months, 69 infants (37 boys, 32 girls) were identified: type A,
10 infants; type B, 1; type C, 53; type D, 4; type E, 1. Mean follow-up was 125
months. During the first 5 years of follow-up, dysphagia (45%), respiratory
infections (29%), and GERD (48%) were common as were growth delays. These
problems improved as the children matured.
CONCLUSIONS: Children with esophageal anomalies face many difficulties during
initial repair and frequently encounter problems years later. Support groups can 
foster child development and alleviate parent isolationism. Despite growth
retardation, esophageal motility disorders, and frequent respiratory infections, 
children with EA/TEF continue to have a favorable long-term outcome.

PMID: 12778380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 2003 May;13(2):271-89.

Tracheoesophageal fistula.

Reed MF(1), Mathisen DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Thoracic Surgery, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, 231 Albert B. Sabin Way, P.O. Box
670558, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0558, USA. michael.reed@uc.edu

Acquired TEF is a rare complication that can occur from a variety of causes. The 
most common etiology of nonmalignant TEF is as a complication of intubation with 
cuff-related tracheal injury. Most patients present with increased secretions,
pneumonia, and evidence of aspiration of gastric contents while the patient is on
mechanical ventilation. When diagnosed after extubation, the most frequent sign
of TEF is coughing after swallowing. A high index of suspicion is required in
patients at risk for developing a TEF. The diagnostic evaluation is by
bronchoscopy and esophagoscopy. When the diagnosis has been made, the immediate
goal should be to minimize tracheobronchial soilage by placing the cuff of a
tracheostomy tube distal to the fistula. Reflux of gastric contents is diminished
by placement of a gastrostomy tube, and adequate nutrition is facilitated by
inserting a jejunostomy tube. Surgical correction is required because spontaneous
closure is rare, but surgery should be postponed until the patient is weaned from
mechanical ventilation because positive pressure ventilation after tracheal
repair carries an increased risk of anastomotic dehiscence and restenosis. An
anterior cervical collar incision can be used for most cases of post-intubation
TEFs. The esophagus should be closed in two layers over a nasogastric tube and
buttressed with a pedicled strap muscle flap. If the tracheal defect is small,
primary repair can be employed. In most cases, however, the best results can be
achieved with tracheal resection and reconstruction. The patient should be
extubated at the completion of the case, if possible. With this strategy, as
first described by Grillo and colleagues [27], single-stage repair can be
performed safely and with a high success rate. Malignant TEFs cannot be cured
because of the underlying incurable disease process. As with nonmalignant TEFs,
the principal complications are tracheo-bronchial contamination and poor
nutrition. Without prompt palliation, death occurs rapidly, with a mean survival 
time of between 1 and 6 weeks in patients who are treated with supportive care
alone. The most common primary tumor causing malignant TEF is esophageal
carcinoma. The other frequent cause is lung cancer. Patients present with signs
and symptoms typical of TEF, including coughing after swallowing. Diagnosis is
made by barium esophagography, and the location and size of the fistula is
determined by bronchoscopy and esophagoscopy. Treatment must correct the two
problems of airway contamination and poor nutrition. The most effective
treatments are esophageal bypass and esophageal stenting. Bypass is demonstrated 
to resolve respiratory soilage and allow fairly normal swallowing, but it should 
be reserved for patients who can tolerate a major operation. Stenting can be
offered to nearly all patients regardless of their physiologic condition.
Stenting also limits aspiration and allows swallowing. Esophageal exclusion is
rarely indicated in the current era of familiarity with stenting techniques.
Direct fistula closure and fistula resection do not yield satisfactory results.
Radiation therapy and chemotherapy combined might offer a survival benefit
compared with supportive care alone. The complication of TEF secondary to
malignancy is a devastating problem that carries a bleak prognosis, but when it
is performed promptly after the diagnosis of a malignant TEF, esophageal bypass
or stenting improves survival and quality of life for these unfortunate patients.

PMID: 12755313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Perinat Med. 2003;31(2):111-4.

Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: the impact of prenatal
suspicion on neonatal outcome in a tertiary care center.

Kalish RB(1), Chasen ST, Rosenzweig L, Chervenak FA.

Author information: 
(1)New York Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, USA.

AIMS: To determine the impact of antenatal suspicion of esophageal atresia (EA)
with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) on neonatal outcome.
METHODS: Retrospective review of all neonates with EA who received prenatal care 
including fetal ultrasound and delivery at our institution from 1990-2001. Cases 
with suspected EA on prenatal ultrasound (hydramnios and/or an absent stomach
bubble) were identified. Neonatal outcome variables for the group suspected
antenatally and the group diagnosed postnatally were compared. Mann Whitney U and
Fischer exact tests were used in analysis.
RESULTS: Twenty-two patients met inclusion criteria. Nine cases (40.9%) had
prenatal ultrasound findings associated with EA/TEF. There was no statistically
significant difference in the incidence of preterm delivery, intrauterine growth 
restriction, respiratory distress syndrome, additional anomalies or neonatal
death, birth weight, requirement for preoperative and postoperative mechanical
ventilation or length of hospital stay between the prenatally suspected and
postnatally diagnosed groups. There were two neonatal demises: one had trisomy 18
and one was born prematurely at 29 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: In our experience, prenatal detection of ultrasound findings
associated with EA/TEF does not affect neonatal outcome or identify a group at
increased risk for neonatal morbidity and mortality. Our favorable outcomes, with
or without prenatal suspicion, may reflect the comprehensive care readily
available at a tertiary care facility. Larger series need to be studied to
exclude the possibility of a type II error.

PMID: 12747226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Chemosphere. 2003 Jul;52(4):725-33.

Survey of commercial pasteurised cows' milk in Wallonia (Belgium) for the
occurrence of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans and coplanar
polychlorinated biphenyls.

Focant JF(1), Pirard C, Massart AC, De Pauw E.

Author information: 
(1)Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Dioxin Laboratory, University of Liege, Allee de
la Chimie 3, B-6c Sart-Tilman, B-4000 Liege, Belgium. jf.focant@ulg.ac.be

Congener-specific analyses of 7 polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), 10
polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and 4 non-ortho (coplanar) polychlorinated 
biphenyls (cPCBs) were performed on 35 samples of commercial long-life
pasteurised cows' milk issued from eight different brands available in Walloon
supermarkets (Belgium). The observed congener profile was characteristic of milk 
samples issued from industrialised countries with good inter and intra-brand
reproducibility's. The PCDDs to PCDFs ratio was equal to 1.8 in concentration.
The toxic equivalent (TEQ based on WHO-TEF) value for PCDD/Fs in all analysed
milks was 1.09+/-0.30 pg TEQ/g fat (range 0.86-1.59), which is below the
recommended EU non-commercialisation threshold value of 3 pg TEQ PCDD/Fs/g of
milk fat. The mean TEQ value including cPCBs was 2.23+/-0.55 pg TEQ/g fat. These 
PCBs actually contributed for 49+/-8.6% of the total TEQ. Among PCDD/Fs and
cPCBs, tetrachloro dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), pentachloro dibenzo-p-dioxin (PeCDD),
pentachloro dibenzofurans (PeCDFs) and 3,3',4,4',5-pentachloro biphenyl (PCB-126)
were the most important contributors to the TEQ. Estimated daily intake (EDI) due
to consumption of such milks was 0.34 pg TEQ/kg of body weight/day for PCDD/Fs
and 0.69 pg TEQ/kg of body weight/day when cPCBs were included.

PMID: 12738286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2003 May;35(5):461-71.

Basal and alpha1-adrenergic-induced activity of minimal rat betaMHC promoters in 
cardiac myocytes requires multiple TEF-1 but not NFAT binding sites.

McLean BG(1), Lee KS, Simpson PC, Farrance IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, 108 N. Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

A culture model for cardiac hypertrophy, stimulation of neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes by alpha(1)-adrenergic agonists, has been used extensively to identify
transcription factors that activate genes during cardiac hypertrophy, such as
skeletal alpha-actin, beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMHC), and B-natriuretic
peptide. We used this culture model to further investigate transcription factors 
regulating the betaMHC promoter in cardiac myocytes under basal conditions and
during hypertrophy. We found that the rat betaMHC promoter contains two other
MCAT sites, in addition to the two MCATs reported previously. The four MCAT sites
are conserved in some but not all of the mammalian betaMHC promoters examined,
and all bind TEF-1 but with varying affinity. As assayed by transient
transfection into cardiac myocytes, the four MCATs within 348 bp of the
transcription start site are required for full activity of the rat betaMHC
promoter in the absence and presence of the alpha(1)-adrenergic agonist
phenylephrine (PE). We found that the betaMHC promoter also contains a binding
site for the NFAT family of transcription factors, which are activated by
calcineurin and are implicated in the hypertrophic process. Although this site
bound NFAT3 in vitro and has been reported to be required for betaMHC promoter
activity in slow skeletal muscle, mutation of the site had no effect on basal or 
on PE-induced activity of the promoter in cardiac myocytes. Our results show that
full activity of minimal betaMHC promoters in the presence and absence of
hypertrophic agents requires multiple MCAT sites but not NFAT-binding sites.

PMID: 12738228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Pediatr Surg Int. 2003 Apr;19(1-2):40-3. Epub 2002 Nov 14.

Long-term evaluation of esophageal function in patients treated at birth for
esophageal atresia.

Tomaselli V(1), Volpi ML, Dell'Agnola CA, Bini M, Rossi A, Indriolo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Niguarda Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy.
vpatom@libero.it

Dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and esophageal metaplasia are reported
with various incidence in the long term follow-up of patients treated at birth
for esophageal atresia (EA). To evaluate the long term outcomes 26 patients
treated at birth for EA with Tracheo Esophageal Fistula (TEF) were examined 8-28 
(mean 15.8) years later by clinical evaluation, including barium meal, fiberoptic
upper GI endoscopy, 24 hour ambulatory two-channel pH-monitoring and stationary
esophageal manometry. 50% of patients complained of dysphagia. Mild esophagitis
was found in 20% of patients but GER was detected in only 16.7% of the cases. By 
morphological X-ray, esophageal anomalies were detected in 31% of cases without
significant functional relevance. Hundred percent of patients had a disorganized 
peristaltic esophageal activity and a low amplitude of the esophageal
contractions was observed in 58% of them. In our series, esophageal dismotilty
seems to be the main consequence of EA without any relevant disturbance of normal
nutritional habit.

PMID: 12721721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2003 Mar 28;66(6):533-50.

The use of toxic equivalency factor distributions in probabilistic risk
assessments for dioxins, furans, and PCBs.

Finley BL(1), Connor KT, Scott PK.

Author information: 
(1)Exponent, Inc., 631 1st Street, Suite 200, Santa Rosa, CA 95404, USA.
bfinley@exponent.com

Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for 2,3,7,8-substituted polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD) and dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and coplanar polychlorinated
biphenyl (PCB) congeners have been developed by the World Health Organization
(WHO). Each TEF was derived from a range of relative potency (REP) estimates
obtained from in vivo and in vitro studies wherein the potency of the congener
was evaluated relative to 2,3,7,8-TCDD (or some other appropriate benchmark). For
most congeners, the range of REP values spans several orders of magnitude, and
the degree of conservatism varies widely among the congeners. Although some TEFs 
are greater than the maximum REP value, others are less than the minimum. This
suggests that the point estimate TEFs introduce a significant amount of
variability and uncertainty into the PCB and PCDD/F risk assessment process. The 
use of REP data distributions, rather than point estimate TEFs, would permit a
more informed evaluation of the variability and uncertainty in the attendant risk
estimates. Further, a standardized method of choosing a TEF from an REP
distribution would ensure a uniform degree of conservatism in the TEF values. In 
this analysis, distributions of REP values were derived for the coplanar PCBs and
2,3,7,8-substituted PCDD/Fs. There are 936 REP values in the WHO database; the
number of values per congener ranges from 1 (1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDF) to 117 (PCB126). 
Twenty REP values qualified by WHO as "<" were replaced with one-half the stated 
value; 65 values qualified as ">" were not used. Fit tests indicate that most
distributions are lognormal. Mean, standard deviation, and 50th and 95th
percentile values for each REP distribution are presented. In general, the WHO
TEFs for the PCDD/Fs are at the upper bound (75th percentile or greater) of the
underlying REP distributions, while the PCB TEFs tend to be more representative
of the central tendency of the underlying REP distribution. A simplistic
weighting scheme that emphasizes long-term in vivo studies suggests that the REP 
distributions may not be overly sensitive to weighting techniques--that is, the
statistical descriptors of the weighted distributions were similar to those of
the unweighted distributions. A case study using fish tissue PCB and PCDD/F data 
suggests that in some settings the use of WHO TEFs may understate upper bound PCB
risks relative to PCDD/F risks. A preliminary sensitivity analysis suggests that 
measurement endpoint, tissue-type and species (or strain) may be significant
contributors to the variability and heterogeneity in the underlying REP data for 
some congeners. Although there are fundamental shortcomings inherent in any TEF
scheme, evidence suggests that some form of REP distributions should be used in
lieu of or in addition to point estimate TEFs in settings where PCBs and PCDD/Fs 
are commingled.

PMID: 12712595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Huan Jing Ke Xue. 2003 Jan;24(1):135-8.

[PAHs pollution in air of coke plant and health risk assessment].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J(1), Zhu L, Shen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310028,
China.

12 PAHs in air of different production sector in coking plant were measured with 
the result showing that, the total PAHs concentrations ranged from 11.75 to 46.66
micrograms/m3, among which, BaP was 0.050-1.054 micrograms/m3 descending
following the order: the outlet of coke oven, the top of coke oven, the gate, the
point of flaming out coke. BaP pollution in air of the top and the outlet of coke
oven were much heavier than in the soot and in air of arterial road. The toxic
equivalency factors (TEF) adjusted concentrations of total PAHs were 0.3875-1.714
micrograms/m3, and in this way, workers' daily exposure to PAHs were 3.100-13.71 
micrograms/m3.

PMID: 12708305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2003 May;27(5):582-90.

Effect of a high-protein, energy-restricted diet on weight loss and energy
expenditure after weight stabilization in hyperinsulinemic subjects.

Luscombe ND(1), Clifton PM, Noakes M, Farnsworth E, Wittert G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of replacing some dietary carbohydrate with
protein, during energy restriction, on weight loss, total energy expenditure
(TEE), resting energy expenditure (REE), respiratory quotient (RQ), and the
thermic effect of feeding (TEF) in subjects with hyperinsulinemia.
DESIGN: Parallel, clinical intervention study of 12 weeks energy restriction (6.5
MJ/day) and 4 weeks energy balance (8.2 MJ/day) in two groups of subjects
randomly assigned to either a high-protein (HP) diet (27% of energy (%E) as
protein, 45%E as carbohydrate) or a lower-protein (LP) diet (16%E as protein,
57%E as carbohydrate).
SUBJECTS: A total of 36 obese nondiabetic volunteers with hyperinsulinemia (10
males/26 females, aged 34-65 y, BMI 28-43 kg/m(2), fasting insulin 12-45 mU/l).
MEASUREMENTS: Body weight and composition, TEE, REE, and RQ were measured at
baseline and at week 16. In addition, the TEF to an HP or LP meal was determined 
for 3 h, at baseline and at week 16.
RESULTS: After 16 weeks, weight loss was similar in response to each diet; the
overall decrease was 7.9+/-0.6 kg (P<0.001), of which 6.8+/-0.5 kg was fat
(P<0.001). REE fell similarly with each diet; the overall decrease was 719+/-106 
kJ/day (P<0.001). The TEF was 2% greater after the HP than after the LP meal at
baseline (P<0.01) and 0.8% greater at week 16 (P=0.35). After 16 weeks, the TEF
was not reduced in either dietary group. There was no change in TEE after 16
weeks.
CONCLUSION: In subjects with hyperinsulinemia an energy-restrictive diet
containing an increased protein-to-carbohydrate ratio does not enhance weight
loss or significantly affect energy expenditure. Caloric restriction, rather than
the macronutrient composition of the diet, is the most important determinant of
weight loss.

PMID: 12704402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Obes Res. 2003 Apr;11(4):509-11.

Arg64 beta3-adrenoceptor variant and the components of energy expenditure.

Walston J(1), Andersen RE, Seibert M, Hilfiker H, Beamer B, Blumenthal J,
Poehlman ET.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. jwalston@jhmi.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine Trp64Arg beta(3)-adrenoceptor genotype-specific
differences in the components of energy expenditure.
HYPOTHESIS: We hypothesized that resting metabolic rate (RMR) and physical
activity levels would be lower and that thermic effect of feeding (TEF) would be 
higher in those with the Arg64 allele.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: RMR and TEF were measured by indirect
calorimetry, physical activity by questionnaire, and total energy expenditure by 
the doubly labeled water method. Genotype-specific measures were compared using
ANOVA and analysis of covariance (ANCOVA).
RESULTS: RMR in Arg64 homozygotes was significantly lower than in Trp64
homozygotes [Arg64, 1373 +/- 259 kcal/d (n = 15) vs. Trp64Arg, 1538 +/- 238
kcal/d (n = 25) vs. Trp64, 1607 +/- 290 kcal/d (n = 22); p < 0.01]. TEF was
significantly higher in Arg64 homozygotes compared with Trp64 homozygotes (Arg64,
359 +/- 28 kcal/d; Trp64Arg, 322 +/- 22 kcal/d; and Trp64, 279 +/- 23 kcal/d; p <
0.05). No differences were identified between genotypes in physical activity or
in total energy expenditure.
DISCUSSION: Our results suggest that the Arg64 beta(3)-adrenoceptor allele
contributes significantly to the genetic variability in both RMR and TEF.

PMID: 12690078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Chemosphere. 2003 Jan;50(3):377-82.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons air levels in Florence, Italy, and their
correlation with other air pollutants.

Lodovici M(1), Venturini M, Marini E, Grechi D, Dolara P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Viale Pieraccini 6, 50134 Florence, Italy.
maura@pharm.unifi.it

Benzo(a)pyrene [B(a)P] air levels were measured in Florence (Italy) in the period
1992-2001. For the period 1999-2000 seven polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) 
(benzo(a)anthracene, crysene, benzo(a)pyrene (B(a)P), benzo(b)fluoranthene
(B(b)F), benzo(k)fluoranthene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene (DBA) and
benzo(g,h,i)perylene (BGP)), were measured in the air in four different sites
(one with heavy traffic (A), one in a park (B), one in a residential area (C) and
one in a hill area (D)). B(a)P levels were elevated in 1992-1998 (maximum average
value of winter months: 5.8 ng/ m3) but a decreasing trend was observed in the
following years, probably due to improvement in vehicle emissions. The sum of PAH
in the air in the period 1999-2000 was about one order of magnitude lower in the 
hill site (D) relative to the urban sites, and residential areas (B and C) had
values 2.5-3 times lower compared to site A with a heavy traffic. PAH
concentrations decreased in the warmer seasons of 2000 in all sites. A negative
correlation was found between PAH levels and ozone. A positive correlation with
carbon monoxide (CO) (r = 0.862, P < 0.001) and low B(a)P/BGP ratios, ranging
from 0.44 to 0.51, indicated that vehicular traffic was the major PAH source in
all monitored sites. Using B(a)P(TEF) values (toxic equivalency factors) for
evaluating the biological activity of PAH, we found that the highest PAH
contributors in terms of potential air carcinogenic activity were B(a)P and DBA. 
Therefore, in addition to B(a)P, DBA concentration should be considered in the
evaluation of air quality in terms of PAH contamination.

PMID: 12656258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):19716-22. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Identification of Ets-1 as an important transcriptional activator of
CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha in COS-7 cells and co-activation
with transcriptional enhancer factor-4.

Sugimoto H(1), Sugimoto S, Tatei K, Obinata H, Bakovic M, Izumi T, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi
371-8511, Japan.

Phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis via the CDP-choline pathway is primarily
regulated by CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CT). Transcriptional
enhancer factor-4 (TEF-4) enhances the transcription of CTalpha in COS-7 cells by
interactions with the basal transcription machinery (Sugimoto, H., Bakovic, M.,
Yamashita, S., and Vance, D.E. (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276,12338-12344). To
identify the most important transcription factor involved in basal CTalpha
transcription, we made CTalpha promoter-deletion and -mutated constructs linked
to a luciferase reporter and transfected them into COS-7 cells. The results
indicate that an important site regulating basal CTalpha transcription is -53/-47
(GACTTCC), which is a putative consensus-binding site of Ets transcription
factors (GGAA) in the opposite orientation. Gel shift analyses indicated the
existence of a binding protein for -53/-47 (GACTTCC) in nuclear extracts of COS-7
cells. When anti-Ets-1 antibody was incubated with the probe in gel shift
analyses, the intensity of the binding protein was decreased. The binding of
endogenous Ets-1 to the promoter probe was increased when TEF-4 was expressed;
however, the amount of Ets-1 detected by immunoblotting was unchanged. When cells
were transfected with Ets-1 cDNA, the luciferase activity of CTalpha promoter
constructs was greatly enhanced. Co-transfection experiments with Ets-1 and TEF-4
showed enhanced expression of reporter constructs as well as CTalpha mRNA. These 
results suggest that Ets-1 is an important transcriptional activator of the
CTalpha gene and that Ets-1 activity is enhanced by TEF-4.

PMID: 12642588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Mar;38(3):474-7; discussion 474-7.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling in the developing tracheoesophageal fistula.

Spilde TL(1), Bhatia AM, Marosky JK, Preuett B, Kobayashi H, Hembree MJ, Prasadan
K, Daume E, Snyder CL, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Childen's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri
64108, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The Adriamycin-induced rat model of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) provides a reliable system for the study of
EA/TEF pathogenesis. The authors previously hypothesized that faulty branching
lung morphogenesis pathways were a critical component of its pathogenesis. The
authors have found evidence for faulty fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling
related to epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the fistula tract. To better
define FGF signaling, the differential expression of FGF ligands and their
receptors between lung, fistula tract, and esophagus are described.
METHODS: Time-dated pregnant, Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with Adriamycin
(2 mg/kg intraperitoneally) on days 6 through 9 of gestation. Tissues were
processed for histology and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
FGF-1, -7 and -10 were measured from whole lung, fistula tract, and esophagus of 
TEF or normal embryos. Expression of FGF2RIIIb and FGF2RIIIc receptors was
measured in isolated epithelium and mesenchyme of lung and fistula tract of TEF
embryos as well as lung and esophagus from normal controls.
RESULTS: FGF-1 mRNA was present in the fistula tract and normal and
Adriamycin-exposed lung but absent from whole esophagus. Interestingly, FGF-7
mRNA was present only in normal lung. FGF-10 was present in all tissues examined.
FGF2RIIIb mRNA was absent in fistula mesenchyme but present in all other tissues 
examined. However, the splice variant FGF2RIIIc mRNA was present in all tissues
examined.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support defective FGF signaling in the rat model of
EA/TEF. Absence of FGF-7 mRNA in Adriamycin-exposed tissues suggests the primary 
effect of Adriamycin may be to inhibit FGF-7 expression. Moreover, absence of
FGF2RIIIb in fistula mesenchyme may be caused by loss of positive feedback from
FGF-7, its normal obligate ligand. Understanding these specific defects in FGF
signaling may provide insight into faulty mechanisms of EA/TEF.

Copyright 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12632370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Pediatr Surg. 2003 Mar;38(3):465-8.

A role for sonic hedgehog signaling in the pathogenesis of human
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Spilde T(1), Bhatia A, Ostlie D, Marosky J, Holcomb G 3rd, Snyder C, Gittes G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, Children's
Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Many theories of the pathogenesis of esophageal atresia with 
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) have been proposed, but no specific mechanism 
has been demonstrated. The authors previously reported data suggesting a
respiratory origin of the fistula tract in the rat model and in humans. Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) "knockout" mice have the VACTERL association, and thus it was
hypothesized that defects in Shh signaling may exist in the human neonatal EA/TEF
fistula tract.
METHODS: With IRB approval, human proximal esophageal pouch and distal fistula
samples were removed at the time of standard repair of EA/TEF in accordance with 
what the surgeons deemed appropriate in preparation for anastomosis. Tissues were
processed for HE, reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and
immunohistochemistry. Normal embryonic lung cDNA was used as a positive control
for the RT-PCR reactions.
RESULTS: As expected, Shh was present by immunohistochemistry in the proximal
esophageal pouch, but was specifically absent in the distal fistula tract. Gli-1,
-2, and -3 (all intracellular mediators of Shh signaling) were present in the
proximal pouch and distal esophagus by RT-PCR.
CONCLUSIONS: The absence of Shh signaling in the developing fistula tract of the 
human neonate was surprising given that Shh normally is present in esophagus and 
other gut components. These results support the conclusion that the fistula tract
is not an esophaguslike structure, despite both its histologic appearance and its
use as an esophageal replacement. Also, like in Shh-null mutant mice, aberrant
Shh signaling may play a critical role in the pathogenesis of EA/TEF in humans.

Copyright 2003, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12632368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Med Syst. 2003 Apr;27(2):215-23.

Survey of fuzzy logic applications in brain-related researches.

Bay OF(1), Usakli AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. bay@tef.gazi.edu.tr

The aim of this study was to survey fuzzy logic (FL) applications in brain
researches. In general, these applications are related to pattern recognition for
localization in brain structures or tumor detection, image segmentation, and
simulations. In recent years, neural networks and FL are gaining popularity. FL
is based on the observation of people. The enormous amount of information
representation by the brain suggests that FL principles can be useful, especially
for complex brain functions. Causal models based on functional neuroanatomy can
be then implemented in computer simulations to reflect the dynamical intersection
of brain structures. FL is considered as an appropriate tool for modelling and
control. FL has been applied in different ways to brain researches. This paper
surveys the utilization of FL in brain researches.

PMID: 12617362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Blood. 2003 Jun 15;101(12):4757-64. Epub 2003 Feb 27.

A PAR domain transcription factor is involved in the expression from a
hematopoietic-specific promoter for the human LMO2 gene.

Crable SC(1), Anderson KP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH, USA.

The transcription factor LMO2 is believed to exert its effect through the
formation of protein-protein interactions with other DNA-binding factors such as 
GATA-1 and TAL1. Although LMO2 has been shown to be critical for the formation of
the erythroid cell lineage, the gene is also expressed in a number of
nonerythroid tissues. In this report, we demonstrate that the more distal of the 
2 promoters for the LMO2 gene is highly restricted in its pattern of expression, 
directing the hematopoietic-specific expression of this gene. Deletion and
mutation analyses have identified a critical cis element in the first
untranslated exon of the gene. This element is a consensus-binding site for a
small family of basic leucine zipper proteins containing a proline and acidic
amino acid-rich (PAR) domain. Although all 3 members of this family are produced 
in erythroid cells, only 2 of these proteins, thyrotroph embryonic factor and
hepatic leukemia factor, can activate transcription from this LMO2 promoter
element. These findings represent a novel mechanism in erythroid gene regulation 
because PAR proteins have not previously been implicated in this process.

PMID: 12609830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Toxicology. 2003 Apr 15;186(1-2):11-20.

Effect of low dose mono-ortho 2,3',4,4',5 pentachlorobiphenyl on thyroid hormone 
status and EROD activity in rat offspring: consequences for risk assessment.

Kuriyama S(1), Fidalgo-Neto A, Mathar W, Palavinskas R, Friedrich K, Chahoud I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Benjamin Franklin Medical
Center, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Toxic equivalency factor (TEF) has been proposed to estimate the risk of
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) congeners. However, ortho chlorine substitution in
the two phenyl rings gives each PCB its own pattern of toxicity which is
different from the mechanism of action of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin.
The present study evaluated the effect of prenatal and postnatal exposure to a
low dose of the mono-ortho pentachlorobiphenyl PCB 118 on thyroid hormone
concentrations and EROD activity in rats. Moreover, the tissue distribution of
PCB 118 following one oral dose was evaluated. Sprague-Dawley rats were treated
by gavage on GD 6 with 375 microg of PCB 118/kg b.w. Decreases in thyroxine and
TSH levels were observed in dams at the end of lactation. Perinatal exposure to a
low dose of PCB 118 permanently disrupted the hypothalamo-pituitary-thyroid (HPT)
axis leading to a significant increase in thyroxine levels in offspring, as a
'thyroid resistance syndrome'. It is noteworthy that no changes in hepatic EROD
activity were detected in dams at the end of lactation, even in the presence of
high amounts of PCB in liver. Based on hepatic EROD activity (as a biomarker for 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) induction), the mechanism of thyroid homeostasis 
disruption seems to be AhR-independent. Additionally, the 'thyroid resistance
syndrome' observed in our study indicates the need for further detailed
investigations on the HPT axis. We conclude that not only TEF, but also
AhR-independent responses should be taken into account for risk assessment of
mono-ortho PCB congeners.

PMID: 12604167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Cir Pediatr. 2001 Oct;14(4):145-51.

[Prognosis assessment of esophageal atresia: our experience of 29 years].

[Article in Spanish]

Pueyo Gil C(1), Elías Pollina J, González Martínez-Pardo N, Pisón Chacón J, Romeo
Ulecia M, Esteban Ibarz JA.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Infantil Universitario Miguel Servet,
Po de Isabel la Católica 1-3, 50009 Zaragoza.

INTRODUCTION: The major advances in neonatal intensive care have made less useful
the Waterston's criteria for esophageal atresia (EA) and/or tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF), and other prognostic classifications have been reported. The aim
of this study was to determine the influence of various parameters on the outcome
of EA-TEF.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We reviewed 97 cases admitted in our hospital for 29 years.
We divided the cases in two groups in relation to the improvement of our neonatal
unit care during the years: 1st. 1971-1982 (n = 46); 2nd. 1983-1999 (n = 51). chi
2 squared test and logistic regression analysis of the influence of several
parameters before surgical treatment (Waterston's and Spitz's birth weight
groups, pneumonia, ventilator dependence, severity of associated anomalies and
cardiac malformations) on mortality was performed.
RESULTS: The survival rate increased since 1983, reaching 86.2% in the last 10
years, although the number of neonates with birth weight < 1500 g has increased. 
Association with a major anomaly increased the mortality significantly in the
2nd. group only (45.5% major vs 7.1% minor and 8.3% none). The cardiac
malformations were the most common, not only before 1983 (26.8%), but also since 
then (31.3%). When the neonate associated a major cardiac malformation the
mortality was significantly higher in the 2nd. group (71.4%). The mortality, when
pneumonia was present, was significantly higher before 1983 only (75% vs 32.4%), 
whereas the mortality was significantly increased by the need of ventilator in
the 2nd. group only (85.7% vs 9.1%). Before 1983, the best prognostic parameters 
were the pneumonia and the severity of associated anomalies, whereas only the
ventilator dependence was selected between 1983 and 1999.
CONCLUSIONS: The EA-TEF mortality has decreased in the last years. The associated
cardiac malformation is the most common. We think that the ventilator dependence 
is the most reliable prognostic risk factor, showing a poor physiologic status of
the neonate.

PMID: 12601962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cir Pediatr. 2000 Oct;13(4):136-40.

[Pneumopathy in patients surgically treated for type III esophageal atresia].

[Article in Spanish]

Soto MC(1), Rivilla F, Dorado MJ, Rueda S, Balboa F, Casillas JG.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario San Carlos, C/Martín
Lagos s/n, 28040 Madrid.

Patients following esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF)
treatment have several long-term respiratory complications during infancy. They
are associated with esophageal dismotility and gastroesophageal reflux (GER) as
well as lung dysplasia.MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ten patients were evaluated as
follow: 1. Review of medical record. 2. An annual interview was performed
concerning respiratory and digestive symptoms. 3. Phmetric score and radiologic
studies of the digestive tract. 4. Functional respiratory test. 5. Update
symptoms.
RESULTS: Mean follow-up was 7.3 +/- 4.45 years (8 months-15 years). Seven cases
(70%) had respiratory distress during the first postoperative year. Two of them
had middle GER, performing a Nissen procedure in another patient with severe GER.
Spirometry was underwent in 6 cases, showing a restrictive pattern in three.
CONCLUSION: Respiratory distress were common during the first postoperative year 
(70% of cases in our serie) but only 25% were GER related. Pulmonary function
test can be performed in long-term evolution of patients following operation for 
EA-TEF in order to have early treatment for respiratory complications.

PMID: 12601947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Eur Radiol. 2003 Feb;13(2):397-9. Epub 2002 Jun 22.

Double balloon esophageal catheter for diagnosis of tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Kiyan G(1), Dagli TE, Tugtepe H, Kodalli N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Marmara University School of Medicine,
Tophanelioglu Caddesi 13-15, Altunizade, 81190 Istanbul, Turkey.
gursukiyan@turk.net

Congenital H-type and recurrent tracheo-esophageal fistulas (TEF) are always
difficult to diagnose. For a more accurate diagnosis we designed a new double
balloon catheter, which is a modification of esophageal dilatation balloon. The
catheter has two balloons to occlude the esophagus proximal and distal to the
fistula. The fistula can be identified by passing of the contrast material to the
tracheal tree, which was injected into the esophageal segment between the
inflated balloons. To prove the efficiency of this catheter, a TEF was created
surgically in a New Zealand rabbit. On the postoperative fourteenth day the
catheter was tried and the fistula could be visualized easily by injecting the
contrast material. We think this technique may be of use in the diagnosis of TEF 
in children.

PMID: 12599006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Pediatr Surg Int. 2002 Dec;18(8):649-52. Epub 2002 Oct 4.

Pediatric surgery in India - a specialty come of age?

Gupta DK(1), Charles AR, Srinivas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi - 110029, India.

The quality of neonatal surgical care and scientific publications are reliable
yardsticks that were used to assess the status of pediatric surgery in India. A
specific questionnaire to assess neonatal care and surgical outcome was mailed to
all institutes imparting pediatric surgery training. Data were obtained regarding
the outcome of important neonatal surgical conditions for the year 1998 and a
PubMed literature search was performed to identify scientific articles between
1995 and 2000. Though a literature search was done to compile a complete list of 
publications of all the consultants in all the institutes, of the 24
questionnaires mailed, only 11 (45.8%) institutes provided data. The mean (range)
annual neonatal admissions in neonatal surgical units was 137 (42-263). The mean 
newborn admissions requiring surgical intervention per surgeon per year was 36
(17-80). The overall survival was 57.2% (30%-75%), 70.8% (40%-100%), 90.4%
(75%-100%), 74.7% (30%-100%), and 59.1% (0%-100%) for esophageal atresia (EA)
with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), congenital diaphragmatic hernia,
anorectal malformations, intestinal atresia, and abdominal-wall defects,
respectively. The center that had the lowest survival in EA/TEF and CDH had the
highest workload per consultant. Between 1995 and 2000, the mean number of
scientific articles published in indexed journals compiled from all the
institutes (n = 24) was 10.7 (0-84). In conclusion, this is a preliminary study
toward setting up national databases of neonatal surgery in different parts of
the world to set goals for improvement.

PMID: 12598956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Tumori. 2002 Nov-Dec;88(6):474-7.

Neoadjuvant chemotherapy with taxotere-epirubicin-5-fluorouracil (TEF) in
local-regionally advanced breast cancer: a preliminary report.

Baltali E(1), Altundag MK, Onat DA, Abbasoglu O, Ozisik Y, Güler N, Atahan L,
Berberoglu U, Altinok M, Baran I, Celik I, Tekuzman G.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University, Institute of Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
Ankara, Turkey.

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Sixty-three patients with local-regionally advanced breast
cancer were treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy consisting of docetaxel
(Taxotere), epirubicin, and 5-fluorouracil (TEF).
METHODS AND STUDY DESIGN: Preoperatively, patients received four cycles of
Taxotere (80 mg/m2), epirubicin (60 mg/m2), and 5-fluorouracil (500 mg/m2),
repeated every 21 days. Following completion of four cycles of chemotherapy,
appropriate surgery was performed. After the surgery, patients received one cycle
of the TEF chemotherapy regimen; following chemotherapy, radiotherapy was
applied, and at the end two more cycles of TEF chemotherapy regimen were given.
RESULTS: Sixty-three patients with locally advanced breast cancer were treated.
Three patients were excluded from the study before the evaluation of response.
Median age of the patients was 50 years (range, 25-77). Twenty-seven and 33
patients were premenopausal and postmenopausal, respectively. Thirty-nine
patients were in stage IIIA and 21 in stage IIIB. Complete and partial responses 
were observed in 15 (25%) and 42 (70%) of the patients following four cycles of
preoperative TEF chemotherapy regimen, respectively. Overall response was 95%,
and primary lesion progressed only in 3 (5%) patients. The mean disease-free
survival was 15.9 +/- 6.8 (range, 3.5-28) months and the mean overall survival
was 18.6 +/- 7.2 (range, 5-30) months. The most frequent side effects were
nausea-vomiting, mucositis, alopecia and leukopenia.
CONCLUSIONS: TEF therapy is a treatment with a high overall response rate and
toxicities similar to other taxotere combinations. A longer follow-up of patients
is necessary for the determination of disease-free survival and overall survival.

PMID: 12597141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2003 Mar;35(3):162-8.

Negative expiratory pressure: a new tool for evaluating lung function in
children?

Tauber E(1), Fazekas T, Eichler I, Eichstill C, Gartner C, Koller DY, Frischer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Vienna University Children's Hospital,
Vienna, Austria.

The negative expiratory pressure technique (NEP) has been applied in adults with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), demonstrating flow limitation in
many of these patients. Because this technique does not require patient
cooperation, it is of potential interest for application in the pediatric
population. This study was performed to test the feasibility of NEP in children, 
and to further investigate it in children with asthma and cystic fibrosis (CF).
We performed NEP (0.3-0.7 kPa) measurements in 14 healthy children (13.3 years,
+/- 2.4), in 12 children with asthma (11.7 years, +/- 3.0), and in 17 children
with CF (13.3 years, +/- 2.7). NEP-derived flow-volume loops were visually
analyzed for flow limitation at tidal breathing. In addition, expiratory flow at 
50% of tidal volume (TEF(50)) was measured. In healthy children, the intraclass
coefficient of correlation was 77%, and intraindividual short- and long-term
variability was 5.8% and 10.8%, respectively. In asthmatics, TEF(50) was lower
compared with controls, and increased after inhalation of salbutamol. However,
appropriate size-correction has still to be established. Measurement of TEF(50)
using NEP is feasible in children. Despite good reproducibility in individual
patients, the high intersubject variability may limit its usefulness as a
clinical tool. In addition, the lack of flow limitation using NEP even in
severely obstructed patients with CF warrants further investigation.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12567383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 7;301(2):267-74.

Inhibition of the TEF/TEAD transcription factor activity by nuclear calcium and
distinct kinase pathways.

Thompson M(1), Andrade VA, Andrade SJ, Pusl T, Ortega JM, Goes AM, Leite MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Federal University of Minas Gerais,
Belo Horizonte, MG 31270-901, Brazil.

Transcription enhancer factor (TEF/TEAD) is a family of four transcription
factors that share a common TEA-DNA binding domain and are involved in similar
cellular functions, such as cell differentiation and proliferation. All adult
tissues express at least one of the four TEAD genes, so this family of
transcription factors may be of widespread importance, yet little is known about 
their regulation. Here we examine the factors that regulate TEAD activity in CHO 
cells. RT-PCR indicated the presence of TEAD-1, TEAD-3, and both isoforms of
TEAD-4, but not TEAD-2. Quantitative measurements showed that TEAD-4 is most
abundant, followed by TEAD-3, then TEAD-1. We examined the relative effects of
nuclear and cytosolic Ca(2+) on TEAD activity, since TEAD proteins are localized 
to the nucleus and since free Ca(2+) within the nucleus selectively regulates
transcription in some systems. Chelation of nuclear but not cytosolic Ca(2+)
increased TEAD activity two times above control. Inhibition of mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK) also increased TEAD activity, while cAMP decreased TEAD
activity, and protein kinase C had no effect. Together, these results show that
nuclear Ca(2+), MAPK, and cAMP each negatively regulate the activity of the TEAD 
transcription factor.

PMID: 12565854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Hereditas. 2002;137(1):29-40.

Edible oil crops and their integration with the major cereals in North Shewa and 
South Welo, Central Highlands of Ethiopia: an ethnobotanical perspective.

Geleta M(1), Asfaw Z, Bekele E, Teshome A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

A total of 1050 sorghum (Sorghum bicolor) and tef (Eragrostis tef) fields
distributed in six study sites within north Shewa and south Welo (Central
Highlands of Ethiopia) were systematically surveyed to examine the status of
integration of edible oil crops into the cereal-based farming system. Farmers'
criteria for, and perception on, integration between edible oil crops and the
major cereals at field level as well as integration between the cereal grains and
the oilseeds in food making at home were studied and analyzed based on formal
semi-structured interview and informal discussion with local expert farmers as
key informants. Farmers' traditional space optimization technique has been
instrumental in rightly fitting edible oil crops (as intercrops and border crops)
into the cereal-based system. Six species of edible oil crops are integrated
(70.3%) in various proportions in fields of sorghum and tef. At least one oil
crop was significantly intercropped and/or border cropped in sorghum fields. Noog
(Guizotia abyssinica) and sesame (Sesamum indicum) were the most important edible
oil crops of the study area having strong integration with sorghum both at field 
and home level. On average, noog was more frequently intercropped with sorghum
(8.3%) than with tef (4.5%), while it was more frequently border cropped with tef
(32.4%) than with sorghum (19%). Sorghum was more frequently inter/border cropped
with sesame (39/2%) than with tef (10.1/0.5%). The stronger the integration of a 
given oilseed with sorghum-based foods, the higher the companionship between
sorghum fields and the oil crop in the landscape. This cultural practice by
farmers has positive contributions to on-farm conservation of oil crops along
with tef and specific sorghum landraces. The central theme of this paper
therefore converges on the issue of on-farm in-situ agrobiodiversity conservation
that was shaped by successive ancestral generations and passed on to the present.

PMID: 12564630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Am J Clin Nutr. 2003 Feb;77(2):371-8.

Differences in resting metabolic rate between paraplegic and able-bodied subjects
are explained by differences in body composition.

Buchholz AC(1), McGillivray CF, Pencharz PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Ontario.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the relation between body composition and
energy metabolism in paraplegia.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the relation between body composition and energy
metabolism in healthy paraplegics as compared with able-bodied control subjects. 
We hypothesized that paraplegics would have lower fat-free mass (FFM), body cell 
mass (BCM), resting metabolic rate (RMR), and thermic effect of feeding (TEF).
DESIGN: This cross-sectional study included 34 control subjects and 28
paraplegics (mean age: 29.1 +/- 7.6 and 33.9 +/- 9.2 y, respectively) with body
mass indexes (in kg/m(2)) of 23.5 +/- 1.8 and 24.3 +/- 6.0, respectively. We
measured RMR and TEF with indirect calorimetry, total body water with deuterium
dilution, and extracellular water with corrected bromide space. We calculated FFM
(total body water/0.732) and BCM [(total body water - extracellular
water)/0.732)].
RESULTS: FFM was higher in control subjects than in paraplegics (77.2 +/- 7.2%
and 69.2 +/- 8.7%, respectively; P = 0.0002), as were BCM (47.4 +/- 6.7% and 35.9
+/- 8.1%, respectively; P < 0.0001) and RMR (7016 +/- 935 and 6159 +/- 954 kJ/d, 
respectively; P = 0.0007). FFM was the single best predictor of RMR in both
groups (r(2) = 0.83 for control subjects and 0.70 for paraplegics, P < 0.0001 for
both). RMR adjusted for FFM did not differ significantly between control subjects
and paraplegics (6670 +/- 504 and 6588 +/- 501 kJ/d, respectively). TEF also did 
not differ significantly between control subjects and paraplegics (6.25 +/- 2.2% 
and 5.53 +/- 1.8% of energy intake, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: FFM, BCM, and RMR, but not obligatory TEF, are lower in paraplegics 
than in control subjects. RMR does not differ between control and paraplegic
subjects after adjustment for FFM, indicating similar metabolic activity in the
fat-free compartment of the body.

PMID: 12540396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Am J Bot. 2003 Jan;90(1):116-22. doi: 10.3732/ajb.90.1.116.

The origin and evolution of Eragrostis tef (Poaceae) and related polyploids:
evidence from nuclear waxy and plastid rps16.

Ingram AL(1), Doyle JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cornell University, L. H. Bailey Hortorium, 462 Mann Library, Ithaca, New York
14853 USA.

Tef (Eragrostis tef; Poaceae) is an allotetraploid (2n = 4x = 40) cereal crop
whose origin within the large genus Eragrostis is unknown. Previous studies have 
suggested a total of 14 wild Eragrostis species as potential progenitors.
Phylogenetic analysis of sequence data from the nuclear gene waxy and the plastid
locus rps16 strongly supports the widely held hypothesis of a close relationship 
between tef and E. pilosa, a wild allotetraploid. Eragrostis heteromera, another 
previously proposed progenitor, is shown by the waxy data to be a close relative 
of one of the tef genomes. Other putative progenitors included in the taxon
sample are not supported as closely related to tef. Plastid sequences from five
varieties of tef and four E. pilosa accessions are identical and therefore are
uninformative with respect to the question of multiple origins of these
polyploids. The waxy phylogeny also resolves the relationships among other
allopolyploids, supporting a close relationship between the morphologically
similar allotetraploids E. macilenta, E. minor, and E. mexicana. Eragrostis
cilianensis, another morphologically similar allopolyploid, appears to have
shared one diploid progenitor with these species but derived its other genome
from an unrelated diploid.

PMID: 21659086  [PubMed]


484. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 21;278(8):6404-10. Epub 2002 Nov 27.

Tat and trans-activation-responsive (TAR) RNA-independent induction of HIV-1 long
terminal repeat by human and murine cyclin T1 requires Sp1.

Yedavalli VS(1), Benkirane M, Jeang KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Section, Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, National
Institutes of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0460, USA.

P-TEFb, cyclin T1 + CDK9, is needed for the expression of cellular promoters and 
primate lentiviral long terminal repeats (LTRs). Curiously, cellular and
lentiviral promoters differ dramatically in the requirements for positive
transcriptional elongation factor (P-TEF) b activity. Lentiviral LTRs, but not
cellular promoters, need an RNA-associated P-TEFb/Tat/TAR
(trans-activation-responsive) RNA ternary complex. Ternary complex defective
murine cycT1 is apparently inactive for lentiviral transcription. Why P-TEFb
requires Tat/TAR for LTRs but not for cellular promoters remains unknown. To
explore this question, we sought to determine whether DNA targeting of murine and
human cyclin T1 can reconstitute a Tat/TAR-independent activity to the HIV-1 LTR.
In the absence of Tat and TAR, we found that both HuCycT1 and MuCycT1 can
robustly activate the HIV-1 LTR. We further showed that Sp1 is necessary and
sufficient for this DNA-targeted activity. Thus, like cellular promoters, HIV-1
LTR can use P-TEFb function without a Tat/TAR RNA complex. This activity could
explain recent findings of robust HIV-1 replication in rat cells that cannot form
a P-TEFb/Tat/TAR moiety.

PMID: 12458222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Mar;284(3):C738-48. Epub 2002 Nov 20.

Transcriptional regulation of the type I myosin heavy chain gene in denervated
rat soleus.

Huey KA(1), Haddad F, Qin AX, Baldwin KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of California, Irvine
92697, USA.

Denervation (DEN) of rat soleus is associated with a decreased expression of slow
type I myosin heavy chain (MHC) and an increased expression of the faster MHC
isoforms. The molecular mechanisms behind these shifts remain unclear. We first
investigated endogenous transcriptional activity of the type I MHC gene in normal
and denervated soleus muscles via pre-mRNA analysis. Our results suggest that the
type I MHC gene is regulated via transcriptional processes in the denervated
soleus. Deletion and mutational analysis of the rat type I MHC promoter was then 
used to identify cis elements or regions of the promoter involved in this
response. DEN significantly decreased in vivo activity of the -3,500, -2,500,
-914, -408, -299, and -215 bp type I MHC promoters, relative to the
alpha-skeletal actin promoter. In contrast, normalized -171 promoter activity was
unchanged. Mutation of the betae3 element (-214/-190) in the -215 promoter and
deletion of this element (-171 promoter) blunted type I downregulation with DEN. 
In contrast, betae3 mutation in the -408 promoters was not effective in
attenuating the DEN response, suggesting the existence of additional
DEN-responsive sites between -408 and -215. Western blotting and gel mobility
supershift assays demonstrated decreased expression and DNA binding of
transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) with DEN, suggesting that this decrease
may contribute to type I MHC downregulation in denervated muscle.

PMID: 12444021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2002 Sep;37(9):542-5.

[Expression of lethal gene mRNA on placenta villi in patients with spontaneous
abortion].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang Y(1), Lin Q, Wang X, Lu P, Sheng Z, Ding C, Hong Y, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Renji Hospital, Second Medical
College in Shanghai, Shanghai 200001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of lethal gene: including retinoic X receptor
(RXR)alpha, N-myc and transcript enhancer factor (TEF)-1 in human spontaneous
abortion.
METHODS: The levels of RXRalpha, N-myc and TEF-1 mRNA expression on placenta
villi from 38 spontaneous abortion women and 33 normal early pregnant women were 
examined by reverse transcription, polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: (1) The levels of RXRalpha mRNA on placenta villi from the abortion
group were significantly decreased as compared with those from normal group (0.4 
+/- 0.3 versus 0.6 +/- 0.3, P < 0.05); There were no significant differences in
the levels of N-myc mRNA expression between the abortion group and normal group
(2.1 +/- 1.2 versus 2.2 +/- 0.9, P > 0.05). The levels of TEF-1 mRNA on placenta 
from abortion group were significantly lower than those from normal group (1.6
+/- 1.1, 2.3 +/- 1.2, P < 0.05); (2) The levels of RXR alpha mRNA, TEF-1 mRNA in 
recurrent abortion group were significantly lower than those from non-recurrent
group (0.3 +/- 0.2 versus 0.6 +/- 0.4, P < 0.05, 1.0 +/- 1.1 versus 1.9 +/- 1.2, 
P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: It was suggested that the lower expression of RXR alpha mRNA, TEF-1
mRNA may play an important role in the pathogenesis of spontaneous abortion
especially in recurrent abortion.

PMID: 12411016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Eur Surg Res. 2002 Nov-Dec;34(6):405-10.

Esophageal, tracheal and pulmonary parenchymal alterations in experimental
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. A histological and morphometric
study.

Otcu S(1), Kaya M, Ozturk H, Buyukbayram H, Dokucu AI, Onen A, Yucesan S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Dicle University, Medical School, Diyarbakir,
Turkey. sotcu@dicle.edu.tr

Pulmonary complications are among the most important causes of morbidity and
mortality in neonates with esophageal atresia and tracheofistula. We aimed to
investigate the possible causes of respiratory complications encountered in
esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in an experimental
model. Sprague-Dawley fetal rats treated with adriamycin were used for the
experiment. Time mated pregnant rats were given 1.75 mg/kg of adriamicyn
intraperitoneally on days 6-9 of gestation. The fetuses were sacrificed on day
21, weighed, and dissected under the surgical microscope. The animals were
divided into four groups: (1) control group; (2) saline-injected group; (3)
adriamycin-induced EA group, and (4) adriamycin administered but without
development of EA. The lungs, esophagus, and trachea were excised and underwent
histological examination. The mucosa of distal esophagus was thickened (p <
0.05); the submucosa was thinner (p < 0.05); and the muscular layer was thickened
(p < 0.05) in fetuses with EA and TEF. In adriamycin-treated rats, in which EA
and TEF developed, tracheal cartilage was loosened and formed into a D or C
shape. The cartilage was fragmented into several segments on transverse sections 
in most fetuses. Alveolar septa were thin in lungs of fetus with EA and TEF (p < 
0.05), without any fibrosis or evidence of parenchymal abnormality
microscopically. Our findings suggest that respiratory complications may
contribute to structural lesions in the trachea and particularly in the distal
esophagus but not in the pulmonary parenchyma itself.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12403939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2003 Jan;284(1):H193-203. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Regulation of the S100B gene by alpha 1-adrenergic stimulation in cardiac
myocytes.

Tsoporis JN(1), Marks A, Van Eldik LJ, O'Hanlon D, Parker TG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The Toronto General Hospital
Research Institute, University of Toronto, Ontario M5G 1L6, Canada.

We previously reported that S100B, a 20-kDa Ca(2+)-binding homodimer, inhibited
the postinfarct myocardial hypertrophic response mediated by alpha(1)-adrenergic 
stimulation through the protein kinase C (PKC) signaling pathway. In the present 
study, we examined whether the same pathway induced the S100B gene, supporting
the hypothesis that S100B is a feedback negative regulator of this pathway. We
transfected cultured neonatal rat cardiac myocytes with a luciferase reporter
gene driven by the maximal human S100B promoter and progressively shorter
segments of this promoter sequentially deleted from the 5' end. We identified a
basic promoter essential for transcription spanning 162 bp upstream of the
transcription initiation site and positive (at -782/-162 and -6,689/-4,463) and
negative (at -4,463/-782) myocyte-selective regulatory elements. We showed that
the basic and maximal S100B promoters were activated specifically by
alpha(1)-adrenergic agonists through the alpha(1A)-adrenergic receptor, but not
by any other trophic hormonal stimuli. The activation of the S100B promoter was
mediated through the PKC signaling pathway. Transcription enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1) and related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1) influenced transcription from the maximal, 
but not the basic, promoter implicating active MCAT elements upstream from the
basic promoter. Acting in opposing fashions, TEF-1 transrepressed the S100B
promoter and RTEF-1 transactivated the promoter. Our results suggest that
alpha(1)-adrenergic stimulation induces the S100B gene after myocardial
infarction through the PKC signaling pathway and that this induction is modulated
by TEF-1 and RTEF-1.

PMID: 12388300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Dec;283(6):C1761-75. Epub 2002 Aug 22.

Divergence in species and regulatory role of beta -myosin heavy chain proximal
promoter muscle-CAT elements.

Tsika RW(1), McCarthy J, Karasseva N, Ou Y, Tsika GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA. tsikar@missouri.edu

We examined the functional role of distinct muscle-CAT (MCAT) elements during
non-weight-bearing (NWB) regulation of a wild-type 293-base pair beta-myosin
heavy chain (beta MyHC) transgene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)
revealed decreased NTEF-1, poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, and Max binding at the
human distal MCAT element when using NWB soleus vs. control soleus nuclear
extract. Compared with the wild-type transgene, expression assays revealed that
distal MCAT element mutation decreased basal transgene expression, which was
decreased further in response to NWB. EMSA analysis of the human proximal MCAT
(pMCAT) element revealed low levels of NTEF-1 binding that did not differ between
control and NWB extract, whereas the rat pMCAT element displayed robust NTEF-1
binding that decreased when using NWB soleus extracts. Differences in binding
between human and rat pMCAT elements were consistent whether using rat or mouse
nuclear extract or in vitro synthesized human TEF-1 proteins. Our results provide
the first evidence that 1) different binding properties and likely regulatory
functions are served by the human and rat pMCAT elements, and 2) previously
unrecognized beta MyHC proximal promoter elements contribute to NWB regulation.

PMID: 12388056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Gene. 2002 Sep 4;297(1-2):1-9.

Alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of the cardiac ankyrin repeat protein gene in
cardiac myocytes.

Maeda T(1), Sepulveda J, Chen HH, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Cardiac ankyrin repeat protein (CARP) is a nuclear transcription cofactor that is
activated by multiple signaling pathways in hypertrophic cardiac myocytes. Since 
CARP has been reported to be a transcriptional co-repressor, its activation
during hypertrophy might contribute to the deregulation of gene expression
leading to heart failure. Here, we found that alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling
activates CARP mRNA expression in rat cardiac myocytes. To examine how
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling activates the CARP gene, a 660 bp fragment of the
mouse CARP promoter was cloned. Previous reports suggested that the mouse CARP
promoter was dependent on the GATA4 transcription factor whereas the human CARP
promoter was dependent on transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). TEF-1 and
GATA4 transcription factors, known mediators of alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling,
bound to the mouse CARP promoter at several sites as determined by gel mobility
shift assays. These sites are highly conserved between the mouse and human
promoters, suggesting that they are functionally important in both. Mutation
analysis showed that binding of TEF-1 factors is required for basal activity of
the CARP promoter in cardiac myocytes. However, over-expression of TEF-1 factors 
could not potentiate the response of the CARP promoter to alpha(1)-adrenergic
stimulation. On the other hand, the alpha(1)-adrenergic response was potentiated 
by GATA4 over-expression. Taken together, our results demonstrate that
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling regulates CARP expression in cardiac myocytes, in
part through the transcription factor GATA4.

PMID: 12384280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 13;277(50):48889-98. Epub 2002 Oct 9.

Mammalian vestigial-like 2, a cofactor of TEF-1 and MEF2 transcription factors
that promotes skeletal muscle differentiation.

Maeda T(1), Chapman DL, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Expression of many skeletal muscle-specific genes depends on TEF-1 (transcription
enhancer factor-1) and MEF2 transcription factors. In Drosophila, the TEF-1
homolog Scalloped interacts with the cofactor Vestigial to drive differentiation 
of the wing and indirect flight muscles. Here, we identify three mammalian
vestigial-like genes, Vgl-1, Vgl-2, and Vgl-3, that share homology in a TEF-1
interaction domain. Vgl-1 and Vgl-3 transcripts are enriched in the placenta,
whereas Vgl-2 is expressed in the differentiating somites and branchial arches
during embryogenesis and is skeletal muscle-specific in the adult. During muscle 
differentiation, Vgl-2 mRNA levels increase and Vgl-2 protein translocates from
the cytoplasm to the nucleus. In situ hybridization revealed co-expression of
Vgl-2 with myogenin in the differentiating muscle of embryonic myotomes but not
in newly formed somites prior to muscle differentiation. Like Vgl-1, Vgl-2
interacts with TEF-1. In addition, we show that Vgl-2 interacts with MEF2 in a
mammalian two-hybrid assay and that Vgl-2 selectively binds to MEF2 in vitro.
Co-expression of Vgl-2 with MEF2 markedly co-activates an MEF2-dependent promoter
through its MEF2 element. Overexpression of Vgl-2 in MyoD-transfected 10T(1/2)
cells markedly increased myosin heavy chain expression, a marker of terminal
muscle differentiation. These results identify Vgl-2 as an important new
component of the myogenic program.

PMID: 12376544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Chemosphere. 2002 Oct;49(2):161-72.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, polychlorinated dibenzofurans and non-ortho,
mono-ortho chlorine substituted biphenyls in Japanese human liver and adipose
tissue.

Takenaka S(1), Todaka T, Nakamura M, Hori T, Iida T, Yamada T, Hata J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Hygiene, Fukuoka Institute of Health and Environmental
Sciences, Dazaifu, Japan. takenaka@fihes.pref.fukuoka.jp

We measured PCDDs/DFs levels in Japanese human livers and adipose tissues in
1999, and TEQ were calculated with WHO TEF. The mean total levels of PCDDs/DFs in
livers and adipose tissues were 57 pg TEQ/g on a lipid basis and 49 pg TEQ/g on a
lipid basis, respectively. 1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDD, 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDD, OCDD,
2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF, 1,2,3,4,7,8-HxCDF, 1,2,3,6,7,8-HxCDF, 2,3,4,6,7,8-HxCDF,
1,2,3,7,8,9-HxCDF and 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-HpCDF concentrations in livers considerably
differed from those in 1989 (p < 0.05). The mean non-ortho-chlorine substituted
biphenyls levels showed 20 pg TEQ/g on a lipid basis and 17 pg TEQ/g on a lipid
basis in livers and adipose tissues, respectively. In livers, the mean of
3,3',4,4'-TCB concentrations was 131 pg/g on a lipid basis, and 7.7-fold higher
than that in 1989. The mean total mono-ortho-chlorine substituted biphenyls level
was 13.0 pg TEQ/g on a lipid basis in livers and 21.6 pg TEQ/g on a lipid basis
in adipose tissues. 3,3',4,4',5-PeCB and 3,3',4,4',5,5'-HxCB levels decreased in 
adipose tissues, and 3,3',4,4',5-PeCB level only decreased in livers. PCDDs,
PCDFs, and mono- and non-ortho-chlorine substituted biphenyls levels may have
decreased in livers and adipose tissues because of a governmental policy on
dioxins discharge for the decade. Then, we estimated the correlations of PCDDs,
PCDFs and the related compound levels between livers and adipose tissues. The
correlative PCDDs congeners may have had a similar behavior to that between liver
and adipose tissue. On the contrary, most PCDFs isomers may have different
behavior between liver and adipose tissue, while 2',3,4,4',5-PeCB (IUPAC No. 123)
may also have a different behavior between liver and adipose tissue.

PMID: 12375863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Curr Protein Pept Sci. 2001 Sep;2(3):245-59.

Life and death in the placenta: new peptides and genes regulating human
syncytiotrophoblast and extravillous cytotrophoblast lineage formation and
renewal.

Morrish DW(1), Dakour J, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, 362 Heritage Medical Research
Center, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2S2, Canada. dmorrish@gpu.srv.ualberta.ca

Differential techniques have revealed several novel genes and peptides involved
in trophoblast development including PL74/gdf15/MIC-1, a TGFbeta family cytokine 
that controls apoptosis and differentiation, PL48, a new serine-threonine protein
kinase, serum and glucocorticoid-induced kinase, PBK-1, a tunicamycin-responsive 
gene, a cathepsin D-like gene (DAP-1) and hypoxia- regulated genes HRF-1,2,6,8
and HIF-1alpha, HIF-1beta, and hEPAS-1. Syncytin, a cell fusion- inducing gene,
has been cloned from placenta where it regulates cell fusion. ERV-3 has also been
demonstrated to promote cell fusion. These two genes represent the first
demonstrated functions of endogenous retroviral sequences in human tissues.
Endoglin, PlGF, TGFbeta3, IGF-II, IGFBP-1, and a placental IGFBP protease have
found new roles in regulating cytotrophoblast proliferation and invasiveness. A
specific placental p105 rasGAP protein has been identified. The homeobox genes
DLX4, HB24, MSX2 and MOX2 also likely play a role in development at the
epithelial-mesenchymal boundary. Transcription factors such as TEF-5, Hand1, HEB,
HASH-2 and two genes represented by ESTs may have regulatory roles in placental
development. Evidence suggests that the placenta has an unusual two-cell system
for apoptosis regulation in which the cytotrophoblast may direct later apoptotic 
events in the syncytium, and with syncytialization possibly triggered by the
"phosphatidylserine flip". Thus, the placenta is both a rich source of new
growth-regulatory substances, and a model system for originating new paradigms of
developmental biology.

PMID: 12369935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Hereditas. 2002;136(2):116-25.

Variation and inter-relationships of quantitative traits in tef (Eragrostis tef
(Zucc.) Trotter) germplasm from western and southern Ethiopia.

Assefa K(1), Tefera H, Merker A.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Crop Science, P.O. 
Box 44, SE-230 53, Alnarp, Sweden. kebebew.assefa@vv.slu.se

Three thousand tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter) lines representing 60
germplasm populations from western and southern Ethiopia were sown on pellic
Vertisols at Debre Zeit Agricultural Research Center during the 1999/2000 main
season. The objectives were to assess the variation with respect to regions and
altitude zones of origin and to study the inter-relationships of 17 pheno-morphic
and agronomic traits. The populations showed significant (p < or = 0.05) regional
variation in 10 (59%) of the quantitative traits, but clinal variation among
altitude zones was significant (p < or = 0.05) only for six (35%) of the traits. 
On the other hand, the populations revealed consistent variation (p < or = 0.05) 
within both regions and altitude zones in all the traits evaluated. Likewise, the
variation among lines within populations of both regions and altitude zones was
significant (p < or = 0.05) in most of the traits. The number of characters
showing substantial correlation depicted regional and clinal variation mainly
depending on the number of populations. Based on the mean of the populations,
grain yield panicle and shoot phytomass plant showed negative correlation with
harvest index, and positive correlation with most of the remaining traits.
Individual plant grain yield was positively correlated with all the other traits 
except harvest index, days to maturity, grain filling period and number of
primary panicle branches. Overall, the tef germplasm populations showed
substantial phenotypic variation which can be utilized in the genetic improvement
of the crop.

PMID: 12369096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Comput Biol Med. 2002 Nov;32(6):445-53.

Comparison of FFT and adaptive ARMA methods in transcranial Doppler signals
recorded from the cerebral vessels.

Güler I(1), Hardalaç F, Kaymaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, 06500 Teknikokullar, Ankara, Turkey.
igueler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this work, transcranial Doppler signals recorded from the temporal region of
the brain on 35 patients were transferred to a personal computer by using a
16-bit sound card. Fast Fourier transform and adaptive auto regressive-moving
average (A-ARMA) methods were applied to transcranial Doppler frequencies
obtained from the middle cerebral artery in the temporal region. Spectral
analyses were obtained to compare both methods for medical diagnoses. The
sonograms obtained using A-ARMA method give better results for spectral
resolution than the FFT method. The sonograms of A-ARMA method offer net envelope
and better imaging, so that the determination of blood flow and brain pressure
can be calculated more accurately. All diseases show higher resistance to flow
than controls with no difference between males and females. Whereas values
between disease classes differed, resistance within each class was remarkably
constant.

PMID: 12356494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Comput Biol Med. 2002 Nov;32(6):435-44.

Application of FFT analyzed cardiac Doppler signals to fuzzy algorithm.

Güler I(1), Hardalaç F, Barisçi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, 06500, Ankara, Teknikokullar, Turkey.
igueler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

Doppler signals, recorded from the output of tricuspid, mitral, and aorta valves 
of 60 patients, were transferred to a personal computer via 16-bit sound card.
The fast Fourier transform (FFT) method was applied to the recorded signal from
each patient. Since FFT method inherently cannot offer a good spectral resolution
at highly turbulent blood flows, it sometimes leads to wrong interpretation of
cardiac Doppler signals. In order to avoid this problem, firstly six known
diseased heart signals such as hypertension, mitral stenosis, mitral failure,
tricuspid stenosis, aorta stenosis, aorta insufficiency were introduced to fuzzy 
algorithm. Then, the unknown heart diseases from 15 patients were applied to the 
same fuzzy algorithm in order to detect the kinds of diseases. It is observed
that the fuzzy algorithm gives true results for detecting the kind of diseases.

PMID: 12356493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Comput Biol Med. 2002 Nov;32(6):419-34.

Determination of Behcet disease with the application of FFT and AR methods.

Güler I(1), Hardalaç F, Ubeyli ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, 06500 Teknikokullar, Ankara, Turkey.
igueler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this study, Doppler signals recorded from ophthalmic artery of 86 patients
were processed by personal computer using fast Fourier transform, Burg
autoregressive (AR), and least-squares AR methods. By using these spectrum
analysis techniques, the variations in the shape of the Doppler spectrums as a
function of time were presented in the form of sonograms in order to obtain
medical information. These sonograms were then used to compare the applied
methods in terms of their frequency resolution and the effects in determination
of Behcet disease.

PMID: 12356492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Food Addit Contam. 2002 Aug;19(8):770-8.

Intake estimation of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans (PCDD/Fs)
and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in salmon: the inclusion of uncertainty.

Smith GC(1), Hart AD, Rose MD, MacArthur R, Fernandes A, White S, Moore DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Central Science
Laboratory, Sand Hutton, York YO41 1LZ, UK.

Dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs are given toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) in order 
to calculate the combined toxic equivalence (TEQ) of these contaminants in a
sample of food. This study calculates the probability of an average consumer
exceeding the recommended tolerable daily intake of 1-4 pg WHO-TEQ kg(-1) bw
day(-1) as the amount of salmon in the diet is increased. Probabilistic risk
analysis is used to account for the known uncertainties in this calculation. When
the TEF uncertainty was excluded with no salmon consumption, the background
dietary intake ranged from 1.36 to 1.78 pg TEQ kg(-1) bw day(-1). A weekly
consumption of three standard salmon portions resulted in a 36% chance of
exceeding the upper limit of the TDI. Inclusion of the TEF uncertainty increased 
the background dietary intake range from 2.1 to 4.4 pg TEQ kg(-1) bw day(-1), and
the weekly consumption of one salmon portion resulted in a 79% chance of the
average consumer exceeding the upper TDI. The most important factors contributing
to the uncertainty in these results were, in order of magnitude, the TEF for PCB 
126 and the sampling uncertainty (sample size) followed by the measurement
uncertainty of PCB 126. We recommend that it is more important to increase sample
size and produce more precise estimates in the TEF than to improve analytical
accuracy.

PMID: 12227941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen. 2002;22(5):377-83.

Blocking the translation elongation factor-1 delta with its antisense mRNA
results in a significant reversal of its oncogenic potential.

Lei YX(1), Chen JK, Wu ZL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Carcinogenesis, Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China. ybl3@cdc.gov

In spite of the strong evidence for the carcinogenic activity of cadmium and its 
related compounds, the underlying molecular mechanisms that lead to malignant
transformation in cells exposed to cadmium remain unknown. Recently, Joseph et
al. [J. Biol. Chem. 227:6131-6136, 2002] have identified, cloned, and
characterized the mouse Translation Elongation Factor-1 delta sub-unit (TEF-1
delta, GenBank Accession Number AF304351) as a novel cadmium-responsive
proto-oncogene. Presently, additional studies regarding the oncogenic potential
of TEF-1 delta have been carried out. Transfection of NIH3T3 cells with the
pcDNA3.1 expression vector containing the TEF-1 delta cDNA in the sense (5'-->3')
orientation resulted in overexpression of the encoded 31 kDa protein.
Transfection-mediated overexpression of TEF-1 delta protein resulted in
transformation of the cells as evidenced from the appearance of transformed foci.
Cotransfection of the cells with a mixture of plasmid DNA consisting of TEF-1
delta cDNA in the sense (5'-->3') and in the antisense (3'-->5') orientation
resulted in significant inhibition of translation of the TEF-1 delta protein.
Antisense TEF-1 delta mRNA-mediated inhibition of translation of TEF-1 delta
protein, furthermore, resulted in inhibition of TEF-1 delta-mediated
transformation of NIH3T3 cells as evidenced from the decrease in the number of
transformed foci. These results further confirm that overexpression of TEF-1
delta is oncogenic and the antisense TEF-1 delta mRNA expression reverses its
oncogenic potential.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Sep 6;296(5):1279-85.

TEF-1 transcription factors regulate activity of the mouse mammary tumor virus
LTR.

Maeda T(1), Maeda M, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, BST
1704.3, 200 Lothrop Street, 15213, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat (LTR) is a potent
transcriptional enhancer. We identified several putative binding sites for the
TEF-1 family of transcription factors (TEF-1, RTEF-1, DTEF-1, and ETF) in the
proximal negative regulatory element of the LTR. Gel mobility shift assays
revealed strong TEF-1 factor binding to one site using nuclear extracts from CV-1
cells and from the human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. Mutation of this site
increased basal activity of the LTR. In transient transfection assays, TEF-1
squelched the basal LTR activity and completely abrogated the response to the
glucocorticoid dexamethasone. RTEF-1 and DTEF-1 had little effect on the basal
activity, whereas ETF activated the LTR. These TEF-1 factors also interfered with
the response to dexamethasone. Taken together, our results reveal an important
new role for TEF-1 factors in regulating MMTV LTR activity and suggest that TEF-1
factors might participate in mammary tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12207913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Nutr Rev. 2002 Aug;60(8):223-33.

The thermic effect of food and obesity: discrepant results and methodological
variations.

Granata GP(1), Brandon LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Performance and Health Promotion, University of New
Orleans, LA 70148, USA.

Comment in
    Nutr Rev. 2002 Sep;60(9):295-7; author reply 299-300.

Studies have yielded discrepant results concerning whether the thermic effect of 
food (TEF) is reduced in obesity. Methodological variations among published
studies make understanding the discrepant results very difficult. Although
methodological differences are often noted as contributing to the discrepant
results, little work has been done to address these differences and standardize
experimental protocols. This paper reviews 50 studies that have investigated TEF 
in obesity and focuses on factors related to experimental protocol and subject
control that reportedly affect measurements of resting energy expenditure,
postprandial energy expenditure, and the calculation of TEF.

PMID: 12199298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Pediatr Med Chir. 2002 Jul-Aug;24(4):297-301.

Bronchoscopy in newborns with esophageal atresia.

Pigna A(1), Gentili A, Landuzzi V, Lima M, Baroncini S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Unit, S. Orsola Malpighi
University, Hospital, Via Albertoni, 19/2, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
picu@orsola-malpighi.med.unibo.it

The aim was to evaluate the influence of rigid laryngotracheo-bronchoscopy in
newborns with oesophageal atresia (OA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF) in
preventing complications, improving diagnosis and surgical treatment. Among 76
consecutive newborns, received in the Paediatric Intensive Care Unit (PICU) from 
January 1990 to September 2001 with prenatal o perinatal suspected OA, forty-five
had one or more other congenital anomalies. They were divided in I Montreal's
risk group for 73.7% (56) and in the II one for 26.3% (20). Endoscopic procedure 
was performed in the operating room with Storz's rigid ventilating bronchoscope
just before surgery, in all babies. With bronchoscopic examination we were able
to identify the level, number and size of TOF and to visualise anatomical
variants in 76 children. 15 children with OA had a gasless abdomen, but an upper 
pouch fistula was found only in three cases. In another four cases bronchoscopy
confirmed the diagnosis of an "H" fistula and cervical surgical approach was
established. One case had only oesophageal stenosis. 56 patients had fistula in
lower pouch and in the last 38 cases we proceeded with selective transtracheal
fistula incannulation and then we provided gastric drainage. One quadriforcation,
2 triforcations, 3 aberrant right upper lobe bronchi, 1 congential subglottic
stenosis and 1 associated with a congenital subglottic stenosis and 1 left main
bronchus agenesia were detected. No complications were correlated to the
procedure and no babies had early pneumonia. Continuous feeding was achieved in
70 out of 76 patients: 46 primary anastomosis with 12 staged repairs (OA I and II
type long gap), 4 resections of TEF, 8 oesophagocoloplasty. Nine babies (11.8%)
did not survive. Clinical follow-up was possible in all the survivors. Mortality 
rate in the high-risk patients with OA remains high because of the many
complications that may occur. Tracheal endoscopy is useful in improving the
diagnostic approach and to prevent pulmonary complications. Fistula incannulation
minimizes the risk of gastric distension and its detrimental effect on
ventilation, helping the surgeon to identify TEF easily and quickly. Moreover,
the endoscopic approach offers obvious advantages for the anaesthesiologist and
the surgeon and has proven, in our experience, to be effective.

PMID: 12197089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Ann Thorac Surg. 2002 Aug;74(2):315-9.

Surgical treatment of tracheomalacia by bronchoscopic monitored aortopexy in
infants and children.

Abdel-Rahman U(1), Ahrens P, Fieguth HG, Kitz R, Heller K, Moritz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-University, Frankfurt/Main, Germany. abdel-rahman@gmx.de

BACKGROUND: Aortopexy has become an established surgical procedure for the
treatment of severe tracheomalacia (TM) in infancy. However, postoperative
outcome may be improved by intraoperative bronchoscopic control of the aortopexy.
METHODS: Between 1992 and 2000, 16 infants and children (2 female, 14 male) with 
TM were treated by pexis of the aorta via a right (15 patients) or left (1
patient) anterior thoracotomy. Patients age ranged from 4 to 122 months (mean, 26
mon). Three infants had previous surgery for esophagus atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula. Another four patients were operated for
gastroesophageal reflux. In all cases, the aortopexy was monitored
intraoperatively by bronchoscopy. Respiratory function was verified for each
patient by comparing pre- and postoperative tidal expiratory flow values (TEF 25%
in ml/sec).
RESULTS: Mean follow-up was 36 months (range, 2 to 60 mo). There was no
intraoperative or postoperative mortality. 13 patients showed permanent relief of
symptoms. Postoperative median TEF 25% increased significantly compared with
preoperative values (81 ml/sec vs. 56 ml/sec; p = 0.016). In one patient repeat
aortopexy was necessary.
CONCLUSIONS: Aortopexy through a right anterior thoracotomy is an efficient and
feasible method in the surgical treatment of TM in infancy and, therefore, can
improve postoperative respiratory function. Intraoperative bronchoscopy is
advantageous.

PMID: 12173806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Ultrasonics. 2002 May;40(1-8):853-8.

Evaluation of diffraction errors in precise pulse-echo measurements of ultrasound
velocity in chambers with waveguide.

Kazys R(1), Mazeika L, Barauskas R, Jasiuniene E, Daniulaitis V.

Author information: 
(1)Ultrasound Institute, Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania.
rkazys@tef.ktu.lt

Ultrasound velocity measurements in medicine and biology usually are performed
using relatively small measurement chambers. When the pulse-echo method is used, 
the presence of the reflector close to the transducer can cause essential
diffraction errors. These errors may be reduced using an additional buffer rod as
a waveguide between the transducer and the measurement chamber. The objective of 
the presented work was analysis of diffraction errors in measurement chambers
with a buffer rod. The work was performed in two steps. In the first stage
propagation of transient ultrasonic waves in a buffer rod was analysed using an
axisymmetric finite element model. This approach enables all dimensions of the
measurement chamber and the waveguide to be taken into account, but is less
accurate in the time domain. In the second step the absolute values of
diffraction errors were evaluated using a mixed analytic-numeric disk shaped
transducer diffraction model. In this case only the dimensions of the waveguide
and measurement chamber along the wave propagation direction were taken into
account. Diffraction errors were calculated by simulating small changes of
ultrasound velocity in the liquid under investigation. The simulation performed
allowed optimisation of the dimensions of the measurement chamber and a buffer
rod thus minimising measurement errors.

PMID: 12160058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Ultrasonics. 2002 May;40(1-8):823-7.

New method of spatial superposition of attenuated waves for ultrasound field
modelling.

Jurkonis R(1), Lukosevicius A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Kaunas University of Technology,
Lithuania. ryjur@tef.ktu.lt

The objective of this work is the contrary issues of ultrasonic diagnostics in
medicine when modern requirements for resolution are in conflict with strict
safety issues. There is only one way to make progress by starting to take into
account the attenuation in biological tissues and the wave diffraction phenomena.
The aim of this work is to develop the flexible ultrasound field model
implemented in routine algorithms of digital signal processing. The method
consists of the calculation of plane wave propagation and the calculation of an
ultrasound signal field. On the basis of the spatial impulse response of an
aperture for calculation of space-spread ultrasound signals and the spectrum
decomposition method for modelling plane wave propagation in lossy media, the
modified method of spatial superposition of attenuated waves was developed. Using
the method of equidistant line calculation the time and frequency features of the
ultrasound signal field caused by the geometry and dynamics of the aperture, the 
attenuation and velocity dispersion in the medium are determined. The method was 
successfully applied to the investigation of the system for intracranial media
monitoring, where a new measurement channel based on the changes of attenuation
and dispersion in intracranial medium has been implemented.

PMID: 12160052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Ultrasonics. 2002 May;40(1-8):397-402.

Determination of spatial position of multiple targets by ultrasonic binaural
method.

Kazys R(1), Mazeika L.

Author information: 
(1)Ultrasound Institute, Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania.
rkazys@tef.ktu.lt

The binaural technique used in ultrasonic sonars has a higher performance speed
in comparison with a mechanically scanned ultrasonic beam, however, in presence
of multiple targets meets a very serious ambiguity problem. In this case the
number of targets detected exceeds the actual number of targets, e.g., there are 
additional non-existing targets found. Objective of this research was development
of a simulation tool enabling to model multi-channel sonar in the environment
with multiple targets of arbitrary geometry and development of robust signal
processing procedures, suitable for detection of multiple targets from the data
collected using the binaural method. The developed software enables to simulate
operation of multi-channel sonar in an environment with multiple reflectors and
predict a time history of the reflected signals. The novel algorithm for
separation of real targets from the virtual ones in presence of multiple targets 
has been developed. Performance of the proposed algorithm was investigated both
in the simulated and a real environment. The results obtained indicate a
significant improvement of the sonar performance.

PMID: 12159973  [PubMed]


7. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 Aug;37(8):1205-7.

Horseshoe lung in association with other foregut anomalies: what is the
significance?

Wales PW(1), Drab SA, Connolly B, Kim PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatric General Surgery and Department of Diagnostic Imaging,
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The authors present an unusual constellation of foregut anomalies in a newborn
boy including horseshoe lung, esophageal atresia (EA) with distal
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation
(CCAM), esophagobronchial fistulae, and a preduodenal pancreas. Horseshoe lung is
a rare congenital anomaly in which the left and right lung bases are fused across
the posterior mediastinum. The presentation is variable. The association of
horseshoe lung with VACTERL anomalies and Bronchopulmonary foregut malformations 
is reviewed.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12149704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Chemosphere. 2002 Jun;47(10):1087-95.

Congener-distribution patterns and risk assessment of polychlorinated biphenyls, 
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in Korean human milk.

Yang YH(1), Chang YS, Kim BH, Shin DC, Ikonomou MG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science 
and Technology, Namgu, South Korea.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and biphenyls
(PCBs) were analyzed by high-resolution gas chromatography/high-resolution mass
spectrometry in human milk samples from an urban and an industrial area in Korea.
All PCB congeners were analyzed to characterize the congener distribution as well
as to evaluate the toxic equivalent quotient (TEQ) values and the total
concentration. In homologue distributions of PCBs, two distinct patterns were
found. The mean concentrations of PCDD/Fs and PCBs were 15.13 and 5.64 TEQ pg/g
fat (based on WHO TEF, 1997), respectively. The contamination in Korean human
milk is comparable to that found in other countries. From these results a daily
intake of 60 TEQ pg/kg/day for an infant was estimated. The assumptions were that
the infant breast feeds for 1 year, has an average body weight of 10 kg during
this period, and ingests 800 g/day of human milk containing a mean concentration 
of 20.84 TEQ (PCDD/Fs) pg/g fat (based on primipara mothers).

PMID: 12137042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Perinat Med. 2002;30(3):265-8.

Sudden intractable respiratory failure in extremely low birth weight infants with
H-type tracheoesophageal fistula.

Hosono S(1), Fuyama Y, Ohno T, Kishimoto H, Ogawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Saitama Children's Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
hosonos@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

A fatality from a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in two extremely low birth
weight infants is presented. The sudden onset of intractable respiratory failure 
accompanied by the absence of chest movement and breathing sounds was observed.
The typical clinical symptoms were concealed because the infants required
mechanical ventilation and nasogastric feedings. When ventilated infants with
these symptoms are suspected of the diagnosis of TEF, prompt reintubation under
the guidance of a flexible bronchoscopy may be life saving because the
endotracheal tube passes through the fistulas into the esophagus with ease.

PMID: 12122910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2002 Jul;128(7):838-41.

Downsizing of voice prosthesis diameter in patients with laryngectomy: an in
vitro study.

Eerenstein SE(1), Grolman W, Schouwenburg PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, PO Box 22700, 1100 DE Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
S.E.Eerenstein@AMC.UVA.NL

Comment in
    Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2003 Apr;129(4):500-2.

In patients with laryngectomy, voice prostheses inserted into a tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) are widely used for vocal rehabilitation. Gradual dilation of the
TEF may cause bothersome leakage around voice prostheses. Prosthesis-related
weight and mechanical trauma possibly exacerbate TEF dilation. If prosthesis size
were to be decreased, with a concomitant decrease in prosthesis weight and
diameter, dilation of the TEF would probably lessen. We performed in vitro tests 
to study the effects on aerodynamic prosthesis function when the prosthesis
size-in particular, the inner diameter-was decreased. The effects on airflow and 
pressure were specifically studied in the airflow range of patients with
laryngectomy. A 1-mm decrease of the regular inner prosthesis diameter from 5 mm 
to 4 mm showed no significant aerodynamic consequences at the average
laryngectomized airflow point. Also, such a 1-mm decrease in diameter involved a 
prosthesis weight reduction of 18%. In view of these findings, downsizing the
standard prosthetic diameter should be considered in future voice prosthesis
development.

PMID: 12117347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Anat Rec. 2002 Jul 1;267(3):220-4.

Complete discontinuity of the distal fistula tract from the developing gut:
direct histologic evidence for the mechanism of tracheoesophageal fistula
formation.

Spilde TL(1), Bhatia AM, Marosky JK, Hembree MJ, Kobayashi H, Daume EL, Prasadan 
K, Manna P, Preuett BL, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City,
Missouri 64108, USA.

The embryogenesis of tracheoesophageal anomalies remains controversial. The
purpose of this study was to better define the embryogenesis of developing
esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF), with specific
attention to the controversial issue of whether a discontinuity exists in the
foregut during its development of EA/TEF. Pregnant outbred rats were injected
with adriamycin (2 mg/kg i.p.) on days 6-9 of gestation (E6-E9). At E12.5 and
13.5, microdissection of the entire foregut was performed. Foreguts were examined
by phase microscopy, and serial, precisely transverse sections were created for
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Gross microdissection of the developing
foregut at E12.5 (n = 9) revealed a blind-ending, bulbous fistula tract arising
from the middle branch of the tracheal trifurcation (as seen by direct and phase 
microscopy). No connection with the gut could be appreciated at E12.5, but by
E13.5 (n = 10) there was an obvious connection between the fistula and the
stomach. Serial H&E transverse sections also demonstrated a blind-ending fistula 
tract arising from the trachea at E12.5. This fistula tract was clearly
discontinuous from the developing stomach, which appeared much further caudal to 
the end of the fistula tract. These results strongly support a model of
experimental TEF wherein the fistula tract arises from a trifurcation of the
trachea, and (only during a specific gestational window between days 12.5 and
13.5) there is discontinuity between the fistula tract and the stomach. By day
13.5, the fistula joins with the stomach anlage. These observations in the
developing EA/TEF should help to resolve the controversy about the mechanism of
EA/TEF formation.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12115271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 2002 Jul;32(7):347-56.

Assessment of isokinetic muscle strength in women who are obese.

Hulens M(1), Vansant G, Lysens R, Claessens AL, Muls E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Physical Education and
Physiotherapy, Katholieke Universiteit, Leuven, Belgium.
maria.hulens@flok.kuleuven.ac.be

STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional study of isokinetic trunk and knee muscle strength 
in women who are obese.
OBJECTIVE: To provide reference values, to identify variables that affect
peripheral muscle strength, and to provide recommendations for isokinetic testing
of trunk and knee muscles in women who are obese and morbidly obese.
BACKGROUND: The assessment of peripheral muscle strength is useful for the
quantification of possible loss of strength, for exercise prescription, and for
the evaluation of the effect of training programs in obese individuals.
METHODS AND MEASURES: Isokinetic trunk and leg muscle strength was assessed in
241 women who were obese (18-65 years, body mass index (BMI) > or = 30 kg/m2).
Trunk flexion and extension peak torque (PT) was measured using the Cybex TEF
dynamometer; trunk rotation (TR) PT was measured using the Cybex TORSO
dynamometer; and knee flexion/extension (KFE) PT was measured using the Cybex 350
dynamometer. Body composition was assessed using the bioelectrical impedance
method; physical activity was assessed using the Baecke questionnaire; and peak
VO2 was assessed using an incremental exercise capacity test on a bicycle
ergometer. To identify variables related to muscle strength, Pearson correlations
were computed and a stepwise multiple regression analysis was performed.
RESULTS: Pearson correlation coefficients of all strength measurements at 60
degrees/s revealed low-to-moderate negative associations with age and positive
associations with mass, height, fat free mass (FFM), and peak VO2 (P < 0.05),
except for gravity-uncorrected trunk extension strength, which was not related to
mass. The sports index of the Baecke questionnaire was associated with TR PT (r =
0.20, P < 0.01) and KFE PT (r = 0.18, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The weight of the trunk accounts largely for the measured trunk
extensor and flexor strength in women who are obese. Contributing variables of
isokinetic trunk flexion and extension strength in women who are obese are age,
height, and FFM; whereas sports activities and aerobic fitness are contributing
factors for trunk rotational and knee extension strength. Recommendations for
measuring isokinetic muscle strength in individuals who are obese are provided.

PMID: 12113469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Med Eng Technol. 2002 Mar-Apr;26(2):82-8.

Humidity control of an incubator using the microcontroller-based active
humidifier system employing an ultrasonic nebulizer.

Güler I(1), Burunkaya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. iguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

Relative humidity levels of an incubator were measured and controlled. An
ultrasonic nebulizer system as an active humidifier was used to humidify the
incubator environment. An integrated circuit-type humidity sensor was used to
measure the humidity level of the incubator environment. Measurement and control 
processes were achieved by a PIC microcontroller. The high-performance and
high-speed PIC provided the flexibility of the system. The developed system can
be used effectively for the intensive care of newborns and/or premature babies.
Since the humidifier generates an aerosol in ambient conditions, it is possible
to provide the high relative humidity level for therapeutic and diagnostic
purposes in medicine.

PMID: 12102328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Waste Manag. 2002;22(4):405-12.

Estimating the human health risks from polychlorinated dioxins and furans in
stack gas emissions from combustion units: implications of USEPA's dioxin
reassessment.

Bell JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)SAFRISK, LC, North Redington Beach, FL 33708, USA. jbell@safrisk.com

Shortly after promulgation of the Hazardous Waste Combustor MACT rule established
regulatory limits for polychlorinated dioxins and furans (dioxins/furans) in
incinerator stack gas, the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) announced
that facilities could still be required to demonstrate that stack emissions do
not present an unacceptable risk to human health and the environment. Guidance
for conducting this risk assessment activity, which was to be required under RCRA
omnibus authority, was developed by the agency and released in 1998. The guidance
represented an increase in complexity over previous documents developed by the
agency and contains multiple chemical, fate and transport, and toxicological
parameters which are to be used as default deterministic parameters in a complex 
series of algorithms which ultimately lead to numerical estimates of risk. As
these changes were occurring, USEPA was also moving towards completion of its
reassessment of dioxin. That series of documents has been the subject of
considerable controversy and has, in several of its various drafts, proposed a
number of changes, including modification of the existing toxic equivalency
factor (TEF) approach and of the cancer potency factor of
2,3,7,8-tetachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. At this time it is unclear what the impact of
these changes will be on facilities progressing through the permitting process,
because it is not intuitively obvious how changes in the risk assessment input
parameters will impact the magnitude of the dioxinlfuran risk. In this paper, the
receptor usually associated with the highest potential risk from dioxins/furans
in a combustion risk assessment, the Subsistence Farmer, will be subjected to a
sensitivity analysis to determine which of the multiple default input parameters 
will have the greatest influence on the potential cancer risk.

PMID: 12099498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Environ Monit. 2002 Jun;4(3):383-8.

Toxic equivalency factors for PAH and their applicability in shellfish pollution 
monitoring studies.

Law RJ(1), Kelly C, Baker K, Jones J, McIntosh AD, Moffat CF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture Science, CEFAS Burnham
Laboratory, Burnham on Crouch, Essex, UK. r.j.law@cefas.co.uk

Fish and shellfish are exposed to a wide range of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons (PAH) following oil spills at sea, and can become contaminated as a 
result. Finfish have a more effective mixed-function oxidase enzyme system than
shellfish, and are therefore able to metabolise and excrete PAH more effectively 
than the invertebrates. Thus, contamination by high-molecular weight PAH,
including those with carcinogenic potential and so of concern with regard to
human consumers, is therefore usually observed in shellfish, and particularly in 
bivalve molluscs. Oil spills are not the sole source of PAH, however, as parent
compounds are also generated by a wide range of combustion processes. In this
paper, consideration is given to monitoring data gathered following recent oil
spills (both of crude oil and diesel fuel), alongside data from other studies.
These include studies conducted around a former gasworks site and downstream of
an aluminium smelter in the UK, and from mussel monitoring studies undertaken in 
the UK and the USA (including the Exxon Valdez oil spill and the National Status 
and Trends programme), and in other countries in Europe. For comparative purposes
the PAH concentrations are summed and also expressed as benzo[a]pyrene
equivalents, their relative concentrations being weighted in relation to the
carcinogenic potential of individual PAH compounds using toxic equivalency
factors (TEF). Our aim was to assess the utility of this approach in fishery
resource monitoring and control following oil spills. Certainly this approach
seems useful from the data assessed in this study. and the relative ranking of
the various studies seems to reflect the relative degree of concern for human
consumers due to the differing contamination sources. As a simple tool for
control purposes it is equally applicable to PAH derived from oil spills, and
from industrial and combustion sources.

PMID: 12094932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2002 Mar;42(1):1-9.

Molecular characterization of regenerated cardiomyocytes derived from adult
mesenchymal stem cells.

Fukuda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. kfukuda@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp.

We recently isolated a cardiomyogenic (CMG) cell line from murine bone marrow
stroma, and in this paper characterize regenerated cardiomyocytes derived from
adult mesenchymal stem cells at the molecular level. Stromal cells were
immortalized, exposed to 5-azacytidine, and repeatedly screened for spontaneously
beating cells. CMG cells began to beat spontaneously after 2 weeks, and beat
synchronously after 3 weeks. They exhibited sinus-node-like or
ventricular-cell-like action potentials. Analysis of the isoforms of contractile 
protein genes, such as of myosin and alpha-actin, indicated that their phenotype 
was similar to that of fetal ventricular cardiomyocytes. The cells expressed
Nkx2.5, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF2-C mRNA before 5-azacytidine exposure, and MEF2-A
and MEF2-D after exposure. CMG cells expressed alpha1A, alpha1B, and
alpha1D-adrenergic receptor mRNA prior to differentiation, and beta1,
beta2-adrenergic and M1, M2-muscarinic receptors after acquiring the
cardiomyocyte phenotype. Phenylephrine induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2, and the
phosphorylation was inhibited by prazosin. Isoproterenol increased the cAMP level
38-fold and beating rate, cell motion, %shortening, and contractile velocity by
48%, 38%, 27%, and 51%, respectively, and the increases were blocked by CGP20712A
(beta1-selective blocker). Carbachol increased IP3 32-fold, and the increase was 
inhibited by AFDX116 (M2-selective blocker). These findings demonstrated that the
regenerated cardiomyocytes were capable of responding to adrenergic and
muscarinic stimulation. This new cell line provides a model for the study of
cardiomyocyte transplantation.

PMID: 12094073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 Jul;37(7):1065-7.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 expression in the human neonatal tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Spilde TL(1), Bhatia AM, Miller KA, Ostlie DJ, Chaignaud BE, Holcomb GW 3rd,
Snyder CL, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Surgical Organogenesis and the Department of Surgery,
Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is
a relatively common congenital anomaly, but its pathogenesis remains poorly
understood. Previous studies using the experimental Adriamycin-induced rat model 
of EA/TEF suggest that the fistula tract, or "distal esophagus," is derived from 
respiratory epithelium and expresses the respiratory-specific transcription
factor TTF-1. To better correlate the experimental rat model of EA/TEF with the
human anomaly, we looked for evidence of a respiratory-derived origin in the
neonatal TEF.
METHODS: After IRB approval, 2 human TEF samples were removed at the time of
surgery. The tissue from the fistula tract was trimmed in accordance with what
the surgeons deemed to be appropriate for the preparation for a primary
anastomosis. The tissues then were processed for reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), histology, and immunohistochemistry. Normal embryonic
lung cDNA was used for positive controls.
RESULTS: Histologic examination of tissue specimens showed many epithelial
tubules within loose connective tissue and a disorganized muscular coat. Thyroid 
transcription factor one (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF-3beta) 
were shown to be present in the tissue specimen by RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry. In addition, FGF-10, a strong morphogen present in the
developing lung, and FGF-1 were both present by RT-PCR. The PCR band sizes for
both FGF-1 and -10 were appropriate, using human embryonic cDNA as a control, and
the bands were confirmed as nongenomic by either placing the PCR primers across a
known intron sequence (TTF-1) or by absence of a band in a negative RT control
(HNF-3beta, FGF-10, FGF-1).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of TTF-1 in the neonatal TEF shows, for the first time,
that parallels may be drawn between the experimental rat model of TEF and the
human anomaly at the molecular level. Moreover, these results suggest that the
fistula tract in the human neonate is derived from a respiratory cell lineage.
This respiratory origin of the human TEF may explain the poor esophageal motility
(and subsequent serious respiratory complications) of the distal segment after
standard EA/TEF repair.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12077772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 Jul;37(7):1024-6.

Management of congenital esophageal stenosis.

Vasudevan SA(1), Kerendi F, Lee H, Ricketts RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The authors report the incidence, diagnosis, and treatment
methods of congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) at their institution.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of 123 patients with tracheoesophageal
anomalies in a pediatric hospital between 1980 and 1999 was performed. Charts
were reviewed for patient demographics, presence of true CES, associated
congenital anomalies, method of diagnosis, methods of treatment, and
histopathology.
RESULTS: Six of the 123 patients (4.9%) had true CES (one patient had 2 separate 
stenoses). Two patients had isolated CES, one patient had CES with isolated
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), one patient had CES with isolated esophageal
atresia (EA), and 2 patients had CES with EA/TEF. Diagnoses were made with an
upper gastrointestinal (GI) contrast study in 5 patients, and one patient had one
of 2 stenoses diagnosed by prenatal ultrasound and the other diagnosed
intraoperatively. Four of the 7 stenoses were treated with surgical resection,
and the remainder was treated with esophageal dilatation. Histopathology from the
4 resected stenoses showed tracheobronchial remnants in 3 specimens and
submucosal thickening in 1 specimen.
CONCLUSIONS: Although isolated CES is rare (2 of 123 = 1.6%), CES associated with
other tracheoesophageal anomalies has a higher incidence (4 of 123 = 3.25%).
Patients with this lesion should be treated first with dilatation. If
ineffective, resection is required.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12077763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Br J Nutr. 2002 Apr;87(4):325-35.

Digestibility and metabolic utilisation of dietary energy in adult sows:
influence of addition and origin of dietary fibre.

Le Goff G(1), Le Groumellec L, van Milgen J, Dubois S, Noblet J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Unité Mixte de Recherches sur
le Veau et la Porc, St Gilles, France.

According to a 4 x 4 Latin square design, four adult ovariectomised sows fed at a
similar energy level (516 kJ ME/kg body weight (BW)0.75 per d) received one of
four diets successively: a control low-dietary-fibre (DF) diet (diet C, 100 g
total DF/kg DM) and three fibre-rich diets (200g total DF/kg DM) that
corresponded to a combination of diet C and maize bran (diet MB), wheat bran
(diet WB), or sugar-beet pulp (diet SBP). Sows were adapted to the diet for 12 d 
before an 8 d measurement period. Digestibility of energy and nutrients in the
diets, and total heat production (HP) and its components (fasting HP, activity HP
and thermic effect of feeding (TEF), were measured. The TEF was partitioned
between a short-term component (TEF(st)) and a long-term component (TEF(lt)).
Total tract digestibility of nutrients and energy was greater for diet C; among
the three other diets, the digestibility coefficients were higher for diet SBP
than for diets MB and WB. Energy losses from CH4 were linearly related to the
digestible total DF intake (+1.4kJ/g). Fasting HP at zero activity averaged 260
kJ/kg BW(0.75) per d. Activity HP represented 20% total HP, or 83 kJ/kg BW(0.75) 
per d on average. Total TEF and TEF(lt) were higher (P<0.05) for diet WB than for
the other diets. However, total HP (406kJ/kg BW(0.75 per d) was not significantly
affected by diet characteristics. Our results suggest that metabolic utilisation 
of dietary energy is little affected by the addition and origin of DF, at least
under the conditions of the present study.

PMID: 12064342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jun 21;294(4):791-7.

TEF-1 and MEF2 transcription factors interact to regulate muscle-specific
promoters.

Maeda T(1), Gupta MP, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, BST
1704.3, PA 15213, USA.

Many muscle-specific genes are regulated by transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1), serum response factor (SRF), and myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2)
transcription factors. TEF-1 interacts with the MADS domain of SRF and together
SRF and TEF-1 co-activate the skeletal alpha-actin promoter. MEF2 factors also
contain a MADS domain with 50% amino acid identity to the SRF MADS domain.
Because of this sequence divergence, some SRF co-factors do not interact with
MEF2. To demonstrate that TEF-1 factors could also interact with MEF2 through its
MADS domain, we used co-immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays in vitro and
a mammalian two-hybrid assay in vivo. The MADS domain was not sufficient for MEF2
interaction with TEF-1, because additional sequences in the activation domains of
both proteins were required for in vivo association. The physiological
significance of this interaction was also demonstrated by transient transfection 
assays using muscle-specific promoters. Our results suggest that by their
interaction with MEF2 factors, TEF-1 factors can control MEF2-dependent
muscle-specific gene expression.

PMID: 12061776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. G Chir. 2002 Jan-Feb;23(1-2):29-33.

[Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: personal contribution].

[Article in Italian]

Marinaccio F(1), Nobili M, Niglio F, Magistro D, Marinaccio M.

Author information: 
(1)Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Foggia U.O. Chirurgia Pediatrica.

From January 1988 to December 1999, 21 new born babies, 13 boys and 8 girls, with
esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheosophageal fistula (TEF) were treated at
Division of Pediatric Surgery in Foggia (Italy). At birth their weight ranged
from 1.600 to 3.000 g, the gestional age ranged from 36 to 41 weeks. Five (23%)
of them were premature, seven (58%) SGA, seventeen (80%) associated congenital
anomalies. Complete surgical correction was performed in all patients. In three
AE cases with wide-gap an azygos vein flap was used to strengthen the anastomosis
under excessive tension. The pathogenetic factors involved in these complications
such as leak, stricture (stenosis), recurrent TEF and gastro-esophageal reflux
are (are taken into account) and analysed. No baby died owing to anastomatic
complication. Survival rate was 100% in Montreal I and 83% in Montreal II. A new 
born baby died but his death was due to major associated conenital anomalies and 
not to surgical complications. The Authors believe that the azygos vein flap is a
useful technique in the treatment of esophageal atresia wide-gap.

PMID: 12043467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Metabolism. 2002 Jun;51(6):801-5.

No effect of the Trp64Arg beta(3)-adrenoceptor gene variant on weight loss, body 
composition, or energy expenditure in obese, caucasian postmenopausal women.

Rawson ES(1), Nolan A, Silver K, Shuldiner AR, Poehlman ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA.

The Trp64Arg polymorphism in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor gene has been associated
with increased prevalence of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and low rates of energy
expenditure, although these findings are not unanimous. It is currently unknown
if the presence of the Trp64Arg gene variant impedes the loss of body weight in
obese, postmenopausal women via a reducing effect on energy expenditure. The
objective of this study was to compare body composition and energy expenditure in
carriers and noncarriers of the Trp64Arg variant in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor
before and after weight loss. We measured body composition, total daily energy
expenditure (TEE), resting metabolic rate (RMR), physical activity energy
expenditure (PAEE), thermic effect of feeding (TEF), and respiratory quotient
(RQ) in 34 obese, postmenopausal women (19 carriers and 15 noncarriers for the
Trp64Arg variant) before and after a weight loss intervention. There were no
differences in body composition or daily energy expenditure and its components
between the 2 groups at baseline. There were significant reductions in body mass,
body mass index (BMI), percent body fat, fat-free mass, and fat mass (main
effect, all P <.0001) when analyzed with the 2 genotypes combined, but no
significant differences between carriers and noncarriers with respect to change
in these variables (group x time interaction term, all P >.05). Total energy
expenditure tended to be reduced (490 kJ x d(-1), P =.13) in both groups
following weight loss, but there was no significant group x time interaction term
(P =.78), indicating no difference in the response of the 2 genotypes. There was 
a 9% reduction in RMR (611 kJ x d(-1), P <.001) when both groups were considered 
together, but no significant group x time interaction term (P =.84), suggesting
that both groups responded in a similar manner to the weight loss intervention.
PAEE and the TEF were not different following weight loss (both P >.60). There
was a trend for RQ to be reduced after weight loss (P =.07), but there was no
difference between carriers or noncarriers of the Trp64Arg variant (P =.58). In
summary, we found that obese postmenopausal women who carry the Trp64Arg variant 
in the beta(3)-adrenoceptor had similar changes in body composition and energy
expenditure to noncarriers of the variant in response to prolonged caloric
restriction. These results suggest that the presence of the Trp64Arg variant in
the beta(3)-adrenoceptor should not be a hindrance to weight reduction.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12037740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Med Syst. 2002 Jun;26(3):199-220.

Theory and applications of telemedicine.

Güler NF(1), Ubeyli ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. fnguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this study, telemedicine and the use of advanced telemedicine technologies are
explained. Telemedicine is the use of modern telecommunications and information
technologies for the provision of clinical care to individuals at a distance, and
transmission of information to provide that care. Telemedicine can be used for
decision making, remote sensing, and collaborative arrangements for the real-time
management of patients at a distance. The use of telecommunications and
information technologies in providing health services is determined. Telemedicine
is described as combination of topics from the fields of telecommunication,
medicine, and informatics. The medical systems infrastructure consisting of the
equipment and processes used to acquire and present clinical information and to
store and retrieve data are explained in details. The challenges existing in
telemedicine development in different countries are given. Technological,
political, and professional barriers in applications of telemedicine are defined.
An investigation of telemedicine applications in various fields is presented, and
enormous impact of telemedicine systems on the future of medicine is determined.

PMID: 12018607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Chemosphere. 2002 Apr;47(2):103-16.

Changes to the TEF schemes can have significant impacts on regulation and
management of PCDD/F and PCB.

Dyke PH(1), Stratford J.

Author information: 
(1)PD Consulting, Brobury, Herefordshire, UK. enquiries@pd-consulting.co.uk

The changes recommended by the World Health Organisation (WHO) to the toxic
equivalency factors (TEFs) for polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and
polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDD/F) and the recommendation to extend both the 
TEF scheme and the tolerable daily intake (TDI) to include "dioxin-like" PCB
congeners have significant implications for regulators who have relied heavily on
the International TEF (I-TEF) scheme in setting and monitoring limits and
exposure to these compounds. This paper examines example data sets of sources,
environmental concentrations, food and exposure to indicate likely changes in
calculated toxic equivalent (TEQ) due to the recommended changes to TEFs. Many
published data sets available do not provide congener specific data for PCDD/F
which limits the ability to recalculate TEQs. There are even fewer congener
specific data published to enable calculation of TEQs for the dioxin-like PCBs.
In general TEQs calculated using the WHO scheme for emissions to air were found
to show small increases (in the order of 1-10%) in comparison to the I-TEQ (for
PCDD/F), some sludge samples showed substantial decreases (up to 70%). Levels in 
food and calculations of exposure showed that the change to TEFs for PCDD/F
increased calculated exposure by 10-20% while the change to PCB TEFs decreased
calculated TEQ attributable to PCB by 0-10%. The effects of including PCB in the 
overall TEQ and the changes to TEFs for PCDD/F substantially increase calculated 
TEQ exposure. Congener specific data should be presented to allow calculation of 
desired TEQ and the impact of the changes on emission limits, regulations on
sludge use and environmental quality standards should all be carefully
considered. The absence of data on emissions of dioxin-like PCB means that it is 
not possible to estimate with any certainty the impact on overall TEQ emissions
of including the nominated PCB. Given the potential for confusion with the
proliferation of TEFs and the extension to include both PCDD/F and PCB in the
calculation of TEQs it is important that great care is taken to clearly express
which compounds are included and which TEF scheme has been applied in each case.

PMID: 11993627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Med Syst. 2002 Apr;26(2):159-78.

Theory and applications of biotelemetry.

Güler NF(1), Ubeyli ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronic and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. fnguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this study, biotelemetry and its evolution is explained in detail. Bioelectric
and physiological variables could be measured by biotelemetry systems. The
development of a biotelemetry system and its principal operation are presented.
The components of a biotelemetry system are explained. Biomedical data has been
telemetered through every medium between two sites by using a variety of
modulated energy forms. Designing of the link between transmitter and receiver is
described. Important factors in designing a backpack or implanted telemeter are
explained. The main features of implanted biotelemetry units are determined.
Single-channel and multichannel biotelemetry systems are defined. The types of
telemetry, and a comparison thereof, are given. The power sources of biotelemetry
systems and features of different power sources are explained. A survey of
biotelemetry applications on humans and animals is presented and advantages of
using biotelemetry systems are determined.

PMID: 11993572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Med Syst. 2002 Apr;26(2):151-7.

Design of microcontroller-based EMG and the analysis of EMG signals.

Güler NF(1), Hardalaç F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics and Computer Education, Faculty of Technical
Education, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. fnguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this work, a microcontroller-based EMG designed and tested on 40 patients.
When the patients are in rest, the fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis was
applied to EMG signals recorded from right leg peroneal region. The histograms
are constructed from the results of the FFT analysis. The analysis results shows 
that the amplitude of fibrillation potential of the muscle fiber of 30 patients
measured from peroneal region is low and the duration is short. This is the
reason why the motor nerves degenerated and 10 patients were found to be healthy.

PMID: 11993571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 May;37(5):776-8.

Esophageal foreign body obstruction after esophageal atresia repair.

Zigman A(1), Yazbeck S.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal, Quebec.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine the incidence and risk
factors for esophageal foreign body obstruction (EFBO) after esophageal
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) repair.
METHODS: A Case-control chart review was conducted from 1987 to 1999.
RESULTS: EFBO occurred in 14 of 108 patients (13%) with EA-TEF. Mean follow-up
was 31 months. Alimentary debris was the most common foreign body. Mean time
between operation and EFBO was 25 months. EFBO recurred in 50%. Sixty-one percent
of patients required endoscopic FB removal. Esophageal stenosis was present in
57% of EFBO patients, and 80% of stenoses presented initially with EFBO. The
incidence of gastroesophageal reflux (GER; 50%), type C anomaly (100%),
anastomotic leak (21%), major associated anomalies (50%), and encephalopathy
(14%) were not significantly different between the EFBO group and the total
EA-TEF population. There was no difference in the need for antireflux surgery
(57%) between those with EFBO and GER and the total EA/TEF population with GER.
CONCLUSIONS: Esophageal foreign body obstruction occurs in at least 13% of
patients after EA-TEF repair. Because no reliable risk factors were identified
that could predict foreign body obstruction, all families should be warned about 
this possibility during the first 5 years, particularly once the child begins
eating solid foods.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 11987099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 5;277(27):24346-52. Epub 2002 May 1.

Mouse DTEF-1 (ETFR-1, TEF-5) is a transcriptional activator in alpha 1-adrenergic
agonist-stimulated cardiac myocytes.

Maeda T(1), Mazzulli JR, Farrance IK, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

alpha(1)-Adrenergic signaling in cardiac myocytes activates the skeletal muscle
alpha-actin gene through an MCAT cis-element, the binding site of the
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family of transcription factors. TEF-1 
accounts for more than 85% of the MCAT binding activity in neonatal rat cardiac
myocytes. Other TEF-1 family members account for the rest. Although TEF-1 itself 
has little effect on the alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of skeletal muscle
alpha-actin, the related factor RTEF-1 augments the response and is a target of
alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling. Here, we examined another TEF-1 family member
expressed in cardiac muscle, DTEF-1, and observed that it also augmented the
alpha(1)-adrenergic response of skeletal muscle alpha-actin. A DTEF-1
peptide-specific antibody revealed that endogenous DTEF-1 accounts for up to 5%
of the MCAT binding activity in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. A TEF-1/DTEF-1
chimera suggests that alpha(1)-adrenergic signaling modulates DTEF-1 function.
Orthophosphate labeling and immunoprecipitation of an epitope-tagged DTEF-1
showed that DTEF-1 is phosphorylated in vivo. alpha(1)-Adrenergic stimulation
increased while phosphatase treatment lowered the MCAT binding by DTEF-1 and the 
endogenous non-TEF-1 MCAT-binding factor. In contrast, alpha(1)-adrenergic
stimulation did not alter, and phosphatase treatment increased, MCAT binding of
TEF-1 and RTEF-1. Taken together, these results suggest that DTEF-1 is a target
for alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of the skeletal muscle alpha-actin gene in
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 11986313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Minerva Pediatr. 2002 Apr;54(2):131-8.

[Esophageal atresia with distal tracheo-esophageal fistula. Evolution of the
treatment in the period of 1955-2000 at the Anna Meyer Children's Hospital of
Florence].

[Article in Italian]

Noccioli B(1), Pampaloni F, Fiorini P, Mattei R, Pancani S, Elia A, Donzelli GP, 
Pampaloni A.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. di Chirurgia Pediatrica, Ospedale Pediatrico Anna Meyer, Firenze, Italy. 
brunonoccioli@libero.it

BACKGROUND: Over the past decades the esophageal atresia (EA) has represented the
greatest challenging malformation encountered by the pediatric surgeon. Since
then, there have been considerable advancements in the treatment of EA. In this
paper the experience at the "Anna Meyer Children's Hospital of Florence" in
regards to the surgical treatment of the EA from 1955 to present day is reported,
so that the analysis of the various medical and surgical choices followed by the 
authors and their predecessors in this long period, can be an important learning 
tool for the EA management.
METHODS: From 1955 to 2000, 223 newborns affected by EA with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) have been operated on out of a total of 250 cases of EA. Our
experience has been subdivided into periods on the basis of homogeneous medical
and surgical treatment adopted in that determined time. We have analyzed
particularly the data of the last period 1995-2000, where there has been a well
standardized protocol of treatment from the medical, surgical and intensive care 
points of view.
RESULTS: The mortality rate has decreased from 44.8 to 3.4% with a significant
reduction (p<0.001) between the years 1979-1983 and 1984-2000, due to the
introduction of a perioperative treatment in the newborn intensive care unit.
Moreover, a significant correlation (p<0.05) has been shown between low
birthweight and associated malformations, two risk factors that however do not
negatively influence the results of the treatment in the last period 1995-2000.
CONCLUSIONS: A full integration between the surgeon and neonatologist is
necessary in order to guarantee a good result. The risk connected to EA is not as
much the surgical procedure as the presence or absence of associate malformations
that are undetected in the prenatal diagnosis. It is suggested that, in order to 
further reduce the mortality and morbidity rate after EA correction, the number
of prenatal diagnoses should be increased.

PMID: 11981527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Pediatr Surg Int. 2002 Mar;18(2-3):162-4.

Costal cartilage grafting for repair of a recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula in 
a 1.6-kg baby with esophageal atresia.

Delarue A(1), Paut O, Simeoni J, Lepra SB, Nicollas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hôpital d'Enfants de la Timone, 13385
Marseille Cedex 5, France.

A large intraoperative tracheal tear occurred during correction of a type III
esophageal atresia in a 1,630-g premature baby. It was repaired by primary
suture. Recurrence of the tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) was treated operatively
with esophageal exclusion and costal cartilage grafting (CCG) onto the tracheal
defect. At 3 months of age, successful esophageal reconstruction was performed
using a posterior mediastinal colonic interposition. On 27-month follow-up, the
child was symptom-free and thriving. Surgical options for TEF recurrence and
intraoperative management of the tracheal air leak are discussed. CCG is
advocated as an attractive material for tracheal repair even in low-weight
prematures.

PMID: 11956786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2002 Jan;372(2):373-81.

An improved clean-up strategy for simultaneous analysis of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF), and
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) in fatty food samples.

Pirard C(1), Focant JF, De PE.

Author information: 
(1)Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, University of Liege, Belgium.

The study and extension of a simple automated clean-up method for polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD) and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDF) to a broad
range of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) is described. The isolation of seven
PCDD, ten PCDF, and three coplanar PCB (cPCB) is extended to eight monoortho
substituted PCB and seven so-called "marker PCB" (Aroclor 1260) for fatty food
samples. This enables quantification of 35 compounds - including all congeners
with a WHO toxic equivalent factor (TEF)--in a single extraction and single
purification step. The chromatographic behaviour of mono-ortho PCB and marker PCB
on a variety of adsorbents, including basic alumina, has been studied.
Partitioning of analytes through multi-column sequences is described and
correlated with their structural and electronic properties, by use of molecular
modelling calculations. The fractionation process available with the Power-Prep
automated clean-up system enables rapid independent analysis of the different
groups of compounds. Gas chromatography with high resolution mass spectrometry
(GC-HRMS) is used for the PCDD/F and cPCB fraction and quadrupole ion-storage
tandem in time mass spectrometry (GC-QISTMS) for analysis of the remaining PCB. A
comparison study was performed on quality-control samples and real fatty food
samples to evaluate the robustness of the new strategy compared with a reference 
method. On the basis of this simultaneous clean-up, a rapid simplified strategy
for PCDD/F and selected PCB analysis determination is proposed for fatty food
samples.

PMID: 11936114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Diabetes Care. 2002 Apr;25(4):652-7.

Effects of energy-restricted diets containing increased protein on weight loss,
resting energy expenditure, and the thermic effect of feeding in type 2 diabetes.

Luscombe ND(1), Clifton PM, Noakes M, Parker B, Wittert G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Adelaide, Department of Physiology, South Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of a high-protein (HP) diet compared with a
low-protein (LP) diet on weight loss, resting energy expenditure (REE), and the
thermic effect of food (TEF) in subjects with type 2 diabetes during moderate
energy restriction.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In this study, 26 obese subjects with type 2
diabetes consumed a HP (28% protein, 42% carbohydrate) or LP diet (16% protein,
55% carbohydrate) during 8 weeks of energy restriction (1,600 kcal/day) and 4
weeks of energy balance. Body weight and composition and REE were measured, and
the TEF in response to a HP or LP meal was determined for 2 h, at weeks 0 and 12.
RESULTS: The mean weight loss was 4.6 +/- 0.4 kg (P < 0.001), of which 4.5 +/-
0.4 kg was fat (P < 0.001), with no effect of diet (P = 0.6). At both weeks 0 and
12, TEF was greater after the HP than after the LP meal (0.064 vs. 0.050 kcal x
kcal(-1) energy consumed x 2 h(-1), respectively; overall diet effect, P =
0.003). REE and TEF were reduced similarly with each of the diets (time effects, 
P = 0.02 and P < 0.001, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with type 2 diabetes, a low-fat diet with an increased
protein-to-carbohydrate ratio does not significantly increase weight loss or
blunt the fall in REE.

PMID: 11919120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2001 Dec;11 Suppl:S208-17.

Energy expenditure and aging: effects of physical activity.

Starling RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock 72205, USA.

Aging is associated with a decline in daily energy expenditure that is
disproportionately greater than the decline in daily energy intake. Collectively,
these events can create a "positive" energy balance, secondary gains in central
and total body fat, and a subsequently higher risk of morbidity and mortality.
Participation in regular physical activity is a logical strategy to attenuate the
decline in energy expenditure with aging, as physical activity can comprise
between 10-50% of an older person's daily energy expenditure. Understanding the
influence of regular physical activity on energy expenditure with advancing age
is clinically relevant, particularly since estimates predict that nearly 25% of
the population will be > or = 65 years of age by the year 2030. This brief review
will focus on the current state of aging, energy expenditure, and physical
activity literature. Topics to be addressed include: (a) measurement of physical 
activity in older adults; (b) aging and physical inactivity; and (c) influence of
regular aerobic exercise on resting metabolic rate (RMR), thermic effect of food 
(TEF), and non-exercising physical activity.

PMID: 11915922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Forensic Sci Int. 2002 Feb 18;125(2-3):231-6.

Factors influencing the precision of estimating the postmortem interval using the
triple-exponential formulae (TEF). Part II. A study of the effect of body
temperature at the moment of death on the postmortem brain, liver and rectal
cooling in 117 forensic cases.

al-Alousi LM(1), Anderson RA, Worster DM, Land DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine & Science, The University of Glasgow, G12 8QQ,
UK. l.m.al-alousi@formed.gla.ac.uk

The temperatures of three body sites, namely, the brain, liver and the rectum as 
well as the temperature of the environment were continuously monitored, every
5-10 min, in 117 forensic cases commencing soon after death and in most cases,
within 45 min postmortem. The body temperature at the moment of death was
empirically determined by a computer-based extrapolation method. Thus,
temperature data for the first 3h of each body site were fitted to
single-exponential equations and the fitted curve was extrapolated backwards to
obtain the intercept on the Y-axis (the temperature axis). The effect of body
temperature at the moment of death on postmortem cooling rate is examined and
factors influencing body temperature at death are discussed. Forensic fatalities 
associated with hyper and hypothermia are reviewed briefly.

PMID: 11909669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Forensic Sci Int. 2002 Feb 18;125(2-3):223-30.

Factors influencing the precision of estimating the postmortem interval using the
triple-exponential formulae (TEF). Part I. A study of the effect of body
variables and covering of the torso on the postmortem brain, liver and rectal
cooling rates in 117 forensic cases.

Al-Alousi LM(1), Anderson RA, Worster DM, Land DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Science, University of Glasgow, G12 8QQ,
UK. l.m.al-alousi@formed.gla.ac.uk

Brain, liver, rectal and environmental temperatures were continuously monitored
under controlled conditions, in 117 forensic fatalities, for up to 60 h after
death. Cases were studied either naked (63%) or covered with two blankets (37%). 
Bodies were classified into fat and thin groups. Statistical analysis and
curve-fitting of the data yielded the average triple-exponential formulae for
each body site and each body group. The effects of covering of the torso and body
parameters such as weight, height, surface area and 'cooling size factor' (Z) on 
postmortem cooling are assessed and discussed. Results show that covering of the 
torso has a significant influence on the rate of postmortem cooling, however,
there is no good correlation between the body variables and the cooling rate.

PMID: 11909668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Belg. 2001;55(4):273-8.

Tracheoesophageal fistula: case report and review of literature.

Pelc P(1), Prigogine T, Bisschop P, Jortay A.

Author information: 
(1)ENT Department, CHU Brugmann.

The case of a 44 year old woman with progressive postoperative dysphagia and food
inhalations complicated by recurrent pulmonary infections, due to a
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is reported. Some months earlier, this woman had 
been operated for a cerebral aneurysm with hemiplegia and aphasia. For several
months, pulmonary and feeding difficulties had been attributed to neurological
status. Wide TEF was diagnosed by bronchoscopy, confirmed with fistulography.
Surgical closure was performed: the oesophagus was sutured, and covered with
fascia and a segment of the cervical trachea was resected with end-to-end
anastomosis. Acquired nonmalignant TEF is an uncommon disorder with a high degree
of morbidity and mortality. The etiology of those TEF is still unclear: traumatic
intubation, elevated endotracheal tube cuff pressure, nasogastric tube,
inflammation, poor general conditions,.... A better knowledge of the predisposing
factors and physiopathology could decrease the number of acquired TEF.

PMID: 11859645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2002 Feb;34(2):223-31.

Alterations of the circadian clock in the heart by streptozotocin-induced
diabetes.

Young ME(1), Wilson CR, Razeghi P, Guthrie PH, Taegtmeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The heart, like other organs, possesses an internal circadian clock. These clocks
provide the selective advantage of anticipation, enabling the organ to prepare
for a given stimulus, thereby optimizing the appropriate response. The heart in
diabetes is associated with alterations in morphology, gene expression,
metabolism and contractile performance. The present study investigated whether
diabetes also alters the circadian clock in the heart. Insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus was induced in rats by treatment with streptozotocin (STZ; 65 mg/kg).
STZ increased humoral (glucose and non-esterified fatty acids) and heart gene
expression (myosin heavy chain beta, pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4 and
uncoupling protein 3) markers of diabetes. The circadian patterns of gene
expression of seven components of the mammalian clock (bmal1, clock, cry1, cry2, 
per1, per2 and per3), as well as three clock output genes (dbp, hlf and tef),
were compared in hearts isolated from control and STZ-induced diabetic rats. All 
components of the clock investigated possessed circadian rhythms of gene
expression. In the hearts isolated from STZ-induced diabetic rats, the phases of 
these circadian rhythms were altered (approximately 3 h early) compared to those 
observed for control hearts. The clock in the heart has therefore lost normal
synchronization with its environment during diabetes. Whether this loss of
synchronization plays a role in the development of contractile dysfunction of the
heart in diabetes remains to be determined.

Copyright 2002 Academic Press.

PMID: 11851361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 Feb;37(2):202-6.

Glossopexy as an alternative to aortopexy in infants with repaired esophageal
atresia and upper airway obstruction.

Cozzi F(1), Morini F, Casati A, Camanni D, Zani A, Cozzi DA.

Author information: 
(1)Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Clinical manifestations of airway obstruction in infants with
repaired esophageal atresia or tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) are attributed 
conventionally to tracheomalacia. In the current study, the authors tested the
hypothesis that a retrodisplacement of the tongue (glossoptosis), by causing a
functional upper airway obstruction (obstructive apnea/hypopnea), may play a role
in the pathogenesis of the respiratory problems.
METHODS: The records of 5 infants with repaired EA/TEF and respiratory symptoms
treated by glossopexy, which serves to anchor the tongue forward, were reviewed. 
Prompt improvement after glossopexy in clinical manifestations, in blood gas
exchange, and in weight velocity was used to establish a primary cause-effect
relationship between glossoptosis and respiratory problems.
RESULTS: Before glossopexy, all infants presented with severe respiratory
distress. Three infants had life-threatening events requiring recurrent or
chronic airway intubation. Four infants had severe tracheomalacia, diagnosed at
bronchoscopy. All infants presented obstructive apnea/hypopnea with desaturation.
Body weight was below the third percentile in all infants. After glossopexy, 3
presented a marked clinical improvement associated with significant increase in
mean oxygen saturation (88% +/- 0.4 SE v 95% +/- 0.3 SE; P <.001). In another
infant, glossopexy allowed permanent decannulation but did not relieve the
problem during crying or excitement when obstructive hypopnea with desaturation
required supplemental oxygen. After glossopexy and despite subsequent aortopexy, 
the last infant could not be extubated and died later of mycotic sepsis. Autopsy 
results showed a vascular ring. In the 4 surviving infants, glossopexy was
followed promptly by significant catch-up growth and subsequent normal growth
velocity (P =.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Present findings support the concept that, in some infants with
EA/TEF, respiratory problems are mainly caused by recurrent obstructive
apnea/hypopnea, which may be treated successfully by lip-tongue adhesion
procedures. Severe airway obstruction, not relieved by glossopexy, requires
aortopexy to reduce the respiratory load imposed by tracheomalacia.

PMID: 11819199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Gig Sanit. 2001 Nov-Dec;(6):6-11.

[Dioxins in the environment and in the blood and breast milk of residents of the 
town of Chapayevsk].

[Article in Russian]

Revich BA, Sotskov IuP, Kliuev NA, Brodskii ES, Lipchenko IuN, Muzurov IV,
Zeilert VIu.

Chapayevsk has a 30-year history of producing organochlorines, leading to
environmental dioxin pollution. As much as 3 kg of these substances are annually 
formed at the plant. The concentrations of dioxins in the ambient air were found 
to be 0.001 to 1.13 pg/m3, in 1-TEF dioxin equivalent or 0.00001-1.76 pg/m3, as
calculated by using WHO-TEF for dioxin-like compounds, those in the urban
drinking water were 0.1 to 20.83 pg/liter, in the soil near the plant, 141 ng
TEQ/kg, by decreasing to 37 ng/kg in the downtown (2-7 km from the plant) and 4
ng/kg at a distance of 7-10 km from the plant, their levels in the vegetables and
fruits were 0.002 to 10.6 pg/kg. The direct indicator of dioxin exposure is its
detection in human breast milk and blood. Examination of the content of dioxins
in the breast milk of Chapayevsk women versus those living in other towns and
cities of Russia has shown considerably higher levels of dioxins, such as
2,3,7,8-TCDD, 1,2,3,7,8-PCDD, 1,2,3,4,7,8-GCDD, and octa-dioxins. The mean
content of dioxins in the breast milk (7 pooled samples from 40 individual
trials) was 43.3 pgTEQ/fat. It is significantly higher than that detected in the 
populations of other Russian territories and other countries. The mean blood
concentrations of dioxins in peoples living near the plant was 75.2 pgTEQ/fat,
those were lower (24.5 pgTEQ/fat) in those living at 5-7 km of the plant.

PMID: 11810913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2001 Dec;11(6):371-6.

Manometric evaluation of postoperative patients of esophageal atresia and
tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Dutta HK(1), Grover VP, Dwivedi SN, Bhatnagar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.

Symptoms related to esophageal dysmotility are common following successful repair
of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF). Esophageal
manometry was performed in 27 survivors of EA/TEF at a mean age of 30.5 +/- 30.3 
months and in 25 age-matched controls (mean age 36.8 +/- 22.6 months). The
patients were also evaluated clinically to grade them into 3 result-oriented
groups "Excellent", "Good" and "Fair", depending on pre-existing criteria
evaluating the ability and ease of swallowing. Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) was 
evaluated with the help of a radionuclide scan. The mean esophageal and peak
esophageal pressures and therefore also the lower esophageal sphincter (LES)
pressure were lower in the patients (12.4 +/- 5.5, 34.9 +/- 20.4 and 12.2 +/- 6.8
mm Hg, respectively) compared to the controls (21.1 +/- 6.9, 62.3 +/- 19.3 and
16.8 +/- 4.3 mm Hg, respectively). The mean body pressures were highest with
"Excellent" results and lowest with "Fair" results and the LES pressures followed
a similar trend. Likewise, in the patients with GER, LES pressure was 12.0 +/-
7.1, 12.3 +/- 3.7, 11.0 +/- 5.7 and 6.9 +/- 5.6 mm Hg with nil, mild, moderate
and severe GER, respectively. The pressure and contractility profile of the
esophagus was abnormal in the majority of patients, even in the absence of
symptoms.

PMID: 11807665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 Jan;37(1):116-8.

A new variant of esophageal atresia associated with esophageal heterotopic
pancreas.

Ozcan C(1), Elik A, Erdener A.

Author information: 
(1)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Surgery, zmir,
Turkey.

An infant with esophageal atresia (EA) and absence of gas on abdominal
radiographs was found to have an obliterated distal tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF). Preoperative bronchoscopy and surgical exploration found that the reason
for gasless abdomen was the atresia of the distal portion of lower esophagus,
which also contained heterotopic pancreatic tissue. The type of
trachea/esophageal anomaly found in this patient, with the association of
esophageal heterotopic pancreas (EHP), has not yet been reported in the
literature.

Copyright 2002 by W.B. Saunders Company.

PMID: 11782001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Pediatr Surg. 2002 Jan;37(1):47-9.

The application of vascular technology to esophageal and airway strictures.

Gilchrist BF(1), Scriven R, Sanchez J, Panetta T, Klotz D, Nguyen M, Ramenofsky
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, The State University of New York, Brooklyn, NY,
USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Strictures of the esophagus and airway tract can be dilated
if the strictures can be traversed and dilators passed. Unfortunately, using
standard methods, not all strictures can be traversed. The authors set out to
find a safe, expeditious, and reproducible way to traverse otherwise impassable
strictures of the esophagus and airway.
METHODS: Eight patients (n = 8), over a 2-year period, with strictures were
entered prospectively into the study. One patient (n = 1) had a main stem
bronchial stricture, and 7 patients (n = 7) had esophageal strictures from the
following etiologies: esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF)
repair, Lye ingestion (n = 2), EA/TEF with gastroesophageal reflux, esophageal
atresia without fistula, lye ingestion with colon interposition (n = 2), and iron
pill inhalation lodged in left main bronchus. None of the strictures could be
passed with conventional maneuvers or instrumentation including endoscopy, guide 
wires, Fogarty catheters, and filliform and followers. Results of barium studies 
showed no flow into the stomach. In the bronchial case, no lumen could be
identified at bronchoscopy.
RESULTS: Utilizing the "Vascular Surgery Glidewire/Berenstein Catheter System"
under fluoroscopy and utilizing the "spinning top" dynamic maneuver intrinsic to 
this system, all of the strictures were traversed easily. The passage of the
wire/catheter system thus allowed sequential dilation of the previously
impassable strictures. The mean time to cross the strictures with the
wire/catheter system was 1 minute, 10 seconds. (t = 70 seconds). All of the
procedures were done in the operating room under general endotracheal anesthesia 
by the same 2 attending pediatric surgeons.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of vascular surgical technology in difficult, otherwise
impassable strictures of the esophagus and upper airway proved to be an extremely
effective, easy-to-perform, and reproducible method of therapy. This procedure
may obviate the need for resectional surgery in this setting.

Copyright 2002 by W.B. Saunders Company.

PMID: 11781985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8682-92. Epub 2001 Dec 21.

Cryptic MCAT enhancer regulation in fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells.
Suppression of TEF-1 mediated activation by the single-stranded DNA-binding
proteins, Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1.

Carlini LE(1), Getz MJ, Strauch AR, Kelm RJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Foundation, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

An asymmetric polypurine-polypyrimidine cis-element located in the 5' region of
the mouse vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene serves as a binding site for
multiple proteins with specific affinity for either single- or double-stranded
DNA. Here, we test the hypothesis that single-stranded DNA-binding proteins are
responsible for preventing a cryptic MCAT enhancer centered within this element
from cooperating with a nearby serum response factor-interacting CArG motif to
trans-activate the minimal promoter in fibroblasts and smooth muscle cells. DNA
binding studies revealed that the core MCAT sequence mediates binding of
transcription enhancer factor-1 to the double-stranded polypurine-polypyrimidine 
element while flanking nucleotides account for interaction of Pur alpha and Pur
beta with the purine-rich strand and MSY1 with the complementary pyrimidine-rich 
strand. Mutations that selectively impaired high affinity single-stranded DNA
binding by fibroblast or smooth muscle cell-derived Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1
in vitro, released the cryptic MCAT enhancer from repression in transfected
cells. Additional experiments indicated that Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1 also
interact specifically, albeit weakly, with double-stranded DNA and with
transcription enhancer factor-1. These results are consistent with two plausible 
models of cryptic MCAT enhancer regulation by Pur alpha, Pur beta, and MSY1
involving either competitive single-stranded DNA binding or masking of MCAT-bound
transcription enhancer factor-1.

PMID: 11751932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Microbiology. 2001 Dec;147(Pt 12):3377-86.

Transcriptional regulation of 3,4-dihydroxy-2-butanone 4-phosphate synthase.

Schlösser T(1), Schmidt G, Stahmann KP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biotechnologie 1, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D-52425 Jülich, 
Germany.

The filamentous hemiascomycete Ashbya gossypii is a strong riboflavin
overproducer. A striking but as yet uninvestigated phenomenon is the fact that
the overproduction of this vitamin starts when growth rate declines, which means 
that most of the riboflavin is produced in the stationary phase, the so-called
production phase. The specific activity of 3,4-dihydroxy-2-butanone 4-phosphate
(DHBP) synthase, the first enzyme in the biosynthetic pathway for riboflavin, was
determined during cultivation and an increase during the production phase was
found. Furthermore, an increase of RIB3 mRNA, encoding DHBP synthase, was
observed by competitive RT-PCR in the production phase. The mRNAs of two
housekeeping genes, ACT1 (encoding actin) and TEF (encoding translation
elongation factor-1 alpha), served as standards in the RT-PCR. Reporter studies
with a RIB3 promoter-lacZ fusion showed an increase of beta-galactosidase
specific activity in the production phase. This investigation verified that the
increase of RIB3 mRNA in the production phase is caused by an induction of
promoter activity. These data suggest that the time course of riboflavin
overproduction of A. gossypii is correlated with a transcriptional regulation of 
the DHBP synthase.

PMID: 11739770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Hereditas. 2001;134(2):103-13.

Variability, heritability and genetic advance in pheno-morphic and agronomic
traits of tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] germplasm from eight regions of
Ethiopia.

Assefa K(1), Tefera H, Merker A, Kefyalew T, Hundera F.

Author information: 
(1)Debre Zeit Agricultural Research Centre, Ethiopia.

One hundred and twenty tef Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter, germplasm lines from
eight regions of Ethiopia were field evaluated in two randomized complete blocks 
at Debre Zeit and Melkassa during the 1995/96, and at Debre Zeit and Alem Tena
during the 1996/97 main seasons. The objectives were to assess the extent and
pattern of their diversity with respect to 17 pheno-morphic and agronomic traits,
and to obtain an insight into the broad sense heritability (H) and genetic
advance (GA) expectations of the various traits. Discernible (p < or = 0.05)
variability among regions and among genotypes within regions were observed in
seven and nine of the traits, respectively. In the combined analysis of variance 
over environments, genotypes showed substantial (p < or = 0.05) variation in all 
traits, and genotypes and environments interacted significantly on nine of the
traits. The phenotypic and genotypic coefficients of variation varied in that
order from about 3% for days to maturity to 28% for grain yield/plant, and from
less than 2% for days to maturity to 15% for number of fertile tillers/plant.
Estimates of H were lowest for shoot phytomass/plant (17%) and highest for
panicle length (75%). The minimum GA expectations were for days to maturity (2%) 
and the maximum was for number of fertile tillers/plant (23%). About 67% of the
gross phenotypic diversity in the germplasm was explained on the basis of four
principal components (PCs). Up to 28% of the variance extracted by the first PC
was due mainly to variations in the second and first basal culm internode
diameters, culm and panicle length, days to panicle emergence, and number of
panicle branches and fertile tillers/plant. Largely variations in the length of
the two basal culm internodes and grain yield/plant contributed to 19% of the
whole variance accounted for by the second PC. Generally, the study showed that
there is ample genetic variation in the genotypes evaluated and this presents a
valuable base for use in the improvement work.

PMID: 11732845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6131-6. Epub 2001 Nov 15.

Oncogenic potential of mouse translation elongation factor-1 delta, a novel
cadmium-responsive proto-oncogene.

Joseph P(1), Lei YX, Whong WZ, Ong TM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory, Toxicology and Molecular Biology Branch,
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, West Virginia 
26505, USA. pcj5@cdc.gov

The molecular mechanisms potentially responsible for cadmium-induced cell
transformation and tumorigenesis were investigated using Balb/c-3T3 cells
transformed with cadmium chloride. Differential display analysis of gene
expression revealed consistent and reproducible overexpression of a transcript in
the transformed cells compared with the nontransformed cells. The full-length
cDNA corresponding to the differentially expressed transcript was cloned and was 
identified as mouse translation elongation factor-1 delta subunit (TEF-1 delta;
GenBank accession number ). Nucleotide sequence analysis of TEF-1 delta cDNA
revealed an open reading frame encoding the predicted protein of 281 amino acids 
and exhibited significant conservation with the corresponding protein of human,
Xenopus laevis, and Artemia. The presence of a leucine zipper motif,
characteristic of translation elongation factor-1 delta, was also found in the
mouse TEF-1 delta. A 31-kDa protein was detected in eukaryotic cells transfected 
with an expression vector containing the TEF-1 delta cDNA. Overexpression of the 
TEF-1 delta protein by transfection was oncogenic in NIH3T3 cells as evidenced by
the appearance of transformed foci exhibiting anchorage-independent growth and
the potential to grow as tumors in nude mice. Blocking the translation of TEF-1
delta with antisense TEF-1 delta mRNA resulted in a significant reversal of the
oncogenic potential of cadmium-transformed Balb/c-3T3 cells as evidenced from
suppression in anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenesis in nude mice. Our
findings demonstrate, for the first time, that the cell transformation and
tumorigenesis induced by cadmium are due, at least in part, to the overexpression
of TEF-1 delta, a novel cadmium-responsive proto-oncogene.

PMID: 11711542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Strength Cond Res. 2001 Feb;15(1):81-5.

The validity of recent curl-up tests in young adults.

Knudson D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Education and Exercise Science, California State
University, Chico 95929, USA.

The validity of 2 field tests of abdominal endurance was examined in a sample of 
22 male and 22 female college students. Scores on the modified trunk-curl (7) and
the 90-second bench trunk-curl (22) were correlated with isometric trunk flexor
strength and endurance measured on a Cybex TEF machine. There were no significant
correlations (-0.21 < r < 0.36) between the field tests and abdominal strength.
Only the bench trunk-curl was significantly correlated (rmale = 0.50 and rfemale 
= 0.46, p < 0.05) with abdominal muscular endurance. The nonsignificant
association with the modified curl-up was likely due to a ceiling effect created 
by the ease of the test. The weak correlations between field tests of abdominal
endurance and isometric abdominal endurance (about 25% common variance) and a
recent longitudinal study (17) suggest that the curl-ups scores and their
hypothesized health-related fitness standards should be interpreted with caution.

PMID: 11708712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Pediatr Surg. 2001 Nov;36(11):1725-7.

Multistaged extrathoracic esophageal elongation procedure for long gap esophageal
atresia: Experience with 12 patients.

Kimura K(1), Nishijima E, Tsugawa C, Collins DL, Lazar EL, Stylianos S, Sandler
A, Soper RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

PURPOSE: This study evaluates the multistaged extrathoracic esophageal elongation
procedure performed on 12 babies with long gap esophageal atresia over 15 years.
METHODS: Eight babies had pure esophageal atresia, 2 had proximal
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), and 2 had distal TEF. The gaps ranged between 2 
and 7 vertebral bodies. Proximal esophagostomy, TEF ligation, and gastrostomy
were performed initially. The proximal esophagus is elongated 2 to 3 cm each time
by translocating the esophagostomy distally along the anterior chest wall at 2-
to 3-month intervals. Sham-fed milk is collected in an ostomy bag and refed via
the gastrostomy. The definitive esophageal reconstruction is performed at 5 to 24
months of age.
RESULTS: Only one elongation was required in 4 babies, 2 were needed in 5, 3 in
2, and 5 in 1 patient. All patients tolerated sham feeding well. After esophageal
restoration, 3 patients had minor leakage. All (12 of 12) patients had
anastomotic stenosis requiring multiple dilatations, of which, 3 needed resection
of stricture. Eleven patients had gastroesophageal reflux that required
fundoplication. Follow-up was possible in 11 patients for 4 months to 14 years
after esophageal restoration. Seven early patients are eating normally.
CONCLUSION: Multistaged extrathoracic esophageal elongation is effective in
stretching the proximal esophagus to bridge 2 to 7 vertebral bodies.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company.

PMID: 11685713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Sci Total Environ. 2001 Oct 20;278(1-3):171-81.

Effect of origin of radiocaesium on the transfer from fallout to reindeer meat.

Ahman B(1), Wright SM, Howard BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Uppsala. birgitta.ahman@hgen.slu.se

Data on radiocaesium contamination of reindeer from five regions in Sweden have
been used, together with interpolated radiocaesium deposition data, to quantify
spatial variation in transfer to reindeer meat and to consider how it changes
with time in different areas. Since the regions were contaminated to different
extents by global and Chernobyl fallout, it was also possible to determine the
influence of the origin or age of radiocaesium fallout on the transfer to
reindeer meat. The regions differed significantly with regard to transfer of
radiocaesium to reindeer meat. In two regions in the North of Sweden, where there
was less Chernobyl 137Cs, aggregated transfer coefficients (Tag), estimated for
the main slaughter period in the first year after the Chernobyl fallout, were low
(0.15 and 0.36 m2 kg(-1) in January-April). Average Tag values calculated for the
winter period (January-April) in two regions in the middle of Sweden, where
deposition from Chernobyl dominated (83 and 94%, respectively, of the total
deposition), were 0.78 and 0.84 m2 kg(-1), respectively with a maximum Tag for an
individual reindeer of 1.87 m2 kg(-1). There was a threefold increase in Tag
values from early autumn to late winter reflecting the change in the reindeer
diet from less contaminated vascular plants to more contaminated lichens. The
decline of 137Cs in reindeer meat from 1986 to 2000 differed between regions with
longer effective half-lives (Tef) in the northerly regions (11.0 and 7.1 years,
respectively) with less Chernobyl fallout, and shorter half-lives in the other
three regions (3.5-3.8 years). This observation, together with a lack of a
decline in early autumn in the region with least Chernobyl fallout, supports the 
theory of a gradual, but reversible, fixation of radiocaesium in the soil over
the mid-long term. The results suggest that both the extent of transfer of 137Cs 
to reindeer meat, and its subsequent decline with time, are affected by the
differing origins of radiocaesium and that previous contamination may
substantially influence radiocaesium transfer in the event of a further accident.

PMID: 11669265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pediatr Surg Int. 2001 Sep;17(7):538-9.

Esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula associated with situs
inversus.

Shenoy VG(1), Jawale SA, Oak SN, Kulkarni BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, LTM Medical College and General Hospital,
Sion, Bombay, India.

The presence of situs inversus (SI) causes difficulty in the repair of esophageal
atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). We report two cases: the first
infant had situs SI abdominis with a right-sided aortic arch and the second had
situs inversus totalis. To our knowledge, these are the first reported cases of
repair of EA/TEF in a patient with SI.

PMID: 11666054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Comput Biol Med. 2001 Nov;31(6):513-23.

A model approach to sharing electronic medical records between and within the
state hospitals in Turkey.

Güler I(1), Müldür S.

Author information: 
(1)Electronics & Computer Education Department, Faculty of Technical Education,
Gazi University, 06500 Teknikokullar, Ankara, Turkey. iguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

It has always been a research interest to solve hospital management problems with
systematic approach by using modern management tools. Almost all the Hospital
Information System (HIS) software packages in Turkey keep track of local
transactions in administrative activities and material flow. In state hospitals
in Turkey, very little medical information is processed and most of the records
are still kept manually and archived on papers. In this paper, a cost-effective, 
flexible and easy-to-use Hospital Information System model is proposed in order
to give better diagnostic and treatment services. It is also demonstrated that
this model makes it possible to exchange information between and within the
hospitals over Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) network. 
User needs are taken into consideration during model development and the benefits
of model implementation to the hospital administration are stated. According to
the model proposed in this paper, only a single health care record number (HCRN) 
is required for a patient to access all her/his medical records stored in
different locations, from any state hospital in Turkey.

PMID: 11604155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Comput Biol Med. 2001 Nov;31(6):441-50.

AR spectral analysis of EEG signals by using maximum likelihood estimation.

Güler I(1), Kiymik MK, Akin M, Alkan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electronics-Computer Education, Faculty of Technical Education, 
Gazi University, 06500 Teknikokullar, Ankara, Turkey. iguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this study, EEG signals were analyzed using autoregressive (AR) method.
Parameters in AR method were realized by using maximum likelihood estimation
(MLE). Results were compared with fast Fourier transform (FFT) method. It is
observed that AR method gives better results in the analysis of EEG signals. On
the other hand, the results have also showed that AR method can also be used for 
some other researches and diagnosis of diseases.

PMID: 11604150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Clin Virol. 2001 Dec;23(1-2):65-77.

Intratype HPV16 sequence variation within LCR of isolates from asymptomatic
carriers and cervical cancers.

Schmidt M(1), Kedzia W, Gozdzicka-Józefiak A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Adam Mickiewicz University, Miedzychodzka 5, 60-371 Poznan,
Poland. mschmidt@amu.edu.pl

BACKGROUND: HPV16 is a predominant type of virus identified in genital lesions
and strongly associated with the development of genital cancers. Infection with
the virus is considered to be the main risk factor in the development of cervical
cancer. Based on HPV16 DNA isolated from invasive cancers, a classification of
intratype genetic variants was established and the strains were designated
according to geographical regions. The HPV16 variants classification was based on
isolates derived from cancers.
OBJECTIVES: Analysis of HPV16 LCR variants isolated from asymptomatic carriers
for comparison with cervical cancer isolates to examine whether a correlation can
be found between cervical epithelium state and variant of HPV16 it carries.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The HPV16 LCR fragments were amplified by PCR using DNA
isolated from cervical swabs and tissue sections then screened for nucleotide
changes by SSCP. Polymorphic sites were analysed for regulatory protein binding
properties by EMSA.
RESULTS: Comparison of the two groups revealed that isolates from cervical
cancers predominantly carry changes in sequences of YY1 binding sites (especially
at nucleotide 7519), while variants from asymptomatic carriers contained
nucleotide changes within or close to transcription binding sites for AP-1,
Oct-1, NF1, Tef-1, Tef-2, Sp1, YY1 and viral E2. EMSA study showed that sequence 
changes in the segment alter binding and formation of transcriptional complexes
in quantitative and/or qualitative manner and so they may inflict viral activity.
CONCLUSION: The results of our study show that there might be HPV16 variants of
decreased oncogenic potential therefore infection with such variants can recede.

PMID: 11595585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Sci (Lond). 2001 Oct;101(4):359-65.

Difference in leptin response to a high-fat meal between lean and obese men.

Imbeault P(1), Doucet E, Mauriège P, St-Pierre S, Couillard C, Alméras N, Després
JP, Tremblay A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Kinesiology, Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, Laval
University, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada G1K 7P4.

The aim of this study was to compare the leptin responses to a high-fat meal in
lean and obese men, and to investigate whether the net leptin response (area
under the incremental curve) after the meal was related to the thermic effect of 
food (TEF). Blood samples were collected after an overnight fast and every 2 h
for 8 h after a high-fat breakfast (60 g of fat/m(2) body surface area) in 12
lean and 12 obese men for determination of glucose, insulin and leptin. The TEF
was calculated as postprandial energy expenditure minus fasting energy
expenditure, as measured by indirect calorimetry. Fasting plasma glucose levels
were similar in lean and obese men, and increased in the same way after the meal.
Fasting and postprandial plasma insulin concentrations were significantly greater
in obese than in lean men (P<0.01 and P<0.05 respectively). Accordingly, obese
men showed a significantly higher net insulin response than lean subjects
(P<0.001). Fasting plasma leptin levels were greater in obese than in lean men
(P<0.001). After the meal, plasma leptin increased significantly in lean men,
whereas it decreased in obese men (group by time interaction, P<0.01). The net
response of leptin was greater in lean than in obese men, but this did not reach 
statistical significance (P=0.07). Moreover, the TEF was similar in the two
groups. No significant relationship was observed between either the net insulin
response or the net leptin response after the high-fat meal and the TEF of lean
subjects (-0.05 <r<0.31). In obese men, the net response of insulin was
correlated significantly with TEF (r=0.70, P<0.05), whereas the net response of
leptin was not (r=-0.40). These results suggest that obesity is related to an
impaired regulation of leptin by insulin, since leptin levels increased in lean
men but decreased in obese men following a high-fat meal. Moreover, the fact that
the postprandial leptin responses of both lean and obese men were not
significantly related to the TEF suggests that the ob gene product is probably
not acutely involved in the control of this energy expenditure component in
humans.

PMID: 11566073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Anim Reprod Sci. 2001 Sep 15;67(3-4):253-65.

Effects of Leucaena pallida and Sesbania sesban supplementation on testicular
histology of tropical sheep and goats.

Woldemeskel M(1), Tegegne A, Umunna NN, Kaitho RJ, Tamminga S.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Addis Ababa University, P.O. Box 34, Debre
Zeit, Ethiopia.

Thirty Ethiopian highland rams with an average body weight of 23.7kg (S.D.=1.23) 
and age of 18 months and 25 East African bucks with an average body weight of
18.6kg (S.D.=2.06) and age of 14 months were used to study the long term effects 
of supplementation with the leaves of Leucaena pallida and Sesbania sesban on
testicular histology. Within species, animals were blocked based on body weight
and scrotal circumference and randomly assigned, within blocks, to five
nutritional treatment groups in a complete randomised block design. All animals
were provided with unchopped teff (Eragrostis tef) straw ad libitum and were
supplemented with either 150g of wheat bran (control), leucaena (200 or 400g) or 
sesbania (200 or 400g) leaves for a period of 6 months. At the end of the
experimental period, all animals were surgically castrated and testicular samples
were collected and prepared for histopathological examination. In sheep 200g S.
sesban induced relatively more necrosis of the seminiferous tubules than 200g L. 
pallida, but with similar degree of tubular degeneration. However, lesions in
testis of goats fed on 200g S. sesban and 200g L. pallida did not differ. The
effect of 400g S. sesban and 400g L. pallida in sheep indicated that the former
hardly induced lesions except depressive effect on spermatogenesis. Similar
results were observed in goats. About 400g S. sesban induced milder lesions in
sheep and goats than were 200g S. sesban. The lesions were compared and discussed
in relation to the phytochemical composition of the supplementary feeds.

PMID: 11530271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Intern Med. 2001 Jul;40(7):620-3.

Unilateral bronchiectasis and esophageal dysmotility in congenital adult
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Behnia M(1), Tarver RD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Occupational Medicine,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, USA.

Tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) in adults are most commonly neoplastic, and very
rarely congenital in nature. We report a 45-year-old Hispanic male with TEF and
initial presentation of minimal hemoptysis. The patient had radiographic evidence
of unilateral upper lobe (RUL) bronchiectasis, massive esophageal dilatation, and
dysmotility. However, there was no evidence of esophageal malignancy, achalasia, 
or Chagas' disease. Bronchoscopy revealed a large TEF in the posterior wall of
trachea, which was not visualized on esophagram or esophagoscopy. Bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) cultures grew Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC). Our report
illustrates that idiopathic, or congenital, TEF can be associated with esophageal
dysmotility, adulthood bronchiectasis, and atypical mycobacterial superinfection.

PMID: 11506303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Anat Rec. 2001 Sep 1;264(1):93-100.

Evidence of a common pathogenesis for foregut duplications and esophageal atresia
with tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Qi BQ(1), Beasley SW, Williams AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch, New
Zealand.

The pathogenesis of the alimentary tract duplications, including foregut
duplications (FgD) remains speculative. The accidental finding of FgD in fetal
rats with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) induced by
Adriamycin provided an animal model to investigate a possible relationship
between these two entities. Timed-pregnant rats were intraperitoneally injected
with Adriamycin (1.75 mg/kg) on gestational Days 6 to 9. Their embryos were
harvested by Caesarean section from gestational Days 14 to 21. Forty-six of
embryos were processed and serially sectioned in the transverse or sagittal
planes. EA-TEF occurred in 43/46 (93%) embryos of which 11 (24%) were found to
have an associated FgD located at the level where the esophagus was absent. Six
FgDs communicated with the foregut or the trachea. Five noncommunicating FgDs
were located between the foregut and the vertebral column. In the control embryo,
the notochord was located in the centre of the vertebral column from Day 11 of
the gestation. In Day 14, 15 and 16, however, embryos exposed to Adriamycin, an
abnormal notochord or branch frequently was located within the mesenchyme of the 
maldeveloped foregut or attached to the duplication cyst. In some, it appeared
that the notochord was drawing the cyst-like structure away from the foregut. The
present study confirms that duplications adjacent to the esophagus arise from the
foregut and that failure of the foregut to detach from the notochord at the
normal time may contribute to the development of foregut duplications.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11505375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;34(1):35-41.

Using dose addition to estimate cumulative risks from exposures to multiple
chemicals.

Chen JJ(1), Chen YJ, Rice G, Teuschler LK, Hamernik K, Protzel A, Kodell RL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biometry and Risk Assessment, National Center for Toxicological
Research, US Food and Drug Administration, Jefferson, Arkansas 72079, USA.

The Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) of 1996 requires the EPA to consider the
cumulative risk from exposure to multiple chemicals that have a common mechanism 
of toxicity. Three methods, hazard index (HI), point-of-departure index (PODI),
and toxicity equivalence factor (TEF), have commonly been considered to estimate 
the cumulative risk. These methods are based on estimates of ED(10) (point of
departure) and reference doses from the dose-response functions of individual
chemicals. They do not incorporate the actual dose-response function of the
mixture from multiple chemical exposures. Dose addition is considered to be an
appropriate approach to cumulative risk assessment because it assumes that the
chemicals of interest act in accordance with a common mode of action (a similar
action). This paper proposes a formal statistical procedure to estimate the
cumulative risk by fitting the dose-response model of the mixture under dose
addition. The relative potency between two chemicals is estimated directly from
the joint dose response model of the mixture. An example data set of four drugs
representing four chemicals is used to illustrate the proposed procedure and
compare it to the HI, PODI, and TEF methods.

PMID: 11502154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Anim Sci. 2001 Jul;79(7):1849-57.

Effect of high temperature and feeding level on energy utilization in piglets.

Collin A(1), van Milgen J, Dubois S, Noblet J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherches sur le Veau et le Porc, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, Saint-Gilles, France.

The effect of temperature (23 or 33 degrees C) and feeding level on components of
energy balance was studied in seven groups of individually reared Piétrain x
(Landrace x Large White) littermate piglets. Within each litter, one pig was
reared at 23 degrees C and given a predefined feeding level close to ad libitum
(23AL pigs), one was reared at 33 degrees C and also fed close to ad libitum
(33AL), and one was reared at 23 degrees C and pair-fed to the 33AL pig (23PF).
Piglets of one litter were acclimated during 2 to 4 wk to their experimental
temperature in temperature-controlled rooms before being transferred (one per
week) to a respiration chamber for measurement of nitrogen and energy balances.
The average initial BW was 22.4 kg. The data on O2 consumption, CO2 production,
and physical activity were collected over seven consecutive days and used to
calculate total heat production (HPtot) and its components: fasting heat
production (FHP), heat production due to physical activity (HPact), and thermic
effect of feed (TEF). A preliminary trial was conducted in which heat production 
was measured in three piglets according to a Latin square design at 23, 25, and
27 degrees C. Total heat production was, but activity-free heat production was
not, affected by temperature, and no firm conclusions could be drawn as to
whether 23 degrees C was within the thermoneutral zone of fed piglets. In Trial
2, the combination of increased temperature and reduced feed intake resulted in a
20% lesser heat production in 33AL than in 23AL pigs. This was due to a reduction
in both TEF (-39%) and FHP (0.642 vs 0.808 MJ x d(-1) x kg BW-0.60). Despite the 
shorter duration of standing activity, HPact was slightly higher at 33 degrees C,
probably due to hyperventilation at this temperature. With similar feeding levels
(23PF vs 33AL), HPtot and activity-free heat production were less at 33 degrees C
and energy retention as protein (+6%) and fat (+31%) was increased. Because HPact
was similar for both treatments, the greater energy retention for 33AL seemed to 
be due to a greater utilization of feed energy or to a reduced maintenance
requirement (i.e., reduced FHP). However, the type of stress imposed on 23PF and 
33AL pigs was different and may have affected energy metabolism. The results
suggest that the reduction in heat production of piglets at high ambient
temperatures is caused by a reduction in voluntary feed intake and differences in
energetic efficiency. The mechanisms for the lesser efficiency at 23 degrees C
compared to 33 degrees C (at the same level of feed intake) remain unclear.

PMID: 11465372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dev Biol. 2001 Jul 15;235(2):507-20.

Novel cell lines promote the discovery of genes involved in early heart
development.

Brunskill EW(1), Witte DP, Yutzey KE, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3300, USA.

Clonal cell lines representing early cardiomyocytes would provide valuable
reagents for the dissection of the genetic program of early cardiogenesis. Here
we describe the establishment and characterization of cell lines from the hearts 
of transgenic mice and embryos with SV40 large T antigen expressed in the
heart-forming region. Ultrastructure analysis by transmission electron microscopy
showed the primitive, precontractile nature of the resulting cells, with the
absence of myofilaments, Z lines, and intercalated disks. Immunohistochemistry,
RT-PCR, Northern blots, and oligonucleotide microarrays were used to determine
the expression levels of thousands of genes in the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines. The
resulting gene-expression profiles showed the transcription of early
cardiomyocyte genes such as Nkx2.5, GATA4, Tbx5, dHAND, cardiac troponin C, and
SM22-alpha. Furthermore, many genes not previously implicated in early cardiac
development were expressed. Two of these genes, Hic-5, a possible negative
regulator of muscle differentiation, and the transcription enhancing factor TEF-5
were selected and shown by in situ hybridizations to be expressed in the early
developing heart. The results show that the 1H and ECL-2 cell lines can be used
to discover novel genes expressed in the early cardiomyocyte.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11437454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Br J Nutr. 2001 Jul;86(1):63-70.

Effect of high temperature on feeding behaviour and heat production in
group-housed young pigs.

Collin A(1), van Milgen J, Dubois S, Noblet J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Recherches sur le Veau et le Porc, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, 35590 Saint-Gilles, France.

To assess the acclimation of pigs to heat stress, the effects of high (33 degrees
C) or thermoneutral (23 degrees C) constant temperatures on feeding behaviour and
components of energy balance were studied in group-housed young pigs. Three
groups of five pigs were used at each temperature. After 1 week of adaptation,
voluntary feed intake (VFI) and heat production (HP) were recorded for thirteen
consecutive days. Animals were fed ad libitum. Fasting HP was measured on the
last day. Average initial body weights (BW) were 21.4 and 20.9 kg at 23 and 33
degrees C respectively. Feeding behaviour was measured individually and rate of
feed intake and characteristics of feeding behaviour were calculated. The O(2)
consumption, CO(2) production and physical activity of the group were used to
calculate total HP (HP(tot)) and its components, i.e. fasting HP (HP(fas)), HP
due to physical activity (HP(act)) and thermic effect of feed (TEF). The BW gain 
and VFI were reduced by 37 and 30 % respectively at 33 degrees C. The decrease in
VFI corresponded to reduced consumption time (-34 %) and size of the meals (-32
%). Feeding behaviour was mostly diurnal (66 % of the VFI), and the rate of feed 
intake (28 g/min) was not affected by temperature. Daily HP(tot), HP(fas) and
TEF, expressed per kg metabolic weight (BW(0.60)), were significantly decreased
at 33 degrees C by 22, 18 and 35 % respectively, whereas HP(act) was not
affected; TEF expressed per g feed was not affected (2 kJ/g). The decrease in
HP(tot) at 33 degrees C was caused by a reduction in TEF and HP(fas) (kJ/d per/kg
BW(0.60)), which are both related to reduction in VFI.

PMID: 11432766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Am Chem Soc. 2001 Jul 4;123(26):6338-48.

Crystal structure of ClF(4)(+)SbF(6)(-), normal coordinate analyses of ClF(4)(+),
BrF(4)(+), IF(4)(+), SF(4), SeF(4), and TeF(4), and simple method for calculating
the effects of fluorine bridging on the structure and vibrational spectra of ions
in a strongly interacting ionic solid.

Christe KO(1), Zhang X, Sheehy JA, Bau R.

Author information: 
(1)Propulsion Sciences and Advanced Concepts Division, Air Force Research
Laboratory (AFRL/PRS), Edwards AFB, California 93524, USA.

The crystal structure of the 1:1 adduct ClF(5).SbF(5) was determined and contains
discrete ClF(4)(+) and SbF(6)(-) ions. The ClF(4)(+) cation has a pseudotrigonal 
bipyramidal structure with two longer and more ionic axial bonds and two shorter 
and more covalent equatorial bonds. The third equatorial position is occupied by 
a sterically active free valence electron pair of chlorine. The coordination
about the chlorine atom is completed by two longer fluorine contacts in the
equatorial plane, resulting in the formation of infinite zigzag chains of
alternating ClF(4)(+) and cis-fluorine bridged SbF(6)(-) ions. Electronic
structure calculations were carried out for the isoelectronic series ClF(4)(+),
BrF(4)(+), IF(4)(+) and SF(4), SeF(4), TeF(4) at the B3LYP, MP2, and CCSD(T)
levels of theory and used to revise the previous vibrational assignments and
force fields. The discrepancies between the vibrational spectra observed for
ClF(4)(+) in ClF(4)(+)SbF(6)(-) and those calculated for free ClF(4)(+) are
largely due to the fluorine bridging that compresses the equatorial F-Cl-F bond
angle and increases the barrier toward equatorial-axial fluorine exchange by the 
Berry mechanism. A computationally simple model, involving ClF(4)(+) and two
fluorine-bridged HF molecules at a fixed distance as additional equatorial
ligands, was used to simulate the bridging in the infinite chain structure and
greatly improved the fit between observed and calculated spectra.

PMID: 11427058  [PubMed]


63. Gene. 2001 May 30;270(1-2):113-20.

Phylogeny and origin of 82 zygomycetes from all 54 genera of the Mucorales and
Mortierellales based on combined analysis of actin and translation elongation
factor EF-1alpha genes.

Voigt K(1), Wöstemeyer J.

Author information: 
(1)Fungal Reference Centre, and Department of General Microbiology and Microbial 
Genetics, Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Institute of Microbiology, Neugasse
24, 07743, Jena, Germany. b5kevo@rz.uni-jena.de

True fungi (Eumycota) are heterotrophic eukaryotic microorganisms encompassing
ascomycetes, basidiomycetes, chytridiomycetes and zygomycetes. The natural
systematics of the latter group, Zygomycota, are very poorly understood due to
the lack of distinguishing morphological characters. We have determined sequences
for the nuclear-encoded genes actin (act) from 82 zygomycetes representing all 54
currently recognized genera from the two zygomycetous orders Mucorales and
Mortierellales. We also determined sequences for translation elongation factor
EF-1alpha (tef) from 16 zygomycetes (total of 96,837 bp). Phylogenetic analysis
in the context of available sequence data (total 2,062 nucleotide positions per
species) revealed that current classification schemes for the mucoralean fungi
are highly unnatural at the family and, to a large extent, at the genus level.
The data clearly indicate a deep, ancient and distinct dichotomy of the orders
Mucorales and Mortierellales, which are recognized only in some zygomycete
systems. Yet at the same time the data show that two genera - Umbelopsis and
Micromucor - previously placed within the Mortierellales on the basis of their
weakly developed columella (a morphological structure of the sporangiophore
well-developed within all Mucorales) are in fact members of the Mucorales.
Phylogenetic analyses of the encoded amino acid sequences in the context of
homologues from eukaryotes and archaebacterial outgroups indicate that the
Eumycota studied here are a natural group but provide little or no support for
the monophyly of either zygomycetes, ascomycetes or basidiomycetes. The data
clearly indicate that a complete revision of zygomycete natural systematics is
necessary.

PMID: 11404008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Chromosoma. 2001 Apr;110(1):10-23.

tef: a mutation that causes telomere fusion and severe genome rearrangements in
Drosophila melanogaster.

Queiroz-Machado J(1), Perdigão J, Simões-Carvalho P, Herrmann S, Sunkel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas de Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto,
Portugal. cesunkel@ibmc.up.pt

Telomeres are the stable ends of linear chromosomes in eukaryotes. These complex 
protein-nucleic acid structures are essential to maintain genomic stability and
the integrity of linear chromosomes. We identified a new mutation in Drosophila
that causes a high frequency of end-to-end fusions of chromosomes during mitosis 
and meiosis. Linear chromosomal ends appear to be essential for fusions to take
place. These fusions do not resolve, leading to cycles of chromosomal breakage
and rejoining and severe genome rearrangements. The gene is essential for normal 
cell proliferation and mutant tissue shows significant apoptosis. Our analysis
suggests that the function encoded by the mutant gene is required to protect the 
linear ends of chromosomes.

PMID: 11398972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Circ Res. 2001 Jun 8;88(11):1142-50.

Clock genes in the heart: characterization and attenuation with hypertrophy.

Young ME(1), Razeghi P, Taegtmeyer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of
Texas-Houston Medical School, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2001 Dec 7;89(12):1084-6.

We investigated whether the heart, like other mammalian organs, possesses
internal clocks, and, if so, whether pressure overload-induced hypertrophy alters
the clock mechanism. Clock genes are intrinsically maintained, as shown by
rhythmic changes even in single cells. Clocks are believed to confer a selective 
advantage by priming the cell for the expected environmental stimulus. In this
way, clocks allow anticipation, thereby synchronizing responsiveness of the cell 
with the timing of the stimulus. We have found that in rat heart all mammalian
homologues of known Drosophila clock genes (bmal1, clock, cry1, cry2, per1, per2,
per3, dbp, hlf, and tef) show circadian patterns of expression and that the
induction of clock output genes (the PAR [rich in proline and acidic amino acid
residues] transcription factors dbp, hlf, and tef) is attenuated in the
pressure-overloaded hypertrophied heart. The results expose a new dynamic
regulatory system in the heart, which is partially lost with hypertrophy.
Although the target genes of these PAR transcription factors are not known in the
heart, the results provide evidence for a diminished ability of the hypertrophied
heart to anticipate and subsequently adapt to physiological alterations during
the day.

PMID: 11397780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Nutr. 2001 Jun;131(6):1833-8.

An underfeeding study in healthy men and women provides further evidence of
impaired regulation of energy expenditure in old age.

Das SK(1), Moriguti JC, McCrory MA, Saltzman E, Mosunic C, Greenberg AS, Roberts 
SB.

Author information: 
(1)The U.S. Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at
Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The effect of aging on energy regulation remains controversial. We compared the
effects of underfeeding on changes in energy expenditure and respiratory quotient
in young normal weight men and women [YNW, age 25.7 +/- 3.2 y(SD), body mass
index (BMI) 23.1 +/- 1.6 kg/m(2)], young overweight men and women (YOW, age 26.1 
+/- 3.5 y, BMI 27.7 +/- 2.1 kg/m(2)) and older (OLD) men and women (age 68.4 +/- 
3.3 y, BMI 27.4 +/- 3.4 kg/m(2)). The thermic effect of feeding (TEF) during
weight maintenance, and changes in resting energy expenditure (REE) and
respiratory quotient were determined in response to undereating by an average
3.75 MJ/d for 6 wk. In addition, body composition was measured. No significant
differences among the groups were observed in TEF, fasting and postprandial
respiratory quotient, or the change in fasting respiratory quotient with
underfeeding. However, REE adjusted for fat-free mass and fat mass was
significantly lower in OLD subjects compared with YNW and YOW subjects (P <
0.05). In addition, the REE response to weight change was significantly
attenuated in the OLD subjects (P = 0.023). These data suggest that the
responsiveness of energy expenditure to negative energy balance is attenuated in 
old age, and provide further support for the hypothesis that mechanisms of energy
regulation are broadly disregulated in old age.

PMID: 11385075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Chemosphere. 2001 May-Jun;43(4-7):903-8.

Public health assessment of hexachlorobenzene.

Pohl HR(1), McClure PR, Fay M, Holler J, De Rosa CT.

Author information: 
(1)Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, US Department of Health and 
Human Services, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. hrp1@cdc.gov

Recently, hexachlorobenzene (HCB) was proposed for inclusion in the system of
toxicity equivalency factors (TEFs) currently used for dioxin-like compounds. In 
this paper, we explore the practical implications of the proposition to the
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) programs by comparing
respective health guidance values for 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) 
and HCB (expressed as total toxicity equivalents [TEQs]), reviewing possible
interactions between HCB and dioxin-like chemicals, and by providing information 
on actual co-existence of HCB and dioxin-like chemicals at hazardous waste sites.
We found a good correlation between the TEF-adjusted oral exposure guidance
values for HCB and guidance values for TCDD. The combination of HCB and other
dioxin-like compounds was not found in soil, air, or water media at hazardous
waste sites. Based on this fact, it is not necessary to include HCB in the total 
TEQ count at hazardous waste sites at this time.

PMID: 11372883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Chemosphere. 2001 May-Jun;43(4-7):501-6.

The survey of PCDDs and PCDFs in the ambient air of the urban and industrial
sites in Korea, 1998-99.

Kim Y(1), Lee SY, Kim M, Kim SD.

Author information: 
(1)Doping Control Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Cheongryang,
Seoul, South Korea. yjkim@kist.re.kr

A comprehensive quality survey for PCDDs/PCDFs in ambient air has been studied in
Korea for two years. Monitoring was undertaken at two locations throughout Seoul 
(urban site) and Incheon (industrial site) in winter and spring. The periods are 
during 16 to 17 March 1998, 21 to 22 January 1999 and 28 to 29 April 1999 (Seoul)
and 25 to 26 March 1998, 18 to 19 January 1999 and 26 to 27 April 1999 (Incheon).
The values of PCDDs/PCDFs in ambient air were expressed as concentrations and
international TEF values. The contents of PCDDs/PCDFs in urban site (Seoul) were 
lower than in industrial site (Incheon). The measurements in wintertime were
higher than in springtime. The contents of 2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF with half toxicity of 
2,3,7,8-TCDD were high. Thus we assumed to have an interest to the contents of
2,3,4,7,8-PeCDF. In this study, sample size was small (sample number was only 18)
and sampling period was limited by 24 h. Therefore, we need more widespread and
long-term surveys in order to estimate the human exposure by inhalation.

PMID: 11372833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Genes Dev. 2001 May 15;15(10):1229-41.

TEAD/TEF transcription factors utilize the activation domain of YAP65, a
Src/Yes-associated protein localized in the cytoplasm.

Vassilev A(1), Kaneko KJ, Shu H, Zhao Y, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2753, USA.

Mammals express four highly conserved TEAD/TEF transcription factors that bind
the same DNA sequence, but serve different functions during development.
TEAD-2/TEF-4 protein purified from mouse cells was associated predominantly with 
a novel TEAD-binding domain at the amino terminus of YAP65, a powerful
transcriptional coactivator. YAP65 interacted specifically with the carboxyl
terminus of all four TEAD proteins. Both this interaction and sequence-specific
DNA binding by TEAD were required for transcriptional activation in mouse cells. 
Expression of YAP in lymphocytic cells that normally do not support
TEAD-dependent transcription (e.g., MPC11) resulted in up to 300-fold induction
of TEAD activity. Conversely, TEAD overexpression squelched YAP activity.
Therefore, the carboxy-terminal acidic activation domain in YAP is the
transcriptional activation domain for TEAD transcription factors. However,
whereas TEAD was concentrated in the nucleus, excess YAP65 accumulated in the
cytoplasm as a complex with the cytoplasmic localization protein, 14-3-3. Because
TEAD-dependent transcription was limited by YAP65, and YAP65 also binds Src/Yes
protein tyrosine kinases, we propose that YAP65 regulates TEAD-dependent
transcription in response to mitogenic signals.

PMCID: PMC313800
PMID: 11358867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Arch Toxicol. 2001 Apr;75(2):80-7.

Toxicity of PCB-126 in European flounder (Platichthys flesus) with emphasis on
histopathology and cytochrome P4501A induction in several organ systems.

Grinwis GC(1), van den Brandhof EJ, Engelsma MY, Kuiper RV, Vaal MA, Vethaak AD, 
Wester PW, Vos JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University,
PO Box 80158, 3508 TD Utrecht, The Netherlands. g.grinwis@pobox.uu.nl

A series of experiments was set up to elucidate the effects of pollution on
marine and estuarine fish health, since the European flounder (Platichthys
flesus) has shown a relatively high prevalence of (pre)neoplastic liver lesions
and lymphocystis virus disease in Dutch coastal and estuarine waters. The
hypothesis of a causal relationship between pollution and the above-mentioned
diseases was supported by results from semi-field experiments. Therefore several 
laboratory experiments were carried out to substantiate causality further and to 
identify the xenobiotics that may play a major role in the field. The present
study focuses on polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). European flounders
(Platichthys flesus) were orally exposed to a single dose of 0, 0.5, 5 or 50 mg
PCB-126/kg body weight under controlled laboratory conditions. The effects on
liver, gills, gastrointestinal tract, gonads, spleen and mesonephros were
examined histologically after 16 days. Induction and localization of cytochrome
P4501A (CYP1A) immunoreactivity, and effects on hepatocyte proliferation were
visualized immunohistochemically. Effects on thymus size were examined by
morphometric analysis of serial sections. Three out of five animals of the
highest dose group showed haemorrhages in the fins and tail after 16 days. All
animals showed reduced activity in the later stages of the experiment, and some
animals of the highest dose group discontinued feeding 14 days after exposure.
Strong and exposure-related induction of CYP1A immunoreactivity was noted in
hepatocytes, endothelium in all organs examined, and epithelium of the digestive 
tract and mesonephros at PCB-126 levels of 0.5, 5 and 50 mg/kg. In addition, the 
strong induction of CYP1A immunoreactivity in a distinct population of
haematopoietic cells in the mesonephros and in circulating blood is remarkable,
and has not been described previously in other fish species. Furthermore, a
morphometrically determined significant reduction in relative thymus size was
noted in animals exposed to 50 mg PCB-126/kg. Although the functional
implications for the immune system of this reduction need to be further
investigated, an impact on the specific resistance against infectious diseases as
observed in the field, e.g. viral lymphocystis disease, is not implausible. In
addition, a significant increase in absolute liver weight, in hepatosomatic
index, and in number of proliferating hepatocytes [measured as immunoreactivity
against proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA)] was noted in animals of the
highest dose group. From these findings we suppose that PCB-126 (and related
chemicals) may play a role in the promotion of tumour development in the liver of
European flounders as observed in the field. The results of the present
experiment show relatively stronger effects than effects previously reported from
experiments with TCDD, suggesting that the TEF of 0.005 assigned to PCB-126 from 
early life stage mortality experiments in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss),
underestimates the toxic potential of PCB-126.

PMID: 11354910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Comput Biol Med. 2001 Jul;31(4):229-38.

Determination of aorta failure with the application of FFT, AR and wavelet
methods to Doppler technique.

Güler I(1), Hardalaç F, Müldür S.

Author information: 
(1)Electronics & Computer Education Department, Faculty of Technical Education,
Gazi University, 06500 Teknikokullar, Ankara, Turkey. iguler@tef.gazi.edu.tr

In this study, Doppler signals recorded from the output of aorta valve of 24
patients were transferred to a personal computer (PC) by using a 16-bit sound
card. Doppler difference frequencies were recorded from each of the patients, and
then analyzed using fast Fourier transform, autoregressive and wavelet transform 
analyzer to obtain their sonograms. These sonograms are then used to compare with
the applied methods in terms of medical evaluation.

PMID: 11334633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Environ Sci Technol. 2001 Apr 15;35(8):1630-6.

Evaluation of methods for predicting the toxicity of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon mixtures.

Reeves WR(1), Barhoumi R, Burghardt RC, Lemke SL, Mayura K, McDonald TJ, Phillips
TD, Donnelly KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy and Public Health and Department of Civil
Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Risk assessments of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon mixtures are hindered by a
lack of reliable information on the potency of both mixtures and their individual
components. This paper examines methods for approximating the toxicity of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) mixtures. PAHs were isolated from a coal
tar and then separated by ring number using HPLC. Five fractions (A-E) were
generated, each possessing a unique composition and expected potency. The
toxicity of each fraction was measured in the Salmonella/mutagenicity assay and
the Chick Embryo Screening Test (CHEST). Their abilities to induce
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase and to inhibit gap junction intercellular
communication in rat liver Clone 9 cells were also measured. In the
Salmonella/mutagenicity assay, fractions were predicted to have potencies in the 
order C > D > E > B > A. Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for fractions A-E were 
in the order E > or = D > C > B > A. TEF values were 20,652, 20,929, 441, 306,
and 74.1 micrograms of BaP equiv/g, respectively. A lack of agreement between
assay-predicted potencies and chemical analysis-predicted potencies was observed 
with other assays and other methods of calculation. The results demonstrate the
limitations of using a single method to predict the toxicity of a complex PAH
mixture.

PMID: 11329713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Pediatr Surg. 2001 May;36(5):815-22.

Significance of the clinical course and early upper gastrointestinal studies in
predicting complications associated with repair of esophageal atresia.

Yanchar NL(1), Gordon R, Cooper M, Dunlap H, Soucy P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric General Surgery, IWK-Grace Health Centre, Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, Canada.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: In many centers, use of upper gastrointestinal (UGI) contrast
studies in the early postoperative period after esophageal atresia (EA) repair is
considered routine. Indications for this are many, including searching for
existing problems and predicting future complications. However, most major
complications, both early and late, usually are identified clinically before any 
radiologic studies. The purpose of this study was to investigate factors that may
anticipate the development of postoperative complications after EA repair,
looking particularly at the predictive value of routine early postoperative UGI
studies.
METHODS: A total of 111 consecutive cases of EA were identified retrospectively
over a 10-year period from 2 major Canadian pediatric health centers. One hundred
one were associated with a distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), of which, 90
had repairs. Ninety-seven percent of these had a UGI study at a median of 9.1
postoperative days (range, 2 to 23) before consideration of oral feeding. Charts 
were reviewed looking at patient variables, surgical factors, early UGI findings,
and postoperative courses. Complications that required intervention were noted,
including anastomotic leaks, gastroesophageal reflux (GER), strictures, and
recurrent and missed fistulae. All initial UGI studies were reexamined by 1 of 2 
pediatric radiologists. Logistic regression was used to examine relationships
between these clinical and radiologic variables and outcomes.
RESULTS: Of the variables analyzed, univariate analysis showed clinically
significant leaks to be associated with intraoperative factors (subjective degree
of anastomotic tension, and the use of myotomies) and early postoperative
clinical evidence suggesting a leak. In a multivariate model, all remained
independently significant except for the use of myotomies. Later development of
clinically significant GER also was associated with the degree of tension. It had
no relationship, however, with findings of dysmotility, esophageal shortening, or
reflux at the initial UGI study. Development of a stricture requiring dilatations
or resection was associated with a history of clinically evident GER only; no
relationships were seen with a history of an anastomotic leak or any other
clinical, operative, or radiographic variables. Missed or recurrent fistulae were
all suspected clinically before radiologic confirmation.
CONCLUSIONS: Early and late complications after repair of EA can be identified
and potentially anticipated based on clinical findings at the time of repair and 
during the postoperative period. The use of early "routine" UGI studies, with no 
suspicion of a problem, has little value in terms of predicting complications or 
future clinical course.

Copyright 2001 by W.B. Saunders Company.

PMID: 11329597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Genes Dev. 2001 Apr 15;15(8):995-1006.

Antagonistic role of E4BP4 and PAR proteins in the circadian oscillatory
mechanism.

Mitsui S(1), Yamaguchi S, Matsuo T, Ishida Y, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Brain Science, Kobe University School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

E4BP4, a basic leucine zipper transcription factor, contains a DNA-binding domain
closely related to DBP, HLF, and TEF, which are PAR proteins. Here, we show that 
the phase of e4bp4 mRNA rhythm is opposite to that of the dbp, hlf, and tef
rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the mammalian circadian center, and
the liver. The protein levels of E4BP4 and DBP also fluctuate in almost the
opposite phase. Moreover, all PAR proteins activate, whereas E4BP4 suppresses,
the transcriptional activity of the reporter gene containing a common binding
sequence in transcriptional assays in vitro. An electrophoretic mobility shift
assay demonstrated that E4BP4 is not able to dimerize with the PAR proteins, but 
is able to compete for the same binding sites with them. Furthermore, we showed
sustained low e4bp4 and high dbp mRNA levels in mCry-deficient mice. These
results indicate that the E4BP4 and PAR proteins are paired components of a
reciprocating mechanism wherein E4BP4 suppresses the transcription of target
genes during the time of day when E4BP4 is abundant, and the PAR proteins
activate them at another time of day. E4BP4 and the PAR proteins may switch back 
and forth between the on-off conditions of the target genes.

PMCID: PMC312673
PMID: 11316793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Pediatr Surg Int. 2001 Mar;17(2-3):101-3.

Azygos vein anomaly: the best predictor of a long gap in esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Gupta DK(1), Arora M, Srinivas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi-110029, India.

The gap between the pouches has a direct bearing on the tension at the
anastomosis that ultimately determines the anastomotic leak in esophageal atresia
with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF). Long-gap EA has been reported
to be associated with aortic-arch anomalies and 13 pairs of ribs. Our observation
that EA-TEF with an azygos-vein anomaly (AVA) invariably had a long gap led us to
retrospectively analyze our data. The mean gaps (+/- SD) in the groups with 13
pairs of ribs (n = 6), right-sided aortic arch (n = 16), and AVA (n = 9) were
1.25 +/- 0.27, 2.18 +/- 0.98, and 3.16 +/- 0.16 cm, respectively. There was no
statistically significant difference in the gap in patients who had 13 pairs of
ribs compared with controls who had 12 pairs of ribs. The gap was highest in the 
AVA group and was statistically significant (P < 0.001) compared with patients
with a normal azygos vein. In addition, the AVA group had a significant increase 
in mortality (P < 0.05) compared to the groups with a normal azygos vein;
although there was no statistically significant difference in other factors:
birth weight, time between delivery and surgery, cardiac anomalies, anorectal
malformations, renal malformations, and chest infection in the AVA group and
controls. An extra pair of ribs is not associated with a long gap, and an AVA per
se is an independent predictor of a long gap and mortality in EA-TEF.

PMID: 11315263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23464-70. Epub 2001 Apr 19.

DNA binding of TEA/ATTS domain factors is regulated by protein kinase C
phosphorylation in human choriocarcinoma cells.

Jiang SW(1), Dong M, Trujillo MA, Miller LJ, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) controls the expression of a diverse set 
of genes. Previous studies implicated protein kinase C (PKC)-mediated signal
transduction in modulating TEF function. We demonstrate that in human
choriocarcinoma BeWo cells, the PKC activator 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol
13-acetate and PKC inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide reciprocally down- and
up-regulate, respectively, TEF-mediated GGAATG core enhancer activity. In vitro
TEF-1 phosphorylation with several PKC isozymes and phosphoamino acid analysis
confirmed that TEF-1 is a potential PKC substrate. TEF-1.DNA complexes formed by 
BeWo nuclear extracts are supershifted by phosphoserine- and phosphothreonine-
but not phosphotyrosine-specific antibodies, indicating that TEF-1 is
phosphorylated in vivo at serine and threonine residues. The TEF-1
phosphorylation domain was localized to the third alpha-helix of the DNA binding 
domain and adjacent hinge region by phosphopeptide analysis. TEF-1
phosphorylation significantly reduced its DNA binding activity both in vitro and 
in vivo, providing a possible mechanism for the inhibitory action of PKC.
Finally, BeWo cells contained abundant levels of gamma and delta PKC isoforms,
and their overexpression resulted in even greater inhibition of GGAATG core
enhancer activity after 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate treatment. These
data strongly suggest that PKC-mediated phosphorylation is a key factor
controlling TEF function.

PMID: 11313339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Inorg Chem. 2001 Apr 9;40(8):1756-69.

Effective monkey saddle points and berry and lever mechanisms in the
topomerization of SF(4) and related tetracoordinated AX(4) species.

Mauksch M(1), Schleyer PR.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Chemie Centrum, Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Nägelsbachstrasse 25, 
91052 Erlangen, Germany.

The topomerization mechanisms of the SF(4) and SCl(2)F(2) sulfuranes, as well as 
their higher (SeF(4), TeF(4)) and isoelectronic analogues PF(4)(-), AsF(4)(-),
SbF(4)(-), SbCl(4)(-), ClF(4)(+), BrF(4)(+), BrCl(2)F(2)(+), and IF(4)(+)), have 
been computed at B3LYP/6-31+G and at B3LYP/6-311+G. All species have trigonal
bipyramidal (TBP) C(2)(v)() ground states. In such four-coordinated molecules,
Berry rotation exchanges both axial with two equatorial ligands simultaneously
while the alternative "lever" mechanism exchanges only one axial ligand with one 
equatorial ligand. While the barrier for the lever exchange in SF(4) (18.8 kcal
mol(-1)) is much higher than that for the Berry process (8.1 kcal mol(-1)), both 
mechanisms are needed for complete ligand exchange. The F(ax)F(ax) and F(eq)F(eq)
isomers of SF(2)Cl(2) have nearly the same energy and readily interconvert by BPR
with a barrier of 7.6 kcal mol(-1). The enantiomerization of the F(ax)F(eq)
chiral isomer can occur by either the Berry process (transition state barrier 8.3
kcal mol(-1)) or the "lever" mechanism via either of two C(s)() transition
states, based on the TBP geometry: Cl(ax) <--> Cl(eq) or F(ax) <--> F(eq)
exchanges with barriers of 6.3 and 15.7 kcal mol(-1), respectively. Full
scrambling of all ligand sites is possible only by inclusion of the lever
mechanism. Planar, "tetrahedral", and triplet forms are much higher in energy.
The TBP C(3)(v) structures of AX(4) either have two imaginary frequencies (NIMAG 
= 2) for the X = F, Cl species or are minima (NIMAG = 0) for the X = Br, I
compounds. These "effective monkey saddle points" have degenerate modes with two 
small frequencies, imaginary or real. Although a strictly defined "monkey saddle"
(with degenerate frequencies exactly zero) is not allowed, the flat C(3)(v)
symmetry region serves as a "transition state" for trifurcation of the pathways. 
The BPR mechanism also is preferred over the alternative lever process in the
topomerization of the selenurane SeF(4) (barriers 5.9 vs. 12.1 kcal mol(-1)), the
tellurane TeF(4) (2.1 vs. 6.4), and the interhalogen cations ClF(4)(+) (2.5 vs
14.8), BrF(4)(+) (4.7 vs. 11.3), BrF(2)Cl(2)(+) (14.6 vs. 17.4), and IF(4)(+)
(1.4 vs. 6.0), as well as for the series PF(4)(-) (7.0 vs. 9.0), AsF(4)(-) (9.3
vs. 17.2), and SbF(4)(-) (3.8 vs. 5.3 kcal mol(-1)), all computed at
B3LYP/6-311+G with the inclusion of quasirelativistic pseudopotentials for Te, I,
and Sb. The heavier halogens increasingly favor the lever process, where the
barrier (2.6 kcal mol(-1)) pertaining to the effective monkey saddle point
(C(3)(v) minimum for SbCl(4)(-)) is less than that for the Berry process (8.2
kcal mol(-1)).

PMID: 11312730  [PubMed]


78. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 May;59(5):1225-34.

Cloning and characterization of the mouse alpha1C/A-adrenergic receptor gene and 
analysis of an alpha1C promoter in cardiac myocytes: role of an MCAT element that
binds transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1).

O'Connell TD(1), Rokosh DG, Simpson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiology Division and Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA.

alpha1-Adrenergic receptor (AR) subtypes in the heart are expressed by myocytes
but not by fibroblasts, a feature that distinguishes alpha1-ARs from beta-ARs.
Here we studied myocyte-specific expression of alpha1-ARs, focusing on the
subtype alpha1C (also called alpha1A), a subtype implicated in cardiac
hypertrophic signaling in rat models. We first cloned the mouse alpha1C-AR gene, 
which consisted of two exons with an 18 kb intron, similar to the alpha1B-AR
gene. The receptor coding sequence was >90% homologous to that of rat and human. 
alpha1C-AR transcription in mouse heart was initiated from a single Inr consensus
sequence at -588 from the ATG; this and a putative polyadenylation sequence 8.5
kb 3' could account for the predominant 11 kb alpha1C mRNA in mouse heart. A
5'-nontranscribed fragment of 4.4 kb was active as a promoter in cardiac myocytes
but not in fibroblasts. Promoter activity in myocytes required a single muscle
CAT (MCAT) element, and this MCAT bound in vitro to recombinant and endogenous
transcriptional enhancer factor-1. Thus, alpha1C-AR transcription in cardiac
myocytes shares MCAT dependence with other cardiac-specific genes, including the 
alpha- and beta-myosin heavy chains, skeletal alpha-actin, and brain natriuretic 
peptide. However, the mouse alpha1C gene was not transcribed in the neonatal
heart and was not activated by alpha1-AR and other hypertrophic agonists in rat
myocytes, and thus differed from other MCAT-dependent genes and the rat alpha1C
gene.

PMID: 11306707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Forensic Sci. 2001 Mar;46(2):323-7.

Multiple-probe thermography for estimating the postmortem interval: II. Practical
versions of the Triple-Exponential Formulae (TEF) for estimating the time of
death in the field.

Al-Alousi LM(1), Anderson RA, Worster DM, Land DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine & Science, University of Glasgow, UK.

A simple, reliable, and relatively accurate method for estimating the time since 
death is described. It is based on the Triple-Exponential Formulae (TEF), which
are devised for the first time in this study. The postmortem cooling rate of the 
brain, liver, and rectum in 117 forensic cases were investigated (Part I). The
method can be used in the field as a computer program, reference graph, or
reference chart-ruler. The program is simple and can easily be run by any user.
There are six reference graphs representing the average brain, liver, and rectal 
cooling curves for naked and covered body groups. The ruler is designed for the
rectal cooling curves for covered and naked bodies. This method requires one
temperature measurement of the chosen body site and the environment. The
postmortem interval is estimated as a probable value +/- a possible range of time
estimates with a built-in confidence limit.

PMID: 11305434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 2001 Apr;42(2):257-60.

Surgical management of acquired non-malignant tracheo-esophageal fistulas.

Oliaro A(1), Rena O, Papalia E, Filosso PL, Ruffini E, Pischedda F, Cavallo A,
Maggi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, S. Giovanni Battista Hospital, University of
Turin, Turin, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the results of one-stage
surgical management of acquired non-malignant tracheo-esophageal fistulas (TEF).
METHODS: Six consecutive patients, 2 men and 4 women with median age of 65 (range
34-71) years had tracheo-esophageal fistulas resulting from a median of 33 (range
20-86) days of intubation via oro-tracheal or tracheostomy tubes. Median TEF
length was 2.6 (range 1.8-3.5) cm and the defect was associated with a tracheal
stenosis near or immediately below the stoma in 4 cases (66%). Tracheal resection
and anastomosis with primary esophageal closure was carried out in 4 patients;
direct closure of the tracheal and esophageal defects with muscle flap
interposition was performed in 2 patients: tracheal stoma was left in site
because of the high risk of postoperative respiratory insufficiency related to
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
RESULTS: All six patients had complete control of the TEF. One perioperative
death occurred on day 27 (16%) related to the recurrence of endocranial bleeding.
The 5 long-term survivors were routinely submitted to tracheo-bronchoscopic
control and only one (20%) revealed granulation tissue at the suture line
requiring two consecutive bronchoscopic removals.
CONCLUSIONS: Postintubation tracheoesophageal fistula is usually best treated
with one-stage surgical procedure: which preferably consists of tracheal
resection and anastomosis and primary esophageal closure.

PMID: 11292946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Surg Today. 2001;31(2):133-9.

Analysis of the development of normal foregut and tracheoesophageal fistula in an
adriamycin rat model using three-dimensional image reconstruction.

Sasaki T(1), Kusafuka T, Okada A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka University Medical School, Suita City, 
Japan.

To examine the developmental process of the normal trachea and esophagus and
their maldevelopment leading to tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), we performed
three-dimensional (3-D) image reconstruction of the developing foregut in normal 
and adriamycin (ADM)-induced TEF rats. Microscopic images of serial sections of
embryos from seven normal and 14 ADM-treated rats killed every half a day after
11-14 days' gestation were traced and reconstructed using a 3-D construction
imaging system (TRI, RATOC System Engineering, Tokyo, Japan). In the normal
embryos, the lung bud appeared just below the pharyngeal foregut on day 11 and it
elongated caudally to shape into the trachea as they grew. A 'tracheoesophageal
septum" did not emerge. In the TEF embryos, although the lung bud appeared in a
similar position on day 11, the trachea and esophagus did not separate and only a
common foregut tube elongated caudally, then bilateral bronchial primordia
emerged directly from it. Furthermore, abnormal development of the notochord was 
evident, being retarded in separation from the foregut, finally descending along 
a more ventral course and bending sharply around the level of the bifurcation.
Microscopically, less mesenchymal cellularity around the foregut was noted in the
TEF embryos. The trachea seemed to be formed only by caudal elongation of the
lung bud in the normal embryos. In the ADM-induced TEF embryos, the upper foregut
appeared to develop only into the trachea, and this maldevelopment may be
implicated in the abnormal interaction between the foregut and the surrounding
mesenchyme.

PMID: 11291707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Artif Organs. 2001 Mar;25(3):187-93.

Development of regenerative cardiomyocytes from mesenchymal stem cells for
cardiovascular tissue engineering.

Fukuda K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Cardiac Therapeutics, Keio University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. kfukuda@mc.med.keio.ac.jp

We have isolated a cardiomyogenic (CMG) cell line from murine bone marrow stroma.
Stromal cells were immortalized, treated with 5-azacytidine, and spontaneous
beating cells were repeatedly screened for. The cells showed a fibroblast-like
morphology. However, this morphology changed after 5-azacytidine treatment in
about 30% of the cells, which connected with adjoining cells after 1 week, formed
myotube-like structures and began spontaneous beating after 2 weeks, and beat
synchronously after 3 weeks. These cells expressed atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP). Electron microscopy revealed a
cardiomyocyte-like ultrastructure including typical sarcomeres and atrial
granules. They had sinus node-like or ventricular cell-like action potentials.
Analysis of the isoform of contractile protein genes, such as myosin and
alpha-actin, indicated that their phenotype was similar to fetal ventricular
cardiomyocytes. These cells expressed Nkx2.5, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF2-C mRNA
before 5-azacytidine treatment, and expressed MEF2-A and MEF2-D after treatment. 
This new cell line provides a powerful model for the study of cardiomyocyte
transplantation.

PMID: 11284885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 13;276(15):12338-44. Epub 2001 Jan 12.

Identification of transcriptional enhancer factor-4 as a transcriptional
modulator of CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase alpha.

Sugimoto H(1), Bakovic M, Yamashita S, Vance DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Gunma University School of Medicine, Maebashi
371-8511, Japan.

CTP:phosphocholine cytidylyltransferase (CCT) is the rate-limiting and regulated 
enzyme of mammalian phosphatidylcholine biosynthesis. There are three isoforms,
CCTalpha, CCTbeta1, and CCTbeta2. The mouse CCTalpha gene promoter is regulated
by an enhancer element (Eb) located between -103 and -82 base pairs
(5'-GTTTTCAGGAATGCGGAGGTGG-3') upstream from the transcriptional start site
(Bakovic, M., Waite, K., Tang, W., Tabas, I., and Vance, D. E. (1999) Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1436, 147-165). To identify the Eb-binding protein(s), we screened 
a mouse embryo cDNA library by the yeast one-hybrid system and obtained 19
positive clones. Ten cDNA clones were identified as transcriptional enhancer
factor-4 (TEF-4). The TEF-binding consensus sequence,
5'-(A/T)(A/G)(A/G)(A/T)ATG(C/T)(G/A)-3', was identified within the Eb binding
region. Gel-shift analysis using radiolabeled Eb fragment as a probe showed that 
cell extracts from yeast expressing hemagglutinin-tagged TEF-4 caused a marked
band retardation that could be prevented with an anti-hemagglutinin antibody.
When COS-7 cells were transfected with TEF-4, CCTalpha promoter-luciferase
reporter activity and CCTalpha mRNA levels increased. A TEF-4 deletion mutant
containing a DNA-binding domain, mTEA(+), stimulated the CCTalpha promoter
activity, whereas protein lacking the DNA binding domain, mTEA(-), did not.
Unexpectedly, when the ATG core of the TEF-4 binding consensus within the Eb
region was mutated, promoter activity was enhanced rather than decreased. Thus,
TEF-4 might act as a dual transcriptional modulator as follows: as a suppressor
via its direct binding to the Eb element and as an activator via its interactions
with the basal transcriptional machinery. These results provide the first
evidence that TEF-4 is an important regulator of CCTalpha gene expression.

PMID: 11279002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Biotechnol. 2001 May 4;87(2):179-91.

Genetic engineering of the Trichoderma reesei endoglucanase I (Cel7B) for
enhanced partitioning in aqueous two-phase systems containing thermoseparating
ethylene oxide--propylene oxide copolymers.

Collén A(1), Ward M, Tjerneld F, Stålbrand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Lund University, PO Box 124, S-221 00 Lund,
Sweden.

Endoglucanases (endo-1,4-beta-D-glucan-4-glucanohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.4) are
industrially important enzymes. In this study endoglucanase I (EGI or Cel7B) of
the filamentous fungi Trichoderma reesei has been genetically engineered to
investigate the influence of tryptophan rich peptide extensions (tags) on
partitioning in an aqueous two-phase model system. EGI is a two-domain enzyme and
is composed of a N-terminal catalytic domain and a C-terminal cellulose binding
domain, separated by a linker. The aim was to find an optimal tag and fusion
position, which further could be utilised for large scale extractions. Peptide
tags of different length and composition were attached at various localisations
of EGI. The fusion proteins were expressed from T. reesei with the use of the
gpdA promoter from Aspergillus nidulans. Variations in secreted levels between
the engineered proteins were obtained. The partitioning of EGI in an aqueous
two-phase system composed of a thermoseparating ethylene oxide-propylene oxide
random copolymer (EO(50)PO(50)) and dextran, could be significantly improved by
relatively minor genetic engineering. The (Trp-Pro)(4) tag added after a short
stretch of the linker, containing five proline residues, gave in the highest
partition coefficient of 12.8. The yield in the top phase was 94%. The specific
activity was 83% of the specific activity of unmodified EGI on soluble substrate.
The efficiency of a tag fused to a protein is shown by the tag efficiency factor 
(TEF). A hypothetical TEF of 1.0 would indicate full tag exposure and optimal
contribution to the protein partitioning by the fused tag. The location of the
fusion point after the sequence of five proline residues in the linker of EGI is 
the most beneficial in two-phase separation. The highest TEF (0.97) was obtained 
with the (Trp-Pro)(2) tag at this position, indicating full exposure and
intactness of the tag. However, the peptide tag composed of (Trp-Pro)(4) improved
the partition properties the most but had lower TEF in comparison to
(Trp-Pro)(2).

PMID: 11278040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Chromatogr A. 2001 Mar 2;910(2):275-84.

Genetically engineered peptide fusions for improved protein partitioning in
aqueous two-phase systems. Effect of fusion localization on endoglucanase I of
Trichoderma reesei.

Collén A(1), Ward M, Tjerneld F, Stålbrand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Lund University, Sweden.

Genetic engineering has been used for fusion of the peptide tag, Trp-Pro-Trp-Pro,
on a protein to study the effect on partitioning in aqueous two-phase systems. As
target protein for the fusions the cellulase, endoglucanase I
(endo-1,4-beta-Dglucan-4-glucanohydrolase, EC 3.2.1.4, EGI, Cel7B) of Trichoderma
reesei was used. For the first time a glycosylated two-domain enzyme has been
utilized for addition of peptide tags to change partitioning in aqueous two-phase
systems. The aim was to find an optimal fusion localization for EGI. The peptide 
was (1) attached to the C-terminus end of the cellulose binding domain (CBD), (2)
inserted in the glycosylated linker region, (3) added after a truncated form of
EGI lacking the CBD and a small part of the linker. The different constructs were
expressed in the filamentous fungus T. reesei under the gpdA promoter from
Aspergillus nidulans. The expression levels were between 60 and 100 mg/l. The
partitioning behavior of the fusion proteins was studied in an aqueous two-phase 
model system composed of the thermoseparating ethylene oxide (EO)-propylene oxide
(PO) random copolymer EO-PO (50:50) (EO50PO50) and dextran. The Trp-Pro-Trp-Pro
tag was found to direct the fusion protein to the top EO50PO50 phase. The
partition coefficient of a fusion protein can be predicted with an empirical
correlation based on independent contributions from partitioning of unmodified
protein and peptide tag in this model system. The fusion position at the end of
the CBD, with the spacer Pro-Gly, was shown to be optimal with respect to
partitioning and tag efficiency factor (TEF) was 0.87, where a fully exposed tag 
would have a TEF of 1.0. Hence, this position can further be utilized for fusion 
with longer tags. For the other constructs the TEF was only 0.43 and 0.10, for
the tag fused to the truncated EGI and in the linker region of the full length
EGI, respectively.

PMID: 11261722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Physiol Behav. 2001 Jan;72(1-2):5-12.

Meal palatability, substrate oxidation and blood glucose in young and older men.

Sawaya AL(1), Fuss PJ, Dallal GE, Tsay R, McCrory MA, Young V, Roberts SB.

Author information: 
(1)Energy Metabolism Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center 
on Aging, Tufts University, 711 Washington Street, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

We investigated the effects of food palatability on the thermic effect of feeding
(TEF), substrate oxidation and circulating glucose and insulin. Healthy young men
(23.4+/-1.0, SD, years, n=10) and older men (69.4+/-1.3, years, n=9) were
resident in a metabolic unit for two 2-day study periods. On the second day of
each period, they consumed in random order either a palatable test meal
containing 2.93 MJ or a nonpalatable control meal containing the same foods in
identical amounts but blended and freeze-dried into biscuit form. TEF and
respiratory quotient (RQ) were measured over 6 h and blood samples were taken for
measurement of glucose and insulin. Age group had no effect on TEF, RQ or
circulating glucose other than to delay the time of peak TEF (P<0.002 for both
meals). There was no significant effect of meal type on TEF, but RQ and
circulating glucose were higher following consumption of the palatable meal
(P<0.001 for both parameters). These results suggest that over 6 h postprandial, 
consumption of palatable foods does not increase TEF, but is instead associated
with increased glycemic response and increased carbohydrate oxidation. These
changes, combined with previous work on the glycemic index, predict an
accelerated return of hunger and increased energy intake at subsequent meals
following consumption of palatable vs. control foods. Further studies are needed 
to examine the possible mechanism for this previously suggested "second meal"
effect of diet palatability on energy intake.

PMID: 11239975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Gene. 2001 Jan 24;263(1-2):239-45.

The DBP transcriptional activation domain is highly homologous to that of HLF and
TEF and is not responsible for the tissue type-specific transcriptional activity 
of DBP.

Li S(1), Hunger SP.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, University of Colorado Cancer Center
and School of Medicine, 4200 East Ninth Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

DBP, HLF and TEF comprise a distinct subfamily of mammalian bZIP proteins that
plays an important role in regulation of tissue-specific gene expression,
particularly in the liver. In this report we demonstrate that DBP contains a 38
amino acid TAD which is highly homologous to the HLF and TEF TADs that we have
delineated previously. Deletion of this domain completely abrogates
transcriptional activity of native DBP and GAL4-DBP fusion proteins. This domain 
functions as a modular TAD that is a potent transcriptional activator when fused 
to the GAL4 DBD. While DBP itself is a liver-specific transactivator, the DBP TAD
is active in a variety of cell types, indicating that liver-specific activity is 
not an intrinsic property of the TAD and must be conferred by other regions of
the protein. Using GAL4-HLF fusion proteins, we further refine the core TAD of
PAR proteins to a region of 13 amino acids. Recently described PAR-bZIP proteins 
from Drosophila and zebrafish also contain domains that share strong homology
with the TAD of mammalian PAR proteins, making this one of the most highly
evolutionarily conserved TADs identified to date.

PMID: 11223263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Surg Today. 2001;31(1):59-61.

Laryngotracheo-esophageal cleft in a neonate with esophageal atresia and
tracheo-esophageal fistula: report of a case.

Ratan SK(1), Ratan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Safdarjang Hospital, West Kidwai Nagar, New
Delhi, India.

Laryngotracheo-esophageal cleft (LTEC) is a congenital anomaly, rarely found in
neonates with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF), that 
poses diagnostic and treatment dilemmas for the attending surgeon. In most cases 
previously reported, the diagnosis of this association was made either at surgery
or at autopsy. We present herein the case of a neonate with EA and distal pouch
(type C) TEF who was also found to have a LTEC (Evans type III) at the time of
surgery. The salient clinical and radiological features of this association are
highlighted to increase awareness of the possibility of this rare association and
to help promote its early detection.

PMID: 11213046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Hereditas. 2000;133(1):29-37.

Trait diversity, heritability and genetic advance in selected germplasm lines of 
tef.

Assefa K(1), Ketema S, Tefera H, Kefyalew T, Hundera F.

Author information: 
(1)Debre Zeit Agricultural Research Center, Ethiopia. DZARC@telecom.net.et

The genetic improvement of the Ethiopian cereal, tef, Eragrostis tef (Zucc.)
Trotter, depends upon the variability in the indigenous germplasm. A
bi-replicated randomized complete block field experiment was, therefore, carried 
out at Debre Zeit and Alem Tena in Ethiopia during the 1996 main season to study 
the pheno-morphic and agronomic trait diversity in 320 tef germplasm lines. All
of the 17 traits assessed showed substantial (p < or = 0.001) variation among the
lines. Genotypes and locations interacted significantly (p < or = 0.05) on 11 of 
the traits. At about 50% similarity level, the tef lines grouped into six major
clusters of nine to 243 lines. Five principal components (PCs) extracted about
71% of the entire variation of the lines. About 28% of the total variance
explained by the first PC was due chiefly to variation in main shoot culm length,
diameters of the two basal culm internodes, panicle length and grain
yield/panicle. About 16% of the whole variance explained by the second PC
originated mainly from variation in the length of the first and second basal culm
internodes, grain yield/plant, and peduncle length. The third PC accounting for
about 12% of the entire variance resulted largely from variation in harvest index
and shoot phytomass yield/plant. Across traits, the phenotypic and genotypic
coefficients of variation varied in that order from about 2% for grain
yield/panicle to 58% for number of fertile tillers/plant, and from less than 1%
for diameters of the two basal culm internodes and grain yield/panicle to 35% for
panicle length. Estimates of broad sense heritability and genetic advance (as
ratio of the mean) were highest for panicle length (71%) and number of fertile
tillers/plant (21%), respectively. But both of these were lowest for the second
basal culm internode diameter (< 1%). Overall, the study confirmed that tef is a 
highly versatile crop with broad trait diversity in the germplasm, and this
offers ample opportunities for improvement through breeding.

PMID: 11206851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 30;276(13):10413-22. Epub 2001 Jan 2.

Physical interaction between the MADS box of serum response factor and the
TEA/ATTS DNA-binding domain of transcription enhancer factor-1.

Gupta M(1), Kogut P, Davis FJ, Belaguli NS, Schwartz RJ, Gupta MP.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Institute for Children and Department of Physiology and Biophysics,
University of Illinois, Chicago 60612, USA. mgupta@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu

Serum response factor is a MADS box transcription factor that binds to consensus 
sequences CC(A/T)(6)GG found in the promoter region of several serum-inducible
and muscle-specific genes. In skeletal myocytes serum response factor (SRF) has
been shown to heterodimerize with the myogenic basic helix-loop-helix family of
factors, related to MyoD, for control of muscle gene regulation. Here we report
that SRF binds to another myogenic factor, TEF-1, that has been implicated in the
regulation of a variety of cardiac muscle genes. By using different biochemical
assays such as affinity precipitation of protein, GST-pulldown assay, and
coimmunoprecipitation of proteins, we show that SRF binds to TEF-1 both in in
vitro and in vivo assay conditions. A strong interaction of SRF with TEF-1 was
seen even when one protein was denatured and immobilized on nitrocellulose
membrane, indicating a direct and stable interaction between SRF and TEF-1, which
occurs without a cofactor. This interaction is mediated through the C-terminal
subdomain of MADS box of SRF encompassing amino acids 204-244 and the putative
2nd and 3rd alpha-helix/beta-sheet configuration of the TEA/ATTS DNA-binding
domain of TEF-1. In the transient transfection assay, a positive cooperative
effect of SRF and TEF-1 was observed when DNA-binding sites for both factors,
serum response element and M-CAT respectively, were intact; mutation of either
site abolished their synergistic effect. Similarly, an SRF mutant, SRFpm-1,
defective in DNA binding failed to collaborate with TEF-1 for gene regulation,
indicating that the synergistic trans-activation function of SRF and TEF-1 occurs
via their binding to cognate DNA-binding sites. Our results demonstrate a novel
association between SRF and TEF-1 for cardiac muscle gene regulation and disclose
a general mechanism by which these two super families of factors are likely to
control diversified biological functions.

PMID: 11136726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Surgery. 2001 Jan;129(1):29-38.

Clinical characteristics of congenital esophageal stenosis distal to associated
esophageal atresia.

Kawahara H(1), Imura K, Yagi M, Kubota A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka Medical Center for Maternal and Child
Health, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Congenital esophageal stenosis (CES) has been reported to be a rare
association in patients with esophageal atresia or tracheoesophageal fistula, or 
both (EA-TEF). This study investigates the clinical characteristics of this
association with special reference to its treatment.
METHODS: A retrospective review of medical and radiographic records of 81
patients who underwent primary repair of EA-TEF was performed. An association of 
CES was diagnosed when they showed histologic evidence or persistent radiographic
images of esophageal narrowing since the neonatal period.
RESULTS: Eleven of 81 EA-TEF patients (14%) were identified with CES. Their
symptoms were difficulty in swallowing solid food, food impaction, emesis,
stridor, repeated respiratory infection, and failure to thrive. Two patients had 
a recurrence of TEF. Three patients were diagnosed with CES in the neonatal
period-2 at the time of primary repair of EA-TEF and 1 on the initial
postoperative esophagram. The remaining 8 patients were diagnosed between the
ages of 2 months and 3 years. Although esophageal dilatation was attempted in 9
patients, its effectiveness was temporary in all except 2 patients and esophageal
laceration occurred in 4 patients. Surgical repair including myotomy and
resection of the narrow segment was performed in 7 patients, in 6 of whom
Nissen/Collis-Nissen fundoplication was added. A histologic examination was
performed in 5 patients, revealing that their CES was due to fibro-muscular
hypertrophy (2) or tracheobronchial remnants (3). The long-term outcome was
satisfactory in all patients except one who showed wrap herniation.
CONCLUSIONS: The association between CES and EA-TEF is not rare. Esophageal
dilatation was not universally effective and carried with it a considerable
incidence of esophageal leakage. An antireflux operation concomitant with repair 
of CES may be useful to prevent postoperative gastroesophageal reflux in patients
with a narrowing close to the esophagogastric junction.

PMID: 11150031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genetics. 2001 Jan;157(1):273-81.

The teflon gene is required for maintenance of autosomal homolog pairing at
meiosis I in male Drosophila melanogaster.

Tomkiel JE(1), Wakimoto BT, Briscoe A Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan 48202, USA. jtomkiel@cmb.biosci.wayne.edu

In recombination-proficient organisms, chiasmata appear to mediate associations
between homologs at metaphase of meiosis I. It is less clear how homolog
associations are maintained in organisms that lack recombination, such as male
Drosophila. In lieu of chiasmata and synaptonemal complexes, there must be
molecules that balance poleward forces exerted across homologous centromeres.
Here we describe the genetic and cytological characterization of four EMS-induced
mutations in teflon (tef), a gene involved in this process in Drosophila
melanogaster. All four alleles are male specific and cause meiosis I-specific
nondisjunction of the autosomes. They do not measurably perturb sex chromosome
segregation, suggesting that there are differences in the genetic control of
autosome and sex chromosome segregation in males. Meiotic transmission of
univalent chromosomes is unaffected in tef mutants, implicating the tef product
in a pairing-dependent process. The segregation of translocations between sex
chromosomes and autosomes is altered in tef mutants in a manner that supports
this hypothesis. Consistent with these genetic observations, cytological
examination of meiotic chromosomes suggests a role of tef in regulating or
mediating pairing of autosomal bivalents at meiosis I. We discuss implications of
this finding in regard to the evolution of heteromorphic sex chromosomes and the 
mechanisms that ensure chromosome disjunction in the absence of recombination.

PMCID: PMC1461467
PMID: 11139508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Toxicol Sci. 2001 Jan;59(1):92-100.

Effects of subchronic exposure to complex mixtures of dioxin-like and
non-dioxin-like polyhalogenated aromatic compounds on thyroid hormone and vitamin
A levels in female Sprague-Dawley rats.

van der Plas SA(1), Lutkeschipholt I, Spenkelink B, Brouwer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Technology & Nutritional Sciences, Toxicology Group,
Wageningen University, P.O. Box 8000, 6700 EA Wageningen, The Netherlands.

The aim of this study was to determine the effects of subchronic exposure to
complex mixtures of polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (PHAHs) on the thyroid 
hormone and retinoid status in female Sprague-Dawley rats and to investigate the 
predictability of these effects by the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) concept. In
the first experiment, the focus was on a complex dioxin-like PHAH mixture, which 
covered > 90% of the total toxic equivalents (TEQ) present in Baltic herring. In 
the second experiment, the contribution of non-dioxin-like polychlorinated
biphenyls (PCBs) was investigated by testing the commercial PCB mixture Aroclor
1260, its 0-1 ortho and 2-4 ortho fractions and the reconstituted 0-4 ortho
fraction. Hepatic retinoid levels were severely decreased ( approximately 70%)
after treatment with the dioxin-like PHAH mixture, similar to the effect of a TEQ
equivalent dose of 1 microg 2,3,7,8-TCDD/kg bw/week. However, the TEF concept
failed to predict the effect on plasma retinol; a decrease (21%) was observed
after treatment with the PHAH mixture, whereas an increase (21%) was found after 
treatment with TCDD. A more severe decrease of total thyroid hormone in plasma
was observed after exposure to the PHAH mixture compared to treatment with TCDD (
approximately 60% vs. 38%). The discrepancy found between the predicted and
observed effects for plasma retinol and thyroid hormone is possibly due to an
additional effect of hydroxylated PCBs, formed from metabolizable PCBs present in
the PHAH mixture. Aroclor 1260 and its fractions did not significantly alter the 
retinoid and thyroid hormone status at the dose levels tested, indicating that in
case of exposure to complex PCB mixtures at environmental levels, no effects, or 
at best, only marginal effects can be expected on the retinoid and thyroid
hormone status.

PMID: 11134548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000 Dec 15;169(3):255-68.

Contribution of planar (0-1 ortho) and nonplanar (2-4 ortho) fractions of Aroclor
1260 to the induction of altered hepatic foci in female Sprague-Dawley rats.

van der Plas SA(1), Sundberg H, van den Berg H, Scheu G, Wester P, Jensen S,
Bergman A, de Boer J, Koeman JH, Brouwer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Technology and Nutritional Sciences, Agricultural
University Wageningen, 6700 EA Wageningen, The Netherlands.

The hepatic tumor promoting activity of the planar 0-1 ortho ( approximately 9.7%
w/w) and the nonplanar 2-4 ortho ( approximately 90.3% w/w) fraction of the
commercial PCB mixture Aroclor 1260 was studied using a medium-term two-stage
initiation/promotion bioassay in female Sprague-Dawley rats. Fractionation was
carried out on an activated charcoal column. The composition of the effluent from
the column was tested by GC-ECD. The absence of planar compounds in the 2-4 ortho
fraction was confirmed by GC-MS analysis. The dioxin-like toxic potency of the
fractions was determined with the DR-CALUX assay. The animal experiment was
started with the initiation procedure (diethylnitrosamine injection, 30 mg/kg
body wt ip, 24 h after (2)/(3) hepatectomy), followed 6 weeks later by the
promotion treatment, which consisted of a weekly subcutaneous injection during 20
weeks. Exposure groups (n = 10) received the following treatments (dose/kg body
wt/week): Aroclor 1260 (10 mg), 0-1 ortho fraction (0.97 mg), 2-4 ortho fraction 
(1, 3, or 9 mg), a reconstituted 0-4 ortho fraction (9.97 mg),
2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB 153; 1 or 9 mg), 2,3,7,8-TCDD (1 microg;
positive control) or corn oil (1 ml; vehicle control). One group did not receive 
a promotion treatment. All exposure groups exhibited a significantly increased
volume fraction of the liver occupied by hepatic foci positive for the placental 
form of glutathione-S-transferase-p compared to the corn oil control, except for 
the groups treated with 0-1 ortho fraction and 1 mg PCB 153/kg body wt/week.
Approximately 80% of the total tumor promoting capacity of the reconstituted 0-4 
ortho fraction could be explained by the 2-4 ortho PCB fraction while the 0-1
ortho fraction had only a negligible contribution. These results suggest that the
majority of the tumor promotion potential of PCB mixtures resides in the
non-dioxin-like fraction, which is not taken into account in the toxic
equivalency factor (TEF) approach for risk assessment of PCBs. This may result in
an underestimation of the tumor promotion potential of environmental PCB
mixtures.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11133348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Appl Microbiol. 2000 Dec;89(6):969-78.

Evaluation of numerical analyses of RAPD and API 50 CH patterns to differentiate 
Lactobacillus plantarum, Lact. fermentum, Lact. rhamnosus, Lact. sake, Lact.
parabuchneri, Lact. gallinarum, Lact. casei, Weissella minor and related taxa
isolated from kocho and tef.

Nigatu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ethiopian Health and Nutrition Research Institute, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

AIM: The study was carried out to assess the agreement of API 50 CH fermentation 
data of food lactobacilli with their RAPD profiles to determine whether the
system could be used alone as a reliable taxonomic tool for this genus.
METHODS AND RESULTS: API 50 CH, RAPD and DNA:DNA reassociation data for 42
lactobacilli from tef and kocho were compared with 30 type strains. Discrepancies
were observed between the three methods in assigning strains of Lactobacillus
plantarum, Lact. fermentum, Weissella minor and Lact. gallinarum, and Lact.
fermentum, Lact. amylophilus, Lact. casei subsp. pseudoplantarum and Lact.
rhamnosus. DNA reassociation data agreed well with RAPD results.
CONCLUSIONS: API 50 CH profiles should be complemented with molecular genetic
results for effective identification in Lactobacillus.
SIGNIFICANCE AND IMPACT OF THE STUDY: The study suggested less dependability of
metabolic data alone as an identification tool.

PMID: 11123470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Dec 15;1517(1):82-90.

Tumor cell splice variants of the transcription factor TEF-1 induced by SV40
T-antigen transformation.

Zuzarte PC(1), Farrance IK, Simpson PC, Wildeman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The large tumor antigen (TAg) of simian virus 40 is able to transform cells
through interactions with cellular proteins, notably p53 and Rb. Among the other 
proteins that form complexes with TAg is TEF-1, a transcription factor utilized
by the viral enhancer to activate expression of the early gene which encodes TAg.
We show that fibroblasts contain several alternately spliced TEF-1 mRNAs, the
most abundant of which encodes a protein with an additional four amino acid exon 
compared to the database entry for Hela cell TEF-1. Transformation by TAg induces
alternate splicing, producing a more abundant form lacking this exon and matching
the published sequence. Splicing variants lacking this exon were detected in
mouse pancreatic tumors and in cell lines derived from human pancreatic cancers, 
in contrast to a single isoform with the exon in normal mouse pancreas. A total
of eight splice variants were identified, with the loss of the four amino acid
exon typical of transformed cells. These and other data presented suggest that
TAg 're-models' host cell transcription factors that are used early in viral
infection, and thereby mimics an event that naturally occurs during
transformation. The data indicate that TEF-1 alterations may be a hallmark
feature of tumorigenesis.

PMID: 11118619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7575-85. Epub 2000 Nov 28.

Control of cardiac-specific transcription by p300 through myocyte enhancer
factor-2D.

Slepak TI(1), Webster KA, Zang J, Prentice H, O'Dowd A, Hicks MN, Bishopric NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, University of Miami,
Florida 33101, USA.

The transcriptional integrator p300 regulates gene expression by interaction with
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins and local remodeling of chromatin. p300 is
required for cardiac-specific gene transcription, but the molecular basis of this
requirement is unknown. Here we report that the MADS (MCM-1, agamous, deficiens, 
serum response factor) box transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor-2D
(MEF-2D) acts as the principal conduit for cardiac transcriptional activation by 
p300. p300 activation of the native 2130-base pair human skeletal alpha-actin
promoter required a single hybrid MEF-2/GATA-4 DNA motif centered at -1256 base
pairs. Maximal expression of the promoter in cultured myocytes and in vivo
correlated with binding of both MEF-2 and p300, but not GATA-4, to this AT-rich
motif. p300 and MEF-2 were coprecipitated from cardiac nuclear extracts by an
oligomer containing this element. p300 was found exclusively in a complex with
MEF-2D at this and related sites in other cardiac-restricted promoters. MEF-2D,
but not other MEFs, significantly potentiated cardiac-specific transcription by
p300. No physical or functional interaction was observed between p300 and other
factors implicated in skeletal actin transcription, including GATA-4, TEF-1, or
SRF. These results show that, in the intact cell, p300 interactions with its
protein targets are highly selective and that MEF-2D is the preferred channel for
p300-mediated transcriptional control in the heart.

PMID: 11096067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Pituitary. 1999 May;1(3-4):159-68.

Molecular determinants of pituitary cytodifferentiation.

Asa SL(1), Ezzat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The pituitary is a complex gland and is composed of several cell types, each
responsible for the production of specific hormones. In the past, it was thought 
that one cell could make only one hormone; the concept of plurihormonality was
poorly understood. Plurihormonal adenomas were thought to be either composed of
multiple cell types, each producing one hormone (plurimorphous adenomas) or
composed of poorly differentiated cells that exhibited abnormal production of
multiple hormones. However, the molecular factors that determine hormone
production have now been identified as transcription factors that target specific
hormone genes. These factors have clarified three main pathways of cell
differentiation. ACTH-producing corticotrophs are determined by corticotropin
upstream transcription-binding element (CUTE) proteins including neuroD1/beta 2. 
Bihormonal gonadotrophs require expression of steroidgenic factor (SF)-1. The
complex family of Pit-1 expressing cells can mature into somatotrophs,
mammosomatotrophs, lactotrophs or thyrotrophs with the additional expression of
estrogen receptor (ER) alpha, which enhances PRL secretion, or thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF) which stimulates TSH-beta production. The recognition of
these molecular determinants of adenohypophysial cytodifferentiation has
clarified the patterns of plurihormonality which have been recognized in
pituitary adenomas and provide a framework for classification of these tumors.

PMID: 11081194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Metabolism. 2000 Oct;49(10):1340-5.

Kinetic analysis of the thermic effect of food and its relationship to body
composition in humans.

Kunz I(1), Klaus S, Kallies B, Schorr U, Sharma AM.

Author information: 
(1)German Institute of Human Nutrition, Division of Biochemistry and Psysiology
of Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Germany.

The course of energy expenditure after a meal can vary widely with regard to the 
slope of onset, amplitude, and duration of the thermic effect. The aim of the
present study was to explore the relationship between the thermic effect of food 
(TEF), as characterized by kinetic analysis of postprandial energy expenditure,
body composition, and variables related to the metabolic syndrome including
central obesity, hypertension, and glucose tolerance. A total of 181 men and
women (body mass index [BMI] range, 19.4 to 52.2 kg/m2) were characterized for
body composition, blood pressure, oral glucose tolerance, and energy expenditure 
after a test meal. Energy expenditure, as measured by indirect calorimetry, was
analyzed over a 6-hour period by 3-parameter curve fitting using equations
derived from kinetics describing a biphasic reaction involving 2 consecutive
first-order reactions (A-->B-->C). Apart from total thermic effect of food
(TEFk), the curve also provided an estimate of time of peak (Tp) and amplitude of
peak (Ap) for each subject. Multiple stepwise regression analysis with TEFk, Ap, 
and Tp as dependent variables showed significant effects of sex, age, body
weight, body fat, beta-blockade, and body composition on TEF curve parameters.
Cluster analysis based on Tp shown 2 distinct clusters with significant
differences in age and body fat mass. This study shows that kinetic analysis of
postprandial energy expenditure can be used to examine the determinants of the
time course of the thermic effect of food in man.

PMID: 11079826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Nov;35(11):1621-2.

Simplified access for division of the low cervical/high thoracic H-type
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Ko BA(1), Frederic R, DiTirro PA, Glatleider PA, Applebaum H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kaiser Permanente Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA
90029, USA.

H-type tracheoesophageal fistulas (H-TEF) often are located in the low
cervical/high thoracic region where determination of the most appropriate
surgical approach is difficult. When it can provide adequate exposure, a cervical
incision is preferred because of the likelihood of decreased morbidity. A child
with VACTERL association presented with recurrent respiratory problems.
Esophagogram showed an H-TEF below the level of the clavicle. A vascular guide
wire was placed through the H-TEF with the ends brought out through the mouth.
Under fluoroscopic guidance, gentle traction was placed on the wire to bring the 
fistula into the neck for an easily accessible cervical exposure, thus
eliminating the need for a thoracotomy.

PMID: 11083436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Nov;35(11):1617-20.

Temporospatial aberrations of apoptosis in the rat embryo developing esophageal
atresia.

Williams AK(1), Qi BQ, Beasley SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Christchurch Hospital, Christchurch School
of Medicine, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Recent work has shown that apoptosis is a key component of
the normal development of the foregut. This study was designed to compare the
patterns of apoptosis in the normal foregut with those in the fetus developing
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) using 3-dimensional
reconstructive techniques.
METHODS: Timed pregnant rats that received no treatment (control group) or
received Adriamycin intraperitoneally (experimental group) had their embryos
removed between days 11 and 14 of gestation. The embryos were sectioned serially 
and stained with H&E. Three-dimensional reconstructions were made of the foregut 
and areas of apoptosis were marked on them to facilitate analysis of apoptotic
patterns.
RESULTS: Apoptosis was evident in control embryos in the region in which
tracheoesophageal separation occurs from days 12 and 12.5. Experimental embryos
showed no apoptosis until day 13 when apoptosis was observed immediately
posterior to the foregut within the esophageal mesenchyme and in the laryngeal
mesenchyme ventral to the foregut.
CONCLUSIONS: The pattern, timing and location of apoptosis in rats developing
EA-TEF is abnormal. Our work indicates that it is actually a complete lack of
apoptosis at the crucial stage of development that leads to this abnormality
rather than an alteration in the patterning of apoptosis at this crucial time.
The observation of apoptosis only within the mesenchyme raises the possibility
that apoptosis in the foregut developing EA-TEF may be a reaction to that
abnormal development rather than its cause.

PMID: 11083435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hereditas. 2000;132(3):193-202.

A molecular genetic analysis of Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter: non-coding
regions of chloroplast DNA, 18S rDNA and the transcription factor VP1.

Espelund M(1), Bekele E, Holst-Jensen A, Jakobsen KS, Nordal I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, University of Oslo, Norway.

The non-coding chloroplast DNA sequences of the trnL (UAA) intron and the
trnL-trnF (GAA) intergeneric spacer (IGS), the coding sequences of nuclear 18S
rDNA, and the transcription factor Vp1 of the cereal tef (Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) 
Trotter) were studied. No intraspecific variation was found among the 6 studied
tef varieties. However, the study displayed that Eragrostis tef has a number of
unique traits compared to other grasses. Phylogenetic analysis of the chloroplast
DNA gave three grass clades, joining Eragrostis with sorghum and maize in one. In
the analysis of the 18S rDNA sequences, the three grass species were joined in a 
monophyletic trichotomy in the cladogram, in which maize is the most divergent,
rice the least and tef intermediate. The Vp1 is highly conserved. The Vp1
phylogeny showed that the tef Vp1-sequence is the hitherto most divergent
Vp1-sequence reported from a grass.

PMID: 11075514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Oct;35(10):1421-5.

Defective fibroblast growth factor signaling allows for nonbranching growth of
the respiratory-derived fistula tract in esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Crisera CA(1), Maldonado TS, Longaker MT, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Repair, New York University
Medical Center, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The fistula tract in esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) appears to arise from a trifurcation of the
embryonic lung bud. Subsequently, it does not branch like the other bronchi,
which also arise from the lung bud. Previous results have implied that aberrant
mesenchymal-epithelial signaling in the developing foregut, possibly involving
fibroblast growth factors, may allow for the nonbranching growth of the fistula, 
and the ultimate development of the fistula tract in TEF.
METHODS: Adriamycin injections into pregnant rat dams induced EA-TEF formation in
rat embryos. Control and Adriamycin-exposed embryos were harvested on the 13th
gestational day, and the developing foregut was isolated with microdissection.
mRNA was isolated from the developing fistula tract, embryonic lung, and normal
embryonic esophagus. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) for
the IIIb splice variant of the FGF2R receptor was performed. Foregut specimens
also were processed for histologic analysis, and immunofluorescence for FGF1 was 
performed.
RESULTS: FGF2R-IIIb is specifically absent from the developing fistula tract in
TEF, whereas it is present in the normal developing lung and esophagus. FGF1 also
is uniquely absent from the developing fistula tract, but it is present in the
normal lung mesenchyme.
CONCLUSIONS: FGF1, FGF7, and FGF10 are critical mesenchymal factors that mediate 
proliferation and branching morphogenesis by the developing respiratory
epithelium. The absence of FGF2R-IIIb, the obligate common receptor for FGF7 and 
FGF10, from the fistula tract, and the absence of FGF1 in the fistula tract
mesenchyme, collectively imply the absence of a specific FGF signaling pathway in
the developing fistula tract. This absence of FGF signaling could explain the
lack of branching by the developing fistula tract as it grows caudally in the
abnormally developing embryo. Downregulation of these components of the FGF
signaling pathways may allow for a patterned compensation by the embryo for the
proximal foregut atresia in this anomaly. This compensation may then reestablish 
gastrointestinal continuity as the fistula tract connects to the developing
stomach.

PMID: 11051141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Amino Acids. 2000;19(1):263-72.

NMDA receptor dependent and independent components of veratridine toxicity in
cultured cerebellar neurons are prevented by nanomolar concentrations of
terfenadine.

Díaz-Trelles R(1), Novelli A, Puia G, Baraldi M, Fernández-Sánchez MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oviedo, Spain.

Exposure of cultured neurons to nanomolar concentrations of terfenadine prevented
the NMDA receptor-mediated early appearance (30min.) of toxicity signs induced by
the voltage sensitive sodium channel activator veratridine. Terfenadine also
provided an histamine-insensitive protection against delayed neurotoxicity by
veratridine (24h), occurring independently of NMDA receptor activation, while not
protecting from excitotoxicity following direct exposure of neurons to glutamate.
Terfenadine reduced tetrodotoxin-sensitive inward currents, and reduced
intracellular cGMP formation following veratridine exposure. Our data suggest
that nanomolar concentrations of TEF may reduce excitatory aminoacid release
following neuronal depolarization via a presynaptic mechanism involving voltage
sensitive sodium channels, and therefore may be considered as a prototype for
therapeutic drugs in the treatment of diseases that involve excitatory aminoacid 
neurotransmission.

PMID: 11026497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 12;276(2):1173-84.

Multiprotein complex formation at the beta myosin heavy chain distal muscle CAT
element correlates with slow muscle expression but not mechanical overload
responsiveness.

Vyas DR(1), McCarthy JJ, Tsika GL, Tsika RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine,
and the Dalton Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
Missouri 65211, USA.

To examine the role of the beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC) distal muscle CAT
(MCAT) element in muscle fiber type-specific expression and mechanical overload
(MOV) responsiveness, we conducted transgenic and in vitro experiments. In adult 
transgenic mice, mutation of the distal MCAT element led to significant
reductions in chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) specific activity measured 
in control soleus and plantaris muscles when compared with wild type transgene
beta293WT but did not abolish MOV-induced CAT specific activity. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay revealed the formation of a specific low migrating nuclear
protein complex (LMC) at the betaMyHC MCAT element that was highly enriched only 
when using either MOV plantaris or control soleus nuclear extract. Scanning
mutagenesis of the betaMyHC distal MCAT element revealed that only the
nucleotides comprising the core MCAT element were essential for LMC formation.
The proteins within the LMC when using either MOV plantaris or control soleus
nuclear extracts were antigenically related to nominal transcription enhancer
factor 1 (NTEF-1), poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP), and Max. Only in vitro
translated TEF-1 protein bound to the distal MCAT element, suggesting that this
multiprotein complex is tethered to the DNA via TEF-1. Protein-protein
interaction assays revealed interactions between nominal TEF-1, PARP, and Max.
Our studies show that for transgene beta293 the distal MCAT element is not
required for MOV responsiveness but suggest that a multiprotein complex likely
comprised of nominal TEF-1, PARP, and Max forms at this element to contribute to 
basal slow fiber expression.

PMID: 11010974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Microsc Res Tech. 2000 Sep 15;50(6):522-31.

Control of cardiac myosin heavy chain gene expression.

Morkin E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Physiology, Pharmacology, and the Sarver Heart
Center, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.

The alpha- and beta-myosin genes extend over 51 kb on chromosome 14 in human and 
11 in mouse separated by about 4.5 kb of intergenic sequence. They are located in
tandem in the order of their expression during development. Transcription of each
gene is independently controlled but coordinately regulated. During each
embryogenesis, the beta-MHC gene is expressed as part of the cardiac myogenic
program under the control of NKX-2.5, MEF-2C, and GATA-4/5/6. After birth,
thyroid hormone induces expression of alpha-MHC mRNA and inhibits expression of
the beta-MHC gene. While a large number of physiological stimuli are capable of
modifying this basic paradigm, thyroid hormone is required for expression of
alpha-MHC in ventricular muscle. The positive TRE for T(3)-stimulation of
alpha-MHC is an imperfect direct repeat located in the proximal promoter of the
gene. The negative TRE for the beta-MHC gene is probably a binding half-site that
is located adjacent to the TATA box. Binding of TEF-1 to a strong positive
element in the proximal promoter is important in basal expression of beta-MHC
gene and in the response to alpha(1)-adrenergic stimulation. The beta-MHC gene
also is induced together with several other "fetal" genes during cardiac
hypertrophy by a mechanism involving Ca(2+)-mediated activation of calcineurin
and NF-AT3. Upon activation, NF-AT3 translocates to the nucleus and interacts
with GATA-4 to stimulate beta-MHC expression. Changes in chromatin structure
mediated by the association of histone acetylases and deacetylases with
transcription factors are essential in regulating cell-specific expression of MHC
genes.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10998641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2000 Sep 15;167(3):157-72.

Dose-response relationships for induction of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 enzyme activity in
liver, lung, and skin in female mice following subchronic exposure to
polychlorinated biphenyls.

DeVito MJ(1), Ménache MG, Diliberto JJ, Ross DG, Birnbaum LS.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Division, United States Environmental Protection
Agency, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711, USA.
devito.mike@epamail.epa.gov

The Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) method is used to estimate potential health
risks associated with exposure to dioxin-like chemicals. The TEF method is a
relative potency (REP) scheme that assumes dose additivity, that the chemicals
produce the same response through the same mechanism, and that the REP of a
chemical is equivalent for all responses. The present study estimates the REP for
five PCBs with dioxin-like activity. Mice were exposed to either
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 2,3,3',4, 4'-pentachlorobiphenyl
(105), 2,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (118), 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl
(126), or 2,3,3',4,4'-, 5-hexachlorobiphenyl (156), five days/week for 13 weeks
by oral gavage in a corn oil vehicle. Three days after the last dose, animals
were euthanized and the ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase activity was determined in
liver, lung, and skin. Acetanilide-4-hydroxylase activity was determined in
liver. In addition, liver and skin disposition of the chemicals were determined. 
REPs were estimated using a statistical method previously described (DeVito et
al., Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol.147, 267-280, 1997). For any given compound, the
REP generally varied by less than a factor of four across endpoints when
calculated based on an administered dose. However, typically there was one
response for every chemical in which the REP was different by an order of
magnitude or more from the other responses. There was some evidence that the REPs
may be dose-dependent. While, in general, these data support the use of a single 
point estimate of the REP, the issue of dose-dependency requires targeted
investigation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10986007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. DNA Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;19(8):507-14.

Cooperative binding of TEF-1 to repeated GGAATG-related consensus elements with
restricted spatial separation and orientation.

Jiang SW(1), Desai D, Khan S, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

The human transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF) family includes TEF-1, TEF-3,
TEF-4, and TEF-5. The TEFs share a highly conserved 68-amino acid TEA/ATTS
DNA-binding domain, which binds to SV40 GT-IIC (GGAATG), SphI (AGTATG), SphII
(AGCATG), and muscle-specific M-CAT (GGTATG) enhansons. We determined the optimal
DNA-binding consensus sequence for TEF-1. Using a purified GST-TEF-1 fusion
protein and a random pool of synthetic oligonucleotides, 31 independent clones
were obtained after six rounds of binding site selection. DNA sequences analysis 
revealed that 16 clones contained direct repeats with a 3-bp spacer (DR3), and 15
clones contained a single binding site. The predominate consensus half-site was
GGAATG (67%), and the other elements were of the form G(A)GA(T/C)ATG. The TEF-1
bound to the DR3 as a dimer in a cooperative manner. Cooperative binding was
dependent on the spacing and orientation of the half-sites and was inhibited by
deoxycholate treatment, providing evidence that protein-protein interactions were
involved. The data suggest that TEF dimerization is important for its ability to 
modulate gene transcription.

PMID: 10975468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2000 Aug;109(8 Pt 1):731-5.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula in critically ill patients.

Wolf M(1), Yellin A, Talmi YP, Segal E, Faibel M, Kronenberg J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Acquired benign tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is an infrequent complication of 
prolonged intubation and tracheostomy. Not infrequently, it is associated with
severe circumferential malacia of the trachea and a need for concomitant
correction of both. Controversy exists as to whether this should be performed in 
a single-stage or a 2-stage procedure. Four patients with acquired TEF underwent 
operation in a tertiary referral medical center between 1995 and 1997. The
operations were performed through either an anterior (3) or a lateral (1) neck
approach. Three patients underwent closure of the fistula with tracheal resection
and anastomosis in a single stage and are doing well. One patient with complete
subglottic stenosis underwent closure of the TEF and was planned for tracheal
reconstruction in a second stage. This patient died in the early postoperative
period. The complications included aspiration of blood leading to pneumonia (2), 
spontaneously resolving pneumomediastinum (1), subcutaneous emphysema (2), and
cardiac arrhythmia ( 1). Residual fistula, noted in 1 patient, was treated
conservatively and resolved spontaneously within several weeks. We conclude that 
acquired TEF is amenable to repair through a cervical approach. A single-stage
correction of the TEF with reconstruction of the trachea is suitable and
successful in most patients. Several stages seem justified when concurrent
laryngotracheal reconstruction is needed.

PMID: 10961805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Br J Nutr. 2000 Jul;84(1):85-94.

The effect of dietary fibre on energy utilisation and partitioning of heat
production over pregnancy in sows.

Ramonet Y(1), van Milgen J, Dourmad JY, Dubois S, Meunier-Salaün MC, Noblet J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Station de Recherches Porcines,
St-Gilles, France.

A low (L) and high-fibre (H) diet were fed to six multiparous sows during
gestation in a 2 x 2 repeated Latin square design. A single meal per day was
given that provided 37.2 MJ digestible energy/d. The kinetics of heat production 
(HP) and its partitioning (fasting HP, activity HP, and thermic effect of feeding
(TEF)) were determined. The TEF was partitioned between a dynamic component
(TEFst) and a constant component (TEFlt). Digestibility of energy and nutrients
was lower for the diet H. In spite of the lower metabolisable energy (ME) intake 
(33.9 v. 35.4 MJ/d for diets H and L respectively), HP was higher for diet H
(30.5 v. 28.9 MJ/d) resulting in a lower energy retention. The estimated fasting 
HP was 270 kJ/kg body weight 0.75 per d at day 0 of gestation and increased with 
advancement of pregnancy. The TEFlt was not significantly different from zero for
diet L, but represented 4.1% of ME intake for diet H. The TEFst was not affected 
by the diet but diet H delayed the postprandial peak of HP. Total TEF was higher 
for diet H than for diet L (11.7 v. 8.2% of ME intake). The longer duration of
eating with diet H was compensated for by less physical activity between meals,
so that activity HP was equivalent for both diets. The activity HP represented
20% of ME intake but was variable between sows. The ME requirements for
maintenance averaged 440 kJ/kg body weight 0.75 per d. Feeding high-fibre diets
increases HP, delays the postprandial peak of HP and maintains the basal HP at a 
higher level.

PMID: 10961164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Pediatr Surg Int. 2000;16(5-6):322-5.

Cineradiographic evaluation of postoperative patients with esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Dutta HK(1), Rajani M, Bhatnagar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi.

Esophageal dysmotility is a common occurrence after successful repair of
esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The etiology of this
motility disorder, however, remains controversial. Cine-barium esophagograms were
performed in 25 survivors of EA/TEF at a mean age of 30.5 months. A clinical
evaluation was done at the same time and the results were classified as
"excellent", "good", and "fair". The study revealed that 88% of patients had
dysmotile esophageal segments and segmental contractions. Normal peristalsis was 
seen in only 16% of patients and 64% showed to-and-fro movements. The bolus
transit time was delayed in 60%. The clinical status of these patients correlated
well with the cine-radiographic findings. Thus, abnormal motility of the
esophagus, which may be inherent, exists in postoperative survivors of EA/TEF and
may be responsible for the clinical status of these patients.

PMID: 10955554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cent Eur J Public Health. 2000 Jul;8 Suppl:43-5.

Dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like toxic effects of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs): implications for risk assessment.

Giesy JP(1), Kannan K, Blankenship AL, Jones PD, Hilscherova K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824, USA.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic
contaminants in the environment. Individual PCB congeners exhibit different
physico-chemical properties and biological activities which result in different
environmental distributions and toxicity profiles. The variable composition of
PCB residues in environmental matrices and their different mechanisms of
toxicity, complicate the development of scientifically based regulations for the 
risk assessment. Various approaches for the assessment of risks of PCBs have been
critically examined. Recent developments in the toxic equivalency factor (TEF)
approach for the assessment of toxic effects due to dioxin-like PCBs have been
examined. PCB exposure studies which describe non-dioxin-like toxic effects,
particularly neuro-behavioral effects and their effective doses in animals were
also considered. A comparative assessment of effective doses for dioxin-like and 
non-dioxin-like effects by PCBs was made to evaluate the relative significance of
non-ortho and ortho-substituted PCBs in risk assessment. Using mink as an
example, relative merits and implications of using TEF and total PCB approaches
for assessing the potential for toxic effects in wildlife was examined.

PMID: 10943457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. APMIS. 2000 May;108(5):313-7.

Congenital laryngeal atresia: two autopsy cases, one describing the use of
computed tomography.

Asano S(1), Yamagiwa K, Konnai I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Iwaki Kyoritsu General Hospital, Japan.

Two autopsy cases of congenital laryngeal atresia (CLA) were studied. In the
first case (a boy delivered at 37 weeks of gestation) the subglottic lumen was
almost totally occupied by a dome shaped cricoid cartilage with a
pharyngotracheal duct (PTD). No tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) was found. In the
second case (a girl born at 41 weeks of gestation) histology showed that the
subglottic lumen was almost occluded by an epithelial lamina and a dome-shaped
cricoid cartilage. Again no TEF was found. Both cases had PTD and showed normal
development of the lungs. These deformities coincided with Smith & Bain's type II
subglottic atresia. The anatomy of the lesion was confirmed by postmortem
three-dimensional reconstruction CT, the use of which has not previously been
reported.

PMID: 10937767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 6;275(40):30801-5.

Functional interaction between the p160 coactivator proteins and the
transcriptional enhancer factor family of transcription factors.

Belandia B(1), Parker MG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London WC2A
3PX, United Kingdom.

SRC1, initially identified as a nuclear receptor coactivator, was found to
interact with a member of the transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF) family of
transcription factors, TEF-4. The interaction, which occurs in both intact cells 
and in a cell-free system, is mediated by the highly conserved basic
helix-loop-helix/Per-Arnt-Sim (bHLH-PAS) domain present in the N-terminal region 
of SRC1. Moreover, all three members of the p160 family of nuclear receptor
coactivators, SRC1, TIF2, and RAC3, are able to potentiate transcription from a
TEF response element in transient transfection experiments, and this activation
requires the presence of the bHLH-PAS domain. These results suggest that the p160
proteins could be bona fide coactivators of the TEF family of transcription
factors.

PMID: 10934189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Aug 15;28(16):3168-77.

Protein kinase-A dependent phosphorylation of transcription enhancer factor-1
represses its DNA-binding activity but enhances its gene activation ability.

Gupta MP(1), Kogut P, Gupta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery (Cardiac and Thoracic), The University of Chicago, 5841 
South Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. mgupta@surgery.bsd.uchicago.edu

The cAMP-dependent signaling pathway has been implicated in cardiac cell
growth/differentiation and muscle gene transcription. Previously, we have
identified a cAMP-inducible E-box/M-CAT hybrid motif in the cardiac alpha-myosin 
heavy chain (alpha-MHC) gene promoter. The two factors, TEF-1 and Max, that bind 
to this motif are found to physically associate with each other and exert a
positive cooperative effect for gene regulation. Here we show that TEF-1, but not
Max, is a substrate for protein kinase-A (PK-A)-dependent phosphorylation. TEF-1 
is phosphorylated by PK-A at residue serine-102. This post-translational
modification of TEF-1 repressed its DNA-binding activity, but not its ability to 
interact with the Max protein. Replacement of serine-102 in TEF-1 by a neutral or
a charged amino acid did not abolish its DNA-binding ability, suggesting that
changing a charge at the 102 amino-acid position of TEF-1 was not sufficient to
inhibit its DNA-binding activity. We also show that PK-A response of the
alpha-MHC gene is stimulated by the presence of wild-type TEF-1 but not by mutant
TEF-1 having serine-102 replaced by alanine, suggesting that phosphorylation at
this residue accounts for the cAMP/PK-A response of the gene. Thus, these data
demonstrate that TEF-1 is a direct target of cAMP/PK-A signaling in cardiac
myocytes.

PMCID: PMC108436
PMID: 10931933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Food Addit Contam. 2000 Apr;17(4):347-58.

Human risk assessment and TEFs.

van den Berg M(1), Peterson RE, Schrenk D.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Toxicology, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

The concept of toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) has been developed to facilitate 
risk assessment and regulatory control of exposure to complex PCDD, PCDF and PCB 
mixtures. Recently the European Centre for Environment and Health of the World
Health Organization (WHO-ECEH) and the International Programme on Chemical Safety
(IPCS) jointly re-evaluated the TEFs of PCDDs, PCDFs and dioxin-like PCBs for
mammals and derived consensus TEFs for birds and fish (Stockholm, 1997). From a
mechanistic point of view it can be concluded that, although the quantitative
response will vary depending on the congener involved, the occurrence of a common
mechanism (binding to the Ah receptor) legitimates the use of the TEF concept
across species. But there also is criticism regarding the TEF concept.
Pharmacokinetic differences between species can significantly influence the TEF
value, and uncertainties due to additive or non-additive interactions, to
differences in species responsiveness and to differences in the shape of the
dose-response curve might hamper the derivation of consensus TEF values. In this 
context it should be noted, however, that using TCDD alone, as the only measure
of exposure to dioxin-like PCDDs, PCDFs and PCBs, would severely underestimate
the risk from exposure to these compounds. Therefore, it can be concluded that,
for pragmatic reasons, the TEF concept remains the most feasible approach for
risk assessment purposes, in spite of the uncertainties associated with its use.

PMID: 10912248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Pediatr Surg Int. 2000;16(4):256-61.

Defective epithelial-mesenchymal interactions dictate the organogenesis of
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Crisera CA(1), Grau JB, Maldonado TS, Kadison AS, Longaker MT, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

We have previously suggested that the fistula tract in esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) arises from a trifurcation of the embryonic
lung bud. Thus, it appears to be a respiratory-derived structure, and expresses
the lung-specific transcription factor TTF-1 in its epithelium. The fistula tract
does not give rise to lungs like the other branches from the bud. It grows
caudally until it fistulizes with the stomach. We hypothesized that
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions (EMI) dictate the differential pattern of
growth of the respiratory-derived fistula tract in EA/TEF. EA/TEF was induced in 
rat embryos via prenatal exposure to adriamycin. Microdissection was performed on
E13.5 embryos to isolate developing lung bud, fistula tract, or esophagus from
adriamycin-treated or control animals, respectively. The mesenchyme and
epithelium from each of these foregut structures were separated. The individual
epithelia were recombined with each of the various mesenchymes and grown in
culture. They were assayed for relative degrees of branching. Isolated lung-bud
epithelia (LBE) or fistula epithelium were also cultured in Matrigel with
exogenous fibroblast growth factors (FGF) and subsequently assayed for branching.
The fistula-tract mesenchyme relatively inhibited branching of lung epithelium.
The epithelium of the fistula tract could be induced to branch by non-fistula
(lung or esophageal) mesenchyme. The fistula-tract and adriamycin-treated LBE
both branched in response to FGF1. In contrast, neither responded to FGF7 or
FGF10. EMI are defective in the developing EA/TEF. The inability to respond to
FGF7 and FGF10 suggests an epithelial defect involving the receptor FGF2R-IIIb,
to which these mesenchymal factors obligately bind. Thus, the mesenchyme around
the developing fistula tract may lack an FGF branching morphogen(s), such as
FGF1. Hence, this mesenchyme is unable to induce branching of respiratory
epithelia and allows the middle branch of the embryonic tracheal trifurcation to 
grow caudally as an unbranched tube until it fistulizes into the stomach.

PMID: 10898225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Surg Res. 2000 Aug;92(2):245-9.

Patterning of the "distal esophagus" in esophageal atresia with
tracheo-esophageal fistula: is thyroid transcription factor 1 a player?

Crisera CA(1), Maldonado TS, Kadison AS, Li M, Longaker MT, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Repair, New York University Medical
Center, New York, New York, 10016, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have recently proposed that the "distal esophagus" in esophageal
atresia with tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA/TEF) is actually embryologically
derived from the middle branch of a trifurcation of the embryonic lung bud, which
subsequently grows caudally in the foregut to connect with the developing
stomach. We hypothesized that differential mRNA expression of the lung-specific
patterning transcription factor, thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), in the
developing fistula tract in TEF relative to the bronchi (the other branches of
the lung bud trifurcation) might explain the unique nonbranching pattern of
growth of the fistula tract.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: EA/TEF was induced in Sprague-Dawley rat embryos via
intraperitoneal injection of 2.2 mg/kg adriamycin into pregnant dams on Days 6-9 
of gestation. The foregut from embryos developing EA/TEF and from control embryos
(no adriamycin) were isolated on Gestational Days 13.5, 15.5, and 17.5 (term = 21
days). Some were processed for whole-mount in situ hybridization for TTF-1, while
others were embedded and sectioned for histologic analysis via in situ
hybridization for TTF-1.
RESULTS: The expression of the respiratory-specific transcription factor TTF-1 is
conserved in the epithelium of the developing fistula tract in TEF. The pattern
of expression of TTF-1 in the fistula tract mirrors the expression in the large
airways of the developing lungs, despite the fact that the fistula tract does not
form secondary branches to give rise to a lung.
CONCLUSIONS: The fistula tract in TEF is a respiratory-derived structure that
expresses the lung-specific transcription factor TTF-1 throughout its development
in the foregut. Contrary to the patterning role that it normally plays in the
developing lung, TTF-1 does not induce branching morphogenesis in the fistula
tract. Thus, the nonbranching pattern of growth of the fistula tract may be
attributable to local mesenchymal-epithelial interactions that override TTF-1
patterning activity.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10896829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Ultrasonics. 2000 Mar;38(1-8):171-5.

Application of orthogonal ultrasonic signals and binaural processing for imaging 
of the environment

Kazys R(1), Svilainis L, Mazeika L.

Author information: 
(1)Kaunas University of Technology, Lithuania. rkazys@tef.ktu.lt

Data acquisition rates in ultrasonic imaging systems are limited by the finite
value of the speed of ultrasonic waves. In order to improve the imaging speed, it
is proposed to perform simultaneous scanning of the environment in different
directions. In order to avoid cross-talk between adjacent channels in different
directions, different orthogonal signals are transmitted. Application of
cross-correlation processing and non-linear iterative deconvolution enables the
reliable separation of signals transmitted by different sources and reflected by 
multiple targets. The spatial positions of the targets are found using the data
obtained after the non-linear deconvolution as the initial data for binaural or
tri-aural processing. This approach has been exploited in ultrasonic sonar used
for navigation of mobile robots.

PMID: 10829652  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


120. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 May;35(5):740-4.

Gastric motility disorders in patients operated on for esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula: long-term evaluation.

Romeo C(1), Bonanno N, Baldari S, Centorrino A, Scalfari G, Antonuccio P,
Centonze A, Gentile C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pediatric Surgery, Policlinico Viale Gazzi, Messina, Italy.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Disturbed peristalsis is reported frequently after successful
repair of esophageal atresia (EA). Delayed gastric emptying could be considered a
cause of symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux (GER) in patients with repaired EA. 
The aim of the current study was to evaluate the incidence of and to characterize
gastric motility disorders in a long-term follow-up of patients operated on for
EA-tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) by studying gastric emptying with
scintigraphic techniques and comparing the results with gastric manometric data.
METHODS: Eleven patients, between 12 and 23 years of age (median, 17) operated on
for EA-TEF between 1975 and 1985, were studied. The scinthigraphic study was
undertaken using a standard solid meal. The manometric study was performed using 
a 2.3-mm probe with 3 solid-state transducers.
RESULTS: Dysphagia was present in about 20% of patients. Dyspepsia was recorded
in 40% of the patients. A pathological reflux was present in 2 patients. Delayed 
gastric emptying (T1/2 > 90') was present in 4 patients (36%). Manometric data
showed alteration of gastric peristaltic activity in 5 patients (45%).
CONCLUSIONS: Delayed gastric emptying is frequent in long-term follow-up of
patients operated on for EA-TEF. In these patients antral hypomotility also is
recorded manometrically. Abnormal gastric motility can be considered as an
important factor predisposing to symptoms of GER. A thorough evaluation of
gastric function is recommended in symptomatic patients after EA repair.

PMID: 10813339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2000 May;9(2):73-8.

Esophageal atresia in infants with very low birth weight.

Chahine AA(1), Ricketts RR.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta at Egleston and Emory Children's Center,
Georgia, USA.

Infants with esophageal atresia (EA), with or without a tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) frequently are of low birth weight. With advances in neonatal, respiratory,
surgical, and anesthetic care, more infants with very low birth weight (VLBW;
birth weight less than 1.5 kg) are surviving. The therapy of the VLBW neonate
with EA is not longer automatically staged. Primary or delayed primary
anastomosis can be performed safely if the patient is stable. This report will
review the epidemiology, pathophysiology, treatment, and prognosis of EA in VLBW 
infants. The authors present their own experience in dealing with the VLBW with
EA and review the world literature.

PMID: 10807227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 12;275(19):14524-31.

Involvement of thyrotroph embryonic factor in calcium-mediated regulation of gene
expression.

Krueger DA(1), Warner EA, Dowd DR.

Author information: 
(1)E. A. Doisy Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, St. Louis
University Health Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, USA.

In the present study, we used an expression cloning strategy to identify
transcription factors that bind specifically to a limited region of the inducible
cAMP early repressor (ICER) promoter and regulate transcription. Murine
thyrotroph embryonic factor (mTEF) was isolated and was shown to bind to a site
located at nucleotides -117 to -108 from the transcriptional start site.
Transient expression of reporter constructs containing either a consensus TEFRE
or the icerTEF binding site demonstrated that TEF-dependent transcription
correlated with relative binding affinities, i.e. the consensus TEFRE bound TEF
more tightly and was more responsive to TEF than the icerTEFRE. Because the
icerTEFRE overlapped a cAMP response element, the responsiveness of these
sequences to either cAMP or Ca(2+) was tested. Although TEF expression had no
effect on the cAMP-regulated transcriptional response of the ICER promoter, TEF
did confer calcium responsiveness to these sequences. Calcium also modestly
increased the TEF-mediated transcription from a consensus TEFRE. Additional
studies using Ca(2+)-activated kinases indicate that Ca(2+)/TEF/TEFRE-regulated
transcription may be mediated through Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase (CaMK)
IV. Moreover, studies with the icerTEFRE in a CaMK IV-deficient cell line
demonstrated that these cells were transcriptionally unresponsive to
thapsigargin; however, responsiveness was restored by co-expression of the active
CaMK IV. These studies are the first to demonstrate that TEF is a
calcium-responsive transcription factor, and they suggest that there are two
classes of TEF-regulated genes. One class, represented by a consensus TEFRE, is
regulated by TEF in the resting cell; the second class, represented by icerTEFRE,
is regulated by TEF in the calcium-activated cell.

PMID: 10799536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Int J Cancer. 2000 Jun 1;86(5):695-701.

Analysis of mutations in the URR and E6/E7 oncogenes of HPV 16 cervical cancer
isolates from central China.

Stephen AL(1), Thompson CH, Tattersall MH, Cossart YE, Rose BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, Australia.

High rates of cervical cancer have been reported from parts of China and this may
reflect a predominance of cervical infection with particularly aggressive human
papillomavirus (HPV) variants. This PCR-based investigation of cervical tumours
from Sichuan province in central China demonstrated an HPV positivity rate of
88%. HPV 16 was most common (21/34, 61%), followed by HPV 18 (3/34, 9%), while
types 33, 45, 58 and 59 were each identified in one specimen. Sequencing of up to
1349 bases of the 21 HPV 16-positive isolates, encompassing the enhancer/promoter
of the upstream regulatory region (URR) and the E6 and E7 genes, revealed
distinct patterns of genomic stability and variability. An overall mutation rate 
of 5% was seen in the URR. One isolate had a large deletion of 436 bases in the
enhancer; while varying combinations of 21 point mutations were identified in the
remainder, impacting several YY1, NF1, TEF-1 and Oct-1 sites. More sequence
variations were found in E6 compared to E7 (81% vs. 52% of isolates showing at
least one mutation), some of which resulted in changes to the translated amino
acids. Since the E6/E7 genes encode the oncogenic proteins essential for
malignant transformation, and as their expression is controlled by the URR, it is
possible that some of the identified mutations altered the oncogenicity of the
virus: either directly by changing amino acid sequences of the E6 or E7
oncoproteins, or indirectly through alterations to transcription factor binding
sites in the URR.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10797293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Genome Res. 2000 Apr;10(4):454-72.

Construction of a high-resolution 2.5-Mb transcript map of the human
6p21.2-6p21.3 region immediately centromeric of the major histocompatibility
complex.

Tripodis N(1), Palmer S, Phillips S, Milne S, Beck S, Ragoussis J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Laboratory, Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Guy's Campus,
GKT School of Medicine, King's College London SE1 9RT, UK.

We have constructed a 2.5-Mb physical and transcription map that spans the human 
6p21.2-6p21.3 region and includes the centromeric end of the MHC, using a
combination of techniques. In total 88 transcription units including exons,
cDNAs, and cDNA contigs were characterized and 60 were confidently positioned on 
the physical map. These include a number of genes encoding nuclear and splicing
factors (Ndr kinase, HSU09564, HSRP20); cell cycle, DNA packaging, and apoptosis 
related [p21, HMGI(Y), BAK]; immune response (CSBP, SAPK4); transcription
activators and zinc finger-containing genes (TEF-5, ZNF76); embryogenesis related
(Csa-19); cell signaling (DIPP); structural (HSET), and other genes (TULP1,
HSPRARD, DEF-6, EO6811, cyclophilin), as well as a number of RP genes and
pseudogenes (RPS10, RPS12-like, RPL12-like, RPL35-like). Furthermore, several
novel genes (a Br140-like, a G2S-like, a FBN2-like, a ZNF-like, and B1/KIAA0229) 
have been identified, as well as cDNAs and cDNA contigs. The detailed map of the 
gene content of this chromosomal segment provides a number of candidate genes,
which may be involved in several biological processes that have been associated
with this region, such as spermatogenesis, development, embryogenesis, and
neoplasia. The data provide useful tools for synteny studies between mice and
humans, for genome structure analysis, gene density comparisons, and studies of
nucleotide composition, of different isochores and Giemsa light and Giemsa dark
bands.

PMCID: PMC310888
PMID: 10779486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2000 Apr;81(6):455-62.

Interindividual differences in the thermoregulatory response to cool exposure in 
sleeping neonates.

Bach V(1), Telliez F, Zoccoli G, Lenzi P, Leke A, Libert JP.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur les Explorations Physiologiques et Comportementales
(TEF: EA 2088), Faculté de Médecine, Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, 
France. veronique.bach@sa.u-picardie.fr

The responses of the thermoregulatory effectors vary greatly among neonates.
Therefore, we assume that a small decrease in air temperature from
thermoneutrality induces various thermoregulatory responses within neonates that 
represent an energy cost due to the cold defence processes. To determine the
importance of this variability in nursing, 26 neonates were explored at
thermoneutrality and in a cool environment (-1.5 degrees C from thermoneutrality)
similar to that which occurs currently in clinical procedure. Oxygen consumption 
(VO2), oesophageal and skin temperatures, as well as sleep parameters were
recorded continuously in both conditions. Analysis of all of the data from all of
the neonates revealed that the cool exposure induced thermal and sleep
disturbances, but VO2 did not increase and was not negatively correlated to body 
temperature (as might be expected). Analyses of individual data showed large
variability in body temperature regulation: the neonates could be assigned to one
of three groups according to the direction of the individual slopes of VO2 versus
oesophageal or skin temperature. The groups also differed according to the sleep 
changes recorded in the cool condition. The results show that the definition of
thermoneutrality should be revised by incorporating non only changes in the body 
temperature, but also the sleep disturbances (increased wakefulness and active
sleep, decreased quiet sleep), which are criteria that are more sensitive to mild
cool exposure. Thermoneutrality should be defined for each individual, since the 
results stress that the variability does not help to predict a general pattern of
thermoregulatory responses in cool-exposed neonates.

PMID: 10774868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Apr;35(4):584-7.

Esophageal atresia in Bremen, Germany--evaluation of preoperative risk
classification in esophageal atresia.

Yagyu M(1), Gitter H, Richter B, Booss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Central Hospital St Jürgen Strasse, Bremen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The current study enrolled 113 patients with esophageal
atresia (EA) accompanying tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) (Vogt type IIIb) who
were treated at the Central Hospital St. Jürgen Strasse, Department of Pediatric 
Surgery in Bremen, Germany between 1978 and 1997.
METHODS: These EA patients were classified into patients preoperatively
complicated by respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) or pneumonia and those without
complications. In each group, risk factors were classified according to the risk 
classification described by Spitz et al, and the prognoses and therapeutic
problems were evaluated. Based on these results, a new preoperative risk
classification consisting of risk factors described by Spitz et al supplemented
with RDS and pneumonia was evaluated.
RESULTS: When the prognoses of EA were evaluated, the survival rate was markedly 
decreased when RDS or pneumonia alone or more than 2 of 3 factors including major
cardiac anomalies and low birth weight were present as preoperative risk factors.
Concerning therapeutic problems, the necessity of treatment with delayed primary 
repair tended to increase when RDS or pneumonia was present as risk factors.
However, it was suggested that secure and safe blockage of TEF was still
difficult during the initial surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: During selection of therapeutic strategies for EA, RDS and pneumonia
are still considered to be essential as preoperative risk factors for EA. Our new
preoperative risk classification consisting of risk factors described by Spitz et
al supplemented with RDS and pneumonia appears to clearly reflect the prognoses
and therapeutic problems of EA.

PMID: 10770387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 9;275(23):17476-80.

Identification of the functional domain in the transcription factor RTEF-1 that
mediates alpha 1-adrenergic signaling in hypertrophied cardiac myocytes.

Ueyama T(1), Zhu C, Valenzuela YM, Suzow JG, Stewart AF.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA. stewartaf@msx.upmc.edu

Cardiac myocytes respond to alpha(1)-adrenergic receptor stimulation by a
progressive hypertrophy accompanied by the activation of many fetal genes,
including skeletal muscle alpha-actin. The skeletal muscle alpha-actin gene is
activated by signaling through an MCAT element, the binding site of the
transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family of transcription factors.
Previously, we showed that overexpression of the TEF-1-related factor (RTEF-1)
increased the alpha(1)-adrenergic response of the skeletal muscle alpha-actin
promoter, whereas TEF-1 overexpression did not. Here, we identified the
functional domains and specific sequences in RTEF-1 that mediate the
alpha(1)-adrenergic response. Chimeric TEF-1 and RTEF-1 expression constructs
localized the region responsible for the alpha(1)-adrenergic response to the
carboxyl-terminal domain of RTEF-1. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to
inactivate eight serine residues of RTEF-1, not present in TEF-1, that are
putative targets of alpha(1)-adrenergic-dependent kinases. Mutation of a single
serine residue, Ser-322, reduced the alpha(1)-adrenergic activation of RTEF-1 by 
70% without affecting protein stability, suggesting that phosphorylation at this 
serine residue accounts for most of the alpha(1)-adrenergic response. Thus, these
results demonstrate that RTEF-1 is a direct target of alpha(1)-adrenergic
signaling in hypertrophied cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 10764782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Curr Genet. 2000 Feb;37(2):119-24.

Characterization and expression of a Neurospora crassa ribosomal protein gene,
crp-7.

Kusuda M(1), Yajima H, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, 
Urawa, Japan.

We have isolated and characterized a Neurospora crassa cytoplasmic ribosomal
protein gene, named crp-7, which is found upstream of the photolyase gene. The
deduced amino-acid sequence of this gene is highly homologous to the YS25
ribosomal protein of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The crp-7 ORF consists of two
exons which are separated by a short intron. The deduced polypeptide contains 87 
amino acid residues and has a calculated molecular weight of 9.7 kDa. RFLP
mapping showed that the crp-7 gene is located on the right arm of linkage group
I. Southern blot hybridization analyses indicated that there is only one copy of 
the crp-7 gene in the N. crassa genome. Transcriptional elements, the Dde box,
the Taq box and the CG element, that have been identified in other N. crassa
ribosomal protein genes are observed in the promoter region of the crp-7 gene.
The crp-7 mRNA levels were low in conidia and highest in young mycelia during
vegetative growth. The mRNA levels of four r-protein genes, including the crp-7
gene, as well as the tef-1 gene encoding translational elongation factor 1 alpha,
were raised following the treatment of mycelia with a low concentration of
cycloheximide. This indicates that the expression of r-protein genes is under the
control of so-called super-induction.

PMID: 10743568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochemistry. 2000 Mar 28;39(12):3505-13.

Novel human TEF-1 isoforms exhibit altered DNA binding and functional properties.

Jiang SW(1), Trujillo MA, Sakagashira M, Wilke RA, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry/Molecular
Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) is a member of the TEA/ATTS domain 
family. TEF-1 binds to GT-IIC (GGAATG), SphI (AGTATG), SphII (AGCATG), and M-CAT 
(GGTATG) response elements and is involved in the transactivation of a variety of
genes, including the SV40 large T antigen, mammalian muscle-specific genes, and
human chorionic somatomammotropin genes. Also, TEF-1 acts as a transcriptional
repressor in placental cells, possibly through interaction with the TATA binding 
protein (TBP), preventing TBP binding to the TATA box. Here we describe the
cloning, tissue-specific expression pattern, and functional characterization of
two novel TEF-1 isoforms, TEF-1beta and TEF-1gamma. These isoforms most likely
arise from alternative splicing of mRNA transcribed from a single gene and
involve substitutions and/or insertions in a region immediately following the DNA
binding domain. TEF-1beta appears to be widely distributed like the prototypic
TEF-1, designated TEF-1alpha, whereas TEF-1gamma exhibits a narrower
tissue-specific expression pattern that includes pancreas, kidney, and skeletal
and heart muscle. The relatively limited sequence alterations among these
isoforms cause significant changes in their DNA binding and transcriptional
activities. TEF-1beta and TEF-1gamma bind to GT-IIC sequences with higher
affinity and repress hCS promoter more efficiently than TEF-1alpha. These results
suggest that each TEF-1 isoform may play unique regulatory roles in various
tissues.

PMID: 10727247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Pediatr Surg. 2000 Mar;35(3):438-41.

A histopathological study of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Dutta HK(1), Mathur M, Bhatnagar V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Histopathologic examination of the esophagus has not been
reported often in esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
Abnormal esophageal motility has been reported after successful repair of EA and 
TEF, although the exact etiology of this motility disorder remains unclear.
Histological evaluation of the fistulous portion of the esophagus has been
performed to document any abnormality that may be responsible for the abnormal
motility.
METHODS: Histopathological study of fistulous segment of esophageal atresia and
distal TEF was conducted on 65 patients, which included autopsy material from 3
patients in whom the entire esophagus was examined by serial section. Special
stains were administered to each specimen to look for tracheobronchial remnants
and the arrangement of muscle fibers. Clinical evaluation was performed in 27
patients who were available for review 6 months to 9 years after successful
surgical treatment. These patients were categorized into 3 groups according to
their clinical status.
RESULTS: These findings showed that the majority of these patients have
tracheobronchial remnants in the esophagus in the form of abnormal mucous glands 
and ducts, abnormal mucin secretion, presence of cartilage, and a disorganized
muscle coat.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of abnormal mucous glands and abnormal mucin secretion 
has not been highlighted before. Although tracheobronchial remnants and a
disorganized muscle coat are common findings in the fistulous portion of the
esophagus, these may not reflect the structure of the remaining esophagus.

PMID: 10726684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2000 Feb;31(1):30-43.

Assessing the risks of exposures to multiple chemicals with a common mechanism of
toxicity: how to cumulate?

Wilkinson CF(1), Christoph GR, Julien E, Kelley JM, Kronenberg J, McCarthy J,
Reiss R.

Author information: 
(1)Jellinek, Schwartz & Connolly, Inc., 1525 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 600,
Arlington, Virginia, 22209, USA.

The Food Quality Protection Act (FQPA) of 1996 requires the U.S. EPA to consider 
the "cumulative effects" of pesticides and other substances that have a "common
mechanism of toxicity." Several different methods for combining the exposures to 
estimate the risk of groups of common mechanism chemicals with different
potencies and exposure characteristics are critically evaluated. These are the
hazard index (HI), toxicity equivalence factor (TEF), and combined margin of
exposure (MOE(T)) procedures as well as the point of departure index (PODI) and
cumulative risk index (CRI) methods that are the reciprocals of the HI and MOE(T)
approaches, respectively. Each of these methods ideally requires, at a minimum,
the availability of in vivo toxicology data for the same toxicological endpoint
in the same animal species. Furthermore, all assume that the effects of the
individual components in the mixture are independent in nature (i.e., are
additive rather than synergistic or antagonistic) and that the dose-response
functions for all compounds have a similar slope. The point of departure (POD),
preferably the dose corresponding to a given effect level (e.g., the ED(10)), can
be used as a measure of the relative potency of the different chemicals in the
group. If appropriate exposure and toxicology data are available, and the
chemicals in the group have a common uncertainty factor (UF), all the procedures 
yield a numerically identical result. The fact that different chemicals in the
group often have different UFs raises issues for all summation procedures and, in
the case of the TEF approach, the UF of the index chemical selected dictates the 
final result of the assessment. A major distinction between the different methods
for addition is the point in the process at which uncertainty is considered. The 
HI and CRI approaches are problematic because they require application of
policy-driven UFs (in the form of RfDs) at that stage of the process where
exposure should be expressed in terms of potency. In contrast, the PODI and
MOE(T) approaches require application of a single group UF(G) at the end of the
risk assessment process although they will also accommodate the application of
data-based adjustments earlier in the analysis. Importantly, both the PODI and
the MOE(T) approaches allow policy- and data-driven UFs to be separated and thus 
make the process more transparent; these should be considered the methods of
choice for cumulative risk assessment. Assignment of a single group UF is
somewhat different from developing an UF for a single chemical and the total
weight of evidence available in the group database can be used to advantage to
reduce the UFs that need to be applied to the group. This larger database can
also be used to refine the PODs for individual members of the group. It is
important to emphasize that there remains a great deal of scientific uncertainty 
about how to proceed with cumulative risk assessment as described in the FQPA.
The serious difficulties associated with defining "common mechanism of toxicity" 
and "concurrent exposure" combined with the current paucity of data and
methodology required to conduct cumulative risk assessment suggest that the
procedure is not yet ready for use in pesticide regulation.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10715222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2000 Feb;105(2):731-8; quiz 739.

The separation of anatomic components technique for the reconstruction of massive
midline abdominal wall defects: anatomy, surgical technique, applications, and
limitations revisited.

Shestak KC(1), Edington HJ, Johnson RR.

Author information: 
(1)Magee-Women's Hospital, Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School
of Medicine, PA 15213, USA. shestakkc@msx.upmc.edu

Reconstruction of massive abdominal wall defects has long been a vexing clinical 
problem. A landmark development for the autogenous tissue reconstruction of these
difficult wounds was the introduction of "components of anatomic separation"
technique by Ramirez et al. This method uses bilateral, innervated, bipedicle,
rectus abdominis-transversus abdominis-internal oblique muscle flap complexes
transposed medially to reconstruct the central abdominal wall. Enamored with this
concept, this institution sought to define the limitations and complications and 
to quantify functional outcome with the use of this technique. During a 4-year
period (July of 1991 to 1995), 22 patients underwent reconstruction of massive
midline abdominal wounds. The defects varied in size from 6 to 14 cm in width and
from 10 to 24 cm in height. Causes included removal of infected synthetic mesh
material (n = 7), recurrent hernia (n = 4), removal of split-thickness skin graft
and dense abdominal wall cicatrix (n = 4), parastomal hernia (n = 2), primary
incisional hernia (n = 2), trauma/enteric sepsis (n = 2), and tumor resection
(abdominal wall desmoid tumor involving the right rectus abdominis muscle) (n =
1). Twenty patients were treated with mobilization of both rectus abdominis
muscles, and in two patients one muscle complex was used. The plane of
"separation" was the interface between the external and internal oblique muscles.
A quantitative dynamic assessment of the abdominal wall was performed in two
patients by using a Cybex TEF machine, with analysis of truncal flexion strength 
being undertaken preoperatively and at 6 months after surgery. Patients achieved 
wound healing in all cases with one operation. Minor complications included
superficial infection in two patients and a wound seroma in one. One patient
developed a recurrent incisional hernia 8 months postoperatively. There was one
postoperative death caused by multisystem organ failure. One patient required the
addition of synthetic mesh to achieve abdominal closure. This case involved a
thin patient whose defect exceeded 16 cm in width. There has been no clinically
apparent muscle weakness in the abdomen over that present preoperatively.
Analysis of preoperative and postoperative truncal force generation revealed a 40
percent increase in strength in the two patients tested on a Cybex machine.
Reoperation was possible through the reconstructed abdominal wall in two patients
without untoward sequela. This operation is an effective method for autogenous
reconstruction of massive midline abdominal wall defects. It can be used either
as a primary mode of defect closure or to treat the complications of trauma,
surgery, or various diseases.

PMID: 10697187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Pediatr Rev. 2000 Jan;21(1):21, 26.

Index of suspicion. Case 5. Esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF).

Kulayalat NA(1), Narchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Saudi Aramco-Al Hasa Health Center, Mubarraz, Saudi Arabia.

PMID: 10702074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Feb;108(2):A58.

Health effects of hexachlorobenzene and the TEF approach.

Vos JG.

Comment on
    Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Nov;106(11):683-8.
    Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Dec;106(12):775-92.

PMCID: PMC1637891
PMID: 10656862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Plant J. 1999 Dec;20(5):553-61.

Plant interstitial telomere motifs participate in the control of gene expression 
in root meristems.

Tremousaygue D(1), Manevski A, Bardet C, Lescure N, Lescure B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des Relations Plantes-Microorganismes,
CNRS-INRA, BP 27, 31326 Castanet-Tolosan, France.

The promoters of Arabidopsis eEF1A genes contain a telomere motif, the telo-box, 
associated with an activating sequence, the tef-box. Database searches indicated 
the presence of telo-boxes in the 5' region of numerous genes encoding components
of the translational apparatus. By using several promoter constructs we
demonstrate that the telo-box is required for the expression of a
beta-glucoronidase gene in root primordia of transgenic Arabidopsis. This effect 
was observed when a telo-box was inserted upstream or downstream from the
transcription initiation site, and occurred in synergy with the tef-box. These
results clearly indicate that interstitial telomere motifs in plants are involved
in control of gene expression. South-western screening of a lambdaZAP library
with a double-stranded Arabidopsis telomere motif resulted in characterization of
a protein related to the conserved animal protein Puralpha. The possibility of a 
regulation process similar to that achieved by the Rap1p in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is discussed.

PMID: 10652127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Metabolism. 2000 Jan;49(1):6-10.

Postabsorptive resting metabolic rate and thermic effect of food in relation to
body composition and adipose tissue distribution.

Armellini F(1), Zamboni M, Mino A, Bissoli L, Micciolo R, Bosello O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics, San Lorenzo Hospital, Valdagno, Italy.

One hundred thirty subjects were studied to investigate relationships between the
body composition and fat distribution as evaluated by computed tomography and the
resting metabolic rate (RMR) as evaluated by indirect calorimetry: 82
premenopausal women (age, 18 to 52 years; body mass index [BMI], 27 to 52 kg/m2),
27 postmenopausal women (46 to 71 years; 28 to 49 kg/m2), and 21 men (18 to 70
years; 31 to 43 kg/m2). The thermic effect of food (TEF) was evaluated in all men
and in 2 subgroups of 55 and 19 women. The best-fitting equations for predicting 
RMR, obtained by multiple regression, included the following as covariates:
fat-free mass and both subcutaneous and visceral adipose tissue in premenopausal 
women (R2 = .55, P = .0001), fat-free mass and visceral adipose tissue in
postmenopausal women (R2 = .58, P = .001), and age, with minus sign, and visceral
adipose tissue in men (R2 = .44, P = .0051). Fasting insulin and fat-free mass,
with minus sign, and both visceral and subcutaneous adipose tissue were the
predictors of the TEF (R2 = .25, P = .0055) in premenopausal women. This study
demonstrates that visceral fat distribution is important in determining the RMR
in postmenopausal women and men. In premenopausal women, total adipose tissue is 
a main determinant of both the RMR and TEF This last effect could be
counterbalanced by insulin resistance.

PMID: 10647057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dis Esophagus. 1999;12(3):209-11.

Benign tracheoesophageal fistula: results of surgical therapy.

Baisi A(1), Bonavina L, Narne S, Peracchia A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Chirurgia Generale ed Oncologia Chirurgica, Università degli Studi
di Milano-Ospedale Policlinico, Italy.

Acquired fistulas between the trachea and the esophagus (TEFs) are unusual,
serious and still challenging clinical entities. Between 1980 and 1997, 31
patients with acquired benign TEF were evaluated and treated in our department.
The definitive treatment was undertaken when patients were weaned from the
ventilator. Dissection of the fistula and closure of the tracheal and esophageal 
defect was performed in 26 patients. Esophagogastroplasty plus closure of the
tracheal defect and omental interposition was performed in two patients. Tracheal
resection and reconstruction plus of the sternocleidomastoid muscle interposition
was carried out in one patient with circumferential tracheal damage. In two
patients, no surgical treatment was carried out. One patient died after surgical 
treatment. In 23 patients, long-term follow-up was excellent, with normal
post-operative function of both the esophagus and the airway. Two failures of
treatment occurred which required definitive tracheostomy plus T-tube. Management
of TEFs can be safely carried out after weaning patients from the ventilator.

PMID: 10631915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Nov;34(11):1593-8.

Relationship of the notochord to foregut development in the fetal rat model of
esophageal atresia.

Qi BQ(1), Beasley SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Christchurch Hospital, New Zealand.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The notochord (Nt) is thought to act as a primary organizer
for adjacent axial embryonic organs. The current study used the
Adriamycin-induced fetal rat model of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA-TEF) to determine whether anomalies of the foregut (FG) were
associated with an abnormal Nt.
METHODS: Eight experimental female Sprague-Dawley rats received intraperitoneal
injection of Adriamycin (1.75 mg/kg) on gestational days 6 to 9 inclusive, and 4 
control rats received saline injection only. Their embryos were harvested on
gestational days 11, 12, 13, and 14. Embryos from each age subgroup were serially
sectioned and stained with H&E. The FG and Nt were traced from the primitive
pharynx to the level of the stomach.
RESULTS: By day 11, the Nt of control embryos had completely separated from the
FG and was located immediately ventral to the neural tube. On gestational day 12,
the Nt detached from the neural tube, and the trachea and esophagus were
separating. On day 11, in the Adriamycin-treated embryos, the Nt was still
attached to an FG that was narrowed or occluded. On day 12, the Nt remained
adherent to the FG from the primitive pharynx to the level above the primitive
respiratory buds, at which point it became thicker and branched sagittally, with 
the anterior branch contacting or merging with the FG. The FG usually loses its
lumen or continuity when in contact with the Nt.
CONCLUSIONS: Exposure of rat embryos to Adriamycin leads to abnormal development 
of the Nt, including prolonged attachment to or fusion with the FG, and abnormal 
branching. Traction on the FG by the Nt produces occlusion of its lumen and may
result in its complete interruption. Separation of the Nt from the FG would
appear to be a prerequisite for the normal development of the FG into its
derivatives: the esophagus and trachea.

PMID: 10591549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Food Chem Toxicol. 1999 Nov;37(11):1081-8.

PCB congeners transferred by human milk, with an estimate of their daily intake.

Angulo R(1), Martínez P, Jodral ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Hygiene and Technology, University of Córdoba, Spain.

The degree of exposure by nursing mothers to individual polychronated biphenyl
(PCB) congeners was studied and an estimate made of the daily intake by their
infants. Epidemiological data from 100 nursing mothers were collected; 11
individual PCB congeners were determined in samples of the mothers' milk and the 
toxicity equivalent (TEQ) calculated. The mothers' data and the congener levels
were statistically correlated. In over 80% of the samples, PCB congeners nos 180,
28, 138 and 170 were identified, and in over 70%, PCB congeners nos 188, 52, 187 
and 153. PCB congeners nos 183, 101 and 118 were identified in percentages of
between 39 and 15% of the samples. The highest levels detected were those in PCB 
no. 28 (1.626 ppb), and the lowest concentrations corresponded to PCB no. 183
(0.109 ppb). The toxicity equivalent (TEQ) was calculated from the toxic
equivalent factor (TEF) of the congeners studied. There were no statistical
differences between the geographical place of residence, age, occupation, and the
congeners studied. There was a significant differentiation with respect to the
birthplace, the location of industrial estates and the irrigation facilities in
the area of residence, to smoking, the consumption of a varied diet, meat, fish
or industrially processed foods, the physical constitution of the mothers, number
of children and lactation periods, and PCB congener levels. The total PCB daily
intake estimate was under the acceptable daily intake (ADI) limits of tolerance
(WHO, 1988), and it was not possible to come to any conclusions for the estimated
daily intake (EDI) of the 11 congeners studied since these have not yet been
established. It was thus proposed to use the EDIs obtained in order to establish 
the ADIs of the individual PCB congeners.

PMID: 10566879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Ann Nutr Metab. 1999;43(3):140-4.

Resting metabolic rate and thermogenic effect of food in vegetarian diets
compared with Mediterranean diets.

Bissoli L(1), Armellini F, Zamboni M, Mandragona R, Ballarin A, Bosello O.

Author information: 
(1)Servizio Clinicizzato di Geriatria, Verona, Italia.

The purpose of our work is to compare the resting metabolic rate (RMR) and
thermogenic effect of food (TEF) in a group of vegetarians and a group of
subjects consuming a Mediterranean diet. The composition of the diets was
similar. Thirty-two subjects were studied: 16 vegetarians (age 34 +/- 9 years,
BMI 21 +/- 2) and 16 omnivors (age 30 +/- 5 years, BMI 22 +/- 3). All were in
excellent general health. Each subject consumed a dish of pasta (100 g) and bread
(30 g) after RMR had been measured. TEF was measured over the next 3 h and
calculated as the incremental area above RMR. Energy (vegetarians and omnivors
7,727 +/- 3,516 vs 8,970 +/- 2,273 kJ/day, respectively) and carbohydrate
(vegetarians and omnivors 285.1 +/- 141.3 vs. 300.1 +/- 74 g/day, respectively)
intakes of the 2 groups were similar. The vegetarian group consumed a higher
quantity of fiber (30.5 +/- 16.7 vs. 16.5 +/- 7.9) and a lower amount of protein 
(44.9 +/- 18.3 vs. 70.1 +/- 14.9) than the omnivorous group. No significant
differences were observed in RMR (4.23 +/- 0.96 vs. 4.06 +/- 0.54 kJ/min) and TEF
(0.50 +/- 0.25 vs. 0.38 +/- 0.25 Delta kJ/min) between the groups. Results did
not change after correcting for weight, age and gender. Our study failed to show 
any significant differences in RMR and TEF between vegetarians and subjects
consuming a Mediterranean diet. We conclude that vegetarianism per se is not
accompanied by a difference in RMR and TEF when the carbohydrate content of the
diet is similar to a control group of nonvegetarians.

PMID: 10545669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 1999 Nov 5;274(45):32342-50.

A novel element and a TEF-2-like element activate the major histocompatibility
complex class II transactivator in B-lymphocytes.

Ghosh N(1), Piskurich JF, Wright G, Hassani K, Ting JP, Wright KL.

Author information: 
(1)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, Department of Biochemistry, University of South 
Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules play a central role in 
immune responses, and transcription of this family of genes requires the MHC
class II transactivator (CIITA). CIITA has four promoters, which are transcribed 
in a tissue-specific manner. CIITA promoter III is constitutively active in
mature B-lymphocytes. This report now describes the minimal 319-base pair
promoter region necessary for maximal transcriptional activity in B-lymphocytes. 
Ultraviolet light and dimethylsulfate in vivo genomic footprinting analyses
reveal five occupied DNA sequence elements present in intact B-lymphocytes.
Functional analysis of these elements using promoter deletions and site-specific 
mutations demonstrates that at least two of the sites occupied in vivo are
critical for transcriptional activity. In vitro protein/DNA analysis suggests
that one of the sites is a TEF-2-like element and the other is occupied by a
novel transcription activator. In addition, nuclear factor-1 associates with the 
promoter both in vivo and in vitro. In myeloma cell lines, loss of CIITA
transcription correlates with a completely unoccupied CIITA promoter III. These
findings suggest that CIITA transcription in B-lymphocytes is activated through
at least two strong promoter elements, while loss of expression in myeloma cells 
is mediated through changes in promoter assembly.

PMID: 10542275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1999 Jul;77(7):544-50.

Resting metabolic rate and thermic effects of a sucrose-sweetened soft drink
during the menstrual cycle in young Chinese women.

Li ET(1), Tsang LB, Lui SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Hong Kong, SAR, PRC. etsli@hkucc.hku.hk

The resting metabolic rate (RMR) and thermic effects (TEF) of a sucrose-sweetened
soft drink in a group (n = 19) of ovulating young Chinese women were determined
by indirect calorimetry in the midfollicular and midluteal phases of the
menstrual cycle. Urinary luteinizing hormone surge was used to confirm ovulation.
The RMR was measured twice in each phase and found to be similar (F(1,18) =
0.863) across the follicular (5018 kJ/24 h) and the luteal (5098 kJ/24 h) phases.
Within each phase and on separate days, subjects were given water (280 mL) or
sucrose-sweetened soft drink (539 kJ). Soft drink, but not water, consumption
increased energy expenditure over a period of 45 min. Compared with the
follicular phase, a small but significant increase in TEF (kJ/45 min) was
observed in the luteal phase (t = 2.434, p < 0.05). Energy expenditure after
drinking the soft drink, however, was similar in the two phases. RMR was
positively correlated with TEF (r = 0.613, p < 0.01) and net TEF (r = 0.648, p < 
0.005) in the luteal but not the follicular phase. In ovulating women, the
thermic effect of sucrose is influenced by the phase of the menstrual cycle.

PMID: 10535715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Am J Perinatol. 1999;16(5):239-44.

Congenital anomalies associated with esophageal atresia: Saudi experience.

Rejjal A(1).

Author information: 
(1)King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Eighty-nine Saudi newborns with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA/TEF) were managed at King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center
(KFSH & RC), Riyadh, Saudi Arabia between the years 1980-1995; there were 54 boys
and 35 girls. Forty-four (49%) newborns had associated congenital anomalies.
Genitourinary anomalies were present in 19 (21%), cardiovascular in 17 (19%),
gastrointestinal in 9 (10%), central nervous system in 8 (9%), musculoskeletal in
7 (8%), chromosomal anomalies in 4 (5%), and head and neck in 5 (6%) cases. In
general, the survival rate was higher in patients without associated anomalies
than with associated anomalies (93 vs. 77%, p = 0.028). However, all patients
with head and neck anomalies survived, whereas all patients with chromosomal
anomalies died. With these exceptions, the survival rate was similar regardless
of the type or the number of associated anomalies. The average birth weight was
similar between survivors and non-survivors (2572 vs. 2376 g) and between
patients with or without associated anomalies (2566 vs. 2519 g). We conclude that
the survival rate of newborns with EA/TEF is high, especially in the absence of
associated anomalies. Investigations for possible associated genitourinary and
cardiovascular anomalies should be considered for all patients with EA/TEF.

PMID: 10535617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4807-16.

TONDU (TDU), a novel human protein related to the product of vestigial (vg) gene 
of Drosophila melanogaster interacts with vertebrate TEF factors and substitutes 
for Vg function in wing formation.

Vaudin P(1), Delanoue R, Davidson I, Silber J, Zider A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Quantitative et Moléculaire, Institut Jacques Monod, 
France. Zider@ijm.jussieu.fr.

The mammalian TEF and the Drosophila scalloped genes belong to a conserved family
of transcriptional factors that possesses a TEA/ATTS DNA-binding domain.
Transcriptional activation by these proteins likely requires interactions with
specific coactivators. In Drosophila, Scalloped (Sd) interacts with Vestigial
(Vg) to form a complex, which binds DNA through the Sd TEA/ATTS domain. The Sd-Vg
heterodimer is a key regulator of wing development, which directly controls
several target genes and is able to induce wing outgrowth when ectopically
expressed. Here we show that Vg contains two distinct transcriptional activation 
domains, suggesting that the function of Vg is to mediate transcriptional
activation by Sd. By expressing a chimeric GAL4-Sd protein in Drosophila, we
found that the transcriptional activity of the Vg-Sd heterodimer is negatively
regulated at the AP and DV boundary of the wing disc. We also identify a novel
human protein, TONDU, which contains a short domain homologous to the domain of
Vg required for interaction with Sd. We show that TONDU specifically interacts
with a domain conserved in all the mammalian TEF factors. Expression of TDU in
Drosophila by means of the UAS-GAL4 system shows that this human protein can
substitute for Vg in wing formation. We propose that TDU is a specific
coactivator for the mammalian TEFs.

PMID: 10518497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Ann Thorac Surg. 1999 Sep;68(3):1071-2.

Tracheoplasty in a large tracheoesophageal fistula.

Galán G(1), Tarrazona V, Soliveres J, Calvo V, París F.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery Unit and Anesthesiology Service, Clinic University Hospital, 
Valencia, Spain.

Postintubation tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs) are severe lesions that can be
associated with tracheal stenosis and therapeutic difficulties. A case is
reported of a woman with TEF and postintubation tracheal stenosis with 6.5 cm of 
affected trachea, and total esophageal exclusion. A tracheoplasty method is
described patching the loss of the tracheal membranous wall with the posterior
esophageal wall. In a final step, a self-expanded tracheal stent and
esophagocolic bypass were added.

PMID: 10510014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Sep;34(9):1322-6.

TTF-1 and HNF-3beta in the developing tracheoesophageal fistula: further evidence
for the respiratory origin of the distal esophagus'.

Crisera CA(1), Connelly PR, Marmureanu AR, Li M, Rose MI, Longaker MT, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)New York University Medical Center, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2000 May;35(5):811-2.

PURPOSE: Using an established rat model of esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF), the authors have studied the organogenesis of
this congenital anomaly. The authors previously have proposed that the "distal
esophagus" actually is of respiratory lineage. In this report this hypothesis is 
tested by examining the expression of two foregut patterning transcription
factors, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3beta (HNF-3beta), within the developing TEF.
METHODS: Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with 2.2 mg/kg of Adriamycin 
intraperitoneally on days 6 to 9 of gestation. Using microdissection, the
trachea, blind-ending esophagus, TEF, and stomach were isolated from embryos of
various gestional ages. Immunohistochemistry was performed using polyclonal
antibodies to TTF-1 and HNF-3beta.
RESULTS: TTF-1 is a homeodomain protein that previously has been shown to be
expressed in the lung and trachea but not in the gastrointestinal tract, and
which, when deleted in a developing lung, results in a mouse with no peripheral
lung parenchyma. TTF-1 was expressed strongly in the lung, fistula, and distal
esophagus, but not in the proximal esophagus. HNF-3beta is a forkhead
transcription factor important in foregut patterning that binds and activates the
TTF-1 promotor sequence. HNF-3beta was expressed globally in the fistula and lung
as well as the esophagus.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of the lung-specific transcription factor TTF-1
within the TEF strongly implies that the "distal esophagus" is a
respiratory-derived structure and thus supports our theory of TEF organogenesis. 
The conservation of HNF-3beta expression both in the TEF as well as the normal
developing trachea and esophagus suggests that global foregut patterning is
intact in the formation of this anomaly, and the defect lies at the level of the 
respiratory versus gastrointestinal commitment.

PMID: 10507421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Gen Genet. 1999 Jul;261(6):892-900.

Characterization and properties of heteromeric plant protein complexes that
interact with tef cis-acting elements in both RNA polymerase II-dependent
promoters and rDNA spacer sequences.

Manevski A(1), Bardet C, Tremousaygue D, Lescure B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des Relations Plantes-Microorganismes,
CNRS-INRA, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

The tef box, a cis-acting element identified in promoters of several plant genes 
encoding components of the translation apparatus, is involved in the activation
of gene expression in cycling cells. In vitro, this element mediates the
formation of two protein complexes called C1 and C2. A tef-like box is also found
within the intergenic transcribed spacer of several plant rRNA genes. In radish
this sequence has already been described as a protein-binding site putatively
involved in the regulation of rDNA expression and is sufficient for formation of 
C1 complexes. By using mutated tef boxes, we show that tef-dependent activation
of transcription is correlated with formation of both C1 and C2 complexes in a
context-dependent manner. In transient expression experiments, the activation of 
a minimal promoter-GUS gene fusion is associated with the formation of C2
complexes. In contrast, the ability to form C1 complexes appears to allow
activation of reporter gene expression in root meristems of transgenic
Arabidopsis. SDS-PAGE analysis of purified protein fractions containing either
the C1 or the C2 activity indicates a complex heteromeric structure for these
potential regulators. Thus, the tef box seems to be a central component of the
regulation of gene transcription in distinct and overlapping developmental
programs, and could be involved in co-regulation of transcription by RNA
polymerases I and II.

PMID: 10485279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Teratology. 1999 Sep;60(3):114-6.

Malrotation in conjunction with esophageal atresia/tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Cieri MV(1), Arnold GL, Torfs CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

Esophageal atresia or tracheo-esophageal fistula (EA/TEF) often occurs in
association with a well-defined group of other anomalies. We report the
prevalence of malrotation and other intestinal anomalies in a large data series
comprising 632 nontrisomic infants with EA/TEF ascertained by the California
Birth Defects Monitoring Program from January 1, 1983 to December 31, 1994.
Consistent with findings reported previously in smaller case series, our findings
showed a notable prevalence of imperforate anus (9.0%) and duodenal atresia
(5.2%), among other gastrointestinal defects. They also showed a previously
unrecognized high prevalence of intestinal malrotation (4.4%). Compared with
other infants studied, the infants with EA/TEF and malrotation of the intestine
had a higher proportion of other associated anomalies (in particular intestinal, 
central nervous system, vertebral and rib, renal and genital anomalies). These
findings indicate that intestinal malrotation is more common in infants with
EA/TEF than is generally perceived, and that intestinal malrotation in an infant 
with EA/TEF is associated with a higher burden of additional congenital
anomalies, suggesting that this group of infants may have more pervasive
developmental deficits and poorer prognosis than has previously been recognized.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10471893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Aug;34(8):1291-3.

Use of a Palmaz stent for tracheomalacia: case report of an infant with
esophageal atresia.

Tazuke Y(1), Kawahara H, Yagi M, Yoneda A, Soh H, Maeda K, Yamamoto T, Imura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute
for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi-city, Japan.

A male infant with congenital cardiac anomalies and esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) showed intractable respiratory symptoms after 
delayed primary repair of EA-TEF. Computed tomography demonstrated that the
trachea was compressed by the enlarged aorta. Artificial ventilation was
necessary even after aortopexy performed at 2 months of age. At 140 days of age, 
an expandable metallic stent (Palmaz stent) was inserted through a rigid
bronchoscope into the trachea underfluoroscopic control. His respiratory status
improved dramatically, and he was extubated in 18 hours. Although the follow-up
period has been 9 months, the short-term result is satisfactory. The expandable
metallic stent placement should be considered in patients with EA-TEF who show
intractable respiratory symptoms caused by tracheomalacia.

PMID: 10466618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Eur J Nutr. 1999 Jun;38(3):158-66.

Nutrient oxidation and metabolic rate as affected by meals containing different
proportions of carbohydrate and fat, in healthy young women.

Labayen I(1), Forga L, Martínez JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Nutrition, University of Navarra, Pamplona,
Spain.

The amount and composition of food eaten influence body weight regulation, which 
requires that, in the long term, energy intake matches energy expenditure and
that the oxidation rate to be equal to intake for each and separate nutrients.
The aim of this study was to examine the influence of two liquid formulas with
different macronutrient composition, a high carbohydrate (HC) meal as compared to
a high fat (HF) meal, on substrate oxidation and on thermic effect of food (TEF).
Eighteen lean and healthy women which were fed a HC diet during the 3 preceding d
were studied for a further 4 h after meal intake. The test meals provided fixed
energy intake and whose calculated FQ were 0.77 for HF meal, and 0.96 for HC
meal. The mean NPRQs were higher (P < 0.01) in the HC group than in the HF group,
even with values greater than 1.00 indicating net lipid synthesis (NL), and which
correlated with metabolic rate (MR) value (P < 0.05), glucose (P < 0.05), and
heart rate (HR) values. Carbohydrate (CHO) oxidation was higher with the HC than 
with HF meal (P < 0.01) and correlated with the MR (P < 0.05). Protein oxidation 
rate rose above baseline (P < 0.01); this increase was accompanied by with a
negative CHO balance. It is concluded that the change in fuel selection and the
increase of TEF is mainly due to CHO intake and metabolism, respectively, and
that surplus of dietary CHO of preceding days together with a large load of CHO
can exceed the glycogen storage capacity and trigger NL.

PMID: 10443338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Jul;34(7):1082-5.

Revisiting the role of routine retropleural drainage after repair of esophageal
atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula.

Kay S(1), Shaw K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill
University, Quebec, Canada.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to review routine retropleural drainage in
esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF).
METHODS: The charts of 52 patients diagnosed with TEF between 1987 and 1997 were 
reviewed. Data collected included gestational age, birth weight, associated
congenital anomalies, respiratory status, operative technique and timing, size of
gap, tension on the anastomosis, complications related to the drain, and
esophageal anastomotic leak (incidence, diagnosis, and treatment).
RESULTS: A total of 52 cases of TEF were identified. Data on sex, gestation age, 
birth weights, and malformations are summarized. Forty-seven patients underwent a
single-stage extrapleural repair. Only one leak was identified in the
single-stage group on routine day 7 esophagogram: a Waterson C patient who was
clinically well with minimal drainage. The only other leak was in a class C
patient who had undergone a staged repair because of an initial long gap. None of
the favorable Waterston class patients suffered a leak.
CONCLUSIONS: A routine retropleural drain placed near the anastomosis may not be 
necessary in all cases of TEF. Good prognosis patients (Waterston class A and B) 
who undergo an uncomplicated extrapleural repair without undue tension do not
appear to benefit from having a chest drain in place, and there is potential for 
complications. In complicated cases, however, retropleural drainage remains a
reasonable adjunct.

PMID: 10442595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Theor Appl Genet. 1999 Aug;99(3-4):599-604. doi: 10.1007/s001220051274.

A genetic linkage map of tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] based on amplified 
fragment length polymorphism.

Bai G(1), Tefera H, Ayele M, Nguyen HT.

Author information: 
(1)NCAUR-ARS-USDA, 1815 N. University Street, 61604, IL Peoria, USA, US.

A genetic linkage map of tef was constructed with amplified fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP) markers using F(5) recombinant inbred lines (RILs) derived by
single seed descent from the intraspecific cross of 'Kaye Murri'×'Fesho'. A total
of 192 EcoRI/MseI primer combinations were screened for parental polymorphism.
Around three polymorphic fragments per primer combination were detected,
indicating a low polymorphism level in tef. Fifty primer combinations were
selected to assay the mapping population, and 226 loci segregated among 85 F(5)
RILs. Most AFLP loci behaved as dominant markers (presence or absence of a band),
but about 15% of the loci were codominant. Significant deviations from the
expected Mendelian segregation ratio were observed for 26 loci. The genetic
linkage map comprised 211 markers assembled into 25 linkage groups and covered
2,149 cM of genome. AFLP is an efficient marker system for mapping plant species 
with low polymorphism such as tef. This is the first genetic linkage map
constructed for tef. It will facilitate the mapping of genes controlling
agronomically important traits and cultivar improvement in tef.

PMID: 22665195  [PubMed]


153. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1999 Jul;31(7):1076-82.

Reliability of a new device to assess the oxygen consumption of human respiratory
muscles.

Ahmaidi S(1), Comte D, Topin N, Hayot M, Delanaud S, Ramonatxo M, His N, Vardon
G, Freville M, Libert JP, Préfaut C.

Author information: 
(1)TEF-Adaptations Physiologiques et Comportementales, Faculté de Médecine (EA
2088), Université de Picardie Jules Verne, Amiens, France.
Said.Ahmaidi@ca.u-picardie.fr

PURPOSE: This study tests the reliability of a new device for assessing the
oxygen consumption of the respiratory muscles (VO2 resp.).
METHODS: Fourteen healthy male volunteers participated in the study. The device
consists of an expandable external ventilatory dead space created with pieces of 
plastic tubing and a spirometer filled with 100% oxygen. It also incorporates a
carbon dioxide absorber. Total VO2 (VO2 tot.) was recorded from the spirometric
closed circuit and ventilation (V(E)), from the spirometer tracing. For each
subject the test procedure was carried out in duplicate (T1 and T2) after an
overnight fast. The dead space was increased at a constant rate of 260 mL every
90 s, and VO2 tot. and V(E) increased progressively. Because log VO2 tot. was
linearly related to V(E), we calculated the slope value (log VO2-V(E)) and the
Y-intercept (VE = 0) of the semilog regression representing, respectively, VO2
resp. and metabolic VO2 (VO2 met.).
RESULTS: When compared with values in the literature, these values did not differ
from those recorded in subjects of a similar age group. The VO2 resp. and VO2
met. calculated in T1 and T2 were not different (VO2 resp. = 0.0066 +/- 0.0005
for T1 vs 0.0067 +/- 0.0005 log mL x min(-1)/L x min(-1) for T2 and VO2 met. =
269.3 +/- 28.6 for T1 vs 281.9 +/- 24.1 mL x min(-1) for T2). The coefficients of
variation were: 25% at T1 and 23% at T2 for VO2 resp. and 34% at T1 and 29% at T2
for VO2 met. Moreover, significant correlations (r = 0.96, P < 0.001 for VO2
resp., r = 0.95, P < 0.001 for VO2 met.), high coefficients of determination (r2 
= 0.92 for VO2 resp., r2 = 0.90 for VO2 met.) and negligible SEE (0.0005 for VO2 
resp., 0.2 mL x min(-1) for VO2 met.) were found between the two tests. When we
plotted the mean values of VO2 resp. and VO2 met. measured at T1 and T2 against
their respective differences, more than 95% of the slight differences ranged
between the limits defined by mean value +/- 2 SD, reflecting the small
discrepancy between duplicate measurements.
CONCLUSION: The results confirm that the test performed with this device is
useful and reliable for assessing the VO2 resp. in healthy subjects.

PMID: 10416573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1999 Jul;125(7):782-4.

Does the presence of a tracheoesophageal fistula predict the outcome of laryngeal
cleft repair?

Walner DL(1), Stern Y, Collins M, Cotton RT, Myer CM 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Bronchoesophagology, Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's 
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if the presence of a tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF)
alters outcome following laryngeal cleft repair.
DESIGN: A retrospective review of patients diagnosed and treated for laryngeal
clefts, with a minimum follow-up period of 1 year.
SETTING: An academic tertiary care children's hospital.
PATIENTS: Twenty-five pediatric patients diagnosed and surgically treated for
laryngeal cleft.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Each chart was reviewed to determine if patients with a
laryngeal cleft had been diagnosed with TEF and had undergone a surgical TEF
repair procedure. The success of the surgery was evaluated based on the
resolution of symptoms and the endoscopic evaluation of the repair site.
RESULTS: Twenty-five patients were reviewed for study purposes. Fourteen had a
history of TEF repair and 11, no history of TEF. All 25 patients underwent
surgical repair of the laryngeal cleft. Twelve of the 14 patients with a history 
of TEF repair experienced a breakdown of the laryngeal cleft repair. Only 1 of
the 11 patients with no history of TEF experienced such a breakdown. In 8 of 9
patients with a laryngotracheoesophageal type I cleft, surgical repair was not
successful.
CONCLUSIONS: In our series, patients with laryngeal clefts who also had a history
of TEF had a much higher incidence of breakdown of cleft repair compared with
patients with no history of TEF. This finding is not conclusive and requires
further investigation. The failure of cleft repair correlated with the severity
of the cleft. The importance of these associations may lead to enhanced surgical 
planning and realistic preoperative family expectations.

PMID: 10406317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Environ Health Perspect. 1999 Apr;107(4):A183-4.

The TEF approach for hexachlorobenzene.

Schwab BW.

Comment on
    Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Nov;106(11):683-8.

PMCID: PMC1566534
PMID: 10383245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jun;13(6):879-89.

Human placental TEF-5 transactivates the human chorionic somatomammotropin gene
enhancer.

Jiang SW(1), Wu K, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) gene expression in the placenta is
controlled by an enhancer (CSEn) containing SV40-related GT-IIC and SphI/SphII
enhansons. These enhancers are controlled by members of the transcription
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) family. Recently TEF-5, whose mRNA is abundant in
placenta, was shown to bind cooperatively to a unique, tandemly repeated element 
in CSEn2, suggesting that TEF-5 regulates CSEn activity. However, expression of
TEF-5 using a cDNA lacking the 5'-untranslated region and containing a modified
translation initiation site was not accompanied by CSEn activation. Using nested,
degenerate PCR primers corresponding to conserved TEF domains, several novel
TEF-1-related cDNAs have been cloned from a human placental cDNA library. The
open reading frame of one 3033-bp clone was identical to TEF-5 and contained 300-
and 1423-bp 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions, respectively. The in vitro generated
approximately 53-kDa TEF-5 polypeptide binds specifically to GT-IIC and
SphI/SphII oligonucleotides. Overexpression of TEF-5 in BeWo cells using the
intact 3033-bp cDNA transactivates the hCS and SV40 enhancers and artificial
enhancers comprised of tandemly repeated GT-IIC enhansons, but not OCT enhansons.
The data demonstrate that TEF-5 is a transactivator that is likely involved in
the transactivation of CSEn enhancer function. Further, the data suggest that
elements within the untranslated regions, initiation site, or both control TEF-5 
expression in ways that influence its transactivation function.

PMID: 10379887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Pediatr Surg Int. 1999;15(3-4):260-3.

Congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung associated with esophageal
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

De Felice C(1), Di Maggio G, Messina M, Toti P, Bagnoli F, Bracci R, Tota G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Pediatrics and Neonatology, University of Siena,
Italy.

Bronchopulmonary malformations associated with esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) are extremely rare. The authors describe a case
of type II congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM) of the right lower
lobe associated with EA and TEF (Vogt-Gross type C) in a full-term female infant.
The CCAM presented as an incidental radiologic finding, and a contralateral
tension pneumothorax developed shortly after surgical repair of the EA. Early
recognition of this rare association is essential for correct operative
management.

PMID: 10370039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Food Addit Contam. 1998 Nov-Dec;15(8):863-75.

Validation and use of the CALUX-bioassay for the determination of dioxins and
PCBs in bovine milk.

Bovee TF(1), Hoogenboom LA, Hamers AR, Traag WA, Zuidema T, Aarts JM, Brouwer A, 
Kuiper HA.

Author information: 
(1)State Institute for Quality Control of Agricultural Products (RIKILT-DLO),
Wageningen, The Netherlands.

There is a strong need for the development of relatively cheap and rapid
bioassays for the determination of dioxins and related compounds in food. A newly
developed CALUX (Chemical-Activated LUciferase gene eXpression) bioassay was
tested for its possible use to determine low levels of dioxins in bovine milk.
Data show that this mammalian cell-based test is very sensitive for
2,3,7,8-substituted dioxins and related PCBs, thereby reflecting the relative
potencies of these compounds in comparison to TCDD (TEF-values). The limit of
detection was about 50 fg of TCDD. Furthermore, the response obtained with a
mixture of dioxins was additive, in accordance with the TEF-principle. Milk fat
was isolated by centrifugation followed by clean-up of the fat with n-pentane,
removal of the fat on a 33% H2SO4 silica column, and determination of Ah receptor
agonist activity with the CALUX-bioassay. An equivalent of 67 mg fat was tested
per experimental unit, resulting in a limit of quantification around 1 pg i-TEQ/g
fat. To investigate the performance of the method, butter fat was cleaned and
spiked with a mixture of 17 different 2,3,7,8-substituted PCDD and PCDF congeners
at 1, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 pg TEQ/g fat, as confirmed by GC/MS. In this
concentration range, the method showed a recovery of TEQs around 67% (58-87%).
The reproducibility, determined in three independent series showed a CV varying
between 4% and 54%, with the exception of the sample spiked at 1 pg i-TEQ (CV
97%). The repeatability determined with the sample spiked at 6 pg i-TEQ/g showed 
a CV of 10%. Testing of 22 bovine milk samples, taken at different sites in The
Netherlands, in the CALUX-assay showed combined dioxin and dioxin-like PCB levels
equivalent to 1.6 pg TCDD/g fat (range 0.2-4.6). GC/MS analysis of these samples 
revealed an average level of 1.7 pg i-TEQ/g fat, varying between 0.5 and 4.7 pg
i-TEQ/g fat. All five samples showing a GC/MS determined dioxin content of more
than 2 pg i-TEQ/g fat gave a response in the CALUX-assay corresponding to more
than 2 pg TCDD/g fat. These data clearly show that the CALUX-bioassay is a
promising method for the rapid and low cost screening of dioxins in bovine milk.

PMID: 10366995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Hereditas. 1999;130(1):33-40.

Genetic characterization of two Eragrostis species using AFLP and morphological
traits.

Ayele M(1), Tefera H, Assefa K, Nguyen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant and Soil Science, Texas Tech University, Lubbock
79409-2122, USA.

Tef [Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trotter] is the most important cereal crop in
Ethiopia. An experiment was conducted to investigate genetic diversity among four
cultivars of tef and 14 accessions of Eragrostis pilosa using radiolabelled and
silver stained amplified fragment length polymorphism. Morphological traits were 
also evaluated. A total of 897 markers were obtained out of which 395 were
polymorphic using 11 primer combinations. Cluster analysis revealed accessions of
E. pilosa which are distantly related and others closely related to tef. Our
previous experience also indicates that E. pilosa is crossable with tef. Those
accessions distantly related to tef could be used in a crossing program to
generate a population for selection and/or genetic mapping. Such genetic mapping 
populations will form an important entry point towards the molecular genetic
dissection of the plant genus, Eragrostis, especially in the context of
comparative mapping. Knowledge gained from such study, apart from tef
improvement, will also be useful for many forage and turf grass species where
little molecular genetic information is available. Nine cultivars or accessions
had one or more unique fragments using one or more AFLP primers indicating the
potential of the technology in fingerprinting tef in a breeding or seed
multiplication program. The results also showed that clusters obtained using
silver staining and gamma 33P-ATP labeling were similar, suggesting that silver
staining could be used as an alternative to radiolabeling at least in genetic
diversity analysis. Significant genetic variation was obtained for morphological 
traits. Of particular interest to tef breeding was short plant stature in E.
pilosa which could be transferred to tef to minimize the problem of lodging.
Diversity revealed at the morphological trait level was not commensurate with
that observed for AFLP. This was due to the small number of available
morphological traits and their interaction with the environment.

PMID: 10364827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 May;34(5):872-5; discussion 876.

Apoptosis in tracheoesophageal embryogenesis in rat embryos with or without
adriamycin treatment.

Zhou B(1), Hutson JM, Farmer PJ, Hasthorpe S, Myers NA, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)F. Douglas Stephens Surgical Research Laboratory, Royal Children's Hospital
Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine whether apoptosis participates in
separation of the foregut into trachea and esophagus and to evaluate the
potential role of apoptosis in the development of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA + TEF) induced by Adriamycin.
METHODS: Timed-pregnant rats were injected daily with either saline or Adriamycin
(2 mg/kg) intraperitoneally on days 6 to 9 of gestation. Paraffin sections were
prepared from 31 experimental and 31 control embryos at days 12 and 13 of
gestation. Condensed nuclei were identified on the paraffin sections using the
TUNEL method. Apoptosis was quantified by counting the positively stained cell
nuclei in transverse sections of embryos.
RESULTS: In day 12 control embryos the number of apoptotic nuclei in both lateral
ridges of the foregut was high (15.67 +/- 1.38) but relatively low (4.17 +/-
0.80) in Adriamycin-treated embryos (P< .0001). In day 13 Adriamycin-treated
embryos, the number of apoptotic nuclei in the region of the upper esophageal
pouch was extremely high (23.78.5 +/- 2.20) compared with no detectable apoptotic
nuclei in the control embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: Apoptosis is required for normal tracheoesophageal embryogenesis and
may be an important mechanism to be involved in the embryological development of 
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

PMID: 10359198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Obes Res. 1999 May;7(3):273-80.

Components of total energy expenditure in healthy young women are not affected
after 14 days of feeding with medium-versus long-chain triglycerides.

Papamandjaris AA(1), White MD, Jones PJ.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Dietetics and Human Nutrition, Faculty of Agricultural and
Environmental Sciences, McGill University, Ste-Anne-de-Bellevue, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of consumption of medium-chain triglycerides
(MCT) vs. long-chain triglycerides (LCT) on total energy expenditure (TEE) and
its components in young women during the second week of a 2-week feeding period.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Twelve healthy lean women (age: 22.7+/-0.7
years, body mass index [BMI]: 21.5+/-0.8 kg/m2) were fed weight maintenance diets
containing 15% of energy as protein, 45% as carbohydrate, and 40% as fat, 80% of 
which was treatment fat, for 2 weeks in a randomized cross-over design separated 
by a 2-week washout period. Dietary fat was composed of triglycerides containing 
either 26% medium-chain fatty acids (MCFA) and 74% long-chain fatty acids (LCFA),
or 2% MCFA and 98% LCFA. Free-living TEE was measured from day 7 to 14 on each
dietary treatment using doubly labeled water (DLW). Basal metabolic rate (BMR)
and thermic effect of food (TEF) were measured on days 7 and 14 using respiratory
gas exchange analysis (RGE) for 30 minutes and 330 minutes, respectively.
Activity-induced energy expenditure (AIEE) was derived as the difference between 
TEE and the sum of BMR and TEF.
RESULTS: The average TEE while consuming the MCT diet (2246+/-98 kcal/day) did
not differ from that of the LCT diet (2186+/-138 kcal/day. BMR was significantly 
higher on the MCT diet on day 7 (1219+/-38 kcal/day vs. 1179+/-42 kcal/day), but 
not on day 14; there was no effect of diet on TEF. There were no differences in
BMR, TEF, or AIEE between diets when expressed as percentages of TEE. On average,
BMR, TEF, and AIEE represented 54.6%, 8.2%, and 37.2%, respectively, of TEE.
DISCUSSION: Results suggest that between day 7 and day 14 feeding of MCT vs. LCT 
at these levels, TEE is not affected and that increases seen in energy
expenditure following MCT feeding may be of short duration. Thus, compensatory
mechanisms may exist which blunt the effect of MCT on energy components over the 
longer term.

PMID: 10348498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mamm Genome. 1999 Jun;10(6):632-4.

Genomic structure and chromosomal mapping of the mouse transcription factor TEF-5
(Tead3) gene.

Jacquemin P(1), Chen Z, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1, rue Laurent Fries, F-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

PMID: 10341100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Genes Dev. 1999 May 1;13(9):1089-101.

UASrpg can function as a heterochromatin boundary element in yeast.

Bi X(1), Broach JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
08544, USA.

The HM loci in Saccharomyces cerevisiae constitute region-specific but
gene-nonspecific repression domains, as a number of heterologous genes
transcribed by RNA polymerase II or III are silenced when placed at these loci.
The promoters of the Ashbya gossypii TEF gene and the S. cerevisiae TEF1 and TEF2
genes, however, are resistant to transcriptional silencing by the HM silencers in
yeast. Moreover, when interposed between the HML alpha genes and the E silencer, 
certain segments of these promoters block the repression effect of the silencer
on the alpha genes. All of these fragments contain UASrpg (upstream activation
sequence of ribosome protein genes) composed of multiple binding sites for Rap1. 
In fact, a 149-bp segment consisting essentially of only three tandem
Rap1-binding sites from the UASrpg of yeast TEF2 exhibits silencer-blocking
activity. This element also exhibits insulating activity and orientation
dependence characteristic of known chromatin boundary elements. Finally, the
element blocks the physical spread of heterochromatin initiated at a silencer.
This segment provides the first example of chromatin domain boundary or insulator
elements in yeast.

PMCID: PMC316950
PMID: 10323861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Apr;34(4):615-8.

Esophageal lung with multiple congenital anomalies: conundrums in diagnosis and
management.

Saydam TC(1), Mychaliska GB, Harrison MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Fetal Treatment Center, University of California
San Francisco, 94143-0570, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Communicating bronchopulmonary foregut malformations (CBPFM) 
are a diverse group of potentially devastating congenital anomalies with anatomy 
that may be difficult to delineate. The authors present a case that illustrates
conundrums in the diagnosis and management of these complex disorders.
METHODS: A term baby had esophageal atresia (EA), tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF), and tetralogy of Fallot. Initially, a gastrostomy was performed, and a
balloon catheter was inserted through the endotracheal tube to occlude the
fistula until the patient was hemodynamically stable. Subsequently, the fistula
was ligated. Postoperatively, the left lung collapsed, and bronchoscopy showed an
atretic left mainstem bronchus. Repeat thoracotomy showed that the fistula
ligation was intact. Air was introduced through the gastrostomy tube, and,
surprisingly, the left lung inflated, indicating the left mainstem bronchus arose
from the esophagus distal to the ligated TEF.
RESULTS: Despite reopening this fistula, ventilation remained poor, and support
was withdrawn. Autopsy findings confirmed a unilobed left lung arising from the
esophagus, EA, TEF, an atretic left mainstem bronchus, tetralogy of Fallot, and
DiGeorge syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of a combination of EA and distal TEF with 
a second CBPFM involving the esophagus and the entire left lung. Successful
correction of these anomalies will require extensive delineation of the anatomy
to plan an operative strategy.

PMID: 10235336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Apr;34(4):536-9.

Tracheobronchial malformations in experimental esophageal atresia.

Xia H(1), Otten C, Migliazza L, Diez-Pardo JA, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hospital Infantil La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Malformations of the tracheobronchial tree may account for
postoperative respiratory symptoms in patients with esophageal atresia (EA). This
study examines the respiratory tract in fetal rats with EA induced by Adriamycin.
METHODS: Time-mated female rats were given either 2 mg/kg intraperitoneal
Adriamycin on gestational days 8 and 9 (adria group, n = 6) or no treatment
(control group, n = 2), and the fetuses were recovered on day 21. Laryngo-tracheo
bronchial tree was studied after transparentation and alcian blue-alizarin red
staining that depicts the cartilage in blue and make the surrounding tissues
transparent.
RESULTS: There were no malformations in any of the 1 1 control animals studied.
Conversely, 31 of 46 (67%) Adriamycin fetuses had EA with distal TEF. These had
more tracheal rings than controls (32+/-2 v 26+/-1.5, P < .05) at the expense of 
those of the mainstem bronchi (3.2+/-1 v 6.6+/-1.1 in the right, P< .05 and
6.2+/-2.1 v 11+/-1.1 in the left, P < .05). There were tracheal stenoses in 16
pups with EA (some severe and five double), and all these had fragmented rings in
the trachea or bronchi. In six cases there was an ectopic upper right bronchus,
and 1 had a grossly abnormal larynx. The malformations in the 15
Adriamycin-exposed fetuses without EA were limited to some fragmented or mishaped
rings.
CONCLUSIONS: Laryngo-tracheobronchial malformations entailing the whole length of
the tract are very constant and severe in rats with EA and tracheoesophageal
fistula and correspond to an abnormal development of the tracheobronchial anlage 
from the ventral foregut. Their nature and extent invite a careful investigation 
of the respiratory tracts in EA babies in whom they could be underscored.

PMID: 10235316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Am J Physiol. 1999 May;276(5 Pt 2):R1434-42.

Upright posture reduces forearm blood flow early in exercise.

Shoemaker JK(1), McQuillan PM, Sinoway LI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiology, The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, 
The Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.
kshoemak@gcrc.hmc.psghs.edu

The hypothesis that upright posture could modulate forearm blood flow (FBF) early
in exercise was tested in six subjects. Both single (2-s duration) and repeated
(1-s work/2-s rest cadence for 12 contractions) handgrip contractions (12 kg)
were performed in the supine and 70 degrees head-up tilt (HUT) positions. The arm
was maintained at heart level to diminish myogenic effects. Baseline brachial
artery diameters were assessed at rest in each position. Brachial artery mean
blood velocity (MBV; Doppler) and mean arterial pressure (MAP) (Finapres) were
measured continuously to calculate FBF and vascular conductance. MAP was not
changed with posture. Antecubital venous pressure (Pv) was reduced in HUT (4.55
+/- 1.3 mmHg) compared with supine (11.3 +/- 1.9 mmHg) (P < 0.01). For the
repeated contractions, total excess FBF (TEF) was reduced in the HUT position
compared with supine (P < 0.02). With the single contractions, peak FBF, peak
vascular conductance, and TEF during 30 s after release of the contraction were
reduced in the HUT position compared with supine (P < 0.01). Sympathetic blockade
augmented the FBF response to a single contraction in HUT (P < 0.05) and tended
to increase this response while supine (P = 0.08). However, sympathetic blockade 
did not attenuate the effect of HUT on peak FBF and TEF after the single
contractions. Raising the arm above heart level while supine, to diminish Pv,
resulted in FBF dynamics that were similar to those observed during HUT.
Alternatively, lowering the arm while in HUT to restore Pv to supine levels
restored the peak FBF and vascular conductance responses, but not TEF response,
after a single contraction. It was concluded that upright posture diminishes the 
hyperemic response early in exercise. The data demonstrate that sympathetic
constriction restrains the hyperemic response to a single contraction but does
not modulate the postural reduction in postcontraction hyperemia. Therefore, the 
attenuated blood flow response in the HUT posture was largely related to factors 
associated with diminished venous pressures and not sympathetic vasoconstriction.

PMID: 10233037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Surg Today. 1999;29(4):344-6.

Successful treatment of tracheomalacia associated with esophageal atresia without
a tracheoesophageal fistula by aortopexy: report of a case.

Kikuchi S(1), Kashino R, Hirama T, Kobayashi H, Abe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Sapporo Medical University 
School of Medicine, Japan.

Tracheomalacia (TM) is well known as a complication associated with esophageal
atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF); however, the occurrence of TM
requiring surgical treatment in a patient having EA without a tracheoesophageal
fistula has never been reported. We describe herein a rare case of TM associated 
with EA without TEF. Respiratory distress was caused by compression of the
trachea by a severely dilated upper esophageal pouch with weakness of the
tracheal wall. Aortopexy was performed, and an excellent postoperative result was
achieved.

PMID: 10211565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nat Biotechnol. 1999 Mar;17(3):241-5.

Synthetic muscle promoters: activities exceeding naturally occurring regulatory
sequences.

Li X(1), Eastman EM, Schwartz RJ, Draghia-Akli R.

Collaborators: Schwartz RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 1999 Mar;17(3):224-5.

Relatively low levels of expression from naturally occurring promoters have
limited the use of muscle as a gene therapy target. Myogenic restricted gene
promoters display complex organization usually involving combinations of several 
myogenic regulatory elements. By random assembly of E-box, MEF-2, TEF-1, and SRE 
sites into synthetic promoter recombinant libraries, and screening of hundreds of
individual clones for transcriptional activity in vitro and in vivo, several
artificial promoters were isolated whose transcriptional potencies greatly exceed
those of natural myogenic and viral gene promoters.

PMID: 10096290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Invest. 1999 Mar;103(5):697-705.

Cardiomyocytes can be generated from marrow stromal cells in vitro.

Makino S(1), Fukuda K, Miyoshi S, Konishi F, Kodama H, Pan J, Sano M, Takahashi
T, Hori S, Abe H, Hata J, Umezawa A, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiopulmonary Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Keio University
School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

We have isolated a cardiomyogenic cell line (CMG) from murine bone marrow stromal
cells. Stromal cells were immortalized, treated with 5-azacytidine, and
spontaneously beating cells were repeatedly screened. The cells showed a
fibroblast-like morphology, but the morphology changed after 5-azacytidine
treatment in approximately 30% of the cells; they connected with adjoining cells 
after one week, formed myotube-like structures, began spontaneously beating after
two weeks, and beat synchronously after three weeks. They expressed atrial
natriuretic peptide and brain natriuretic peptide and were stained with
anti-myosin, anti-desmin, and anti-actinin antibodies. Electron microscopy
revealed a cardiomyocyte-like ultrastructure, including typical sarcomeres, a
centrally positioned nucleus, and atrial granules. These cells had several types 
of action potentials, such as sinus node-like and ventricular cell-like action
potentials. All cells had a long action potential duration or plateau, a
relatively shallow resting membrane potential, and a pacemaker-like late
diastolic slow depolarization. Analysis of the isoform of contractile protein
genes, such as myosin heavy chain, myosin light chain, and alpha-actin, indicated
that their muscle phenotype was similar to that of fetal ventricular
cardiomyocytes. These cells expressed Nkx2.5/Csx, GATA4, TEF-1, and MEF-2C mRNA
before 5-azacytidine treatment and expressed MEF-2A and MEF-2D after treatment.
This new cell line provides a powerful model for the study of cardiomyocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC408125
PMID: 10074487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1999 Feb 1;24(3):275-80.

Predictors of isokinetic back muscle strength in patients with low back pain.

Keller A(1), Johansen JG, Hellesnes J, Brox JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine, Ullevaal University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

STUDY DESIGN: Testing for trunk muscle strength was performed on 105 patients
with chronic low back pain.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate prediction of isokinetic back muscle strength in
patients with low back pain.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: The clinical evaluation of patients with chronic low 
back pain often in difficult because of discrepancy between disability and
impairment. The isokinetic trunk device was developed as a tool for objective
assessment of back muscle strength. However, the performance of patients depends 
on radiologic abnormalities of the spine, conditions of the back muscles, and
various psychosocial factors. Studies are warranted that address how these
variables influence back muscle strength.
METHODS: The patients with chronic low back pain were tested by an isokinetic
trunk muscle strength test (Cybex TEF, Ronkonkoma, NY). In addition, the
following variables were recorded: gender, age, body mass index, emotional
distress, pain on exertion, self-efficacy for pain, degenerative changes of the
lumbar spine, cross-sectional area, and density of the erector spinae muscles.
The three latter variables were estimated by computed tomography scans. The sum
of the total work performed during isokinetic extension strength test was the
dependent variable in a multiple regression analysis, and anthropometric,
demographic, psychological, and radiologic factors were independent variables.
RESULTS: Gender, cross-sectional muscle area, and pain on exertion were the most 
powerful predictors of isokinetic back muscle strength. The final regression
model, which included these variables, could account for approximately 40% of the
variability in back muscle strength.
CONCLUSION: For assessing the results of an isokinetic trunk muscle strength
test, cross-sectional muscle area, gender, and pain on exertion should be taken
into account.

PMID: 10025023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Brain Res. 1999 Feb 27;820(1-2):1-11.

Expression patterns of the hepatic leukemia factor gene in the nervous system of 
developing and adult mice.

Hitzler JK(1), Soares HD, Drolet DW, Inaba T, O'Connel S, MG Rosenfeld, Morgan
JI, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
332 N. Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Hepatic leukemia factor (HLF) is a bZIP transcription factor related to the CES-2
protein, which controls apoptosis of the NSM serotoninergic neurons in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Ectopic expression of HLF as an E2A-HLF fusion protein in
t(17;19)-positive human pro-B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias is believed to
promote malignancy by interfering with apoptosis. While HLF has been linked to
malignancies of the lymphoid system, it is not normally expressed in these cells.
Rather, HLF transcripts are detected in the liver, kidney, lung and adult nervous
system by Northern blotting. Despite the links to cell death, little is known of 
the distribution or function of HLF in the adult and developing mammalian nervous
system. Therefore, we cloned mouse Hlf and studied its expression by in situ
hybridization. During embryonic brain development, Hlf expression was restricted 
to the anterior pituitary and meninges. By early postnatal life, Hlf was highly
expressed in somatosensory cortex, thalamic nuclei, and structures arising from
ectodermal placodes. Subsequently, Hlf expression increased in the central
nervous system and was found throughout the brain by adulthood. In the developing
pituitary gland, Hlf was highly expressed in the rostral tip of the anterior
lobe. This pattern is similar to that of Tef, an Hlf-related bZIP protein.
However, while Tef is expressed in the anterior pituitary of the adult mouse, Hlf
was detected in both the anterior and posterior pituitary. Hlf expression was not
associated with cells undergoing programmed cell death in the nervous system. Hlf
expression increased markedly with synaptogenesis and was coincident with barrel 
formation revealed by cytochrome oxidase staining. Together, these data suggest
that Hlf plays a role in the function of differentiated neurons in the adult
nervous system rather than programmed cell death.

Copyright 1999 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10023025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Jan;34(1):204-8.

Esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula: suggested mechanism in faulty 
organogenesis.

Crisera CA(1), Connelly PR, Marmureanu AR, Colen KL, Rose MI, Li M, Longaker MT, 
Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New York University Medical Center, NY 10016, USA.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The organogenesis of esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) is unknown. Using an established model for
EA-TEF in rats, the authors proposed to study this aberrancy of development in
the hope of gaining insight into its mechanism of formation.
METHODS: Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with 2.2 mg/kg of Adriamycin 
intraperitoneally on days 6 through 9 of gestation. Using microdissection, the
trachea, blind-ending esophagus, TEF, and stomach were isolated from embryos of
various gestional ages. The specimens were analyzed histologically with routine
H&E staining.
RESULTS: The classic EA-TEF developed in the embryos, with proximal EA and distal
TEF. As expected, the atresia formed as a blind-ending pouch, but the distal
fistula began as an apparent equal trifurcation of the tracheal anlage into two
mainstem bronchi and the fistula tract leading to the stomach. Histological
analysis of the fistula tract showed respiratorylike pseudostratified columnar
epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: TEF develops as the middle branch of a tracheal trifurcation. EA-TEF
occurs by a primary atresia of the esophagus. As a secondary phenomenon, the
distal foregut anlage is switched toward the pulmonary phenotype. It trifurcates,
and its middle branch grows caudally to fistulize into the stomach.

PMID: 10022173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Jan;34(1):70-3; discussion 74.

Survival of patients with esophageal atresia: influence of birth weight, cardiac 
anomaly, and late respiratory complications.

Choudhury SR(1), Ashcraft KW, Sharp RJ, Murphy JP, Snyder CL, Sigalet DL.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108, USA.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine the influence of various
prognostic factors on the outcome of esophageal atresia patients.
METHODS: The authors reviewed 240 charts of patients admitted with esophageal
atresia or tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) in a single institution. A logistic
regression model was used with survival as the dependent variable and era of
repair, birth weight, and cardiac anomaly as independent variables.
RESULTS: Era was statistically significant (P = .011); 87% (117 of 134) of
patients survived in the era from 1980 through 1997 compared with 78% (83 of 106)
from 1960 through 1979. Cardiac anomaly (CHD) was a significant risk factor (P = 
.001); 88% (176 of 199) survived without cardiac anomaly, whereas only 59% (24 of
41) survived with cardiac disease. Eighty-four percent (185 of 219) of infants
with a birth weight (BW) of more than 1,500 g survived, compared with 71% (15 of 
21) of infants with a birth weight of less than 1,500 g. This was not
statistically significant (P = .59). Early hospital deaths were primarily cardiac
and chromosomal (61%). Late deaths were primarily respiratory (59%; two-tailed
Fisher's Exact test, P = .004).
CONCLUSIONS: (1) Survival of patients with esophageal atresia has significantly
improved in the recent years. (2) Low birth weight (<1,500 g) does not seem to
affect survival. (3) Associated cardiac and chromosomal anomalies are significant
causes of death, particularly for early demise. (4) Late death from respiratory
disease (tracheomalacia, reactive airway disease, reflux, and aspiration)
warrants attention, and a close follow-up of postoperative patients is suggested.

PMID: 10022146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Feb;13(2):228-38.

Reconstitution of the protein kinase A response of the rat prolactin promoter:
differential effects of distinct Pit-1 isoforms and functional interaction with
Oct-1.

Diamond SE(1), Chiono M, Gutierrez-Hartmann A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Colorado Cancer Center, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

PRL gene transcription is primarily regulated by dopamine, which lowers cAMP
levels and inhibits protein kinase A (PKA) activity. Current data indicate that
the cAMP/PKA response maps to the most proximal Pit-1/Pit-1beta binding site
footprint I (FP I) on the rat PRL (rPRL) promoter. Pit-1, a POU-homeo domain
transcription factor, is specifically expressed in the anterior pituitary and is 
required both for the normal development of anterior pituitary cell types,
somatotrophs, lactotrophs, and thyrotrophs, and for the expression of their
hormones: GH, PRL, and TSHbeta. Pit-1 has been shown to functionally interact,
via FP I, with several transcription factors, including Oct-1, a ubiquitous
homeobox protein, and thyrotroph embryonic factor, which is found in lactotrophs,
to activate basal rPRL promoter activity. Pit-1beta/GHF-2, a distinct splice
isoform of Pit-1, acts to inhibit Ras-activated transcription from the rPRL
promoter, which is mediated by a functional interaction between Pit-1 and Ets-1
at the most distal Pit-1 binding site (FP IV). In this manuscript we show 1) that
the Pit-1beta isoform not only fails to block PKA activation, but is, in fact, a 
superior mediator of the PKA response; 2) that the PKA response requires intact
POU-specific and POU-homeo domains of Pit-1; and 3) that Oct-1, but not
thyrotroph embryonic factor, functions as a Pit-1-interacting factor to mediate
an optimal PKA response.

PMID: 9973253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):1242-50.

An RNA polymerase II complex containing all essential initiation factors binds to
the activation domain of PAR leucine zipper transcription factor thyroid
embryonic factor.

Ossipow V(1), Fonjallaz P, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire Sciences II, CH-1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

Transcription initiation of protein-encoding genes involves the assembly of RNA
polymerase II and a number of general transcription factors at the promoter. A
mammalian RNA polymerase II complex containing all of the components required for
promoter-specific transcription initiation can be isolated by immunopurification 
with a monoclonal antibody directed against the cyclin-dependent kinase CDK7, a
subunit of the general transcription factor TFIIH. In vitro transcription by this
immunopurified RNA polymerase II complex is effectively stimulated by thyroid
embryonic factor (TEF), a basic leucine zipper transcription factor. Thus, the
RNA polymerase II complex must also contain components required for activated
transcription that interact with the transactivation domain of TEF. This
conjecture was verified by affinity selection experiments in which the TEF
transcription activation domain was used as a bait. Indeed, an RNA polymerase II 
complex containing all of the accessory proteins required for transcription
initiation can be enriched by its affinity to recombinant proteins containing the
TEF transactivation domain. These results are compatible with a mechanism by
which TEF can recruit an RNA polymerase II holoenzyme to the promoter in a single
step.

PMCID: PMC116053
PMID: 9891058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genomics. 1999 Jan 1;55(1):127-9.

Localization of human transcription factor TEF-4 and TEF-5 (TEAD2, TEAD3) genes
to chromosomes 19q13.3 and 6p21.2 using fluorescence in situ hybridization and
radiation hybrid analysis.

Jacquemin P(1), Depetris D, Mattei MG, Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/, Illkirch Cédex, F-67404, France.

PMID: 9889009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Pediatr Surg Int. 1998 Dec;14(3):214-7.

Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula: success and failure rates in
the United Arab Emirates.

Nawaz A(1), Matta H, Shawis R, Jazcobsz A, Kassir S, Al-Salem AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tawam Hospital, Al Ain, 
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.

The management of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) has
improved markedly over the years, with a current overall survival of 80%-90%.
This however, is not the case in developing countries, where mortality continues 
to be high. The results of treatment of 41 consecutive cases EA and/or TEF have
been analyzed to determine factors pertinent to the outcome. The distribution of 
anomalies and a postoperative survival of 86.8% were comparable to those from
developed countries. Aspiration pneumonia was unusually frequent in our patients 
(78%), but did not adversely influence outcome. Associated congenital anomalies
as well as low birth weight continue to be important predictors of outcome in our
setting. Our post-operative complications were similar to those from developed
countries apart from a high incidence of stricture formation. This was attributed
to gastroesophageal reflux, non-ventilation post-operatively, and the use of silk
sutures to construct the anastomosis.

PMID: 9880753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Dec;33(12):1817-9.

Lung abscess: an unusual presentation of congenital tracheoesophageal fistula
without atresia.

Quah BS(1), Indudharan R, Hashim I, Simpson H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Kubang Kerian Kelantan.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) without atresia is rare and usually presents with
symptoms from birth. In this report, a 9-year-old boy presented with productive
cough of 4 month's duration and was shown to have a right lung abscess seen on
chest radiograph. His parents denied earlier respiratory symptoms or illnesses.
Rigid bronchoscopy showed a fistulous opening of about 1 mm in diameter in the
posterior wall of the trachea about 16 cm from the upper incisor teeth.
Cannulation with a ureteral catheter demonstrated that the fistulous opening
communicated with the esophageal lumen. The tracheoesophageal fistula was 1 cm
long and was divided through a right supraclavicular incision. The postoperative 
period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative 
day. This case demonstrated that TEF should be considered in any patient
presenting with chronic respiratory problems even after a prolonged symptom-free 
period.

PMID: 9869060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 1998 Nov;101(11):1303-10.

[Voice restoration and clinical outcome in patients undergoing laryngectomy with 
voice prostheses].

[Article in Japanese]

Kumazawa H(1), Tsuta Y, Momodani A, Yoshinaga K, Fukutake T, Yamashita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kansai Medical University, Osaka.

Since the introduction of the tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) technique for
restoration of voice in 1983, we performed voice restoration using primary
tracheoesophageal fistula in 83 patients undergoing laryngectomy. The success
rate for voice restoration with TEF was 80.6% (good voice; 69.8%, fair voice;
10.8%). Thirty-one patients out of 51 patients who have been followed for over 3 
years had 34 problems with TEF (15 granulations of TEF, 7 difficulties in
insertion of voice prostheses, 4 stenoses of the tracheal stoma, 5 other
reasons). However, most patients could use TEF by following appropriate
procedures. Our results suggest that the Blom Singer TEF procedure is a safe,
simple and effective means of alaryngeal communication.

PMID: 9866995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1998 Nov;28(6):511-69.

Dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like toxic effects of polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs): implications for risk assessment.

Giesy JP(1), Kannan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, National Food Safety and Toxicology Center, Michigan
State University, East Lansing 48824, USA.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are persistent, bioaccumulative, and toxic
contaminants in the environment. Individual PCB congeners exhibit different
physicochemical properties and biological activities that result in different
environmental distributions and toxicity profiles. The variable composition of
PCB residues in environmental matrices and their different mechanisms of toxicity
complicate the development of scientifically based regulations for the risk
assessment. In this article various approaches for the assessment of risks of
PCBs have been critically examined. Recent developments in the toxic equivalency 
factor (TEF) approach for the assessment of toxic effects due to dioxin-like PCBs
have been examined. PCB exposure studies that describe non-dioxin-like toxic
effects, particularly neurobehavioral effects and their effective doses in
animals were compiled. A comparative assessment of effective doses for
dioxin-like and non-dioxin-like effects by PCBs has been made to evaluate the
relative significance of non-ortho-and ortho-substituted PCBs in risk assessment.
Using mink as an example, relative merits and implications of using TEF and total
PCB approaches for assessing the potential for toxic effects in wildlife was
examined. There are several advantages and limitations associated with each
method used for PCB risk assessment. Toxic effects due to coplanar PCBs occur at 
relatively smaller concentrations than those due to non-dioxin-like PCBs and
therefore the TEF approach derives the risk assessment of PCBs, in the
environment. The need for the refinement of TEF approach for more accurate
assessment of risks is discussed.

PMID: 9861526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):296-306.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase binds with transcription enhancer factor 1 to MCAT1
elements to regulate muscle-specific transcription.

Butler AJ(1), Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143-0452, USA.

Striated muscle-specific expression of the cardiac troponin T (cTNT) gene is
mediated through two MCAT elements that act via binding of transcription enhancer
factor 1 (TEF-1) to the MCAT core motifs and binding of an auxiliary protein to
nucleotides flanking the 5' side of the core motif. Using DNA-protein and
protein-protein binding experiments, we identified a 140-kDa polypeptide that
bound both the muscle-specific flanking sequences of the most distal MCAT1
element and TEF-1. Screening of an expression library with the MCAT1 element
yielded a cDNA encoding a truncated form of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP).
Endogenous PARP from embryonic tissue nuclear extracts migrated as a 140-kDa
protein. Recombinant full-length PARP preferentially bound the wild-type MCAT1
element and was shown to physically interact with TEF-1. In addition, endogenous 
TEF-1 could be coimmunoprecipitated with PARP from extracts of primary skeletal
muscle cells. Recombinant PARP was able to ADP-ribosylate TEF-1 in vitro.
Inhibition of the enzymatic activity of PARP repressed expression of an
MCAT1-dependent reporter in transiently transfected primary muscle cells.
Together, these data implicate PARP as the auxiliary protein that binds with
TEF-1 to the MCAT1 element to provide muscle-specific gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC83887
PMID: 9858553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Nov;33(11):1645-7.

Definitive localization of isolated tracheoesophageal fistula using bronchoscopy 
and esophagoscopy for guide wire placement.

Garcia NM(1), Thompson JW, Shaul DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles, California
90027, USA.

PURPOSE: To aid in identification of isolated tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF),
many surgeons have recommended the bronchoscopic placement of a ureteric or
Fogarty catheter. This method can fail because of intraoperative dislodgment of
the catheter. The authors present a new technique that enables us to definitively
isolate and treat all H-type fistulas.
METHODS: Six cases of isolated TEF are presented consisting of 4 H-type fistulas,
a proximal pouch fistula, and a recurrent TEF. Three of the patients had
undergone a total of four prior failed operations at outside institutions using
attempted bronchoscopic catheter placement. On all six patients, bronchoscopy was
first performed where the fistula tract was noted in the trachea and a guide wire
was passed through the fistula. After orotracheal intubation, the authors
performed rigid esophagoscopy; the guide wire was identified and brought out
through the mouth. This created a wire loop through the fistula. With the use of 
x-ray we were then able to visualize the level of the fistula and determine
whether a cervical or thoracic approach should be used. Identification of the
fistula intraoperatively was then facilitated by traction on the loop by the
anesthesiologist.
RESULTS: Five of the six TEFs were repaired with neck exploration; one required
right thoracotomy. In all patients, the fistula was identified and divided. There
were no recurrences or other complications.
CONCLUSION: This new technique is a simple and definitive method in
identification and treatment of isolated TEF.

PMID: 9856885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Am J Clin Nutr. 1998 Dec;68(6):1223-7.

Lower daily energy expenditure as measured by a respiratory chamber in subjects
with spinal cord injury compared with control subjects.

Monroe MB(1), Tataranni PA, Pratley R, Manore MM, Skinner JS, Ravussin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise Science and Physical Education, Arizona State
University, Tempe, USA. monroem@Colorado.edu

BACKGROUND: This study was designed to determine the effect of chronic spinal
cord injury on daily energy expenditure.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that both resting and total energy expenditure would
be lower in spinal cord-injured (SCI) subjects than in control subjects because
of lower sympathetic nervous system activity and reduced levels of physical
activity in SCI subjects.
DESIGN: Twenty-four-hour energy expenditure (24-h EE), resting metabolic rate
(RMR), sleeping metabolic rate, spontaneous physical activity, the thermic effect
of food (TEF), and 24-h respiratory quotient were measured by using a respiratory
chamber in 10 male SCI subjects (injury ranged from level C6 to L3) and 59
age-matched, noninjured, male control subjects.
RESULTS: The 24-h EE was lower in SCI than in control subjects (7824 +/- 305
compared with 9941 +/- 188 kJ, P < 0.01). After adjustment for fat-free mass, fat
mass, and age, 24-h EE was still lower (-753 kJ/d, P < 0.01) in SCI than in
control subjects. Spontaneous physical activity measured by a radar system was
also significantly lower (4.6 +/- 0.6% compared with 6.5 +/- 0.3% of time, P <
0.01) in SCI than in control subjects. In absolute value (7347 +/- 268 compared
with 9251 +/- 1326 kJ/d, P < 0.01) or after adjustment for fat-free mass, fat
mass, and age (-678 kJ/d, P < 0.01), RMR was also lower in SCI than in control
subjects. TEF was significantly lower in SCI than in control subjects (987 +/-
142 compared with 1544 +/- 213 kJ/d, representing 12.9% and 15.9% of total energy
intake, respectively, P < 0.05). The sleeping metabolic rate and 24-h respiratory
quotient did not differ significantly between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: The 24-h EE was significantly lower in SCI than in control subjects.
This difference can be explained by the lower levels of physical activity, and
lower RMR and TEF values, in SCI subjects.

PMID: 9846850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Am J Physiol. 1998 Dec;275(6 Pt 1):C1438-48.

Effect of serum and mechanical stretch on skeletal alpha-actin gene regulation in
cultured primary muscle cells.

Carson JA(1), Booth FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, Pharmacology, and Physiology, University of
Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether mechanical stretch or serum
availability alters pretranslational regulation of skeletal alpha-actin (SkA) in 
cultured striated muscle cells. Chicken primary skeletal myoblasts and cardiac
myocytes were plated on collagenized Silastic membranes adherent to nylon
supports and stretched 8-20% of initial length 96 h postplating. Serum dependence
of SkA gene regulation was determined by maintaining differentiated muscle cells 
in growth/differentiation (G/D; skeletal myotubes, 10% horse serum-2% chick
embryo extract; cardiac myocytes, 10% horse serum) or growth-limiting (G-L; 0.5% 
horse serum) medium. Skeletal myotubes had higher SkA mRNA and SkA promoter
activity in G/D than in G-L medium. Cardiac myocyte SkA mRNA was higher in G-L
than in G/D medium. Serum response factor (SRF) protein binding to serum response
element 1 (SRE1) of SkA promoter increased in skeletal cultures in G/D compared
with G-L medium. Western blot analysis demonstrated that increased SRF-SRE1
binding was due, in part, to increased SRF protein. Stretching skeletal myotubes 
in G-L medium reduced SkA mRNA and repressed SkA promoter activity. The first 100
bp of SkA promoter were sufficient for stretch-induced repression of SkA promoter
activity, and an intact transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) binding site
was necessary for this response. Serum and stretch appear to repress SkA promoter
activity in skeletal myotubes through different DNA binding elements, the SRE1
and TEF-1 sites, respectively. Stretching increased SkA mRNA in cardiac myocytes 
in G-L medium but did not alter SkA mRNA level in cardiac cells in G/D medium.
These results demonstrate that stretch and serum interact differently to alter
SkA expression in cultured cardiac and skeletal muscle cells.

PMID: 9843704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Dec;106(12):775-92.

Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for PCBs, PCDDs, PCDFs for humans and wildlife.

Van den Berg M(1), Birnbaum L, Bosveld AT, Brunström B, Cook P, Feeley M, Giesy
JP, Hanberg A, Hasegawa R, Kennedy SW, Kubiak T, Larsen JC, van Leeuwen FX, Liem 
AK, Nolt C, Peterson RE, Poellinger L, Safe S, Schrenk D, Tillitt D, Tysklind M, 
Younes M, Waern F, Zacharewski T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Toxicology, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Feb;108(2):A58.
    Environ Health Perspect. 1999 Oct;107(10):A492-3.

An expert meeting was organized by the World Health Organization (WHO) and held
in Stockholm on 15-18 June 1997. The objective of this meeting was to derive
consensus toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) for polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins 
(PCDDs) and dibenzofurans (PCDFs) and dioxinlike polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
for both human, fish, and wildlife risk assessment. Based on existing literature 
data, TEFs were (re)evaluated and either revised (mammals) or established (fish
and birds). A few mammalian WHO-TEFs were revised, including
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorinated DD, octachlorinated DD, octachlorinated DF, and PCB
77. These mammalian TEFs are also considered applicable for humans and wild
mammalian species. Furthermore, it was concluded that there was insufficient in
vivo evidence to continue the use of TEFs for some di-ortho PCBs, as suggested
earlier by Ahlborg et al. [Chemosphere 28:1049-1067 (1994)]. In addition, TEFs
for fish and birds were determined. The WHO working group attempted to harmonize 
TEFs across different taxa to the extent possible. However, total synchronization
of TEFs was not feasible, as there were orders of a magnitude difference in TEFs 
between taxa for some compounds. In this respect, the absent or very low response
of fish to mono-ortho PCBs is most noticeable compared to mammals and birds.
Uncertainties that could compromise the TEF concept were also reviewed, including
nonadditive interactions, differences in shape of the dose-response curve, and
species responsiveness. In spite of these uncertainties, it was concluded that
the TEF concept is still the most plausible and feasible approach for risk
assessment of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons with dioxinlike properties.

PMCID: PMC1533232
PMID: 9831538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1998 Nov;53(6):B409-14.

The effects of age on postprandial thermogenesis at four graded energetic
challenges: findings in young and older women.

Melanson KJ(1), Saltzman E, Vinken AG, Russell R, Roberts SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts
University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

There remains controversy over the effect of age on postprandial thermogenesis,
with some studies observing decreased postprandial thermogenesis in older
subjects and other studies finding no effect of age. We investigated this issue
in 8 young (25.2+/-1.8 years) and 8 older (72.2+/-2.1 years) healthy
glucose-tolerant women with normal thyroid hormone status. Repeated measures of
the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) were obtained following consumption of test
meals containing 0, 1046, 2092, and 4184 kilojoules (kJ) by using indirect
calorimetry. TEF at each meal size was determined once in the older subjects and 
twice in the younger subjects (during follicular and luteal phases of the
menstrual cycle) for a total of 96 measurements. There was a positive
dose-response between meal size and TEF (p < .001) that was not significantly
affected by age group. The best single predictor of TEF expressed as a percentage
of meal energy content was waist-to-hip ratio (R2=67.416, p < .02). These results
indicate that aging is not associated with decreased TEF in the absence of
factors such as a hypothyroid state or glucose intolerance.

PMID: 9823736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Acoust Soc Am. 1998 Nov;104(5):3030-8.

Some aspects of the lateralization of echoed sound in man. I. The classical
interaural-delay based precedence effect.

Tollin DJ(1), Henning GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

The precedence effect in two-click stimuli was investigated by measuring
observers' sensitivity to interaural time delays (ITDs) as a function of
interclick interval (ICI). A two-interval two-alternative forced-choice
discrimination paradigm was used in two stimulus configurations: type I, a
dichotic click with a given ITD preceded a diotic click; and type II, a dichotic 
click followed a diotic click. Threshold ITDs were measured in each configuration
for a finely sampled distribution of ICIs that ranged from 0.1 to 25.6 ms.
Performance was characterized by the "threshold elevation factor" (TEF) which
normalized each of the observers' type I and type II ITD thresholds relative to
their ITD threshold for a single dichotic click. The finer sampling of ICIs
revealed two novel results: First, for two observers, sensitivity to ITD in the
later arriving ITD (type II) oscillated in a consistent and systematic way with
changes in ICI. Second, when the ICI reached 12.8 ms, ITD thresholds in the type 
I and type II configurations were equal but nearly a factor of 2 greater than for
a single dichotic click. Some aspects of the data are consistent with the
phenomenon of binaural adaptation.

PMID: 9821347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Yeast. 1998 Oct;14(14):1267-83.

Comparison of expression systems in the yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Hansenula polymorpha, Klyveromyces lactis, Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Yarrowia
lipolytica. Cloning of two novel promoters from Yarrowia lipolytica.

Müller S(1), Sandal T, Kamp-Hansen P, Dalbøge H.

Author information: 
(1)Microbial Discovery I, Novo Nordisk A/S, Bagsvaerd, Denmark.

We have compared expression systems based on autonomously replicating vectors in 
the yeasts Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Kluyveromyces
lactis, Hansenula polymorpha and Yarrowia lipolytica in order to identify a more 
suitable host organism for use in the expression cloning method (Dalbøge and
Heldt-Hansen, 1994) in which S. cerevisiae has traditionally been used. The
capacity of the expression systems to secrete active forms of six fungal genes
encoding the enzymes galactanase, lipase, polygalacturonase, xylanase and two
cellulases was examined, as well as glycosylation pattern, plasmid stability and 
transformation frequency. All of the examined alternative hosts were able to
secrete more active enzyme than S. cerevisiae but the relative expression
capacity of the individual hosts varied significantly in a gene-dependent manner.
One of the most attractive of the alternative host organisms, Y. lipolytica,
yielded an increase which ranged from 4.5 times to more than two orders of
magnitude. As the initially employed Y. lipolytica XPR2 promoter is unfit in the 
context of expression cloning, two novel promoter sequences for highly expressed 
genes present in only one copy on the genome were isolated. Based on sequence
homology, the genes were identified as TEF, encoding translation elongation
factor-1 alpha and RPS7, encoding ribosomal protein S7. Using the heterologous
cellulase II (celII) and xylanase I (xylI) as reporter genes, the effect of the
new promoters was measured in qualitative and quantitative assays. Based on the
present tests of the new promoters. Y. lipolytica appears as a highly attractive 
alternative to S. cerevisiae as a host organism for expression cloning.

PMID: 9802206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Oct;208(8):440-6.

Specific interactions between vestigial and scalloped are required to promote
wing tissue proliferation in Drosophila melanogaster.

Paumard-Rigal S(1), Zider A, Vaudin P, Silber J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, L.G.Q.M., 2, Place Jussieu, Tour 43, F-75251 Paris
cedex 05, France.

The two genes vestigial (vg) and scalloped (sd) are required for wing development
in Drosophila melanogaster. They present similar patterns of expression in second
and third instar wing discs and similar wing mutant phenotypes. vg encodes a
nuclear protein without any recognized nucleic acid-binding motif. Sd is a
transcription factor homologous to the human TEF-1 factor whose promoter activity
depends on cell-specific cofactors. We postulate that Vg could be a cofactor of
Sd in the wing morphogenetic process and that, together, they could constitute a 
functional transcription complex. We investigated genetic interactions between
the two genes. We show here that vg and sd co-operate in vivo in a manner
dependent on the structure of the Vg protein. We ectopically expressed vg in the 
patch (ptc) domains. We show evidence that wing-like outgrowths induced by
ectopic expression of vg are severely reduced in vg or sd mutant backgrounds.
Accordingly, we demonstrate that ptc-GAL4-driven expression of vg induces both
expressions of the endogenous vg and sd genes and that the two Vg and Sd proteins
have to be produced together to promote wing proliferation. Furthermore, we show 
an interaction between the two proteins by double hybrid experiments in yeast.
Our results therefore support the hypothesis that Sd and Vg directly interact in 
vivo to form a complex regulating the proliferation of wing tissue.

PMID: 9799424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Environ Health Perspect. 1998 Nov;106(11):683-8.

Hexachlorobenzene as a possible major contributor to the dioxin activity of human
milk.

van Birgelen AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park,
NC 27709 USA.

Comment in
    Environ Health Perspect. 1999 Apr;107(4):A183-4.
    Environ Health Perspect. 2000 Feb;108(2):A58.

A dioxinlike compound is a compound that binds to the aryl hydrocarbon (Ah)
receptor, results in dioxinlike effects, and bioaccumulates. These are the three 
factors for including dioxinlike chemicals in the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) 
concept. Risk assessment of dioxinlike compounds is based on using these TEFs.
Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) has all three features and should therefore be included
in this TEF concept. Relative potency values express the potency of a specific
compound in comparison to 2,3,7, 8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), the most
potent dioxinlike compound, with a relative potency value of 1. For the
estimation of the total dioxin activity in an environmental biological sample,
the TEF value of a compound is multiplied by the concentration in the specific
matrix. This results in a certain amount of toxic equivalents (TEQs) for this
compound. The summation of all TEQs in a certain mixture gives the total dioxin
activity of this mixture. HCB binds to the Ah receptor about 10,000 times less
than TCDD. HCB is also about 10,000 times less potent than TCDD based on in vitro
cytochrome P4501A induction and porphyrin accumulation. Using a relative potency 
value of 0.0001, HCB could add 10-60% to the total TEQ in human milk samples in
most countries. In a few countries such as Spain, Slovakia, and the Czech
Republic, HCB levels in human milk expressed as TEQ could contribute up to a
factor of six to the total TEQ in comparison to the contribution of
polychlorinated dioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphenyls together, i.e., up to a
daily intake of about 1 ng TEQ/kg for a breast-fed infant. The HCB levels in
human milk in these countries are about the same as in India. Biochemical,
immunological, and neurological alterations have been observed in infants fed
breast milk in countries with relatively low TEQ levels in human milk. Based on
the above information, it is clear that HCB should be classified as a dioxinlike 
compound, that more studies are needed to reduce the uncertainty in the
estimation of a relative potency value for HCB, and that epidemiological studies 
should be undertaken in infants fed breast milk in countries with high HCB
exposure levels. Furthermore, measurements of HCB levels in human and
environmental samples in conjunction with other dioxinlike compounds is a
prerequisite to estimate the total dioxin activity in these samples.

PMCID: PMC1533492
PMID: 9799183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1998 Nov;64(11):4283-90.

Threonine aldolase overexpression plus threonine supplementation enhanced
riboflavin production in Ashbya gossypii.

Monschau N(1), Sahm H, Stahmann K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biotechnologie 1, Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH, D-52425 Jülich, 
Germany.

Riboflavin production in the filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii is limited by
glycine, an early precursor required for purine synthesis. We report an
improvement of riboflavin production in this fungus by overexpression of the
glycine biosynthetic enzyme threonine aldolase. The GLY1 gene encoding the
threonine aldolase of A. gossypii was isolated by heterologous complementation of
the glycine-auxotrophic Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain YM13 with a genomic
library from A. gossypii. The deduced amino acid sequence of GLY1 showed 88%
similarity to threonine aldolase from S. cerevisiae. In the presence of the GLY1 
gene, 25 mU of threonine aldolase specific activity mg-1 was detectable in crude 
extracts of S. cerevisiae YM13. Disruption of GLY1 led to a complete loss of
threonine aldolase activity in A. gossypii crude extracts, but growth of and
riboflavin production by the knockout mutant were not affected. This indicated a 
minor role of the enzyme in glycine biosynthesis of A. gossypii. However,
overexpression of GLY1 under the control of the constitutive TEF promoter and
terminator led to a 10-fold increase of threonine aldolase specific activity in
crude extracts along with a 9-fold increase of riboflavin production when the
medium was supplemented with threonine. This strong enhancement, which could not 
be achieved by supplementation with glycine alone, was attributed to an almost
quantitative uptake of threonine and its intracellular conversion into glycine.
This became evident by a subsequent partial efflux of the glycine formed.

PMCID: PMC106640
PMID: 9797278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Scand J Immunol. 1998 Oct;48(4):350-6.

Isoforms of murine and human serum amyloid P component.

Nybo M(1), Hackler R, Kold B, Nielsen EH, Steinmetz A, Svehag SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Odense University, Denmark.

Isoelectric focusing (IEF) and immunofixation of murine serum amyloid P component
(SAP), purified and in serum, showed a distinct and strain-dependent isoform
pattern with up to seven bands (pI 5.1-5.7). Neuraminidase treatment caused a
shift of the isoforms to more basic pI values, but did not affect their number.
When the acute-phase response was analysed in three mouse strains, CBA/J and
C3H/HeN initially showed seven SAP isoforms in serum and C57BL/6 J three or four.
The responses in all three strains peaked at day 2 and were normalized within 14 
days. On days 2 and 4, CBA/J and C3H/HeN mice showed one more acidic isoform and 
an increase in the concentration of the most basic isoform. C57BL/6 J mice
exhibited two to three new isoforms during the acute-phase response. This appears
to be the first demonstration of the physiological existence of SAP isoforms. In 
contrast, demonstration of isoforms of human SAP required the presence of urea
and higher SAP concentrations. TEF and immunofixation of SAP monomers showed five
to eight isoforms, ranging from pI 4.7-5.7. IEF of SAP in human serum resulted in
a less distinct pattern and more acidic isoforms. As with murine SAP,
neuraminidase treatment caused a shift of the isoforms, but no reduction in
isoform number. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis confirmed the existence of
multiple isoforms of human SAP monomers.

PMID: 9790304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Sep;152(1):153-65.

Interactive effects of three structurally different polychlorinated biphenyls in 
a rat liver tumor promotion bioassay.

Haag-Grönlund M(1), Johansson N, Fransson-Steen R, Hâkansson H, Scheu G, Wärngård
L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, S-171
77, Sweden. Marie.Haag.Gronlund@imm.ki.se

Interactive effects between the non-ortho-substituted 3,3', 4,4',
5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126), the mono-ortho-substituted 2,3,3',4,
4'-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB105), and the di-ortho-substituted 2,2',4,
4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB153) were studied in an initiation/promotion
bioassay. Female Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with 30 mg/kg ip of
N-nitrosodiethylamine 24 h after partial hepatectomy. Five weeks later, weekly sc
administrations of the three PCBs in 15 systematically selected dose combinations
started. After 20 weeks of administration, the animals were killed and the livers
were analyzed for areas expressing placental glutathione-S-transferase as a
marker of preneoplastic foci. In addition, concentration of liver and kidney
retinoids and plasma retinol was analyzed, as well as body and organ weights,
plasma transaminases, and induction of hepatic cytochrome P450 1A1/2 (CYP1A1/2)
and CYP2B1/2 activities. Data were analyzed with a multivariate method. At the
doses applied in this study, weak antagonism was observed between PCB126 and
PCB153 for effects on volume fraction of foci, number of foci/cm3, concentration 
of plasma retinol and liver retinoids, relative liver weight, and induction of
CYP2B1/2 activity. Weak antagonism was also observed between PCB126 and PCB105
for effects on volume fraction of foci, number of foci/cm3, and plasma retinol
concentration. No interactions other than pure additivity were observed between
PCB105 and PCB153. Synergism was not observed within the dose ranges investigated
in this study. Knowledge of interactive effects is important for risk assessment 
of environmental mixtures of dioxin-like compounds. Antagonism between congeners 
generally results in risk assessments that overestimate human risk. The
significance to human risk assessment of the relatively weak antagonism observed 
in this study is however unclear, considering many other uncertainties involved
in the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) concept. A change of the TEF concept for
risk assessments of dioxin-like substances is not motivated based on the results 
of this study.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9772211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Sep;33(9):1393-5.

Management of instrumental perforations of the esophagus occurring during
treatment of corrosive strictures.

Avanoglu A(1), Ergün O, Mutaf O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The initial symptoms of esophageal perforations (EP) may be subtle,
but the progression is very rapid, and the outcome may be disastrous unless the
diagnosis is made early and proper treatment is started immediately.
METHODS: Between 1976 and 1996, 1,249 patients with caustic esophageal burns were
treated at Ege University. The study group is composed of 52 patients with
instrumental ER Perforations occured during dilatation attempts of esophageal
strictures. Twelve patients were referred from other institutions after the
occurrence of EP.
RESULTS: In two patients, emergency surgical repair of the perforation was
possible. Seventeen patients with unilateral and two patients with bilateral
empyema were treated by pleural drainages. Anterior retrosternal mediastinal
drainage was needed in one patient, and 11 patients required posterior
mediastinal drainages. Three patients were treated by both anterior and posterior
mediastinal drainage. Tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) developed in eight
patients immediately after a dilatation attempt. Seven of these patients required
esophageal replacement with colon to bypass the fistulas, and one patient in this
group healed spontaneously. EP healed in 42.5 +/- 49.4 days. Twelve (23%)
patients died of mediastinitis and sepsis.
CONCLUSION: When EP is diagnosed and treated with these methods, the mortality
rate should approach zero.

PMID: 9766361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Sep;33(9):1341-6.

Outcome of patients operated on for esophageal atresia: 30 years' experience.

Somppi E(1), Tammela O, Ruuska T, Rahnasto J, Laitinen J, Turjanmaa V, Järnberg
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tampere University Hospital, and the Digital Media
Institute, Tampere University of Technology, Finland.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the outcome and late sequelae of
patients with esophageal atresia or tracheoesophageal fistula.
METHODS: Sixty patients with esophageal atresia or tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA-TEF) were treated in Tampere University Hospital in the years 1963 through
1993. Long-term outcome was evaluated with a questionnaire, pulmonary and
esophageal function test results, 24-hour pH level monitoring,
tracheobronchoscopy findings, and esophagogastroscopy with biopsy sections and
samples for bacterial cultures.
RESULTS: One third of the respondents reported having impaired quality of life
because of respiratory infections, dyspnea, and difficulties in swallowing and
coughing at night. Eighteen percent had gastroesophageal reflux (GER) symptoms.
The rate of symptoms decreased with age. Impaired pulmonary function, GER,
abnormal esophageal peristalsis, and transit time were registered.
Tracheobronchoscopy showed tracheal narrowing and inflammation in one third; in
histopathologic analysis, however, the rate of inflammation was more than
doubled. Histologically, esophageal inflammation was found in 51%, Barrett's
esophagus in 6%, and a Helicobacter pylori infection in 21% of cases. The
severity of GER, esophageal peristaltic abnormality, tracheal inflammation, and
impairment of pulmonary function seems to be alleviated with age.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the long-term outcome of EA-TEF patients seems to be
favorable, respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms as well as functional
abnormalities remain frequent. Gastric metaplasia in the esophagus and the high
rate of tracheal, esophageal, and gastric inflammation indicate a need for
long-term follow-up.

PMID: 9766349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Chemosphere. 1998 Oct;37(8):1457-72.

Dioxin-like PCBs in the environment-human exposure and the significance of
sources.

Alcock RE(1), Behnisch PA, Jones KC, Hagenmaier H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Science, Institute of Environmental and Natural
Science, Lancaster University, UK.

Dioxin-like PCBs represent an important component of the Sigma-TEQ in many
environmental media. Specifically, in animal produce and in fish PCBs dominate
the Sigma-TEQ ingested by humans. This in turn leads to high background body
burdens in humans with PCB-TEQ greater than that associated with PCDD/Fs. High
fish consumers are apparently subject to elevated TEQ exposure from dioxin-like
PCBs. This has important implications for exposure assessment studies which have 
previously only been concerned with PCDDs and PCDFs. Unlike PCDD/Fs, dioxin-like 
PCBs are not controlled within the food chain. Sources and pathways of exposure
are poorly defined. Aroclor formulations and their subsequent usage are
considered to be the most important sources in terms of human exposure to some
TEF-rated congeners, notably PCB-118, PCB-156 and part of PCB-126. Emissions from
combustion sources contribute additional PCB-126. More research is needed to
place these compounds in an integrated risk evaluation framework.

PMID: 9753761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1998 Jul 10;44(2):109-13.

Acquired tracheo-esophageal fistula in the pediatric population.

Birman C(1), Beckenham E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The New Children's
Hospital, Royal Alexandra Hospital for Children, Westmead, NSW, Australia.

Acquired tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) in the paediatric population is a rare 
entity, an acquired fistula can be due to tracheotomy tubes and tracheotomy
cuffs. Patients with burns are at greater risk from these tracheotomy
complications. Acquired TEF can also occur due to a foreign body impaction.
Prevention and early diagnosis are important. In patients with possible airway
burns, 'safe' intracuff pressures maybe too high. To avoid further damage of the 
mucosa, the patient should have a small air leak maintained if a cuff is used.
Most acquired TEF do not close spontaneously and surgical closure is required.
Our paper presents two cases of acquired TEF in the pediatric population and
reviews the literature on this subject.

PMID: 9725526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Rozhl Chir. 1998 May;77(5):222-4.

[Diagnosis and surgical treatment of tracheoesophageal fistulas without
esophageal atresia].

[Article in Slovak]

Vidiscák M(1), Smrek M, Pevalová L, Cingel V, Kirnák J.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika detskej chirurgie, DFNsP, Bratislava, Slovenská republika.

Tracheooesophageal fistulae (TEF) without atresia of the oesophagus cause in
children relapsing respiratory diseases. The authors present diagnostic and
therapeutic procedures in seven children. The symptoms of aspiration with attacks
of non-productive cough and suffocation when fed were recorded in all children
since birth. In five the diagnosis was made late. In four children the diagnosis 
was established by oesophagoscopy, in two by cinematooesophageography and in one 
by Fabian's test (Koop's test). All seven children were operated by a
transcervical approach. After surgery all children are in a good condition and
have no respiratory complaints.

PMID: 9721554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 1998 Jul;50(1):85-92.

Utilization of the TEF1-alpha gene (TEF1) promoter for expression of
polygalacturonase genes, pgaA and pgaB, in Aspergillus oryzae.

Kitamoto N(1), Matsui J, Kawai Y, Kato A, Yoshino S, Ohmiya K, Tsukagoshi N.

Author information: 
(1)Food Research Institute, Aichi Prefectural Government, Nagoya, Japan.

For the development of an efficient gene expression system in a shoyu koji mold
Aspergillus oryzae KBN616, the TEF1 gene, encoding translation-elongation factor 
1 alpha, was cloned from the same strain and used for expression of
polygalacturonase genes. The TEF1 gene comprised 1647 bp with three introns. The 
TEF1-alpha protein consisted of 460 amino acids possessing high identify to other
fungal TEF proteins. Two nucleotide sequences homologous to the upstream
activation sequence, characterized for the ribosomal protein genes in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as well as the pyrimidine-rich sequences were present
in the TEF1 gene promoter region, suggesting that the A, oryzae TEF1 gene has a
strong promoter activity. Two expression vectors, pTFGA300 and pTFGB200 for
production of polygalacturonases A and B respectively, were constructed by using 
the TEF1 gene promoter. A polygalacturonase (PGB) gene cloned from the same
strain comprised 1226 bp with two introns and encoded a protein of 367 amino
acids with high similarity to other fungal polygalacturonases. PGA and PGB were
secreted at approximately 100 mg/l in glucose medium and purified to homogeneity.
PGA had a molecular mass of 41 kDa, a pH optimum of 5.0 and temperature optimum
of 45 degrees C. PGB had a molecular mass of 39 kDa, a pH optimum of 5.0 and
temperature optimum of 55 degrees C.

PMID: 9720204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Pediatr Surg Int. 1998 Sep;13(7):521-3.

Long-term survival in a patient with congenital laryngeal atresia and multiple
malformations.

Okada T(1), Ohnuma N, Tanabe M, Iwai J, Yoshida H, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Chiba University School of Medicine, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260, Japan.

Laryngeal atresia (LA) is an uncommon congenital anomaly, and only a few cases
with long-term survival are reported in the literature. The authors describe a
2-year-old boy with LA and esophageal (EA), intestinal, and urethral atresia
(UA). Immediately after birth, severe respiratory distress and mild abdominal
distension became evident. Endotracheal intubation was unsuccessful and emergency
tracheal puncture was performed, after which a tracheostomy was constructed.
Direct laryngoscopy revealed LA at the vocal cord level. A cystostomy and
gastrostomy were constructed immediately because of UA and EA. A
cystocutaneostomy, ileocolic anastomosis, and resection of a tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) were simultaneously performed 1 day after birth. The EA was
proximal with a distal TEF. The gap between the ends of the upper and lower
esophagus was 4 cm in length. It was thought impossible to perform a primary
anastomosis, and therefore, a gastrostomy and resection of the TEF using
multiple-stage surgery was undertaken. Intestinal resection and anastomosis were 
performed due to intestinal stenosis from necrotizing enterocolitis at the age of
3 months. Hypoxic encephalopathy developed due to accidental obstruction of the
tracheostomy tube at the age of 10 months, and physical therapy was begun. He
required a cutaneous nephrostomy due to a right hydromegaureter with
vesicoureteric reflux and a left non-functioning kidney at the age of 23 months. 
He has been hospitalized for partial ventilatory assistance for 2 years at our
institution. The course of this patient seems noteworthy in relation to the
genesis of the multiple malformations.

PMID: 9716685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1998 Jul;151(1):70-8.

Subchronic/chronic toxicity of a mixture of four chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins in
rats. II. Biochemical effects.

Viluksela M(1), Stahl BU, Birnbaum LS, Rozman KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, 66160-7417, USA.

Groups of 20 male and 20 female rats were given five different oral doses of a
mixture of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), 1, 2,3,7,8-pentaCDD,
(PCDD) 1,2,3,4,7,8-hexaCDD (HxCDD), and 1,2,3,4,6, 7,8-heptaCDD (HpCDD) divided
into four daily loading doses and six biweekly maintenance doses. PCDD and HxCDD 
were used as positive controls. The dosing period was 13 weeks, after which half 
of the rats were necropsied and the rest provided with an off-dose period of
another 13 weeks. Liver ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD) activity was
dose-dependently increased in rats dosed with the mixture starting at the lowest 
dose (13- to 16-fold increase), with the effect reaching maximum at the middle
dosage (74- to 112-fold increase), as well as in the positive control groups.
There was some indication of reversibility at the lower doses and in positive
controls during the off-dose period. The activity of phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK) in liver was dose-dependently decreased (maximally by 51%).
This effect was more distinct in males than in females. Liver tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase (TdO) activity decreased maximally by 53% at the two highest
doses. This effect was more distinct in females than in males. Serum tryptophan
concentrations were increased in rats moribund due to wasting. Some reversibility
was apparent by the end of the off-dose period regarding all three biochemical
markers of CDD toxicity. Serum glucose concentrations were decreased at the three
highest doses of the mixture and in positive controls, maximally by 30%, with
some reversibility during the off-dose period. There was a dose-dependent
decrease of serum thyroxine (T4) concentrations in rats given the mixture and in 
the PCDD and HxCDD dosage groups (maximally by 69%), with some reversibility in
males during the off-dose period. Serum triiodothyronine (T3) levels were not
much affected, except that they tended to be decreased in rats moribund with
hemorrhage or anemia. The results demonstrate that comparable biochemical changes
occur after multiple as after single dosing with CDDs and that TEFs derived from 
acute studies can be used to predict the toxicity of mixtures of CDDs regardless 
whether they are administered as single compounds or as a mixture. This study
supports the validity of the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) method and the notion
of additive toxicity for CDDs as currently used in the risk assessment of these
compounds.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9705888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Am J Physiol. 1998 Aug;275(2 Pt 1):C608-18.

Two MCAT elements of the SM alpha-actin promoter function differentially in SM
vs. non-SM cells.

Swartz EA(1), Johnson AD, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia 22906, USA.

Transcriptional activity of the smooth muscle (SM) alpha-actin gene is
differentially regulated in SM vs. non-SM cells. Contained within the rat SM
alpha-actin promoter are two MCAT motifs, binding sites for transcription
enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) transcriptional factors implicated in the regulation of
many muscle-specific genes. Transfections of SM alpha-actin promoter-CAT
constructs containing wild-type or mutagenized MCAT elements were performed to
evaluate their functional significance. Mutation of the MCAT elements resulted in
increased transcriptional activity in SM cells, whereas these mutations either
had no effect or decreased activity in L6 myotubes or endothelial cells.
High-resolution gel shift assays resolved several complexes of different
mobilities that were formed between MCAT oligonucleotides and nuclear extracts
from the different cell types, although no single band was unique to SM. Western 
blot analysis of nuclear extracts with polyclonal antibodies to conserved domains
of the TEF-1 gene family revealed multiple reactive bands, some that were similar
and others that differed between SM and non-SM. Supershift assays with a
polyclonal antibody to the TEF-related protein family demonstrated that TEF-1 or 
TEF-1-related proteins were contained in the shifted complexes. Results suggest
that the MCAT elements may contribute to cell type-specific regulation of the SM 
alpha-actin gene. However, it remains to be determined whether the differential
transcriptional activity of MCAT elements in SM vs. non-SM is due to differences 
in expression of TEF-1 or TEF-1-related proteins or to unique (cell type
specific) combinatorial interactions of the MCAT elements with other cis-elements
and trans-factors.

PMID: 9688616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1998 Jul;52(7):482-8.

The influence of thermic effect of food on satiety.

Crovetti R(1), Porrini M, Santangelo A, Testolin G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate energy expenditure after three isoenergetic meals of
different nutrient composition and to establish the relationship between the
thermic effect of food (TEF), subsequent energy intake from a test meal and
satiety sensations related to consumption.
DESIGN: The study employed a repeated measures design. Ten subjects received, in 
a randomized order, three meals of 2331+/-36 kJ (557+/-9 kcal). About 68% of
energy from protein in the high protein meal (HP), 69% from carbohydrate in the
high carbohydrate meal (HC) and 70% from fat in the high fat meal (HF).
SETTING: The experiments were performed at the University of Milan.
SUBJECTS: Ten normal body-weight healthy women.
METHODS: Energy expenditure was measured by indirect calorimetric measurements,
using an open-circuit ventilated-hood system; intake was assessed 7h later by
weighing the food consumed from a test meal and satiety sensations were rated by 
means of a satiety rating questionnaire.
RESULTS: TEF was 261+/-59, 92+/-67 and 97+/-71 kJ over 7 h after the HP, HC and
HF meals, respectively. The HP meal was the most thermogenic (P < 0.001) and it
determined the highest sensation of fullness (P=0.002). There were no differences
in the sensations and thermic effect between fat and carbohydrate meals. A
significant relationship linked TEF to fullness sensation (r=0.41, P=0.025).
Energy intake from the test meal was comparable after HP, HC and HF meals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that TEF contributes to the satiating power of
foods.

PMID: 9683329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jul;212(3):423-36.

Differential expression of the TEF family of transcription factors in the murine 
placenta and during differentiation of primary human trophoblasts in vitro.

Jacquemin P(1), Sapin V, Alsat E, Evain-Brion D, Dollé P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

We describe the molecular cloning of murine (m) Transcriptional Enhancer Factor
(TEF)-5 belonging to the TEF family of transcription factors. We show that mTEF-5
is specifically expressed in trophoblast giant cells and other extra-embryonic
structures at early stages of development. At later stages, mTEF-5 is
specifically expressed in the labyrinthine region of the placenta and in several 
embryonic tissues. We further show that the other mTEFs are differentially
expressed in extraembryonic structures and in the mature placenta. Interestingly,
human (h)TEF-5 is specifically expressed in the differentiated
syncytiotrophoblast of the human term placenta and its expression is upregulated 
during the differentiation of cytotrophoblasts to syncytiotrophoblast in vitro,
whereas that of hTEF-1 is down-regulated. Together with previous results
describing hTEF-binding sites in the human placental lactogen-B gene enhancer,
these novel observations support a role for hTEF-5 in the regulation of this
gene. We further propose that the hTEF factors may play a more general role in
placental gene regulation and development.

PMID: 9671946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Gen Genet. 1998 Jun;258(6):619-27.

Pleiotropic deficiencies of the laccase-derepressed mutant lah-1 are caused by
constitutively increased expression of the cross-pathway control gene cpc-1 in
Neurospora crassa.

Harashima T(1), Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, Saitama University,
Urawa, Japan.

In Neurospora crassa, expression of the laccase gene is induced by treatment with
the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX). This expression is mediated 
by CPC1, which acts as a general transcriptional activator when mycelia are
treated with CHX or starved for any one of the amino acids. A laccase-derepressed
mutant, lah-1, shows pleiotropic deficiencies in growth, hyphal morphology, CHX
sensitivity, and production of protoperithecia. Moreover, in the lah-1 mutant,
transcript levels of CHX-inducible genes, including lacc, tub-2, tef-1, and amino
acid biosynthetic genes such as cpc-1, trp-3, and arg-12, are increased without
exposure to CHX. All of the defects exhibited in the lah-1 mutant are suppressed 
by a mutation in the cpc-1 locus. These findings suggest that the cpc-1 mutation 
is epistatic to the lah-1 mutation and that the pleiotropic defects in the lah-1 
mutant are attributable to constitutive expression of CPCI. These conclusions are
supported by a developmental Northern blot analysis of the CHX-inducible genes.
Based on these results, the lah-1 gene product appears to regulate expression of 
the cpc-1 gene negatively. Expression of the CHX-inducible genes was induced by
CHX treatment in the lah-1 cpc-1 mutant, as well as in the cpc-1 mutant. This
observation indicates that LAH1 is not a component of CHX-responsive pathway
itself.

PMID: 9671030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Circ Res. 1998 Jul 13;83(1):43-9.

Transcription factor RTEF-1 mediates alpha1-adrenergic reactivation of the fetal 
gene program in cardiac myocytes.

Stewart AF(1), Suzow J, Kubota T, Ueyama T, Chen HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
als6+@pitt.edu

Alpha1-adrenergic receptor stimulation induces cardiac myocytes to hypertrophy
and reactivates many fetal genes, including beta-myosin heavy chain (betaMyHC)
and skeletal alpha-actin (SKA), by signaling through myocyte-specific CAT (M-CAT)
cis elements, binding sites of the transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1)
family of transcription factors. To examine functional differences between TEF-1 
and related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1) in alpha1-adrenergic reactivation of the fetal
program, expression constructs were cotransfected with betaMyHC and SKA
promoter/reporter constructs in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. TEF-I
overexpression tended to transactivate a minimal betaMyHC promoter but
significantly interfered with a minimal SKA promoter. In contrast, RTEF-1
transactivated both the minimal betaMyHC and SKA promoters. TEF-1 and RTEF-I also
affected the alpha1-adrenergic response of the betaMyHC and SKA promoters
differently. TEF-1 had no effect. In contrast, RTEF-1 potentiated the
alpha1-adrenergic responses of the SKA promoter and of a -3.3-kb betaMyHC
promoter. To determine why the promoters responded differently to TEF-1 and
RTEF-1, promoters with mutated M-CAT elements were tested in the same way. The
betaMyHC promoter required an intact M-CAT element to respond to TEF-1 and
RTEF-1, whereas the SKA promoter M-CAT was required for the TEF-1 response but
not for the RTEF-1 response, suggesting that SKA promoter-specific cofactors may 
be involved. By competition gel shift assay, the M-CAT of the minimal betaMyHC
promoter had a lower affinity than that of the SKA promoter, which partly
explains the different responses of these promoters to TEF-1. These results
highlight functional differences between TEF-1 and RTEF-1 and suggest a novel
function of RTEF-1 in mediating the alpha1-adrenergic response in hypertrophic
cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 9670917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Chemosphere. 1998 Aug;37(3):431-42.

Congener-specific analysis of PCBs in human milk from Kazakhstan.

She J(1), Petreas MX, Visita P, McKinney M, Sy FJ, Winkler JJ, Hooper K, Stephens
RD.

Author information: 
(1)Hazardous Materials Laboratory, California Public Health Foundation, Berkeley 
94704, USA.

We have characterized the spectrum of PCB contaminants in human milk samples from
95 women in Kazakhstan using GC/MS congener specific analysis. In these samples, 
12 PCBs comprised 83% of total PCB concentration, and were similar to the major
PCBs reported in other published human milk studies. By summing concentration
levels of 80 PCB congeners in the Kazakhstan samples, a mean total PCB
concentration of 368 ng/g fat was obtained. This is lower than levels reported in
human milk samples from Western Europe. Six indicator PCBs were summed in Kazakh 
milk samples; their aggregate value was similar to literature values published
for human milk from the former Soviet Union. Using WHO's recent TEF scheme, the
mean sum of PCDD/F, coplanar PCB, mono-ortho PCB, and di-ortho PCB TEQ is 42 pg
TEQ/g fat.

PMID: 9661274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cell. 1998 Jun 12;93(6):929-37.

A serum shock induces circadian gene expression in mammalian tissue culture
cells.

Balsalobre A(1), Damiola F, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Sciences II, Université de Genève,
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Cell. 1998 Jun 12;93(6):917-9.

The treatment of cultured rat-1 fibroblasts or H35 hepatoma cells with high
concentrations of serum induces the circadian expression of various genes whose
transcription also oscillates in living animals. Oscillating genes include rper1 
and rper2 (rat homologs of the Drosophila clock gene period), and the genes
encoding the transcription factors Rev-Erb alpha, DBP, and TEF. In rat-1
fibroblasts, up to three consecutive daily oscillations with an average period
length of 22.5 hr could be recorded. The temporal sequence of the various mRNA
accumulation cycles is the same in cultured cells and in vivo. The serum shock of
rat-1 fibroblasts also results in a transient stimulation of c-fos and rper
expression and thus mimics light-induced immediate-early gene expression in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus.

PMID: 9635423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Mol Biol. 1998 Jun 19;279(4):959-72.

Inter-helical interactions in the leucine zipper coiled coil dimer: pH and salt
dependence of coupling energy between charged amino acids.

Krylov D(1), Barchi J, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have investigated the physical nature of the observed coupling energy (Delta
Delta DeltaGint) between the charged side-chains of the three inter-helical
g<-->e' (i, i'+5) pairs (E<-->R, E<-->K, and E<-->E) in the leucine zipper coiled
coil dimer. Circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy measured the thermal stability
of eight proteins derived from the basic region leucine zipper domain of chicken 
VBP, the mammalian TEF at seven pHs and three KCl concentrations. Data from these
proteins were used to construct double mutant alanine thermodynamic cycles and
determine coupling energies (Delta Delta DeltaGint) for the three g<-->e' pairs. 
The attractive E<-->R coupling energy of -0.6 kcal mol-1 at low salt decreases to
-0.2 kcal mol-1 at high salt. The E<-->K coupling energy of -0.5 kcal mol-1 at
low salt decreases to -0.1 kcal mol-1 at high salt. The repulsive E<-->E coupling
energy of +0.8 kcal mol-1 at low salt drops to +0.4 at high salt. Reducing the pH
to 2.2 halved the attractive coupling energy for the E<-->R and E<-->K pairs
while abolishing the repulsion of the E<-->E pair. 13C NMR of a protein
selectively labeled with [13Cdelta]glutamate that contained three E<-->R and one 
R<-->E pair identified four glutamates shifted upfield. We suggest that this is
due to electronic perturbation of glutamates in inter-helical E<-->R
interactions. Taken together, these data indicate that the E<-->R coupling energy
of -0.5 kcal mol-1 at pH 7.4 and 150 mM KCl has an electrostatic component.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press Limited.

PMID: 9642074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Arch Surg. 1998 May;133(5):552-6.

Delayed primary repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula: is
it worth the wait?

Healey PJ(1), Sawin RS, Hall DG, Schaller RT, Tapper D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, and the Children's Hospital
and Medical Center, Seattle 998105, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize a successful approach to the management of infants
with long-gap esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF),
significant prematurity with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), or both, so as 
to preserve the native esophagus.
DESIGN: A review of the medical records and office charts of a cohort of patients
with EA and TEF.
SETTING: A tertiary care children's hospital affiliated with a major university.
PATIENTS: A total of 118 children with EA and TEF admitted from February 1986
through December 1996. All of the patients diagnosed as having EA and TEF during 
this period were included.
INTERVENTION: Of the 118 infants, 88 received primary repair of EA and TEF within
48 hours of birth. An additional 23 children had the TEF divided and a
gastrostomy placed secondary to (1) severe RDS and prematurity (n = 6), (2)
long-gap EA (gap length > 4 cm or the upper pouch above the thoracic inlet (n =
10), or (3) associated cardiac defects (n = 7). Delayed primary EA repair was
done when the RDS resolved or the gap length was 2 cm or less.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Successful anastomosis of native esophagus. Comparison of 
incidence of gastroesophageal reflux, anastomotic complications, or survival
between groups undergoing primary or delayed repair.
RESULTS: Primary EA was accomplished in 88 patients. Delayed EA was successfully 
accomplished in 18 of the 19 surviving patients within 5 months, thereby
preserving the native esophagus in all surviving infants. There was no difference
in anastomotic complications, gastroesophageal reflux, or survival when the
delayed group was compared with those who had a primary repair.
CONCLUSIONS: Using delayed EA repair, all children with EA and TEF, regardless of
gap length, can have their esophagus preserved. The primary cause of mortality
was the association of a severe cardiac anomaly with EA and TEF.

PMID: 9605920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 7;245(1):204-10.

Selective pituitary resistance to thyroid hormone produced by expression of a
mutant thyroid hormone receptor beta gene in the pituitary gland of transgenic
mice.

Hayashi Y(1), Xie J, Weiss RE, Pohlenz J, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 60637,
USA.

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) has been subdivided into generalized
resistance (GRTH) and pituitary resistance (PRTH) based on the clinical
impression of absence or presence of thyrotoxicosis. However, due to lack of
objective clinical and genetic criteria, the existence of PRTH as a distinct
entity became controversial. To determine what the phenotype would be if RTH was 
confined to the pituitary, a transgenic mouse was developed in which expression
of the mutant thyroid hormone receptor (TR) beta (G345R) was targeted to the
pituitary thyrotrophs by placing it downstream of the mouse thyrotropin beta
promoter. This construct exhibited an antagonistic effect on the thyroid
hormone-dependent transactivation, mediated through the wild-type TRbeta1, only
when cotransfected with the thyrotroph embryonic factor in a heterologous cell
line. As expected the transgene was transcribed predominantly in the pituitary
gland but not in liver. These mice showed a significant, though modest, increase 
in serum T4 concentration. A decrease in the serum cholesterol was observed in
keeping with the selective tissue hyposensitivity to thyroid hormone.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9535809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Apr;33(4):606-12.

Embryology of esophageal atresia in the adriamycin rat model.

Possögel AK(1), Diez-Pardo JA, Morales C, Navarro C, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hospital Infantil La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to describe the dysmorphogenetic process
leading to esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA + TEF) in the
recently developed Adriamycin model of the malformation.
METHODS: Time-mated pregnant rats were given either Adriamycin (1.75 mg/kg
intraperitoneally) or saline on days 6 to 9 of gestation, and their embryos
recovered on days 12, 12.5, and 13 were serially sectioned in the transversal
plane and studied microscopically after H&E and PAS staining. The findings were
compared with those of age-matched untreated embryos.
RESULTS: All untreated and saline embryos were normal, whereas 49% of Adriamycin 
embryos had foregut malformations. Tracheoesophageal separation was complete on
day 12 in control embryos, whereas 9 of 10 Adriamycin-exposed embryos had a
common esophagotrachea with low emergence of the bronchi at that stage. This
pattern had evolved into that of a regular EA + TEF in all nine malformed embryos
by day 13. On day 12.5, esophagotrachea was found in 6 of 13 and EA + TEF in 5 of
13 embryos. Two had less well-defined malformations.
CONCLUSIONS: Esophagotrachea equivalent to complete tracheoesophageal cleft is
the first step leading to EA + TEF in this model. The full-blown malformation is 
finally acquired by partial loss of the posterior wall of the foregut, which
tapers-off in the mediastinal mesenchyme and respiratory differentiation of the
anterior wall down to the level of bronchial bifurcation, where it constitutes
the fistula and the distal esophagus.

PMID: 9574761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nihon Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1997 Dec;98(12):1008-12.

[Recent advance in the treatment of congenital esophageal atresia and congenital 
tracheal stenosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsugawa C(1), Nishijima E, Muraji T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kobe Children's Hospital, Japan.

Advances in anesthetic management, neonatal intensive care and cardiovascular
techniques for severe cardiac defects have permitted improved survival rate for
esophageal atresia (EA) and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) during the last
two decades. In the treatment of EA-TEF, primary esophageal repair without
staging or preliminary gastrostomy becomes popular among pediatric surgeons. In
pure EA and long-gap EA with TEF, options for esophageal reconstruction include
use of the native esophagus or replacement with colon or stomach. In considering 
the esophageal motility in patient's whole life, native esophageal reconstruction
is the procedure of choice rather than esophageal replacement. Improved survival 
rates are noted irrespective of the traditional Waterson criteria, which now seem
outdated. The surgical treatment of congenital tracheal stenosis have started in 
the early '80s. Resection of the stenotic trachea with end-to-end anastomosis has
been available in the stenosis ranging less than 30% of the entire trachea.
However, the treatment of long segment tracheal stenosis is still controvertial. 
Various surgical techniques including balloon tracheal split, slide
tracheoplasty, implantation of autografts of pericardium and costal cartilage
have been attempted. In this review, we described our own experience in
tracheoplasty using costal cartilage.

PMID: 9526742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Virol. 1998 Apr;72(4):3501-3.

The CAR1 gene encoding a cellular receptor specific for subgroup B and D avian
leukosis viruses maps to the chicken tvb locus.

Smith EJ(1), Brojatsch J, Naughton J, Young JA.

Author information: 
(1)Avian Disease and Oncology Laboratory, Agricultural Research Service, USDA,
East Lansing, Michigan 48823, USA. Smitheu1@pilot.msu.edu

Host susceptibility to subgroup B, D, and E avian leukosis viruses (ALV) is
determined by specific alleles of the chicken tvb locus. Recently, a chicken gene
that encodes a cellular receptor, designated CAR1, specific for subgroups B and D
ALV was cloned, and it was proposed that this gene was the s3 allele of tvb (J.
Brojatsch, J. Naughton, M. M. Rolls, K. Zingler, and J. A. T. Young, Cell
87:845-855, 1996). We now report that in a backcross derived from an F1 (Jungle
Fowl x White Leghorn [WL]) male mated with inbred WL females, the cloned ALV
receptor gene cosegregated with two markers linked to tvb. The two markers used
were a tvb(s1)-specific antigen recognized by the chicken R2 alloantiserum and
restriction fragment length polymorphisms associated with the expressed sequence 
tag com152e. With all three markers, no crossovers were observed among 52
backcross progeny tested and LOD linkage scores of 15.7 were obtained. These data
demonstrate that CAR1 is the subgroup B and D ALV susceptibility gene located at 
tvb(s3).

PMCID: PMC109869
PMID: 9525691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Dev Genet. 1998;22(1):43-55.

Regulation of gene expression at the beginning of mammalian development and the
TEAD family of transcription factors.

Kaneko KJ(1), DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-2753, USA. kjaneko@box-k.nih.gov

In mouse development, transcription is first detected in late 1-cell embryos, but
translation of newly synthesized transcripts does not begin until the 2-cell
stage. Thus, the onset of zygotic gene expression (ZGE) is regulated at the level
of both transcription and translation. Chromatin-mediated repression is
established after formation of a 2-cell embryo, concurrent with the developmental
acquisition of enhancer function. The most effective enhancer in cleavage stage
mouse embryos depends on DNA binding sites for TEF-1, the prototype for a family 
of transcription factors that share the same TEA DNA binding domain. Mice contain
at least four, and perhaps five, genes with the same TEA DNA binding domain
(mTEAD genes). Since mTEAD-2 is the only one expressed during the first 7 days of
mouse development, it is most likely responsible for the TEAD transcription
factor activity that first appears at the beginning of ZGE. All four mTEAD genes 
are expressed at later embryonic stages and in adult tissues; virtually every
tissue expresses at least one family member, consistent with a critical role for 
TEAD proteins in either cell proliferation or differentiation. The 72-amino acid 
TEA DNA binding domains in mTEAD-2, 3, and 4 are approximately 99% homologous to 
the same domain in mTEAD-1, and all four proteins bind specifically to the same
DNA sequences in vitro with a Kd value of 16-38 nM DNA. Since TEAD proteins
appear to be involved in both activation and repression of different genes and do
not appear to be functionally redundant, differential activity of TEAD proteins
must result either from association with other proteins or from differential
sensitivity to chromatin-packaged DNA binding sites.

PMID: 9499579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Arch Bronconeumol. 1997 Dec;33(11):577-81.

[Benign acquired tracheoesophageal fistulas].

[Article in Spanish]

Calvo Medina V(1), Galán Gil G, Sales Badía G, Morcillo Aixelá A, García Zarza A,
Tarrazona Hervás V, París Romeu F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cirugía Torácica, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia.

Benign acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare though serious
occurrence associated with a high degree of morbidity and mortality. We review 18
cases of TEF treated over 16 years in our hospital. The variables analyzed
descriptively were demographic (age, sex and others), clinical (etiology, time of
intubation, time and symptoms leading to clinical suspicion, diagnostic
techniques, and others), and therapeutic (dependence on mechanical ventilation,
location of tissues, tracheal resection, tissue interposition, postoperative
course of disease, and others). Fifteen of the 18 patients required surgery. The 
rate of success (80%) was high in terms of respiration, swallowing and phonation.
Surgery involved simple closure of the TEF, with half the patients requiring a
second operation to correct tracheal stenosis. Resection and anastomosis were
performed in the remaining 11 cases, with only one requiring a second operation
for recurrence of stenosis. Two cases of perioperative mortality and one TEF
recurrence related to assisted ventilation were recorded. Tracheoscopy was the
most effective diagnostic technique, complemented by computerized tomography of
the trachea. Presurgical evaluation of tracheal stenosis, the absence of
mechanical ventilation, preoperative preparation and postoperative care are the
factors that determine success in this type of surgery. When tracheal stenosis is
associated with TEF, resection and anastomosis should be performed in the
affected zone.

PMID: 9508473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Chemosphere. 1998 Mar;36(7):1637-51.

Environmental occurrence and potential toxicity of planar, mono-, and di-ortho
polychlorinated biphenyls in the biota.

Hong CS(1), Xiao J, Bush B, Shaw SD.

Author information: 
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, USA.
hongc@wadsworth.org

Four non-ortho-, eight mono-ortho-, and two di-ortho-chlorinated congeners have
been determined in fresh water and salt water mussels, fish, snapping turtles,
mallard, seals, and in human milk and adipose tissue. The planar PCB congeners
are separated from the remainder of PCBs by activated carbon chromatography or
HPLC on porous graphitic carbon followed by gas chromatography with electron
capture detection. PCB toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) recommended by WHO [1]
for 3 non-ortho, 8 mono-ortho, and 2 di-ortho PCBs and a TEF for congener 81
suggested by Harris et al. [2] were used for calculation of the contribution to
dioxin-like toxicity to each life form. In all the biota examined, PCB congener
IUPAC number 126 was the major contributor to PCB toxic equivalents. Congeners
IUPAC number 118, 114, 105, 156, 157, 77, 81, and 170 also contributed
significantly to PCB toxic equivalents. The ability to separate out planar PCBs
from the majority of PCBs has allowed the use of TCDD toxicity equivalence to
compare the relative dioxin-like potency of PCB residues in various species from 
different locations.

PMID: 9503581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Anim Sci. 1998 Jan;76(1):134-41.

Development validation and problems with the toxic equivalency factor approach
for risk assessment of dioxins and related compounds.

Safe SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, College Station 
77843-4466, USA.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), dibenzofurans (PCDF), and biphenyls
(PCB) are industrial compounds or by-products that have been widely identified as
environmental contaminants, and residues have been detected in fish, wildlife,
and humans. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD; dioxin) is the most toxic 
member of this class of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (HAH); mechanistic
studies indicate that the toxic and biochemical effects associated with exposure 
to TCDD are mediated via initial binding to the cytosolic aryl hydrocarbon (Ah)
receptor protein present in target tissues and organs. Several other 2,3,7,
8-substituted PCDD and PCDF and non-ortho substituted PCB also bind to the Ah
receptor and induce toxic responses similar to those for TCDD. Moreover, for
these HAH there is a rank order correlation between their structure-Ah receptor
binding and structure-toxicity relationships, and this supports a role for the Ah
receptor in mediating these responses. Thus, the toxic equivalency factor (TEF)
approach for HAH is based on the common mechanism of action for TCDD and related 
compounds in which a TEF value for a "dioxin-like" congener is defined as the
potency of the individual (i) congener relative to TCDD ([EC50 [TCDD]/EC50 [test 
compound]). The toxic or dioxin equivalent (TEQ) for a mixture of HAH is defined 
by the following equation: TEQ = sigma [PCDDi] x TEFi + sigma [PCDFi] x TEFi.
Industrial emissions and environmental and food residues contain complex mixtures
of HAH (exodioxins) and the TEF/TEQ approach is used to regulate emissions and
estimate the potential exposure and possible adverse health effects of
exodioxins. The TEF approach for risk assessment of exodioxins makes a number of 
assumptions, including response additivity for individual compounds in a mixture 
of HAH. This review documents some of the following problems and limitations of
the TEF approach: 1) environmental and food residues of HAH contain
"non-dioxin-like" PCB that exhibit "antidioxin" activity for some responses; 2)
the human diet contains endogenous Ah receptor ligands (endodioxins) such as
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), aromatic amines in cooked foods,
indole-3-carbinol (I3C), and related hetero-PAH in cruciferous vegetables. Mass
balance and mass potency estimates for human dietary intakes suggest that for
some responses the effects of natural or endodioxins may be greater than those of
exodioxins; and 3) I3C, a weak Ah receptor agonist, also exhibits Ah receptor
antagonist activity, and interactions between I3C and endodioxins may inhibit or 
inactivate some toxic responses and decrease TEQ(Exodioxin).

PMID: 9464894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 12;272(50):31902-7.

Drosophila factor 2, an RNA polymerase II transcript release factor, has
DNA-dependent ATPase activity.

Xie Z(1), Price D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Drosophila factor 2 has been identified as a component of negative transcription 
elongation factor (N-TEF) that causes the release of RNA polymerase II
transcripts in an ATP-dependent manner (Xie, Z. and Price D. H. (1996) J. Biol.
Chem. 271, 11043-11046). We show here that the transcript release activity of
factor 2 requires ATP or dATP and that adenosine 5'-O-(thiotriphosphate)
(ATPgammaS), adenosine 5'-(beta,gamma-imino)triphosphate (AMP-PNP), or other NTPs
do not support the activity. Factor 2 demonstrated a strong DNA-dependent ATPase 
activity that correlated with its transcript release activity. At 20 microg/ml
DNA, the ATPase activity of factor 2 had an apparent Km(ATP) of 28 microM and an 
estimated Kcat of 140 min-1. Factor 2 caused the release of nascent transcripts
associated with elongation complexes generated by RNA polymerase II on a
dC-tailed template. Therefore, no other protein cofactors are required for the
transcript release activity of factor 2. Using the dC-tailed template assay, it
was found that renaturation of the template was required for factor 2 function.

PMID: 9395538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Obes Res. 1997 Nov;5(6):622-31.

The thermic effect of food and obesity: a critical review.

de Jonge L(1), Bray GA.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, LA 70808-4124, USA.

This review has examined the factors that influence the thermic effect of food
(TEF) by evaluating 49 studies that have compared subjects who are obese with
those who are lean. Meal size, meal composition, the nature of the previous diet,
insulin resistance, physical activity, and ageing influence TEF. In the studies
of individuals who are obese or lean, of those who used intravenous glucose
infusions, all but one found an impaired thermic response. A total of 29 out of
49 studies of individuals of normal weight or with obesity were identified where 
there was no difference in age between the groups, and where the subjects who
were "overweight" were clearly obese. Of these 29, 22 reported a statistically
significant reduction in TEF, 3 studies were not designed to look primarily at
the effect of obesity on TEF, and the other 4 may not have had sufficiently
palatable meals. From this review, we conclude that the reduction of TEF in
obesity is related to the degree of insulin resistance, which may be influenced
by a low level of sympathetic activity.

PMID: 9449148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 1998 Jan;26(1):43-8.

Transpyloric enteral feeding in critically ill children.

Panadero E(1), López-Herce J, Caro L, Sanchez A, Cueto E, Bustinza A, Moral R,
Carrillo A, Sancho L.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Section, Gregorio Marañón General University
Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Nutrition is important in childhood because the child has a lower
energy reserve than the adult and a higher demand for calories because of ongoing
growth. In this study, the utility of transpyloric enteral feeding (TEF) in
critically ill children was evaluated.
METHODS: A prospective, descriptive study was made in a pediatric intensive care 
unit of a tertiary pediatric center of 41 critically ill children, 30 after
surgical procedures and 11 with nonsurgical illness, aged 8 days to 12 years, who
received transpyloric enteral feeding with 8- or 10-Fr weighted feeding tubes.
Analysis was made of tolerance and complications (vomiting, abdominal distension,
excessive gastric residual, diarrhea, and pulmonary aspiration) of TEF.
RESULTS: The mean duration of TEF was 19.5 +/- 26.8 days (range, 1-120 days). The
administration of sedative agents or inotropic drugs did not alter toleration of 
TEF. Eight of 12 patients treated with continuous infusion of vecuronium
tolerated TEF without complications. Eleven gastrointestinal complications
occurred in 10 patients, abdominal distension and excessive gastric residual in 7
(17%), and diarrhea in 4 (9.7%). In 7 patients gastrointestinal complications
improved, with decreasing use or transitory interruption of TEF, but in 4
patients (9.7%), TEF had to be withdrawn. Gastrointestinal complications were
more frequent in postsurgical than in nonsurgical patients (p < 0.001). No
patients suffered from pulmonary aspiration, and the incidence of pulmonary
infection and hepatic dysfunction diminished during TEF.
CONCLUSIONS: Transpyloric enteral feeding is a good method of nutritional support
in critically ill children and can be used in patients treated with neuromuscular
blocking agents. The frequency and severity of complications and the risks of
pulmonary infection and hepatic dysfunction related to TEF are low.

PMID: 9443119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Jan 7;1395(1):13-20.

Cloning and characterization of two isoforms of the zebrafish thyrotroph
embryonic factor (tef alpha and tefbeta).

Xu X(1), Liu L, Wong KC, Ge R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

We have cloned and sequenced two cDNAs representing two isoforms of the zebrafish
thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF) gene products (tef alpha and beta), a member of
the PAR subfamily of bZIP transcription factors. The two isoforms encode two
potential proteins of 300 and 293 amino acids respectively. Sequence comparison
analysis indicate that the zebrafish tefs show high homology to PAR family of
transcription factors of other species in the PAR domain, DNA binding domain and 
leucine zipper domain. Expression analysis by Northern blot and RT-PCR indicates 
that tef alpha and tefbeta are expressed in adult fish and throughout the
zebrafish embryonic development. In addition, the two tefs are expressed in some 
adult tissues, but not others.

PMID: 9434145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Dec;32(12):1670-4.

The diagnosis and treatment of H-type tracheoesophageal fistula.

Karnak I(1), Senocak ME, Hiçsönmez A, Büyükpamukçu N.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: H-type tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) was diagnosed in 12 patients
during the 25 years from 1971 to 1996. Although all patients were symptomatic
since birth, in 58% of the cases, there was a diagnostic delay ranging from 26
days to 4 years.
METHODS: Esophagography and/or cineesophagography, or bronchoscopy and
simultaneous methylene blue administration confirmed the diagnosis of H-type TEF.
Although cineesophagography is highly effective in demonstrating H-type TEF
today, bronchoscopy must be used in every patient suspected of having fistula,
especially when the radiological methods fail. Bronchoscopy is helpful in
diagnosis, in evaluation of associated respiratory tract anomalies, and in
treatment.
RESULTS: Two newborn patients could not have been operated on because of
pulmonary insufficiency resulting from delayed recognition of fistula. Ten
patients underwent fistula repair, nine through cervical approach, and one
through thoracotomy, with seven survivors.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that early diagnosis is essential in the newborn
period. Oversight in identification of H-type TEF, unsatisfactory radiological
method, masquerading symptoms related to associated anomalies, and minute
symptoms in some patients may cause delay in diagnosis. Radiological and
endoscopic procedures are complementary in both diagnosis and treatment of H-type
TEF.

PMID: 9433996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Oct;32(10):1453-4.

13 pairs of ribs--a predictor of long gap atresia in tracheoesophageal fistula.

Kulkarni B(1), Rao RS, Oak S, Upadhyaya MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, L.T.M.G. Hospital, Sion, Mumbai, India.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 1998 Aug;33(8):1328.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Results of treatment of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) have 
improved over the years. However, long gap atresias continue to be a problem and 
require modification in the conventional operation. Preoperative diagnosis of a
long gap atresia in a case of TEF is difficult, and often the defect is noted
only at thoracotomy, thus necessitating multiple intraoperative changes in the
position of the neonate. In the past 5 years the authors have treated 61 cases of
TEF. Of these, 12 had a long gap atresia. Nine of these 12 patients had 13 pairs 
of ribs. None of the patients with a short gap atresia had 13 pairs of ribs.
Hence, the presence of 13 pairs of ribs is a good indicator of long gap atresia. 
In a child who has TEF with 13 pairs of ribs, suitable modifications in operative
procedure can be planned. The report also discusses the possible embryological
basis of this association.

PMID: 9349767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4685-96.

PDP1, a novel Drosophila PAR domain bZIP transcription factor expressed in
developing mesoderm, endoderm and ectoderm, is a transcriptional regulator of
somatic muscle genes.

Lin SC(1), Lin MH, Horváth P, Reddy KL, Storti RV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology M/C536, University of
Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago 60612, USA.

In vertebrates, transcriptional control of skeletal muscle genes during
differentiation is regulated by enhancers that direct the combinatorial binding
and/or interaction of MEF2 and the bHLH MyoD family of myogenic factors. We have 
shown that Drosophila MEF2 plays a role similar to its vertebrate counterpart in 
the regulation of the Tropomyosin I gene in the development of Drosophila somatic
muscles, however, unlike vertebrates, Drosophila MEF2 interacts with a muscle
activator region that does not have binding sites for myogenic bHLH-like factors 
or any other known Drosophila transcription factors. We describe here the
isolation and characterization of a component of the muscle activator region that
we have named PDP1 (PAR domain protein 1). PDP1 is a novel transcription factor
that is highly homologous to the PAR subfamily of mammalian bZIP transcription
factors HLF, DBP and VBP/TEF. This is the first member of the PAR subfamily of
bZIP transcription factors to be identified in Drosophila. We show that PDP1 is
involved in regulating expression of the Tropomyosin I gene in somatic body-wall 
and pharyngeal muscles by binding to DNA sequences within the muscle activator
that are required for activator function. Mutations that eliminate PDP1 binding
eliminate muscle activator function and severely reduce expression of a muscle
activator plus MEF2 mini-enhancer. These and previous results suggest that PDP1
may function as part of a larger protein/DNA complex that interacts with MEF2 to 
regulate transcription of Drosophila muscle genes. Furthermore, in addition to
being expressed in the mesoderm that gives rise to the somatic muscles, PDP1 is
also expressed in the mesodermal fat body, the developing midgut endoderm, the
hindgut and Malpighian tubules, and the epidermis and central nervous system,
suggesting that PDP1 is also involved in the terminal differentiation of these
tissues.

PMID: 9409684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 1997 Sep;68(3):78-80.

The effect of dietary protein on reproduction in the mare. I. The composition and
evaluation of the digestibility of dietary protein from different sources.

van Niekerk FE(1), van Niekerk CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Physiology, University of Stellenbosch,
Matieland, South Africa.

Four rations that differed in their crude protein and essential amino-acid
content were compiled. Digestibility of the crude protein and essential
amino-acid contents were determined biologically in a feeding trial using 4
Anglo-Arab stallions. Their respective daily diets were: Diet 1:2 kg cubes, 5 kg 
tef hay (Eragrostis tef); Diet 2:2 kg cubes, 5 kg lucerne hay (Medicago sativa); 
Diet 3:2 kg cubes, 5 kg tef hay, 200 g fishmeal; Diet 4:2 kg cubes, 5 kg lucerne 
hay, 200 g fishmeal. The concentrations of the amino-acids threonine,
iso-leucine, leucine and arginine were increased in the total ration when lucerne
hay replaced the tef hay while fishmeal supplementation increased the methionine 
and lysine contents, which provided a wide-range of concentrations of digestible 
amino-acids in each of the 4 rations.

PMID: 9408891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Nov;32(11):1587-91.

Aortic arch anomalies associated with long gap esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Canty TG Jr(1), Boyle EM Jr, Linden B, Healey PJ, Tapper D, Hall DG, Sawin RS,
Foker JE.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Seattle, WA, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether aortic arch anomalies
are associated with long gap esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula
(EA-TEF).
METHODS: The authors performed a retrospective review of all infants who had
EA-TEF from 1980 to 1996 at two pediatric surgery centers. Two hundred three
infants who had EA-TEF were identified.
RESULTS: Twelve infants were noted to have both long gap EA-TEF defined as a gap 
length greater than 3 cm and aortic arch anomalies. Of these 12, 7 had aberrant
right subclavian arteries originating from the descending aorta. Four of the
seven infants who had aberrant right subclavian artery (SCA) had gap lengths
greater than 4 cm. All four had their fistulae divided initially through a right 
thoracotomy with primary repair performed at a later date. The remaining five
infants who had long gap EA-TEF had right-sided aortic arch with aberrant left
subclavian arteries. All five initially underwent exploration through the right
chest. On discovery of the long gap EA and concurrent vascular anomaly, the
thoracotomies were closed, and the infants underwent definitive repair of both
their EA-TEF and their vascular anomaly through a left thoracotomy.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors find that aortic arch anomalies are associated with long
gap EA-TEF. Patients who have these two anomalies tend to have a long gap.
Preoperative diagnosis of these anomalies may alter the timing and technique of
surgical intervention. The embryogenesis of these vascular lesions may account
for this more severe form of esophageal atresia.

PMID: 9396531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Nov;32(11):1580-6.

The vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves in the rodent experimental model of
esophageal atresia.

Qi BQ(1), Merei J, Farmer P, Hasthorpe S, Myers NA, Beasley SW, Hutson JM.

Author information: 
(1)F. Douglas Stephen Surgical Research Laboratory, Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: After surgical correction of their esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF), many patients exhibit evidence of esophageal 
dysmotility. Controversy exists as to whether the esophageal motility disorders
result from denervation caused by surgery or from an inherent abnormal
innervation of the esophagus.
METHODS: The present study used an Adriamycin-induced EA-TEF fetal rat model to
trace the course and branching of both the vagus and recurrent laryngeal nerves. 
Abnormalities observed in EA-TEF rat fetuses include: (1) fewer branches from
both recurrent laryngeal nerves; (2) deviation of the left vagus from its normal 
course below the aorta, passing behind the fistula to approach and join with the 
right vagus to form a single nerve trunk on the right side of the esophagus; (3) 
relatively few branches from the single vagal nerve trunk (composed of fibers of 
the left and the right vagus) on the surface of the lower esophagus.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetuses affected by EA-TEF have inherent abnormalities in the course
and branching pattern of the vagus nerves as they descend through the thorax,
culminating in a deficient extrinsic nerve fiber plexus in the lower esophagus.
These observations may account for the esophageal motility disorders seen in
patients who have EA-TEF even before surgical intervention.

PMID: 9396530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Nov;32(11):1575-9.

Tracheomalacia with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula in fetal
rats.

Qi BQ(1), Merei J, Farmer P, Hasthorpe S, Hutson JM, Myers NA, Beasley SW.

Author information: 
(1)F. Douglas Stephens Surgical Research Laboratory, Royal Children's Hospital,
Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Many patients who have esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA-TEF) have associated tracheomalacia, which is thought to be one of
the reasons for respiratory complications after surgical correction of the
abnormality.
METHODS: In this study, tracheas from Adriamycin-induced EA-TEF fetal rats were
examined histologically and relevant cross-sectional parameters of the tracheas
were measured.
RESULTS: The tracheal lumen in tracheomalacia was small and irregular, losing its
normal "D" shape. In most rats, the cartilaginous ring was broken into two to
four segments, making the trachea lose its rigid support. The submucosa was
thickened with prominent bulging of its membranous part into the tracheal lumen. 
The ratio of the inner luminal cross-sectional area to the outer tracheal
cross-sectional area in EA-TEF rats was 15.7%, compared with a control ratio of
47.2%. In EA-TEF rats, the length of the cartilaginous ring was significantly
shortened (P < .001), but not the length of membranous trachea, thus resulting in
a cartilaginous/membranous (C/M) ratio of 1.55:1, markedly lower than that of
normal rats (4.34:1, P < .001). The reduction of anterior-posterior diameter of
the tracheal lumen was more marked than that of the transverse diameter.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggest that the trachea in EA-TEF rats has a
smaller lumen and is more flaccid than normal, making it prone to airway
obstruction. The fact that tracheomalacia developed only in fetuses who had
EA-TEF indicates that the factors that result in EA-TEF also cause
tracheomalacia.

PMID: 9396529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Am J Clin Nutr. 1997 Nov;66(5):1110-5.

Thermic effect of food during each phase of the menstrual cycle.

Tai MM(1), Castillo TP, Pi-Sunyer FX.

Author information: 
(1)Obesity Research Center, St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, USA.
fxpl@columbia.edu

The effect of the menstrual cycle on the thermic effect of food (TEF) was
examined in eight healthy, normal-weight [mean +/- SD: 56.1 +/- 5.6 kg and body
mass index (in kg/m2) 21.3 +/- 1.8] women aged 22-38 y. Their lean body mass and 
fat mass were 39.4 +/- 2.7 kg and 16.9 +/- 6.5 kg, respectively. TEF was measured
on 4 separate days selected to match the four phases of a menstrual cycle: early 
follicular, follicular, luteal, and late luteal. The volunteers consumed a
3138-kJ liquid meal (54.5% carbohydrate, 14.0% protein, and 31.5% fat) on each
test day. Resting metabolic rate was measured for 55 min before the meal and
every 30 min after the start of the meal for 205 min. Although resting metabolic 
rate remained unchanged, there was a significant difference (P < 0.01 by ANOVA)
in mean (+/- SEM) values for TEF among the four phases of the cycle: 0.94 +/-
0.05 kJ/min during the early follicular phase, 0.86 +/- 0.09 kJ/min during the
follicular phase, 0.70 +/- 0.10 kJ/min during the luteal phase, and 0.76 +/- 0.07
kJ/min during the late luteal phase. TEF decreased significantly (P < 0.025 by
paired t test) during postovulation (average of luteal and late luteal phases),
when it was 0.73 +/- 0.07 kJ/min, compared with preovulation (average of early
follicular and follicular phases), when it was 0.90 +/- 0.06 kJ/min. In
conclusion, TEF decreased during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle,
possibly as a result of impairment of glucose uptake and slower transit of food
through the upper gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 9356527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Ann Surg. 1997 Oct;226(4):533-41; discussion 541-3.

Development of a true primary repair for the full spectrum of esophageal atresia.

Foker JE(1), Linden BC, Boyle EM Jr, Marquardt C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnestoa, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether or not a true primary repair, without myotomies
and with the gastroesophageal junction below the diaphragm, can be accomplished
across the esophageal atresia (EA) spectrum. Our hypothesis is that the
esophageal anastomosis can withstand significant tension. The consequences,
particularly for those patients with a very long gap atresia, were assessed.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Difficulties arise roughly in proportion to the size 
of the gap between esophageal segments. Reported surgical complications remain
frequent, and particularly at the far end of the EA spectrum, not all children
are left with a satisfactorily functioning esophagus or esophageal substitute.
METHODS: The outcomes of all infants who had a true primary repair of EA from
1976-1997 were determined. Surgically, the methods used to achieve a reliable
true primary repair were expanded to accomplish this, even for a very long gap
EA.
RESULTS: From 1976-97, 70 infants with or without associated tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) had primary repairs performed with no surgery-related deaths and
11% later deaths. No interpositions were performed since 1983. There were no
discernible anastomotic leaks and one late recurrent TEF related to the early use
of balloon dilation. Ten infants had gaps of 5.0-6.8 cm and, among these, four
had gaps of 5.5-6.8 cm that could not be pulled together initially. Traction
sutures in the esophageal ends, however, produced sufficient lengthening within
6-10 days for a true primary repair. Very long gap repairs produced more reflux
(10 of 10 required a fundoplication versus 24 of 70 overall) and more dilations
to relieve strictures. Two infants underwent stricture resection with no
recurrence. On follow-up, all patients over 2 years of age were eating well or
satisfactorily, and none had a gastrostomy tube.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) The esophageal anastomosis can withstand considerable tension
and allows a reliable true primary repair for the full EA spectrum. (2) Growth is
rapid and traction sutures will produce significant esophageal lengthening within
days. (3) With increasing tension, gastroesophageal reflux (GER) and strictures
are more common; however, both are treatable. Follow-up reveals the benefits of
true primary repair over other solutions.

PMCID: PMC1191075
PMID: 9351721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Virology. 1997 Oct 13;237(1):159-69.

The 5' region of the human papillomavirus type 31 upstream regulatory region acts
as an enhancer which augments viral early expression through the action of YY1.

Kanaya T(1), Kyo S, Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Medical School,
303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Cis-elements which control human papillomavirus early gene expression have
previously been localized to sequences in the upstream regulatory region (URR)
which are proximal to the E6 open reading frame. These elements include an
enhancer element which functions preferentially in keratinocytes as well as
promoter elements. The function of the remaining approximate 500-bp region of the
URR in regulating viral expression in the high risk papillomaviruses has been
largely uncharacterized. In HPV 6, a negative regulator of early expression, or
silencer, has been identified in this 5' region of the URR. In this study, we
have investigated the role of the 5' portion of the HPV 31 URR in regulating
viral expression. Sequences in this region were found to exert a minimal negative
effect on homologous or heterologous promoters. In contrast, a 128-bp sequence
within this region was found to exhibit enhancer activity on heterologous and
homologous promoters. This enhancer also augmented the activity of the previously
identified minimum keratinocyte enhancer. The cellular factors, YY1 and TEF-1,
were determined by DNase I footprint analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays (EMSAs) to bind the 128-bp enhancer. The binding of YY1 to two of these
sites was found to be important for enhancer activity.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997 Oct;146(2):217-26.

Subchronic/chronic toxicity of 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HpCDD) 
in rats. Part II. Biochemical effects.

Viluksela M(1), Stahl BU, Birnbaum LS, Rozman KK.

Author information: 
(1)Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City,
Kansas 66160-7417, USA.

Groups of 20 male and 20 female rats were given five different oral doses of
1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HpCDD) or one dose of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) divided into four daily loading doses 
and six biweekly maintenance doses. The dosing period was 13 weeks, after which
half of the rats were necropsied and the rest assigned to an off-dose period of
another 13 weeks. At the end of the dosing period, liver ethoxyresorufin
O-deethylase (EROD) activity was dose-dependently increased starting at the
lowest dose (7- to 10-fold) with maximum induction (50- to 100-fold) at the
middle or second highest dose. There was a slight reversibility of this effect in
HpCDD-treated rats, particularly at lower doses, and a pronounced reversibility
in TCDD-dosed rats, both in accordance with respective toxicokinetics. The
activity of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase in liver was dose-dependently
decreased (up to 60%) at the two or three highest doses of HpCDD and also in the 
TCDD dosage group. Liver tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase activity was decreased at the
two highest doses of HpCDD (up to 41%), particularly in females. Serum tryptophan
concentrations were elevated in rats found moribund due to wasting. There was a
dose-dependent decrease in serum glucose concentrations (up to 30%) at the end of
the dosing period. Serum thyroxin (T4) concentrations showed a dose-dependent
decrease (78% at the highest dose) beginning in the middle dose for HpCDD and in 
the TCDD dosage group. Serum triiodothyronine (T3) concentrations were only
slightly affected, except that they were somewhat decreased in moribund animals. 
The results demonstrate that similar biochemical changes occur in rats after
single as after multiple dosing with HpCDD and TCDD. Based on these endpoints,
the relative potency of HpCDD after subchronic exposure is in agreement with the 
international toxic equivalency factor (I-TEF) of 0.01 and, more specifically,
with a TEF of 0.007 based on LD50 values in the same strain of rats.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1997 Oct;146(2):207-16.

Subchronic/chronic toxicity of 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HpCDD) 
in rats. Part I. Design, general observations, hematology, and liver
concentrations.

Viluksela M(1), Stahl BU, Birnbaum LS, Schramm KW, Kettrup A, Rozman KK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7417, USA.

Groups of 20 male and 20 female adult Sprague-Dawley rats were given five
different doses of 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (HpCDD). Total doses
for males and females (30.9/18.5, 370/222, 2222/1333, 6667/4000, and 10000/6000
microg/kg) were divided into four daily loading doses and six biweekly
maintenance doses. Positive controls were administered 2,3,7,
8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD, total dose 70/41.9 microg/kg). Liver
concentrations, as determined by GC/MS, reflected quite accurately the calculated
dose ratios. The dosing period was 13 weeks, after which half of the rats were
necropsied and the rest provided with an off-dose period of another 13 weeks.
Body weight gain was dose-dependently reduced throughout the study. Mortality
occurred dose-dependently, starting on Day 22 and continuing until the end of the
off-dose period. Mortality rates at the end of the off-dose period were 90 and
40% for males and 60 and 10% for females in the two highest dose groups. Clinical
signs and necropsy findings suggested that the cause of death was related to
wasting (early deaths), gastrointestinal and nasal hemorrhage (between Days 64
and 126), or anemia (late deaths, after Day 111). Prothrombin times were
prolonged intermittently, mainly at the highest dose of HpCDD. Platelet counts
were dose-dependently decreased at the two highest doses of HpCDD and in the
TCDD-treated group. This study demonstrates that the relative potency derived
from acute toxicity studies is the same as that observed in this
subchronic/chronic toxicity study of HpCDD and TCDD, confirming the validity of
0.007 as the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) for HpCDD, which is in good agreement
with the international TEF of 0.01.

Copyright 1997 Academic Press.

PMID: 9344888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Pediatr Radiol. 1997 Oct;27(10):799-801.

A complex communicating bronchopulmonary foregut malformation: diagnostic imaging
and pathogenesis.

Sumner TE(1), Auringer ST, Cox TD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest
University, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC 27157-1088, USA.

We report a newborn with an esophageal lung, a rare type of communicating
bronchopulmonary foregut malformation (CBPFM). Associated findings included
esophageal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) to the distal esophagus,
duodenal stenosis with annular pancreas, imperforate anus, vertebral anomalies
and ambiguous genitalia. Radiologic evaluation included chest radiographs,
esophagrams, chest ultrasound and chest CT. After colostomy and surgical repair
of duodenal stenosis and TEF, a right thoracotomy was performed to treat an
esophageal lung. Radiologic features of this unusual variant of CBPFM are
presented. Accurate preoperative imaging diagnosis is essential for planning
surgical treatment of an esophageal lung.

PMID: 9323244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Biotechniques. 1997 Oct;23(4):686-90.

Expression of green fluorescent protein in Aureobasidium pullulans and
quantification of the fungus on leaf surfaces.

Vanden Wymelenberg AJ(1), Cullen D, Spear RN, Schoenike B, Andrews JH.

Author information: 
(1)USDA Forest Products Laboratory, University of Wisconsin, Madison, USA.

A red-shifted, mutated form of the jelly-fish green fluorescent protein (GFP)
under control of a TEF promoter was expressed at high levels in the filamentous
fungus Aureobasidium pullulans. In the three transformants studied, all
morphotypes of the fungus, including pigmented chlamydospores, expressed GFP and 
fluoresced brightly. Confocal microscopy showed that the intra-cellular
distribution of GFP was nonuniform. When applied to leaf surfaces, the
transformants were readily visible and amenable to quantification by image
analysis. Thus, GFP expression, together with quantitative image analysis, may
provide a powerful method for ecological studies of plant-microbe relationships
in nature.

PMID: 9343693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Oct 14;94(21):11617-22.

Identification of a cellular receptor for subgroup E avian leukosis virus.

Adkins HB(1), Brojatsch J, Naughton J, Rolls MM, Pesola JM, Young JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 200
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Genetic studies in chickens and receptor interference experiments have indicated 
that avian leukosis virus (ALV)-E may utilize a cellular receptor related to the 
receptor for ALV-B and ALV-D. Recently, we cloned CAR1, a tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNFR)-related protein, that serves as a cellular receptor for ALV-B and
ALV-D. To determine whether the cellular receptor for ALV-E is a CAR1-like
protein, a cDNA library was made from turkey embryo fibroblasts (TEFs), which are
susceptible to ALV-E infection, but not to infection by ALV-B and ALV-D. The cDNA
library was screened with a radioactively labeled CAR1 cDNA probe, and clones
that hybridized with the probe were isolated. A 2.3-kb cDNA clone was identified 
that conferred susceptibility to ALV-E infection, but not to ALV-B infection,
when expressed in transfected human 293 cells. The functional cDNA clone is
predicted to encode a 368 amino acid protein with significant amino acid
similarity to CAR1. Like CAR1, the TEF protein is predicted to have two
extracellular TNFR-like cysteine-rich domains and a putative death domain similar
to those of TNFR I and Fas. Flow cytometric analysis and immunoprecipitation
experiments demonstrated specific binding between the TEF CAR1-related protein
and an immunoadhesin composed of the surface (SU) envelope protein of subgroup E 
(RAV-0) virus fused to the constant region of a rabbit immunoglobulin. These two 
activities of the TEF CAR1-related protein, specific binding to ALV-E SU and
permitting entry only of ALV-E, have unambiguously identified this protein as a
cellular receptor specific for subgroup E ALV.

PMCID: PMC23555
PMID: 9326659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Virol. 1997 Oct;71(10):7227-39.

TAF-like functions of human cytomegalovirus immediate-early proteins.

Lukac DM(1), Harel NY, Tanese N, Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Graduate Group of Molecular Biology, School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6142, USA.

The human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) major immediate-early (IE) proteins IEP86
(IE2(579aa)) and IEP72 (IE1(491aa)) can transcriptionally activate a variety of
simple promoters containing a TATA element and one upstream transcription factor 
binding site. In our previous studies, transcriptional activation was shown to
correlate with IEP86 binding to both the TATA-box binding protein (TBP) and the
transcription factor bound upstream. IEP72 often synergistically affects the
activation by IEP86, although it has not previously been shown to directly
interact in vitro with IEP86, TBP, or transcription factors (e.g., Sp1 and Tef-1)
bound by IEP86. We report biochemical and genetic evidence suggesting that the
major IE proteins may perform a function similar to that of the TBP-associated
factors (TAFs) which make up TFIID. Consistent with this model, we found that the
major IE proteins interact with a number of TAFs. In vitro, IEP86 bound with
drosophila TAF(II)110 (dTAF(II)110) and human TAF(II)130 (hTAF(II)130), while
IEP72 bound dTAF(II)40, dTAF(II)110, and hTAF(II)130. Regions on major IE
proteins which mediate binding have been defined. In addition, our data indicate 
that both IEP72 and IEP86 can bind simultaneously to hTAF(II)130, suggesting that
this TAF may provide bridging interactions between the two proteins for
transcriptional activation and synergy. In agreement, a transcriptional
activation mutant of IEP72 is unable to participate in bridging. Confirmation
that these in vitro interactions were relevant was provided by data showing that 
both IEP72 and IEP86 copurify with TFIID and coimmunoprecipitate with purified
TFIID derived from infected cell nuclei. To further support a TAF-like function
of the IE proteins, we have found that the IE proteins expressed from the intact 
major IE gene, and to a lesser extent IEP86 alone, can rescue the
temperature-sensitive (ts) transcriptional defect in TAF(II)250 in the BHK-21
cell line ts13. Analyses of mutations in the major IE region show that IEP86 is
essential for rescue and that IEP72 augments its effect, and that mutations which
affect TAF interactions are debilitated in rescue. Our data, showing that the IE 
proteins can bind with TFIID and rescue a ts transcriptional defect in
TAF(II)250, support the model that the IE proteins perform a TAF-like function as
components of TFIID.

PMCID: PMC192063
PMID: 9311796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Yeast. 1997 Sep 15;13(11):1065-75.

Heterologous HIS3 marker and GFP reporter modules for PCR-targeting in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Wach A(1), Brachat A, Alberti-Segui C, Rebischung C, Philippsen P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universität Basel, Switzerland.

We have fused the open reading frames of his3-complementing genes from
Saccharomyces kluyveri and Schizosac-charomyces pombe to the strong TEF gene
promotor of the filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii. Both chimeric modules and the
cognate S. kluyveri HIS3 gene were tested in transformations of his3 S.
cerevisiae strains using PCR fragments flanked by 40 bp target guide sequences.
The 1.4 kb chimeric Sz. pombe module (HIS3MX6) performed best. With less than 5% 
incorrectly targeted transformants, it functions as reliably as the widely used
geniticin resistance marker kanMX. The rare false-positive His+ transformants
seem to be due to non-homologous recombination rather than to gene conversion of 
the mutated endogenous his3 allele. We also cloned the green fluorescent protein 
gene from Aequorea victoria into our pFA-plasmids with HIS3MX6 and kanMX markers.
The 0.9 kb GFP reporters consist of wild-type GFP or GFP-S65T coding sequences,
lacking the ATG, fused to the S. cerevisiae ADH1 terminator. PCR-synthesized 2.4 
kb-long double modules flanked by 40-45 bp-long guide sequences were successfully
targeted to the carboxy-terminus of a number of S. cerevisiae genes. We could
estimate that only about 10% of the transformants carried inactivating mutations 
in the GFP reporter.

PMID: 9290211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 1997 Aug;7(6):192-7. doi: 10.1016/S1050-1738(97)00052-2.

The Role of the TEF Transcription Factors in Cardiogenesis and Other
Developmental Processes.

Jacquemin P, Davidson I.

The development of complex tissues and organs during embryogenesis is accompanied
by precise spatial and temporal gene regulation, which usually takes place at the
level of transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II. Differential patterns of 
gene expression are controlled by the binding of combinatorial arrays of
transcription factors to their cognate regulatory elements in the promoters and
enhancers of target genes. Generally, these transcription factors belong to
families that have arisen through gene duplication. Members of a given family can
be identified by the fact that they possess a common DNA-binding domain. In this 
review, we present the current data arguing for the possible involvement of the
TEF family of transcription factors, which contain the TEA DNA-binding domain, in
cardiogenesis and in other developmental processes. (Trends Cardiovasc Med
1997;7:192-197). © 1997, Elsevier Science Inc.

Copyright © 1997 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21235884  [PubMed]


241. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(9):1233-44.

The human chorionic somatomammotropin enhancers form a composite silencer in
pituitary cells in vitro.

Jiang SW(1), Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The human GH (GH) gene family includes the pituitary-specific hGH-1,
placental-specific chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS-5, hCS-2, and hCS-1), and
hGH-2 genes. These duplicated, nearly identical genes are localized on
approximately 50 kb of DNA on chromosome 17q23-q24. An enhancer (CSEn2), located 
downstream of the hCS-2 gene, participates in mediating placental-specific hCS
gene expression. In the preceding paper we demonstrated that CSEn2 activity
derives from the cooperative binding of transcription factor-1, TEF-1, and a
placental-specific factor CSEF-1 to multiple enhansons, Enh1-Enh5, that are
related to the SV40 GT-IIC and SphI/SphII enhansons. Here we demonstrate that two
copies of CSEn2 or a single copy of CSEn2 linked to either of the other two
enhancers in the hGH/hCS locus, CSEn1 and CSEn5, act cooperatively to enhance hCS
promoter activity in choriocarcinoma (BeWo) cells, but silence the promoter in
pituitary GC cells. Mutation of Enh4, an essential GT-IIC-like enhanson in the
context of the intact enhancer, abolishes silencer activity, and multimerized
GT-IIC enhansons mimic the intact CSEn enhancer/silencer activities in BeWo and
GC cells, respectively. By antibody-mediated supershift, Western, and far Western
analyses, we identified TEF-1 as the GT-IIC-binding factor in pituitary cells.
The data suggest that TEF-1 may be involved in pituitary-specific repression of
placental GH/CS gene transcription through long-range interactions between the
multiple CS enhancers present on the GH/CS gene locus.

PMID: 9259315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Aug;11(9):1223-32.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer function is mediated by cooperative
binding of TEF-1 and CSEF-1 to multiple, low-affinity binding sites.

Jiang SW(1), Trujillo MA, Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The human chorionic somatomammotropin gene enhancer (CSEn) is composed of
multiple enhansons (Enh) that share sequence similarities with those of the
simian virus, SV40 enhancer (SVEn). The sequence homology includes two
GT-IIC-like (Enh1 and Enh4) and three SphI/II-like enhansons (Enh2, Enh3, and
Enh5). We previously showed that transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) and a
30-kDa placental-specific factor, chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer factor 1
(CSEF-1), bind to Enh4, which plays an essential role in enhancer function. In
this study, we demonstrate that TEF-1 and CSEF-1 bind specifically to all the
other GT-IIC- and SphI/II-like elements within CSEn with a broad range of binding
affinities that vary between 0.005 and 0.15 that of Enh4. Each individual
concatenated enhanson was able to stimulate hCS promoter activity in an
orientation-independent manner in choriocarcinoma cells (BeWo) with an observed
stimulation that was directly proportional to its relative binding affinity for
TEF-1 and CSEF-1. These results indicate that CSEn function results from the
cooperative interaction of TEF-1 and/or CSEF-1 binding to multiple, low-affinity 
GT-IIC- and SphI/II-like enhansons within the enhancer.

PMID: 9259314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;17(8):4330-7.

Cooperative binding interactions required for function of the Ty1 sterile
responsive element.

Baur M(1), Esch RK, Errede B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill 27599-7260, USA.

The Ste12p transcription factor controls the expression of Ty1 transposable
element insertion mutations and genes whose products are required for mating in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The binding site for Ste12p is a consensus DNA sequence
known as a pheromone response element (PRE). Upstream activating sequences (UASs)
derived from known Ste12p-dependent genes have previously been characterized to
require either multiple PREs or a single PRE coupled to a binding site for a
second protein. The Ste12p-dependent UAS from Ty1, called a sterile response
element (SRE), is of the second type and is comprised of a PRE and an adjacent
TEA (TEF-1, Tec1, and AbaA motif) DNA consensus sequence (TCS). In this report,
we show by UV cross-linking analysis that two proteins, Ste12p and a protein with
an apparent size of 72 kDa, directly contact the Ty1 SRE. Other experiments show 
that Tec1p is required for formation of the Ty1 SRE protein-DNA complex and is
physically present in the complex. These results establish a direct role for
Tec1p in the Ty1 SRE and yet another set of combinatorial interactions that
achieve a qualitatively distinct mode of transcriptional regulation with Ste12p.

PMCID: PMC232286
PMID: 9234690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Jul;32(7):1089-91; discussion 1092.

Efficacy of partial wrap fundoplication for gastroesophageal reflux after repair 
of esophageal atresia.

Snyder CL(1), Ramachandran V, Kennedy AP, Gittes GK, Ashcraft KW, Holder TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO 64108,
USA.

Gastroesophageal reflux (GER) often develops in children who have undergone prior
repair of esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF). Fundoplication
is necessary in many of these children. The complete wrap (Nissen) fundoplication
is often used in this setting. However, poor results have been noted, with a mean
failure rate of 30% reported in four recent studies. A partial wrap
fundoplication for GER associated with EA/TEF is theoretically attractive,
because the poor esophageal motility and diminished acid clearance (already
physiologically present) is exacerbated by a complete wrap fundoplication. The
authors reviewed their extensive experience with partial wrap (Thal)
fundoplication in EA/TEF to determine if the failure rate was better than that
reported for the Nissen fundoplication. In the past 18 years, the authors
performed 1,467 fundoplication procedures. During the same period, 143 children
underwent repair of EA/TEF. Fifty-nine children underwent fundoplication after a 
previous EA/TEF repair. Most of the fundoplications (58 of 59, 98%) were Thal
procedures. Defining failure strictly as a need for reoperation, the failure rate
in our series was 15% (9 of 59 children). Compared with the failure rate in the
1,408 non-EA/TEF patients (61 of 1408, 4.3%), results were significantly worse
for the EA/TEF group (P > .001). The failure rate of Thal fundoplication
performed for GER in the EA/TEF population is substantially higher than the
non-EA/TEF patients. The same factors responsible for the development of reflux
in these children (poor acid clearance, altered motility, esophageal shortening) 
may contribute to the higher failure rate. Although partial wrap fundoplication
frequently failed (15%), the results were still substantially better than those
reported for Nissen fundoplication in these children (30% failure rate).

PMID: 9247240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Pediatr Surg. 1997 Jul;32(7):1075-9; discussion 1079-80.

Prognostic classification for esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula:
Waterston versus Montreal.

Teich S(1), Barton DP, Ginn-Pease ME, King DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital, Columbus, OH, USA.

Since 1962, the Waterston classification has been used to stratify neonates who
have esophageal atresia (EA) and/or tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) into
prognostic categories based on birth weight, the presence of pneumonia, and the
identification of other congenital anomalies. In response to advances in neonatal
care, the surgeons from the Montreal Children's Hospital proposed a new
categorization system in 1993 in an attempt to define the current risk factors
for patients who have EA/TEF. In the Montreal experience only two characteristics
independently affected survival: preoperative ventilator dependence and
associated major anomalies. The goal of this study was to determine which system 
had the greatest validity for the evaluation of prognosis in our patients with
EA/TEF. The charts of 94 patients who had EA/TEF treated between 1972 and 1991
were reviewed. Patients were classified using both the Waterston and Montreal
systems. Groups were compared with Fisher's Exact test using a 95% confidence
level for statistical significance. Eleven infants were ventilator dependent
preoperatively; 62 children had major associated anomalies, 8 of which were
considered life threatening. Sixteen children died within 4 years, eight during
their initial hospital stay. Five of the eight early postoperative deaths
occurred in the highest-risk patients (Waterston C or Montreal II). Analysis was 
performed for multiple risk factors and mortality. As in the Montreal study, the 
presence of life-threatening and major congenital anomalies represented
significant risk factors for death. Pulmonary disease as delineated by ventilator
dependence appeared to be more accurate than pneumonia. This study confirms the
accuracy of the Montreal classification in defining prognosis for EA/TEF. The
Montreal system more accurately identifies children at highest risk than the
Waterston classification.

PMID: 9247237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3924-36.

Transcription enhancer factor 1 interacts with a basic helix-loop-helix zipper
protein, Max, for positive regulation of cardiac alpha-myosin heavy-chain gene
expression.

Gupta MP(1), Amin CS, Gupta M, Hay N, Zak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The M-CAT binding factor transcription enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) has been
implicated in the regulation of several cardiac and skeletal muscle genes.
Previously, we identified an E-box-M-CAT hybrid (EM) motif that is responsible
for the basal and cyclic AMP-inducible expression of the rat cardiac alpha-myosin
heavy chain (alpha-MHC) gene in cardiac myocytes. In this study, we report that
two factors, TEF-1 and a basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper protein, Max, bind
to the alpha-MHC EM motif. We also found that Max was a part of the cardiac
troponin T M-CAT-TEF-1 complex even when the DNA template did not contain an
apparent E-box binding site. In the protein-protein interaction assay, a stable
association of Max with TEF-1 was observed when glutathione S-transferase
(GST)-TEF-1 or GST-Max was used to pull down in vitro-translated Max or TEF-1,
respectively. In addition, Max was coimmunoprecipitated with TEF-1, thus
documenting an in vivo TEF-1-Max interaction. In the transient transcription
assay, overexpression of either Max or TEF-1 resulted a mild activation of the
alpha-MHC-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene at lower
concentrations and repression of this gene at higher concentrations. However,
when Max and TEF-1 expression plasmids were transfected together, the repression 
mediated by a single expression plasmid was alleviated and a three- to fourfold
transactivation of the alpha-MHC-CAT reporter gene was observed. This effect was 
abolished once the EM motif in the promoter-reporter construct was mutated, thus 
suggesting that the synergistic transactivation function of the TEF-1-Max
heterotypic complex is mediated through binding of the complex to the EM motif.
These results demonstrate a novel association between Max and TEF-1 and indicate 
a positive cooperation between these two factors in alpha-MHC gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC232245
PMID: 9199327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997 Jun 6;3(2):105-13.

2,3,7,8-Tetrafluorodibenzo-p-dioxin: a potent agonist of the murine dioxin
receptor.

Schmitz HJ(1), Weber R, Hagenmaier A, Hagenmaier H, Poellinger L, Schrenk D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Toxikologie, Universität Tübingen, D-72074 Tübingen, Germany.

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related polychlorinated aromatic
hydrocarbons exert a pattern of toxicity related to their binding to a common
receptor, the Ah (aryl hydrocarbon) or dioxin receptor. No information is
available, however, on the toxicological properties of
2,3,7,8-tetrafluorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TFDD). In our experiments, TFDD was found to
act as a highly potent dioxin receptor agonist leading to a transient induction
of cytochrome P450(CYP)1A1 mRNA and protein in receptor-proficient mouse Hepa-1
hepatoma cells treated with 10(-10) M TFDD. However, no significant induction of 
7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD) activity was observable in TFDD-treated
Hepa-1 cells or mouse hepatocytes in primary culture, suggesting an interference 
with the catalytic activity of CYP1A1. Parallel experiments with 10(-10) M TCDD
showed a sustained induction of CYP1A1 mRNA and protein, and of EROD activity.
When a reporter gene construct comprising a xenobiotic-responsive element (XRE)
in 5'-position was transfected in Hepa-1c-1c-7 cells, 5×10(-8) M TFDD and
5×10(-9) M TCDD induced transcription to a comparable extent. Both inducers were 
inactive when a mutant XRE with a guanine replaced by thymine was transfected. In
metabolism studies in mouse liver homogenate, TFDD was rapidly degraded in the
presence of an NADPH-regenerating system, and metabolism was enhanced in liver
homogenate from ß-naphthoflavone-pretreated mice indicating that TFDD is
metabolized in a CYP-catalyzed pathway. The open ring products
dihydroxytetrafluororbiphenyl ether, and 1,2-difluoro-o-benzoquinone, probably
derived from 1,2-difluorocatechol, were identified by GC-MS analysis of the
incubation mixtures, whereas no phenolic metabolites/and or metabolites with an
intact dioxin ring could be found. It is concluded that TFDD, in contrast to its 
chlorinated analogue, is metabolically unstable, and thus currently does not
fulfill the criteria for the recommendation of a TCDD or toxicity equivalency
factor (TEF).

PMID: 21781767  [PubMed]


248. J Otolaryngol. 1997 Jun;26(3):171-9.

Predicting postlaryngectomy voice outcome in an era of primary tracheoesophageal 
fistulization: a retrospective evaluation.

Jacobson MC(1), Franssen E, Birt BD, Davidson MJ, Gilbert RW.

Author information: 
(1)Speech Pathology Service, Sunnybrook Health Science Centre, North York, ON.

OBJECTIVES: Not all laryngectomees appear to have the same potential to develop
functional spoken communication. Our goal was to evaluate voice outcome in
different functional subgroups of laryngectomees and to identify physical and
demographic factors associated with success and failure to achieve functional
spoken communication.
DESIGN: Retrospective chart review.
SETTING: Surgery was performed at a tertiary care hospital. Multidisciplinary
follow-up was conducted at weekly head and neck clinics held at the associated
regional cancer centre. Voice rehabilitation procedures took place in both
settings.
PATIENTS: Sixty-four consecutive patients who had undergone total laryngectomy
during the era of primary tracheoesophageal fistulization (TEF) at this facility.
Patients were subdivided into four groups according to whether they had undergone
primary TEF, or whether this had been contraindicated by locoregional factors of 
TEF candidacy/performance status, or both.
INTERVENTIONS: Primary TEF was performed whenever technically feasible and
traditional TEF candidacy criteria were met. Voice rehabilitation procedures were
initiated prior to discharge.
OUTCOME MEASURES: A judgement of voice outcome was assigned based on
documentation on at least one of three patient treatment records by a physician
or speech-language pathologist that a patient had demonstrated functional spoken 
communication within the clinical setting.
RESULTS: Forty-five of 64 patients (70%) achieved functional spoken
communication. Six laryngectomized subgroups were ultimately identified and
characterized. Voice outcome varied considerably between these subgroups.
Prelaryngectomy communication status and age emerged as predictors of voice
outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Voice outcome is related to several factors present prior to or at
laryngectomy. Different combinations of such factors create various
postlaryngectomy recovery streams for which voice outcome may be predicted more
specifically.

PMID: 9176801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Pediatr Radiol. 1997 Jun;27(6):530-4.

Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula and associated congenital esophageal
stenosis.

Newman B(1), Bender TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, 3705 Fifth Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2583, USA.

BACKGROUND: The association of congenital stenosis of the distal esophagus (CES) 
in children with esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula complex (TEF) has
been described but is thought to be rare. Most reports have been of individual or
small numbers of cases.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to evaluate the incidence, clinical and
radiographic features of CES associated with TEF, and to compare the clinical and
radiographic features of CES with acquired anastomotic strictures in TEF
patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective review was undertaken of the records and
radiographs of 225 infants with primary TEF repair over a 26-year period.
RESULTS: A total of 18 of 225 (8 %) cases of CES associated with TEF and 43 of
225 (19 %) cases of anastomotic strictures were identified. CES was typically a
relatively long, smooth circumferential narrowing at the junction of the
mid-esophagus and distal esophagus, with normal-caliber esophagus above and
below; anastomotic strictures, in contrast, were focal. Diagnosis of CES was
delayed in 10 cases and missed on one or more fluoroscopic studies in 14
children. Symptoms, including feeding and respiratory problems and foreign body
impaction, were common in both CES and anastomotic strictures; repeated
esophageal dilatations were usually necessary. Esophageal perforation complicated
dilatation in 6 (33 %) young children with CES, but none of the children with
anastomotic strictures (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: CES in combination with TEF is not rare and usually produces clinical
symptoms. The diagnosis may be missed or delayed unless specifically evaluated
surgically and radiologically. Esophageal dilatation in CES is potentially
hazardous with a high risk of perforation, especially in young children.

PMID: 9174027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 16;272(20):12928-37.

Human TEF-5 is preferentially expressed in placenta and binds to multiple
functional elements of the human chorionic somatomammotropin-B gene enhancer.

Jacquemin P(1), Martial JA, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B.P. 163-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We report the cloning of a cDNA encoding the human transcription factor hTEF-5,
containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain and related to the TEF family of
transcription factors. hTEF-5 is expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle, but
the strongest expression is observed in the placenta and in placenta-derived
JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells. In correlation with its placental expression, we
show that hTEF-5 binds to several functional enhansons of the human chorionic
somatomammotropin (hCS)-B gene enhancer. We define a novel functional element in 
this enhancer comprising tandemly repeated sites to which hTEF-5 binds
cooperatively. In the corresponding region of the hCS-A enhancer, which is known 
to be inactive, this element is inactivated by a naturally occurring single base 
mutation that disrupts hTEF-5 binding. We further show that the binding of the
previously described placental protein f/chorionic somatomammotropin enhancer
factor-1 to TEF-binding sites is disrupted by monoclonal antibodies directed
against the TEA domain and that this factor is a proteolytic degradation product 
of the TEF factors. These results strongly suggest that hTEF-5 regulates the
activity of the hCS-B gene enhancer.

PMID: 9148898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Rev Hosp Clin Fac Med Sao Paulo. 1997 May-Jun;52(3):154-8.

[Evaluation of isokinetic trunk flexion and extension in normal sportsman and
sedentary people].

[Article in Portuguese]

Greve JM(1), Terreri AS, Plapler PG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ortopedia e Traumatologia, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade
de São Paulo.

It was studied two groups: Group 1: 13 male voluntaries, competition sportsman,
mean age: 25 +/- 2.1 years (18-30): Group 2: 17 male voluntaries, sedentary, mean
age: 31.2 years (23-46). All the voluntaries was evaluated by the CYBEX 6000, TEF
(trunk flexion extension) module. The parameters analyzed were: peak torque,
total work and average power (absolute values and corrected by the body weight)
and the flexion/extension relation. All the tests were performed at the speed of 
60 and 120 degrees per second. The peak torque absolute values at 60 and 120
degrees were higher in Group 1 than Group 2 (p < 0.05), in flexion and extension 
movement. At the corrected date by the body weight, this relation remained the
same, at 60 degrees, for flexion and extension and for extension at 120 degrees
(p < 0.05), but the flexion at 120 degrees is not different in both groups. The
peak torque angle is the same for extensor tests at both speed, but is different 
for the flexor test, at 60 degrees. The total work performed was better in the
Group 1 at 60 degrees during the flexion (p < 0.05) and during the extension in
both tested speed. At the corrected values the work is the same at flexion and at
extension is higher only at 120 degrees (p < 0.05). At the average power of
flexion movement there is a difference at the absolute values, that was not seen 
at the body weight corrected date. The difference between average power of the
extension, in both speeds was significant at 60 and 120 degrees. The relation
between flexor and extensor: Group 1: peak torque 80% at 60 degrees, total work
and average power is nearly 100%; Group 2: peak torque, total work and average
power is closed to 100%, at 60 degrees. The flexor muscles values are light
higher than the extensor muscles, that means the abdominal muscles are stronger
than the spine erector muscles. At 120 degrees this tendency is more clear and
the relation is 120-125% and at the sedentary group this relation is higher:
150-165%.

PMID: 9435390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Development. 1997 May;124(10):1963-73.

Transcription factor mTEAD-2 is selectively expressed at the beginning of zygotic
gene expression in the mouse.

Kaneko KJ(1), Cullinan EB, Latham KE, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2753, USA.

mTEF-1 is the prototype of a family of mouse transcription factors that share the
same TEA DNA binding domain (mTEAD genes) and are widely expressed in adult
tissues. At least one member of this family is expressed at the beginning of
mouse development, because mTEAD transcription factor activity was not detected
in oocytes, but first appeared at the 2-cell stage in development, concomitant
with the onset of zygotic gene expression. Since embryos survive until day 11 in 
the absence of mTEAD-1 (TEF-1), another family member likely accounts for this
activity. Screening an EC cell cDNA library yielded mTEAD-1, 2 and 3 genes.
RT-PCR detected RNA from all three of these genes in oocytes, but upon
fertilization, mTEAD-1 and 3 mRNAs disappeared. mTEAD-2 mRNA, initially present
at approx. 5,000 copies per egg, decreased to approx. 2,000 copies in 2-cell
embryos before accumulating to approx. 100,000 copies in blastocysts, consistent 
with degradation of maternal mTEAD mRNAs followed by selective transcription of
mTEAD-2 from the zygotic genome. In situ hybridization did not detect mTEAD RNA
in oocytes, and only mTEAD-2 was detected in day-7 embryos. Northern analysis
detected all three RNAs at varying levels in day-9 embryos and in various adult
tissues. A fourth mTEAD gene, recently cloned from a myotube cDNA library, was
not detected by RT-PCR in either oocytes or preimplantation embryos. Together,
these results reveal that mTEAD-2 is selectively expressed for the first 7 days
of embryonic development, and is therefore most likely responsible for the mTEAD 
transcription factor activity that appears upon zygotic gene activation.

PMID: 9169843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1997 Apr 25;50(6):567-79.

Reassessment of the carcinogenicity of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

Smith MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Health Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
30602-2102, USA.

The current policy for regulating polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) is based on
one chronic bioassay that examined the carcinogenicity of a 60% chlorinated PCB
(Norback & Weltman, 1985). All studies originally considered by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for use in calculating a cancer slope
factor (CSF) for PCBs were reevaluated and new CSFs calculated based on the
results of a pathology reassessment (Moore et al., 1994). When studies of 60%
chlorine PCBs from 3 different laboratories were compared, there was no
scientific basis for selecting only 1 data set for deriving CSF estimates. Using 
a geometric mean to calculate a CSF based on all studies of PCBs with 60%
chlorine replaces the current value of 7.7 (mg/kg/d)(-1) with a value of 1.9
(mg/kg/d)(-1). CSFs for PCBs containing less than 60% chlorine (54% and 42%) were
less than 1.0 (mg/kg/d)(-1). Using a toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach
similar to that of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin shows no correlation
between toxic equivalent dose and CSFs, indicating that use of TEFs is not
predictive of cancer potency for PCBs. Based on these findings, PCB cancer risk
assessment policy would more closely reflect scientific data if (1) separate risk
assessments were developed for each major PCB formulation and (2) all appropriate
data were used when calculating cancer potency for PCB mixtures of 60% chlorine.

PMID: 15279030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 18;272(16):10664-8.

The human transcription enhancer factor-1, TEF-1, can substitute for Drosophila
scalloped during wingblade development.

Deshpande N(1), Chopra A, Rangarajan A, Shashidhara LS, Rodrigues V, Krishna S.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Biological Sciences, TIFR Center, Bangalore 560012, India.

The human transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) belongs to a family of
evolutionarily conserved proteins that have a DNA binding TEA domain. TEF-1
shares a 98% homology with Drosophila scalloped (sd) in the DNA binding domain
and a 50% similarity in the activation domain. We have expressed human TEF-1 in
Drosophila under the hsp-70 promoter and find that it can substitute for Sd
function. The transformants rescue the wingblade defects as well as the lethality
of loss-of-function alleles. Observation of reporter activity in the imaginal
wing discs of the enhancer-trap alleles suggests that TEF-1 is capable of
promoting sd gene regulation. The functional capability of the TEF-1 product was 
assessed by comparing the extent of rescue by heat shock (hs)-TEF-1 with that of 
hs-sd. The finding that TEF-1 can function in vivo during wingblade development
offers a potent genetic system for the analysis of its function and in the
identification of the molecular partners of TEF-1.

PMID: 9099715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. EMBO J. 1997 Apr 1;16(7):1721-31.

Developmental acquisition of enhancer function requires a unique coactivator
activity.

Majumder S(1), Zhao Z, Kaneko K, DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Enhancers are believed to stimulate promoters by relieving chromatin-mediated
repression. However, injection of plasmid-encoded genes into mouse oocytes and
embryos revealed that enhancers failed to stimulate promoters prior to formation 
of a two-cell embryo, even though the promoter was repressed in the maternal
nucleus of both oocytes and one-cell embryos. The absence of enhancer function
was not due to the absence of a required sequence-specific enhancer activation
protein, because enhancer function was not elicited even when these proteins
either were provided by an expression vector (GAL4:VP16) or were present as an
endogenous transcription factor (TEF-1) and shown to be active in stimulating
promoters. Instead, enhancer function in vivo required a unique coactivator
activity in addition to enhancer-specific DNA binding proteins and promoter
repression. This coactivator activity first appeared during mouse development in 
two- to four-cell embryos, concurrent with the major onset of zygotic gene
expression. Competition between various enhancers was observed in these embryos, 
but not competition between enhancers and promoters, and competition between
enhancers was absent in one-cell embryos. Moreover, enhancer function in oocytes 
could be partially restored by pre-injecting mRNA from cells in which enhancers
were active, the same mRNA did not affect enhancer function in two- to four-cell 
embryos.

PMCID: PMC1169775
PMID: 9130716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1997 Apr;21(4):267-73.

A study of the prognostic respiratory markers of sustained weight loss in obese
subjects after 28 days on VLCD.

Valtueña S(1), Solà R, Salas-Salvadó J.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition Unit, Hospital Sant Joan, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, 
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate parameters of energy metabolism during a 28 d VLCD to
identify possible prognostic markers of weight change observed, subsequently,
when the subjects were on a six-month hypocaloric diet.
DESIGN: Longitudinal, clinical intervention study of a 2 MJ diet daily for 28 d
and six month follow-up under a conventional, hypocaloric diet.
SUBJECTS: Seven pre-menopausal women and one male all morbidly obese but
otherwise healthy (age: 16-47 y, BMI 38.9-50.5 kg/m2).
MEASUREMENTS: Body weight, resting energy expenditure (REE), resting respiratory 
quotient (RQ) and the 5 h thermic effect of food (TEF) were assessed by indirect 
calorimetry at the beginning and at the end of a 28 d VLCD treatment. Body
composition was measured on day 1 by hydrodensitometry and tetrapolar
bioelectrical impedance (TBIA), on day 28 by TBIA and nitrogen balance (NB) and
by TBIA on follow-up.
RESULTS: The individual weight loss during VLCD (mean 9.9 +/- 2.4 kg) was
significant (P < 0.01) and correlated significantly with energy deficit (r =
0.83, P = 0.01). REE/FFM decreased 6.2% (FFMTBIA) and 8.9% (FFMNB), respectively.
TEF28 was unchanged from TEF1 while fasting RQ declined during the intervention
period but was back to baseline already within one month of follow-up even though
the mean weight loss at six months had increased to 14.0 +/- 5.6 kg. There was a 
significant (P < 0.05) positive correlation between RQ28 and body-weight changes 
after one, three and six months of follow-up. The RQ28 explained 60-72% of the
inter-individual variation in weight change.
CONCLUSION: The resting RQ measurement is recommended as a simple and inexpensive
assessment at the end of a strict weight-loss regimen in order to identify those 
individuals who may need greater assistance in maintaining a weight-loss when
placed on a subsequent, free-living hypocaloric diet.

PMID: 9130022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Pediatr Surg Int. 1997 Apr;12(4):261-3.

Elective, postoperative ventilation in the management of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Al-Salem AH(1), Qaisaruddin S, Srair HA, Dabbous IA, Al-Hayek R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Qatif Central Hospital, Qatif, Saudi Arabia.

The management of esophageal atresia (EA) with or without tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) has undergone many changes. As a result of recent advances in
neonatal intensive care and pediatric anesthesia, the survival of infants with EA
and TEF has improved markedly, but the occurrence of anastomotic complications
has remained constant. To overcome this problem, various techniques and suture
materials have been used. This review of 20 consecutive cases of EA/TEF stresses 
the importance and influence of non-reversal of anesthesia, paralysis, and
elective ventilation for protection of the esophageal anastomosis following
repair of EA and TEF.

PMID: 9099641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Pediatr Surg Int. 1997 Mar 21;12(2/3):186-7.

A new variant of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula and duodenal
atresia: a diagnostic dilemma

Sinha CK(1), Gangopadhyay AN, Sahoo SP, Gopal SC, Gupta DK, Sharma SP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi 221 005, India

A new variant of esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
associated with duodenal atresia is reported. The TEF was between the lower pouch
and the trachea, with a cystic dilatation in the midportion. The tracheal end of 
the fistula was obstructed by a membranous septum at both ends of a cystic
dilatation, leading to a diagnosis of pure EA (gasless abdomen). After the lower 
pouch was opened beyond the cystic dilatation, 100 ml nonbilious fluid was
obtained. A laparotomy revealed a type III atresia of the first part of the
duodenum.

PMID: 9069229  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


259. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Mar 18;94(6):2609-14.

Pivotal role for the NFIL3/E4BP4 transcription factor in interleukin 3-mediated
survival of pro-B lymphocytes.

Ikushima S(1), Inukai T, Inaba T, Nimer SD, Cleveland JL, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF (hepatic leukemia factor) oncoprotein, generated in pro-B lymphocytes
by fusion of the trans-activation domain of E2A to the basic region/leucine
zipper (bZIP) domain of HLF, functions as an anti-apoptotic transcription factor 
in leukemic cell transformation. When introduced into interleukin 3
(IL-3)-dependent mouse pro-B lymphocytes, E2A-HLF prevents apoptosis induced by
growth factor deprivation, suggesting that IL-3 mediates cell survival through
activation of a transcription factor whose activity can be constitutively
replaced by the chimeric oncoprotein. We considered four bZIP transcription
factors as candidates for this putative IL-3-regulated factor, each of which
binds avidly to the DNA consensus sequence recognized by E2A-HLF and is related
to the Caenorhabditis elegans CES-2 (cell death specification protein)
neuron-specific mediator of cell death. The expression and binding activity of
the Nfil3 protein (also called E4bp4), but not of Hlf, Dbp, or Tef, was found to 
be regulated by IL-3 in mouse pro-B cell lines (Baf-3 and FL5.12). Northern blot 
analysis showed that Nfil3/E4bp4 is regulated as a "delayed-early"
IL-3-responsive gene, requiring de novo protein synthesis. In the absence of
IL-3, enforced expression of the human NFIL3/E4BP4 cDNA promoted the survival but
not the growth of IL-3-dependent pro-B cells. Our results implicate NFIL3/E4BP4
(nuclear factor regulated by IL-3/adenovirus E4 promoter binding protein) in a
distinct growth factor-regulated signaling pathway that is responsible for the
survival of early B-cell progenitors, and whose alteration by E2A-HLF leads to
childhood B lineage leukemia.

PMCID: PMC20136
PMID: 9122243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Chemosphere. 1997 Mar-Apr;34(5-7):915-28.

An immunoassay for TEQ screening of dioxin/furan samples: current status of assay
and applications development.

Harrison RO(1), Carlson RE.

Author information: 
(1)Millipore Corp., Scarborough ME 04074, USA.

A simple and easy to use system has been developed for rapid screening of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (2,3,7,8-TCDD) in a variety of situations.
The system uses a competitive inhibition Enzyme ImmunoAssay (EIA) based on a
previously described mouse monoclonal antibody which is specific for 2,3,7,8-TCDD
and related congeners. Two formats have been developed, a rapid tube test and a
microplate test. Respective sensitivities are 100 pg/tube and 25 pg/well of
2,3,7,8-TCDD. Congener specificity of the tube test roughly correlates with
1-TEF. The concept of TEQ screening is validated by comparing TEQ values for a
set of soil samples to the EIA responses predicted for those samples. Actual
analysis of crude extracts of some of the same soils indicated some clean-up is
required to remove interferences. Rapid extraction and sample clean-up methods
for soil and other matrices are being developed. Potential implementation of the 
EIA in a fixed lab is discussed. The EIA system offers significant improvements
in speed, sample throughput, and cost compared to GC-MS. This system should be
useful for screening environmental samples in many situations.

PMID: 9134667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Eur J Endocrinol. 1997 Mar;136(3):309-15.

Effect of a high-fat diet on energy balance and thermic effect of food in
hypothyroid rats.

Iossa S(1), Mollica MP, Lionetti L, Barletta A, Liverini G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiologia Generale ed Ambientale, Università di Napoli,
Italy.

Comment in
    Eur J Endocrinol. 1997 Mar;136(3):267-8.

We have carried out measurements of energy balance in hypothyroid rats fed a
low-fat or a high-fat diet for eighteen days. We have also measured cephalic and 
processing thermic effect of food (TEF) after a low-fat or a high-fat meal. Body 
lipid gain, carcass lipid content and gross efficiency were significantly (P <
0.05) higher in hypothyroid rats fed a high-fat diet compared with hypothyroid
rats fed a low-fat diet, while metabolizable energy intake and energy expenditure
remained unchanged. Cephalic TEF after a low-fat meal was significantly (P <
0.05) lower in hypothyroid rats fed a high-fat diet compared with hypothyroid
rats fed a low-fat diet, while it was significantly (P < 0.05) higher after a
high-fat meal than after a low-fat meal in hypothyroid rats fed a high-fat diet. 
No significant variation was found in processing TEF after a low-fat or a
high-fat meal. Our results indicate that hypothyroid rats are unable to develop
increased energy expenditure and increased TEF in response to a high-fat diet.

PMID: 9100557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Am J Otolaryngol. 1997 Mar-Apr;18(2):94-8.

Long-term results of voice rehabilitation after total laryngectomy using primary 
tracheoesophageal puncture in Chinese patients.

Wong SH(1), Yuen AP, Cheung C, Wei WI, Lam LK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong
Kong.

PURPOSE: Prosthetic voice restoration is an increasingly popular method of
postlaryngectomy voice rehabilitation. Despite its success in non-tonal
languages, the efficacy of tracheoesophageal speech in tonal languages was
largely unknown. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the long-term
results of voice rehabilitation using a Blom-Singer valve (BSV) in the tonal
language of Cantonese.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The records of 159 patients who underwent total
laryngectomy and primary tracheoesophageal puncture (TEP) between May 1985 and
December 1994 were retrospectively reviewed. Tracheoesophageal speech was
regarded as functional if effective communication could be made during
face-to-face conversation and telephone conversation. Any TEP-related
complications were noted. Perioperative factors that might contribute to
nonfunctional speech were subjected to statistical analysis.
RESULTS: Six hospital mortalities were excluded from speech analysis. Of the
remaining 153 patients, the median follow-up was 25 months, ranging from 3 to 113
months. Seventy-three patients had closure of tracheosophageal fistulae (TEF),
and the main causes were ineffective voice production, dislodgment, and
tracheostomal stenosis. Only 15 of them acquired functional speech before
closure. The other 80 patients used a BSV as the chief modality of voice
rehabilitation, with functional results achieved in 64 patients. None of the
perioperative factors were found to be statistically significant in relation to
nonfunctional speech.
CONCLUSION: Primary TEP is an established method of voice rehabilitation after
total laryngectomy. In our series, 52% patients achieved functional
tracheoesophageal speech using a BSV.

PMID: 9074732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1417-24.

Cell transformation mediated by homodimeric E2A-HLF transcription factors.

Inukai T(1), Inaba T, Yoshihara T, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2A-HLF fusion gene, created by the t(17;19)(q22;p13) chromosomal
translocation in pro-B lymphocytes, encodes an oncogenic protein in which the E2A
trans-activation domain is linked to the DNA-binding and protein dimerization
domain of hepatic leukemia factor (HLF), a member of the proline- and acidic
amino acid-rich (PAR) subfamily of bZIP transcription factors. This fusion
product binds to its DNA recognition site not only as a homodimer but also as a
heterodimer with HLF and two other members of the PAR bZIP subfamily, thyrotroph 
embryonic factor (TEF) and albumin promoter D-box binding protein (DBP). Thus,
E2A-HLF could transform cells by direct regulation of downstream target genes,
acting through homodimeric or heterodimeric complexes, or by sequestering normal 
PAR proteins into nonfunctional heterocomplexes (dominant-negative interference).
To distinguish among these models, we constructed mutant E2A-HLF proteins in
which the leucine zipper domain of HLF was extended by one helical turn or
altered in critical charged amino acids, enabling the chimera to bind to DNA as a
homodimer but not as a heterodimer with HLF or other PAR proteins. When
introduced into NIH 3T3 cells in a zinc-inducible vector, each of these mutants
induced anchorage-independent growth as efficiently as unaltered E2A-HLF,
indicating that the chimeric oncoprotein can transform cells in its homodimeric
form. Transformation also depended on an intact E2A activator region, providing
further support for a gain-of-function contribution to oncogenesis rather than
one based on a dominant-interfering or dominant-negative mechanism. Thus, the
tumorigenic effects of E2A-HLF and its mutant forms in NIH 3T3 cells favor a
straightforward model in which E2A-HLF homodimers bind directly to
promoter/enhancer elements of downstream target genes and alter their patterns of
expression in early B-cell progenitors.

PMCID: PMC231866
PMID: 9032268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Pediatr Surg Int. 1997 Feb;12(2-3):186-7.

A new variant of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula and duodenal
atresia: a diagnostic dilemma.

Sinha CK(1), Gangopadhyay AN, Sahoo SP, Gopal SC, Gupta DK, Sharma SP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi 221 005, India.

A new variant of esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
associated with duodenal atresia is reported. The TEF was between the lower pouch
and the trachea, with a cystic dilatation in the midportion. The tracheal end of 
the fistula was obstructed by a membranous septum at both ends of a cystic
dilatation, leading to a diagnosis of pure EA (gasless abdomen). After the lower 
pouch was opened beyond the cystic dilatation, 100 ml nonbilious fluid was
obtained. A laparotomy revealed a type III atresia of the first part of the
duodenum.

PMID: 9156854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1997 Feb;25(1):68-78.

Estimating relative potency for receptor-mediated toxicity: reevaluating the
toxicity equivalence factor (TEF) model.

Putzrath RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown Risk Group, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

Once considered and interim procedure for use with mixtures of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans, use of the toxicity equivalence factor (TEF)
model has been proposed for other groups of structurally similar chemicals. Data 
from polychlorinated dibenzo p-dioxins and polychlorinated dibenzofurans as well 
as theoretical analyses of the biological basis for receptor-mediated toxicity
demonstrate the limitations of this model and indicate that estimation of
equivalent doses for such chemicals is more likely to require a function than a
point estimate such as a TEF. Relatively small changes in the TEFs can result in 
both significant changes in the estimated dose for the mixture and the percentage
of the estimated risk that is attributable to the most potent or reference
compound. Estimates of equivalent doses are likely to become less accurate when
extrapolated to lower responses which frequently serve as the basis for
regulatory decisions. Existing models allow the relative potency to be a function
rather than a point estimate as well as interaction at the receptor among the
chemicals.

PMID: 9056502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen. 1997-1998;17(4-5):285-304.

Limitations of the toxic equivalency factor approach for risk assessment of TCDD 
and related compounds.

Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466, USA.

Halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (HAHs), such as polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs), dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), and dibenzofurans (PCDFs), are industrial
compounds or by-products that have been widely identified as environmental
contaminants. Hazard and risk assessment of complex HAH mixtures have utilized a 
toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach, where the toxic equivalents (TEQs) of
any mixture are equal to the sum of the concentration of individual (i) congeners
times their potencies (TEFi) relative to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD, TEF = 1.0). TEQ = sigma [PCDDi] x TEFi + sigma [PCDFi] x TEFi + sigma
[PCBi] x TEFi. The TEQ (or TCDD equivalents) can be readily calculated from
analytical data and provides an estimate of the toxicity of any mixture
containing HAHs. Several in vivo and in vitro studies with some PCDD/PCDF and PCB
mixtures have demonstrated correlations between experimentally determined and
calculated TEQs. However, results of several studies have also shown that for
specific responses, the TEQ for some HAH mixtures are non-additive. For example, 
PCB mixtures and individual PCB congeners such as
2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl inhibit toxic and biochemical responses induced
by TCDD and related compounds. Another problem associated with hazard and risk
assessment of background exposure to HAHs is the relative contribution of trace
levels of HAHs (exodioxins) compared to relatively high exposure to naturally
occurring aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) agonists, which act through the same
mechanistic pathway.

PMID: 9508738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen. 1997-1998;17(4-5):265-73.

Selected other effects and TEFs.

Kimbrough RD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Evaluating Health Risks, Washington, DC 20006, USA.

The half-lives and tissue distribution of chlorinated dibenzodioxins and
dibenzofurans in humans are reviewed. An attempt is made to correlate adverse
effects observed in humans such as chloracne, Yusho, Yucheng, and Seveso with
tissue levels. No causal inferences should be made in the Ranch Hand studies
because TCDD serum levels are slightly higher in older persons and in persons who
have diseases related to their lipid metabolism and their age. These differences 
cannot be used in the context of a dose-response relationship but should be used 
in the context of variations in the distribution of PCDD and PCDF levels within
different subpopulations. Based on these observations in humans, TEF values for
mixtures of PCDD and PCDF are poor predictors of human risk.

PMID: 9508736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Teratog Carcinog Mutagen. 1997-1998;17(4-5):217-24.

Interactions between 2,3,7,8-TCDD and PCBs as tumor promoters: limitations of
TEFs.

Wölfle D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, University of Hamburg Medical School, Germany.

The assessment of the carcinogenic risk of polychlorinated dioxins (PCDDs),
furans (PCDFs), and biphenyls (PCBs) by TEFs is hampered by species- and
tissue-specific responses that cannot readily be explained by differences in the 
Ah receptor levels but may be due to events subsequent to ligand binding to the
Ah receptor. Moreover, PCDDs and related compounds accumulate in the environment,
in animal and human tissues as highly complex mixtures. Thus, comprehensive risk 
assessment should include all Ah receptor ligands and agents that modulate the Ah
receptor-mediated responses. Tumor promoter studies with mixtures of PCDDs and
halogenated biphenyls have shown additive, synergistic, and antagonistic effects.
To analyse the interactions of TCDD and PCBs as tumor promoters in more detail,
we established an in vitro assay, i.e., the enhancement (promotion) of malignant 
transformation of carcinogen-initiated C3H/M2 mouse fibroblasts after treatment
with tumor promoters. The coplanar PCB 126, a potent Ah receptor agonist, and the
diortho-substituted PCB153, to which no TEF value has been ascribed, are
promoters of malignant transformation. A defined mixture of PCB126 and TCDD had
an additive promoting effect, while PCB 153 antagonized the TCDD-mediated
promotion. Thus, the TEF-approach may be insufficient to estimate the
tumor-promoting activities of PCDDs, PCDFs, and PCBs in mammalian tissues in
which diortho-substituted PCBs are greatly accumulated.

PMID: 9508731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Acta Chir Hung. 1997;36(1-4):25-6.

A case of fibrin sealant application for closing benign trachea-esophageal
fistula (TEF).

Benkó I(1), Molnár TF, Horváth OP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, First Surgical Clinic, Medical University of
Pécs, Hungary.

Surgical treatment of upper airway-esophageal communications are frequently lead 
to failure. Having previous experience of thoracic administration of Tissucol
fibrin glue authors attempted the local application in a case of TEF. A young
lady suffering from myasthenia gravis required longstanding artificial
ventilation. Not surprisingly a TEP developed in the area of the tracheostomy.
There was no room for surgical repair of the TEF. Two administrations of rapid
acting form of Tissucol was needed following local astringent therapy and
enzymatic debridement to achieve a complete and permanent closure of a
tracheobronchial sinus in a diameter of 5 mm. In addition of meticulous technique
and of general supporting therapy special attention was paid to the followings:
1/healthy wound edges 2/ local infection control 3/dry environment 4/patient
building up strategy.

PMID: 9408274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Abdom Imaging. 1997 Jan-Feb;22(1):14-9.

Nonexpandable silicone esophageal stents for treatment of malignant
tracheoesophageal fistulas: complications and radiographic appearances.

Stemerman DH(1), Caroline DF, Dabezies M, Mercader VP, Krevsky B, Gatenby RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Temple University Hospital/School of
Medicine, Broad and Ontario Streets, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

BACKGROUND: The aim was to evaluate the radiologic appearances and complications 
that occurred after placement of nonexpandable silicone stents used as palliative
therapy for patients with malignant tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs).
METHODS: Records of 11 patients (6 males, 5 females) who underwent placement of
esophageal stents for malignant TEF between 1988 and 1994 were reviewed. Nine
patients had esophageal carcinoma and two patients bronchogenic carcinoma. A TEF 
was documented radiographically in all patients. Silicone stents were placed in
all patients under endoscopic guidance. A chest radiograph was obtained for each 
patient immediately following stent placement to confirm proper positioning and
to assess complications. A contrast study was performed within 24 hours after the
procedure to evaluate the function of the stent and its efficacy for occluding
the fistulous tract. The patients were followed until January 1995 or until their
death (range 1.5-24. 0 months).
RESULTS: Seven of the patients developed stent-related complications. Within the 
first 24 hours after stent insertion (which was successful in 100% of cases), 2
of the 11 patients developed minor complications. One patient had pooling of
contrast around the proximal portion of the stent leading to aspiration of
contrast, and one patient experienced transient, asymptomatic, idiopathic,
esophagovenous intravasation. Delayed (>24 hours) complications related to stent 
placement occurred in five of the patients: one patient each had pooling at the
proximal end of the stent with aspiration, worsening esophageal dysphagia causing
reflux through the stent, caudad stent migration, superior stent migration,
epithelial hyperplasia causing obstruction of the stent, and pressure necrosis.
There were no cases of hemorrhage. Two patients were lost to long-term follow-up,
and eight patients died of their disease, all unrelated to the stent placement.
CONCLUSION: Silicone esophageal stents provide successful short-term palliation
for most patients with malignant TEF but are not without associated
complications. These complications, however, can usually be detected early using 
radiographic imaging, permitting remediation.

PMID: 9000348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 15;24(24):4978-86.

Structure and function of the zeta-globin upstream regulatory element.

Sabath DE(1), Koehler KM, Yang WQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle 98195-7110, USA. dsabath@u.washington.edu

The human zeta-globin promoter contains a strong positive regulatory element in
the 5' flanking region, designated the zeta-globin upstream regulatory element
(URE). In this study, we define the minimal sequences required for URE function
and characterize the associated protein-DNA interactions. Deletion experiments
show that the URE spans a 60 bp region located between 220 and 279 bp 5' to the
transcription start site. Further subdivision of this region shows that multiple 
cis acting sequences are present. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrate that the erythroid transcription factor GATA-1 binds a site at -230, 
and Sp1 and an unidentified factor bind a CCACC site at -240. The unidentified
CCACC factor is distinct from two other CCACC factors, EKLF and BKLF/TEF-2. A
third complex contains a novel DNA-binding activity that interacts with a site in
the -269 to -255 region, designated URE binding factor (URE-BF). This factor is
present in K562 cells that express zeta-globin, but is absent in the OCIM1 cell
line, a human erythroid cell line that does not express zeta-globin. URE-BF
appears to interact with a GATA factor, since formation of the URE-BF complex can
be prevented by the presence of unlabeled oligonucleotides containing GATA sites.
Finally, increasing the distance from the -230 GATA site to the two upstream
sites causes a progressive decrease in zeta-globin promoter activity. There is no
indication of a requirement for GATA-1 to be on the same side of the DNA helix as
the other upstream factors. These results show that zeta-globin promoter function
is highly dependent on a 60 bp region to which at least three different factors
bind. Two of these factors may represent DNA-binding proteins not previously
identified as important for regulation of globin gene expression. It is likely
that these factors interact physically to create a functional regulatory unit.

PMCID: PMC146349
PMID: 9016669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. AIDS Patient Care STDS. 1996 Dec;10(6):334-5.

Tracheoesophageal fistula in AIDS: stent versus primary repair.

Rosario P(1), Song J, Wittenborn W, Christian F.

Author information: 
(1)Departmental of Cardiothoracic Surgery UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School,
Newark, USA.

Tracheoesophageal fistula arising secondary to Mycobacterium tuberculous
infection in AIDS patients is extremely rare. We describe a case with a fistula
lesion that initially failed to close using a four-drug antituberculosis regimen.
The original lesion closed following placement of an esophageal stent. However,
the stent migrated, causing an iatrogenic tracheoesophageal fistula that needed
surgical repair. Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is an uncommon clinical
condition, most frequently arising as a sequelae to esophageal malignancy.
Iatrogenic injury to the membraneous trachea secondary to cuffed endotracheal or 
tracheostomy tubes in the presence of an in-dwelling nasogastric tube and
corrosive burns, accounts for most of the remainder of occurring fistulas.
Infections such as candidiasis, syphilis, and tuberculosis are also known to
cause this condition. We report stent migration with perforation and subsequent
TEF formation in an HIV-positive patient who originally had stent placement for a
tuberculous tracheoesophageal fistula.

PMID: 11361547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Surg Oncol. 1996 Dec;63(4):265-7.

Tracheoesophageal fistula developing during chemotherapy for non-Hodgkins
lymphoma.

Lackner RP(1), Bierman PJ, Galbraith TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha
68198-2315, USA.

Lymphoma is an unusual cause of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Most fistulas
develop after radiation therapy and are a rare occurrence in patients treated
with chemotherapy alone. The presence of a TEF is usually indicative of active
lymphoma. This report describes a tracheoesophageal fistula that developed during
chemotherapy for diffuse large cell lymphoma.

PMID: 8982372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):365-70.

A novel family of TEA domain-containing transcription factors with distinct
spatiotemporal expression patterns.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We cloned two novel types of TEA domain-containing transcription factor (ETFR-1
and -2) cDNAs. Amino acid sequences deduced for ETFR-1 and -2 as well as those of
other known proteins of the same family, TEF-1 and ETF, exhibited significant
identity (63-75% overall) to each other not only in the TEA DNA binding domain
but also in the C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis revealed that both the
mRNAs were expressed in embryos as well as in many adult tissues, although their 
levels of expression varied. The results demonstrate that the mammalian TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family consists of at least four distinct 
members, TEF-1, ETF, ETFR-1, and ETFR-2, which exhibit overlapping but differing 
spatiotemporal expression patterns, suggesting their redundant yet unique roles
involved in not only developmental control but also tissue-specific regulation.

PMID: 8920920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Nov 12;93(23):12974-9.

Essential role of beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1 in cardiac development and
function.

Jaber M(1), Koch WJ, Rockman H, Smith B, Bond RA, Sulik KK, Ross J Jr, Lefkowitz 
RJ, Caron MG, Giros B.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Laboratories, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

The beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 1 (beta ARK1) is a member of the G
protein-coupled receptor kinase (GRK) family that mediates the agonist-dependent 
phosphorylation and desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors. We have
cloned and disrupted the beta ARK1 gene in mice by homologous recombination. No
homozygote beta ARK1-/- embryos survive beyond gestational day 15.5. Prior to
gestational day 15.5, beta ARK1-/- embryos display pronounced hypoplasia of the
ventricular myocardium essentially identical to the "thin myocardium syndrome"
observed upon gene inactivation of several transcription factors (RXR alpha,
N-myc, TEF-1, WT-1). Lethality in beta ARK1-/- embryos is likely due to heart
failure as they exhibit a > 70% decrease in cardiac ejection fraction determined 
by direct in utero intravital microscopy. These results along with the virtual
absence of endogenous GRK activity in beta ARK1-/- embryos demonstrate that beta 
ARK1 appears to be the predominant GRK in early embryogenesis and that it plays a
fundamental role in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC24031
PMID: 8917529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Oct 15;24(20):3887-95.

Chromatin structure and factor site occupancies in an in vivo-assembled
transcription elongation complex.

Eadara JK(1), Hadlock KG, Lutter LC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Program, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, MI 48202,
USA.

The chromatin structure specific to the SV40 late transcription elongation
complex as well as the occupancy of several sites that bind transcription factors
have been examined. These features have been determined by assessing blockage to 
restriction enzyme digestion. Cleavage specific to the elongation complex has
been quantified using ternary complex analysis. This method involves
radioactively labeling the complex by in vitro transcription followed by
determining the extent of linearization by electrophoresis in an agarose gel. It 
was found that not only is the origin region devoid of nucleosomes, but there is 
also no stable factor occupancy at the BglI, SphI, KpnI and MspI restriction
enzyme sites within this region. Thus these sites were cleaved to a high degree, 
meaning that the binding sites for a number of transcription factors, including
OBP/TEF-1, TBP, DAP, as well as a proposed positioned nucleosome, are unoccupied 
in the native viral transcription elongation complex. The absence of these
trans-acting factors from their respective binding sites in the elongation
complex indicates that they bind only transiently, possibly cycling on and off
during the transcription cycle. This finding implies that various forms of
transcription complex are assembled and disassembled during transcription and
thus supports a 'hit-and-run' model of factor function.

PMCID: PMC146202
PMID: 8918788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 1996 Oct;42(5):449-68.

Effects of intermittent food restriction and refeeding on energy efficiency and
body fat deposition in sedentary and exercised rats.

Lim K(1), Murakami E, Lee S, Shimomura Y, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry of Exercise & Nutrition, Institute of Health &
Sports Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Japan.

The effects of body weight cycling on energy metabolism and body fat accumulation
were examined in sedentary and exercised rats. Ten rats were sacrificed before
the experiment to obtain basal data, and then 90 rats were divided into three
groups; control (CN), food restricted (FR) and weight cycling (WC). Food intake
in rats of the FR group was restricted constantly to 70% of the intake of the CN 
group. The rats of WC group were subjected to four bouts of weight cycling
consisting of 7-days food restriction followed by 7-days refeeding, but were fed 
the same total amount of dietary energy as that of the FR group throughout the
experimental period. The rats of all groups were meal-fed twice a day. Half of
the rats in each group were exercised by running on a treadmill (30 min/day)
throughout the experimental period. The body weight, abdominal adipose tissue
weight, body fat, body protein and energy restoration for the study in both
sedentary and exercised groups were greater in the WC group than in the FR group.
The resting metabolic rate of the WC group after four bouts of weight cycling was
lower than that of the FR group in the sedentary rats, but this difference was
not observed in the exercised rats. Also, the thermic effect of food (TEF) in the
sedentary rats for 6 h after a meal was significantly less in the WC group as
compared to that of the FR group. However, the TEF for the exercised rats was not
different between the two groups. The serum insulin level, activities of
lipogenic enzymes and lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue for the sedentary rats
of the WC group were higher than those of the FR group, but did not differ in the
exercised rats. These results suggest that weight cycling increases body fat
deposition and energy efficiency by decreasing energy expenditure, particularly
the TEF, and that exercise training can alleviate the effects of weight cycling
on the energy metabolism.

PMID: 8981251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biochem. 1996 Oct-Nov;163-164:203-10.

Catecholamines and cardiac growth.

Gupta MP(1), Gupta M, Jakovcic S, Zak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Section of Cardiology), University of Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

The present knowledge concerning the alpha- and beta-adrenergic systems in the
regulation of cardiac growth and gene expression is reviewed. To investigate the 
mechanism by which cAMP regulates the expression of cardiac genes we have used
cultured myocytes derived from fetal rat hearts. We have shown previously that
the addition of Br cAMP to the culture medium produced an increase in
alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC) mRNA level, in its rate of transcription as 
well as in the amount of V1 isomyosin. To characterize the promoter element(s)
involved in cAMP responsive regulation of alpha-MHC expression we performed
transient transfection analysis with a series of alpha-MHC gene promoter-CAT
constructs. We have identified a 13 bp E-box/M-CAT hybrid motif (EM element)
which conferred a basal muscle specific and cAMP inducible expression of the
alpha-MHC gene. Using mobility shift assay we have documented that one of the EM 
element binding protein is TEF-1. Moreover, by incubating cardiac nuclear
extracts with the catalytic subunit of PK-A we have found that factor(s) binding 
to the EM element is a substrate for cAMP dependent phosphorylation.

PMID: 8974058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Genomics. 1996 Oct 1;37(1):68-76.

Cloning of human RTEF-1, a transcriptional enhancer factor-1-related gene
preferentially expressed in skeletal muscle: evidence for an ancient multigene
family.

Stewart AF(1), Richard CW 3rd, Suzow J, Stephan D, Weremowicz S, Morton CC, Adra 
CN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.
als6+@pitt.edu

Transcriptional Enhancer Factor-1 (TEF-1) is a transcription factor required for 
cardiac muscle gene activation. Since ablation of TEF-1 does not abolish cardiac 
gene expression, we sought to identify a human gene related to TEF-1 (RTEF-1)
that might also participate in cardiac gene regulation. A human heart cDNA
library was screened to obtain a full-length RTEF-1 cDNA. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization assigned the RTEF-1 gene to chromosome 12p13.2-p13.3. In contrast, 
PCR screening of human/rodent cell hybrid panels identified TEF-1 on chromosome
11p15.2, between D11S1315 and D11S1334, extending a region of known synteny
between human chromosomes 11 and 12 and arguing for an ancient divergence between
these two closely related genes. Northern blot analysis revealed a striking
similarity in the tissue distribution of RTEF-1 and TEF-1 mRNAs; skeletal muscle 
showed the highest abundance of both mRNAs, with lower levels detected in
pancreas, placenta, and heart. Phylogenetic analysis of all known TEF-1-related
proteins identified human RTEF-1 as one of four vertebrate members of this
multigene family and further suggests that these genes diverged in the earliest
metazoan ancestors.

PMID: 8921372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Semin Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996 Oct;8(4):392-9.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula and its management.

Couraud L(1), Ballester MJ, Delaisement C.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Surgery Unit, Haut-Lévêque Hospital, France.

Tracheoesophageal fistulae (TEF) are severe lesions leading to serious and
eventually fatal pulmonary complications. Currently, TEF are mainly iatrogenic,
occurring in the course of tracheal intubation for resuscitation or malignant
after invasion of both esophageal and tracheal walls. Difficulty in treatment
results from the need to manage both the consequences of esophagotracheal
communication and those of the illness responsible for fistula. Various carefully
selected means may be used to achieve this aim: division and closure of the TEF, 
esophageal exclusion followed by gastric or colic bypass or push-through
intubation. Abstention from treatment may be appropriate in hopeless situations.

PMID: 8899926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Nutr. 1996 Oct;126(10):2531-8.

Postabsorptive and postprandial energy expenditure and substrate oxidation do not
change during the menstrual cycle in young women.

Melanson KJ(1), Saltzman E, Russell R, Roberts SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Jean Mayer U.S. Department of Agriculture Human Nutrition Research Center 
on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

There is little information on the effects of the menstrual cycle on the thermic 
effect of feeding (TEF) and postprandial substrate oxidation. To address these
issues, a dose-response study was conducted in eight young women to whom test
meals containing 0, 1046, 2092 and 4148 kJ were administered on nonconsecutive
days, once each during the follicular phase and once during the luteal phase of
the menstrual cycle. Postprandial energy expenditure was measured until it
returned to base line (test duration for the 0 kJ meal was matched to duration of
4184 kJ meal). There was no significant difference between menstrual cycle phases
in the duration of the thermogenic response to any size meal. TEF, calculated by 
four different methods, did not differ between follicular and luteal phases, and 
a comparable dose-response was observed in both phases. Similarly, there was no
effect of menstrual cycle phase on postabsorptive or postprandial protein, fat,
or carbohydrate oxidation. In conclusion, postabsorptive and postprandial energy 
expenditure and substrate oxidations did not differ in young women during the
follicular and luteal phases of the menstrual cycle.

PMID: 8857514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 1996 Oct;31(3):404-9.

Effects of 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) injected into the yolks of chicken
(Gallus domesticus) eggs prior to incubation.

Powell DC(1), Aulerich RJ, Meadows JC, Tillitt DE, Giesy JP, Stromberg KL,
Bursian SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, East Lansing,
Michigan 48824, USA.

The yolks of White Leghorn chicken (Gallus domesticus) eggs were injected prior
to incubation with either 3,3',4,4',5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB 126) at doses
ranging from 0.1 to 12.8 microg/kg egg or 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) at doses ranging from 0.04 to 0.64 microg/kg egg. Chicks were subjected to
necropsy within 24 h of hatching. The brain, bursa, heart, liver, and spleen were
removed and weighed. Assessment of the rate of hatching indicated an LD50+/-S.E. 
of 2.3+/-0.19 microg/kg egg (7. 1+/-0.58 nmol/kg egg) for PCB 126 and 0.15 +/-
0.012 microg/kg egg (0.47 +/- 0.037 nmol/kg egg) for TCDD. No significant
differences in the incidence of developmental abnormalities (structural defects
and edema) were observed in TCDD-exposed embryos, while PCB 126 caused
significantly more developmental abnormalities at 3.2, 6.4, and 12.8 microg/kg
egg than the vehicle control. PCB 126 caused lower hatchling weights and greater 
relative brain, heart, and liver weights when compared to the vehicle control
group at a dose of 3.2 microg/kg egg which is greater than the LD50. TCDD at 0.08
microg/kg egg caused relative bursa weights to be less than those of the vehicle 
control. A toxic equivalency factor (TEF) of 0.07 was determined for PCB 126 in
relation to TCDD based on overt lethality.

PMID: 8854835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 27;271(39):24278-85.

Repression of transcriptional enhancer factor-1 and activator protein-1-dependent
enhancer activity by vascular actin single-stranded DNA binding factor 2.

Kelm RJ Jr(1), Sun S, Strauch AR, Getz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcriptional repression of the murine vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene 
in fibroblasts results from the interaction of two sequence-specific
single-stranded DNA binding activities (VACssBF1 and VACssBF2) with opposite
strands of an essential transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) element (Sun,
S., Stoflet, E. S., Cogan, J. G., Strauch, A. R., and Getz, M. J. (1995) Mol.
Cell. Biol. 15, 2429-2436). Here, we identify a sequence element located within a
protein-coding exon of the gene that bears structural similarity with the TEF-1
enhancer. This includes a 30-base pair region of purine-pyrimidine asymmetry
encompassing a perfect 6-base pair GGAATG TEF-1 recognition motif. Unlike the
enhancer, however, the exon sequence exhibits no TEF-1 binding activity nor does 
the pyrimidine-rich strand bind VACssBF1. However, VACssBF2 interacts equally
well with the purine-rich strand of both the enhancer and the exon sequence. To
test the ability of VACssBF2 to independently repress transcription, the exon
sequence was placed upstream of a deletionally activated promoter containing an
intact TEF-1 binding site. The exon sequence repressed promoter activity, whereas
a mutant deficient in VACssBF2 binding did not. Moreover, VACssBF2 similarly
repressed activator protein-1-dependent transcription of a heterologous tissue
factor promoter. These results suggest that VACssBF2 possesses an intrinsic
ability to disrupt enhancer function independently of the enhancer-binding
proteins involved.

PMID: 8798674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):21775-85.

A novel family of developmentally regulated mammalian transcription factors
containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain.

Jacquemin P(1), Hwang JJ, Martial JA, Dollé P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, B.P. 163-67404 Illkirch Cédex, France.

We describe the molecular cloning of two novel human and murine transcription
factors containing the TEA/ATTS DNA binding domain and related to transcriptional
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). These factors bind to the consensus TEA/ATTS cognate
binding site exemplified by the GT-IIC and Sph enhansons of the SV40 enhancer but
differ in their ability to bind cooperatively to tandemly repeated sites. The
human TEFs are differentially expressed in cultured cell lines and the mouse
(m)TEFs are differentially expressed in embryonic and extra-embryonic tissues in 
early post-implantation embryos. Strikingly, at later stages of embryogenesis,
mTEF-3 is specifically expressed in skeletal muscle precursors, whereas mTEF-1 is
expressed not only in developing skeletal muscle but also in the myocardium.
Together with previous data, these results point to important, partially
redundant, roles for these TEF proteins in myogenesis and cardiogenesis. In
addition, mTEF-1 is strongly coexpressed with mTEF-4 in mitotic neuroblasts,
while accentuated mTEF-4 expression is also observed in the gut and the
nephrogenic region of the kidney. These observations suggest additional roles for
the TEF proteins in central nervous system development and organogenesis.

PMID: 8702974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Surg Oncol. 1996 Sep;63(1):65-70.

Malignant tracheo-esophageal fistula: use of esophageal endoprosthesis.

Spivak H(1), Katariya K, Lo AY, Harvey JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Beth Israel Medical Center New York, New York, USA.

Malignant tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF) is a serious complication of cancer
arising usually in the esophagus, lung, or tracheobronchial tree. Repeated
aspiration and pneumonia lead to rapid deterioration and death. The prognosis is 
dismal and curative resections are curiosities. Surgical bypass of the lesion has
been performed but is associated with 25-61% mortality. Other treatments have
been employed, such as enterostomies, esophageal endoprostheses, and supportive
care. The reported mortality of palliative procedures using endoprostheses,
surgical bypass, or exclusion in almost identical. A retrospective review of the 
data over the past decade revealed a trend toward insertion of endoprostheses.
Insertion of endoprostheses can be performed in an endoscopy suite, under
sedation, and has fewer major complications than occur with a surgical approach. 
The periprocedure mortality rate for these patients is 15%, compared to a 29-47% 
perioperative mortality for patients undergoing surgery. Even so, patients after 
surgical procedures could survive for 8 months or more, which is better than
survival after endoprosthesis intubation. We conclude that insertion of an
esophageal endoprosthesis should be the usual preferred option for palliative
treatment of malignant TEF. However, for special candidates a surgical procedure 
is a valid option.

PMID: 8841471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Genomics. 1996 Sep 1;36(2):263-70.

Structural organization and chromosomal assignment of the mouse embryonic TEA
domain-containing factor (ETF) gene.

Suzuki K(1), Yasunami M, Matsuda Y, Maeda T, Kobayashi H, Terasaki H, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Kumamoto, 862, Japan.

Embryonic TEA domain-containing factor (ETF) belongs to the family of proteins
structurally related to transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) and is
implicated in neural development. Isolation and characterization of the cosmid
clones encoding the mouse ETF gene (Etdf) revealed that Etdf spans approximately 
17.9 kb and consists of 12 exons. The exon-intron structure of Etdf closely
resembles that of the Drosophila scalloped gene, indicating that these genes may 
have evolved from a common ancestor. The multiple transcription initiation sites 
revealed by S1 protection and primer extension analyses are consistent with the
absence of the canonical TATA and CAAT boxes in the 5'-flanking region, which
contains many potential regulatory sequences, such as the E-box, N-box, Sp1
element, GATA-1 element, TAATGARAT element, and B2 short interspersed element
(SINE) as well as several direct and inverted repeat sequences. The Etdf locus
was assigned to the proximal region of mouse chromosome 7 using fluorescence in
situ hybridization and linkage mapping analyses. These results provide the
molecular basis for studying the regulation, in vivo function, and evolution of
Etdf.

PMID: 8812452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Pediatr Surg Int. 1996 Aug;11(7):444-7. doi: 10.1007/BF00180079.

Narrowing the embryologic window of the adriamycin-induced fetal rat model of
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Qi B(1), Diez-Pardo JA, Navarro C, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Infantil Universitario "La Paz",
E-28046, Madrid, Spain.

We recently reported on a new fetal rat model of esophageal atresia (EA) with
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) induced by prenatal exposure to adriamycin (1.75 
mg/kg i. p. injected daily to the pregnant dam from the 6th to 9th gestational
days). With this treatment regime, many fetuses were resorbed and the number of
associated malformations was very high. The present study demonstrates that
similar doses of the drug administered only on the 8th and 9th gestational days
allow higher fetal survival (9.7 ± 3.9 vs. 6.8 ± 4.7 fetuses per litter, P <
0.01) with a similar incidence of EA-TEF (41.2% vs. 56.4%, n. s.) and decreased
occurence of associated anorectal and genitourinary malformations. Since this
model is an instrument for further investigation of the disturbed cellular and
morphogenetic events leading to EA and TEF, the narrowing of the embryologic
window obtained by the present study will allow better focusing of the research
on the critical period of time involved.

PMID: 24057779  [PubMed]


288. J Am Coll Nutr. 1996 Aug;15(4):403-7.

The effects of theophylline on metabolic rate in chronic obstructive lung disease
patients.

Mosier K(1), Renvall MJ, Ramsdell JW, Spindler AA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine/Geriatrics, University of California,
San Diego 92103-8415, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of theophylline and an alternative bronchodilator,
ipratropium, on resting energy expenditure (REE) and thermic effect of food
(TEF).
DESIGN: 5-week randomized, repeated measures, double-blind, cross-over design,
comparing the effects of theophylline and ipratropium drug treatments on
metabolic measurements made during a baseline period.
SETTING: Ambulatory Clinical Trials Center at University of California, San
Diego.
SUBJECTS: 14 patients at least 65 years old with a clinical diagnosis of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.
MEASUREMENTS: Resting energy expenditure and thermic effect of food were measured
by indirect calorimetry. Body composition was determined using bioimpedance.
RESULTS: Resting energy expenditure did not differ between baseline and either of
the two drug treatments. In men, the thermic effect of food increased
significantly during theophylline and ipratropium drug treatment periods (p <
0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Theophylline or ipratropium does not appear to increase resting
energy expenditure in patients with chronic obstructive lung disease. The
elevated values for thermic effect of food in men need further study.

PMID: 8829097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 1996 Aug;26(4):201-6.

Prognostic value of histopathological therapeutic effects and mitotic index in
locally advanced breast cancers after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Akashi-Tanaka S(1), Tsuda H, Fukuda H, Watanabe T, Fukutomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan.

A study was conducted to examine whether or not the histopathological therapeutic
effects of preoperative chemotherapy could be useful for determining prognosis in
women with locally advanced breast cancer. The patients were 37 women with
locally advanced breast cancer who received preoperative chemotherapy between
1977 and 1987. The histological grade of malignancy (HGM) and histopathological
therapeutic effects of chemotherapy (TEf) were examined in resected specimens.
Patients with HGM 3 showed a poorer 10-year overall survival (38%) than those
with HGM 1 or 2 (62%). Patients showing a better histopathological response (TEf 
1b plus 2) had a poorer 10-year overall survival (20%) than those with a poorer
response (TEf 0 plus 1a) (60%). Therapeutic effects were significantly related to
histological grade, nuclear atypia and mitotic index (p = 0.03, 0.005 and 0.002, 
respectively). Histopathological therapeutic effects were not directly correlated
with patient prognosis. Cox proportional hazard regression analysis revealed that
mitotic index was the most significant prognostic factor related to 10-year
overall survival.

PMID: 8765175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Pediatr Surg. 1996 Jul;31(7):989-91.

Coexisting left congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula: successful management in a premature neonate.

Sapin E(1), Berg A, Raynaud P, Lapeyre G, Seringe R, Helardot PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, CHU
Cochin-Port-Royal, Université Rene Descartes, Paris, France.

The combination of left congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) with esophageal
atresia (EA) and distal tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is extremely rare and is 
considered highly lethal. The authors describe a premature neonate with this
association, who is alive at 6 1/2 years of age. Temporary banding of the
gastroesophageal junction and gastrostomy was performed concurrently with hernia 
repair and prosthetic abdominoplasty to enlarge the abdominal cavity. A right
thoracotomy for ligation of the fistula, using extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO), was performed 13 days later. Complete repair of the
esophageal atresia was accomplished 7 weeks after birth. The methods that have
been suggested in the literature are discussed. The institution of ECMO at birth 
could allow a primary complete surgical repair of EA and CDH. Nevertheless,
surgical management with staged repair, as described herein, can be useful.

PMID: 8811578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Am J Clin Nutr. 1996 Jul;64(1):78-86.

Thermic and metabolic responses to oral glucose in obese subjects with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus treated with insulin or a very-low-energy
diet.

Gougeon R(1).

Author information: 
(1)McGill Nutrition and Food Science Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal,
Canada.

Increased resting energy expenditure (REE) and a blunted thermic effect of
glucose (TEF) have been reported in obese subjects with non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). I questioned whether the abnormal REE and TEF would be
corrected by normalizing glycemia with insulin or a very-low-energy diet (VLED). 
Three male and four female obese subjects with NIDDM [weighing 108 +/- 6 kg and
with body mass index (in kg/m2) of 39 +/- 2] received a weight-maintaing formula 
diet containing 95 g protein/d for 15 d then a 1.7-MJ, 93-g-protein VLED for 27
d. Insulin was given from days 1 to 8 in doses sufficient to normalize glycemia. 
REE was measured weekly and TEF was measured on days 8 and 15 of isoenergetic
feeding and 28 d after the VLED by using a ventilated-hood indirect calorimeter. 
Weight decreased 9.8 +/- 1 kg during the VLED. REE was 3% lower with insulin
treatment than during hyperglycemia (7878 +/- 364 compared with 8125 +/- 381
kJ/d, P = 0.002). REE decreased by 20% to 6494 +/- 280 kJ/d by week 4 of the
VLED. After 112 g oral glucose, increments in energy expenditure were
significantly greater during isoenergetic feeding with insulin than without (7.5 
+/- 1.3% compared with 4.3 +/- 0.9% above REE) and after the VLED (10.5 +/- 1.0% 
above REE, P < 0.05). Plasma glucose excursions were greatest without exogenous
insulin (peak 21.5 +/- 1.8 mmol/L at 120 min, 16.3 +/- 1.9 mmol/L at 225 min).
Plasma fatty acid excursions were the lowest with insulin treatment. The
integrated plasma glucose and fatty acid responses above baseline did not differ 
among studies; the integrated insulin and C-peptide responses were greater after 
the VLED. Cumulative nonoxidative glucose disposal (stored glucose) was higher
with insulin therapy than without (52 +/- 6 compared with 35 +/- 7 g/210 min, P <
0.05) and increased significantly to 66 +/- 6 g after the VLED (compared with the
isoenergetic diet without insulin). TEF correlated significantly with integrated 
C-peptide and insulin responses. The percentage increase in TEF with euglycemia
(with insulin and VLED) correlated with the percentage increase in stored glucose
(P < 0.05). The greater TEF was associated with a greater insulin response, which
was probably responsible for the greater stored glucose.

PMID: 8669419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3742-55.

Flanking sequences modulate the cell specificity of M-CAT elements.

Larkin SB(1), Farrance IK, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California San Francisco, California
94143, USA.

M-CAT elements mediate both muscle-specific and non-muscle-specific
transcription. We used artificial promoters to dissect M-CAT elements derived
from the cardiac troponin T promoter, whose regulation is highly striated muscle 
specific. We show that muscle-specific M-CAT-dependent expression requires two
distinct components: the core heptameric M-CAT motif (5'-CATTCCT-3'), which
constitutes the canonical binding site for TEF-1-related proteins, and specific
sequences immediately flanking the core motif that bind an additional factor(s). 
These factors are found in higher-order M-CAT DNA-protein complexes with TEF-1
proteins. Non-muscle-specific promoters are produced when the sequences flanking 
the M-CAT motif are removed or modified to match those of non-muscle-specific
promoters such as the simian virus 40 promoter. Moreover, a mutation of the
5'-flanking region of the cardiac troponin T M-CAT-1 element upregulated
expression in nonmuscle cells. That mutation also disrupts a potential E box that
apparently does not bind myogenic basic helix-loop-helix proteins. We propose a
model in which M-CAT motifs are potentially active in many cell types but are
modulated through protein binding to specific flanking sequences. In nonmuscle
cells, these flanking sequences bind a factor(s) that represses M-CAT-dependent
activity. In muscle cells, on the other hand, the factor(s) binding to these
flanking sequences contributes to both the cell specificity and the overall
transcriptional strength of M-CAT-dependent promoters.

PMCID: PMC231370
PMID: 8668191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Am J Med Genet. 1996 Jun 28;63(4):525-8.

Familial recurrence of tracheoesophageal fistula and associated malformations.

McMullen KP(1), Karnes PS, Moir CR, Michels VV.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Medical School, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
USA.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) may occur as an isolated malformation or together
with other malformations. To determine the recurrence risk of TEF or associated
malformations in children and sibs, and to determine the frequency of associated 
malformations in index patients, we reviewed the Mayo Clinic records of 204
patients with TEF. Also, questionnaires were sent to patients or relatives.
Questions were designed to determine whether the patient and relatives had TEF
and/or related organ system (including VACTERL) malformations. The VACTERL
association is a disorder characterized by 3 or more of the following: vertebral,
anal, cardiac, renal, or radial anomalies, and TEF. One hundred twenty-eight
families returned a completed questionnaire, and 140 index patients were
ascertained based on complete medical records, questionnaire, and/or autopsy.
Forty-one (29.3%) of 140 index patients had TEF with one other VACTERL
malformation, and twenty-four (17.1%) of 140 index patients had TEF with at least
two other VACTERL malformations. Of the 347 sibs of index patients, 5 (1.4%) had 
one VACTERL malformation each, including 1 sib with esophageal atresia (EA)
without TEF. Of the 41 children of index patients, 1 (2.4%) had TEF plus two
other VACTERL malformations; another had one non-TEF VACTERL malformation. From
our study, the largest reported population of TEF patients to date, we conclude
that: 1) nearly half (46%) of patients with tracheoesophageal fistula will
exhibit other VACTERL malformations; 2) the recurrence risk for individuals with 
TEF to have affected children is 2-3%; and 3) there is an increased risk to
relatives of TEF patients to exhibit other VACTERL malformations.

PMID: 8826429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 7;271(23):13786-95.

Identification of a murine TEF-1-related gene expressed after mitogenic
stimulation of quiescent fibroblasts and during myogenic differentiation.

Hsu DK(1), Guo Y, Alberts GF, Copeland NG, Gilbert DJ, Jenkins NA, Peifley KA,
Winkles JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Holland Laboratory, American Red Cross,
Rockville, Maryland 20855, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-1 binding to cell surface receptors stimulates an 
intracellular signaling pathway that ultimately promotes the transcriptional
activation of specific genes. We have used a mRNA differential display method to 
identify FGF-1-inducible genes in mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts. Here, we report that
one of these genes, FGF-regulated (FR)-19, is predicted to encode a member of the
transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 family of structurally related
DNA-binding proteins. Specifically, the deduced FR-19 amino acid sequence has
approximately89, 77, and 68% overall identity to chicken TEF-1A, mouse TEF-1, and
mouse embryonic TEA domain-containing factor, respectively. Gel mobility shift
experiments indicate that FR-19, like TEF-1, can bind the GT-IIC motif found in
the SV40 enhancer. The FR-19 gene maps in the distal region of mouse chromosome
6, and analysis of several FR-19 cDNA clones indicates that at least two FR-19
isoforms may be expressed from this locus. FGF-1 induction of FR-19 mRNA
expression in mouse fibroblasts is first detectable at 4 h after FGF-1 addition
and is dependent on de novo RNA and protein synthesis. FGF-2, calf serum,
platelet-derived growth factor-BB, and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate can also
induce FR-19 mRNA levels. We have also found that FR-19 mRNA expression increases
during mouse C2C12 myoblast differentiation in vitro. The FR-19 gene is expressed
in vivo in a tissue-specific manner, with a relatively high level detected in
lung. These results indicate that increased expression of a TEF-1-related protein
may be important for both mitogen-stimulated fibroblast proliferation and
skeletal muscle cell differentiation.

PMID: 8662936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Am J Physiol. 1996 Jun;270(6 Pt 1):C1624-33.

SRF and TEF-1 control of chicken skeletal alpha-actin gene during slow-muscle
hypertrophy.

Carson JA(1), Schwartz RJ, Booth FW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas-Houston Health Science 
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The purpose of this study was to delineate the alpha-actin regulatory elements
and transcription factors that are responsible for conferring stretch-overload
responsiveness during hypertrophy of the anterior latissimus dorsi (ALD) muscle
of young chickens by weighting one wing. Minimal promoter constructs were
evaluated by direct injection into the ALD, which demonstrated that both serum
response element 1 (SRE1) and the transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1)
elements were sufficient for increased expression during stretch overload. A
mutated SRE1 prevented expression in both basal and stretched ALD muscles,
whereas a mutated TEF-1 element reduced actin promoter function in both control
and stretched muscles. The serum response factor (SRF)-SRE1 binding complex
demonstrated faster migration in mobility shift assays from day 3-and day
6-stretched ALD nuclear extracts relative to their control. TEF-1 binding was
qualitatively increased in stretched extracts at day 3 but not day 6 of stretch
overload. Skeletal alpha-actin mRNA accumulated from day 3 to day 6 of stretch
overload. These data demonstrate that SRE1 is necessary and sufficient for
stretch-overload responsiveness from the skeletal alpha-actin promoter and that
the SRF-SRE1 binding complex migrates faster in stretched nuclear extracts of
hypertrophied relative to control extracts from intact ALD muscles of chickens.

PMID: 8764144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Chemosphere. 1996 Jun;32(12):2481-92.

A survey of PCB congeners in U.K. cows' milk.

Sewart A(1), Jones KC.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Science Division, Institute of Environmental and Biological
Sciences, Lancaster University, UK.

Samples of unpasteurised bulked milk, taken directly from ten herds of dairy
cattle on rural and urban farms in the north west of England on five separate
sampling occasions, were analysed for a range of PCB congeners. Sigma PCB
concentrations (sum of 37 congeners) ranged from 3.4-16.4 ng/g milk fat with a
mean sigma PCB concentration of 8.4 ng/g milk fat. The dominating congeners were 
118, 153, 138 and 180, which contributed 15%, 20%, 17% and 9% of the sigma PCB
load respectively. The chlorine pattern of the congeners which made moderate or
major contributions to the sigma PCB concentration were typically substituted at 
both para positions (4,4'), while the PCB congeners not detected in the milk had 
at least one ring that was not 4-substituted. These results indicate the 4,4'
substitution pattern as being the key to PCB persistence in cows. It is estimated
that consumption of typical daily intakes of milk with the PCB concentrations
measured in this study would contribute 11% of the average daily sigma PCB intake
for individuals in the UK. This contribution would increase to 30% when exposure 
through the consumption of dairy products prepared from such milk (e.g. cheese,
butter) is taken into account. It is estimated that the inclusion of the TEF
assigned PCBs would typically increase the TEQ rating of cows' milk by
approximately 40% over that attributed to PCDD/Fs alone.

PMID: 8653383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Blood. 1996 Jun 1;87(11):4607-17.

The proto-oncogene HLF and the related basic leucine zipper protein TEF display
highly similar DNA-binding and transcriptional regulatory properties.

Hunger SP(1), Li S, Fall MZ, Naumovski L, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, University
of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO, USA.

Genes encoding transcription factors are frequently altered by chromosomal
translocations in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), suggesting that aberrant
transcriptional regulation plays a prominent role in leukemogenesis. E2A-hepatic 
leukemia factor (HLF), a chimeric transcription factor created by the t(17;19),
consists of the amino terminal portion of E2A proteins, including two
experimentally defined transcriptional activation domains (TADs), fused to the
HLF DNA binding and protein dimerization basic leucine zipper (bZIP) domain. To
understand the mechanisms by which E2A-HLF induces leukemia and the crucial
functions contributed by each constituent of the chimera, it is essential to
define the normal transcriptional regulatory properties of HLF and related bZIP
proteins. To address these questions, we cloned the human homologue of TEF/VBP, a
bZIP protein closely related to HLF. Using a binding site selection assay, we
found that TEF bound preferentially to the consensus sequence 5'-GTTACGTAAT-3',
which is identical to the previously determined HLF recognition site. TEF and HLF
activated transcription of consensus site-containing reporter genes in several
different cell types with similar potencies. Using GAL4 chimeric proteins, a TAD 
was mapped to a discrete approximate 40 amino acid region of TEF and HLF within
which they share 72% amino acid identity and 85% similarity. The TEF/HLF
activation domain (THAD) has a predicted helical secondary structure, but shares 
no sequence homology with previously reported TADs. The THAD contained most, if
not all, of the transcriptional activation properties present in both TEF and HLF
and its deletion completely abrogated transcriptional activity of TEF and HLF in 
both mammalian cells and yeast. Thus, TEF and HLF share indistinguishable
DNA-binding and transcriptional regulatory properties, whose alteration in
leukemia may be pathogenetically important.

PMID: 8639829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1996 May 17;119(1):1-10.

"Repair' of the chorionic somatomammotropin-A "enhancer' region reveals a novel
functional element in the chorionic somatomammotropin-B enhancer.

Lytras A(1), Surabhi RM, Zhang JF, Jin Y, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin (CS) synthesis results from the independent
expression of two homologous genes, CS-A and CS-B. A transcription enhancer
factor-1 (TEF-1) element and an upstream 81 bp modulatory domain, containing
repressor (RF-1) and derepressor (DF-1) activities, are important for efficient
CS-B enhancer function in transfected placental JEG-3 cells. The equivalent
region of the CS-A gene is not active. Although the TEF-1 element is conserved
between the CS-A and CS-B genes, a single base substitution is present in the
DF-1 element and two more are located between the RF-1 and DF-1 sites in a region
we term AF-1. Repair of the DF-1 site increased CS-A enhancer function
approximately 70-fold, but repair of previously uncharacterized AF-1 sequences
was also required for full (CS-B like) enhancer activity. A 5 bp disruption of
AF-1 sequences in the CS-B enhancer region, resulted in a 97% loss of stimulatory
activity. The AF-1 sequences showed no intrinsic enhancer activity, however, they
were able to significantly repress heterologous promoter activity stimulated by a
TEF-1 enhancer element. A high affinity/specificity interaction between JEG-3
nuclear protein and AF-1 sequences was confirmed by gel mobility shift assay. By 
comparison to "wild type' AF-1 sequences, this interaction was competed to a
lesser extent by both RF-1 and DF-1 elements, but not by mutated AF-1 sequences. 
The major protein binding to AF-1 sequences was estimated to be 23 kDa by UV
crosslinking. These data indicate that enhancer activity can be generated by
modulating binding events proximal to the TEF-1 element in the CS-A "enhancer'
region and that coordinated binding of AF-1 and DF-1 are required for efficient
(CS-B) enhancer activity.

PMID: 8793848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 3;271(18):10827-33.

Serum response factor mediates AP-1-dependent induction of the skeletal
alpha-actin promoter in ventricular myocytes.

Paradis P(1), MacLellan WR, Belaguli NS, Schwartz RJ, Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

"Fetal" gene transcription, including activation of the skeletal alpha-actin
(SkA) promoter, is provoked in cardiac myocytes by mechanical stress and trophic 
ligands. Induction of the promoter by transforming growth factor beta or
norepinephrine requires serum response factor (SRF) and TEF-1; expression is
inhibited by YY1. We and others postulated that immediate-early transcription
factors might couple trophic signals to this fetal program. However, multiple
Fos/Jun proteins exist, and the exact relationship between control by Fos/Jun
versus SRF, TEF-1, and YY1 is unexplained. We therefore cotransfected ventricular
myocytes with Fos, Jun, or JunB, and SkA reporter genes. SkA transcription was
augmented by Jun, Fos/Jun, Fos/JunB, and Jun/JunB; Fos and JunB alone were
neutral or inhibitory. Mutation of the SRF site, SRE1, impaired activation by
Jun; YY1, TEF-1, and Sp1 sites were dispensable. SRE1 conferred Jun activation to
a heterologous promoter, as did the c-fos SRE. Deletions of DNA binding,
dimerization, or trans-activation domains of Jun and SRF abolished activation by 
Jun and synergy with SRF. Neither direct binding of Fos/Jun to SREs, nor physical
interaction between Fos/Jun and SRF, was detected in mobility-shift assays. Thus,
AP-1 factors activate a hypertrophy-associated gene via SRF, without detectable
binding to the promoter or to SRF.

PMID: 8631897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1996 May;20(5):481-7.

Determinants of weight loss following ileogastrostomy.

Su W(1), Jones PJ, Cleator IG, Phang PT, Birmingham CL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Nutrition, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

To examine the factors associated with weight loss following ileogastrostomy, (i)
energy expenditure, (ii) body composition and (iii) urinary and fecal energy
losses were examined in 11 morbidly obese subjects (36 +/- 3 y, 43.7 +/- 0.9
kg/m2 BMI, 47.0 +/- 1.3% body fat (BF) (mean +/- SEM) prior to and after this
surgical procedure. Respiratory gas exchange analysis was used to measure changes
in basal energy expenditure (BEE) and thermic effect of food (TEF). Total energy 
expenditure (TEE) was determined by doubly labeled water (DLW) method over 14 d
during 6-8 weeks after surgery. Body composition was assessed using isotope
dilution space (IDS) method. Illegastrostomy did not significantly influence BEE 
levels but TEF declined following surgery (p = 0.001). There was a significant
decline (p < 0.0001) in fat-free mass (FFM) and fat mass (FM). Weight loss was
closely associated with TEE (r = 0.719, p = 0.019, n = 10), and fecal energy
content (r = 0.808, p = 0.052, n = 6) but not with urinary energy loss (r =
0.011, p = 0.983, n = 6). The results indicate that ileogastrostomy blunts TEF
levels and both FFM and FM declined following surgery. Total energy expenditure
and fecal energy losses appear to be important determinants in the extent of
weight loss following ileogastrostomy.

PMID: 8696428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 19;271(16):9510-8.

TEF-1 transrepression in BeWo cells is mediated through interactions with the
TATA-binding protein, TBP.

Jiang SW(1), Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) has been implicated in transactivating a 
placental enhancer (CSEn) that regulates human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) 
gene activity. We demonstrated that TEF-1 represses hCS promoter activity in
choriocarcinoma (BeWo) cells (Jiang, S.W., and Eberhardt, N.L. (1995) J. Biol.
Chem. 270, 13609-13915), suggesting that TEF-1 interacts with basal transcription
factors. Here we demonstrate that hTEF-1 overexpression inhibits minimal hCS
promoters containing TATA and/or initiator elements, Rous sarcoma virus and
thymidine kinase promoters in BeWo cells. Cotransfection of TEF-1 antisense
oligonucleotides alleviated exogenous TEF-1-mediated repression and increased
basal hCS promoter activity, indicating that endogenous TEF-1 exerts repressor
activity. GST-TEF-1 fusion peptides fixed to glutathione-Sepharose beads retained
in vitro-generated human TATA-binding protein, hTBP. The TEF-1 proline-rich
domain was essential for TBP binding, but polypeptides also containing the zinc
finger domain bound TBP with higher apparent affinity. TBP supershifted
hTEF-GT-IIC DNA complexes, but TEF-1 inhibited in vitro binding of TBP to the
TATA motif. Coexpression of TBP and TEF-1 in BeWo cells alleviated TEF-1-mediated
transrepression, indicating that the TBP-TEF-1 interaction is functional in vivo.
The data indicate that TEF-1 transrepression is mediated by direct interactions
with TBP, possibly by inhibiting preinitiation complex formation.

PMID: 8621623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Mol Cell Biochem. 1996 Apr 12-26;157(1-2):117-24.

Sympathetic control of cardiac myosin heavy chain gene expression.

Gupta MP(1), Gupta M, Dizon E, Zak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Several neuroendocrine factors have been shown to influence the muscle phenotype.
Various physiological reports have suggested the role of adrenergic nervous
system for cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) expression. We have used cultured
fetal rat heart myocytes to investigate the role of cAMP on the alpha- and
beta-MHC gene expression. In low density cultures, addition of 1 mM 8 Br cAMP
resulted in up regulation of alpha-MHC and down regulation of beta-MHC mRNA. This
antithetic effect of cAMP depends on the basal expression of both expression of
both MHC transcripts. In transient transfection analysis employing a series of
alpha-MHC gene promoter/reporter constructs, we identified a 13 bp E-box M-CAT
hybrid motif (EM element) which conferred a basal muscle specific and
cAMP-inducible expression of the alpha-MHC gene. Data obtained from the mobility 
gel-shift analysis indicated that one of the factor(s) binding to the EM element 
is related to troponin T M-CAT binding factor (TEF-1). To test whether the
protein binding to this sequence could be a substrate for cAMP-dependent
phosphorylation, the cardiac nuclear proteins were preincubated in a kinase
reaction buffer either with a catalytic subunit of PKA (CatPKA) or with cAMP, and
binding activity of proteins to the EM element was evaluated by mobility gel
shift assay. In a concentration dependent manner, a twofold increase in the
intensity of the retarded band was observed. Furthermore, at 100 units of CatPKA,
an additional band of faster mobility was observed which was not present either
when phosphorylated nuclear extract was incubated with alkaline phosphatase or
when ATP was absent in kinase reaction buffer. These results strongly suggest
that factor(s) binding to the EM element is a substrate for cAMP dependent
phosphorylation.

PMID: 8739237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):8266-74.

The role of transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) related proteins in the
formation of M-CAT binding complexes in muscle and non-muscle tissues.

Farrance IK(1), Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, 94143, USA.

M-CAT sites are required for the activity of many promoters in cardiac and
skeletal muscle. M-CAT binding activity is muscle-enriched, but is found in many 
tissues and is immunologically related to the HeLa transcription enhancer
factor-1 (TEF-1). TEF-1-related cDNAs (RTEF-1) have been cloned from chick heart.
RTEF-1 mRNA is muscle-enriched, consistent with a role for RTEF-1 in the
regulation of muscle-specific gene expression. Here, we have examined the tissue 
distribution of TEF-1-related proteins and of M-CAT binding activity by Western
analysis and mobility shift polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. TEF-1-related
proteins of 57, 54 and 52 kDa were found in most tissues with the highest levels 
in muscle tissues. All of these TEF-1-related proteins bound M-CAT DNA and the
57- and 54-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptides were phosphorylated. Proteolytic
digestion mapping showed that the 54-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptide is encoded by 
a different gene than the 52- and 57-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptides. A comparison
of the migration and proteolytic digestion of the 54-kDa TEF-1-related
polypeptide with proteins encoded by the cloned RTEF-1 cDNAs showed that the
54-kDa TEF-1-related polypeptide is encoded by RTEF-1A. High resolution mobility 
shift polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis showed multiple M-CAT binding activities
in tissues. All of these activities contained TEF-1-related proteins. One
protein-M-CAT DNA complex was muscle-enriched and was up-regulated upon
differentiation of a skeletal muscle cell line. This complex contained the 54-kDa
TEF-1-related polypeptide. Therefore, RTEF1-A protein is a component of a
muscle-enriched transcription complex that forms on M-CAT sites and may play a
key role in the regulation of transcription in muscle.

PMID: 8626521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 5;271(14):8260-5.

DTEF-1, a novel member of the transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) multigene
family.

Azakie A(1), Larkin SB, Farrance IK, Grenningloh G, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of
California, San Francisco, 94143, USA. 674.

M-CAT motifs mediate muscle-specific transcriptional activity via interaction
with binding factors that are antigenically and biochemically related to
vertebrate transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1), a member of the TEA/ATTS
domain family of transcription factors. M-CAT binding activities present in
cardiac and skeletal muscle tissues cannot be fully accounted for by existing
cloned isoforms of TEF-1. TEF-1-related cDNAs isolated from heart libraries
indicate that at least three classes of TEF-1-related cDNAs are expressed in
these and other tissues. One class are homologues of the human TEF-1 originally
cloned from HeLa cells (Xiao, J. H., Davidson, I., Matthes, H., Garnier, J. M.,
and Chambon, P. (1991) Cell 65, 551-568). A second class represents homologues of
the avian TEF-1-related gene previously isolated (Stewart, A. F., Larkin, S. B., 
Farrance, I. K., Mar, J. H., Hall, D. E., and Ordahl, C. P. (1994) J. Biol. Chem.
269, 3147-3150). The third class consists of a novel, divergent TEF-1 cDNA, named
DTEF-1, and its preliminary characterization is described here. Two isoforms of
DTEF-1 (DTEF-1A and DTEF-1B) were isolated as 1.9-kilobase pair clones with
putative open reading frames of 433 and 432 amino acids whose differences are
attributable to alternative splicing at the C terminus of the TEA DNA binding
domain. Cardiac muscle contains high levels of DTEF-1 transcripts, but
unexpectedly low levels are detected in skeletal muscle. DTEF-1 transcripts are
present at intermediate levels in gizzard and lung, and at low levels in kidney. 
DTEF-1A is a sequence-specific M-CAT-binding factor. The distinct spatial pattern
of expression, and unusual amino acid sequence in its DNA binding domain, may
indicate a particular role for DTEF-1 in cell-specific gene regulation. Recent
work also suggests that at least one more TEF-1-related gene exists in
vertebrates. We propose a naming system for the four TEF-1 gene family members
identified to date that preserves existing nomenclature and provides a means for 
extending that nomenclature as additional family members may be identified.

PMID: 8626520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Apr;16(2):205-10.

The human placenta expresses transcription enhancer factor-1 but there is no
correlation with the expression of placental lactogen.

Quinn G(1), Boam DS, Davis JR, Glazier JD, Mylona P, Sides K, Sibley CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, University of Manchester, St. Mary's Hospital, UK.

A transcriptional enhancer which has a consensus binding sequence for
transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) has been found 3' of the hPL(3) gene. We 
examined whether TEF-1 is expressed by the human placenta and whether such
expression is co-ordinated with that of human placental lactogen (hPL). Probing
Northern blots of total RNA from first trimester and term placenta, the
choriocarcinoma-derived cell line JAr and primary cultured cytotrophoblast cells 
with a cDNA for TEF-1 revealed transcripts of 12-13 kb and 3-4 kb. The level of
TEF-1 expression was the same in first trimester as compared with term placenta
and in undifferentiated JAr as compared with differentiated cytotrophoblast
cells. hPL expression was tenfold higher in term compared with first trimester
placenta and, whilst detectable in cytotrophoblast cells, was undetectable in JAr
cells. These data show that TEF-1 is expressed by the placenta but is not
co-ordinated with hPL expression.

PMID: 9156523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;28(4):387-403.

Transcription factors and the cardiac gene programme.

Doevendans PA(1), van Bilsen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Limburg, The Netherlands.

During the past decade, major advances have been made in uncovering the
mechanisms that switch genes on and off. Gene methylation and histones play an
important role in gene (in)activation. Following gene activation, the initiation 
of transcription by RNA polymerase requires the assembly of multiple protein
complexes on the promoter region of a gene. How a cell type-specific gene
expression pattern can be induced is a key question in cardiovascular biology
today. Members of the helix-loop-helix-family of the transcription factors play a
dominant role in skeletal muscle formation. In cardiac muscle the situation is
less obvious. Recent studies identified muscle transcription factors like MEF-2, 
TEF-1 and MNF, which are common to both the skeletal and cardiac muscle lineages.
A few transcription factors, among which Nkx 2.5 and GATA-4, are expressed
predominantly in the heart. The absence of master regulators in the heart points 
to the importance of interaction between ubiquitous factors and tissue restricted
factors to initiate the cardiac gene programme and to lock these cells in their
differentiated state. The recent development of murine transgenic and
gene-targeting technology provides tools to study the role of mammalian
transcription factors in vivo. Interesting cardiac phenotypes are found in gene
targeted mice, indicating a crucial role for retinoic acid and homeobox genes in 
murine cardiogenesis.

PMID: 9026350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Am J Physiol. 1996 Apr;270(4 Pt 1):E677-88.

Hypothalamic monoaminergic activity in obese Zucker rats in response to acute and
chronic dietary stimuli.

Specter SE(1), Stern JS, Horwitz BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis
95616-8519, USA.

Monoamine neuromodulators link diet-related signals with autonomic responses in
the regulation of energy balance. In view of evidence that sympathetically
mediated expenditure is blunted in genetically obese (fa/fa) Zucker rats, a
central defect in neurochemical activity has been proposed. This study tested the
hypothesis that genotypic differences in monoaminergic activity in the
hypothalamus underlie a blunted sensitivity of fa/fa rats to acute and chronic
dietary stimuli, leading to less effective modulation of energy metabolism.
Homozygous lean and obese Zucker rats were fed a protein-restricted (PR, protein 
= 8% of total dietary energy) or control (CF, 21% protein) diet from the age of 5
wk. At 10 wk of age, postprandial oxygen consumption (thermic effect of food,
TEF) and levels of brown adipose tissue (BAT) uncoupling protein were
significantly elevated (P < 0.0005) in PR vs. CF lean rats. Serotonin turnover
was significantly (P < 0.0014) greater in the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) of 
meal-fed lean PR (vs. CF) rats, consistent with the suggestion that VMH serotonin
release stimulates sympathetic outflow and may signal a heightened drive for
protein intake. Serotonergic activity, BAT uncoupling protein, and TEF were not
elevated in PR obese rats in response to a test meal, supporting the view that
activation of sympathetic outflow in response to diet-related stimuli in fa/fa
rats is impaired.

PMID: 8928776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Pediatr Surg. 1996 Apr;31(4):498-502.

A new rodent experimental model of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula: preliminary report.

Diez-Pardo JA(1), Baoquan Q, Navarro C, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital La Paz, Universidad Autónoma,
Madrid, Spain.

In spite of the interest paid by pediatric surgeons to esophageal atresia (EA)
with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), no animal experimental model has been
available for investigation. This preliminary report describes a reproducible
fetal model of these malformations. Time-mated pregnant rats were given 1.5,
1.75, or 2 mg/kg of Adriamycin intraperitoneally on days 6 to 9 of gestation, and
the litters were recovered on day 21 (near full-term). The amount of amniotic
fluid was measured, and the fetuses were dissected and studied histologically.
The findings were compared with those of suitable control fetuses.
Adriamycin-exposed fetuses weighed less than controls. EA with TEF (Gross' type
C) was found in 28%, 45%, and 41% of animals in the three dose groups
(respectively). The malformation was anatomically identical to that of the human 
neonate, and the amount of amniotic fluid in affected fetuses increased
significantly. In one instance, an H-type fistula was observed. In addition to
esophageal interruption, many other malformations fitting within the human VATER 
association were found: duodenal atresia (41%, 50%, and 47%, respectively),
anorectal (28%, 50%, and 41%), renal (81%, 100%, and 100%), and limb
malformations (0%, 2.3%, and 13.8%). This new, easily reproducible and relatively
inexpensive experimental model of one of the most interesting pediatric surgical 
malformations permits new research into both its embryogenesis and the biology of
the malformed fetus.

PMID: 8801299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1695-705.

Isolation and characterization of the cDNA encoding BKLF/TEF-2, a major
CACCC-box-binding protein in erythroid cells and selected other cells.

Crossley M(1), Whitelaw E, Perkins A, Williams G, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital, Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

CACCC boxes are among the critical sequences present in regulatory elements of
genes expressed in erythroid cells, as well as in selected other cell types.
While an erythroid cell-specific CACCC-box-binding protein, EKLF, has been shown 
to be required in vivo for proper expression of the adult beta-globin gene, it is
dispensable for the regulation of several other globin and nonglobin erythroid
cell-expressed genes. In the work described here, we searched for additional
CACCC-box transcription factors that might be active in murine erythroid cells.
We identified a major gel shift activity (termed BKLF), present in yolk sac and
fetal liver erythroid cells, that could be distinguished from EKLF by specific
antisera. Through relaxed-stringency hybridization, we obtained the cDNA encoding
BKLF, a highly basic, novel zinc finger protein that is related to EKLF and other
Krüppel-like members in its DNA-binding domain but unrelated elsewhere. BKLF,
which is widely but not ubiquitously expressed in cell lines, is highly expressed
in the midbrain region of embryonic mice and appears to correspond to the gel
shift activity TEF-2, a transcriptional activator implicated in regulation of the
simian virus 40 enhancer and other CACCC-box-containing regulatory elements.
Because BKLF binds with high affinity and preferentially over Sp1 to many CACCC
sequences of erythroid cell expressed genes, it is likely to participate in the
control of many genes whose expression appears independent of the action of EKLF.

PMCID: PMC231156
PMID: 8657145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Physiol. 1996 Mar;270(3 Pt 2):R496-504.

A comparative study of different means of assessing long-term energy expenditure 
in humans.

Rosenbaum M(1), Ravussin E, Matthews DE, Gilker C, Ferraro R, Heymsfield SB,
Hirsch J, Leibel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Behavior and Metabolism, Rockefeller University, New York 
10021, USA.

We compared three independent techniques for measurement of total energy
expenditure (TEE) in human subjects: 1) weight-maintaining energy intake
(dietTEE), 2) 24-h chamber calorimetry (chamberTEE), and 3) differential
elimination rates 2H2O and H(2)18O (isotopeTEE). Twenty-three healthy adult
in-patients [19 never obese (NO), 2 obese (OB), and 2 formerly-obese (RO); 9
female, 14 malel] ingested a liquid formula diet (40% of calories as fat, 45%
carbohydrate, 15% protein), the volume of which was adjusted until body weight
was stable for at least 14 days. Body composition was then determined by
hydrodensitometry, isotope dilution, and dual photon beam absorptiometry (DXA).
The thermic effect of feeding (TEF) and resting energy expenditure [REE; measured
before arising (dietREE) and after arising (chamberREE)] were determined by
indirect calorimetry. Non-resting energy expenditure (NREE) was calculated as
NREE = TEE - (REE + TEF). Subjects then gained or lost 10% of their body weight
and were restudied as described above. All measures of TEE were significantly
correlated (dietTEE vs. chamberTEE r2 = 0.75; dietTEE vs. isotopeTEE r2 = 0.88;
isotopeTEE vs. chamberTEE r2 = 0.73; P < 0.0001). ChamberTEE (mean +/- SE = 2,107
+/- 64 kcal/day) was approximately 20% lower than either dietTEE (2,536 +/- 94
kcal/day, P < 0.0001) or isotopeTEE (2,564 +/- 83 kcal/day, P < 0.0001). When
data were normalized to metabolic mass, weight gain of 10% was associated with
significant increases in dietTEE (P < 0.005) and isotopeTEE (P < 0.05) but not
chamberTEE; weight loss of 10% was associated with significant reductions in
dietTEE (P < 0.005) and isotopeTEE (P < 0.05) but not chamberTEE. We conclude
that measures of energy expenditure obtained in a highly controlled environment
by caloric titration (dietTEE) or differential excretion rates of 2H2O and
H(2)18O (isotopeTEE) are not significantly different and that measurements of TEE
obtained in a respiratory chamber (chamberTEE) are significantly lower than
dietTEE or isotopeTEE, probably largely due to limitations on physical activity
in the chamber.

PMID: 8780213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Microbiol. 1996 Mar;19(6):1255-63.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae TEC1 is required for pseudohyphal growth.

Gavrias V(1), Andrianopoulos A, Gimeno CJ, Timberlake WE.

Author information: 
(1)Myco Pharmaceuticals Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Diverse eukaryotic organisms share developmental transcription factors with
homologous DNA-binding domains. We showed that the developmental regulator AbaA, 
a member of the ATTS/TEA (AbaA, TEF-1, TEC1, Scalloped/TEF-1, TEC1, AbaA) class
of transcription factors of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans, induces 
pseudohyphal development in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The S. cerevisiae
homologue of AbaA, TEC1p, is required for this morphological transition. We
provide evidence that TEC1p functions in co-operation with STE12p to induce
pseudohyphal development.

PMID: 8730867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 1;271(9):4646-52.

A novel site in the muscle creatine kinase enhancer is required for expression in
skeletal but not cardiac muscle.

Fabre-Suver C(1), Hauschka SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington
98195, USA.

Expression of the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) gene in skeletal and heart muscle 
is controlled in part by a 5' tissue-specific enhancer. In order to identify new 
regulatory elements, we designed mutations in a previously untested conserved
portion of this enhancer. Transfection analysis of these mutations delineated a
new control element, named Trex (Transcriptional regulatory element x), which is 
required for full transcriptional activity of the MCK enhancer in skeletal but
not cardiac muscle cells. Gel mobility shift assays demonstrate that myocyte,
myoblast, and fibroblast nuclear extracts but not primary cardiomyocyte nuclear
extracts contain a trans-acting factor that binds specifically to Trex. The Trex 
sequence is similar (7/8 bases) to the TEF-1 consensus DNA-binding site involved 
in regulating other muscle genes. To determine if TEF-1 interacts with Trex,
selected TEF-1 binding sites such as GTIIc and M-CAT and two anti-TEF-1 antisera 
were used in gel shift assays. These experiments strongly suggest that a factor
distinct from TEF-1 binds specifically to Trex. Thus it appears that MCK
transcription is regulated in skeletal muscles through a Trex-dependent pathway
while Trex is not required for MCK expression in heart. This distinction could
account partially for the difference in levels of muscle creatine kinase in these
tissues.

PMID: 8617727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Chest. 1996 Mar;109(3):850-1.

Tracheoesophageal fistula in a patient with recurrent Hodgkin's disease. A case
for hope or despair.

Ling D(1), Bushunow P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Rochester, Rochester General Hospital,
NY 14621, USA.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a devastating complication of malignancies;
however, those associated with Hodgkin's disease (HD) may carry a better
prognosis. We present a patient with recurrent HD and TEF.

PMID: 8617105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1996 Mar;51(2):B158-66.

Effects of age on energy expenditure and substrate oxidation during experimental 
underfeeding in healthy men.

Roberts SB(1), Fuss P, Heyman MB, Dallal GE, Young VR.

Author information: 
(1)USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

Relatively little is known about the influence of age on energy regulation during
energy imbalance. We compared the effects of underfeeding on changes in energy
expenditure, substrate oxidation, and body energy loss between young men (age
22.0 +/- 0.9 [SEM] years) and older men (age 66.0 +/- 1.8) who were leading
unrestricted lives. Changes in total energy expenditure (TEE), resting energy
expenditure (REE), the thermic effect of feeding (TEF), respiratory quotient, and
body energy loss were determined in response to undereating by 3.17 +/- 0.16
Megajoule (MJ)/day for 21 days in 19 healthy subjects consuming a typical diet.
No significant effects of age were observed in changes in TEE, REE, TEF, or body 
energy loss in response to underfeeding. Thus, older men do not appear to have
any impairment of energy conservation during negative energy balance compared to 
young men. This normal pattern of energy conservation during undereating together
with the previously demonstrated reduction in energy dissipation during
overeating can be predicted to promote body fat deposition in older men during
the cycles of positive and negative energy balance that occur during normal life.
This finding may help to explain the increased body fat mass in older
individuals.

PMID: 8612100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1996 Mar;51(2):B148-57.

Effects of age on energy expenditure and substrate oxidation during experimental 
overfeeding in healthy men.

Roberts SB(1), Fuss P, Dallal GE, Atkinson A, Evans WJ, Joseph L, Fiatarone MA,
Greenberg AS, Young VR.

Author information: 
(1)USDA Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging, Tufts University, Boston, MA
02111, USA.

Relatively little is known about the influence of age on energy regulation during
energy imbalance. We compared the effects of overfeeding on changes in energy
expenditure, substrate oxidation, and energy deposition between young men (age
23.7 +/- 1.1 [SEM] years) and older men (age 70.0 +/- 7.0) of normal body weight 
who were leading unrestricted lives. Changes in total energy expenditure, resting
energy expenditure (REE), the thermic effect of feeding (TEF), respiratory
quotient (RQ), and body energy content were determined in response to overeating 
by 4.09 +/- 0.07 Megajoule (MJ)/day for 21 days in 16 healthy subjects consuming 
a typical diet. After excluding data from one young subject with unusual results 
and adjusting for individual differences in excess energy intake, there was a
tendency towards a smaller increase in REE in older men compared to the young men
(p = .07) which was accounted for by their lower fat-free mass (p = .016). There 
was also a significantly smaller increase in resting energy expenditure averaged 
over fasting and fed states (i.e, REE + TEF) with overfeeding in older men than
in young men (p < .01). Combined, these smaller increases in energy expenditure
with overfeeding in the older subjects averaged an estimated 365 kilojoule
(kJ)/day (8.9% of the excess energy intake) (p < .02). There were also
significant effects of age on fasting RQ (p < .001) and the change in RQ with
overfeeding (p < .001), but no significant increase in energy expenditure for
physical activity and thermoregulation with overfeeding in either age-group.
These results are consistent with the suggestion that older individuals
experience both a reduction in the ability to increase energy expenditure, and an
alteration in the pattern of substrate utilization, in response to overfeeding.
These changes may promote cumulative increases in body energy during normal
cycles of positive energy balance unless compensated for by adaptive variations
in energy intake.

PMID: 8612099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 16;271(7):3727-36.

cDNA cloning and characterization of murine transcriptional enhancer
factor-1-related protein 1, a transcription factor that binds to the M-CAT motif.

Yockey CE(1), Smith G, Izumo S, Shimizu N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, Beth Israel Hospital and Department of Medicine, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

The M-CAT motif is a cis-regulatory DNA sequence that is essential for
muscle-specific transcription of several genes. Previously, we had shown that
both muscle-specific (A1) and ubiquitous (A2) factors bind to an essential M-CAT 
motif in the myosin heavy chain beta gene and that the ubiquitous factor is
transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1. Here we report the isolation of mouse
cDNAs encoding two forms (a and b) of a TEF-1-related protein, TEFR1. The TEFR1a 
cDNA encodes a 427-amino acid protein. The coding region of TEFR1b is identical
to 1a in both nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequence except for the absence
of 43 amino acids downstream of the TEA DNA-binding domain. Three TEFR1
transcripts (approximately 7, approximately 3.5, and approximately 2 kilobase
pairs) are enriched in differentiated skeletal muscle (myotubes) relative to
undifferentiated skeletal muscle (myoblasts) and non-muscle cells in culture. In 
situ hybridization analysis indicated that TEFR1 transcripts are enriched in the 
skeletal muscle lineage during mouse embryogenesis. Transient expression of
fusion proteins of TEFR1 and the yeast GAL4 DNA-binding domain in cell lines
activated the expression of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter
constructs containing GAL4 binding sites, indicating that TEFR1 contains an
activation domain. An anti-TEFR1 polyclonal antibody supershifted the
muscle-specific M-CAT.A1 factor complex in gel mobility shift assays, suggesting 
that TEFR1 is a major component of this complex. Our results suggest that TEFR1
might play a role in the embryonic development of skeletal muscle in the mouse.

PMID: 8631987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 1996 Feb 15;1(1):27-37.

Inhibition of intercellular communication and induction of
ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase activity by polychlorobiphenyls, -dibenzo-p-dioxins 
and -dibenzofurans in mouse hepa1c1c7 cells.

De Haan LH(1), Halfwerk S, Hovens SE, De Roos B, Koeman JH, Brouwer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Agricultural University Wageningen, P.O. Box 8000,
6700 EA Wageningen, Netherlands.

Inhibition of intercellular communication (IC) between hepa1c1c7 cells was used
as a possible bioassay to predict tumor promoting potency of polyhalogenated
aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Relative potencies with regard to 2,3,7,8-TCDD to
inhibit IC and to induce cytochrome P450IA1/2 (EROD) in these hepa1c1c7 cells
were compared in order to investigate the possible role of the Ah receptor (AhR).
For the PCDD/F and the co-planar PCB congeners relative potencies of both
responses were within the same range. However, the mono-ortho PCBs,
2,3,3',4,4'-PeCB, 2,3,4,4',5-PeCB, 2,3',4,4',5-PeCB and 2,3,3',4,4',5,5'-HxCB
showed a 30-1300 times higher potency to inhibit IC compared to EROD induction
activity. These potency differences were even more pronounced for the di-ortho
PCBs, 2,2',5,5'-TeCB and 2,2',3,3',4,4'-HxCB. The data presented here indicate
that for IC inhibition by these non-planar PCBs a non-AhR mediated mechanism,
with a different structure-activity relationship may be responsible. Given the
high IC inhibition potency of mono- and di-ortho PCBs and their abundancy in
environmental mixtures, the mono- and di-ortho PCBs may contribute for a major
part to the total tumor promoting potency of complex mixtures relevant to human
exposure. Using the traditional TEF values, these compounds do not account for
much toxic potency in a mixture, which may imply that the tumor promotion
potential is not covered by the commonly derived TEF values.

PMID: 21781660  [PubMed]


318. J Pediatr Surg. 1996 Feb;31(2):258-62.

Anomalies of the tracheobronchial tree in patients with esophageal atresia.

Usui N(1), Kamata S, Ishikawa S, Sawai T, Okuyama H, Imura K, Okada A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

To examine associated anatomic anomalies of the tracheobronchial tree and
structural abnormalities of the trachea, and their clinical consequences,
bronchoscopic examination and follow-up studies were performed in 32 patients
with esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) over a 5-year
period. To evaluate structural abnormalities of trachea, the ratio of
circumferential length of cartilaginous trachea to circumferential length of
membranous trachea (C:M ratio) was determined before surgical repair. In patients
examined before and after surgical repair, the motion of the posterior tracheal
wall was observed under spontaneous respiration. Fifteen of the 32 patients (47%)
had abnormalities of the tracheobronchial tree such as ectopic right upper
bronchus (12), congenital bronchial stenosis (4), and absence of the right upper 
bronchus (2). The C:M ratio of the 27 patients with EA (2.0 +/- 0.6) was
significantly lower than that of controls (3.0 +/- 0.3); the ratio for the 10
cases with ectopic right upper bronchus (1.7 +/- 0.4) was significantly lower
than that of other cases (2.2 +/- 0.5). The C:M ratio for the 12 patients who had
atelectasis (1.7 +/- 0.3) was significantly lower than that of the 15 who did not
have atelectasis (2.2 +/- 0.6). Of 24 infants, nine had bulging of the posterior 
tracheal wall synchronized with expiration, and their C:M ratio (1.8 +/- 0.2) was
significantly lower than that of the 15 patients without bulging (2.2 +/- 0.6).
These data show an association between anatomic anomalies of the tracheobronchial
tree and structural abnormalities of the trachea in patients with EA. Because
these abnormalities may be related to the occurrence of respiratory disorders
such as tracheomalacia and atelectasis, early bronchoscopic examination,
including measurement of the C:M ratio and observation of the motion of the
posterior tracheal wall under spontaneous respiration, may be useful in the care 
of patients with EA.

PMID: 8938354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Clin Nutr. 1996 Feb;63(2):164-9.

Measuring the thermic effect of food.

Reed GW(1), Hill JO.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Nutrition Research Unit, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN
37232-2637, USA.

The thermic effect of food (TEF), defined as the increase in metabolic rate after
ingestion of a meal, has been studied extensively, but its role in body weight
regulation is controversial. We analyzed 131 TEF tests from a wide range of
subjects ingesting meals of varying sizes and compositions. Each test lasted 6 h.
Of the total 6-h TEF, 60% of the total had been measured after 3 h. 78% after 4
h, and 91% after 5 h. We developed a three-parameter curve to fit the data, which
reduced noise and gave additional information about the TEF. The area under this 
parametric curve was positively correlated with fat-free mass (FFM) and meal size
(MS) and negatively correlated with meal size squared (MS2) with an R2 of 0.35.
The usual area under a curve created by connecting the data points of a line was 
correlated with the same factors but with an R2 of 0.28. The peak of the
parametric curve was positively correlated with FFM and MS and negatively
correlated with MS2, percent body fat, and meal composition. The time at which
the peak occurred correlated positively with MS and percent fat in the meal. Our 
analysis suggests that an inadequate measurement duration of the TEF could lead
to errors. In general, we recommend that the TEF be measured for > or = 5 h.

PMID: 8561055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Virol. 1996 Feb;70(2):1203-12.

Interaction between T antigen and TEA domain of the factor TEF-1 derepresses
simian virus 40 late promoter in vitro: identification of T-antigen domains
important for transcription control.

Berger LC(1), Smith DB, Davidson I, Hwang JJ, Fanning E, Wildeman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The large tumor antigen (TAg) of simian virus 40 regulates transcription of the
viral genes. The early promoter is repressed when TAg binds to the origin and DNA
replication begins, whereas the late promoter is activated by TAg through both
replication-dependent and -independent mechanisms. Previously it was shown that
activation is diminished when a site in the viral enhancer to which the factor
TEF-1 binds is disrupted. We show here that the NH2-terminal region of TAg binds 
to the TEA domain of TEF-1, a DNA binding domain also found in the Drosophila
scalloped and the Saccharomyces cerevisiae TEC1 proteins. The interaction
inhibits DNA binding by TEF-1 and activates transcription in vitro from a subset 
of naturally occurring late start sites. These sites are also activated by
mutations in the DNA motifs to which TEF-1 binds. Therefore, TEF-1 appears to
function as a repressor of late transcription, and its involvement in the
early-to-late shift in viral transcription is discussed. The mutation of Ser-189 
in TAg, which reduces transformation efficiency in certain assays, disrupts the
interaction with TEF-1. Thus, TEF-1 might also regulate genes involved in growth 
control.

PMCID: PMC189929
PMID: 8551581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Virol. 1996 Feb;70(2):1191-202.

The major transcriptional transactivation domain of simian virus 40 large T
antigen associates nonconcurrently with multiple components of the
transcriptional preinitiation complex.

Johnston SD(1), Yu XM, Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Medical
School, Madison 53706-1599, USA.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen (Tag) is a promiscuous transcriptional
transactivator; however, its mechanism of transactivation remains unknown. Recent
studies have suggested the possible involvement of protein-protein interactions
with TBP, the TATA box-binding protein of TFIID, and TEF-1, an enhancer-binding
factor. We show here that (i) the Tag domain containing amino acids 133 to 249
directly interacts with the general transcription factor TFIIB, the activator
protein Sp1, and the 140-kDa subunit of RNA polymerase II, as well as with TBP
and TEF-1; (ii) these interactions can also occur when these transcription
factors are present in their functional states in cellular extracts; (iii)
binding of Tag to TBP is eliminated by preincubation of TBP either at 48 degrees 
C or with the adenovirus 13S E1a protein; (iv) this domain of Tag cannot bind
concurrently to more than one of these transcription factors; and (v) the
substitution of Tag amino acid residues 173 and 174 inactivates the ability of
this Tag domain both to associate with any of these transcription factors and to 
transactivate the SV40 late promoter. Thus, we conclude that SV40 Tag probably
does not transactivate via the concurrent interaction with multiple components of
the preinitiation complex. Rather, we hypothesize that transactivation by Tag may
primarily occur by removing or preventing the binding of factors that inhibit the
formation of preinitiation complexes.

PMCID: PMC189928
PMID: 8551580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. EMBO J. 1996 Jan 15;15(2):351-62.

The two PAR leucine zipper proteins, TEF and DBP, display similar circadian and
tissue-specific expression, but have different target promoter preferences.

Fonjallaz P(1), Ossipow V, Wanner G, Schibler U.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Université de Genève, Switzerland.

The two highly related PAR basic region leucine zipper proteins TEF and DBP
accumulate according to a robust circadian rhythm in liver and kidney. In liver
nuclei, the amplitude of daily oscillation has been estimated to be 50-fold and
160-fold for TEF and DBP, respectively. While DBP mRNA expression is the
principal determinant of circadian DBP accumulation, the amplitude of TEF mRNA
cycling is insufficient to explain circadian TEF fluctuation. Conceivably, daily 
variations in TEF degradation or nuclear translocation efficiency may explain the
discrepancy between mRNA and protein accumulation. In vitro, TEF and DBP bind the
same DNA sequences. Yet, in co-transfection experiments, these two proteins
exhibit different activation potentials for two reporter genes examined. While
TEF stimulates transcription from the albumin promoter more potently than DBP,
only DBP is capable of activating transcription efficiently from the cholesterol 
7 alpha hydroxylase (C7alphaH) promoter. However, a TEF-DBP fusion protein,
carrying N-terminal TEF sequences and the DNA binding/dimerization domain of DBP,
enhances expression of the C7alphaH-CAT reporter gene as strongly as wild-type
DBP. Our results suggest that the promoter environment, rather than the affinity 
with which PAR proteins recognize their cognate DNA sequences in vitro,
determines the promoter preferences of TEF and DBP.

PMCID: PMC449950
PMID: 8617210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Virus Genes. 1996;13(1):45-52.

Induction of the HPV16 enhancer activity by Jun-B and c-Fos through cooperation
of the promoter-proximal AP-1 site and the epithelial cell type--specific
regulatory element in fibroblasts.

Kikuchi K(1), Taniguchi A, Yasumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research 
Institute, Yokohama, Japan.

The epithelial cell type-specific enhancer of the human papillomavirus (HPV) type
16 termed the long control region (LCR) carries three AP-1 binding sites. We
investigated the roles of the AP-1 sites for transactivation of the LCR by Jun-B 
that may be a cell type specific-transactivator for the HPVs in human fibroblasts
in which expression of the endogenous Jun-B gene is low. Transient expression of 
Jun-B alone poorly activated transcriptional activity of the LCR. However, when
combined with c-Fos, Jun-B activated the LCR. The promoter-proximal AP-1 site was
required for transactivation of the LCR by Jun-B:c-Fos, but the site itself was
not sufficient for the maximal response. The proposed cell type
specific--regulatory element that harbors binding sites for NF1 as well as TEF-1 
and PEA3 motifs, but neither other AP-1 sites nor the proximal enhancer region,
could augment the transcriptional response of the promoter-proximal AP-1 site to 
Jun-B:c-Fos.

PMID: 8938978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Endocrinol. 1996 Jan;148(1):167-74.

Thermic effect of food in hypothyroid rats.

Iossa S(1), Lionetti L, Mollica MP, Barletta A, Liverini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Environmental Physiology, University of Naples,
Italy.

The regulatory and obligatory components of cephalic and gastrointestinal phases 
of the thermic effect of food (TEF) were measured in control and hypothyroid
rats. A significant decrease (P < 0.05) in regulatory and obligatory components
of cephalic and gastrointestinal TEF, after either a control or energy-dense
meal, was found in hypothyroid rats compared with control rats. Our findings
indicate that hypothyroidism is associated with a decreased thermogenic response 
to food which contributes to the reduced energy expenditure of hypothyroid rats. 
Our results also suggest that tri-iodothyronine is involved in the regulation of 
postprandial thermogenesis directly as well as through its influence on
beta-adrenergic response and insulin release.

PMID: 8568464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Am Coll Surg. 1996 Jan;182(1):41-5.

Measurement of gap length in esophageal atresia: a simple predictor of outcome.

Brown AK(1), Tam PK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Previous classifications of esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) have concentrated on associated medical
conditions that influence survival. We propose a classification based on gap
lengths to define the magnitude of the surgical problems in EA and TEF and
correlate them with outcome.
STUDY DESIGN: Gaps between the esophageal ends were classified as long (greater
than 3 cm), intermediate (greater than 1 cm but less than or equal to 3 cm) or
short (less than or equal to 1 cm). A series of 66 consecutive patients with EA
and TEF were studied.
RESULTS: The outcomes of patients with long (n = 16), intermediate (n = 16), and 
short (n = 34) gaps were respectively: death (18 percent, 6 percent, 3 percent), 
anastomotic leak (31 percent, 25 percent, 6 percent), stricture (44 percent, 31
percent, 17 percent), recurrent TEF (6 percent, 6 percent, 6 percent),
gastroesophageal reflux (56 percent, 37 percent, 36 percent), and failure to
thrive (56 percent, 43 percent, 18 percent). The mean hospital stay at first
admission was (97, 54, 24 days, respectively) and the mean number of readmissions
was (6.9, 5.2, 3.4, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: This classification, which is based on easily measurable criteria,
provides a useful method to predict morbidity, long-term outcome, and health
costs associated with EA and TEF surgery.

PMID: 8542088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Toxicology. 1995 Dec 28;105(2-3):391-401.

Use of toxic equivalency factors for risk assessment for dioxins and related
compounds.

Birnbaum LS(1), DeVito MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Toxicology Division, US Environmental Protection Agency, Research
Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.

TCDD is the most toxic member of a class of polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons
that are structurally related, have a similar mechanism of action, and cause the 
same spectrum of responses. Because of the need to assess the risk from complex
mixtures of these chemicals, the international community has adopted an interim
approach that assigns relative potency factors to this family of chemicals, based
on a comparison with the potency of TCDD. Each chemical that fits the criteria
for this class is assigned a toxic equivalency factor, TEF, which is some
fraction of that of TCDD. The total toxic equivalency of a mixture, TEQ, is the
sum of the weighted potency of each compound in the mixture. Although there may
be some variability between different responses in the determination of a TEF
value for a compound, endpoint-specific TEFs are usually very similar. There may 
also be some species differences in TEFs. Again, if pharmacokinetic factors are
taken into account, they are usually relatively minor. TEFs based on intake
values may also exhibit some differences when compared to those based on target
tissue concentrations. Using scientific judgment and a broad data base, interim
TEF values have been recommended for PCDDs, PCDFs, and dioxin-like PCBs. Using
such values, the TEF approach has been successful at predicting the toxicity of
real world mixtures. Ongoing studies from our laboratory have validated the
approach for synthetic mixtures that approximate congener ratios found in food
samples. Whether non-additive interactions occur with nondioxin-like compounds
found in environmentally relevant concentrations remain to be determined.

PMID: 8571375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Eur J Pharmacol. 1995 Dec 7;293(4):341-53.

Toxic equivalency factors do not predict the acute toxicities of dioxins in rats.

Pohjanvirta R(1), Unkila M, Lindén J, Tuomisto JT, Tuomisto J.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Toxicology, Kuopio, Finland.

Risk evaluation of complex environmental mixtures of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (polychlorinated 
dibenzofurans, azo- and azoxybenzenes, naphthalenes and some of the biphenyls) is
currently carried out by measuring the concentration of each congener in the
mixture and then multiplying every figure by its specific constant, toxic
equivalency factor (TEF). All congeners are thought to produce highly similar
effects albeit at different doses, and the TEFs are believed to represent the
potencies of the congeners relative to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD), considered the most toxic derivative of this class of environmental
contaminants. Here we compared the acute toxicities of TCDD, 1,2,3,7,8-penta-,
1,2,3,4,7,8-hexa- and 1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachloro-dibenzo-p-dioxin in the most
TCDD-susceptible (Long-Evans Turku AB; L-E) and the most TCDD-resistant
(Han/Wistar kuopio; H/W) rat strain. While L-E rats exhibited the expected rank
order of sensitivities to the four dioxins, the higher chlorinated dioxins were
more toxic than TCDD (in terms of acute lethality) to H/W rats, with the
hexachlorodioxin showing the greatest potency. Even if the doses were adjusted
according to the LD50 values, both biochemical and morphological effects elicited
by the dioxins turned out to depend, often critically, on strain, congener or the
interaction of these two determinants. These findings demonstrate that the
dioxins have distinct profiles of acute toxicities and underscore the importance 
of response and test organism in defining the TEFs.

PMID: 8748687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Am Diet Assoc. 1995 Dec;95(12):1393-400; quiz 1401-2.

Unexplained disturbance in body weight regulation: diagnostic outcome assessed by
doubly labeled water and body composition analyses in obese patients reporting
low energy intakes.

Buhl KM(1), Gallagher D, Hoy K, Matthews DE, Heymsfield SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, St Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital, Columbia University,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.

SUBJECTS: Ten patients who had long-term disturbances in body weight regulation, 
were referred over a 3-year period for obesity evaluation, and reported low
energy intakes (< 1,200 kcal/day).
OBJECTIVE: To ascertain whether these patients had a low energy expenditure and
thus reduced energy requirement, and/or whether they were misreporting their
energy intake.
DESIGN: Comparison of outcome measures in referred patients and in obese control 
patients who did not report low energy intakes and disturbances in body weight
regulation.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Low energy expenditure was evaluated with serum thyroid
hormone levels, resting metabolic rate (RMR), thermic effect of food (TEF), and
total energy expenditure (TEE) by doubly labeled water technique. Misreporting of
energy intake was evaluated by comparing patients' self-reported energy intake
with energy intake estimated by doubly labeled water and body composition
analyses over a 14-day period.
STATISTICAL ANALYSES PERFORMED: Low energy expenditure was considered present in 
a patient if RMR or TEE was more than 15% below predicted values according to
results from the control group. Patient group TEF was compared with TEF results
observed in the control group.
RESULTS: All patients had normal serum thyroid hormone levels. Eight patients had
RMR and TEE values within 15% of predicted values and were substantially
underreporting their energy intake. One patient had low TEE (-19%) and a normal
RMR, a finding that implies a low level of physical activity. This patient also
underreported energy intake as estimated by the doubly labeled water technique
during the study (-38%). The 10th patient had a low RMR (-23.2%) and TEE
(-25.0%), the mechanism of which was uncertain. This patient's reported food
intake over the 14-day period was accurate but was less than her long-term intake
over months or years as suggested by doubly labeled water TEE estimates. The TEF 
response in patients was not significantly different from that observed in the
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Underreporting of energy intake from foods is a frequent finding in 
patients with disturbances in body weight regulation who are referred for obesity
evaluation. Severe underreporting may be detectable by means of screening
measures available to most dietitians. Low energy expenditure, due either to
physical inactivity or to metabolic factors, is also observed. Modern evaluation 
methods provide new insights into patients with weight regulatory disturbances
and at the same time stimulate important new research questions.

PMID: 7594141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Plast Reconstr Surg. 1995 Dec;96(7):1623-8.

Quantification of functional deficits associated with rectus abdominis muscle
flaps.

Zauner-Dungl A(1), Resch KL, Herczeg E, Piza-Katzer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Vienna
Medical School, Austria.

To evaluate the deficits in trunk flexion due to partial or complete unilateral
rectus abdominis muscle flap transfer in reconstructive surgery, 27 patients (11 
females, 16 males) with rectus abdominis muscle flap transfer dating back at
least 3 years, clinically healthy at the time of testing, and 22 controls (10
females and 12 males), comparable in age and body mass index, were compared. For 
clinical assessment of power of the straight and oblique abdominal muscles,
Janda's test of muscle function was used, and torque (in N.m) of isometric trunk 
flexion at 0, 5, 10, 20, and 30 degrees was determined with the TEF Modular
Component, an auxiliary unit of the Cybex 6000. Results were analyzed for males
and females separately. Relative torque (N.m/kg) of operated male and female
patients was significantly lower (p < 0.05) as compared with controls.
Differences were more pronounced in males than in females. Clinically, there were
no significant between-group differences in the power of the straight and oblique
abdominal muscles. In conclusion, trunk flexion deficits following rectus
abdominis muscle flap transfer can be compensated for satisfactorily in most
cases, supporting the use of this muscle in reconstructive surgery, if patients
are selected carefully.

PMID: 7480282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Teratology. 1995 Oct;52(4):220-32.

Population-based study of tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia.

Torfs CP(1), Curry CJ, Bateson TF.

Author information: 
(1)California Birth Defects Monitoring Program, Emeryville 94608-1811, USA.

From a multiracial population of 1,035,384 births monitored by the California
Birth Defects Monitoring Program (CBDMP) from 1983 to 1988, we ascertained 34
cases of esophageal atresia (EA), 204 cases of tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
with an EA (TEF/EA), and 54 cases of TEF without EA. The total prevalence rate
was 2.82 per 10,000 live births and stillbirths and showed no secular trend nor
marked seasonal variation. Rates of multiple birth were high for each defect (TEF
3.7%, TEF/EA 4.9%, EA 8.8%; population 1.1%). Non-Hispanic whites were
overrepresented for TEF and TEF/EA, but not for EA. Excluding trisomies, mean
maternal age was above the population mean (26.8 years) for TEF (27.9 years) and 
TEF/EA (28.0 years), but not for EA (26.2 years). The proportion of trisomies was
significantly higher for EA (23.5%) than for TEF (9.3%; P < 0.02) or for TEF/EA
(7.4%; P < 0.003). We subdivided each defect into five mutually exclusive types: 
isolated, multiple, syndromic, chromosomal, and trisomic. Male-to-female (M/F)
ratios varied considerably between types, both within and between defects. The
highest M/F ratios within each defect were for the multiple type (TEF 2.29,
TEF/EA 1.44, EA 1.33; population 1.05), and the lowest for trisomies (TEF 0.25;
TEF/EA 0.25, and EA 0.60). All types except trisomies were significantly
associated with a single umbilical artery. We found an association of EA and
TEF/EA with dextrocardia (3.1% of cases), and confirmed the association of
primary hydrocephalus with TEF and TEF/EA (2.7% of cases). The proportion of
cases with additional midline defects or VATER or VACTERL type anomalies was
similar for all three defects, suggesting a common developmental pathogenesis.
Epidemiologic differences between defects, and between types within defects, may 
reflect differences in timing of the pathological process or differences in
susceptibilities (e.g., by sex or aneuploidy) and emphasize the need to evaluate 
each defect and its types separately in epidemiologic studies.

PMID: 8838292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Genetics. 1995 Oct;141(2):481-9.

Increased expression of Saccharomyces cerevisiae translation elongation factor 1 
alpha bypasses the lethality of a TEF5 null allele encoding elongation factor 1
beta.

Kinzy TG(1), Woolford JL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Translation elongation factor 1beta (EF-1beta) catalyzes the exchange of bound
GDP for GTP on EF-1alpha. The lethality of a null allele of the TEF5 gene
encoding EF-1beta in Saccharomyces cerevisiae was suppressed by extra copies of
the TEF2 gene encoding EF-1alpha. The strains with tef5::TRP1 suppressed by extra
copies of TEF were slow growing, cold sensitive, hypersensitive to inhibitors of 
translation elongation and showed increased phenotypic suppression of +1
frameshift and UAG nonsense mutations. Nine dominant mutant alleles of TEF2 that 
cause increased suppression of frameshift mutations also suppressed the lethality
of tef5::TRP1. Most of the strains in which tef5::TRP1 is suppressed by dominant 
mutant alleles of TEF2 grew more slowly and were more antibiotic sensitive than
strains with tef5::TRP1 is suppressed by wild-type TEF2. Two alleles, TEF2-4 and 
TEF2-10, interact with tef5::TRP1 to produce strains that showed doubling times
similar to tef5::TRP1 strains containing extra copies of wild-type TEF2. These
strains were less cold sensitive, drug sensitive and correspondingly less
efficient suppressor of +1 frameshift mutations. These phenotypes indicate that
translation and cell growth are highly sensitive to changes in EF-1alpha and
EF-1beta activity.

PMCID: PMC1206749
PMID: 8647386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Curr Genet. 1995 Sep;28(4):360-6.

Cloning and characterization of a TEF gene for elongation factor 1 alpha from the
yeast Arxula adeninivorans.

Rösel H(1), Kunze G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research, Gatersleben, Germany.

The translation elongation factor EF-1 alpha appears to play a major role in the 
control of cell proliferation and ageing in higher eukaryotes. Here we report the
cloning of the TEF1 gene encoding the elongation factor 1 alpha of the dimorphic 
yeast Arxula adeninivorans Ls3. The gene is localized on chromosome 2 from Arxula
adeninivorans, comprises 1380 bp and encodes a protein containing 459 amino
acids. In contrast to other fungi, a second TEF gene encoding an identical, or
nearly identical, polypeptide could not be identified. The transcriptional
activity of the TEF1 gene did not change during mycelial growth, whereas a slight
decrease could be detected during the yeast growth.

PMID: 8590482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Pediatr Surg. 1995 Sep;30(9):1334-7.

Physical fitness testing in children operated on for tracheoesophageal fistula.

Zaccara A(1), Felici F, Turchetta A, Calzolari A, Lucchetti MC, Rivosecchi M,
Coran AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome,
Italy.

The maximal physical activity capacity of children operated on for
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) has not been clearly defined. Eight patients
(average age, 12 years) successfully operated on for TEF at birth underwent
maximal exercise stress testing on a treadmill, according to the Bruce protocol, 
to test physical work capacity. Heart rate (HR), oxygen consumption (VO2), and
pulmonary ventilation (VE) were measured by a portable lightweight telemetric
device. Nine healthy children served as controls. Exercise duration was
significantly lower for TEF subjects than for controls (11.6 +/- 1.7 minutes v
15.1 +/- 2.3 minutes; P < .01). Mean HR at rest and during exercise did not
differ between the groups. All children reached the maximum HR according to their
age; however, for the majority of TEF patients, this occurred at an earlier stage
than in the controls. No differences were seen in mean VO2 at rest and on
exertion between TEF and control children. However, maximal VO2, as measured at
the end of exercise, was significantly different when normalized per kilogram of 
body weight (VO2/kg = 52.3 +/- 5.8 v 33.3 +/- 6.6; P < .005). The physical
rehabilitation of TEF children usually takes into account only respiratory and
nutritional factors. However, complete assessment of their cardiac and
respiratory function, at rest and on exertion, also should be performed, because 
this may show that some patients have reduced motor performance; evidence is now 
accumulating that these children can safely participate in the same physical
activities of their healthy peers.

PMID: 8523238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Environ Health Perspect. 1995 Sep;103(9):820-31.

Comparisons of estimated human body burdens of dioxinlike chemicals and TCDD body
burdens in experimentally exposed animals.

DeVito MJ(1), Birnbaum LS, Farland WH, Gasiewicz TA.

Author information: 
(1)Health Effects Research Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.

Humans are exposed to mixtures of polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, and the 
potential health effects of these exposures are uncertain. A subset of this class
of compounds produce similar spectra of toxicity in experimental animals as does 
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), and these chemicals have been
classified as "dioxins." In this study, we compared the body burdens of dioxins
that produce effects in experimental animals to body burdens associated with
these effects in humans. Human body burdens were estimated from lipid-adjusted
serum concentrations of dioxins, assuming dioxins are equally distributed in body
fat and an adult has 22% body fat. The toxic equivalency factor (TEF) method was 
used to calculate body burdens of dioxins in humans. These calculations included 
dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and polychlorinated biphenyls. In the general
population, average background concentrations were estimated at 58 ng TCDD
equivalents (TEQ)/kg serum lipid, corresponding to a body burden of 13 ng TEQ/kg 
body weight. Populations with known exposure to dioxins have body burdens of
96-7,000 ng TEQ/kg body weight. For effects that have been clearly associated
with dioxins, such as chloracne and induction of CYP1A1, humans and animals
respond at similar body burdens. Induction of cancer in animals occurs at body
burdens of 944-137,000 ng TCDD/kg body weight, while noncancer effects in animals
occur at body burdens of 10-12,500 ng/kg. Available human data suggest that some 
individuals may respond to dioxin exposures with cancer and noncancer effects at 
body burdens within one to two orders of magnitude of those in the general
population.

PMCID: PMC1519223
PMID: 7498094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 18;270(33):19487-94.

A TATA-less promoter containing binding sites for ubiquitous transcription
factors mediates cell type-specific regulation of the gene for transcription
enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1).

Boam DS(1), Davidson I, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculair et Cellulaire, Parc
d'Innovations, Illkirch, Strasbourg, France.

TEF-1 is a tissue-specific human transcription factor which binds to and
activates transcription from the SV40 early promoter and the HPV-16 E6/E7
promoter and may be involved in regulation of muscle-specific and
placenta-specific gene expression. To investigate the mechanism of its
tissue-specific expression, we have isolated up to 3 kilobase pairs of
5'-flanking DNA and characterized the promoter of the gene for TEF-1. Multiple
transcription start sites centering on a motif similar to the initiator element
(Inr) were identified. A minimal promoter, which contains no recognizable TATA
element but contains an Inr, delimited at -137 base pairs had full
transcriptional activity both in vivo in HeLa cells and in vitro in HeLa cell
extracts. This promoter is also highly active in vitro in lymphoid cell extracts,
but not in vivo in lymphoid cell lines, which do not express the endogenous TEF-1
gene. The minimal promoter, which is sufficient to direct tissue-specific
expression of the TEF-1 gene in vivo, contains multiple sites which bind the
ubiquitous transcription factors Sp1 and ATF-1. Mutation of the Inr completely
abolished transcription from the major start site while transcription from the
minor sites was slightly augmented. Inactivation of the proximal Sp1 site
abolished transcription from the principle start site and increased transcription
from a 5' minor start site. Insertion of a TATA box element did not qualitatively
alter the pattern of start site usage which seemed to be dependent upon integrity
of the upstream Sp1 site. These observations suggest a "cross-talk" between the
Inr and a proximal element to fix transcription start sites, which is independent
of spacing and the presence of a TATA element.

PMID: 7642633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Gene. 1995 Aug 8;161(1):119-23.

Cloning and analysis of cDNA encoding an elongation factor 1 alpha from the
dimorphic fungus Histoplasma capsulatum.

Shearer G Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern Mississippi,
Hattiesburg 39406-5018, USA.

The cDNA encoding translation elongation factor 1 alpha (EF-1 alpha) was isolated
from the dimorphic fungus, Histoplasma capsulatum (Hc), an important pathogen of 
man. A cDNA library was probed with the tef1 gene from the fungus Mucor
racemosus. Ten independent clones were isolated, all with similar restriction
patterns. The longest clone (1.96 kb) was sequenced. Southern blot analysis
revealed that the Hc tef1 gene was present as a single copy. A single transcript 
of approx. 2300 nucleotides was found in total RNA from both the yeast and mold
forms of the organism. Comparison of the deduced 460-amino-acid Hc EF-1 alpha
protein to EF-1 alpha proteins from other species of fungi revealed the greatest 
degree of similarity to proteins from the filamentous ascomycetes Podospora
anserina and Trichoderma reesei. Phylogenetic tree analysis of fungal tef genes
indicated that Hc is most closely related to filamentous ascomycetes and most
distantly related to the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

PMID: 7642125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 4;270(31):18649-54.

Molecular characterization of cDNA encoding a novel protein related to
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 from neural precursor cells.

Yasunami M(1), Suzuki K, Houtani T, Sugimoto T, Ohkubo H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

We identified a novel cDNA related to that of transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1) during the course of isolation and characterization of cDNAs, whose mRNAs
are preferentially expressed in the mouse neural precursor cells. The putative
polypeptide, termed embryonic TEA domain-containing factor (ETF), deduced from
the nucleotide sequence contains 445 amino acids and shares 66% amino acid
identity with mouse and human TEF-1 proteins. The primary structure of the TEA
domain, a probable DNA-binding domain, and the specific DNA binding activity to
the GT-IIC motif of ETF are indistinguishable from those of the known vertebrate 
TEF-1 proteins. However, the expression of the ETF gene is strictly regulated in 
developing embryos and is limited to certain tissues, such as the hindbrain of a 
10-day-old mouse embryo, in contrast to the ubiquitous expression pattern of the 
TEF-1 gene. These results suggest that ETF is a novel mammalian member of the TEA
domain-containing transcription factor family and may be involved in the gene
regulation of the neural development. We have discussed the possible existence of
multiple subtypes of the mammalian TEF-1 family proteins, which may play
different roles in cellular and development gene regulation.

PMID: 7629195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Chemosphere. 1995 Aug;31(3):2853-61.

Analysis of toxicological risks from local contamination by PCDDs and PCDFs:
importance of isomer distributions and toxic equivalents.

Assmuth TW(1), Vartiainen T.

Author information: 
(1)Water and Environment Research Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

The concentrations of 2,3,7,8-chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and furans
(PCDD/PCDFs) at Finnish contaminated sites associated with chlorophenolic (CP)
wood preservatives were measured by isomer-specific GC/HRMS methods, and the
implications of the spatial and structural distributions of the isomers and of
toxic equivalent (TEF) systems for toxicological risks were investigated. High
concentrations (maximum value of over 90 ppb and arithmetic mean value of 19 ppb 
I-TEQs in dry weight) of PCDD/Fs were found in soil samples from sites where wood
preservative consisting of 2346-TeCP, PeCP and 246-TCP have been used. The
PCDD/Fs were distributed heterogeneously between soil layers, the concentrations 
in topsoil samples being generally smaller (mean 9.1 ppb I-TEQ d.w.) than those
in subsoil (mean 28 ppb I-TEQ d.w.). Concentrations of PCDD/Fs were unrelated to 
the CP contents in the soil samples. Hexa-, hepta- and octachlorinated
dibenzofurans were the dominant congeners by concentration in these and in most
other samples, also in the wood preservative. The isomer distribution differed
considerably between study sites, and even between samples of soil and waste at
the same site. The relative importance of the samples and isomers was affected by
the selection of TEFs; the importance of some of the CP-related samples was
increased when applying TEFs based on lethality to juvenile fish, due to the
abundance of 123478-HxCDF.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7648209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1995 Aug;27(1):131-9.

Immunosuppressive activity of polychlorinated biphenyl mixtures and congeners:
nonadditive (antagonistic) interactions.

Harper N(1), Connor K, Steinberg M, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Texas A & M University, College Station 77843-4466, USA.

The dose-response inhibition of the splenic plaque-forming cell (PFC) response
and serum IgM units to the antigen, trinitrophenyl-lipopolysaccharide, was
determined for several polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) mixtures and congeners in
female B3C3F1 mice. The ED50 values for Aroclor 1260-, 1254-, 1248-, and
1242-induced immunotoxicity varied by less than twofold from 355 to 699 mg/kg.
The range of ED50 values for 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD),
3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl, 3,3',4,4',5-pentaCB, 3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexaCB,
2,3,3',4,4'-pentaCB, 2,3',4,4',5-pentaCB, 2,3,3',4,4',5-hexaCB,
2,3,3',4,4',5,5'-heptaCB, 2,2',3,3',4,4',5-heptaCB, and 2,2',3,4,4',5,5'-heptaCB 
were 4.6 to 4.9, 134 to 245, 4.7 to 7.0, 6.9 to 11.1, 88,000 to 121,000, 122,000 
to 132,000, 99,000 to 157,000, 89,000 to 129,000, 117,000 to 240,000, and 132,000
to 238,000 micrograms/kg, respectively. The immunotoxicity-derived toxic
equivalency factors (TEFs) for these congeners could be calculated from the ED50 
(TCDD)/ED50 (congener) ratios and the TEF values were within the range of those
previously determined for other aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated responses.
Based on the known concentrations of these congeners in the PCB mixtures, TCDD or
toxic equivalents (TEQs) in the mixture were calculated [i.e., TEQ = sigma
(PCBcongener x TEF)] using the immunotoxicity-derived TEFs (plaque-forming
cells/10(6) viable cells). TEQ values for Aroclors 1260, 1254, 1248, and 1242
were 16.0, 54.4, 260.4, and 197 ppm, respectively. Based on the ED50 value for
the immunosuppressive activity of TCDD (4.8 micrograms/kg), the calculated ED50
values for immune suppression by Aroclors 1260, 1254, 1248, and 1242 were 300,
88, 18, and 24 mg/kg, respectively. The ED50 (observed)/ED50 (calculated) ratios 
were 1.2, 5.9, 21, and 22.0 for Aroclors 1260, 1254, 1248 and 1242,
respectively.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7589923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Clin Genet. 1995 Aug;48(2):66-71.

Tracheoesophageal anomalies in oculoauriculovertebral (Goldenhar) spectrum.

Sutphen R(1), Galan-Gomez E, Cortada X, Newkirk PN, Kousseff BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of South Florida, Tampa 33617-3451, USA.

Tracheoesophageal fistula, with or without esophageal atresia (TEF/EA) appears to
be a defect of blastogenesis, as is the oculoauriculovertebral (Goldenhar)
spectrum (OAVS), with which it has occasionally been associated. We reviewed the 
records of all OAVS patients evaluated through the University of South Florida
Regional Genetics Program between 1985 and 1993. Of 60 OAVS patients, three had
TEF/EA. These results suggest that TEF/EA in association with OAVS is
underreported. The occurrence of TEF/EA should prompt a thorough search for other
known anomalies of OAVS.

PMID: 7586653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Pediatr Surg. 1995 Aug;30(8):1224-31.

Ambulatory 24-hour manometric and pH metric evidence of permanent impairment of
clearance capacity in patients with esophageal atresia.

Tovar JA(1), Diez Pardo JA, Murcia J, Prieto G, Molina M, Polanco I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Gastroenterology, Hospital Infantil La Paz,
Universidad Autónoma, Madrid, Spain.

Dysphagia and gastroesophageal reflux (GER) probably caused by structural
disorganization of the esophagus occur frequently after repair of
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), and the extent to which they may improve beyond 
childhood is not known. The aim of the present study is to assess by combined
ambulatory 24-hour manometry and pH-metry the esophageal peristaltic activity and
acid clearing capacity in adolescents and adults who had been operated on for TEF
at birth. Twenty-two patients, aged 17.1 +/- 4.5 years (mean +/- SD), were
examined with combined three-channel manometry and two-channel pH-metry followed 
by endoscopy and biopsy. Although they considered themselves healthy, on careful 
interrogation, 16 (72%) were found to have dysphagia, 13 (59%) had heartburn, 10 
(45%) had foreign body impaction, and 7 (31%) had chronic respiratory tract
disease. GER was detected in 12 (54%) patients (5 with histological esophagitis),
10 of whom had a pattern of prolonged nocturnal episodes with very slow
clearance. All patients had diminished contractile activity with low-amplitude
and short-duration waves that decreased from 0.53 +/- 0.35 waves per minute to
0.28 +/- 0.2 waves per minute during sleep. Propulsive activity was uniformly
disorganized, with peristaltic sequences being few (less than 50% overall) and
incomplete (above 80%). Finally, the acid-clearing capacity was nil; the
proportions of ineffective sequences were above 90% for all periods considered,
including sleep and mealtimes. The motor behavior of nonrefluxing and refluxing
patients was identical despite the differences in esophageal acid
exposure.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7472990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Pediatr Pulmonol. 1995 Jul;20(1):21-6.

Late pulmonary function following repair of tracheoesophageal fistula or
esophageal atresia.

Robertson DF(1), Mobaireek K, Davis GM, Coates AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University, Faculty of Medicine, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Although tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia (TEF-EA) are surgically
correctable, late respiratory complications have been reported. We administered a
respiratory and gastrointestinal symptom questionnaire and performed standard
pulmonary function tests (PF T's) and methacholine challenge testing on an
unselected group of 25 subjects with TEF-EA who underwent surgery at our
institution between 1963 and 1985. Results were compared to predicted normals, as
well as 10 sibling controls. While the mean values of lung function test results 
for the TEF-EA group were within the normal range, they were significantly
different from their siblings. Thirteen of the 25 TEF-EA group (52%), but none
(0%) of the controls, had abnormal pulmonary function. This was classified as
restrictive in 9 (36%), obstructive in 3 (12%), and mixed in 1. In addition,
airway hyperreactivity [defined as a positive methacholine challenge (PC20 < or =
8 mg/mL)], was found in 6 of 18 TEF-EA subjects and 4 of the 9 controls who were 
evaluated. Comparison of TEF-EA subjects with normal and abnormal PFTs showed no 
difference in the incidence of tracheomalacia, esophageal strictures or
dilatation, recurrent pneumonias, or gastroesophageal reflux. The respiratory
symptom score in the subjects and controls was similar, and did not correlate
with abnormal pulmonary function. The cause of the pulmonary function
abnormalities remains unexplained.

PMID: 7478777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 9;270(23):13906-15.

Involvement of a protein distinct from transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) in
mediating human chorionic somatomammotropin gene enhancer function through the
GT-IIC enhanson in choriocarcinoma and COS cells.

Jiang SW(1), Eberhardt NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Previous studies suggested that transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) was
involved in mediating the human chorionic somatomammotropin (hCS) gene enhancer
(CSEn) function (Jiang, S.-W., and Eberhardt, N. L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269,
10384-10392). We now show that an unrelated protein (CSEF-1) found in BeWo and
COS-1 cells binds to the GT-IIC enhanson in CSEn and is correlated with CSEn
activity in these cells. TEF-1 and CSEF-1 were distinguished by differential
migration as GT-IIC complexes, thermal stability, molecular mass, and
cross-reactivity with chicken TEF-1 antibodies. TEF-1 and CSEF-1 bound to the
GT-IIC and Sph-I/Sph-II enhansons with identical binding properties, and in vitro
generated TEF-1 competed with CSEF-1 binding to the GT-IIC motif, suggesting that
their actions might be mutually exclusive. Up- and down-regulation of TEF-1
levels by expression systems and antisense oligonucleotides demonstrated that
TEF-1 inhibited the hCS promoter in a manner independent of the enhancer or a
known TEF-1 DNA binding site. The data suggest that TEF-1 may provide a
counter-regulatory stimulus to the actions of CSEF-1, which may be involved in
mediating enhancer stimulatory activity.

PMID: 7775450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3501-9.

A TEF-1-independent mechanism for activation of the simian virus 40 (SV40) late
promoter by mutant SV40 large T antigens.

Casaz P(1), Rice PW, Cole CN, Hansen U.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Virology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large tumor antigen (T antigen) stimulates the activity of
the SV40 late promoter and a number of cellular and other viral promoters. We
have characterized the ability of T antigens with mutations in the DNA-binding
domain and within the N-terminal 85 residues to activate the SV40 late promoter. 
T antigens lacking both nonspecific and sequence-specific DNA-binding activities 
were able to induce the late promoter. Mutations within the N-terminal 85
residues of T antigen diminished activation by less than twofold. Activation by
wild-type and most of the mutant T antigens required intact binding sites for the
cellular transcription factor TEF-1 in the late promoter. Curiously, two mutants 
altered in the N-terminal region and an additional mutant altered in the
DNA-binding domain activated a late promoter derivative lacking TEF-1 binding
sites, indicating the existence of a TEF-1-independent pathway for activation of 
the late promoter. A consensus binding site for the TATA binding protein, TBP,
was created in variants of late promoters either containing or lacking TEF-1
binding sites. Basal expression was increased by the consensus TBP binding site
only when TEF-1 binding sites were present, leading to a reduction in the degree 
of activation by T antigen. However, activation by a mutant T antigen of the
promoter lacking TEF-1 sites was unchanged or slightly enhanced by the consensus 
TBP binding site. These results suggest that some mutant T antigens can stabilize
an interaction between TBP and additional factors bound to the late promoter.

PMCID: PMC189063
PMID: 7745697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Pediatr Surg. 1995 Jun;30(6):823-6.

Management of tracheoesophageal fistula as a complication of esophageal
dilatations in caustic esophageal burns.

Mutaf O(1), Avanoglu A, Mevsim A, Ozok G.

Author information: 
(1)Ege University Faculty of Medicne, Department of Pediatric Surgery, Izmir,
Turkey.

The authors report on eight patients with caustic esophageal burns in whom
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) developed during dilatation programs. This study 
covered a period of 17 years between 1975 and 1992. The age of the patients
ranged from 1.5 to 8 years (mean age, 3.4 years). TEF developed after 5 to 43
months after injury (mean, 20.05 months). In each case, after documentation of
the fistula by esophagography, esophagoscopy, and/or bronchoscopy, the fistula
was blocked by an intraluminal esophageal stent, a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
tube with a large lumen (10-mm diameter maximum). In this period, patients were
fed via a jejunostomy tube and by total parenteral nutrition (TPN) if indicated, 
while the existing pneumonia was being treated. In one patient, fistula closed
spontaneously during the stent application program, which ended with a patent
esophagus. In two patients primary closure of TEF was attempted. In one of them
fistula recurred and in the other it was technically impossible to separate the
esophagus from trachea safely because of the very tight adhesions. In five
patients a two-stage coloesophagoplasty was performed to bypass the fistulated
esophagus. In the first stage, retrosternal pull-through of the colon and
coloesophagogastric anastomosis was performed. In the second stage, closure of
the distal esophagus and cervical coloesophagostomy was carried out. The patient 
with the primary closure attempt and one patient with stage 1 coloesophagoplasty 
died 3 and 4 months, respectively, after the operations. The cause of death was
uncontrollable pneumonia in both cases. Follow-up of the four patients showed no 
complications. Another fistula patient is currently on stent treatment program
with pneumonia under control.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7666316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 26;270(21):12335-8.

Purification of P-TEFb, a transcription factor required for the transition into
productive elongation.

Marshall NF(1), Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Production of full-length runoff transcripts in vitro and functional mRNA in vivo
is sensitive to the drug 5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole (DRB). 
We previously proposed the existence of an activity, P-TEF (positive
transcription elongation factor) that functions in a DRB-sensitive manner to
allow RNA polymerase II elongation complexes to efficiently synthesize long
transcripts (Marshall, N. F. and Price, D. H. (1992) Mol. Cell. Biol. 12,
2078-2090). We have fractionated nuclear extracts of Drosophila melanogaster Kc
cells and identified three activities, P-TEFa, factor 2, and P-TEFb, that are
directly involved in reconstructing DRB-sensitive transcription. P-TEFb is
essential for the production of DRB-sensitive long transcripts in vitro, while
P-TEFa and factor 2 are stimulatory. P-TEFb activity is associated with a protein
comprising two polypeptide subunits with apparent molecular masses of 124 and 43 
kDa. Using a P-TEFb-dependent transcription system, we show that P-TEFb acts
after initiation and is the limiting factor in the production of long run-off
transcripts.

PMID: 7759473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Eur J Pharmacol. 1995 May 26;293(1):1-40.

Functional aspects of developmental toxicity of polyhalogenated aromatic
hydrocarbons in experimental animals and human infants.

Brouwer A(1), Ahlborg UG, Van den Berg M, Birnbaum LS, Boersma ER, Bosveld B,
Denison MS, Gray LE, Hagmar L, Holene E, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Agricultural University Wageningen, Netherlands.

A scientific evaluation was made of functional aspects of developmental toxicity 
of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs)
and polychlorinated dibenzofurans (PCDFs) in experimental animals and in human
infants. Persistent neurobehavioral, reproductive and endocrine alterations were 
observed in experimental animals, following in utero and lactational exposure to 
PCBs, PCDDs and PCDFs. The lowest observable adverse effect levels (LOAELs) for
developmental neurobehavioral and reproduction endpoints, based on body burden of
TCDD-toxic equivalents (TEQs) in animals, are within the range of current
background human body burdens. Relatively subtle adverse effects on
neurobehavioral development and thyroid hormone alterations have also been
observed in infants and children exposed to background levels. Exclusive use of
the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach may underestimate the risk of
neurodevelopmental effects, because both Ah receptor dependent and independent
mechanisms may be involved in these effects. The use of marker congeners and/or
bioassays based on Ah receptor mediated mechanisms are rapid, low cost
pre-screening alternatives for expensive and time consuming gas
chromatographic-mass spectrometric analysis.

PMID: 7545581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Toxicology. 1995 May 5;99(1-2):47-54.

Potency of mixtures of polychlorinated biphenyls as inducers of dioxin
receptor-regulated CYP1A activity in rat hepatocytes and H4IIE cells.

Schmitz HJ(1), Hagenmaier A, Hagenmaier HP, Bock KW, Schrenk D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Among the polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), a family of widespread environmental 
pollutants, the most toxic non-ortho-substituted coplanar (non-ortho coplanar)
congeners are thought to act as strong dioxin (aryl hydrocarbon) receptor
agonists leading to adverse effects, such as body weight loss, immunosuppression,
thymic atrophy, hepatotoxicity, tumor promotion, and disturbances of steroid
hormone action. Since PCBs are present in environmental and tissue samples as
complex mixtures, we investigated the possible interaction of non-ortho coplanar 
congeners with other major PCBs, which are less active or inactive as dioxin
receptor agonists. As a parameter for dioxin receptor activation, induction of
CYP1A-catalyzed 7-ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD) was determined in rat
hepatocytes in primary culture and in the rat hepatoma cell line H4IIE. In rat
hepatocytes, individual EC50-values and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) equivalency factors (TEFs) for the non-ortho and mono-ortho coplanar PCBs 
126, 169, 105, 118 and 156, were in good agreement with published data from in
vivo experiments, while in H4IIE cells coincidence was lower. However, in both
cell systems TEFs for PCB 77 were significantly higher than reported from
experiments in rats. In an approximately equipotent mixture the six potent PCB
congeners showed perfect additive behaviour in both cell systems. In contrast,
addition of a tenfold surplus of abundant mono- and di-ortho PCBs (28, 52, 101,
138, 153 and 180) led to an almost threefold higher TEF than predicted. This
finding suggests a moderate synergistic enhancement of the inducing potency of
potent PCBs by less potent congeners, present in abundance in environmental and
tissue samples.

PMID: 7762001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2429-36.

Negative regulation of the vascular smooth muscle alpha-actin gene in fibroblasts
and myoblasts: disruption of enhancer function by sequence-specific
single-stranded-DNA-binding proteins.

Sun S(1), Stoflet ES, Cogan JG, Strauch AR, Getz MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Transcriptional activation and repression of the vascular smooth muscle (VSM)
alpha-actin gene in myoblasts and fibroblasts is mediated, in part, by positive
and negative elements contained within an approximately 30-bp
polypurine-polypyrimidine tract. This region contains binding sites for an
essential transcription-activating protein, identified as transcriptional
enhancer factor I (TEF-1), and two tissue-restrictive, sequence-specific,
single-stranded-DNA-binding activities termed VACssBF1 and VACssBF2. TEF-1 has no
detectable single-stranded-DNA-binding activity, while VACssBF1 and VACssBF2 have
little, if any, affinity for double-stranded DNA. Site-specific mutagenesis
experiments demonstrate that the determinants of VACssBF1 and VACssBF2 binding
lie on opposite strands of the DNA helix and include the TEF-1 recognition
sequence. Functional analysis of this region reveals that the CCAAT box-binding
protein nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) can substitute for TEF-1 in activating VSM
alpha-actin transcription but that the TEF-1-binding site is essential for the
maintenance of full transcriptional repression. Importantly, replacement of the
TEF-1-binding site with that for NF-Y diminishes the ability of VACssBF1 and
VACssBF2 to bind to separated single strands. Additional activating mutations
have been identified which lie outside of the TEF-1-binding site but which also
impair single-stranded-DNA-binding activity. These data support a model in which 
VACssBF1 and VACssBF2 function as repressors of VSM alpha-actin transcription by 
stabilizing a local single-stranded-DNA conformation, thus precluding
double-stranded-DNA binding by the essential transcriptional activator TEF-1.

PMCID: PMC230472
PMID: 7739527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Am J Clin Nutr. 1995 May;61(5):1013-9.

Thermic effect of food in humans: methods and results from use of a respiratory
chamber.

Tataranni PA(1), Larson DE, Snitker S, Ravussin E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Diabetes and Nutrition Section, NIDDK, NIH, Phoenix, AZ 85016, USA.

During the past two decades, many investigators have measured the thermic effect 
of food (TEF) in humans and have speculated on its role in the development of
obesity. In this study we compared different ways of computing TEF from daily
energy expenditure measurements in a respiratory chamber, evaluated the
determinants of TEF, and more importantly assessed for the first time the
relation between TEF and change in body weight. In 471 subjects, TEF was 1697 +/-
857 kJ/d (mean +/- SD), ie, 18 +/- 9% of energy intake. In 114 subjects studied
more than once, intraindividual TEF variability was very high (CV = 48%). TEF
correlated positively with the level of spontaneous physical activity (SPA) and
negatively with fasting plasma glucose and insulin concentrations. TEF correlated
inversely with age (males only) and body weight, percent body fat, and
waist-to-hip ratio (females only). The level of SPA and fasting plasma glucose
concentration were the only significant determinants of TEF, explaining 15% of
its variance. In 137 subjects in whom body weight was measured > or = 6 mo after 
TEF measurement (mean follow-up duration of 2.9 +/- 1.7 y), a low TEF was not
predictive of body weight gain. We conclude that, despite the low reproducibility
of TEF from use of a respiratory chamber, data in a large number of subjects
suggest that TEF is increased by higher SPAs and that insulin resistance is
associated with a low TEF. More important, longitudinal data indicate that the
variability in TEF is not associated with changes in body weight.

PMID: 7733021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Pediatr Surg. 1995 May;30(5):668-70.

Combined flexible endoscopy and fluoroscopy in the assessment of the gap between 
the two esophageal pouches in esophageal atresia without fistula.

Chan KL(1), Saing H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Queen Mary Hospital, University of Hong Kong.

The authors have used the technique of combined retrograde flexible endoscopy and
fluoroscopy on two newborn babies with esophageal atresia (EA) without
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). This technique accurately determined the gap
between the two esophageal ends and predicted the feasibility and timing of
delayed primary anastomosis. Esophagostomy was not performed, and continuous
Replogle tube suction of the upper pouch was maintained during the period of
waiting for 10 and 14 weeks, respectively. Gastrostomy feeding allowed
satisfactory growth and development during the period of waiting for esophageal
growth.

PMID: 7623224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1995 Apr 15;20(8):920-6; discussion 926-7.

Trunk muscle endurance measurement. Isometric contrasted to isokinetic testing in
normal subjects.

Mayer T(1), Gatchel R, Betancur J, Bovasso E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, USA.

STUDY DESIGN: This cohort study examined a sample (n = 152) of subjects tested
for isokinetic lumbar strength and endurance, using novel endurance measures.
OBJECTIVES: To validate a new lumbar sagittal isokinetic endurance testing
protocol comparing reliability in a normal subject cohort with strength test
reliability to include presentation of a gender-specific normative database, and 
then correlating the results to a Sorenson isometric endurance protocol.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: The isometric Sorenson test has been virtually the
only validated clinical tool for lumbar extensor trunk muscle endurance testing, 
using an exercise chair and permitting the subject to maintain the trunk
horizontal against gravity for a single timed contraction. Alternative isokinetic
sagittal lumbar performance measurement methodology has been developed recently
to measure trunk muscle endurance by determining declining work performance on
repeated, reciprocal dynamic contractions.
METHOD: We compared protocols, performance measures, normative data, and
reliability for the static isometric Sorenson test to three different isokinetic 
endurance measurements: the endurance ratio, final fatigue ratio, and recovery
ratio. Subjects were tested on a sagittal Cybex TEF (Lumex, Inc., Ronkonkoma, NY)
unit for a strength trial followed by an endurance trial. Subgroups also
performed reliability and isometric endurance protocols.
RESULTS: We found an extremely low test-retest correlation for the isometric
Sorenson trunk extension test. All test-retest correlations for the corresponding
isokinetic endurance measures were significant and markedly higher. Extensor
muscle performance declined more substantially on all endurance measures than
flexors and showed more variability. In contrast, trunk strength measures were
more reliable and less variable than corresponding endurance measures. Moreover, 
correlations between the isometric Sorenson test and the isokinetic endurance
measures were all negative; i.e., increases in Sorenson time are moderately
correlated to greater decline in work performance.
CONCLUSIONS: Reliability of the Sorenson isometric endurance test is unacceptably
low, showing negative correlations to all isokinetic endurance tests for lumbar
extensors. Isokinetic strength and endurance tests are far more reliable than
isometric tests, with normative data showing more consistent results from men
than women. Both genders display more substantial fatigue (and greater
variability) in extensor endurance compared with flexor testing. Endurance
measures are identified as human performance cognitive constructs, and reasons
for greater variability than usually shown by trunk strength measurements are
discussed.

PMID: 7644957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Gene. 1995 Apr 14;156(1):119-22.

Yeast vectors for the controlled expression of heterologous proteins in different
genetic backgrounds.

Mumberg D(1), Müller R, Funk M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Germany.

An expression system for Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Sc) has been developed which, 
depending on the chosen vector, allows the constitutive expression of proteins at
different levels over a range of three orders of magnitude and in different
genetic backgrounds. The expression system is comprised of cassettes composed of 
a weak CYC1 promoter, the ADH promoter or the stronger TEF and GPD promoters,
flanked by a cloning array and the CYC1 terminator. The multiple cloning array
based on pBIISK (Stratagene) provides six to nine unique restriction sites, which
facilitates the cloning of genes and allows for the directed cloning of cDNAs by 
the widely used ZAP system (Stratagene). Expression cassettes were placed into
both the centromeric and 2 mu plasmids of the pRS series [Sikorski and Hieter,
Genetics 122 (1989) 19-27; Christianson et al., Gene 110 (1992) 119-122]
containing HIS3, TRP1, LEU2 or URA3 markers. The 32 expression vectors created by
this strategy provide a powerful tool for the convenient cloning and the
controlled expression of genes or cDNAs in nearly every genetic background of the
currently used Sc strains.

PMID: 7737504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Gen Virol. 1995 Apr;76 ( Pt 4):1033-9.

Differences in the target specificity of the transactivating factors MHBs(t) and 
HBx of hepatitis B virus.

Mühlbauer E(1), Koch W.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Department of Virus Research, Martinsried, 
Germany.

Transient transfections of tissue culture cells with plasmids encoding the
transactivating factors MHBs(t) and HBx of hepatitis B virus result in
transcriptional stimulation of multiple target genes. Our experiments show that
the NF-kappaB-binding enhancer element of simian virus 40 (SV40) and the
AP-1-binding enhancer element of the human metallothionein IIA gene mediate the
transactivating function of MHBs(t) and HBx. In contrast, the elements GT(IIC +
I) and Sph(II + I) of the SV40 enhancer, that, as a common feature, require
binding of transcription factor TEF-1 for activity, efficiently mediate
transactivation only by HBx but not by MHBs(t). This finding suggests that at
least one regulatory pathway exists that can only be activated by HBx but not by 
MHBs(t).

PMID: 9049354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;15(4):1923-32.

DNA-binding specificity of the PAR basic leucine zipper protein VBP partially
overlaps those of the C/EBP and CREB/ATF families and is influenced by domains
that flank the core basic region.

Haas NB(1), Cantwell CA, Johnson PF, Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

The PAR subfamily of basic leucine zipper (bZIP) factors comprises three proteins
(VBP/TEF, DBP, and HLF) that have conserved basic regions flanked by proline- and
acidic-amino-acid-rich (PAR) domains and functionally compatible leucine zipper
dimerization domains. We show that VBP preferentially binds to sequences that
consist of abutted GTAAY half-sites (which we refer to as PAR sites) as well as
to sequences that contain either a C/EBP half-site (GCAAT) or a CREB/ATF
half-site (GTCAT) in place of one of the PAR half-sites. Since the sequences that
we describe as PAR sites and PAR-CREB/ATF chimeric sites, respectively, were both
previously described as high-affinity binding sites for the E4BP4 transcriptional
repressor, we infer that these sequences may be targets for positive and negative
regulation. Similarly, since the sequences that we describe as PAR-C/EBP and
PAR-CREB/ATF chimeric sites are known to be high-affinity binding sites for C/EBP
and CREB/ATF factors, respectively, we infer that these sites may each be targets
for multiple subfamilies of bZIP factors. To gain insights regarding the
molecular basis for the binding-site specificity of PAR factors, we also carried 
out an extensive mutational analysis of VBP. By substituting five amino acid
residues that differ between the Drosophila giant bZIP factor and the vertebrate 
PAR bZIP factors, we show that the fork region, which bridges the basic and
leucine zipper domains, contributes to half-site sequence specificity. In
addition, we report that at least two domains amino terminal to the core basic
region are required for VBP to bind to the full spectrum of PAR target sites.
Thus, whereas direct base contacts may be restricted to basic-region residues (as
indicated by GCN4-DNA crystal structures), several other domains also influence
the DNA-binding specificity of PAR bZIP proteins.

PMCID: PMC230418
PMID: 7891686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Jpn J Genet. 1995 Apr;70(2):273-87.

Cloning, nucleotide sequence, and expression of tef-1, the gene encoding
translation elongation factor 1 alpha (EF-1 alpha) of Neurospora crassa.

Ichi-ishi A(1), Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regulation Biology, Faculty of Science, Saitama University,
Urawa, Japan.

The tef-1 gene encoding translation elongation factor 1 alpha was cloned from the
ascomycete fungus Neurospora crassa. The sequences of genomic DNA and cDNA clones
showed that the tef-1 gene contained one ORF of 1380 bp length that is
interrupted by three short introns. The deduced polypeptide contained 460 amino
acid residues, and the sequence had a high similarity with those of EF-1 alpha
polypeptides from other species. The level of tef-1 mRNA was low in conidia but
high in growing cells. When mycelia were transferred to poor nutrient media, the 
level of tef-1 gene mRNA decreased remarkably. The pattern of tef-1 expression
was similar to the expression of genes for ribosomal proteins. The tef-1 gene was
mapped between arg-3 and leu-4 loci on linkage group I by restriction fragment
length polymorphism mapping. Southern blot analysis showed that Neurospora
genomic DNA contained only one copy of the tef-1 gene in a genome.

PMID: 7605676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Pediatr Surg. 1995 Apr;30(4):549-52.

Cervical approach for the repair of esophageal atresia.

Kemmotsu H(1), Joe K, Nakamura H, Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ibaraki Children's Hospital, Mito, Japan.

Repair of esophageal atresia is usually performed by a thoracic approach. In
cases associated with a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) located in a high
position, however, the cervical approach is a reasonable alternative. In the
literature, the authors found only three patients repaired by this approach. This
report describes three additional cases of esophageal atresia successfully
repaired by the cervical approach. Three neonates with esophageal atresia and TEF
were confirmed as having an unusually high position of the distal TEF by the
preoperative bronchoscopy and contrast study. The transcervical approach for
repair was chosen. The skin was incised transversely at the right supraclavicular
region, and the sternocleidomastoid muscle and the carotid sheath were retracted 
posterolaterally. After the division of the TEF, the suture site of the tracheal 
fistula was covered by a flap of the sternothyroid muscle that was inserted
between the trachea and the esophagus, thus avoiding opposing suture lines. These
cases emphasize that pediatric surgeons should be aware of the presence of
cervical esophageal atresia in which distal TEF is located above the clavicle,
and suggest that cervical repair is feasible for the patient whose distal TEF
moves up above the first rib on inspiration. The most reliable methods for
detecting the location of the distal TEF are telescopic bronchoscopy and contrast
study.

PMID: 7595831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 3;270(9):4575-87.

Cloning of an SNF2/SWI2-related protein that binds specifically to the SPH motifs
of the SV40 enhancer and to the HIV-1 promoter.

Sheridan PL(1), Schorpp M, Voz ML, Jones KA.

Author information: 
(1)Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037.

We have isolated a human cDNA clone encoding HIP116, a protein that binds to the 
SPH repeats of the SV40 enhancer and to the TATA/inhibitor region of the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 promoter. The predicted HIP116 protein is related 
to the yeast SNF2/SWI2 transcription factor and to other members of this extended
family and contains seven domains similar to those found in the vaccinia NTP1
ATPase. Interestingly, HIP116 also contains a C3HC4 zinc-binding motif (RING
finger) interspersed between the ATPase motifs in an arrangement similar to that 
found in the yeast RAD5 and RAD16 proteins. The HIP116 amino terminus is unique
among the members of this family, and houses a specific DNA-binding domain.
Antiserum raised against HIP116 recognizes a 116-kDa nuclear protein in Western
blots and specifically supershifts SV40 and HIV-1 protein-DNA complexes in gel
shift experiments. The binding site for HIP116 on the SV40 enhancer directly
overlaps the site for TEF-1, and like TEF-1, binding of HIP116 to the SV40
enhancer is destroyed by mutations that inhibit SPH enhancer activity in vivo.
Purified fractions of HIP116 display strong ATPase activity that is
preferentially stimulated by SPH DNA and can be inhibited specifically by
antibodies to HIP116. These findings suggest that HIP116 might affect
transcription, directly or indirectly, by acting as a DNA binding site-specific
ATPase.

PMID: 7876228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Laryngoscope. 1995 Mar;105(3 Pt 1):256-62.

Quantitative measures of laryngeal function following Teflon injection or
thyroplasty type I.

D'Antonio LL(1), Wigley TL, Zimmerman GJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, Department of Surgery, Loma Linda University, Calif.

Laryngeal/voice function was evaluated in six patients with unilateral true vocal
fold paralysis following treatment with Teflon injection (TEF) compared to six
patients treated with thyroplasty type I (THY). Auditory perceptual, aerodynamic,
and endoscopic assessments were conducted. Three judges rated nine voice
characteristics. Aerodynamic measures included estimated subglottal pressure,
airflow, and laryngeal resistance. Two judges rated laryngeal characteristics
from flexible fiberoptic assessment. The THY group had significantly better voice
quality and better quantitative aerodynamic findings compared to the TEF group.
The TEF group also was more likely to have an irregular vocal fold edge, an
irregular glottal closure pattern, a higher occurrence of hyperfunction and
hypertrophy of the false vocal folds, edema, and erythema of the paralyzed folds.
Results suggest that THY was associated with more favorable measures of
laryngeal/voice function than TEF. It is likely that the poorer perceptual,
aerodynamic, and endoscopic findings associated with TEF injection may be due to 
violation of the true vocal fold cover, particularly increased true vocal fold
mass and stiffness.

PMID: 7877413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1995 Mar;19(3):162-8.

Effect of dexfenfluramine on energy expenditure in obese patients on a
very-low-calorie-diet.

Recasens MA(1), Barenys M, Sola R, Blanch S, Masana L, Salas-Salvadó J.

Author information: 
(1)Human Nutrition Unit, Medical School, Rovira i Virgili University, Reus,
Spain.

AIM: To investigate the effect of dexfenfluramine (dF) on Energy Expenditure
(EE).
DESIGN: 20 obese females were studied in a double-blind design. Pre-diet and at
14 and 28 days of VLCD and dF treatment (30 mg/d) or placebo, Resting Metabolic
Rate (RMR), 3 h-Thermic Effect of Food (3 h-TEF) and body composition were
determined. EE and body composition were measured by indirect calorimetry and
bioelectrical impedance, respectively.
RESULTS: No differences between groups were observed in relation to weight loss, 
body composition changes or RMR. At 3 h postprandial, the EE was still elevated
in both groups. No changes on TEF were observed in the placebo group during VLCD.
In contrast, TEF decreased in dF group during VLCD (P < 0.05). No significant
differences in TEF at the end of the study were observed between groups.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that dF modifies 3 h-TEF but not RMR in obese
patients during VLCD administration.

PMID: 7780491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Microbiol Res. 1995 Mar;150(1):63-70.

Analysis of the gene for the elongation factor 1 alpha from the zygomycete
Absidia glauca. Use of the promoter region for constructions of transformation
vectors.

Burmester A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena, Germany.

The complete genomic DNA sequence was determined for one of the gene for the
elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF), isolated from the zygomycete Absidia glauca.
Sequence comparison with TEF genes from other fungi show the highest similarity
to TEF-genes of the closely related zygomycete Mucor racemosus (Sundstrom et al. 
1987). Southern-blot analysis of genomic DNA from A. glauca with the TEF gene
reveals six chromosomal copies in the genome. In transformation experiments of A.
glauca, vector constructions were used which allow targeting of one of the TEF
loci. Several transformants of A. glauca were analyzed at the DNA level. In most 
cases, rearranged forms of autonomously replicated plasmids could be found in
these isolates. However, some transformants show a different restriction pattern 
of the TEF loci if compared with the parental strains. From Southern-blot data it
could be concluded that in one case the rearrangement lies downstream of one TEF 
locus. In a second case genetic parts following the 3'-end of the TEF gene are
moved towards the 5'-end of the gene.

PMID: 7735720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Handchir Mikrochir Plast Chir. 1995 Mar;27(2):83-8; discussion 89.

[Functional deficits following transfer of rectus abdominis muscle].

[Article in German]

Zauner-Dungl A(1), Resch KL, Herczeg E, Piza-Katzer H.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinik für Physikalische Medizin und Rehabilitation, Krankenhauses
Lainz in Wien.

Functional deficits after raising of a rectus abdominis muscle flap in
reconstructive surgery were evaluated retrospectively in 27 patients (11 female, 
16 male) and compared to 22 healthy control individuals. To test the torque of
trunk flexion, the Cybex 6000 (TEF modular component) was used and subjects
tested in a defined position allowing isolated sagittal flexion. For the rectus
and oblique abdominal muscles, the Janda muscle function test was applied. For
comparison of patients and controls, the Man and Whitney test was applied, and
subgroup analyses were performed for men and women, respectively. The peak torque
(relative to bodyweight) was significantly lower in patients as compared to
controls, the differences being greater in men than in women, whereas clinical
examination did not reveal a significant difference between either group. After
autologous transplantation of the rectus abdominis muscle flap, compensation is
obviously restricted to a certain degree, although the remaining deficit does not
seem to represent a handicap in normal life. Thus the use of rectus abdominis
muscle flaps in reconstructive surgery may be beneficial for the patient,
provided the indication is precise and long-term control is possible.

PMID: 7729756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):3631-7.

Characterization of a HeLa cell factor which negatively regulates transcriptional
activation in vitro by transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1).

Chaudhary S(1), Tora L, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch.

A novel negatively acting factor has been identified and partially purified from 
HeLa and BJA-B cell extracts by chromatographic fractionation. Addition of this
factor to HeLa cell extracts or to a reconstituted HeLa cell transcription system
repressed transcriptional activation by a chimeric activator, GAL-TEF-1,
containing the activation function of transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1). 
In contrast, this factor did not repress transactivation by the chimeric GAL-VP16
activator. Repression of transactivation by GAL-TEF-1 could be alleviated by the 
addition of immunopurified HeLa cell TFIID, but not by increased quantities of
GAL-TEF-1. These observations suggest that this negatively acting factor
represses transactivation by interfering with the function of, or competing for, 
the TATA-binding protein-associated coactivators which mediate the activity
TEF-1.

PMID: 7876100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 1995 Feb;21(1):108-16.

A novel application of a competitive binding model in dioxin risk assessment.

Rao VR(1), Unger A.

Author information: 
(1)Quantitative Analysis Division, Science Applications International
Corporation, Falls Church, Virginia 22043, USA.

The EPA-recommended toxicity equivalence factor (TEF) approach to estimating the 
lifetime incremental cancer risks for dioxins does not address (a) differences in
the severity of toxicity according to the composition of chemical mixture and (b)
potentials for modification of tissue-level doses of congeners in mixtures and
consequently the cancer risk estimates. Our earlier efforts to model the binding 
of congeners to the Ah receptor in the low-dose range and to develop quantitative
estimates for the formation of fractions of Ah receptor-congener complexes
resulted in the definition of a unique parameter, defined as competitive binding 
ratio (CBR), to adjust tissue-level doses for mixture exposure. We made an effort
to incorporate CBR values in the dose-response analysis and risk characterization
of congeners in two distinct exposure scenarios. The modified approach to
estimating tissue-level doses of congeners in mixtures by the use of a
competitive binding model indicated that (a) the Ah receptor affinity is an
important criterion in the determination of tissue-level dose of congeners, (b)
the TEF doses calculated by using the model algorithms modified the tissue-level 
doses for congeners in mixture exposures, and (c) the combined lifetime
incremental cancer risks for all congeners were generally lower when model
algorithms were used in the dose-response analysis. However, the percentage
contribution of toxic congeners was significantly higher when model algorithms
were used. The percentage contribution of higher congeners with low toxicity was 
considerably reduced when model algorithms were used.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250
WORDS)

PMID: 7784623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Environ Res. 1995 Feb;68(2):96-105.

Effects of inhalative exposure to dioxins in wood preservatives on cell-mediated 
immunity in day-care center teachers.

Wolf N(1), Karmaus W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sociology, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany.

The study investigated the effects of chronic inhalative low-level exposure to
dioxins in day-care centers containing wood treated with preservatives on (1) the
number of peripheral CD4 and CD8 cells and the CD4:CD8 ratio in peripheral blood 
and (2) the delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction of the skin (Multitest
Méreux). The study population consisted of 221 exposed and 189 unexposed
employees of day-care centers in or near Hamburg. A status of decreased skin test
reagibility was operationalized as hypoergy I (score < 5 mm), hypoergy II (< or =
1 positive reaction), and anergy (no positive reaction). Taking the fading during
postexposure time into account, a surrogate for the dioxin burden based on the
concentration of dioxins in indoor air (measured using the 2,3,7,8-TCDD TEF
followed by the Federal Republic of Germany) was modeled. No effect was found
regarding the number of CD4 cells, CD8 cells, and CD4:CD8 ratio. However, some
evidence for an increasing dose-response relationship between inhalative exposure
to dioxins and the risk of hypoergy and anergy was found, both in the total study
population and among subjects with a short postexposure time (< or = 6 months).
Subjects with a short postexposure time and a dioxin burden > 0.6 pg/m3 had a
significantly higher risk of hypoergy than unexposed subjects (hypoergy I: OR =
9.51, 95% CI = 1.96-42.02; hypoergy II: OR = 2.92, 95% CI = 1.14-7.5). It is
concluded that a suppressive effect of inhalative exposure to dioxins in wood
preservatives on human cell-mediated immunity cannot be ruled out.

PMID: 7601078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 6;270(1):410-7.

M-CAT, CArG, and Sp1 elements are required for alpha 1-adrenergic induction of
the skeletal alpha-actin promoter during cardiac myocyte hypertrophy.
Transcriptional enhancer factor-1 and protein kinase C as conserved transducers
of the fetal program in cardiac growth.

Karns LR(1), Kariya K, Simpson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
San Francisco, California 94121.

Induction of the fetal isogenes skeletal alpha-actin (skACT) and beta-myosin
heavy chain (beta-MHC) is characteristic of cardiac growth in many models,
suggesting a conserved signaling pathway. However, divergent regulation has also 
been observed. beta-Protein kinase C (PKC) and transcriptional enhancer factor-1 
(TEF-1) are involved in induction of beta-MHC in alpha 1-adrenergic-stimulated
hypertrophy of cultured cardiac myocytes (Kariya, K., Farrance, I.K. G., and
Simpson, P.C. (1993) J. Biol. Chem. 268, 26658-26662; Kariya, K., Karns, L. R.,
and Simpson, P.C. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 3775-3782). In the present study, we
asked whether the skACT promoter used the same mechanism. A mouse skACT promoter 
fragment (-113/-46) was induced by both alpha 1-adrenergic stimulation and
co-transfection of activated beta-PKC, and contained three required DNA sequence 
elements: M-CAT, CArG, and Sp1. The skACT M-CAT element bound TEF-1 in cardiac
myocytes. Thus the skACT and beta-MHC promoters both require a TEF-1 binding site
for activation by alpha 1-adrenergic stimulation, but differ in that skACT also
requires a CArG box. These results provide a potential molecular basis for
divergent regulation of the fetal program, and also imply that PKC and TEF-1 are 
conserved transducers for this program during cardiac growth.

PMID: 7814403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Meat Sci. 1995;41(3):301-13.

Binding properties and colour of Bologna sausage made with varying fat levels,
protein levels and cooking temperatures.

Carballo J(1), Mota N, Barreto G, Colmenero FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto del Frío (CSIC), Ciudad Universitaria, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

A little-studied procedure for adjusting the properties of low-fat products is to
use the influence that both composition and certain processing factors exert on
these properties. The object of the present work was to assess the effects of
protein level (P, ranging from 10% to 16%), fat level (F, ranging from 10.1% to
22%) and cooking temperature (HT, ranging from 77 °C to 105 °C) on the binding
properties and colour of meat emulsions. Protein content was the variable that
most influenced total expressible fluid (TEF) and purge loss. Heating rate had
scarcely any effect on the binding properties of Bologna sausages. Analysis of
variance indicated that the regression models for parameters L, a and b were not 
significant.

PMID: 22060201  [PubMed]


368. Environ Pollut. 1995;90(3):391-9.

Toxicity to Microtox, micro-algae and duckweed of effluents from the Bai Bang
paper company (BAPACO), a Vietnamese bleached kraft pulp and paper mill.

Oanh NT(1), Bengtsson BE.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Engineering Programme, School of Environment, Resources and
Development, Asian Institute of Technology, G.P.O. Box 2754, Bangkok 10501,
Thailand.

Toxicity of the combined effluent as well as effluents from different production 
units of BAPACO, a Vietnamese bleached kraft integrated pulp and paper mill, was 
studied using three ecotoxicological tests: Microtox, the micro-alga, Selenastrum
capricornutum, and the duckweed, Lemna aequinoctialis. Physico-chemical
characteristics of the effluents were also analyzed. Due to unstable operating
conditions of the mill, a number of samples taken at different monitoring periods
from each effluent were tested, in order to get statistically reliable ranges and
averages of toxicity characteristics. For the mill combined effluent, it was
found that the micro-algae were the most sensitive followed by Microtox bacteria,
while duckweed was not sensitive. Microtox tests showed that the bleaching
filtrate from the chlorination stage (C-stage) was the most toxic among all
effluents in the mill. The combined effluent from the bleaching plant contributed
the largest TEF (Toxicity Emission Factor) to the toxicity balance of the whole
BAPACO combined effluent. A less-than-additive mode of toxicity was obtained. In 
spite of high pollution loads, e.g. BOD, COD, SS, to the Red River, the toxicity 
of the effluent was considered to be low. However, during periods of low river
water sublethal toxic effects on the biota may be expected.

PMID: 15091474  [PubMed]


369. Arch Dermatol Res. 1995;287(8):740-6.

Repression of involucrin gene expression by transcriptional enhancer factor 1
(TEF-1).

Takahashi H(1), Kobayashi H, Matsuo S, Iizuka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical College, Japan.

Involucrin is one of the precursor proteins of keratinocyte cornified envelope
that is formed beneath the inner surface of the cell membrane during terminal
differentiation. Although involucrin is specifically expressed in the upper
squamous cells of the epidermis, the precise regulatory mechanism of involucrin
gene expression remains unknown. Transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1), which
binds to SV40 enhancer, is a nuclear protein expressed in various types of cells 
including keratinocytes. Immunohistochemical study has revealed that TEF-1
protein is highly expressed on the basal cell layer of the epidermis. To examine 
the possible regulatory mechanism of involucrin gene expression by TEF-1 protein,
we analysed involucrin promoter activity of the INV-CAT vector, which was
constructed by connecting the 5' upstream region of the involucrin gene (-801 bp 
upstream from the transcription start site and downstream including the
untranslated first exon) to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter 
gene. The INV-CAT vector was transfected to SV40-transformed human keratinocytes 
(SVHK). Cotransfection of the TEF-1 expression vector significantly repressed
INV-CAT promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner. The repression was also
observed by transfection of the GAL4-TEF-1 vector, which was constructed by
replacement of the TEF-1 DNA binding domain by the GAL4 activator domain. This
suggests that TEF-1-induced repression is due to interference/squelching of a
limiting transcriptional intermediary factor that is essential for involucrin
expression.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8554386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Thorac Imaging. 1995 Spring;10(2):126-8.

Tracheoesophageal fistula due to Wegener granulomatosis.

Conces DJ Jr(1), Kesler KA, Datzman M, Tarver RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, 
USA.

Most acquired tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEFs) are due to malignant disease
processes, with nonmalignant causes infrequently encountered. We report a patient
with a TEF caused by Wegener granulomatosis. The radiographic findings of this
rare cause of TEF are described.

PMID: 7769627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1995 Jan;24(1):145-8.

The importance of pharmacokinetics in determining the relative potency of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran.

DeVito MJ, Birnbaum LS.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans induce
exthoxyresorufin-O-deethylase (EROD) activity, a marker for CYP1A1. Differences
in potency of these compounds can be attributed to differences in their affinity 
for the Ah receptor as well as differences in pharmacokinetics. To test the role 
of pharmacokinetics in the in vivo potency of these chemicals,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzofuran
(TCDF) were administered to female B6C3F1 mice for 4 or 13 weeks of treatment and
EROD activity in liver and skin was determined. The doses were designed to be
equally potent based on the published Toxic Equivalency Factor (TEF) values for
these compounds. Mice received either 150 ng TCDD/kg/day or 1500 ng TCDF/kg/day, 
5 days/week for either 4 or 13 weeks. At 4 weeks, hepatic EROD was induced 11-
and 7-fold by TCDD and TCDF, respectively. These data indicate that the published
TEFs accurately estimated the relative potency of TCDF after 4 weeks of
treatment. After 13 weeks, hepatic EROD was induced 41- and 6-fold by TCDD and
TCDF, respectively. The TEFs did not accurately estimate the relative inductive
potency of these compounds when compared after 13 weeks of treatment. The
inability of the TEFs to predict the relative potency of these compounds after 13
weeks of treatment may be due in part to the differences in the pharmacokinetic
properties of each congener. The half-life of TCDF and TCDD is approximately 2
and 15 days, respectively. Steady-state levels of TCDD were not attained by 4
weeks, which is reflected in the increase in hepatic EROD between 4 and 13 weeks.
In contrast, steady-state levels of TCDF were reached within 4 weeks.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7713338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1995;70(5):437-41.

Meal size and frequency: effect on potentiation of the thermal effect of food by 
prior exercise.

Young JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Exercise Physiology Laboratory, University of Nevada, Las Vegas 89154, USA.

Prior exercise potentiates the thermic effect of a carbohydrate meal. The purpose
of this study was to determine if meal size or feeding pattern influences this
response. Two groups of healthy, normal-weight young women exercised for 45 min
on a cycle ergometer at 70% of maximal aerobic capacity. Once aerobic capacity
returned to pre-exercise baseline, the thermic effect of food (TEF) was
determined by indirect calorimetry over a 2-h period. One group of subjects
ingested a 2510-kJ meal and the other a 5020-kJ meal. As a control, subjects
ingested the test meal without prior exercise. In addition, subjects ingesting
the 5020-kJ meal were studied for an additional 2 h. In a separate trial, these
subjects ingested a 5020-kJ meal in two equal portions after a bout of exercise, 
the second portion 120 min after the first. TEF was less for the 2510-kJ meal
compared with the 5020-kJ meal for both the control [mean (SE), 76 (17) vs 158
(19) kJ.2h-1, P < 0.01), and prior exercise [124 (23) vs 197 (24) kJ.2h-1, P <
0.01) trials. However, the same increment in TEF resulted from the prior bout of 
exercise [48 (9) vs 40 (8) kJ.2h-1 for 2510-and 5020-kJ meals, respectively). TEF
was 31% lower when the 5020-kJ meal was given in two portions compared with one
[281 (30) vs 369 (41) kJ.4h-1, P < 0.05]. No difference in TEF was found between 
the first and second 2510-kJ portion.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7671879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Surg Today. 1995;25(3):278-80.

Right pneumonectomy syndrome: report of two cases.

Matsumoto Y(1), Ohi R, Hayashi Y, Chiba T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Iwaki Kyoritsu General Hospital, Japan.

We report herein the cases of two infants who developed right pneumonectomy
syndrome, both of whom were born with gross C-type esophageal atresia (EA/TEF),
and a hypoplastic right lung arising from the lower esophagus, being a
bronchopulmonary foregut malformation (BPFM). Appropriate and well-timed
treatments for a variety of sequelae primarily caused by the mediastinal shift
must be considered after right pneumonectomy in early childhood.

PMID: 7640462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 30;269(52):33082-90.

Structural organization of the human neuronal nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS1).

Hall AV(1), Antoniou H, Wang Y, Cheung AH, Arbus AM, Olson SL, Lu WC, Kau CL,
Marsden PA.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, St. Michael's Hospital, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Neuronal nitric oxide (NO) synthase, localized to human chromosome 12, uniquely
participates in diverse biologic processes; neurotransmission, the regulation of 
body fluid homeostasis, neuroendocrine physiology, control of smooth muscle
motility, sexual function, and myocyte/myoblast biology, among others.
Restriction enzyme mapping, subcloning, and DNA sequence analysis of
bacteriophage- and yeast artificial chromosome-derived human genomic DNA
indicated that the mRNA for neuronal NO synthase is dispersed over a minimum of
160 kilobases of human genomic DNA. Analysis of intron-exon splice junctions
predicted that the open reading frame is encoded by 28 exons, with translation
initiation and termination in exon 2 and exon 29, respectively. Determination of 
transcription initiation sites in brain poly(A) RNA with primer extension
analysis and RNase protection revealed a major start site 28 nucleotides
downstream from a TATA box. Sequence inspection of 5'-flanking regions revealed
potential cis-acting DNA elements: AP-2, TEF-1/MCBF, CREB/ATF/c-Fos, NRF-1, Ets, 
NF-1, and NF-kappa B-like sequences. Diversity appears to represent a major theme
apparent upon analysis of human neuronal NO synthase mRNA transcripts. A
microsatellite of the dinucleotide variety was detected within the
3'-untranslated region of exon 29. Multiple alleles were evident in normal
individuals indicating the existence of allelic mRNA sequence variation.
Characterization of variant human neuronal NO synthase cDNAs indicated the
existence of casette exon 9/10 and exon 10 deletions as examples of structural
mRNA diversity due to alternative splicing. The latter deletion of a
175-nucleotide exon introduces a frame-shift and premature stop codon indicating 
the potential existence of a novel NH2 terminus protein. In summary, analysis of 
the human neuronal NO synthase locus reveals a complex genomic organization and
mRNA diversity that is both allelic and structural.

PMID: 7528745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 9;269(49):31275-82.

In vivo regulation of the mouse beta myosin heavy chain gene.

Knotts S(1), Rindt H, Neumann J, Robbins J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati, Ohio.

The interactions of trans-acting factors with their respective cis-acting
elements in the 5' upstream region of the beta myosin heavy chain gene (MyHC)
regulate its tissue- and developmental stage-specific expression. The role of
three conserved elements, an MCAT or TEF-1 binding site, a C-rich region, and a
beta e3 region, in muscle-specific gene expression was analyzed in vivo. Each
cis-acting site was ablated in the context of the beta MyHC promoter, fused to
the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene, and used to generate
transgenic mice. In contrast to results obtained in vitro, the data demonstrate
that mutating any one of these cis-acting elements does not affect the level or
tissue specificity of transgene expression. Sequences upstream of -600 can
functionally substitute for any one of these regulatory cassettes and are
important both for high levels of expression as well as for controlled muscle
specificity. Mutation of any two of the cis-acting elements also does not affect 
transgene expression. However, simultaneous mutation of the three sites
significantly reduces expression, indicating that these conserved sequences do
play an important role and that combinatorial interactions underlie the beta
MyHC's regulation.

PMID: 7983072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Metabolism. 1994 Dec;43(12):1543-8.

Changes in body composition, resting energy expenditure, and thermic effect of
food in short children on growth hormone therapy.

Vaisman N(1), Zadik Z, Akivias A, Voet H, Katz I, Yair S, Ashkenazi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics B, Kaplan Hospital, Rehovot, Israel.

The effect of growth hormone (GH) treatment on body composition, resting energy
expenditure (REE), and the thermic effect of food (TEF) was studied in 10
prepubertal boys (aged 6.2 to 9.5 years, with subnormal spontaneous GH secretion 
during the first 6 months of treatment [0.2 IU/kg.dl]). Patients were studied
before and at 2, 4, and 6 months after commencing treatment. Height and weight
increased significantly during treatment (112.2 +/- 4.5 to 117.2 +/- 6.0 cm and
18.0 +/- 2.8 to 20.8 +/- 3.2 kg, respectively). Body fat percent decreased
significantly (15.93% +/- 4.08% to 11.97% +/- 3.30%, P < .0002), but was not
different at 4 and 6 months. Total body potassium (TBK) increased significantly
(39.15 +/- 5.77 to 48.70 +/- 6.35 g, P < .001) during treatment. When correcting 
for the expected changes in body composition over time, height and weight were
still shown to increase, fat percent decreased significantly, but TBK and mid-arm
muscle circumference (MAMC) were not different from the expected values. REE
increased significantly during treatment, but when it was expressed per TBK or
corrected for the change in kilograms of fat-free body mass (FFBM), it increased 
only at 2 months and stabilized thereafter. The TEF was increased at 2 and 4
months of treatment and returned to pretreatment levels at 6 months of treatment.
Substrate utilization as studied by indirect calorimetry pointed toward a
significant protein-sparing effect during the first 4 months of treatment; this
change tended to disappear in resting energy metabolism by 6 months of GH
treatment.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7990709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Pediatr Surg. 1994 Dec;29(12):1594-5.

Congenital microgastria in a premature infant.

Moulton SL(1), Bouvet M, Lynch FP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Diego.

The authors report the case of a 1,500-g baby boy with microgastria, vascular
ring, tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), and the VATER association. Despite repair 
of the TEF and placement of a gastrostomy tube, he failed to thrive and had
recurrent bouts of aspiration pneumonia. Gastric augmentation at 8 months of age 
resolved the feeding problems, and he now has a normal diet.

PMID: 7877041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Yeast. 1994 Dec;10(13):1793-808.

New heterologous modules for classical or PCR-based gene disruptions in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Wach A(1), Brachat A, Pöhlmann R, Philippsen P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Angewandte Mikrobiologie, Universität Basel, Switzerland.

We have constructed and tested a dominant resistance module, for selection of S. 
cerevisiae transformants, which entirely consists of heterologous DNA. This kanMX
module contains the known kanr open reading-frame of the E. coli transposon Tn903
fused to transcriptional and translational control sequences of the TEF gene of
the filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii. This hybrid module permits efficient
selection of transformants resistant against geneticin (G418). We also
constructed a lacZMT reporter module in which the open reading-frame of the E.
coli lacZ gene (lacking the first 9 codons) is fused at its 3' end to the S.
cerevisiae ADH1 terminator. KanMX and the lacZMT module, or both modules
together, were cloned in the center of a new multiple cloning sequence comprising
18 unique restriction sites flanked by Not I sites. Using the double module for
constructions of in-frame substitutions of genes, only one transformation
experiment is necessary to test the activity of the promotor and to search for
phenotypes due to inactivation of this gene. To allow for repeated use of the
G418 selection some kanMX modules are flanked by 470 bp direct repeats, promoting
in vivo excision with frequencies of 10(-3)-10(-4). The 1.4 kb kanMX module was
also shown to be very useful for PCR based gene disruptions. In an experiment in 
which a gene disruption was done with DNA molecules carrying PCR-added terminal
sequences of only 35 bases homology to each target site, all twelve tested
geneticin-resistant colonies carried the correctly integrated kanMX module.

PMID: 7747518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 25;269(47):29677-87.

An E-box/M-CAT hybrid motif and cognate binding protein(s) regulate the basal
muscle-specific and cAMP-inducible expression of the rat cardiac alpha-myosin
heavy chain gene.

Gupta MP(1), Gupta M, Zak R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Section of Cardiology, University of Chicago, Illinois
60637.

Expression of the cardiac myosin heavy chain (MHC) genes is regulated
developmentally and by numerous epigenetic factors. Here we report the
identification of a cis-regulatory element and cognate nuclear binding protein(s)
responsible for cAMP-induced expression of the rat cardiac alpha-MHC gene. By
Northern blot analysis, we found that, in primary cultures of fetal rat heart
myocytes, the elevation of intracellular levels of cAMP results in up-regulation 
of alpha-MHC and down-regulation of beta-MHC mRNA expression. This effect of cAMP
was dependent upon the basal level of expression of both MHC transcripts and was 
sensitive to cycloheximide. In transient expression analysis employing a series
of alpha-MHC/CAT constructs, we identified a 31-base pair fragment located in the
immediate upstream region (-71 to -40), which confers both muscle-specific and
cAMP-inducible expression of the gene. Within this 31-base pair fragment there
are two regions, an AT-rich portion and a hybrid motif which contains overlapping
sequences of E-box and M-CAT binding sites (GGCACGTGGAATG). By substitution
mutation analysis, both elements were found important for the basal
muscle-specific expression; however, the cAMP-inducible expression of the gene is
conferred only by the E-box/M-CAT hybrid motif (EM element). Using mobility gel
shift competition assay, immunoblotting, and UV-cross-linking analyses, we found 
that a protein binding to the EM element is indistinguishable from the
transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) in terms of sequence recognition,
molecular mass, and immunoreactivity. Methylation interference and point mutation
analyses indicate that, besides M-CAT sequences, center CG dinucleotides of the
E-box motif CACGTG are essential for protein binding to the EM element and for
its functional activity. Furthermore, our data also show that, in addition to
TEF-1, another HF-1a-related factor may be recognized by the alpha-MHC gene EM
element. These results are first to demonstrate transcriptional activation of a
sarcomeric gene by cAMP and support the role of TEF-1 and HF-1a-like factors in
the regulation of alpha-MHC gene expression in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 7961957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Chest Surg Clin N Am. 1994 Nov;4(4):785-809.

Esophageal disease in the pediatric age group.

Foglia RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, St. Louis Children's Hospital, Washington University
School of Medicine, Missouri.

This article reviews the congenital disorder, esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), and the acquired problem of gastroesophageal
reflux (GER). Each can cause significant morbidity, but if treated appropriately 
can have gratifying results. EA and TEF anomalies exemplify a congenital disorder
which is life threatening, but have been treated with improved success over the
past three decades and continue to challenge pediatric surgeons. GER is an
abnormal physiologic event which with overt emesis can present pulmonary problems
or pathologies involving the esophagus alone. Recognition of GER as part of a
foregut motility disorder enhances our understanding of the problem and its
treatment.

PMID: 7859010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1994 Oct 18;1219(2):351-60.

Transcriptional activation by hypersensitive site three of the human beta-globin 
locus control region in murine erythroleukemia cells.

Pruzina S(1), Antoniou M, Hurst J, Grosveld F, Philipsen S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

In this paper we describe a complete deletional analysis of hypersensitive site
three (HS3) of the human beta-globin Locus Control Region (LCR). The previously
defined core fragment consists of 6 footprinted regions, with multiple binding
sites for the erythroid-specific factor GATA-1 and G-rich motifs that can
interact with ubiquitous factors such as Sp1 and TEF-2. We show in this paper
that the 5' half of this fragment is the most important for activity in murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. A fragment containing footprints 1-4 can stimulate
transcription of a linked human beta-globin gene to levels of about 40% of that
obtained with footprints 1-6. Constructs containing either footprints 1-3 or 3-6 
cannot be distinguished from the beta-globin gene alone. We further show that
binding sites for the erythroid-specific factor NF-E2 can co-operatively interact
with parts of the HS3 core fragment, and that HS3 requires elements upstream from
-103 in the human beta-globin promoter for full activity. The importance of these
results is discussed in the context of the regulation of the genes in the human
beta-globin cluster.

PMID: 7918632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Genes Dev. 1994 Oct 1;8(19):2293-301.

Transcriptional enhancer factor 1 disruption by a retroviral gene trap leads to
heart defects and embryonic lethality in mice.

Chen Z(1), Friedrich GA, Soriano P.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98104.

We have used a retroviral gene trap in embryonic stem (ES) cells to derive a
recessive embryonic lethal mouse strain, ROSA beta-geo5. Mutant embryos display
an enlarged pericardial cavity, bradycardia, a dilated fourth ventricle in the
brain, and die between embryonic days 11 and 12. Whereas heart development in the
mutant embryos is extensive, the ventricular wall is abnormally thin with a
reduced number of trabeculae. Cloning of the trapped gene indicates that proviral
insertion creates a null mutation in the transcriptional enhancer factor 1
(TEF-1) gene. Although transcription of a number of muscle-specific genes
believed to be TEF-1 targets appears normal, the defect in cardiogenesis is
likely attributable to diminished transcription of one or several
cardiac-specific genes.

PMID: 7958896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. DNA Cell Biol. 1994 Oct;13(10):1037-45.

A TEF-1 binding motif that interacts with a placental protein is important for
the transcriptional activity of the hCS-B enhancer.

Jacquemin P(1), Oury C, Belayew A, Martial JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique, Université de
Liège, Sart-Tilman, Belgium.

The transcriptional activity of the human placental lactogen genes
(choriosomatomammotropic hormone, hCS) is controlled by tissue-specific enhancers
located 4 kb downstream from their respective origins of transcription. The hCS-B
enhancer is the strongest; its activity is mediated by synergism between two
protein-binding sites (DF-3 and DF-4). The DF-4 site possesses a potential
binding sequence for TEF-1, a known transcription factor. In this paper, we show 
by electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and antibody supershift experiments that
TEF-1 does not bind to site DF-4. Mutations in the TEF-1-like binding motif of
site DF-4 prevent formation of the DNA-protein complex, called complex f, in the 
presence of placental JEG-3 cell extracts. When HeLa cell extracts are used,
another complex (complex c) is also affected. In transient expression
experiments, TKCAT constructs linked to this mutated DF-4 site exhibit greatly
reduced transcriptional activity when introduced into JEG-3 cells. Some cell
lines contain both protein c and protein f (the proteins forming complexes c and 
f); when transfected, these lines display reduced DF-4-driven activity,
suggesting that the two proteins could compete for the same DF-4 sequence. We
conclude that protein f is important for the placenta-specific activity of the
hCS-B enhancer. By UV cross-linking, we show that protein f is actually three
polypeptides ranging in size from about 12 to 21 kD.

PMID: 7945936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 1994 Oct;18(10):679-85.

Chronic fenfluramine treatment: effects on body weight, food intake and energy
expenditure.

Stallone DD(1), Levitsky DA.

Author information: 
(1)Cornell University, Division of Nutritional Sciences, Ithaca, New York 14850.

Fenfluramine suppressess the body weight of experimental animals during chronic
treatment by a mechanism that is not yet clear. The present research investigated
the contributions of fenfluramine-induced alterations in food intake and two
components of energy expenditure, resting energy expenditure (REE) and the
thermic effect of food (TEF), to maintenance of a lowered body weight in male
Long Evans rats. DI-Fenfluramine (20 mg/kg) produced an initial severe anorexia
and weight loss. Food intake then increased steadily, reaching control levels by 
the fourth day of treatment. Tolerance to the anorectic effects of fenfluramine
was not complete however -- food intake of fenfluramine-treated rats fell below
control levels on 7 of the remaining 20 days of treatment. The body weight of
fenfluramine treated rats remained significantly below control levels throughout 
the entire treatment period, but rose rapidly to control levels following
fenfluramine withdrawal. REE was unaffected by fenfluramine treatment. By
contrast, fenfluramine treatment significantly altered the TEF. Twenty-four hours
after initiation of treatment the TEF of fenfluramine treated animals was higher 
than that of controls. On the 15th day of drug administration and the first day
of fenfluramine withdrawal, however, the TEF of control and treated animals no
longer differed. By contrast, on the second day of fenfluramine withdrawal the
TEF of fenfluramine treated rats was suppressed to 17% of control levels. These
findings suggest that the effect of fenfluramine on body weight involves
modulation of both food intake and energy expenditure.

PMID: 7866463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1994 Oct;23(3):465-9.

Accumulation of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans in liver of
control laboratory rats.

Vanden Heuvel JP(1), Clark GC, Tritscher Am, Lucier GW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Risk Analysis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709.

Polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), dibenzofurans (PCDFs), and biphenyls
belong to a class of compounds, the polyhalogenated aromatic hydrocarbons
(PHAHs), which are ubiquitous environmental contaminants. Due to the existence of
a common mechanism of action, i.e., binding to the Ah receptor, the activity of
members of this class of compounds is generally expressed relative to the
prototypical 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) as toxic equivalency
factors (TEFs). In the present studies we examined the presence of liver of
untreated PCDFs in standard laboratory feed and in the liver of untreated rats at
three different ages (60, 140, and 200 days) in terms of concentration and in
toxic equivalents (TEQs, TEF x concentration). Feed was shown to contain trace
amounts of PCDDs and PCDFs and control rat liver was shown to contain several
PCDD and PCDF congeners in terms of concentration of congener and concentration
of TEQs contributed by that congener. The total concentration of TEQs increased
with increasing age in rat liver, going from 20 ppt TEQ at 60 days to 78 ppt TEQ 
at 200 days of age. This accumulation in dioxin-like activity was due primarily
to PCDFs. In particular the congener 2,3,4,7,8-pentachlorodibenzofuran accrued in
untreated rat liver accounting for approximately 80% of the total TEQ at 200 days
of age. These studies affirm the pervasive presence of PHAHs and suggest prudence
in evaluating chronic rat studies in which interference from background levels of
PCDDs and PCDFs may be a factor.

PMID: 7835546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Ethiop Med J. 1994 Oct;32(4):223-9.

Inhibition of spoilage and food-borne pathogens by lactic acid bacteria isolated 
from fermenting tef (Eragrostis tef) dough.

Nigatu A(1), Gashe BA.

Author information: 
(1)Ethiopian Nutrition Institute, Addis Abeba.

A study was carried out at the Department of Biology, Addis Abeba University, in 
1991 to determine the inhibitory potential of fermenting tef and the lactic acid 
bacteria isolated from fermenting tef dough on Salmonella spp., Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp., Bacillus cereus and Staphylococcus aureus. The test 
bacteria grew in the fermenting tef uptill 30 hr or till the pH dropped to 4.7.
Thereafter, growth was inhibited and decreases in population were apparent. The
results showed that the spent media from all of the four lactic acid bacterial
isolates, namely, Lactobacillus spp., Pediococcus spp., Leuconostoc spp. and
Streptococcus spp. inhibited the test bacteria. Acidity on its own was not
responsible for the inhibition of the test bacteria. The spent medium from
Streptococcus spp. showed the best inhibitory activity amongst the lactic acid
bacteria.

PMID: 7835350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Genomics. 1994 Sep 15;23(2):344-51.

Chromosomal localization and cDNA cloning of the human DBP and TEF genes.

Khatib ZA(1), Inaba T, Valentine M, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105.

We have isolated cDNA and genomic clones and determined the human chromosome
positions of two genes encoding transcription factors expressed in the liver and 
the pituitary gland: albumin D-site-binding protein (DBP) and thyrotroph
embryonic factor (TEF). Both proteins have been identified as members of the PAR 
(proline and acidic amino acid-rich) subfamily of bZIP transcription factors in
the rat, but human homologues have not been characterized. Using a fluorescence
in situ hybridization technique, the DBP locus was assigned to chromosome 19q13, 
and TEF to chromosome 22q13. Each assignment was confirmed by means of human
chromosome segregation in somatic cell hybrids. Coding sequences of DBP and TEF, 
extending beyond the bZIP domain to the PAR region, were highly conserved in both
human-human and interspecies comparisons. Conservation of the exon-intron
boundaries of each bZIP domain encoding exon suggested derivation from a common
ancestral gene. DBP and TEF mRNAs were expressed in all tissues and cell lines
examined, including brain, lung, liver, spleen, and kidney. Knowledge of the
human chromosome locations of these PAR proteins will facilitate studies to
assess their involvement in carcinogenesis and other fundamental biological
processes.

PMID: 7835883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):6013-20.

Characterization of a delayed early serum response region.

Groskopf JC(1), Linzer DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Cell Biology, Northwestern
University, Evanston, Illinois 60208.

The proliferin (PLF) gene promoter provides a relatively simple model system for 
the study of growth-regulated gene expression in mouse cells. The promoter
elements required for this serum-induced regulation have been identified and
include an AP-1 site as well as an adjacent element comprised of three imperfect 
repeats that are similar in sequence to the simian virus 40 (SV40) Sph motif.
Distinct protein complexes bound independently to the AP-1 and Sph elements, and 
both of these juxtaposed sites could be occupied simultaneously. Furthermore,
serum stimulation of mouse fibroblasts resulted in similar increases in protein
binding to the AP-1 and Sph elements. Consistent with this increase in AP-1 and
Sph binding activity, the PLF AP-1 and Sph elements were independently able to
confer serum responsiveness to a minimal promoter, and together these two
elements acted synergistically in response to serum. Although several members of 
the AP-1 family were able to activate the PLF gene promoter in transient
cotransfection experiments, the predominant AP-1 components interacting with the 
PLF gene promoter in serum-stimulated cells were Fra-1, JunB, and JunD. Analysis 
of the Sph element revealed that mutation of Sph repeats I or III abolished serum
responsiveness of the PLF gene promoter, and mutation of Sph repeat III decreased
protein binding to this element. Although the Sph element is similar in sequence 
to the SV40 element, the PLF Sph-binding factor is distinct from TEF-1, the
factor that binds to the SV40 Sph motif.

PMCID: PMC359127
PMID: 8065334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Hum Exp Toxicol. 1994 Sep;13(9):581-97.

Review of the safety assessment of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) with
particular reference to reproductive toxicity.

Battershill JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Health Environment and Food Division (M), Skipton House,
London, UK.

1. The methods used to evaluate the toxicological effects of PCBs in animals have
been reviewed. 2. The data show that Toxic Equivalency Factors (TEFs) could be
developed to assess the potential toxicity of PCB mixtures for certain specific
target organ effects (such as the liver and immune system) but would be
inappropriate for other effects (e.g. thyroid function and neurochemical
effects). More data on a wider range of individual PCB congeners and a method for
systematically balancing toxicodynamic and toxicokinetic data are required before
the TEF approach can be fully evaluated. 3. With the exception of the teratogenic
effects seen in mice and the anti-oestrogenic effects reported in in vitro
studies, there are insufficient data on individual PCB congeners to evaluate the 
structure-activity relationships for the effects of PCBs on reproduction. The
data also show that individual PCBs may have opposing effects on a particular
aspect of reproduction (for example individual PCB congeners may have either
oestrogenic or anti-oestrogenic effects). Studies with individual PCB congeners
have shown both enhancement and antagonism of the teratogenic effects of 2, 3, 7,
8-tetrachloro dibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in the mouse. It is not possible to use
TEFs to evaluate the reproductive effects of PCBs. 4. The mechanism(s)
responsible for the effects of PCBs on postnatal neurobehavioural development in 
rodents and monkeys have not been elucidated. At least two groups of PCBs which
might be responsible for the observed effects have been identified in this
review, one affecting the dopaminergic system and the other group affecting
thyroid hormone levels. Considerably more research would be required before the
TEF approach could be applied to the effects of PCBs on postnatal
neurobehavioural development. This would include research on an appropriate
animal model to determine whether the critical toxicological mechanism is
mediated through the Ah receptor. 5. The reproductive toxicity of complex PCB
mixtures such as those found in foods will depend on the identifies and relative 
proportions of individual PCB congeners in the mixture. It is not possible to
give an accurate estimate of a NOAEL or LOAEL from the reproduction studies using
commercial PCB mixtures which could be readily applied to the safety assessment
of PCBs present as contaminants in food. 6. It is concluded that the data
presented in this paper support the hypothesis that there is no satisfactory
method derived from the available studies in laboratory animals for evaluating
the potential risk of adverse effects on reproduction posed by contamination of
foods with PCBs.

PMID: 7986570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Reprod Dev. 1994 Sep;39(1):112-7.

Control of cardiac gene transcription by fibroblast growth factors.

Schneider MD(1), Kirshenbaum LA, Brand T, MacLellan WR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Unit, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Skeletal alpha-actin (SkA) is representative of the cardiac genes that are
expressed at high levels in embryonic myocardium, downregulated after birth, and 
reactivated by tropic signals including basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF-2)
and type beta transforming growth factors (TGF beta). To investigate the
molecular basis for cardiac-restricted and growth factor-induced SkA
transcription, we have undertaken a mutational analysis of the SkA promoter in
neonatal ventricular myocytes, with emphasis on the role of three nominal serum
response elements. Serum response factor (SRF) and the bifunctional factor YY1
are the predominant cardiac proteins contacting the proximal SRE (SRE1).
Mutations of SRE1 that prevent recognition by SRF and YY1. or SRF alone,
virtually abolish SkA transcription; mutation of distal SREs was ineffective. A
mutation which selectively abrogates YY1 binding increases expression,
substantiating the predicted role of YY1 as an inhibitor of SRF effects. SkA
transcription requires combinational action of SRE1 with consensus sites for Sp1 
and the SV40 enhancer binding protein, TEF-1. As an isolated motif, SRE1 can
confer responsiveness to both FGF-2 and TGF beta to a heterologous promoter.
Whether TEF-1 binding sites likewise can function as FGF response elements is
unknown. Molecular dissection of mechanisms that govern the differentiated
cardiac phenotype has largely been undertaken to date in neonatal ventricular
myocytes, as the adult ventricular myocyte has been refractory to conventional
procedures for gene transfer. To circumvent expected limitations of other
methods, we have used replication-deficient adenovirus to achieve efficient gene 
transfer to adult cardiac cells in culture.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7528025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1994 Aug;120(8):840-5.

Problems with tracheoesophageal fistula voice restoration in totally
laryngectomized patients. A review of 95 cases.

Izdebski K(1), Reed CG, Ross JC, Hilsinger RL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, University of
California-Davis.

OBJECTIVES: Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) construction, performed during or
after total laryngectomy, is used for voice and speech restoration but has been
associated with mild to severe complications. Our goal was to study the successes
and complications in the application of this technique to restore voice function 
after laryngectomy in 95 consecutive patients.
RESEARCH DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study with a mean follow-up time of 3.5
years.
SETTING: Five medical facilities in northern California: the Veterans Affairs
Medical Centers in San Francisco and Martinez, the Kaiser Permanente Medical
Center in Oakland, and private practice offices in San Francisco and Pinole.
PATIENTS: Ninety-five patients (90 men and five women) who had undergone total
laryngectomy with subsequent or primary TEF construction. Patients' ages ranged
from 35 to 80 years.
INTERVENTIONS: Three- or two-layer closure was used, depending on whether TEF
construction was done as a secondary or a primary procedure. Most patients
underwent radiation therapy, and most used surface or intraoral electrolarynx
devices before TEF construction. Insufflation tests were performed by clinicians,
or self-insufflation tests were performed by the patient. Patients' voices were
recorded and analyzed. In many cases, respiratory and pulmonary function studies 
were performed before and after total laryngectomy or TEF. Blom-Singer and
Groningen voice prostheses were used.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Voice restoration was considered successful when the
patient was able to communicate effectively via the TEF.
RESULTS: Approximately 92% of patients who underwent TEF construction and had
voice prostheses placed were considered to be successfully rehabilitated.
Complications ranged from mild to severe and included problems with predictive
values obtained during insufflation, fistula retention, TEF angulation shifts,
fungal colonization of the prosthesis, valve retention problems, difficulty with 
digital occlusion, pressure necrosis, postradiation necrosis, dysphagia,
phonatory gagging, emesis, gastric distention, pouching, stenosis, infection,
hypertrophy, shunt insufficiency, persistent spasm, myotomy, inadvertent fistula 
closure, and aspiration of the prosthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Acoustic measures indicate that speech produced with the TEF
compares better with normal laryngeal speech than does esophageal or electronic
speech. Thus, TEF should remain the preferred procedure to rehabilitate patients 
undergoing total laryngectomy.

PMID: 8049046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5290-9.

A cell-specific factor represses stimulation of transcription in vitro by
transcriptional enhancer factor 1.

Chaudhary S(1), Brou C, Valentin ME, Burton N, Tora L, Chambon P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Unité 184 de
Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique de l'INSERM, Institut de Chimie
Biologique, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Transcription in HeLa cell extracts in vitro was stimulated 8- to 10-fold by a
recombinant chimera, GAL-TEF-1, consisting of the DNA-binding domain of GAL4 and 
the activation function of the HeLa cell activator TEF-1. In contrast, only a 2- 
to 3-fold stimulation was obtained with GAL-TEF-1 in extracts from BJA-B lymphoid
cells. Stimulation by GAL-TEF-1 in BJA-B extracts was dramatically increased by
the addition of immunopurified HeLa cell TFIID, suggesting that BJA-B TFIID lacks
or contains lower quantities of a TATA-binding-protein-associated factor(s)
required for the activity of the TEF-1 activation function. However,
chromatography, immunopurification, and transcriptional reconstitution
experiments indicated that BJA-B extracts did not lack the previously identified 
TATA-binding-protein-associated factors required for TEF-1 activity but rather
contained a negatively acting factor(s) which inhibited transactivation by
GAL-TEF-1. These results indicate that the relative lack of activity of the TEF-1
activation function in vitro in BJA-B cell extracts does not result from the
absence of positively acting factors from the presence of a cell-specific
negatively acting factor(s).

PMCID: PMC359048
PMID: 8035807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Virol. 1994 Aug;68(8):5184-93.

Transcriptional activation by the human cytomegalovirus immediate-early proteins:
requirements for simple promoter structures and interactions with multiple
components of the transcription complex.

Lukac DM(1), Manuppello JR, Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104.

We have utilized a number of well-defined, simple, synthetic promoters (upstream 
factor binding sites and TATA elements) to analyze the activation mechanisms of
the human cytomegalovirus immediate-early (IE) proteins. We found that the 86-kDa
IE protein (known as IEP86, IE2(559aa), or ppUL122a) can recognize and activate a
variety of simple promoters, in agreement with the observation that it is a
promiscuous activator. However, in the comparison of otherwise identical
promoters IEP86 does have preferences for specific TATA elements (hsp70 >
adenovirus E2 > simian virus 40 early) and specific upstream transcription factor
binding sites (CAAT > SP1 approximately Tef-1 > ATF; no activation with AP1 or
OCT). In contrast, the 72-kDa IE protein (known as IEP72, IE1(491aa), or ppUL123)
alone did not significantly activate the simple promoters under our experimental 
conditions. However, each promoter activated by IEP86 was synergistically
affected by the addition of IEP72. In addition, the 55-kDa IE protein (IEP55, a
splice variant form of IE2, IE2(425aa), or ppUL122b) repeatedly had a negative
effect, downregulating the activation of promoters caused by IEP86 and the
synergy of IEP86 and IEP72. We show that the ability of IEP86 to activate many
simple promoters correlates not only with its previously described ability to
interact with the TATA-binding protein (TBP) (B. A. Furnari, E. Poma, T. F.
Kowalik, S.-M. Huong, and E.-S. Huang, J. Virol. 67:4981-4991, 1993; C.
Hagemeier, S. Walker, R. Caswell, T. Kouzarides, and J. Sinclair, J. Virol.
66:4452-4456, 1992; R. Jupp, S. Hoffman, R. M. Stenberg, J. A. Nelson, and P.
Ghazal, J. Virol. 67:7539-7546, 1993) but also with its ability to interact with 
the transcription factors which bind to the upstream element of promoters it
activated (e.g., SP1 and Tef-1 but not Oct-1). This ability to have multiple
interactions with the promoter complex may be crucial for transcriptional
activation, since the IE proteins cannot activate promoters having only a TATA
element or only an upstream transcription factor binding site. In addition, we
show that proteins which bind IEP86 also bind to IEP55. Thus, the negative effect
on transcription noted with IEP55 may be the result of competition with IEP86 for
interaction with the promoter complex. The synergy caused by IEP72 appears to be 
mediated by a more indirect mechanism. This is suggested by our observation that 
IEP72 could not bind to any of the proteins tested (TBP, Tef-1, or Oct-1) or to
IEP86.

PMCID: PMC236462
PMID: 8035517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Semin Radiat Oncol. 1994 Jul;4(3):202-214.

Palliative Treatment of Esophageal Cancer.

Ahmad NR(1), Goosenberg EB, Frucht H, Coia LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA,
USA

Palliative interventions for advanced esophageal cancer include surgery,
radiation therapy, chemotherapy, chemoradiation, endoscopic procedures, and
combinations of the above. Palliative esophagectomy or bypass procedures are
difficult to justify in these patients because their life expectancy is so short.
Palliative external beam radiation to doses of 50 to 60 Gy is successful in 50%
to 70% of patients. The addition of brachytherapy may improve these results. One 
third to one half of patients treated with radiation develop benign or maglinant 
stricture. Although response rates to combination chemotherapy are only 50% at
best, the majority of patients do have improvement of dysphagia. These regimens
are commonly used as part of a multidisciplinary approach with radiation andøor
surgery, rather than as a sole modality of treatment. Chemoradiation regimens
results in better survival than treatment with radiation alone, and provide
palliation of dysphagia in up to 90% of patients. Although acute toxicity of
chemoradiation is more severe than radiation alone, this is of limited duration. 
Chemoradiation may be the treatment of choice for the majority of patients with
locally advanced esophageal cancer. Endoscopic techniques are available that
provide palliation of dysphagia. The most commonly used technique is esophageal
dilatation, either alone or before performing other palliative procedures such as
laser therapy or stent placement. The most significant limitation of dilatation
alone is that palliation is short-lived and most patients require repeat
dilatations. Esophageal stents offer a high degree of palliation, but
procedure-related morbidity and mortality rates are not insignificant. Expandable
metal stents are associated with few complications but tumor ingrowth through the
metallic mesh is frequent. Conventional plastic stents are not affected by tumor 
ingrowth but can migrate. Endoscopic laser therapy also provides symptoms relief 
and complication rates are relatively low. It is possible that a combination of
laser therapy and external beam or intraluminal radiation will provide more
durable palliation than laser treatment alone. BICAP tumor probes, (Circon-ACMI, 
Stamford, CT), which provide direct application of electrical current, are
limited to treatment of tumors that are circumferential. Photodynamic therapy
(PDT), which applies laser light along with a photosensitizing agent, has
resulted in a high rate of palliation. Limitations of PDT include skin
photosensitization requiring patients to stay out of the sun for at least 1 month
following treatment, high cost of required equipment, and limited efficacy
because of the shallow depth of light penetration. A variety of treatment options
exist for the management of tracheoesophageal fistulae (TEF), but only radiation 
therapy or bypass surgeyr appear to prolong survival. Radiation therapy does not 
appear to worsen the TEF as was commonly thought in the past, and it is likely
applicable in more patients than is surgery. The challenge for the physician in
palliating patients with esophageal cancer is to select therapy appropriate for a
given patient, taking into account the patient's disease, coexisting medical
problems, performance status, and the patient's desires.

PMID: 10717108  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


395. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1994 Jul;77(1):366-72.

Effects of increased energy intake and/or physical activity on energy expenditure
in young healthy men.

Goran MI(1), Calles-Escandon J, Poehlman ET, O'Connell M, Danforth E Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405.

This study was designed to examine effects of alterations in energy balance on
adaptive changes in components of total energy expenditure (TEE). Nineteen young 
healthy males were studied during a 10-day sedentary energy balance baseline
period and then randomly assigned to one of four 10-day treatment groups: 1) no
change in energy intake (EI) or physical activity (PA; energy balance at low
energy flux), 2) EI increased by 50% with no change in PA (positive energy
balance), 3) TEE increased by 50% by increasing PA, matched by a 50% increase in 
EI (energy balance at high energy flux), and 4) TEE increased by 50% by
increasing PA with no change in EI (negative energy balance). TEE was measured
with doubly labeled water, resting metabolic rate (RMR) by indirect calorimetry, 
and thermic response to feeding (TEF) by indirect calorimetry; energy expenditure
of physical activity (EEPA) was estimated by subtracting RMR, TEF, and prescribed
PA from TEE. TEE was significantly increased by PA (by design) but not EI. There 
was a significant main effect of intake and a significant intake-by-activity
interaction for changes in RMR. In post hoc analysis, RMR was significantly
increased during positive energy balance and energy balance at high energy flux
relative to change in RMR when energy balance was maintained at low energy flux. 
A significant increase in RMR was also noted during negative energy balance after
adjustment for change in fat-free mass. There was no significant difference in
change in RMR among the three treatment groups.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 7961258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 17;269(24):16754-60.

Transforming growth factor-beta response elements of the skeletal alpha-actin
gene. Combinatorial action of serum response factor, YY1, and the SV40
enhancer-binding protein, TEF-1.

MacLellan WR(1), Lee TC, Schwartz RJ, Schneider MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

Skeletal alpha-actin (SkA) is representative of the cardiac genes that are
expressed at high levels in embryonic myocardium, down-regulated after birth, and
reactivated by trophic signals including type beta-transforming growth factors
(TGF beta). To investigate the molecular basis for cardiac-restricted and TGF
beta-induced SkA transcription, we have undertaken a mutational analysis of the
SkA promoter in ventricular myocytes, with emphasis on the role of three nominal 
serum response elements. Serum response factor (SRF) and the bifunctional factor 
YY1 are the predominant cardiac proteins contacting the proximal SRE (SRE1).
Mutations of SRE1 that prevent recognition by SRF and YY1, or SRF alone,
virtually abolish SkA transcription in both TGF beta- and vehicle-treated cells; 
mutation of distal SREs was ineffective. A mutation which selectively abrogates
YY1 binding increases both basal and TGF beta-dependent expression,
substantiating the predicted role of YY1 as an inhibitor of SRF effects. However,
efficient SkA transcription requires combinatorial action of SRE1 with consensus 
sites for Sp1 and the SV40 enhancer-binding protein, TEF-1. As isolated motifs,
either SRE1- or TEF-1-binding sites function as TGF beta response elements.
Induction of the SkA promoter by TGF beta required SRF and TEF-1 in concert,
unlike other pathways for TGF beta-dependent gene expression.

PMID: 8206998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Genes Dev. 1994 Jun 15;8(12):1473-87.

Distribution of targets for avian retrovirus DNA integration in vivo.

Withers-Ward ES(1), Kitamura Y, Barnes JP, Coffin JM.

Author information: 
(1)Tufts University School of Medicine, Department of Molecular Biology and
Microbiology, Boston, Massachusetts 02111.

The targeting of DNA integration in retrovirus-infected cells is a central yet
very poorly understood aspect of the biology of the virus. To investigate this
problem, we have assessed the use of specific sites for integration targets of
avian leukosis virus (ALV) DNA within defined regions of turkey embryo fibroblast
(TEF) cellular DNA. For this purpose, we developed an assay of sufficient
sensitivity and specificity to allow detection and location of single integration
events in a population of 5 million cells. Targets selected for study were either
regions cloned by virtue of a previous integration event or clones chosen at
random from cellular DNA. By use of this approach, we found that all genomic
regions tested contained integration targets, with a frequency that varied from
approximately 0.2 to 4 times that expected for random integration. Within
regions, the frequency of use of specific sites varied considerably, with some
sites used up to 280 times random frequency. When one region was introduced into 
cells at moderately high copy number by transfection, it provided integration
targets in a pattern very much like that seen with the same sequence in vitro. On
the basis of our sampling, we conclude that most or all regions of the TEF genome
are accessible to ALV retroviral integration. As with integration in vitro,
integration specificity seems to be determined largely by local structural
features rather than accessibility of specific regions.

PMID: 7926746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1994 Jun;126(2):202-13.

Toxic potency of 2,3,3',4,4',5-hexachlorobiphenyl relative to and in combination 
with 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in a subchronic feeding study in the
rat.

Van Birgelen AP(1), Van der Kolk J, Fase KM, Bol I, Poiger H, Van den Berg M,
Brouwer A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Toxicology, University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Interactive effects on toxicity and biochemical parameters were studied between
2,3,3',4,4',5-hexachlorobiphenyl (PCB 156) and
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) in a 13-week feeding study of female
Sprague-Dawley rats. The diets were supplemented with PCB 156 (1.2, 6, or 12
mg/kg), with TCDD (5 micrograms/kg), or with combinations of both compounds.
Estimated daily intake of 365 micrograms/kg body wt/day (6 mg/kg diet group) of
PCB 156 caused a decrease in body weight gain, thymic atrophy, liver enlargement,
a loss in hepatic retinoids, induction of CYP2B activity, and a decrease in
plasma thyroxine concentrations. At an estimated daily intake of 81 micrograms
PCB 156/kg body wt/day CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 activities were induced. Compared to a
simultaneous subchronic feeding study with TCDD a toxic equivalency factor (TEF) 
between 0.00004 and 0.001 was estimated for PCB 156 with respect to the mentioned
effects. Antagonistic effects were found between TCDD and PCB 156 for CYP2B
activity and hepatic retinol levels. These effects concurred with a PCB 156
dose-dependent decrease in hepatic TCDD levels. Hepatic PCB 156 levels were found
to be increased at the 1.2-mg PCB 156/kg dose group in coadministration with
TCDD. In conclusion, at least part of the antagonistic effects between PCB 156
and TCDD observed have a toxico-kinetic base. Furthermore, the magnitude of the
antagonistic effects may be neglected in comparison with the uncertainty in the
TEF value. Therefore, the interactive effects found between PCB 156 and TCDD may 
have no implications for the additivity of the TEF concept.

PMID: 8209374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Gen Virol. 1994 Jun;75 ( Pt 6):1281-90.

Biochemical and mutational analysis of the polyomavirus core promoter:
involvement of nuclear factor-1 in early promoter function.

Shivakumar CV(1), Das GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Science Center at 
Tyler 75710.

The polyomavirus enhancer is separated from the early RNA initiation sites by a
120 bp promoter region. To identify the core promoter elements, we introduced
base-substitution mutations within the potential elements in the vicinity of the 
RNA initiation site. Three of these mutants, two with mutations within a putative
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) binding site and the other within the TATA box, exhibited
reduced promoter activity by about threefold in the mouse NIH 3T3 cell line. The 
activity of the other three mutants was either little affected or remained
unchanged. Mobility shift assays using specific competitors and antibodies
against NF-1 demonstrated the binding of a protein of the NF-1 family at a site
adjacent to the TATA box, suggesting a role for NF-1 binding in early promoter
function. The effect of these mutations was also evaluated in undifferentiated
mouse embryonal carcinoma (F9) cells in the presence of an additional mutation
(F441) at nucleotide position 5233. This additional mutation creates a strong
binding site for a transcription factor, TEF-1, and helps the virus to grow in
this cell line. While the TATA box and the GC box mutants behaved qualitatively
in a similar fashion, the NF-1 motif now played a minor role in F9 cells. Western
blot experiments demonstrated low levels of NF-1 protein in this cell line. The
NF-1 motif partially overlaps a T-antigen binding motif and this motif is not
involved in T-antigen-mediated regulation of the early promoter. Our results
suggest that a protein of the NF-1 family binds to the core promoter and is
important for early transcription in vivo. We further demonstrate that
undifferentiated F9 cells contain a very low level of NF-1 and the F441 mutant
possibly follows a different mechanism for promoter function in these cells.

PMID: 8207394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Endocrinol. 1994 Apr;8(4):478-89.

Human chorionic somatomammotropin gene enhancer activity is dependent on the
blockade of a repressor mechanism.

Lytras A(1), Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

The human chorionic somatomammotropin genes (hCS-A and -B) are expressed at high 
levels in the syncytiotrophoblast during pregnancy. A 22-base-pair (bp)
transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) element in a 1022-bp fragment of the
hCS-B 3'-flanking DNA (nucleotides 1-1022) was shown to be important for
efficient promoter activity in placental cells. However, the TEF-1 site used
alone does not contain all of the information required for the complete enhancer 
activity seen with the 1022-bp fragment. A 241-bp region of the 1022-bp fragment 
(nucleotides 1-241) maintains full enhancer activity in placental cells.
Interactions between placental nuclear factors and sequences distinct from the
TEF-1 element (nucleotides 117-139) were identified by gel mobility shift assay
using the up-stream region corresponding to nucleotides 1-80. Interaction between
these factors and the TEF-1 element was indicated by competition of the 1-80 bp
region for complex formation by a TEF-1 site. We mutated sequences within the
1-80 bp region of the 241-bp enhancer fragment and assessed the enhancer function
of wild-type and modified 241-bp fragments. We identified a sequence (DF-1 site) 
upstream of the TEF-1 site which is required for hCS-B enhancer function. DF-1
derepresses a repressor mechanism present in the 241-bp fragment that inhibits
TEF-1 activity. A component of this repressor mechanism (RF-1 site) is present in
the 1-80 bp region adjacent to the DF-1 site. Gel mobility shift competition
analysis shows that the RF-1 and DF-1 sites participate in the formation of a
common complex or compete for common protein factors in a tissue-specific manner.

PMID: 8052268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 4;269(5):3147-50.

Muscle-enriched TEF-1 isoforms bind M-CAT elements from muscle-specific promoters
and differentially activate transcription.

Stewart AF(1), Larkin SB, Farrance IK, Mar JH, Hall DE, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco 94143.

M-CAT elements mediate cardiac- and embryonic skeletal muscle-specific expression
of the cardiac troponin T gene and a number of other cardiac-specific genes.
M-CAT binding factor was shown to be related to cloned human TEF-1, a
transcriptional regulator of the SV40 viral enhancer. Here we describe the
cloning of TEF-1 from chick heart and the identification of several novel
isoforms. We show that TEF-1 mRNA is considerably enriched in cardiac and
skeletal muscle, consistent with a proposed role in muscle gene transcription.
The predominant TEF-1 isoforms, TEF-1A and a novel isoform TEF-1B, bind M-CAT
elements with high affinity and in a sequence-specific manner. We further
demonstrate that the C-terminal portion of TEF-1B, which contains the 13-amino
acid exon that distinguishes this isoform, can activate transcription when linked
to a heterologous DNA binding domain, while the same domain of TEF-1A cannot.
Therefore, isoforms of TEF-1 may play different roles in the regulation of
M-CAT-dependent promoters in striated muscle cells.

PMID: 8106348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Arch Dermatol. 1994 Feb;130(2):210-5.

Transcriptional control and cell type specificity of HPV gene expression.

Bernard HU(1), Apt D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Papillomavirus Biology, National University of Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Papillomaviruses are of great medical interest as they are causally
associated with benign and malignant neoplasia of mucosal and cutaneous
epithelia. The viral genome can be viewed as a control unit that releases signals
in form of transforming proteins in infected epithelial cells. These proteins
create a molecular environment favorable for papillomavirus biology and an
expanded cell population for multiplication of the virus. On the other side, the 
genome receives signals through cellular transcription factors.
OBSERVATIONS: Cellular transcription factors help the virus to identify the
epithelial target cell, and they provide information about mitotic and
physiologic signals to the epithelium and its differentiation state. Present
research concentrates on the question how these distinct functions are brought
about by factors that are ubiquitous rather than cell-type specific, such as
NFI/CTF, TEF-1, AP-1, oct-1, and the progesterone receptor. Papillomaviruses have
the additional capability to generate positive and negative feedback loops of
gene expression through the virally encoded E2 proteins, a necessary tool to
achieve long-term persistence.
CONCLUSIONS: An intricate interplay between cellular and viral transcription
factors is a prerequisite for epithelial specificity, physiologic responses, and 
persistence of papillomavirus infections.

PMID: 8304760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Gen Genet. 1994 Feb;242(3):263-71.

Sequence and promoter analysis of the highly expressed TEF gene of the
filamentous fungus Ashbya gossypii.

Steiner S(1), Philippsen P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie und Molekularbiologie, Universität Giessen,
Germany.

Ashbya gossypii carries only a single gene (TEF) coding for the abundant
translation elongation factor 1 alpha. Cloning and sequencing of this gene and
deletion analysis of the promoter region revealed an extremely high degree of
similarity with the well studied TEF genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
including promoter upstream activation sequence (UAS) elements. The open reading 
frames in both species are 458 codons long and show 88.6% identity at the DNA
level and 93.7% identity at the protein level. A short DNA segment in the
promoter, between nucleotides -268 and -213 upstream of the ATG start codon, is
essential for high-level expression of the A. gossypii TEF gene. It carries two
sequences, GCCCATACAT and ATCCATACAT, with high homology to the UASrpg sequence
of S. cerevisiae, which is an essential promoter element in genes coding for
highly expressed components of the translational apparatus. UASrpg sequences are 
binding sites for the S. cerevisiae protein TUF, also called RAP1 or GRF1. In gel
retardation with A. gossypii protein extracts we demonstrated specific protein
binding to the short TEF promoter segment carrying the UASrpg homologous
sequences.

PMID: 8107673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1994 Feb;22(2):277-85.

A toxic equivalency factor scale for polychlorinated dibenzofurans.

Tysklind M(1), Tillitt D, Eriksson L, Lundgren K, Rappe C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Chemistry, University of Umeå, Sweden.

The ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD) induction of 20 polychlorinated
dibenzofurans (PCDFs) was examined in the H4IIE rat hepatoma cell bioassay. The
selection of the compounds tested was based on a multivariate chemical
characterization laying the groundwork for covering the whole chemical series of 
PCDFs. The EROD induction potency was found to vary in ED50 values from 25 to
100,000,000 pg/mg, i.e., nearly seven orders of magnitude. The response of the
bioassay was calibrated against the 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, enabling
the corresponding toxic equivalency factors (TEFs) to be calculated. In order to 
establish a quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) for the TEF
values, 37 physicochemical descriptor variables were used to chemically
characterize the 87 tetra- to octachlorinated PCDFs. Using partial least-squares 
modeling on a training set of 10 congeners, a QSAR model with sound predictive
power was obtained. The QSAR model was validated with a validation set of
additional 10 congeners. The predicted TEFs indicate that a large number of
congeners are potent EROD inducers.

PMID: 8005379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. World J Microbiol Biotechnol. 1994 Jan;10(1):69-73. doi: 10.1007/BF00357567.

Microbial flora and some chemical properties of ersho, a starter for teff
(Eragrostis tef) fermentation.

Ashenafi M(1).

Author information: 
(1), .

Ersho is a clear, yellow liquid that accumulates on the surface of fermenting
teff-flour batter and is collected to serve as an inoculum for the next
fermentation. The pH of ersho samples was about 3.5 and titratable acidity ranged
between 3.1% and 5.7%. The mean aerobic mesophilic counts from four households
varied between 6.9×10(6) and 1.3×10(8) c.f.u./ml and the aerobic bacterial flora 
consisted of Bacillus spp. Mean yeast counts ranged between 5.2×10(5) and
1.8×10(6) c.f.u./ml and comprised, in order of abundance, Candida milleri,
Rhodotorula mucilaginosa, Kluyveromyces marxianus, Pichia naganishii and
Debaromyces hansenii. Candida milleri was the most dominant isolate in all
samples. About 90% of the teff flour samples had aerobic mesophilic counts =10(5)
c.f.u./g and Gram-positive bacteria constituted about 71% of the total isolates. 
About 80% of samples had Enterobacteriaceae counts of 10(4) c.f.u./g.

PMID: 24420890  [PubMed]


406. Obes Res. 1994 Jan;2(1):44-53.

Determinants of free-living energy expenditure in normal weight and obese women
measured by doubly labeled water.

Hibbert JM(1), Broemeling LD, Isenberg JN, Wolfe RR.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Unit, Shriners Burns Institute, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77550, USA.

Erratum in
    Obes Res. 1994 May;2(3):303.

Total free-living energy expenditure (TEE) was measured in 9 normal weight
controls and 5 obese women using the doubly labeled water (DLW) method. Resting
energy expenditure (REE) and the thermic effect of food (TEF) were measured by
indirect calorimetry and the energy cost of physical activity (PA) calculated by 
deduction, in order to quantify the components and identify determinants of
free-living TEE. Although REE was quantitatively the major component of TEE in
both groups, PA best explained the variability, contributing 76% to the variance 
in free-living TEE. The obese women had elevated values for TEE (12397 +/- 2565
vs. 8339 +/- 1787 kJ/d, mean +/- SD; p < 0.005), compared with the control women.
PA (5071 +/- 2385 vs. 2552 +/- 1452; p < 0.05) and REE (6393 +/- 678 vs. 5084 +/-
259; p < 0.0005) were also raised in the obese, whereas TEF was not significantly
different between the groups, accounting for 7.6% of energy expenditure for the
obese and 8% for the control subjects. Body weight was the single best
determinant of mean daily free-living TEE across both groups. We conclude that PA
and body weight are the main determinants of free-living TEE.

PMID: 16353607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Crit Rev Toxicol. 1994;24(2):87-149.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs): environmental impact, biochemical and toxic
responses, and implications for risk assessment.

Safe SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466.

Commercial polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and environmental extracts contain
complex mixtures of congeners that can be unequivocally identified and
quantitated. Some PCB mixtures elicit a spectrum of biochemical and toxic
responses in humans and laboratory animals and many of these effects resemble
those caused by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) and related
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, which act through the aryl hydrocarbon
(Ah)-receptor signal transduction pathway. Structure-activity relationships
developed for PCB congeners and metabolites have demonstrated that several
structural classes of compounds exhibit diverse biochemical and toxic responses. 
Structure-toxicity studies suggest that the coplanar PCBs, namely,
3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorobiphenyl (tetraCB), 3,3',4,4',5-pentaCB,
3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexaCB, and their monoortho analogs are Ah-receptor agonists and
contribute significantly to the toxicity of the PCB mixtures. Previous studies
with TCDD and structurally related compounds have utilized a toxic equivalency
factor (TEF) approach for the hazard and risk assessment of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxin (PCDD) and polychlorinated dibenzofuran (PCDF) congeners in
which the TCDD or toxic TEQ = sigma([PCDFi x TEFi]n)+sigma([PCDDi x TEFi]n)
equivalent (TEQ) of a mixture is related to the TEFs and concentrations of the
individual (i) congeners as indicated in the equation (note: n = the number of
congeners). Based on the results of quantitative structure-activity studies, the 
following TEF values have been estimated by making use of the data available for 
the coplanar and monoortho coplanar PCBs: 3,3',4,4',5-pentaCB, 0.1;
3,3',4,4',5,5'-hexaCB, 0.05; 3,3',4,4'-tetraCB, 0.01; 2,3,3',4,4'-pentaCB, 0.001;
2,3',4,4',5-pentaCB, 0.0001; 2,3,3',4,4',5-hexaCB, 0.0003; 2,3,3',4,4',5'-hexaCB,
0.0003; 2',3,4,4',5-pentaCB, 0.00005; and 2,3,4,4',5-pentaCB, 0.0002. Application
of the TEF approach for the risk assessment of PCBs must be used with
considerable caution. Analysis of the results of laboratory animal and wildlife
studies suggests that the predictive value of TEQs for PCBs may be both species- 
and response-dependent because both additive and nonadditive (antagonistic)
interactions have been observed with PCB mixtures. In the latter case, the TEF
approach would significantly overestimate the toxicity of a PCB mixture. Analysis
of the rodent carcinogenicity data for Aroclor 1260 using the TEF approach
suggests that this response is primarily Ah-receptor-independent. Thus, risk
assessment of PCB mixtures that uses cancer as the endpoint cannot solely utilize
a TEF approach and requires more quantitative information on the individual
congeners contributing to the tumor-promoter activity of PCB mixtures.

PMID: 8037844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Genet Epidemiol. 1994;11(2):141-54.

Comparative epidemiology of selected midline congenital abnormalities.

Yang P(1), Khoury MJ, Stewart WF, Beaty TH, Chee E, Beatty JC, Diamond EL, Gordis
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Family Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA 15261.

We present comparative epidemiologic characteristics of five congenital
abnormalities that have been suggested to result from midline abnormal
developmental disturbances: esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal 
fistula (EA/TEF), imperforate anus with or without fistula (IA/F), omphalocele
(OM), bladder exstrophy (BE), and diaphragmatic hernia (DH). The purpose was to
assess the extent of epidemiologic similarities among these five defects. Data
were collected as part of a population-based case-control study of infants with
these defects born to mothers residing in Maryland, Washington, D.C., or Northern
Virginia from 1980 through 1987. The estimated annual birth prevalences (per
10,000 live births) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) of these five defects were 
0.40 (0.26-0.61) for BE, 1.34 (1.08-1.67) for OM, 1.59 (1.29-1.95) for DH, 2.11
(1.76-2.53) for EA/TEF, and 2.97 (2.55-3.46) for IA/F. The birth prevalence of
IA/F and DH increased between 1980 and 1987. In contrast to the other four
defects, DH showed a significant male preponderance (rate ratio 1.57, 95% CI
1.03-2.47), a significant white excess (rate ratio white:other, 1.56, 95% CI
1.00-2.48), and a lower proportion of multiple associated defects (30% vs.
46-61%). We concluded from this study that the descriptive epidemiology of
diaphragmatic hernia is different from that of the other four defects. This
finding may imply differences in etiologic and pathogenetic mechanisms underlying
DH.

PMID: 8013895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Gene. 1993 Dec 22;136(1-2):313-8.

Isolation of Trichoderma reesei genes highly expressed on glucose-containing
media: characterization of the tef1 gene encoding translation elongation factor 1
alpha.

Nakari T(1), Alatalo E, Penttilä ME.

Author information: 
(1)VTT Biotechnical Laboratory, Espoo, Finland.

Genes that are highly expressed on glucose-containing media were isolated from
the filamentous fungus, Trichoderma reesei. A cDNA bank was prepared from
glucose-grown fungus, the bank was screened with the same cDNA as a probe, and
clones giving the strongest signal were isolated. This resulted in the isolation 
of previously uncharacterized genes. Five of the genes, representing the most
abundant transcripts, corresponded to 1-3% of the total mRNA population and were 
clearly more highly expressed than the phosphoglycerate kinase-encoding gene
(pgk1) of T. reesei. Based on sequence homology, one of the genes was identified 
as tef1, encoding translation elongation factor 1 alpha (TEF). The T. reesei TEF 
is most related to the Mucor racemosus TEF3, showing an overall amino acid
similarity of 85%. Interestingly, an exon of only 2 bp seems to be present in T. 
reesei tef1, comprising the first 2 bp of the Gly15 codon.

PMID: 8294023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 15;268(35):26658-62.

Transcriptional enhancer factor-1 in cardiac myocytes interacts with an alpha
1-adrenergic- and beta-protein kinase C-inducible element in the rat beta-myosin 
heavy chain promoter.

Kariya K(1), Farrance IK, Simpson PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Research Service, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
San Francisco, California 94121.

In cultured rat cardiac myocytes, a 20-base pair sequence (-215/-196) of the rat 
beta-myosin heavy chain (MHC) promoter mediates induction by both alpha
1-adrenergic stimulation and a constitutively activated beta-protein kinase C
(PKC), and binds cardiac myocyte nuclear factor(s) through an "enhancer core"
element (5'-TGTGG-TATG-3') (Kariya, K., Karns, L. R., and Simpson, P. C. (1994)
J. Biol. Chem. 269, in press). Here, we report identification of this enhancer
core binding factor as the rat homologue of transcriptional enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1), a human transcription factor for viral enhancers. In gel mobility shift 
and immunoblot analyses, the myocyte factor and human TEF-1 were
indistinguishable in terms of sequence recognition, mobility, and
immunoreactivity. Furthermore, DNA binding activity for the beta-MHC enhancer
core and TEF-1 immunoreactivity correlated closely. These results are the first
to suggest a role for TEF-1 in transcriptional regulation by PKC. The data also
provide direct evidence for interaction of TEF-1 with the beta-MHC promoter,
supporting a function for TEF-1 in regulation of cellular gene expression, as
well as viral, and outline a pathway for alpha 1-adrenergic regulation of
beta-MHC gene transcription in cardiac myocytes.

PMID: 8253797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Pediatr Surg. 1993 Dec;28(12):1532-5.

Survival after gastrointestinal perforation from esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Holcomb GW 3rd(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 1993 Dec;28(12):1646.

Management of premature infants with esophageal atresia (EA), tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF), and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) can be one of the most
challenging aspects in the surgical care of the newborn. Although not common,
there have been reports of EA, TEF, and RDS with gastric perforation, but an
associated duodenal perforation has not been reported. Two premature infants
weighing less than 1,200 g with EA, TEF, and perforation are described. One baby 
developed a gastric perforation and the other a duodenal perforation. Emergency
thoracotomy and fistula ligation were necessary after gastrostomy placement.
These patients are the smallest infants reported to survive gastrointestinal
perforation complicated by EA, TEF, and RDS.

PMID: 8301482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. EMBO J. 1993 Dec;12(12):4657-66.

Transcription enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) DNA binding sites can specifically
enhance gene expression at the beginning of mouse development.

Mélin F(1), Miranda M, Montreau N, DePamphilis ML, Blangy D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UPR 272, Laboratoire Virus et Différenciation de l'Université Pierre et 
Marie Curie, Villejuif, France.

In an effort to identify transcriptional elements that are recognized at
different stages of early mouse development, polyomavirus (PyV) enhancer
mutations were selected for their ability to support PyV transcription and
replication in various mouse undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma (EC) and
embryonic stem (ES) cell lines. Several of these enhancer mutations were then
isolated, sequenced and tested for their ability to stimulate the PyV early gene 
promoter in plasmid DNA that was either transfected into EC, ES and fibroblast
cell lines, or injected into the nuclei of mouse 1-cell and 2-cell embryos. EC,
ES and fibroblast cell lines showed clear preferences for different enhancer
configurations, and cleavage-stage embryos (2- to 8-cell stage) strongly
preferred the same enhancer configuration favored by ES cells. This 'embryo
responsive' (ER) enhancer configuration was characterized by a tandem duplication
of the region containing a single point mutation that created a DNA binding site 
for Transcription Enhancer Factor-1 (TEF-1). ER enhancers stimulated the PyV
promoter up to 350-fold in embryos, and were up to 74-fold more active than the
wild-type PyV enhancer. Most of the activity from PyER enhancers could be
duplicated in 2-cell embryos by synthesizing only the tandemly repeated sequence.
Comparison of these synthetic enhancers with ER enhancers confirmed that TEF-1
DNA binding sites were highly preferred in ES cells and cleavage-stage embryos,
and suggested that ER enhancer activity resulted primarily from cooperative
interaction between either two closely spaced TEF-1 DNA binding sites or two
TEF-1 DNA binding sites separated by a third, as yet unidentified, transcription 
factor binding site. These results provide a prototype of a mammalian embryo
responsive enhancer, and suggest that TEF-1 plays an important role in activation
of gene expression at the beginning of mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC413903
PMID: 8223475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Neurogenet. 1993 Dec;9(2):123-39.

The Drosophila homolog of the human transcription factor TEF-1, scalloped, is
essential for normal taste behavior.

Inamdar M(1), Vijayraghavan K, Rodrigues V.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Unit, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, India.

The scalloped (sd) locus of Drosophila melanogaster encodes a protein with a
novel DNA binding domain bearing a high degree of similarity to the human
transcription factor TEF-1 (Campbell et al., 1992). We demonstrate that sd
mutants show defects in response to a number of taste stimuli. Higher stimulus
concentrations are required to elicit behavioral responses from mutant larvae and
adult flies. The electrophysiological responses of the peripheral taste neurons
in the labellum were found to be normal, suggesting that an inability to detect
stimuli is not the cause of the mutant phenotype. The range of mutant responses
of sd alleles to salt and sugar stimuli define a functional requirement for the
gene in the nervous system and provide an assay for the genetic and molecular
analysis of this role.

PMID: 8126597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Virol. 1993 Nov;67(11):6682-8.

Transcriptional activation by simian virus 40 large T antigen: requirements for
simple promoter structures containing either TATA or initiator elements with
variable upstream factor binding sites.

Gilinger G(1), Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6142.

The simian virus 40 large T antigen is a promiscuous transcriptional activator of
many viral and cellular promoters. We show that the promoter structure necessary 
for T antigen-mediated transcriptional activation is very simple. A TATA or
initiator element is required, in addition to an upstream factor-binding site,
which can be quite variable. We found that promoters containing an SP1-, ATF-,
AP1-, or TEF-I-binding site, in conjunction with a TATA element, can all be
activated in the presence of T antigen. In addition, preference for specific TATA
elements was indicated. Promoters containing the HSP70 TATA element functioned
better than those with the adenovirus E2 TATA element, while promoters containing
the simian virus 40 (SV40) early TATA element failed to be activated. In
addition, simple promoters containing the initiator element from the terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase gene could be activated by T antigen. The SV40 late
promoter, a primary target for T antigen transcriptional activation, conforms to 
this simple promoter structure. The region from which most late transcripts
initiate contains a cluster of initiator-like elements (SV40 nucleotides [nt] 250
to 335) forming an initiator region (IR). This lies downstream of the previously 
described octamer-TEF element (SV40 nt 199 to 218) which contains the
TEF-I-binding sites shown to be necessary for T antigen-mediated transcriptional 
activation of the late promoter. We show that a simple late promoter made up of
IR sequences and octamer-TEF element-containing sequences is transcriptionally
activated by T antigen. These experiments also showed that specific sequences in 
the IR, SV40 nt 272 to 294, are particularly important for late promoter
activation. Previous findings (M. C. Gruda, J. M. Zablotny, J. H. Xiao, I.
Davidson, and J. C. Alwine, Mol. Cell. Biol. 13:961-969, 1993) suggested that T
antigen could mediate transcriptional activation through interaction with the
TATA-binding protein, as well as upstream bound transcription factors. Our
present data are predicted by this model and suggest that at least one mechanism 
by which the T antigen manifests promiscuous transcriptional activation is its
ability to interact with numerous transcription factors in a simple promoter
context.

PMCID: PMC238107
PMID: 8411370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Minerva Chir. 1993 Oct 15;48(19):1107-9.

[Iatrogenic esophago-tracheal fistula treated with endoscopically administered
fibrin glue].

[Article in Italian]

Scappaticci E(1), Ruffini E, Oliaro A, Mancuso M, Filosso PL, Rastelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra di Chirurgia Toracica, Università degli Studi di Torino.

Successful closure of a iatrogenic tracheoesophageal fistula by means of
bronchoscopic application of fibrin glue in a 77-year old patient is reported.
The fistula was completely obliterated after a single application of the glue,
with resolution of the clinical and radiological signs. The procedure may be
suggested as an alternative to surgery or as first attempt before surgery in very
selected patients with TEF.

PMID: 8309610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Environ Health Perspect. 1993 Oct;101 Suppl 3:317-25.

Development of bioassays and approaches for the risk assessment of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin and related compounds.

Safe S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station 77843-4466.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDDs), dibenzofurans
(PCDFs), and related halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons (HAHs) are industrial
compounds or by-products that have been identified as contaminants in almost
every component of the global ecosystem. 2,3,7,8- Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD) is the most toxic HAH, and studies in rodents have shown that this
compound is a carcinogen. Analysis of environmental samples for HAHs has shown
that these extracts contain complex mixtures of isomers and congeners, and this
greatly complicates risk assessment due to the paucity of data available for most
of the individual compounds. Extensive research has demonstrated a common
receptor-mediated mechanism of action for TCDD and related toxic HAHs, and this
has led to the development of a mechanism-based risk assessment approach for
HAHs. Toxic equivalency factors (TEFs; relative potency compared to TCDD) have
been developed for selected HAH congeners, and the TEF values can be used to
determine "toxic equivalents" (TEQs) for HAH mixtures. In addition, several
bioassays that use receptor-mediated end points have been developed and can be
used directly to determine the TEQs for HAH mixtures. The applications of the
TEF/TEQ approach for the risk assessment of HAHs are considerable, particularly
with the conversion of complex analytical data into TEQs. However, there appear
to be several limitations to this approach, particularly with PCBs because their 
potential nonadditive (antagonistic), interactive effects with
"2,3,7,8-TCDD-like" compounds may invalidate the use of the risk assessment
procedure for some environmental matrices.

PMCID: PMC1521135
PMID: 8143638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Br J Nutr. 1993 Sep;70(2):421-31.

Adaptive changes in energy expenditure during mild and severe feed restriction in
the rat.

Even PC(1), Nicolaïdis S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie des Régulations, C.N.R.S. URA 637, Collège de
France, Paris.

Using a new-generation open-circuit calorimeter capable of monitoring the cost of
activity, and thereby both the real thermic effect of feeding (TEF) and basal
metabolism in free-moving freely-feeding rats, we have reassessed the proposal
that when food intake is restricted an adaptative reduction in energy expenditure
participates in the achievement of energy balance. Total energy expenditure,
energy expenditure due to spontaneous activity, TEF, basal energy expenditure and
respiratory quotient (RQ) were computed by indirect calorimetry in rats given
either a mildly restricted (MR) feed intake for 20-30 d (17 g feed/d) or a
severely restricted (SR) feed intake for 1-10 d (4 g feed/d). In MR rats no
significant changes in any of the measured variables were observed. In contrast, 
SR rats exhibited an adaptative reduction in energy expenditure due to a reduced 
spontaneous activity and probably also due to a reduced basal energy expenditure.
On the other hand none of the animals fed on a restricted feed intake showed an
adaptative TEF decrease, suggesting that TEF under ad lib. feeding is rather an
obligatory process that does not include an adaptative component. Taken together,
these results point out that under restricted feeding most of the decrease in
energy expenditure is associated with simple passive mechanisms, such as body
weight loss, and with the reduced feed intake per se. Only under severe feed
restriction can some additional energetic economy be obtained from a possible
reduction of basal metabolism, and to some extent from reduced activity.

PMID: 8260469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Br J Nutr. 1993 Sep;70(2):407-19.

Metabolic utilization of dietary energy and nutrients for maintenance energy
requirements in sows: basis for a net energy system.

Noblet J(1), Shi XS, Dubois S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, Station de Recherches Porcines,
St Gilles, France.

Digestible energy (DE), metabolizable energy (ME) and net energy for maintenance 
(NEm) values of a set of fourteen diets were measured in six adult sows fed at
and below their maintenance energy level. The efficiency of ME for NEm was
estimated from heat production (HP) measurements (indirect calorimetry) at these 
different feeding levels. HP was partitioned between HP due to physical activity,
thermic effect of food (TEF) and fasting heat production (FHP). The amounts of DE
digested in the small intestine or in the hindgut were measured. Equations for
prediction of NEm from dietary characteristics were calculated. HP at maintenance
level averaged 400 kJ/kg body-weight0.75, 16 and 19% of the total being due to
physical activity and TEF respectively. The efficiency of ME for NEm averaged
77.4% with higher values for digestible diethyl ether extract (100%) and
starch+sugar (82%). The efficiencies of digestible crude protein (N x 6.25) and
digestible residue averaged 69 and 56% respectively. The energy absorbed from the
small intestine was used more efficiently than the energy fermented in the
hindgut (82 v. 59%). These values are comparable with those obtained in growing
pigs. The NEm content of diets can be predicted accurately from equations
including DE (or ME) values and some dietary chemical characteristics.

PMID: 8260468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Int J Sport Nutr. 1993 Sep;3(3):272-89.

Exercise training and dietary carbohydrate: effects on selected hormones and the 
thermic effect of feeding.

Witt KA(1), Snook JT, O'Dorisio TM, Zivony D, Malarkey WB.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Natural Sciences, Messiah College, Grantham, PA 17027.

To determine relationships among dietary carbohydrate, aerobic exercise training,
the thermic effect of food (TEF), and hormonal responses to feeding, 8 trained
and 7 sedentary men consumed diets providing 15, 45, or 75% of energy as
carbohydrate for 5 days. On Day 6, metabolic rate was measured before as well as 
30, 60, 90, and 120 min after an 868-kcal liquid test breakfast. Blood was
sampled hourly during Day 5 and during each metabolic rate measurement. The
trained group had a larger TEF (40 +/- 2.4 vs. 31 +/- 3.0 kcal/2 hrs), greater
insulin sensitivity, and greater plasma prolactin and cortisol levels. As
carbohydrate in the treatment diet increased, carbohydrate utilization and
thyroid stimulating hormone were higher and thyroxine was lower, but TEF was not 
significantly different. After the test meal, trained individuals had a higher
TEF but the carbohydrate content of the treatment diet did not influence TEF.

PMID: 8220393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer. 1993 Sep 1;72(5):1513-21.

Malignant tracheoesophageal fistula in patients with esophageal cancer.

Gschossmann JM(1), Bonner JA, Foote RL, Shaw EG, Martenson JA Jr, Su J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

BACKGROUND: Patients with esophageal cancer and a malignant tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) have an extremely poor prognosis. Additionally, these patients
often are denied treatment with radiation therapy because there is concern that
these treatments may increase the size and associated problems of the TEF.
METHODS: To determine the appropriate treatment (use of radiation therapy) for
patients with esophageal cancer and malignant TEF, a review was performed of all 
such cases seen at the Mayo Clinic between 1971 and 1991.
RESULTS: Between 1971 and 1991, 41 patients with malignant TEF arising as a
result of esophageal cancer were seen at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester.
Twenty-eight of these cancers were locally recurrent, and this group of patients 
had a uniformly poor outcome (median survival time, 1.4 months). Thirteen
patients had a malignant TEF and had not received previous treatment for their
esophageal cancer. The median survival length was 4 months for this group of
patients. Of the 41 patients in this study, 10 received radiation therapy for
their malignant TEF (30-66 Gy). The median survival length of this group of
patients was 4.8 months. Six of these 10 patients died of metastatic disease
(median survival length, 9 months), and there was no evidence of progression of
the local tumor. Four of these 10 patients died of local progression of the
malignancy (median survival length, 3 months).
CONCLUSIONS: Radiation therapy did not increase the severity of the TEF. The
authors conclude that radiation therapy can be administered safely in patients
with TEF resulting from esophageal cancer. In some patients, radiation treatment 
may contribute to stabilization of the local tumor process (60% of patients
treated with radiation therapy died of metastatic disease without local
progression of tumor); however, all patients in this study eventually died of
esophageal cancer.

PMID: 7688653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 25;21(17):4103-10.

Both a ubiquitous factor mTEF-1 and a distinct muscle-specific factor bind to the
M-CAT motif of the myosin heavy chain beta gene.

Shimizu N(1), Smith G, Izumo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215.

The A element, a fourteen base pair sequence in the rabbit myosin heavy chain
(HC) beta promoter (-276/-263), contains the M-CAT motif, a cis-acting element
found in several muscle-specific genes. The A element is essential for
muscle-specific transcription of the myosin HC beta gene. Recently, we have
identified both muscle-specific and ubiquitous factors (A1 and A2 factors,
respectively) that bind to the A element. Since the sequence of the A element is 
very similar to the GTIIC motif in the SV40 enhancer, we examined the
relationship between A-element-binding factors and a GTIIC binding factor TEF-1, 
recently isolated from HeLa cells. The GTIIC motif was bound by the A1 and A2
factors in muscle nuclear extracts and competed with the A element for
DNA-protein complex formation. Antibody against human TEF-1 'supershifted' the
ubiquitous A2 factor-DNA complex, but did not alter the mobility of the
muscle-specific A1 factor-DNA complex. We isolated a murine cDNA clone (mTEF-1)
from a cardiac cDNA library. The clone is highly homologous to Hela cell TEF-1.
The in vitro transcription/translation product of mTEF-1 cDNA bound to the A
element, and the DNA binding property of mTEF-1 was identical to that of the A2
factor. Transfection of mTEF-1 cDNA into muscle and non-muscle cells confirmed
that mTEF-1 corresponds to A2, but not to A1 factors. The mTEF-1 mRNA is
expressed abundantly in skeletal and cardiac muscles, kidney and lung, but it is 
also expressed at lower levels in other tissues. These results suggest that the
M-CAT binding factors consist of two different factors; the ubiquitous A2 is
encoded by mTEF-1, but the muscle-specific A1 factor is distinct from mTEF-1.

PMCID: PMC310013
PMID: 8396764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Cancer. 1993 Jun 15;71(12):3808-12.

Irradiation of carcinoma of the esophagus containing a tracheoesophageal fistula.

Arlington A(1), Bohorquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, University of Oklahoma, Oklahoma City.

BACKGROUND: For patients with locally advanced esophageal carcinoma, tracheal
involvement is common, and the formation of a tracheoesophageal fistula is a
frequent complication of the disease, with or without treatment. However, the
presence of a tracheoesophageal fistula has historically been considered a
relative contraindication to radiation therapy. Therefore, we are presenting a
case report whereby irradiation was continued despite the presence of such a
fistula.
METHODS: A 60-year-old white man diagnosed with Stage III, T4N0M0, moderately
well-differentiated invasive squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus was
initially treated with four courses of chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil and
cisplatin) and had an excellent tumor response. He was then referred for
consolidative radiation therapy (XRT). At 600 cGy, he had symptoms consistent
with a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), which was documented by barium swallow at
3000 cGy. Radiation treatments were continued, but at a reduced fraction size
that was gradually increased over several days.
RESULTS: Upon completion of the radiation therapy, the TEF persisted but had
completely disappeared 2 months post-XRT. However, at 4 months post-XRT, the
fistula recurred due to tumor recurrence. At 6 months post-XRT, he died with
metastatic disease, 16 months after initial diagnosis and 8.5 months after the
first TEF occurred.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of a TEF may not be an absolute contraindication to
radiation therapy. Radiation therapy may be initiated or continued in the
presence of a TEF, and eventual resolution of the fistula may occur. Recurrence
of a healed TEF may indicate recurrence of a tumor.

PMID: 8508348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. EMBO J. 1993 Jun;12(6):2337-48.

Characterization of the transcription activation function and the DNA binding
domain of transcriptional enhancer factor-1.

Hwang JJ(1), Chambon P, Davidson I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Strasbourg,
France.

The regions of transcriptional enhancer factor-1 (TEF-1) required for its
activation function and sequence-specific DNA binding have been determined.
Deletion analysis of a chimera between TEF-1 and the GAL4 DNA binding domain
(DBD) indicated that at least three regions of TEF-1 were involved in
transactivation. However, none of these regions functioned as independent
activating domains. Moreover, none of the GAL4 chimeras containing individual
TEF-1 regions interfered with the activity of endogenous HeLa cell TEF-1, while
interference was observed with the GAL4-TEF-1 chimeras which functioned as
transactivators. These results indicate that there is a general correlation
between the abilities of a given GAL4-TEF-1 chimera to function in
transcriptional activation and interference, thus supporting the idea that
transactivation by TEF-1 is mediated by a limiting transcriptional intermediary
factor. In addition, we show experimentally that the TEA/ATTS domain is a novel
class of DBD involved in the sequence-specific DNA binding of TEF-1 and its
Drosophila homologue scalloped. Two other regions of TEF-1 are also required for 
DNA binding. These regions are not part of the minimum DBD, but may function by
antagonizing the effect of sequences which negatively regulate DNA binding
mediated by both the TEF-1 TEA/ATTS domain and the GAL4 DBD. In addition,
analysis of TEF-1 and scalloped derivatives in which their TEA/ATTS domains have 
been interchanged further indicates that the TEA/ATTS domain is not the only
determinant of DNA binding specificity.

PMCID: PMC413464
PMID: 8389695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. EMBO J. 1993 May;12(5):2039-48.

The Aspergillus nidulans yA gene is regulated by abaA.

Aramayo R(1), Timberlake WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens 30602.

The developmentally regulated Aspergillus nidulans yA gene encodes a p-diphenol
oxidase that is needed for synthesis of green conidial pigment. We subjected the 
yA 5' flanking region to mutational analysis in A. nidulans and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae to identify DNA sequence elements involved in its transcriptional
control, and identified two functionally distinct elements. Element I contained
potential BrlA binding sites and was required for full level yA transcription,
but not for developmental regulation in the presence of element II. Element II
contained putative TEF-1 binding sites flanking a CCAAT element and was
sufficient for developmental regulation of transcription. Mutation of the TEF-1
binding sites eliminated developmental regulation, whereas mutation of the CCAAT 
element led to elevated levels of transcription. Element II was also sufficient
to induce transcription in S. cerevisiae when the A.nidulans developmental
regulatory gene abaA was expressed from the GAL1 promoter. As AbaA and TEF-1
possess similar DNA binding domains, the abaA-yA interaction in yeast is probably
direct. Thus, abaA appears to be a direct activator of yA, but yA regulation may 
also involve interactions with BrlA and a member of the CCAAT class of DNA
binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC413426
PMID: 8491194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1993 May;20(4):456-63.

Comparative potencies of Aroclors 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 in male Wistar
rats--assessment of the toxic equivalency factor (TEF) approach for
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

Harris M(1), Zacharewski T, Safe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station 77843-4466.

Immature male Wistar rats were treated with several different doses of the
commercial polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) Aroclors 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 
1260 (10, 40, 160, 480, and 2000 mg/kg) and the effects on body weight gain,
thymic atrophy, and the induction of hepatic microsomal aryl hydrocarbon
hydroxylase (AHH), ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase (EROD), and pentoxyresorufin
O-deethylase (PROD) activities were measured 14 days after treatment. A
significant inhibition in body weight gain was observed only in rats treated with
high doses of Aroclors 1232 and 1248 and thymic atrophy was not observed for any 
of the Aroclors. All the Aroclors caused a dose-dependent increase in hepatic
microsomal AHH, EROD, and PROD activities. The corresponding ED50 values for the 
induction of AHH-EROD activities varied from 51 to 678 mg/kg. Aroclor 1260 was
the least active inducer of the P4501A1-mediated enzyme activities. In contrast, 
Aroclor 1260 was a potent inducer of PROD activity (ED50 = 37 mg/kg), but
Aroclors 1232, 1242, 1248, and 1254 did not induce 50% of the maximal response at
the highest dose used in this experiment (2000/kg). Previous studies have
quantitated the levels of those PCB congeners which induce AHH or EROD activities
in Aroclors 1232, 1242, 1254, and 1260 and their potencies or toxic equivalency
factors (TEFs) relative to that of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD)
have also been estimated or experimentally determined. Using highly conservative 
TEF values it was demonstrated that the calculated ED50s for the Aroclors as
inducers of AHH and EROD activity were significantly lower than the observed ED50
values.2

PMID: 8314461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Science. 1993 Apr 2;260(5104):78-82.

Skn-1a and Skn-1i: two functionally distinct Oct-2-related factors expressed in
epidermis.

Andersen B(1), Schonemann MD, Flynn SE, Pearse RV 2nd, Singh H, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California School of Medicine, San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

Erratum in
    Science. 1993 Dec 3;262(5139):1499.

Two forms of a member of the POU domain family of transcriptional regulators,
highly related to Oct-2, are selectively expressed in terminally differentiating 
epidermis and hair follicles. One form, referred to as Skn-1i, contains an
amino-terminal domain that inhibits DNA binding and can inhibit transactivation
by Oct-1. A second form, Skn-1a, contains an alternative amino terminus and
serves to activate cytokeratin 10 (K10) gene expression. The pattern of
expression of the Skn-1a/i gene products and the effect of the alternative
products on the expression of other genes suggest that these factors serve
regulatory functions with respect to epidermal development.

PMID: 7682011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1993 Apr;47(4):274-84.

Effect of circadian variation in energy expenditure, within-subject variation and
weight reduction on thermic effect of food.

Miles CW(1), Wong NP, Rumpler WV, Conway J.

Author information: 
(1)United States Department of Agriculture, Beltsville Human Nutrition Research
Center, MD 20705.

Thermic effect of food (TEF) studies give conflicting answers to research
questions and in many cases data from one laboratory to another is not comparable
because of the utilization of different experimental methods. Likewise, how
weight reduction affects measurement of TEF is controversial. Two studies were
conducted on how TEF affects energy expenditure. The first study examined how
resting energy expenditure (REE) measurements can affect TEF studies and how much
within-subject variation is found in TEF studies. The TEF of a standard meal was 
measured in six subjects for 6.5 h on three different occasions by indirect
calorimetry. REE was measured on each subject for 1 h before the meal was given
on each measurement occasion. On a separate day, the energy expenditure was
measured on each subject during the same time period as the TEF measurement, but 
without any food given to determine if a circadian increase in REE over the time 
period of the measurement was observed. We found no circadian increase in energy 
expenditure during the 6.5 h of the REE study. While the within-subject variation
in REE (four measurements) had an average coefficient of variation of 5.2% (range
2.4-8.5%), the coefficient of variation of the TEF measured (three measurements) 
was 26.4% (range 13.6-50.9). In the second study, REF and the TEF were measured
before and after weight reduction in moderately overweight adult women. Nine
women weighing between 62.1 and 84.7 kg lost an average of 7.3 kg while on a
reduced calorie, low fat diet for between 12 and 14 weeks. After weight
reduction, the average REE of these subjects decreased by 8.8% or 515 kJ (123
kcal)/24 h. The TEF of these nine women was measured for 6.5 h before and after
weight reduction using 16 oz of Sustacal, 2008 kJ (480 kcal). Before weight
reduction the thermic effect of Sustacal was 264 kJ (63 kcal) or 13% of calories 
consumed, and after weight reduction it was 251 kJ (60 kcal) or 12.5% of calories
consumed. We did not find the TEF to be lower than expected in these subjects
before weight reduction, since TEF is often reported to be around 10% of energy
consumed, and it was not changed after weight reduction.

PMID: 8491165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Gen Virol. 1993 Apr;74 ( Pt 4):597-605.

Identification of proteins binding to the F441 locus of polyomavirus B enhancer
that are required for its activity in embryonic carcinoma cells.

DasGupta S(1), Shivakumar CV, Das GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Health Center, Tyler
75710.

A point mutation at nucleotide 5233 of the polyomavirus (A2 strain) enables it to
overcome growth restriction in undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma cells. We
analysed the binding of nuclear proteins from F9 cells to a 38 bp region that
spans this site of mutation and encompasses two copies of the bovine
papillomavirus core sequence, CCACCC, and characterized this domain by mutational
analysis. Our results showed that the F441 mutation creates a sequence motif
which binds TEF-1 or a TEF-1-like protein from F9 cells more strongly than its
wild-type counterpart and increases its activity by about 10-fold. Another
protein identified as CP1 binds with increased affinity in the presence of the
F441 mutation to the CAT box-like sequences which is contiguous with the
downstream CCACCC box. Point mutations within these two motifs that abolished
binding in vitro also impaired the activity of the F441 locus in vivo. As neither
the wild-type sequence without the F441 mutation, nor the F441 template without
the CAT box has appreciable activity in vivo, interaction between these two
elements is required for function. At a higher level of organization, this
interaction is probably extended to factors bound to other domains in the A and B
enhancer.

PMID: 8385690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Am J Perinatol. 1993 Mar;10(2):164-7.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula in a premature infant.

Rawlings DJ(1), Lawrence S, Goldstein JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida Health Science Center,
Jacksonville.

A fatality from an acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in a very low
birthweight premature infant is presented. Neonatal tracheal and esophageal
injuries related to endotracheal (ET) intubation are discussed. The infant had
important risk factors for the development of subglottic stenosis: birthweight
less than 1000 gm, prolonged positive pressure ventilation, and repeated ET
intubation. The pathologic examination was consistent with acquired fistula
formation resulting from a combination of preexisting subglottic stenosis and
prolonged and repeated ET intubation. The recognition of clinical signs of an
acquired TEF, as observed in our patient, followed by expeditious diagnostic
testing may be lifesaving.

PMID: 8476483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 11;21(3):747-8.

Striking homology between mouse and human transcription enhancer factor-1
(TEF-1).

Blatt C(1), DePamphilis ML.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Roche Research Center, Nutley, NJ 07110.

PMCID: PMC309183
PMID: 8441689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. EMBO J. 1993 Feb;12(2):489-99.

Distinct TFIID complexes mediate the effect of different transcriptional
activators.

Brou C(1), Chaudhary S, Davidson I, Lutz Y, Wu J, Egly JM, Tora L, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Institut de
Chimie Biologique, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

Multiple chromatographically separable complexes containing the TATA binding
protein (TBP), which exhibit different functional properties, exist in HeLa
cells. At least three distinct subpopulations of such complexes can be
functionally defined as TFIID since they function with RNA polymerase II. Using a
partially reconstituted HeLa cell in vitro transcription system and
immunoprecipitation with a monoclonal antibody directed against TBP, we show that
stimulation of transcription by the chimeric activators GAL-VP16, GAL-TEF-1 and
GAL-ER(EF) requires the presence of factors which are tightly associated with
these TFIID complexes. Moreover, the activity of GAL-TEF-1 appears to be mediated
by at least two chromatographically distinct populations of TFIID. The factor(s) 
associated with one of these populations is also required for the activity of
GAL-ER (EF) and GAL-VP16, while the factor(s) associated with the other
population functions selectively with GAL-TEF-1. These two TFIID populations are 
composed of both common and unique TBP associated factors (TAFs).

PMCID: PMC413232
PMID: 8440239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Pediatr Surg. 1993 Feb;28(2):151-4.

Staged repair improves outcome of high-risk premature infants with esophageal
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Alexander F(1), Johanningman J, Martin LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45229.

Twenty-five high-risk premature infants weighing less than 2,000 g at birth
(Waterson class C), were treated for esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). If four patients with associated Trisomy 18 are 
excluded for whom definitive surgery was denied, 17 of 21 patients (81%)
survived. Of significance is that 14 patients with EA and TEF underwent initial
gastrostomy tube placement followed by either primary anastomosis or staged
repair, depending on clinical status. Four of these infants with distal TEF who
were considered low risk underwent a primary anastomosis with 100% survival.
However, 3 of these 4 patients developed significant postoperative complications 
and 2 required subsequent Nissen fundoplication (50%). Ten reached at least 2,000
g in weight with 70% survival. In this group 3 neonates died before the
definitive repair could be performed. Of the 7 who survived, only 2 incurred
postoperative complications and only 1 patient required Nissen fundoplication
(14%). Five other patients were found to have EA without TEF and underwent staged
repair with 100% survival. Finally, one additional patient with H-type TEF
underwent transcervical ligation and another with a congenital esophageal
stenosis died of intracerebral hemorrhage prior to the institution of surgical
therapy. Although the number in this series are small, these findings suggest
that premature infants with EA and TEF incur a lesser morbidity when treated by a
staged repair versus a primary anastomosis.

PMID: 8437067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Feb;13(2):961-9.

Transcriptional activation by simian virus 40 large T antigen: interactions with 
multiple components of the transcription complex.

Gruda MC(1), Zabolotny JM, Xiao JH, Davidson I, Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6142.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen is a potent transcriptional activator of
both viral and cellular promoters. Within the SV40 late promoter, a specific
upstream element necessary for T-antigen transcriptional activation is the
binding site for transcription-enhancing factor 1 (TEF-1). The promoter structure
necessary for T-antigen-mediated transcriptional activation appears to be simple.
For example, a promoter consisting of upstream TEF-1 binding sites (or other
factor-binding sites) and a downstream TATA or initiator element is efficiently
activated. It has been demonstrated that transcriptional activation by T antigen 
does not require direct binding to the DNA; thus, the most direct effect that T
antigen could have on these simple promoters would be through protein-protein
interactions with either upstream-bound transcription factors, the basal
transcription complex, or both. To determine whether such interactions occur,
full-length T antigen or segments of it was fused to the glutathione-binding site
(GST fusions) or to the Gal4 DNA-binding domain (amino acids 1 to 147) (Gal4
fusions). With the GST fusions, it was found that TEF-1 and the TATA-binding
protein (TBP) bound different regions of T antigen. A GST fusion containing amino
acids 5 to 172 (region T1) efficiently bound TBP. TEF-1 bound neither region T1
nor a region between amino acids 168 and 373 (region T2); however, it bound
efficiently to the combined region (T5) containing amino acids 5 to 383.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC358980
PMID: 8423815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Pediatr Surg. 1993 Jan;28(1):53-5.

Efficacy of the Nissen fundoplication in the management of gastroesophageal
reflux following esophageal atresia repair.

Wheatley MJ(1), Coran AG, Wesley JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor.

From January 1974 to December 1988, 80 patients with esophageal atresia (EA) and 
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) were treated at the C.S. Mott Children's Hospital
with division of their TEF and esophagoesophagostomy. Thirty-four in this group
developed gastroesophageal reflux (GER). After an unsuccessful trial of medical
management, 21 underwent Nissen fundoplication, and an additional child with
refractory GER died intraoperatively before completion of her fundoplication.
Following fundoplication, only eight patients had an uncomplicated course with
elimination of reflux and no postoperative dysphagia. Wrap disruption and
recurrent reflux occurred in 7 of the 21 (33%), a markedly higher incidence than 
the 10% figure seen in 220 children without EA who have undergone fundoplication 
at this institution. Upward tension on the wrap due to the presence of a
shortened esophagus probably predisposes to an increased frequency of
fundoplication failure in the EA child. In addition, postoperative dysphagia
requiring prolonged gastrostomy feedings complicated eight otherwise successful
initial or redo-fundoplications. Prolonged dysphagia in this group is likely
related to the inability of the dyskinetic esophagus, common in EA, to overcome
the increased resistance caused by the Nissen fundoplication. Three deaths (14%) 
from complications related to antireflux surgery occurred in the series. Although
15 of the 21 children (71%) eventually had excellent long-term results following 
initial or redo-fundoplication with elimination of reflux and normalization of
oral intake, morbidity and mortality were clearly significant. Due to the high
incidence of postoperative dysphagia and recurrent reflux, the transabdominal
Nissen fundoplication may not be appropriate in EA patients.

PMID: 8429473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Chest. 1993 Jan;103(1):308-9.

H-type tracheoesophageal fistula and congenital esophageal stenosis.

Homnick DN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Michigan State University/Kalamazoo Center for Medical Studies, Mich.

An 18-month-old boy was seen in the pediatric pulmonary clinic with a history of 
wheezing, stridor and intolerance to solid foods. Barium esophagram revealed
distal esophageal stenosis and subsequently an H-type TEF at surgery. Following
the surgery to repair both lesions the child continues to do well.

PMID: 8417914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mamm Genome. 1993;4(10):621-3.

Localization of thyrotropin-releasing hormone receptor and thyrotroph embryonic
factor on mouse chromosome 15.

Lossie AC(1), Gordon DF, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109-0618.

PMID: 7903570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Eur J Pharmacol. 1992 Dec 1;228(4):179-99.

Impact of polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans, and biphenyls on
human and environmental health, with special emphasis on application of the toxic
equivalency factor concept.

Ahlborg UG(1), Brouwer A, Fingerhut MA, Jacobson JL, Jacobson SW, Kennedy SW,
Kettrup AA, Koeman JH, Poiger H, Rappe C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

A scientific evaluation was made of the mechanisms of action of polychlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins, dibenzofurans and biphenyls. Distinction is made between the
aryl-hydrocarbon (Ah) receptor-mediated and non-Ah receptor-mediated toxic
responses. Special attention is paid to the applicability of the toxic
equivalency factor (TEF) concept.

PMID: 1335882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Gen Genet. 1992 Nov;235(2-3):166-72.

The SEG1 element: a new DNA region promoting stable mitotic segregation of
plasmids in the zygomycete Absidia glauca.

Burmester A(1), Wöstemeyer A, Arnau J, Wöstemeyer J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genbiologische Forschung Berlin GmbH, FRG.

A series of new vectors for the model zygomycete Absidia glauca was constructed
on the basis of the structural neomycin resistance (Neor) gene controlled by the 
promoter of the gene for elongation factor 1 (TEF). In order to select for
transformed colonies with a stable Neor phenotype, spores from primary
transformants were pooled and grown for two sporulation cycles under
non-selective conditions. Southern blot analysis of DNA from single spore
isolates originating from independent transformant pools allowed the
identification of two autonomously replicating plasmids. Retransformation of
Escherichia coli and restriction analysis of the two plasmids provided evidence
for spontaneous in vivo insertion of a new DNA element (SEG1) from the A. glauca 
genome. The inserted regions in both plasmids are essentially identical and do
not represent repetitive DNA. Compared with other autonomously replicating
vectors, these SEG1-containing plasmids are mitotically extremely stable and are 
passed on to the vegetative spore progeny of a retransformed A. glauca strain. We
assume that SEG1 contains structural elements involved in partitioning and stable
segregation of plasmids. For the construction of stable transformants of A.
glauca, the SEG1 element may be regarded as a major breakthrough, because
stabilization of transformed genetic traits by integration is difficult to
achieve in all mucoraceous fungi and all known replicating plasmids are
mitotically unstable.

PMID: 1465090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Med Genet. 1992 Sep 15;44(2):200-2.

Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula in two infants born to
hyperthyroid women receiving methimazole (Tapazol) during pregnancy.

Ramírez A(1), Espinosa de los Monteros A, Parra A, De León B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Instituto Nacional de Perinatología, México, D.F.

We report on 2 newborn infants with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA + TEF) born to hyperthyroid mothers receiving methimazole (Tapazol)
before and during their entire pregnancies. Both mothers were euthyroid during
gestation and developed hydramnios diagnosed during weeks 34 and 33 of gestation.
Premature delivery (36.2 weeks of gestation) occurred in one case, and both
newborn infants were small for date with palpable goiter; one of them had other
associated malformations. Hypothyroidism was diagnosed by laboratory tests in
both cases. Corrective surgery was undertaken, but both newborn infants developed
septicemia and renal insufficiency and died in the first week of life. The EA +
TEF and a normally placed enlarged thyroid gland were confirmed at necropsy.
These cases represent a previously unreported example of the association of
maternal ingestion of methimazole during pregnancy and EA + TEF.

PMID: 1456292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Surgery. 1992 Sep;112(3):527-32.

Etiology and management of respiratory complications after repair of esophageal
atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Delius RE(1), Wheatley MJ, Coran AG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109.

This article reviews the cause and management of respiratory symptoms after
repair of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Postoperative 
respiratory symptoms developed in 31 (46%) of 68 patients and included apnea and 
bradycardia, respiratory arrest, aspiration, and recurrent pneumonia. The
respiratory symptoms were initially attributed to gastroesophageal reflux (GER)
in 20 patients (64%), tracheomalacia in 4 patients (13%), recurrent TEF in 4
patients (13%), and anastomotic stricture in 3 patients (10%). Three patients
with GER and the three patients with a stricture were initially managed
nonoperatively. The remaining 25 patients underwent surgical correction of the
underlying cause of the respiratory symptoms. Despite aggressive management of
this problem, 14 (45%) of these 31 patients had persistent or recurrent
respiratory symptoms. Although GER is the most common cause of respiratory
complications in patients who have undergone prior TEF repair, other factors are 
often responsible for these symptoms and should not be overlooked.

PMID: 1519168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Genes Dev. 1992 Sep;6(9):1608-20.

Hlf, a novel hepatic bZIP protein, shows altered DNA-binding properties following
fusion to E2A in t(17;19) acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Hunger SP(1), Ohyashiki K, Toyama K, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, California
94305.

Oncogenic conversion of transcription factors by chromosomal translocations is
implicated in leukemogenesis. We report that the t(17;19) in acute lymphoblastic 
leukemia produces a chimeric transcription factor consisting of the
amino-terminal portion of HLH proteins E12/E47 (products of the E2A gene) fused
to the basic DNA-binding and leucine zipper dimerization motifs of a novel
hepatic protein called hepatic leukemia factor (Hlf). Hlf, which is not normally 
transcribed in lymphoid cells, belongs to the recently described PAR subfamily of
basic leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, which also includes Dbp and Tef/Vbp.
Wild-type Hlf is able to bind DNA specifically as a homodimer or as a heterodimer
with other PAR factors. Structural alterations of the E2a-Hlf fusion protein
markedly impair its ability to bind DNA as a homodimer compared with wild-type
Hlf. However, E2a-Hlf can bind DNA as a heterodimer with other PAR proteins,
suggesting a novel mechanism for leukemogenic conversion of a bZIP transcription 
factor.

PMID: 1516826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Pediatr Surg. 1992 Sep;27(9):1223-4.

Tracheoesophageal fistula associated with perforated Meckel's diverticulum.

Ford EG(1), Woolley MM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Childrens Hospital of Los Angeles, CA 90027.

Neonates with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) may present 
with respiratory distress. Intubation and mechanical ventilation may force air
from the tracheobronchial tree, through a distal fistula and into the
gastrointestinal tract. We present a newborn with TEF who became moribund during 
mechanical ventilation. High ventilator pressures transmitted via the TEF caused 
over distention of the gastrointestinal tract and perforation of a Meckel's
diverticulum.

PMID: 1432535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Exp Gerontol. 1992 Sep-Dec;27(5-6):551-8.

Explanations for reduced tumor proliferative capacity with age.

Ershler WB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Madison VA GRECC, Wisconsin.

Tumors in general occur more frequently in older people, but many of the common
tumors appear to be less malignant in older hosts. In this article mechanisms of 
tumor enhancement are reviewed, and those that are age-sensitive are emphasized. 
In this regard, our earlier experimental work suggested that age-associated
immune change (immune senescence) is most important in explaining reduced tumor
growth. We have found that unstimulated spleen cells in culture produce a
tumor-enhancing factor (TEF) that enhances B16 murine melanoma cell
proliferation. TEF, and others, such as lymphocyte-induced angiogenesis factor
(LIA) and various other autocrine growth factors, may stimulate malignant cells
in cancer-bearing hosts. An age-associated reduction in those factors could
account for the observed reduced tumor growth and spread in hosts of advanced
age.

PMID: 1426087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 25;267(24):17234-40.

M-CAT binding factor is related to the SV40 enhancer binding factor, TEF-1.

Farrance IK(1), Mar JH, Ordahl CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0452.

M-CAT binding factor (MCBF) governs the activity of the cardiac troponin T gene
promoter. M-CAT motifs have also been implicated recently in the regulation of
other contractile protein genes which like cardiac troponin T, do not require
direct interaction with MyoD1 or related factors for activity. Mutational
analysis of the M-CAT motif revealed that it can be functionally replaced by a
regulatory motif of the SV40 enhancer which binds human transcription factor
TEF-1. Biochemical analyses show that MCBF from muscle nuclei is
indistinguishable from TEF-1 in terms of specificity of binding site recognition,
fractionation on DNA-agarose, and apparent molecular weight. In addition,
antibodies raised against amino- and carboxyl-terminal regions of human TEF-1
also bind to MCBF from chicken muscle. We conclude, therefore, that MCBF is
closely related to TEF-1. Finally, MCBF/TEF-1 is highly enriched in the nuclei of
striated muscle, as compared with other tissues, consistent with a role in
muscle-specific promoter regulation.

PMID: 1324927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Pediatr Surg. 1992 Aug;27(8):1136-40; discussion 1140-1.

Severe tracheomalacia associated with esophageal atresia: results of surgical
treatment.

Filler RM(1), Messineo A, Vinograd I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

This study reviews our experience from 1977 to 1991 with 32 children born with
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) who later underwent
surgery for severe tracheomalacia. Indications for surgery included dying spells 
(21), inability to extubate the airway (nasotracheal tube 5, tracheotomy 3), and 
recurrent pneumonia (3). Diagnosis was confirmed by chest x-ray, esophagogram,
and bronchoscopy. Aortopexy was performed in 31 of 32 children; a splint without 
aortopexy was used in one older girl. Splinting was also necessary in two of the 
31 at the initial operation, when aortopexy failed to prevent tracheal collapse. 
There were four initial failures. Currently, 29 children are well (median
follow-up, 6.6 years). Two have a tracheostomy in place, and one, who had a
vascular ring divided after aortopexy, died at home of unknown cause 1 month
later. These findings indicate that aortopexy provides long-term relief of severe
symptoms of tracheomalacia associated with EA-TEF in almost all affected
children. When aortopexy fails, the insertion of an airway splint may succeed;
otherwise, tracheostomy is necessary.

PMID: 1403550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Pediatr Surg. 1992 Aug;27(8):1122-5; discussion 1125-6.

Pericardial flap interposition for the definitive management of recurrent
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Wheatley MJ(1), Coran AG.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, C.S. Mott Children's Hospital, Ann Arbor, MI
48109.

From 1974 to 1988, six children with fistula recurrence following primary
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) repair have been managed at our hospital.
Reclosure of the fistula with pleural flap interposition was used as the initial 
corrective procedure in five patients, with an 80% incidence of second TEF
recurrences. Due to these discouraging results, we have abandoned this technique 
and instead favor fistula reclosure with interposition of a pedicle of
vascularized pericardium between the esophageal and tracheal suture lines. The
pericardial pedicle is easy to mobilize, effectively isolates the tracheal and
esophageal suture lines, and eliminates the often difficult task of finding
sufficient pleural tissue for fistula interposition in small infants.
Furthermore, the vascularized pedicle serves as a template for the ingrowth of
neomucosa from the existing esophageal mucosa should an anastomotic leak occur.
Since adopting this approach, we have used this technique on four children, three
of whom had second recurrences after pleural interposition, and have had no
evidence of recurrent fistula formation at follow-up ranging from 2 to 6 years.
With at least a 20% incidence of second recurrences reported following
conventional management with fistula closure and pleural interposition, we
believe use of a pericardial flap in the management of the recurrent TEF is the
most appropriate surgical procedure.

PMID: 1403547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Science. 1992 Jul 24;257(5069):531-4.

Fusion of the leucine zipper gene HLF to the E2A gene in human acute B-lineage
leukemia.

Inaba T(1), Roberts WM, Shapiro LH, Jolly KW, Raimondi SC, Smith SD, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology-Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105.

A t(17;19) chromosomal translocation in early B-lineage acute leukemia was shown 
to result in chimeric transcripts that contain sequences from the E2A basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor gene on chromosome 19, fused to sequences
from a previously unidentified gene (HLF) on chromosome 17 that encodes a hepatic
leukemia factor. The chimeric protein consisted of the amino-terminal
transactivation domain of E2A linked to the carboxyl-terminal basic
region-leucine zipper domain of HLF. HLF was normally expressed in liver and
kidney, but not in lymphoid cells, and was found to be closely related to the
leucine zipper-containing transcription factors DBP (albumin D-box binding
protein) and TEF (thyrotroph embryonic factor), which regulate developmental
stage-specific gene expression.

PMID: 1386162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Aust N Z J Surg. 1992 Jul;62(7):594-5.

Congenital tracheo-oesophageal fistula in a young adult.

Ramaswamy S(1), Sharma SK, Mitra DK, Gupta AK, Chattopadhyay TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, 
New Delhi.

Congenital tracheo-oesophageal fistula (TEF) is rare in adults. Patients who
present with repeated attacks of chest infection since birth or cough, choking
and cyanosis during feeding should be investigated for TEF. It should be possible
to detect all cases of tracheo-oesophageal fistulae using bronchoscopy,
oesophagoscopy and CT either singly or in combination. These investigations also 
help in deciding on the route of exploration and the type of surgery.
Disconnection of the abnormal fistulous tract brings dramatic relief of symptom
and prevents further pulmonary damage.

PMID: 1610331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Am Coll Nutr. 1992 Jun;11(3):267-71.

Effect of daytime on resting energy expenditure and thermic effect of food in
obese adolescents.

Zwiauer KF(1), Mueller T, Widhalm K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Vienna Medical School, Austria.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of daytime on resting energy 
expenditure (REE) and thermic effect of food (TEF), REE and TEF were measured in 
11 obese boys (mean age +/- SD 11.9 +/- 1.6 years; body mass index 30.1 +/- 4.0
kg/m2) by indirect calorimetry (SensorMedics 2900) on two consecutive days: early
in the morning (7:30 a.m.) on one day and at 12 noon on the other day or vice
versa. REE was measured for 30 minutes and TEF for 180 minutes after a 600 kcal
liquid meal containing 13% protein, 39% fat and 48% carbohydrates. REE measured
in the morning was not statistically different from that measured at noon (2191
+/- 358 vs 2223 +/- 319 kcal/24 hours) and morning values were highly correlated 
with afternoon values (r2 = 0.805). Therefore we conclude that the effect of
daytime is negligible for measurements of REE if the patients are in a
postabsorptive state and avoid physical activity and stress 10-12 hours prior to 
measurements. The thermic effect of food calculated in the morning also was not
statistically significantly from values found in the afternoon (8.2 +/- 8.8% in
the morning and 6.6 +/- 7.5% in the afternoon). However, because of very high
within-patient variability the correlation between morning and afternoon values
was weaker than for REE (r2 = 0.289).

PMID: 1619178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1992 Jun;101(6):503-10.

Communication status following laryngectomy: the Iowa experience 1984-1987.

Morris HL(1), Smith AE, Van Demark DR, Maves MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa
City 52242.

Data regarding treatment and outcome for a consecutive series of 73 total
laryngectomy patients were collected from clinical records with a follow-up
period of 30 to 78 months postoperatively. Notable findings were that 27% were
women; 75% reported hoarseness or a voice change as an early symptom; and 22%
reported combined heavy use of both cigarettes and alcohol. Of the 73 patients,
38 (52%) died during the follow-up period; 18 of the 38 died within 1 year
postoperatively. Thirty-nine (53%) of the 73 had received a surgical
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) for voice restoration, as either a primary or a
secondary procedure. Of the 39, 75% were using the TEF at last examination, with 
no failures attributed to sphincter spasm. Of the total group, the primary
communication modality was reported to be use of a TEF by 44% and use of an
electrolarynx by 50%. Limitations of the study and directions for future
investigations are discussed.

PMID: 1610068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. EMBO J. 1992 Jun;11(6):2271-81.

Transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 and its cell-specific co-activator
activate human papillomavirus-16 E6 and E7 oncogene transcription in
keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells.

Ishiji T(1), Lace MJ, Parkkinen S, Anderson RD, Haugen TH, Cripe TP, Xiao JH,
Davidson I, Chambon P, Turek LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City
52242.

The human papillomavirus (HPV)-16 oncogenes, E6 and E7, are transcribed
preferentially in keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells due to a 5'
enhancer. An abundant peptide binding to a 37 nt enhancer element was purified
from human keratinocytes by sequence-specific DNA chromatography. This protein
was identified as transcriptional enhancer factor (TEF)-1 by complex mobility,
binding to wild-type and mutant SV40 and HPV-16 enhansons and antigenic
reactivity with two anti-TEF-1 antibodies. TEF-1 is cell-specific, but its
transactivation also depends on a limiting, cell-specific TEF-1 'co-activator'.
We show that both TEF-1 and the TEF-1 co-activator are active in human
keratinocytes and essential for HPV-16 transcription. TEF-1 binding in vivo was
necessary for HPV-16 P97 promoter activity. Excess TEF-1 and chimeric GAL4-TEF-1 
specifically inhibited the P97 promoter by 'squelching', indicating that HPV-16
transcription also requires a limiting TEF-1 co-activator. TEF-1 and the TEF-1
co-activator functions mirrored HPV-16 transcription by their presence in
keratinocytes and cervical carcinoma cells and their absence from lymphoid
B-cells, but also functioned in liver cells where the HPV-16 promoter is
inactive. TEF-1 and its associated co-activator are thus part of a complex
mechanism which determines the restricted cell range of the HPV-16 E6 and E7
oncogene promoter.

PMCID: PMC556694
PMID: 1318197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Biol Chem. 1992 May 15;267(14):9917-24.

Characterization of a strong positive cis-acting element of the human beta-myosin
heavy chain gene in fetal rat heart cells.

Flink IL(1), Edwards JG, Bahl JJ, Liew CC, Sole M, Morkin E.

Author information: 
(1)University Heart Center, Tucson, Arizona.

A strong positive element within the proximal promoter region of the human
beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC) gene that is required for high level
expression in primary cultures of fetal rat heart cells was localized by
transient assays and DNase I footprinting to positions- 277/-298. Using gel shift
studies, this sequence was found to bind specifically at high affinity (Kd
approximately 4 x 10(-9) M) to a transcriptional factor (beta F1) found in
nuclear extracts from rabbit heart. Dimethyl sulfate interference studies
suggested that beta F1 may bind as a dimer to two hexameric imperfect direct
repeats containing the consensus sequence 5'-(C/G)-T-G-(T/A)-G-G-3'. Gel shift
analyses suggested that beta F1 is related to the M-CAT factor, which is known to
control muscle-specific expression of the cardiac troponin T gene. A clustered
mutation of the region between the putative binding half-sites and within the
"M-CAT"-like domain abolished beta-MHC promoter activity. The sequence of the
positive element also contains binding motifs for several transcriptional factors
that regulate viral and cellular genes, including AP4, AP5, TEF-1, and MyoD-like 
proteins. When multiple copies of the beta-MHC element were inserted downstream
from the transcriptional initiation site of the thymidine kinase gene, it did not
act as a classical enhancer, showing some dependence upon orientation.

PMID: 1577822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Pediatr Surg. 1992 May;27(5):562-7.

Reassessment of the end-to-side operation for esophageal atresia with distal
tracheoesophageal fistula: 22-year experience with 68 cases.

Touloukian RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT 06510.

End-to-side anastomosis (ES) and ligation of the tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) 
has been the procedure of choice for esophageal atresia at our institution since 
1967. This report summarizes our operative and long-term results with the ES
operation in 68 babies, including 33 in Waterston group A (50%), 23 in group B
(35%), and 12 in group C (15%). An additional 10 patients had a primary
end-to-end (EE) anastomosis, while 14 others required either staged EE repair or 
an esophageal replacement procedure. Overall survival rate with ES was 93%
including two deaths attributed to major anastomotic leaks and sepsis, and three 
others in group C from cardiac anomalies. Six (9%) of those having ES anastomosis
developed a recurrent TEF between 40 days and 21 months of age, necessitating
reoperation. Predisposing factors to recurrent TEF were surgical inexperience
(three cases; first operation for each surgeon), forceful vomiting secondary to
gastroesophageal reflux (GER) in two, and drug overdose in one. Anastomotic leak 
occurred in seven (10%) following end-to-side repair and was implicated in two
deaths. Three patients developed minor anastomotic stricture requiring less than 
three dilatations, while one with a tight stricture needed as many as five
dilatations over the first 14 months of life. Mild dysphagia and respiratory
symptoms were uniformly observed during the first year, but only five patients
(7%), including the two with recurrent TEF, required fundoplication for
persistent GER. All patients were eating table foods after 1 year of age, while
10 (15%) have required periodic endoscopic removal of solid food lodged at the
radiographically unobstructed anastomosis.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1625121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Pediatr Surg. 1992 May;27(5):561.

Prophylactic extrapleural chest drainage following repair of esophageal atresia: 
is it necessary?

McCallion WA(1), Hannon RJ, Boston VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, Royal Belfast Hospital for Sick Children,
Northern Ireland.

In a review of 110 cases of esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF), 15 patients (13.6%) developed anastomotic leakage. All patients had
extrapleural surgical exposure and prophylactic extrapleural chest drainage
(PEPCD). Despite this precaution, all patients with anastomotic leaks developed a
pneumothorax with or without a pleural effusion. This required insertion of an
additional drain in 12 (80%) cases. PEPCD following repair of EA and TEF does not
appear to prevent pneumothorax or pleural effusion when anastomotic leakage
occurs.

PMID: 1625120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1992 May;72(5):1754-63.

Effects of exercise mode and intensity on postprandial thermogenesis in lean and 
obese men.

Segal KR(1), Chun A, Coronel P, Valdez V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029.

To characterize further the impact of exercise before a meal on thermogenesis,
the effects of exercise intensity and mode and the duration of the effect of
exercise on the thermic effect (TEF) of a 720-kcal mixed meal were compared in 10
lean and 10 obese men (16 +/- 1 vs. 34 +/- 2% fat). In study A, TEF (kcal/3 h)
was significantly greater for the lean than the obese men during rest and
immediately after 1 h of cycling at 50 and 100 W. TEF was significantly greater
after both exercise intensities than during rest for the obese men, but exercise 
had no effect on TEF in the lean men. In study B, TEF was significantly greater
for the lean than the obese men during rest and immediately after 1 h of leg
cycling at an O2 consumption of 1.09 l/min but only marginally different after 1 
h of arm exercise at the same O2 consumption (P = 0.15). For the obese men, TEF
was greater after arm than leg cycling and greater after leg cycling than at rest
(P less than 0.01), but TEF was not different among the three conditions for the 
lean men. In study C, TEF was compared at rest and immediately and 24 h after 1 h
of cycling at 100 W. TEF was greater for the lean than the obese men under all
conditions (P less than 0.05). For the obese but not the lean men, TEF was
greater both immediately after and on the day after exercise than at rest (P less
than 0.01). Thus, acute exercise improves but does not normalize the blunted TEF 
in obesity; a minimally intense bout of exercise is needed to improve TEF;
exercise mode alters thermogenesis in the obese men, even at a fixed intensity;
and TEF in the obese men is enhanced for as long as 24 h after exercise.

PMID: 1601783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Am J Clin Nutr. 1992 May;55(5):924-33.

Effect of weight reduction on resting energy expenditure, substrate utilization, 
and the thermic effect of food in moderately obese women.

Nelson KM(1), Weinsier RL, James LD, Darnell B, Hunter G, Long CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Baptist Medical Centers, Birmingham, AL 35211.

It is not known whether the decrease in the thermic effect of food (TEF) in
obesity is a consequence of obesity or a factor contributing to the development
of obesity. The resting energy expenditure (REE) of 24 obese, nondiabetic,
postmenopausal women was 5481 +/- 110 kJ/24 h (1310 +/- 26.4 kcal/24 h). After
weight loss (12.7 +/- 0.45 kg) the REE was significantly decreased (4858 +/- 94
kJ/24 h, or 1161 +/- 22.4 kcal/24 h) and equivalent to the REE of 4866 +/- 119
kJ/24 h (1163 +/- 28.5 kcal/24 h) in 24 never-obese, postmenopausal women. The
TEF, expressed as a percentage of the calories ingested, was 8.2 +/- 0.50% for
obese subjects, 8.7 +/- 0.57% for postobese subjects, and 9.8 +/- 0.54% for
never-obese subjects. Compared with never-obese subjects, the TEF was
significantly reduced in obese subjects (P = 0.043) and remained unchanged after 
weight loss (P = 0.341). These findings indicate that the lower TEF in the obese 
subjects is uncorrected by weight loss, and thus it is a contributor to obesity
rather than a consequence of obesity.

PMID: 1570799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 May;12(5):2078-90.

Control of formation of two distinct classes of RNA polymerase II elongation
complexes.

Marshall NF(1), Price DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

We have examined elongation by RNA polymerase II initiated at a promoter and have
identified two classes of elongation complexes. Following initiation at a
promoter, all polymerase molecules enter an abortive mode of elongation. Abortive
elongation is characterized by the rapid generation of short transcripts due to
pausing of the polymerase followed by termination of transcription. Termination
of the early elongation complexes can be suppressed by the addition of 250 mM KCl
or 1 mg of heparin per ml soon after initiation. Elongation complexes of the
second class carry out productive elongation in which long transcripts can be
synthesized. Productive elongation complexes are derived from early paused
elongation complexes by the action of a factor which we call P-TEF (positive
transcription elongation factor). P-TEF is inhibited by
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole at concentrations which have no 
effect on the initiation of transcription. By using templates immobilized on
paramagnetic particles, we show that isolated preinitiation complexes lack P-TEF 
and give rise to transcription complexes which can carry out only abortive
elongation. The ability to carry out productive elongation can be restored to
isolated transcription complexes by the addition of P-TEF after initiation. A
model is presented which describes the role of elongation factors in the
formation and maintenance of elongation complexes. The model is consistent with
the available in vivo data concerning control of elongation and is used to
predict the outcome of other potential in vitro and in vivo experiments.

PMCID: PMC364379
PMID: 1569941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Plant Mol Biol. 1992 Apr;18(6):1083-9.

The activation process of Arabidopsis thaliana A1 gene encoding the translation
elongation factor EF-1 alpha is conserved among angiosperms.

Curie C(1), Liboz T, Montané MH, Rouan D, Axelos M, Lescure B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des Relations Plantes-Microorganismes,
CNRS-INRA, Castanet-Tolosan, France.

In Arabidopsis thaliana, the activation process of the A1 EF-1 alpha gene depends
on several elements. Using the GUS reporter gene, transient expression
experiments have shown that mutations of upstream cis-acting elements of the A1
promoter, or the deletion of an intron located within the 5' non-coding region,
similarly affect expression in dicot or monocot protoplasts. The results reported
here strongly suggest that this 5' intron is properly spliced in Zea mays. We
show that two trans-acting factors, specifically interacting with an upstream
activating sequence (the TEF 1 box), are present in nuclear extracts prepared
from A. thaliana, Brassica rapa, Nicotiana tabacum and Z. mays. In addition, a
DNA sequence homologous to the TEF 1 box, found at approximately the same
location within a Lycopersicon esculentum EF-1 alpha promoter, interacts with the
same trans-acting factors. Homologies found between the A. thaliana and L.
esculentum TEF 1 box sequences have allowed us to define mutations of this
upstream element which affect the interaction with the corresponding trans-acting
factors. These results support the notion that the activation processes of A.
thaliana EF-1 alpha genes have been conserved among angiosperms and provide
interesting data on the functional structure of the TEF 1 box.

PMID: 1600144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Genes Dev. 1992 Mar;6(3):367-79.

The scalloped gene encodes a novel, evolutionarily conserved transcription factor
required for sensory organ differentiation in Drosophila.

Campbell S(1), Inamdar M, Rodrigues V, Raghavan V, Palazzolo M, Chovnick A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs
06269-2131.

The scalloped (sd) gene of Drosophila melanogaster was initially characterized by
mutants affecting structures on the wing of the adult fly. The sequence of a cDNA
clone of the gene reveals a predicted protein sequence homologous to that of a
human transcriptional enhancer factor, TEF-1 (68% identity). The homology
includes a sequence motif, the TEA domain, that was shown previously to be a
DNA-binding domain of TEF-1. An sd enhancer trap strain expresses the reporter
gene in a subset of neuroblasts in the central nervous system and in the
peripheral sense organs of the embryo. The reporter gene is later expressed in
specific regions of the imaginal discs, including regions of the wing disc
destined to become structures defective in viable sd mutants. Later still,
expression in the adult brain is restricted to subsets of cells, some in regions 
involved in the processing of gustatory information. These observations indicate 
that the sd gene encodes a transcription factor that functions in the regulation 
of cell-specific gene expression during Drosophila development, particularly in
the differentiation of the nervous system.

PMID: 1547938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Clin Chem. 1992 Mar;38(3):346-52.

Simultaneous assay of corticosterone and cortisol in plasma by reversed-phase
liquid chromatography.

Hariharan M(1), Naga S, VanNoord T, Kindt EK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Psychiatry, Ann Arbor
48109-0656.

We have developed a simple, specific, and sensitive reversed-phase
liquid-chromatographic method for accurate and simultaneous analysis of
corticosterone and cortisol in human plasma. We achieved a detection limit of 300
ng/L for both steroids by modifying the old solid-phase extraction method to make
use of "Tef Elutor" C18 columns, using a minibore (100 x 2 mm) analytical column,
and using an ultraviolet detector with a 10-mm-pathlength flow cell. With the new
extraction method absolute extraction efficiencies were greater than 90% for all 
the analytes, including the internal standard, flumethasone. The mobile phase was
water (containing 5 mL of triethylamine per liter and citric acid to adjust the
pH to 6.5), tetrahydrofuran, and acetonitrile (82/10/8 by vol). The average
interassay CV for corticosterone at 0-25 micrograms/L was 6.5%; that for cortisol
at 0-300 micrograms/L was 3.8%. The analytical recovery relative to the internal 
standard was 100.2% for cortisol and 102.6% for corticosterone. Possible
interferences from drugs and other steroids were studied.

PMID: 1547550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Clin Invest. 1992 Mar;89(3):824-33.

Independent effects of obesity and insulin resistance on postprandial
thermogenesis in men.

Segal KR(1), Albu J, Chun A, Edano A, Legaspi B, Pi-Sunyer FX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York 10029.

The putative blunted thermogenesis in obesity may be related to insulin
resistance, but insulin sensitivity and obesity are potentially confounding
factors. To determine the independent effects of obesity and insulin resistance
on the thermic effect of food, at rest and after exercise, lean and obese men
were matched at two levels of insulin sensitivity determined by
insulin-stimulated glucose disposal (milligrams per kilogram fat-free mass [FFM] 
per minute) during the euglycemic, hyperinsulinemic (40 mU/m2.min) clamp: 5.4
mg/kg FFM for the lean and obese groups with low insulin sensitivity, and 8.1
mg/kg FFM for the groups with high insulin sensitivity. The two lean groups were 
matched for percent fat (approximately 15 +/- 1% fat), as were the two obese
groups (approximately 33 +/- 2% fat). Energy expenditure was measured for 3 h in 
the fasting state and for 3 h after a 720-kcal mixed meal, each at rest and
immediately after 1 h of cycling at 100 W. The thermic effect of food (TEF) was
calculated as the postprandial minus fasting energy expenditure (kcal/3 h) during
rest and after exercise. During rest, TEF was blunted by both obesity (24 +/- 5
and 34 +/- 6 kcal/3 h for obese groups with low and high insulin sensitivity vs. 
56 +/- 6 and 74 +/- 6 kcal/3 h for the lean groups with low and high insulin
sensitivity; P less than 0.01 lean vs. obese) and insulin resistance
(insulin-resistant less than insulin-sensitive, at both levels of obesity; P less
than 0.01). After exercise, TEF was also impaired in the obese (47 +/- 6 and 44
+/- 5 kcal/3 h for the insulin-resistant and -sensitive groups) and in the lean
insulin-resistant (55 +/- 5 kcal/3 h), compared with the lean insulin-sensitive
men (71 +/- 3 kcal/3 h), P less than 0.01. Compared with rest, TEF after exercise
was improved, but not normalized, in both obese groups (P less than 0.05), but
unchanged in the lean groups. These results suggest that both insulin resistance 
and obesity are independently associated with impaired TEF at rest, but the
responsiveness of thermogenesis to exercise before a meal is related to the obese
state and not independently to insulin resistance per se.

PMCID: PMC442927
PMID: 1541675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Int J Sport Nutr. 1992 Mar;2(1):87-95.

Exercise intensity and the thermic effect of food.

Goben KW(1), Sforzo GA, Frye PA.

Author information: 
(1)Div. of Cardiac Rehabilitation, Arnot-Ogden Medical Center, Elmira, NY 14901.

This study investigated the effect of varying exercise intensity on the thermic
effect of food (TEF). Sixteen lean male subjects were matched for VO2 max and
randomly assigned to either a high or low intensity group for 30 min of treadmill
exercise. Caloric expenditure was measured using indirect calorimetry at rest and
at 30-min intervals over 3 hrs following each of three conditions: a 750-kcal
liquid meal, high or low intensity exercise, and a 750-kcal liquid meal followed 
by high or low intensity exercise. Low intensity exercise enhanced the TEF during
recovery at 60 and 90 min while high intensity enhanced it only at 180 min but
depressed it at 30 min. Total metabolic expense for a 3-hr postmeal period was
not differently affected by the two exercise intensities. Exercise following a
meal had a synergistic effect on metabolism; however, this effect was delayed
until 180 min postmeal when exercise intensity was high. The circulatory demands 
of high intensity exercise may have initially blunted the TEF, but ultimately the
TEF measured over the 3-hr period was at least equal to that experienced
following low intensity exercise.

PMID: 1299486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Int J Sport Nutr. 1992 Mar;2(1):1-19.

Influence of diet and exercise on energy expenditure--a review.

Van Zant RS(1).

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Agricultural Res. Serv., Beltsville Human Nutr.
Res. Ctr., MD 20705.

Maintenance of a healthy body weight results from equating total energy intake to
total energy expenditure (resting metabolic rate, RMR; the thermic effect of
feeding, TEF; the thermic effect of activity, TEA; and adaptive thermogenesis,
AT). Dietary quantity and composition and acute and chronic exercise have been
shown to influence all components of total energy expenditure. This paper reviews
the effects of exercise and diet on energy expenditure and, ultimately, energy
balance. Overnutrition increases RMR and TEF while undernutrition decreases them.
Carbohydrate and protein oxidation is closely tied to intake whereas fat
oxidation does not closely parallel fat intake. Thus excess fat intake is likely 
to lead to fat storage. Acute endurance exercise at > 70% VO2max increases
postexercise RMR and TEF. Chronic exercise training may increase RMR while also
increasing TEF. Review of the research indicates that energy balance may best be 
achieved by consuming an energy appropriate, low fat diet complemented by
endurance exercise.

PMID: 1299482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Curr Genet. 1992 Feb;21(2):121-4.

Transformation of the mycoparasite Parasitella simplex to neomycin resistance.

Burmester A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Genbiologische Forschung Berlin GmbH, Federal Republic of
Germany.

The facultatively parasitic zygomycete Parasitella simplex was transformed to
neomycin resistance by a vector, which had been developed primarily for
transformation of its host Absidia glauca. This plasmid, pAmNEF21, contained the 
bacterial resistance gene for neomycin (NPTII) under the control of the promoter 
region from the gene for elongation factor 1 (tef) isolated from A. glauca. Both 
flanking regions of the marker gene contain parts of the structural tef gene. DNA
isolated from two Parasitella transformants was re-transformed in E. coli and the
resulting plasmids, pAt21 and pAt35, were analyzed. The restriction map and
Southern blot analysis show that both plasmids are rearranged. They had lost the 
structural tef information and were found to contain new DNA fragments, which
were identical in both cases. Southern blot analysis of the transformants
indicates that the rearranged plasmids are present in the fungal transformants
and that the changes are not the result of re-transformation in E. coli. Plasmids
were only recovered after growth under selective conditions. Southern blot
analysis and re-transformation with undigested transformant DNA shows that the
plasmids are replicated autonomously.

PMID: 1568255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Jan 25;20(2):203-9.

Optimal tRNA((Ser)Sec) gene activity requires an upstream SPH motif.

Myslinski E(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire du CNRS, Strasbourg, France.

The X. laevis tRNA((Ser)Sec) gene is different from the other tRNA genes in that 
its promoter contains two external elements, a PSE and a TATA box functionally
equivalent to those of the U6 snRNA gene. Of the two internal promoters governing
classical tRNA gene transcription, only subsists the internal B box. In this
report, we show that the tRNA((Ser)Sec) contains in addition an activator element
(AE) which we have mapped by extensive mutagenesis. Activation is only dependent 
on a 15 bp fragment residing between -209 and -195 and containing an SPH motif.
In vitro, this element forms a complex with a nuclear protein which is different 
from the TEF-1 transcriptional activator that binds the SV40 Sph motifs. This AE 
is versatile since it shows capacity of activating a variety of genes in vivo,
including U1 and U6 snRNAs and HSV thymidine kinase. Unexpectedly for an
snRNA-related gene, the tRNA((Ser)Sec) is deprived of octamer or octamer-like
motifs. The X.laevis tRNA((Ser)Sec) gene represents the first example of a Pol
III snRNA-type gene whose activation of transcription is completely
octamer-independent.

PMCID: PMC310355
PMID: 1311068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Chem Ecol. 1992 Jan;18(1):1-11. doi: 10.1007/BF00997160.

Phytotoxicity of sorgoleone found in grain Sorghum root exudates.

Einhellig FA(1), Souza IF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology University of South Dakota, 57069, Vermillion, South
Dakota.

Root exudates ofSorghum bicolor consist primarily of a dihydroquinone that is
quickly oxidized to ap-benzoquinone named sorgoleone. The aim of this
investigation was to determine the potential activity of sorgoleone as an
inhibitor of weed growth. Bioassays showed 125µM sorgoleone reduced radicle
elongation ofEragrostis tef. In liquid culture, 50-µM sorgoleone treatments
stunted the growth ofLemna minor. Over a 10-day treatment period, 10µM sorgoleone
in the nutrient medium reduced the growth of all weed seedlings tested:Abutilon
theophrasti, Datura stramonium, Amaranthus retroflexus, Setaria viridis,
Digitaria sanguinalis, andEchinochloa crusgalli. These data show sorgoleone has
biological activity at extremely low concentrations, suggesting a strong
contribution toSorghum allelopathy.

PMID: 24254628  [PubMed]


467. J Orthop Sports Phys Ther. 1992;16(2):92-6.

A comparison of selected isokinetic trunk strength parameters of elite male judo 
competitors and cyclists.

Kort HD, Hendriks ER.

Each sporting activity appears to require some distinctive motor functions. The
purpose of this study was to establish referential isokinetic strength parameters
in competitive judo athletes because no previous studies have examined trunk
strength of judo athletes isokinetically and to test the hypothesis that the
isokinetic strength parameters of competitive judo athletes, who are specifically
trained with respect to trunk strength, are significantly different from those in
another well-trained population (racing cyclists), who train very differently.
Twenty-eight male top judo athletes and 34 top racing cyclists, all without back 
trouble, were tested by means of the Cybex Trunk Extension Flexion (TEF) unit and
the Torso Rotation (TR) unit. This was done at four different speeds-30, 60, 90
and 120 degrees /set. The results of MANOVA showed that the judo athletes have
statistically higher performance than cyclists (p < 0.05) on all of the
isokinetic variables (ie., peak torque, best work repetition, and average power
corrected for body weight) in trunk extension, flexion, left rotation, and right 
rotation. The ratios of flexion to extension and left rotation to right rotation 
were not significantly different between the cyclists and the judo athletes. The 
authors concluded that for clinical purposes, the ratios of flexion to extension 
and left rotation to right rotation may be of more importance than separate
values as such. Research in this area is of utmost importance to provide a needed
shift in emphasis from injury treatment to injury prevention. J Orthop Sports
Phys Ther 1992;16(2):92-96.

PMID: 18780991  [PubMed]


468. Am J Clin Nutr. 1992 Jan;55(1 Suppl):167S-172S.

Metabolic consequences of fenfluramine for the control of body weight.

Levitsky DA(1), Troiano R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853.

The chronic ingestion of fenfluramine results in a sustained depression in body
weight despite the return of ad libitum food intake to normal levels. This
chronic suppression of body weight is immediately reversed after discontinuation 
of the drug treatment. Such a phenomenon indicates that the drug must increase
metabolic rate. However, studies in both humans and animals have failed to
demonstrate an increase in metabolic rate after the administration of the drug.
Instead, fenfluramine appears to potentiate the expenditure of energy whenever
increases in energy expenditure occur. Fenfluramine potentiates the thermic
effect of food (TEF) both in animals as well as in humans. Moreover, the energy
cost of locomotor behavior also appears to be potentiated by this drug. Most
importantly from a therapeutic perspective, unlike the anorectic effect of
fenfluramine, tolerance does not appear to develop to its ability to potentiate
energy expenditure.

PMID: 1728828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Nihon Kyobu Geka Gakkai Zasshi. 1992 Jan;40(1):141-8.

[A successful repair of the left ventricular rupture and tracheo-esophageal
fistula complicated after mitral valve replacement--a case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsuda H(1), Yamamoto S, Ishii N, Matsumori M, Okada M, Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

A 59-year-old woman having mitral stenosis with left atrial thrombus, was
admitted to our department and uneventful mitral valve replacement was performed.
After weaning from the cardiopulmonary bypass, massive pericardial bleeding was
encountered and the heart soon arrested. CPB was reinstituted after thirty
minutes. The diagnosis was the left ventricular rupture (Miller Type III), and
the direct closure was successfully performed. The patient was complicated with
renal and heart failures, which were well managed by the peritoneal dialysis and 
intraaortic balloon pumping. Long-term intratracheal intubation, however, was
required due to the respiratory failure, and tracheostomy was done on the
seventeenth postoperative day. The patient was also complicated with
mediastinitis, the cause of which was considered to be the tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF) diagnosed by esophagoscopy and bronchoscopy. Gastrostomy and
continuous mediastinal lavage were performed but the TEF was not closed. Thus,
the direct suture of the esophageal fistula orifice and the resection of four
tracheal rings followed by the direct end-to-end anastomosis were performed on
the 102nd postoperative day. After the second operation, the patient greatly
improved, and was discharged eighty-seven days later, presenting only slight LV
posterior wall hypokinesis but no tracheal stenosis.

PMID: 1564348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Ann Nutr Metab. 1992;36(3):141-7.

Thermic responses to vegetarian meals and yoga exercise.

Agte V(1), Chiplonkar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biometry and Nutrition, Maharashtra Association for the
Cultivation of Science, Pune, India.

The thermic effect (TEF) of vegetarian meals was measured for breakfast and lunch
in 6 lean healthy men (18-25 years) during normal feeding (NF) and with 20%
overfeeding (OF) on 28 successive days. The energy contents of breakfast were 223
+/- 10 and 330 +/- 48 kcal, and those of lunch were 1,033 +/- 220 and 1,247 +/-
222 kcal in NF and OF, respectively. In NF, the TEF per 180 min was 32.7 +/- 8.6 
and 54.8 +/- 6.3 kcal for breakfast and lunch, respectively. In OF, the TEF was
38.3 +/- 8.3 kcal for breakfast and 57.2 +/- 5.4 kcal for lunch. The increase in 
total TEF due to OF was nonsignificant (p greater than 0.2). In response to 20%
OF, adaptive thermogenesis was manifested mainly through an increase in the
resting metabolic rate of 4.9% (p less than 0.001). In both feeding, regimes, the
percent TEF was higher for breakfast than for lunch (p less than 0.05).
Regression analysis of TEF versus calorie load indicated a stable component of 42
kcal with a 2% rate of increase. Yoga exercises were performed from 16.00 to
17.00 daily. The thermic effect of yoga exercises observed from 17.10 to 18.30
was 21 kcal and persisted beyond 90 min, indicating the role of yoga in energy
metabolism.

PMID: 1530282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Padiatr Padol. 1992;27(6):177-81.

The effect of meal frequency on postprandial thermogenesis in obese children.

Molnár D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Medical School of Pécs, Hungary.

The effect of meal frequency on the thermic effect of food (TEF) was studied in
six obese boys and five obese girls (age: mean +/- SE, 12.7 +/- 0.6 yr).
Post-absorptive and postprandial resting energy expenditure (REE) were monitored 
continuously by indirect calorimetry. The children consumed one large liquid meal
(LM) or three consecutive small meals (SM) at 1.5 h intervals on subsequent days.
The first mode of nutrient intake was determined random. The energy content of
the LM and one SM was tailored to provide 30% and 10% of the 24 h postabsorptive 
REE, respectively. The postprandial changes in REE were monitored for 6 h. The
postabsorptive REE (mean +/- SE) was 4.86 +/- 0.28 and 4.9 +/- 0.27 kJ/min before
the LM and SM, respectively. REE, respiratory quotient, plasma glucose and
insulin concentrations increased sooner, steeper and higher with the LM than with
the SM. The magnitude of the TEF was greater (p < 0.02) after the LM (11.9 +/-
1.3%) than after the SM (8.5 +/- 0.7%). It is concluded that the frequency of
food consumption influences the immediate thermogenic response as well as the
changes in respiratory quotient, glycaemia and insulinaemia. However, the complex
effect of different meal frequencies on the overall energy balance of obese
patients cannot be answered on the basis of the present results.

PMID: 1484710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Arch Toxicol. 1992;66(7):471-7.

Comparative toxicity of four chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (CDDs) and their
mixture. Part I: Acute toxicity and toxic equivalency factors (TEFs).

Stahl BU(1), Kettrup A, Rozman K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City 66160-7717.

There is presently no scientifically proven method to assess the toxicity of
environmental samples containing complex mixtures of chlorinated
dibenzo-p-dioxins (CDDs) of known composition. Their risk assessment is currently
based on the interim concept of toxicity equivalency factors (TEFs), with the
unproven assumption that all interactions of CDDs are additive. To address this
problem we conducted acute toxicity studies with four different CDDs, viz
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (tetra-CDD),
1,2,3,7,8-pentachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (penta-CDD),
1,2,3,4,7,8-hexachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (hexa-CDD) and
1,2,3,4,6,7,8-heptachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (hepta-CDD), all containing chlorine
substituents in the crucial 2,3,7,8-positions. The homologues, dissolved in corn 
oil/acetone, were administered to groups of five male Sprague Dawley rats at
several doses (at least three) by gastric intubation. The obtained mortality data
were employed to calculate the LD20,50 and 80 for each homologue. These data were
subsequently used to prepare equipotent doses (expected mortality of 20, 50 and
80%) of a mixture containing all four homologues, each of them contributing one
fourth of the toxicity, under the assumption of additive toxicity. The obtained
LD50 value and (TEF) was for tetra-CDD 43 micrograms/kg (1), penta-CDD 206
micrograms/kg (0.2) hexa-CDD 887 micrograms/kg (0.05) and hepta-CDD 6325
micrograms/kg (0.007), respectively. The dose-response to the mixture confirmed
the hypothesis of strict additivity in the acute toxicity of the four CDD
homologues.

PMID: 1444813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 25;19(24):6799-804.

Role of the SV40 enhancer in the early to late shift in viral transcription.

Kelly JJ(1), Wildeman AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

Simian virus 40 large tumor antigen is a multifunctional protein, with two of its
roles being the promotion of viral DNA replication and replication-independent
activation of viral transcription. Replication leads to a shift in transcription 
from the early-early to the late and late-early cap sites, through mechanisms
poorly understood. The viral transcription enhancer contains sequences important 
for both early and late transcription, and we therefore have carried out
experiments to evaluate its role in these events. We find that the ability of
replication to lead to a shift diminishes when early-early transcription is made 
increasingly stronger by multimerizing the enhancer, and suggest that replication
might lead to the shift by interfering with the ability of the enhancer to direct
initiation to those sites. The natural situation in the virus of having two
copies of this element might represent a compromise between maximizing both T
antigen expression early in infection and late gene expression after replication 
begins. We also show that replication-independent transcription activation by T
antigen is bidirectional and involves at least in part elements to which the
factor TEF-1 binds.

PMCID: PMC329312
PMID: 1662364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Appl Physiol (1985). 1991 Dec;71(6):2088-93.

Effect of feeding and fasting on excess postexercise oxygen consumption.

Bahr R(1), Sejersted OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo,
Norway.

This study was undertaken to determine the effect of fasting on the magnitude and
time course of the excess postexercise O2 consumption (EPOC). Six lean untrained 
subjects were studied in the fasted state for 7 h after a previous strenuous
exercise bout (80 min at 75% of maximal O2 uptake) and in a control experiment.
The results were compared with identical control and exercise experiments where
the subjects were fed a 4.5-MJ test meal after 2 h of rest. EPOC was calculated
as the difference in O2 uptake between the corresponding control and exercise
experiments. The total EPOC (0-7 h postexercise) was 20.9 +/- 4.5 (fasting) and
21.1 +/- 3.6 liters (food, NS). A significant prolonged EPOC component was
observed in the fasted and in the fed state. The thermic effect of food (TEF) was
calculated from O2 consumption and respiratory exchange ratio as the difference
in energy expenditure between the corresponding food and fasting experiments. The
total TEF (0-5 h postprandial) was 321 +/- 32.0 (control) and 280 +/- 37.7 kJ/5 h
(exercise, NS). It is concluded that the prolonged component of EPOC is present
in the fasting state. Furthermore, no major interaction effects between food
intake and exercise on the postexercise O2 consumption could be detected.

PMID: 1778897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Virol. 1991 Dec;65(12):6535-43.

trans activation of the simian virus 40 late promoter by large T antigen requires
binding sites for the cellular transcription factor TEF-1.

Casaz P(1), Sundseth R, Hansen U.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Transcription, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) T antigen stimulates the level of transcription from
several RNA polymerase II promoters, including the SV40 late promoter. The
mechanism of trans activation appears to be indirect since binding of T antigen
to specific DNA sequences is not required. However, specific promoter elements
that respond to T antigen have not previously been defined. We identified DNA
sequences from the SV40 late promoter whose ability to stimulate transcription is
induced by the expression of T antigen. In particular, the Sph I + II motifs of
the SV40 enhancer can confer T-antigen inducibility to the normally uninducible
herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase gene promoter when multiple copies of the
sequence are inserted 5' of the transcription initiation site and TATA sequence. 
Binding sites for the cellular transcription factor TEF-1 and octamer binding
proteins are contained within the Sph I + II motifs, as well as at other
positions in the SV40 promoter. To study the role of individual protein-binding
sites in trans activation by T antigen, mutations were constructed in various
TEF-1 and octamer protein-binding sites of the SV40 late promoter. These
mutations did not significantly affect basal promoter activity. However, mutation
of all three TEF-1 sites prevented detectable activation by T antigen. DNase I
footprinting of the mutated promoters with purified proteins demonstrated that
inducibility by T antigen correlated with binding affinity of TEF-1 for the DNA
and not with binding affinity of an octamer binding protein.

PMCID: PMC250705
PMID: 1658359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Am J Clin Nutr. 1991 Nov;54(5):783-7.

Meal size and frequency: effect on the thermic effect of food.

Tai MM(1), Castillo P, Pi-Sunyer FX.

Author information: 
(1)Obesity Research Center, St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, Columbia
University, New York, NY.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 1992 Dec;56(6):1069.

The effects of meal size and frequency on thermic effect of food (TEF) were
examined in seven healthy normal-weight young women. Each volunteer consumed in
random order one of two identical meals [3138 kJ (750 kcal), 54.5% carbohydrate, 
14.0% protein, 31.5% fat]. One meal was taken over 10 min [large meal (LM)]
whereas the other was taken in six equal portions of 523 kJ (125 kcal) at 30-min 
intervals over a 3-h period [small meals (SM)]. Metabolic rate was measured for 1
h before and every 30 min after the meal started for 5 h. When expressed as
either kJ/min (kcal/min) or kJ/5h (kcal/5h), TEF was significantly higher in the 
LM day than in the SM day (P less than 0.05). We conclude that the temporal
pattern in which a mixed caloric load is eaten affects the thermogenic response
and may be an important determinant of energy balance after a meal.

PMID: 1951147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Pediatr Surg. 1991 Nov;26(11):1303-5.

The absence of clinically significant tracheomalacia in patients having
esophageal atresia without tracheoesophageal fistula.

Rideout DT(1), Hayashi AH, Gillis DA, Giacomantonio JM, Lau HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, IWK Children's Hospital, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

The association of tracheomalacia (TM) with esophageal atresia (EA) has been well
described. This study attempted to find a correlation between the severity of TM 
and the presence or absence of an associated tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) in
patients with EA. A review of all patients presenting at this institution with EA
through the years 1970 to 1990 was carried out. Six patients with EA without
fistula (type A) and 61 patients having EA with fistula (types B, C, D, and E)
were analyzed. Five of the six type A patients required esophageal dilatations
and antireflux procedures; none had clinically significant TM. Thirty-five of the
61 patients with fistula required esophageal dilatation, and 8 had an antireflux 
procedure; 11 (18%) required either long-tube tracheostomy or aortopexy for TM.
This small study supports a recent hypothesis of different embryological events
resulting in different types of esophageal and tracheal anomalies. When EA occurs
without fistula, it appears that no significant alteration in tracheal
development occurs.

PMID: 1812262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1991 Nov;45(11):527-37.

Effect of refeeding on the energy metabolism of adolescent girls who have
anorexia nervosa.

Vaisman N(1), Rossi MF, Corey M, Clarke R, Goldberg E, Pencharz PB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Nutrition, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

The effect of refeeding on resting energy expenditure (REE) and substrate
utilization was studied in 18 hospitalized adolescent girls (aged 12.9-19.1
years) suffering from anorexia nervosa. Changes in body composition were
monitored weekly and included weight, fat body mass (FBM), lean body mass (LBM)
and total body potassium (TBK). REE was studied weekly by open-circuit
calorimetry. Weight gain was noted in all patients (38.2 +/- 5.6 to 44.5 +/- 5.3 
kg), involving increased FBM and LBM. REE increased per kg of weight (91.6 +/-
15.1 to 101.7 +/- 18.0 kJ kg-1 d-1) and LBM over the first weeks of refeeding (P 
less than 0.025) and then stabilized. Substrate utilization showed an increase in
carbohydrate and protein utilization (P less than 0.001) during the first few
weeks of refeeding. We also studied the thermic effect of food (TEF) in 14 of the
18 subjects. Upon admission the subjects had a reduced TEF (36.4 +/- 24.3 kJ 2
h-1) (P less than 0.001). With refeeding TEF rose to a peak or plateau, then
decreased to normal levels (61.9 +/- 36.0 kJ 2 h-1) before discharge from
hospital. We conclude that the energy metabolism of adolescent girls adapts to
semi-starvation by a reduction in both REE and TEF; with refeeding there is
reversal of this adaptive function.

PMID: 1782924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Endocr Rev. 1991 Nov;12(4):316-28.

The human placental lactogen genes: structure, function, evolution and
transcriptional regulation.

Walker WH(1), Fitzpatrick SL, Barrera-Saldaña HA, Resendez-Perez D, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

hPL is a member of an evolutionarily related gene family including hGH and hPRL. 
Expression of hPL is limited to the placenta but its physiological actions are
far reaching. hPL has a direct somatotropic effect on fetal tissues, it alters
maternal carbohydrate and lipid metabolism to provide for fetal nutrient
requirements, and aids in stimulation of mammary cell proliferation. Two hPL
genes (hPL3 and hPL4) encoding identical proteins are responsible for the
production of up to 1-3 g PL hormone/day. Recent studies have characterized the
regulatory controls of hPL expression. At the post transcriptional level, RNA
stability may contribute to variable levels of hPL3 vs. hPL4 production. In
addition, non-tissue-specific protein-promoter interactions involving the Sp1
transcription factor are necessary for hPL transcription initiation. A
transcriptional enhancer located 3' to the hPL3 gene is responsible for the
placenta-specific expression of this gene, while an additional enhancer may be
located 3' to the hPl4 gene. The hPL enhancer is bound by multiple proteins
including at least one placental specific protein that interacts with a TEF-1
motif. Therefore, enhancer-protein interactions most likely play a large part in 
the high levels of placenta-specific hPL expression.

PMID: 1760991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Virol. 1991 Nov;65(11):5933-43.

The enhancer of human papillomavirus type 16: binding sites for the ubiquitous
transcription factors oct-1, NFA, TEF-2, NF1, and AP-1 participate in epithelial 
cell-specific transcription.

Chong T(1), Apt D, Gloss B, Isa M, Bernard HU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National University of Singapore.

The enhancer of human papillomavirus type 16 (HPV-16) is considered to be
specific for epithelial cells, in particular for cervical carcinoma-derived cell 
lines. We reexamined this hypothesis with the complete enhancer as well as
nonoverlapping subclones and found all clones to be active in epithelial cell
lines derived from the epidermis and from carcinomas of the cervix, mammary
gland, and colon, but inactive in fibroblast, lymphoma, and embryonal carcinoma
cells. Although the virus infects only human mucosal epithelia, enhancer activity
was independent of the exact type or of the species of origin of the transfected 
epithelial cell. In spite of epithelial cell specificity, we found that the
activity of the HPV-16 enhancer varied strongly from a cytomegalovirus enhancer
and the simian virus 40 enhancer in a cell line-dependent manner. This suggests
varying quantitative contributions of enhancer elements rather than regulation by
an all-or-none switch. Cell type specificity was maintained by a 91-bp subclone
of the 400-bp enhancer. Most of the enhancer activity of this fragment was
eliminated by alternative mutations in binding sites for the ubiquitous factors
AP-1, nuclear factor 1 (NF1), or TEF-2. These three types of factors bind this
91-bp enhancer without cooperation, although activation appears to be
synergistic. Outside the 91-bp fragment, a motif typical for papillomavirus
enhancers, namely an octamerlike sequence flanked by an NF1-binding site,
contributes to enhancer function, as the activity was strongly reduced upon its
deletion. In HPV-16, this motif is bound by the oct-1 factor as well as by a
probably novel factor, NFA, whereas a related motif of HPV-11 is recognized only 
by NFA. On examination, none of the five types of transcription factors involved 
in HPV enhancer activation was restricted to epithelial cells, but NF1, AP-1, and
oct-1 were present in higher concentration in HeLa cells than in fibroblasts.
Only NF1 showed some qualitative cell type-specific differences. We propose that 
the epithelial specificity of the HPV-16 enhancer is brought about via binding
sites for supposed ubiquitous transcription factors. The mechanism of this
activation apparently involves synergism between factors that vary in
concentration and may include cell-specific functional differences residing
outside the DNA-binding domain of these factors.

PMCID: PMC250257
PMID: 1656080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Genes Dev. 1991 Oct;5(10):1739-53.

TEF, a transcription factor expressed specifically in the anterior pituitary
during embryogenesis, defines a new class of leucine zipper proteins.

Drolet DW(1), Scully KM, Simmons DM, Wegner M, Chu KT, Swanson LW, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0648.

We have identified and characterized a new member of the leucine zipper (bZIP)
gene family of transcription factors, thyrotroph embryonic factor (TEF). Analysis
of the ontogeny of TEF gene expression reveals the presence of TEF transcripts,
beginning on embryonic day 14, only in the region of the rat anterior pituitary
gland in which thyrotrophs arise. This pattern of gene expression corresponds
temporally and spatially to the onset of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH beta)
gene expression, which defines the thyrotroph phenotype. Coupled with this
observation, we find that TEF can bind to and trans-activate the TSH beta
promoter. In contrast to this restricted pattern of expression during
embryogenesis, TEF transcripts appear in several tissues in the mature organism. 
We propose that TEF belongs to a new class of bZIP proteins on the basis of the
unique homology between TEF and another member of the bZIP gene family, the
albumin D box-binding protein (DBP). TEF and DBP transcripts are coexpressed in a
pituitary cell line, and these two proteins can readily form heterodimers. The
DNA-binding and dimerization domains of TEF correspond to those found in other
bZIP proteins. We have however, identified a cluster of basic amino acids, found 
only in TEF and DBP, that is necessary for the proper DNA-binding site
specificity of TEF. A major trans-activation domain of TEF resides outside the
region of homology to other bZIP proteins. These data are consistent with a role 
for a member of a new class of bZIP transcription factors in activating gene
expression in the developing thyrotroph.

PMID: 1916262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Qual Assur. 1991 Oct;1(1):70-81.

Toxicity equivalency factors for PCBs?

Barnes D(1), Alford-Stevens A, Birnbaum L, Kutz FW, Wood W, Patton D.

Author information: 
(1)Science Advisory Board, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC
20460.

In December 1990 the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency sponsored a workshop to
discuss the applicability of an interim "toxicity equivalency factor" (TEF)
approach to assessing risks posed by exposures to complex mixtures of
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The group concluded that application of the TEF
approach to PCBs would be less straightforward than it was in the case of
chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans (CDDs/CDFs). It appears that
"dioxin"-like properties of some PCB congeners are amenable to a TEF treatment
that is compatible with that used for CDDs/CDFs. Such a scheme also seems to have
utility in assessing risks to wildlife. Other non-"dioxin"-like toxic endpoints
(e.g., neurotoxicity) appear to have a different structure-activity-related
mechanism-of-action that requires a separate TEF scheme. The workshop identified 
data gaps in toxicology and analytical chemistry that hinder adoption of proposed
TEF schemes for PCBs at this time.

PMID: 1669971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Microbiol. 1991 Jul;5(7):1703-6.

Both genes for EF-1 alpha in Candida albicans are translated.

Sundstrom P(1), Irwin M, Smith D, Sypherd PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Texas College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Fort Worth 76107.

In previous work, we showed that Candida albicans has two genes, TEF-1 and TEF-2,
which encode identical polypeptides for the highly conserved, essential, protein 
synthesis factor EF-1 alpha (Breviario et al., 1988). This result prompted
questions as to whether C. albicans preferentially uses one of the genes over the
other and whether both genes are actually translated into protein. Gene-specific 
sequence differences in the untranslated portion of each gene made it possible to
prepare gene-specific oligonucleotide hybridization probes. Results with the
probes showed that the relative steady-state mRNA levels of the two genes were
equivalent and that the mRNA for each gene was present in active translation
complexes.

PMID: 1943704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Indian Pediatr. 1991 Jul;28(7):745-7.

Peri-anesthetic management of tracheo-esophageal fistula.

Khan RM(1), Khan TZ, Chana RS, Zafaruddin M, Haq G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Surgery, J.N. Medical College, Aligarh Muslim
University.

During a 3-year period 11 neonates underwent general anesthesia for primary
repair of tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF). The age ranged from 1-10 days. Out of
these patients, 8 (72.7%) had atresia of the esophagus with a blind upper pouch
and lower segment communicating with a trachea. A total of 7 patients (63.6%) had
aspiration pneumonitis pre-operatively. Intubation was difficult in 3 (27.3%).
There was no intraoperative mortality. However, the incidence of post-operative
mortality was 27.3% (3 cases). The cause of death in all these cases was severe
non-resolving pneumonia.

PMID: 1839298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Virol. 1991 Jul;65(7):3553-8.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) T-antigen transcriptional activation mediated through the 
Oct/SPH region of the SV40 late promoter.

Gruda MC(1), Alwine JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia 19104-6148.

Simian virus 40 (SV40) large T antigen is a promiscuous transcriptional activator
of many viral and cellular promoters. The SV40 late promoter, a primary target
for T-antigen transcriptional activation, contains a previously described
T-antigen-activatable binding site (SV40 nucleotides 186 to 225). The
T-antigen-activatable binding site element contains overlapping octamer (Oct)-
and SPH (TEF-1)-binding sites (Oct/SPH site). Using this Oct/SPH site as an
upstream element in a simple promoter, we show that the SPH sites are necessary
for transcriptional activation by T antigen. In addition, we show that when Oct 1
is overproduced, it can eliminate T-antigen-mediated transcriptional activation, 
as well as basal activity, from the simple Oct/SPH promoter as well as the intact
SV40 late promoter. This suggests that one function of T antigen in
transcriptional activation of the late promoter is to alter factor binding at the
Oct/SPH region to favor binding of factors to the SPH sites.

PMCID: PMC241352
PMID: 1645783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Am J Med Genet. 1991 Jun 15;39(4):380-4.

Familial occurrence of esophageal atresia with and without tracheoesophagel
fistula: report of two unusual kindreds.

Pletcher BA(1), Friedes JS, Breg WR, Touloukian RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Human Genetics, New Haven,
CT 06510.

We describe 2 unique kindreds with familial occurrence of esophageal atresia (EA)
with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and reviewed the literature on
familial EA +/- TEF. EA +/- TEF appears to be causally heterogeneous with
evidence pointing to the existence of non-genetic developmental and
multifactorial forms. The literature suggests that the parents of a single
affected child should be given an empiric recurrent risk between 1/2 and 2%,
rising to 20% if more than one sib is affected. The empiric risk of an affected
child born to an affected parent is 3-4%. Empiric risk figures are useful in
counseling families at the present time; however, the 2 kindreds presented here
raise the possibility of autosomal dominant transmission in certain families. A
third generation of affected offspring, or additional family reports should help 
to clarify this issue in the future.

PMID: 1877613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Pediatr Surg. 1991 Jun;26(6):672-5.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula in infancy and childhood.

Szold A(1), Udassin R, Seror D, Mogle P, Godfrey S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hadassah University Hospital Mount Scopus,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is a rare entity in the pediatric age
group. We report two pediatric patients with acquired TEF caused by shells of
pistachio nuts. In both patients the primary operation did not resolve the
problem and a second intervention for recurrent fistula was needed. The special
nature of acquired TEF, particularly the one described herein, requires delayed
surgical intervention and meticulous separation of the respiratory and alimentary
tracts by an intercostal muscle flap.

PMID: 1941455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Cell. 1991 May 17;65(4):551-68.

Cloning, expression, and transcriptional properties of the human enhancer factor 
TEF-1.

Xiao JH(1), Davidson I, Matthes H, Garnier JM, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Unité 184 de
Génie Génétique et de Biologie, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

We describe the cDNA encoding the SV40 transcriptional enhancer factor 1 (TEF-1) 
and show that its translation initiates exclusively at an AUU codon in vivo.
Cloned TEF-1, which is unrelated to other known transcription factors,
specifically binds the SV40 GT-IIC and Sph enhansons. Cloned TEF-1 does not
activate these enhansons in lymphoid MPC11 cells where they are known to be
inactive, but represses the endogenous HeLa TEF-1 activity in vivo and in vitro. 
Repression is also observed with chimeras where the DNA-binding domain of the
GAL4 activator replaces that of TEF-1, showing that repression results from
interference/squelching. Such chimeras stimulate transcription in HeLa, but not
in MPC11, cells in vivo and in HeLa cell extracts in vitro. However, high
concentrations result in self-interference/squelching. These results strongly
suggest that the trans-activation function of TEF-1 is mediated by a highly
limiting, possible cell-specific, titratable transcriptional intermediary
factor(s).

PMID: 1851669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Int J Obes. 1991 May;15(5):337-44.

Energy need in childhood and adult-onset obese women before and after a
nine-month nutrition education and walking program.

Moore JM(1), Oddou WE, Leklem JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Management, Oregon State University,
Corvallis 97331.

The effect of a 9-month nutrition education and walking program on total calorie 
need, resting metabolic rate (RMR), thermic effect of food (TEF), body
composition, and activity level was determined in seven women (28-41 years of
age) with childhood-onset obesity (CO) and eight women (29-42 years of age) with 
adult-onset obesity (AO). A 3-week testing period was conducted before and after 
the 9-month program during which all subjects were fed a controlled,
weight-maintaining metabolic diet which was used to determine daily calorie need.
Body composition, RMR, and TEF were measured during the second and third weeks of
both 3-week testing periods. Body weight decreased significantly for CO (mean
-5.7 +/- 9.3 kg) and AO (mean -3.3 +/- 6.2 kg), but fat-free mass (FFM) was
unchanged. When comparing pre to post data, mean total calorie need increased by 
2.9 percent for CO and 3.1 percent for AO (P greater than 0.05), RMR decreased
3.6 percent for CO and 2.8 percent for AO (P less than 0.05), and TEF increased
11 percent for CO and 50 percent for AO (P less than 0.05). Time spent in light
and moderate level activity increased significantly from pre to post. The
increase in activity and TEF more than compensated for the slight decrease in RMR
(mean -55 kcal/day), contributing to an overall increase in daily energy need
(mean = 74 kcal/day) at the end of the program, even for the six women who lost
greater than 5 kg body weight.

PMID: 1885259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Sci Total Environ. 1991 May 1;104(1-2):73-86.

Toxicity equivalents and EPA's risk assessment of 2,3,7,8-TCDD.

Barnes DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)United States Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC 20460.

Toxicity equivalent factors (TEFs) have proved useful in estimating the toxicity 
of complex mixtures of chlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins and dibenzofurans
(CDDs/CDFs). An international consensus has formed around a specific set of TEF
values as interim solution for addressing environmental contamination by
CDDs/CDFs. This procedure capitalizes on the congener-specific analytical results
that are more routinely available in recent years. The TEF approach should be
updated as necessary and replaced by more definitive bioassay approaches as soon 
as practicable. In an independent activity, the USEPA considered a proposal to
change (reduce) the cancer potency ascribed to 2,3,7,8-TCDD by a factor of 16.
The recommendation was based upon an analysis of the literature and the Agency's 
earlier risk assessment. The proposal was reviewed by the Science Advisory Board,
a group of outside scientific advisors. Subsequently, the Agency decided against 
making any changes in its assessment at this time. However, it is likely that a
reassessment will be conducted shortly that will incorporate new data and a new
approach to estimating of cancer risks posed by 2,3,7,8-TCDD.

PMID: 1871591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Mar 25;19(6):1305-10.

Cis and trans-acting elements involved in the activation of Arabidopsis thaliana 
A1 gene encoding the translation elongation factor EF-1 alpha.

Curie C(1), Liboz T, Bardet C, Gander E, Médale C, Axelos M, Lescure B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire des Relations Plantes-Microorganismes,
CNRS-INRA, Castanet Tolosan, France.

In A. thaliana the translation elongation factor EF-1 alpha is encoded by a small
multigenic family of four members (A1-A4). The A1 gene promoter has been
dissected and examined in a transient expression system using the GUS reporter
gene. Deletion analysis has shown that several elements are involved in the
activation process. One cis-acting domain, the TEF 1 box, has been accurately
mapped 100 bp upstream of the transcription initiation site. This domain is the
target for trans-acting factors identified in nuclear extracts prepared from A.
thaliana. Homologies are found between the TEF 1 box and sequences present at the
same location within the A2, A3 and A4 promoters. This observation, together with
those obtained from gel retardation assays performed using DNA fragments from the
A4 promoter, suggest that the activation process mediated by the TEF 1 element is
conserved among the A. thaliana EF-1 alpha genes. Analysis of nearly full length 
cDNA clones has shown that in addition to a single intron located within the
coding region, the A1 gene contains a second intron located within the 5' non
coding region. Such an intron is also present within the A2, A3 and A4 genes.
This 5' intervening sequence appears to be essential to obtain a maximum GUS
activity driven by the A1 gene promoter.

PMCID: PMC333858
PMID: 1840652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Int J Radiat Biol. 1991 Mar;59(3):815-25.

Thermal radiosensitization in CHO cells by prior heating at 41-46 degrees C.

Dikomey E(1), Jung H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysics and Radiobiology, University of Hamburg, Germany.

CHO cells were exposed to heat at temperatures ranging from 41 degrees C to 46
degrees C followed by irradiation on ice with graded doses of X-rays. The
dose-response curves obtained were analysed in terms of D10%, D0 and Dq and
thermal enhancement was expressed by the corresponding values TER10%, TEF and
TEQ, respectively. TER10% and TEF were shown to increase linearly with heating
time, the increase being steeper at higher temperatures. The dose-response curves
were also analysed using the equation -ln(S/S0) = alpha D + beta D2; the values
of alpha and beta obtained from curve-fitting were found to increase with heating
time. For temperatures below 43 degrees C the relative increase in alpha was
greater than that in beta; the Arrhenius activation energies were Ea = 890 kJ
mol-1 for alpha and Ea = 1830 kJ mol-1 for beta. At temperatures exceeding 43
degrees C the relative increase of alpha and beta was similar and the
corresponding activation energies were about the same (Ea approximately 700 kJ
mol-1). The increase in the alpha-term was attributed to a depressed repair of
double-strand breaks, whereas the increase of beta was assumed to be a
consequence of an insufficient repair of base damage.

PMID: 1672368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Am J Physiol. 1991 Feb;260(2 Pt 1):E257-61.

Effect of endurance training on sedentary energy expenditure measured in a
respiratory chamber.

Schulz LO(1), Nyomba BL, Alger S, Anderson TE, Ravussin E.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Diabetes and Nutrition Section, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Phoenix, Arizona
85016.

The effect of endurance training on 24-h energy expenditure (EE), basal metabolic
rate (BMR), sleeping metabolic rate (SMR), and the thermic effect of food (TEF)
was assessed in a respiratory chamber where only spontaneous physical activity
(SPA) was allowed. Results from 20 highly trained male endurance athletes (25 +/-
5 yr, 178 +/- 7 cm, 70 +/- 8 kg body wt, 64 +/- 7 kg fat-free mass) were compared
with those of 43 untrained males who were matched for age (28 +/- 6 yr), height
(175 +/- 5 cm), weight (73 +/- 13 kg), and fat-free mass (62 +/- 8 kg). Subjects 
were admitted to a metabolic ward, fed a weight-maintenance diet, and refrained
from physical activity for at least 2 days before measurements. No significant
differences were found with respect to 24-h EE (2,126 +/- 186 vs. 2,154 +/- 245
kcal), BMR (1,808 +/- 342 vs. 1,709 +/- 329 kcal), SMR (1,523 +/- 120 vs. 1,555
+/- 188 kcal), or TEF (24.9 +/- 9.2 vs. 21.3 +/- 6.7% of ingested calories; these
values included the energy cost of arousal) between trained and untrained
subjects, respectively, before or after adjusting for differences in body
composition. Neither the 24-h respiratory quotient nor the level of SPA differed 
between the two groups. No relationship was found between maximal aerobic
capacity and metabolic rate adjusted for differences in fat-free mass and fat
mass. These results do not support an effect of fitness level on EE measured
under sedentary conditions.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1996628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Biol Chem. 1990 Aug 5;265(22):12940-8.

Human placental lactogen transcriptional enhancer. Tissue specificity and binding
with specific proteins.

Walker WH(1), Fitzpatrick SL, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

Human placental lactogen (hPL) and growth hormone (hGH) are thought to be derived
from a common ancestral gene and have similar nucleotide and amino acid
sequences. Although the genes are similar in structure, they are expressed in
different tissues. A transcriptional enhancer has been found 2.2 kilobases 3' of 
the hPL3 gene at the distal extreme of the hPL/hGH gene cluster. This enhancer is
at least 20-fold more active in hPL-producing human choriocarcinoma JEG-3 cells
than in non-hPL-producing cells. The enhancer is active when linked to either the
hPL3 or SV40 promoter. We have localized the hPL enhancer to a 138-base pair (bp)
region that retains tissue specificity in transient transfection assays. Gel
mobility shift assays showed that the hPL enhancer interacted specifically with
nuclear proteins from JEG-3 cells and placental tissue. Within the 138-bp
enhancer, a 22-bp region overlapping a TEF-1 binding site was shown to be
protected from DNase I digestion by placental and HeLa nuclear extracts.
Placental protein(s) binding this region may be instrumental in tissue-specific
activity of the hPL enhancer.

PMID: 2376582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Pediatr Surg. 1990 Aug;25(8):855-60.

Current management of laryngeal and laryngotracheoesophageal clefts.

DuBois JJ(1), Pokorny WJ, Harberg FJ, Smith RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Laryngeal and laryngotracheoesophageal clefts (L-LTEC) are uncommon anomalies in 
neonates that cause significant morbidity secondary to aspiration, pneumonia, and
respiratory distress. Other anomalies of development, such as esophageal atresia 
and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF), are observed in 20% of patients with
L-LTEC and often confuse the radiographic and clinical picture. Repair of L-LTEC 
depends on the length and location of the cleft, associated anomalies, and
concurrent systemic illness. For type I L-LTEC, endoscopic repair occasionally is
possible with microsurgical instrumentation. With types II to IV L-LTEC, an open 
approach must be used. Tracheotomy is a universal requirement, often for extended
periods of time. Reported here is our experience with four cases of L-LTEC
managed over the past 7 years at Texas Children's Hospital.

PMID: 2401940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Br J Nutr. 1990 Jul;64(1):37-44.

Thermic effect of food in man: effect of meal composition, and energy content.

Kinabo JL(1), Durnin JV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Glasgow.

The effect of meal composition and energy content on the thermic effect of food
(TEF) was investigated in sixteen adult, non-obese female subjects. Each subject 
consumed four different test meals, each meal on a different day. Meals were of
high-carbohydrate-low-fat (HCLF) with 0.70, 0.19 and 0.11 of the energy content
from carbohydrate, fat and protein respectively, and low-carbohydrate-high-fat
(LCHF) with 0.24, 0.65 and 0.11 of the energy content from carbohydrate, fat and 
protein respectively. The energy contents of the test meals for each composition 
were 2520 kJ (600 kcal) and 5040 kJ (1200 kcal). The basal metabolic rate (BMR)
and the postprandial metabolic rate (PP-MR) were measured by open-circuit
indirect calorimetry using the Douglas bag technique while the subjects were in
the supine position. The mean BMR value was 3.63 (SE 0.07) kJ/min (0.87 kcal/min 
(SE 0.017)). The 5 h-TEF value for the 2520 kJ (600 kcal) HCLF meal was 228 (SE
11.8) kJ (54 kcal (SE 2.8)) and for the LCHF meal was 228 (SE 9.6) kJ (54 kcal
(SE 2.3)). The corresponding values for the 5040 kJ (1200 kcal) meals were 356
(SE 20.4) kJ (85 kcal (SE 4.9)) and 340 (SE 15.8) kJ (81 kcal (SE 3.8)). There
was no significant (P = 0.49) effect of meal composition on TEF, but the energy
content of the meals had a significant (P less than 0.001) effect on TEF. In all 
subjects and for all meals, PP-MR had not returned to premeal level 5 h after a
meal, indicating that the TEF values measured underestimate total TEF. The
present study suggests that TEF is significantly influenced by the energy content
of a meal but not by meal composition.

PMID: 2400767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Pediatr Surg. 1990 Jul;25(7):778-81.

Prediction and prevention of anastomotic complications of esophageal atresia and 
tracheoesophageal fistula.

McKinnon LJ(1), Kosloske AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico School of Medicine,
Albuquerque 87131.

We analyzed our experience with 64 infants with esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), to determine the possibility of prediction and
prevention of anastomotic complications (leak, stricture, and recurrent TEF). In 
most of the infants, the anatomical level of the fistula was documented
preoperatively by bronchoscopy. The level of the fistula, in turn, correlated
with the esophageal anatomy at thoracotomy, ie, carinal fistulas had a wide gap
between esophageal pouches, whereas midtracheal or cervical fistulas had a
minimal gap. Major anastomotic complications were defined as leak requiring
reoperation, symptomatic strictures requiring four or more dilatations, or a
recurrent TEF. The complication rates wre: leak (major and minor), 21%; major
stricture, 15%; and recurrent TEF, 5%. Major complications occurred in 42%
(11/26) of infants with wide gaps, compared with 8% (3/36) of infants with
minimal gaps. Route of repair (transpleural or retropleural) made no difference
in incidence of anastomotic complications. No infant died of an anastomotic
complication. Survival was 100% for Waterston A and B infants, 83% for Waterston 
C, and 90% overall. Severe gastroesophageal reflux, requiring Nissen
fundoplication, was more common among infants with wide gaps than those with
minimal gaps (32% v 3%). The most important pathogenetic factor, present in 79%
(11/14) of major anastomotic complications, was anastomotic tension, determined
by the gap between esophageal pouches, and predicted by preoperative
bronchoscopy. Thus the bronchoscopic finding of a carinal fistula signals the
need for technical measures that may limit anastomotic morbidity, such as
myotomy, patching the anastomosis, retropleural approach, or delayed repair.
Assuming precise technique and gentle handling of tissues, the anatomy of the
anomaly determines the anastomotic morbidity of EA and TEF.

PMID: 2380896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Pediatr Surg. 1990 Jul;25(7):769-72.

Aortosternopexy for tracheomalacia following repair of esophageal atresia:
evaluation by cine-CT and technical refinement.

Kimura K(1), Soper RT, Kao SC, Sato Y, Smith WL, Franken EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City
52242.

During the period of 1 year (1988 to 1989), five infants, aged 3 weeks to 10
months, presented with recurrent respiratory distress following repair of
esophageal atresia with tracheoesphageal fistula (EA/TEF). These patients had
associated congenital anomalies, including right aortic arch (1), biliary atresia
(1), and a long gap that required esophageal elongation by spiral myotomy (1).
The patients were evaluated for tracheomalacia using cinecomputed tomography
(cine-CT; C-100 Scanner, Imatron, San Francisco, CA), which provides images of
eight levels (8-mm interval) simultaneously with 0.7 second time intervals of
cine-CT. Dynamic studies of the trachea by cine-CT showed tracheal collapse that 
was most significant during expiration in the segment immediately above and at
the aortic arch. These patients underwent aortosternopexy. Via a right second
intercostal approach, the ascending aorta and aortic arch were lifted anteriorly 
using two to four sutures of 5-0 Tevdek on pledgets placed between the tunica
media and adventitia of the side walls of the aorta and the adjacent sternum.
Respiratory distress was significantly improved postoperatively. Preliminary
experience with these patients allows us to conclude that (1) cine-CT is a useful
technique for diagnosing tracheomalacia; (2) it provides objective indication for
its correction by aortosternopexy; and (3) the refined technique in placing
sutures on the aorta may reduce the surgical risks of aortosternopexy.

PMID: 2380894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Metabolism. 1990 Jul;39(7):733-7.

The thermic effect of feeding in older men: the importance of the sympathetic
nervous system.

Schwartz RS(1), Jaeger LF, Veith RC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, Harborview Medical Center,
Seattle, WA 98104.

We have previously published direct evidence that approximately one third of the 
thermic effect of feeding (TEF) in young healthy men can be accounted for by the 
meal-induced increment in sympathetic nervous system (SNS) activity. The elderly 
are known to have abnormal beta-adrenergic mechanisms and blunted responsiveness 
to sympathetic stimulation. Therefore, we postulated that the elderly might also 
have a blunted thermic response to a meal. In the present study, we evaluated the
TEF in 25 young (age, 29.4 +/- 4.6 years) and 12 older (66.6 +/- 7.0 years),
healthy weight-stable, untrained, nonsmoking men on no medications. Energy
expenditure (ventilated hood system) and SNS activity (arterialized plasma
catecholamine concentrations and norepinephrine [NE] kinetics) were measured
before and following ingestion of an 800-kcal high-carbohydrate meal. At
baseline, arterialized plasma NE concentration (P = .001) and appearance rate (P 
= .05) were 40% and 28% higher, respectively, in the elderly. Resting energy
expenditure was related to fat-free mass (r = .54, P less than .01), and was 21% 
lower in the older men (P less than .01). Energy expenditure increased in both
groups following the meal, but this TEF was 48% lower in the older men (P less
than .001). This reduced TEF observed in the older subjects was associated with
only a slight, nonsignificant, blunting of the SNS response to the meal. The TEF 
was related to the arterialized plasma NE appearance rate in the young, but not
the older group. The TEF was unrelated to either glucose or insulin
concentrations in either group.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2195295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Surg Res. 1990 Jun;48(6):573-8.

Components of energy expenditure in tumor-bearing animals.

Luketich JD(1), Rigberg D, Banchs R, Shinkwin M, Sigal R, Daly J, Mullen JL.

Author information: 
(1)Harrison Department of Surgical Research, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

Single snapshot measurements of resting energy expenditure (REE) suggest that
hypermetabolism contributes to cancer cachexia, but tumor impact on total 24-hr
energy expenditure (TEE) is unknown. Automated multicage indirect calorimetry was
employed to measure daily energy expenditure in adult Buffalo rats (n = 16)
randomized to tumor inoculation or controls. Measurements included baseline REE, 
activity EE (AEE), thermic response to food (TEF), and TEE. Rats (n = 16) were
randomized. Metabolic measurements, tumor size, and body weight were recorded
weekly. Animals were sacrificed at Week 5 for analysis of host and tumor
composition. Significant depletion of total lean body mass occurred in TB rats
(greater than 15% wt loss, ANOVA P less than 0.001) which inversely correlated
with tumor growth (r = -0.81, P less than 0.001). REE, TEF, AEE, and TEE did not 
change in controls (ANOVA P = n.s.). In TB rats, a 19.5% increase in REE occurred
(119.4 +/- 3.3 to 138.7 +/- 1.8 kcal/kg LBM/day, P less than 0.01). TEE remained 
unchanged (157.3 +/- 5.6 vs 152.9 +/- 3.6 kcal/kg LBM/day, P = n.s.) due to a 66%
decrease in AEE (32.9 +/- 3.1 to 10.5 +/- 1.7 kcal/kg LBM/day, P = 0.01). TEF did
not change (4.7 +/- 0.8 vs 5.0 +/- 0.3 kcal/kg LBM/day, P = n.s.). Both TB and
controls demonstrated a decreased REE in response to a 24-hr fast (7.9% vs 4.8%, 
P = n.s.). Respiratory quotient decreased in both groups when comparing fed to
fasted values: TB (0.86 to 0.76) and controls (0.86 to 0.71), but the decline was
greater in controls (P = 0.04).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2362417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Metabolism. 1990 Jun;39(6):651-8.

Energy expenditure and physical performance in overweight women: response to
training with and without caloric restriction.

Keim NL(1), Barbieri TF, Van Loan MD, Anderson BL.

Author information: 
(1)US Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, San Francisco, CA
94129.

The metabolic effects of exercise training and the influence of a moderate
calorie restriction on the training response were examined in overweight women.
Ten healthy women, 119% to 141% of desirable weight, completed the 14-week study.
After a 2-week stabilization period, in which diets were designed to maintain
body weight (BW), five women were assigned to a 12-week experimental program of
diet and exercise (D + EX) that included a 50% reduction in energy intake and a
program of moderate intensity aerobic exercise 6 days per week. The other five
women were assigned to the same daily exercise (EX) and continued to consume the 
stabilization diet. Periodic measurements of resting metabolic rate (RMR),
thermic effect of food (TEF), energy cost of exercise, and predicted maximal
aerobic capacity (VO2 max) were obtained, and the respiratory quotient (RQ) was
determined during rest and exercise. Body composition was monitored weekly. Tests
of strength and anaerobic capacity were conducted. D + EX lost an average of
approximately 1.1 kg/wk, which was 67% fat, 33% lean. EX lost approximately 0.5
kg/wk, which was 86% fat, 14% lean. In both groups, the exercise program resulted
in an 11% to 13% improvement in VO2 max and an 8% to 16% decrease in energy
expenditure at submaximal workloads. The caloric restriction significantly
increased fat utilization during exercise. The RMR declined 9% in D + EX, from
1,550 to 1,411 kcal/d, whereas it was maintained in EX, 1,608 to 1,626 kcal/d.
The decrease in RMR observed in D + EX was consistent with the loss of fat-free
mass (FFM).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2352481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Toxicology. 1990 May 31;62(2):203-11.

Chelating agents in the treatment of acute vanadyl sulphate intoxication in mice.

Domingo JL(1), Gomez M, Llobet JM, Corbella J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Barcelona, Spain.

Eighteen chelating or reducing agents were tested to determine their relative
efficacy as antagonists in acute intramuscular vanadyl sulphate intoxication in
mice. The chelating or reducing agents were administered intraperitoneally to
male Swiss mice at doses equal to one-fourth of their respective LD50.
Therapeutic effectiveness (TEF) was calculated. In a subsequent experiment, the
effect of EDTA, glutathione, DFOA, ascorbic acid, succinic acid, monosodium
phosphate, Tiron, DTPA, and 2-mercaptosuccinic acid on the excretion, and
distribution of vanadium was determined. Of the compounds examined, Tiron
followed by ascorbic acid, and 2-mercaptosuccinic acid were effective in
increasing the urinary excretion of vanadium. Tiron, and 2-mercaptosuccinic acid 
were also effective in reducing the concentration of vanadium found in kidney,
the main target organ of vanadium accumulation. Tiron appears to be the most
effective agent of those tested in the prevention of acute vanadium (IV)
intoxication in mice.

PMID: 2353359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Eur J Clin Nutr. 1990 May;44(5):389-95.

Effect of meal frequency on the thermic effect of food in women.

Kinabo JL(1), Durnin JV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Glasgow, Scotland.

The effect of meal frequency on the thermic effect of food (TEF), also referred
to as dietary induced thermogenesis (DIT), was investigated in eighteen non-obese
female subjects. Their metabolic rate before and after consuming the test meal
was measured by open circuit indirect calorimetry using the Douglas bag
technique, while the subjects were in the resting state (lying down). Eight
subjects consumed a high carbohydrate-low fat (HCLF) meal providing 70, 19 and 11
per cent of the energy content from carbohydrate, fat and protein, respectively, 
and ten other subjects consumed a low carbohydrate-high fat (LCHF) meal providing
24, 65 and 11 per cent of the energy from carbohydrate, fat and protein,
respectively. On two separate occasions, each subject consumed the appropriate
diet either as one large meal containing 5040 kJ (1200 kcal) or as two smaller
meals each containing 2520 kJ (600 kcal). TEF values were calculated for 6 h
after the test meal and the mean values after consuming the HCLF meal were 377.0 
+/- 30.0 kJ (90 +/- 7.2 kcal) and 381.0 +/- 26.5 kJ (91.0 +/- 6.3 kcal) for the
one meal and the two meals, respectively. The mean TEF values for the subjects
who consumed the LCHF meal wre 356.0 +/- 23.0 kJ (85.0 +/- 5.5 kcal) and 340 +/- 
15.9 kJ (81.0 +/- 3.8 kcal) for the one meal and the two meals, respectively. No 
significant differences were found between the two feeding regimens (HCLF, P =
0.94; LCHF, P = 0.64) as well as between the compositions (P = 0.57). Thus, meal 
frequency and meal composition did not seem to influence the TEF.

PMID: 2387273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Arch Environ Contam Toxicol. 1990 Mar-Apr;19(2):185-9.

Treatment of acute lead intoxication. A quantitative comparison of a number of
chelating agents.

Llobet JM(1), Domingo JL, Paternain JL, Corbella J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Biochemistry, School of Medicine, University of
Barcelona, Spain.

The efficacy of several chelating agents in alleviating acute lead intoxication
has been investigated in male Swiss mice. The relative effectiveness of
diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA),
ethyleneglycolbis-(beta-amino-ethylether)-N,N'-tetraacetic acid (EGTA),
cyclohexanediaminetetraacetic acid (CDTA), L-cysteine, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC),
ascorbic acid, sodium diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC), 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid
(DMSA) and sodium 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonate (DMPS) in reducing lethality 
of lead was examined. Significant increases in survival were noted with CDTA,
ascorbic acid, DMSA, and DMPS. Therapeutic effectiveness (TEF) was determined for
these compounds; TEF for ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and for
2,3-dimercaptopropanol (BAL) was also determined; CDTA (2.33) and EDTA (1.73)
showed the highest values. In subsequent experiments, the effect of the chelating
agents on the distribution and excretion of lead was investigated. Lead acetate
trihydrate was administered subcutaneously at doses of 37.8 mmol/kg (LD50), and
fifteen minutes later, chelators were given intraperitoneally at doses
approximately equal to one-fourth of their respective LD50 values. EDTA, DTPA and
CDTA were the most effective agents in increasing the urinary excretion of lead, 
whereas DTPA, CDTA, and DDC increased significantly the fecal excretion of lead. 
EDTA, DDC, and CDTA were the most effective chelators in reducing the
concentration of lead found in various tissues. On the basis of these results,
CDTA may be considered as an alternative in the treatment of acute lead
poisoning.

PMID: 2322019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990 Mar;51(3):350-8.

Energy utilization of breast-fed and formula-fed infants.

Butte NF(1), Smith EO, Garza C.

Author information: 
(1)USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Department of Pediatrics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.

Breast-fed and formula-fed infants (n = 65) were studied at 1 and 4 mo of age to 
elucidate differences in energy utilization between feeding groups. Gross energy 
intake at 1 mo was comparable between groups but was statistically different at 4
mo. Weight, length, and weight gain were not different between groups. Energy
expenditure 0-4 h postprandially did not differ between feeding groups. Sleeping 
metabolic rates (SMRs) were not different but minimal observable energy
expenditures standardized by weight were lower among 4-mo-old breast-fed infants 
(p less than 0.03). No differences were found between feeding groups in thermic
effect of feeding (TEF). Activity patterns revealed that breast-fed infants slept
less than formula-fed infants (p less than 0.04). Disparities in energy intake
observed between breast-fed and formula-fed infants at 4 mo of age did not result
in statistically significant differences in growth rate, SMR, or TEF.

PMID: 2309642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jan 11;18(1):75-82.

Structure and expression of the Euglena gracilis nuclear gene coding for the
translation elongation factor EF-1 alpha.

Montandon PE(1), Stutz E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie Végétale, Université de Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

A cDNA library from the protist Euglena gracilis was used to isolate and sequence
an ORF coding for the elongation factor protein EF-1 alpha. The decoded amino
acid sequence (MW, 48'515) is to 75-80% identical with other eukaryotic EF-1
alpha sequences but only to 24% identical with the Euglena chloroplast EF-Tu.
Homologous DNA probes interact with multiple fragments of Euglena nuclear
restricted DNA typical for a multimembered gene family. We present the
restriction sites map of four tef nuclear gene loci and postulate that the
nuclear genome also contains tef related sequences (e.g. pseudogenes). Expression
of tef gene(s) is monitored by Northern hybridization and the 5' end of a stable 
transcript (1.5 kb) is sequenced and shown to precede the start codon by 29
positions only. The steady state concentration of the 1.5 kb mRNA is not
influenced by switching cell growth conditions from dark to light (chloroplast
development).

PMCID: PMC330205
PMID: 2106666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Clin Nutr. 1990 Jan;51(1):14-21.

Comparison of thermic effects of constant and relative caloric loads in lean and 
obese men.

Segal KR(1), Edaño A, Blando L, Pi-Sunyer FX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029.

Controversy regarding defective thermic effect of food (TEF) in obesity might be 
related to differences among studies in the caloric loads. To clarify further the
role of blunted thermogenesis in obesity, responses to the same absolute caloric 
load (720 kcal) and a relative load, which was 35% of each subject's resting
metabolic rate (RMR), were compared in 11 lean (L) and 11 obese (O) men. The
relative load was slightly larger for O than L (752 +/- 27 vs 683 +/- 21 kcal;
means +/- SEM, NS). TEF, calculated as 3-h postprandial minus fasting RMR, was
greater for L than O for both the 720-kcal (69 +/- 4 vs 31 +/- 3 kcal/3 h, p less
than 0.01) and relative loads (64 +/- 4 vs 37 +/- 3 kcal/3 h, p less than 0.01). 
For L, TEF was greater for the 720-kcal load than for the relative load whereas
for O, TEF was greater for the relative than for the 720-kcal meal. However,
expressed as a percent of the calories ingested, TEF for the absolute and
relative meals was identical for each group, in both cases lower for O (4.2 +/-
0.4% vs. 4.7 +/- 0.3%) than for L (9.7 +/- 0.4% vs 9.3 +/- 0.8%); p less than
0.01. These results demonstrate the impact on thermogenesis of the basis on which
the meal is dosed and provide further evidence for defective thermogenesis in
obesity.

PMID: 2404397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dysphagia. 1990;5(3):138-41.

Esophageal motility in an adult with a congenital H-type tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Heitmiller RF(1), Nikoomanesh P, Ravich WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 21205.

Congenital H-type tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) are rare. Long-standing
respiratory symptoms are the most common presenting complaints. Patients with
these fistulas have a congenital esophageal motor abnormality characterized by
uncoordinated, low-amplitude peristalsis of the esophageal body; both low and
normal lower esophageal sphincter pressures have been described. These findings
persist despite fistula repair. A case history of an adult patient with
congenital TEF is presented and the literature is reviewed. This patient is
unusual in that esophageal symptoms (dysphagia) were more prominent than the
usual respiratory symptoms.

PMID: 2249489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Annu Rev Nutr. 1990;10:255-75.

Regulation of energy expenditure in aging humans.

Poehlman ET(1), Horton ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington
05405.

A brief overview of the effects of aging on two components of energy expenditure,
RMR and TEF, has been presented. Whereas the decline in RMR appears to be related
primarily to the loss of muscle tissue, the reason for the lower TEF in older
individuals is less clear. Evidence has been provided suggesting that physical
activity influences RMR and TEF in younger and older individuals. The possibility
is raised that regular physical activity will increase RMR and TEF in older
individuals. The increase in resting energy expenditure (RMR and TEF), in
addition to the direct energy cost of physical exercise, may help increase the
total energy requirements in older individuals. The majority of studies support
an increase in resting SNSA in older individuals. The level of physical activity 
and percentage of body fat may be two factors contributing to age-related
alterations in resting sympathetic tone. Future studies should continue to
examine the effects of physical activity and body composition on metabolic rate
and SNSA in older individuals.

PMID: 2200465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Int J Obes. 1990 Jan;14(1):75-84.

Long-term exercise training with constant energy intake. 2: Effect on glucose
metabolism and resting energy expenditure.

Tremblay A(1), Nadeau A, Després JP, St-Jean L, Thériault G, Bouchard C.

Author information: 
(1)Physical Activity Sciences Laboratory, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.

The effect of exercise training on glucose and insulin metabolism as well as on
resting energy expenditure was investigated in five young men (mean BMI = 27.5
+/- 2.9 (s.d)). Subjects performed cycle-ergometer exercise 6 days/week over a
100 day period and the quantity of daily exercise was calculated to induce a 4.2 
MJ/day surplus in energy expenditure during the days of training. As expected,
significant weight and fat losses were observed in response to the training
program. Exercise training induced a significant reduction in fasting levels and 
in the responses of insulin to a 4.2 MJ meal or an oral glucose load. Most of the
training effects were noted after only 25 days of training. However, a
significant decrease in plasma C-peptide concentrations during the oral glucose
tolerance test was observed only at the end of the exercise program whereas
essentially no change occurred during the first 25 days of training. The resting 
metabolic rate (RMR) and the thermic effect of food (TEF) were not significantly 
modified by training. Results show that the reduction in plasma insulin induced
by training occurred earlier than that for C-peptide. Moreover, the absence of
change in RMR in the presence of a substantial weight loss may represent a
beneficial effect of training in comparison to the documented effect of
diet-induced weight loss on RMR.

PMID: 2179148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Pediatr Surg. 1989 Oct;24(10):1055-9.

Esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula: associated anomalies
and prognosis in the 1980s.

Ein SH(1), Shandling B, Wesson D, Filler RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Ninety-seven newborns with esophageal atresia and distal tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA-TEF) were treated between 1979 and 1985 inclusive; there were 54 boys
and 43 girls. Their weights ranged from 800 to 4,000 g (average, 2.5 kg). They
included: 28 neonates with cardiac defects (most common: patent ductus arteriosus
[PDA], ventricular septal defect and atrial septal defect [VSD-ASD]), of whom 18 
survived (64%); 17 babies with other gastrointestinal anomalies (imperforate
anus, duodenal atresia), of whom 12 survived (70%); 12 patients with skeletal
malformations (digital, vertebral), of whom 11 survived (91%); 8 newborns with
genitourinary abnormalities (hypospadias, undescended testis), of whom 6 survived
(75%); and 16 infants with other congenital lesions (trisomy 18, lung
agenesis-hypoplasia), of whom 3 survived (18%). Forty-six infants (average, 2.7
kg) had no other anomalies and all survived. As the number of systems with
defects increased, both the weight of the baby and survival rate decreased. From 
this entire series of 97 newborns with EA-TEF, 81 (83%) survived (average, 2.3
kg). Sixteen babies died (average, 1.9 kg); 11 had defects incompatible with
life. Eleven of the 16 were never operated on (seven patients with trisomy died
within 5 days, and four patients with complex cardiac defects died within 3
weeks). Four of the 16 who were operated on died between 3 months and 2 years
from chest problems and one newborn died in the operating room. We concluded that
(1) newborns who have the common type of EA-TEF will almost certainly survive if 
there are no other anomalies; (2) the most frequently associated congenital
defects are cardiovascular (28%), gastrointestinal (17%), skeletal (12%), and
genitourinary (8%); (3) as the number of systems with defects increases, the
weight of the baby and its survival rate fall; and (4) 11% will have trisomy
and/or complex cardiac defects with no survival.

PMID: 2809951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Arch Surg. 1989 Oct;124(10):1188-90; discussion 1191.

Primary repair without routine gastrostomy is the treatment of choice for
neonates with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Shaul DB(1), Schwartz MZ, Marr CC, Tyson KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California at Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento.

Gastrostomy and staged repair are techniques frequently recommended for the
management of esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF), 
especially for those infants at high risk. We describe 42 consecutive patients
with EA-TEF treated during the past 8 years. Staged repair and preliminary
gastrostomy were not routinely employed. Fifteen infants were considered to be at
high risk (Waterston class C). Surgical treatment via an extrapleural approach
consisted of fistula division and primary single-layer end-to-end esophageal
anastomosis. Four patients required proximal esophageal circular myotomy. Four
patients early in the series received a gastrostomy at or before definitive
repair for various life-threatening indications. One patient had fistula division
only and died before esophageal anastomosis was possible. Two neonates died
before repair and another died after repair. The deaths in this series of
patients were unrelated to EA-TEF. One patient developed a clinically significant
anastomotic leak. Four patients required multiple dilatations for anastomotic
stricture. Fundoplication was necessary in 3 patients with symptomatic
gastroesophageal reflux. Our data demonstrate that excellent overall survival
(90%) with low morbidity (15%) can be achieved using primary repair without
preliminary gastrostomy in most neonates with EA-TEF. We believe that mortality
in high-risk patients with EA-TEF is due to associated life-threatening
anomalies.

PMID: 2802981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1989 Oct;21(5):515-25.

A review: exercise and its influence on resting energy metabolism in man.

Poehlman ET(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, Metabolism & Nutrition, College of Medicine, University of
Vermont, Burlington 05405.

Daily energy expenditure is composed of three major components: 1) resting
metabolic rate (RMR); 2) the thermic effect of feeding (TEF); and 3) the thermic 
effect of activity (TEA). RMR constitutes 60 to 75% of daily energy expenditure
and is the energy associated with the maintenance of major body functions. TEF is
the cumulative increase in energy expenditure after several meals and constitutes
approximately 10% of daily energy expenditure. Most investigators, however, have 
examined the thermic effect of a single meal test (TEM). TEA is the most variable
component of daily energy expenditure and can constitute 15 to 30% of 24-h energy
expenditure. This component includes energy expenditure due to physical work,
muscular activity, including shivering and fidgeting, as well as purposeful
physical exercise. Participation in purposeful exercise (both acute and chronic) 
is a subcomponent of TEA and has been found to influence resting energy
expenditure (RMR and TEM). Reports in the literature, however, are discrepant
regarding the direction and magnitude of the effects of exercise and exercise
training on RMR and TEM. Cross-sectional and longitudinal studies that have
examined the effects of exercise on RMR and TEM are reviewed. Possible
explanations for divergent results in the literature are discussed. The major
focus of this review is directed to human studies, although pertinent animal work
is included. The role of genetic variation, gender specific responses, and
methodological considerations for future studies examining the relation among
RMR, TEA, and TEM are considered. Although still controversial, purposeful
physical exercise appears to influence resting energy expenditure in man.

PMID: 2691813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Metabolism. 1989 Jul;38(7):641-8.

Thermogenesis in humans during overfeeding with medium-chain triglycerides.

Hill JO(1), Peters JC, Yang D, Sharp T, Kaler M, Abumrad NN, Greene HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232.

To test whether excess dietary energy as medium-chain triglycerides (MCT) affects
thermogenesis differently from excess dietary energy as long chain triglycerides 
(LCT), ten male volunteers (ages 22 to 44) were overfed (150% of estimated energy
requirement) liquid formula diets containing 40% of fat as either MCT or LCT.
Each patient was studied for one week on each diet in a double-blind, crossover
design. Resting metabolic rate (RMR) did not change during either week of
overfeeding. The thermic response to food (TEF) was greater on day 1 following a 
meal (1,000 kcal) containing MCT than following an isocaloric meal containing LCT
(8 +/- .8% v 5.8 +/- .8% of ingested energy; P less than .05). Moreover, the TEF 
observed after a 1,000 kcal meal containing MCT increased significantly to 12%
(+/- 1.3%) overfeeding. The TEF of the 1,000 kcal meal containing LCT was
unchanged by five days of LCT overfeeding (6.6 +/- 1.0% of ingested energy).
Energy expenditure during a 20-hour continuous enteral infusion of the diet on
day 7 was also significantly higher with the MCT diet than with the LCT diet
(15.7 +/- 1.7% v 7.3 +/- .9% of ingested energy; P less than .05). Our results
demonstrate that excess dietary energy as MCT stimulates thermogenesis to a
greater degree than does excess energy as LCT. This increased energy expenditure,
most likely due to lipogenesis in the liver, provides evidence that excess energy
derived from MCT is stored with a lesser efficiency than is excess energy derived
from dietary LCT.

PMID: 2739575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Surgery. 1989 Jun;105(6):770-7.

Tracheoesophageal fistula in the patient with lymphoma: case report and review of
the literature.

Perry RR(1), Rosenberg RK, Pass HI.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Md. 20892.

Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) occurs only rarely in the patient with lymphoma. 
Two cases are presented to illustrate the challenges in managing TEF in this
patient population. Most of the 38 previously reported cases have occurred in
patients who have undergone radiation therapy, although several patients have had
TEF as an initial manifestation of lymphoma. TEF is usually, but not universally,
associated with the presence of active lymphoma. The surgical approach should be 
individualized, based on the patient's overall condition, the site and size of
the fistula, and sites of disease. Often a conservative surgical approach is
warranted with the expectation that many of these fistulas will close after
radiation therapy or chemotherapy. Patients with lymphoma-related TEF have a
better prognosis than do those with TEF caused by carcinoma of the lung or
esophagus.

PMID: 2471284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Pediatr Surg. 1989 May;24(5):488-90.

Double aortic arch associated with esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Hartenberg MA(1), Salzberg AM, Krummel TM, Bush JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Radiology, Medical College of Virginia, Richmond 23298.

Esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is commonly
associated with significant cardiovascular anomalies. Mortality is higher with
cardiovascular abnormalities, especially those undiagnosed prior to surgical
repair of the EA/TEF. Advances in cardiac imaging techniques, most notably
echocardiography, have made noninvasive evaluation of the heart and great vessels
easy to perform and reliable. Thus, the preoperative cardiovascular anatomy of
these infants should be routinely assessed prior to surgical correction. A case
of EA/TEF associated with an unsuspected double aortic arch is described.
Although a wide variety of cardiovascular lesions have been associated with
EA/TEF, coexistence of a double aortic arch has not been previously reported.
Preoperative recognition of this anomaly would have altered the surgical
approach, and perhaps reduced the postoperative morbidity and mortality.

PMID: 2738813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nutr Rev. 1989 May;47(5):129-37.

The impact of food intake and exercise on energy expenditure.

Poehlman ET, Horton ES.

Food intake and physical exercise affect two components of energy expenditure,
resting metabolic rate (RMR) and the thermic effect of feeding (TEF). Classic
studies of overfeeding and underfeeding clearly showed that caloric deficit and
surfeit conditions alter RMR. Recent work on short-term overfeeding of
monozygotic twins provides new evidence that genetic factors influence individual
sensitivity to changes in RMR and TEF when caloric excess is present. Exercise
affects energy expenditure during nonactive times; acute bouts of vigorous
exercise may result in increased RMR, and this effect appears most pronounced in 
the first 12 h after exercise. Acute exercise may potentiate the thermic effects 
of food when they are taken together, and high levels of exercise training may
increase RMR. Thus, physical exercise appears to play an important role in the
regulation of energy balance by way of its direct energy cost and its influence
on RMR and TEF.

PMID: 2654774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Ann Surg. 1989 Apr;209(4):471-4.

Tracheostomies in burn patients.

Jones WG(1), Madden M, Finkelstein J, Yurt RW, Goodwin CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, New York.

The use of tracheostomies in burned patients with inhalation injuries is now
reserved for specific indications rather than as prophylactic airway management. 
A 5-year burn center experience with tracheostomies used in this fashion is
presented. Ninety-nine tracheostomies were performed in 3246 patients who had
indications of prolonged respiratory failure or acute loss of airway. Although
colonization of the sputum was universal, neither rates of pulmonary sepsis nor
mortality were significantly increased in patients who underwent tracheostomies. 
Twenty-eight patients developed late upper airway sequelae, including tracheal
stenosis (TS), tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), and tracheoarterial fistula
(TAF). Duration of intubation correlated only with development of TAF, whereas
patients in whom TEF developed were significantly older and more likely to have
evidence of tracheal necrosis at the time of tracheostomy. The pathogenesis of
upper airway sequelae in these patients as divergent responses to the combined
insults of inhalation injury, infection, and intubation is considered.

PMCID: PMC1493971
PMID: 2930291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 1989 Apr;67(4):394-401.

Role of thermogenesis in the regulation of energy balance in relation to obesity.

Himms-Hagen J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Ottawa, Ont., Canada.

Obligatory thermogenesis is a necessary accompaniment of all metabolic processes 
involved in maintenance of the body in the living state, and occurs in all
organs. It includes energy expenditure involved in ingesting, digesting, and
processing food (thermic effect of food (TEF]. At certain life stages extra
energy expenditure for growth, pregnancy, or lactation would also be obligatory. 
Facultative thermogenesis is superimposed on obligatory thermogenesis and can be 
rapidly switched on and rapidly suppressed by the nervous system. Facultative
thermogenesis is important in both thermal balance, in which control of
thermoregulatory thermogenesis (shivering in muscle, nonshivering in brown
adipose tissue (BAT] balances neural control of heat loss mechanisms, and in
energy balance, in which control of facultative thermogenesis (exercise-induced
in muscle, diet-induced thermogenesis (DIT) in BAT) balances control of energy
intake. Thermal balance (i.e., body temperature) is much more stringently
controlled than energy balance (i.e., body energy stores). Reduced energy
expenditure for thermogenesis is important in two types of obesity in laboratory 
animals. In the first type, deficient DIT in BAT is a prominent feature of
altered energy balance. It may or may not be associated with hyperphagia. In a
second type, reduced cold-induced thermogenesis in BAT as well as in other organs
is a prominent feature of altered thermal balance. This in turn results in
altered energy balance and obesity, exacerbated in some examples by hyperphagia. 
In some of the hyperphagic obese animals it is likely that the exaggerated
obligatory thermic effect of food so alters thermal balance that BAT
thermogenesis is suppressed. In all obese animals, deficient hypothalamic control
of facultative thermogenesis and (or) food intake is implicated.

PMID: 2667732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Am J Physiol. 1989 Mar;256(3 Pt 1):E357-67.

Energy expenditure during carbohydrate overfeeding in obese and nonobese
adolescents.

Bandini LG(1), Schoeller DA, Edwards J, Young VR, Oh SH, Dietz WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology, and Nutrition, Tufts New England
Medical Center, Boston 02111.

Basal metabolic rate (BMR), thermic effect of food (TEF), and total daily energy 
expenditure (TDEE) were measured in six nonobese and seven obese adolescents
during periods of weight maintenance and 2 wk of carbohydrate overfeeding. BMR
and TEF were measured by indirect calorimetry and TDEE by the doubly labeled
water method. Fasting blood levels of insulin, thyroid, and norepinephrine (NE)
and urinary excretion of NE and 4-hydroxy-3-methoxymandelic acid (VMA) were
measured before and after overfeeding. Energy intake was 1.61 X BMR during
maintenance and 2.45 X BMR during overfeeding. BMR increased comparably in both
groups during overfeeding (obese, 7.9 +/- 1.2%, nonobese, 8.6 +/- 1.9%). TEF was 
similar and did not change significantly during overfeeding (maintenance: obese, 
9.4 +/- 0.6%; nonobese, 9.8 +/- 0.4% vs. overfeeding: obese, 8.6 +/- 0.3%;
nonobese, 9.2 +/- 0.7%). TDEE did not differ significantly between obese and
nonobese. Increases in insulin and 3,5,3'-triiodothyronine levels were
significant but did not differ between the two groups. Plasma NE and urinary
excretion of VMA and NE did not increase during overfeeding. The thermogenic
response to food or to overfeeding does not appear reduced in obese adolescents, 
nor does facultative thermogenesis appear to be a significant factor in weight
maintenance in adolescents.

PMID: 2646945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cor Vasa. 1989;31(4):294-8.

Pulmonary circulation and thyroid hormone levels in pacemaker patients with and
without atrial fibrillation.

Usov VYu(1), Lishmanov YuB, Chernov VI, Akhmedov SD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk Research Centre of Academy of Medical Sciences,
USSR.

The pulmonary haemodynamics and thyroid hormone level were investigated in 21
patients with EKS-222 (VVI) pacemaker, implanted after successful transvenous
electrical endocardial His-bundle fulguration (TEF). Triiodthyronine (T3) and
thyroxine (T4) were determined by radioimmunoassay, pulmonary circulation
parameters were estimated by means of radiocardiography and radionuclide
ventriculography using an Omega 500 gamma-camera and a "Scintron MX" computer
system. Patients with atrial fibrillation (AF) during VVI pacing had higher level
of T3 and T4 and better pulmonary circulation parameters than those with
persistent sinus node activity during paced rhythm.

PMID: 2805703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Jpn J Surg. 1989 Jan;19(1):78-81.

Surgical treatment of recurrent tracheo-esophageal fistula using a latissimus
dorsi pedicled muscle flap--report of a case.

Fujita H(1), Kawahara H, Yoshimatsu H, Nakamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Occupational 
and Environmental Health School of Medicine, Fukuoka, Japan.

We report herein, a case of a child in whom a prepared latissimus dorsi muscle
flap was successfully utilized in the treatment of recurrent tracheo-esophageal
fistula (TEF). A 12-month-old girl who had undergone a primary repair of Gross's 
type C esophageal atresia at 6 days of age and a secondary repair of recurrent
TEF at 4 months of age experienced, postoperatively, repeated episodes of
aspiration pneumonia caused by recurrence of the fistula. Thus, we performed a
reoperation in which the fistula was excised, and a latissimus dorsi muscle
pedicled flap was interposed between the tracheal and esophageal suture lines.
Viability of the muscle flap was adequately achieved by means of a three-stage
delayed operation. Although a minor anastomotic leakage of the esophagus was
found postoperatively, it healed spontaneously, and the patient was commenced on 
a normal diet orally without any problems at 26 months of age.

PMID: 2733283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Cell. 1988 Sep 23;54(7):931-42.

The HeLa cell protein TEF-1 binds specifically and cooperatively to two SV40
enhancer motifs of unrelated sequence.

Davidson I(1), Xiao JH, Rosales R, Staub A, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Faculté de
Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

We have purified a protein (TEF-1) that specifically binds to two sequence
unrelated motifs (GT-IIC and Sph) of the simian virus 40 (SV40) enhancer. TEF-1
binds cooperatively to templates containing tandem but not inverted or spaced
repeats of its cognate motifs. This cooperative binding correlates with the
ability of the tandem repeats to generate enhancer activity in vivo. In contrast,
TEF-1 and a second SV40 enhancer binding protein, TEF-2, bind independently to
templates containing the cognate motifs of both proteins (GT-I and either GT-IIC 
or Sph motifs) even though these motifs cooperate in enhancer activity in vivo.
These results allow us to distinguish different classes of enhancer factors.

PMID: 2843293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Pediatr Surg. 1988 Sep;23(9):805-9.

Management of esophageal atresia: review of 16 years' experience.

Sillén U(1), Hagberg S, Rubenson A, Werkmäster K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Ostra Sjukhuset, Göteborg, Sweden.

This report reviews 16 years' experience in the management of patients with
esophageal atresia (EA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF), with special
emphasis on long-term results and early complications in relation to the
magnitude of the gap between the esophageal segments. In 94 infants with no or
moderate distance between the esophageal ends (less than 2 cm), an end-to-end
anastomosis was performed in 90 cases after closing the TEF. In 51 of the 90
patients, no complications were seen (57%), whereas in the remaining 39,
postoperative complications were noted with anastomotic leakage (24 patients,
26%), anastomotic stricture (16 patients, 18%) and gastroesophageal reflux (5
patients, 5%). Sixteen patients (9 with and 7 without TEF) had a "long gap"
between the esophageal segments (greater than 2 cm). Thirteen (9 with and 4
without TEF) of these 16 patients were subjected to an end-to-end anastomosis, 11
primarily and two secondarily after 3 and 12 weeks, respectively. All 13 patients
with an end-to-end anastomosis had anastomotic leakage (100%)--nine had stricture
(75%) and 5 had gastroesophageal reflux (50%). The remaining three patients in
this long-gap group were subjected to colon transposition, two primarily and one 
secondarily. The total mortality rate decreased from 19/57 patients (33%) from
1969 to 1977, to 5/53 (9%) from 1978 to 1984. The main cause of death in both
periods was associated anomalies (18% and 7%, respectively), whereas deaths
related to the EA malformation as such had almost disappeared during the latter
period (15% and 2%, respectively).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3183892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Radiat Res. 1988 Sep;115(3):576-85.

The role of low intracellular or extracellular pH in sensitization to
hyperthermic radiosensitization.

Chu GL(1), Dewey WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of California, San Francisco
94143.

Previous work showed that intracellular pH (pHi) and not extracellular pH (pHe)
was the determinant in the low pH sensitization of hyperthermic killing. The
present studies show that the same is true for heat-induced radiosensitization
and loss of cellular DNA polymerase activities. Chinese hamster ovary cells after
they had adapted to low pH (6.7) had an increase in pHi which rendered cells
partially resistant to the low pH sensitization of heat-induced cell killing,
radiosensitization, and loss of cellular DNA polymerase activities. These results
were quantified by plotting versus pHe, both the thermal enhancement ratio (TER),
defined as the ratio of the X-ray dose without heat to the X-ray dose with heat
to give an isosurvival value of 0.01, and the thermal enhancement factor (TEF),
defined as the ratio of the D0 of the radiation survival curve to the D0 of the
radiation survival curve for heat plus radiation. Both the TER and TEF were
higher for the unadapted cells than for the adapted cells, i.e., 1.3-1.4 fold
higher at a pHe of 6.3. However, the TER or TEF plotted versus pHi was identical 
for the two cell types. Finally, heat-induced loss of cellular DNA polymerase
activities correlated with pHi and not pHe. Therefore, we conclude that pHi and
not pHe is responsible for the increase by acid in heat-induced
radio-sensitization and loss of cellular DNA polymerase activities.

PMID: 3174938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Radiobiologiia. 1988 May-Jun;28(3):343-6.

[Dependence of the therapeutic benefit factor on the dose of fast neutrons].

[Article in Russian]

Lisin VA.

An analytical equation was obtained to describe the therapeutic effectiveness
factor (TEF) as a function of radiation dose. By this equation TEF function of
dose was found for rhabdomyosarcoma that showed a considerable dependence of TEF 
upon dose fractionation schedule. At the same time, TEF gave no unique
information on the advantage of neutron therapy since doses at which TEF was
maximum did not correspond to those providing the highest effectiveness of the
treatment.

PMID: 3399634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Pediatr Surg. 1988 May;23(5):466-70.

Crucial bronchoscopic findings in esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula.

Kosloske AM(1), Jewell PF, Cartwright KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque 87131.

We performed a brief bronchoscopy in 42 newborn infants with esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The procedure was carried out in the
operating room, usually just prior to thoracotomy for repair of the anomaly. Most
infants had a gastrostomy tube placed initially. Observations included: (1) level
of fistula, (2) presence of unusual variants, eg, double fistula, trifurcation
fistula, (3) presence and severity of tracheobronchitis, and (4) position of the 
aortic arch. The endoscopic findings influenced the operative technique or
management of 24 of the 42 infants (57%), including 13 infants (31%) with crucial
findings which dictated a change in operative technique or management. Examples
of the latter were an unsuspected cervical fistula associated with esophageal
atresia, repaired by a cervical approach; other unusual variants of TEF (proximal
fistula, trifurcation or quadrifurcation TEF), requiring specific dissection at
thoracotomy; congenital stenosis of the right mainstem bronchus, requiring
postoperative dilatation; or severe tracheobronchitis, which contraindicated
thoracotomy. Observations at bronchoscopy accurately predicted the position of
the aortic arch in ten recent infants, although the side of dominant pulsation
was indeterminate in three other infants. Only one minor complication was
attributable to the bronchoscopy. The procedure appeared to be safe and
beneficial, and should be considered for all infants with esophageal atresia and 
TEF.

PMID: 3379553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Pediatr Surg. 1988 May;23(5):418-21.

Improved survival with primary anastomosis in the low birth weight neonate with
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Pohlson EC(1), Schaller RT, Tapper D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Hospital and Medical Center, University of
Washington, Seattle 98105.

Management of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) has evolved
over the past 5 years at Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Seattle, in the 
premature patient weighing less than 2.5 kg. Traditionally, these low birth
weight infants underwent gastrostomy and fistula ligation followed by repair
after a period of weight gain. However, since 1980, of the 31 neonates weighing
2.5 kg or less with type-C TEF, a primary repair was performed in 22 within the
first five days of life. There were no mortalities and only one subclinical
anastomotic leak. All anastomoses were done extrapleurally in a single-layer
interrupted fashion. Staged repair was elected for nine neonates. Seven had
severe respiratory distress requiring mechanical ventilation and two in the
staged group expired prior to repair. The survival for the entire group of 31
neonates was 94%. Primary repair may be performed safely in the premature
neonate. The presence of severe pulmonary disease is the critical factor that
might necessitate a staged repair.

PMID: 3379547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Am J Gastroenterol. 1988 May;83(5):513-8.

Treatment of pharyngoesophageal stenosis by polyvinyl prosthesis.

Goldschmid S(1), Boyce HW Jr, Nord HJ, Brady PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of South Florida College of
Medicine, Tampa.

Many authors have objected to the use of esophageal stents in the palliative
management of lesions obstructing the cervical esophagus, especially when the
prosthesis must lie within 2 cm of the cricopharyngeus muscle (CPM). Ten patients
with stenosis of the cervical esophagus by lesions within 2 cm of or involving
the CPM were considered for prosthesis placement. The prosthesis was successfully
placed in eight patients, five of whom had a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). A
prosthesis could not be placed in two patients, and two patients complained of a 
minimal but tolerable foreign body sensation. Six prostheses were custom-made.
The necessity to place a prosthesis within 2 cm of or even immediately proximal
to the CPM should not be considered an absolute contraindication to esophageal
prosthesis placement in selected patients. Foreign body sensation may be absent
or minimal, and stent migration is common.

PMID: 2452566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Aust Vet J. 1988 Feb;65(2):37-40.

Immunoglobulins and immunoglobulin-containing cells in the reproductive tracts of
rams naturally infected with Brucella ovis.

Foster RA(1), Ladds PW, Husband AJ, Hoffmann D.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Tropical Veterinary Science, James Cook University of North
Queensland, Townsville.

Erratum in
    Aust Vet J 1988 Apr;65(4):131.

Thirteen rams with serological evidence of Brucella ovis exposure (CFT of 1:8 or 
greater), but with no or only mild epididymitis, were selected from a ram flock. 
Serum, semen, preputial washings and fluids from the accessory sex glands (ASGF) 
and testis and epididymis (TEF) were examined and immunoglobulin (Ig)
concentrations estimated. Genital tissues were examined histologically and the
percentages of class specific immunoglobulin containing cells (ICC) determined.
Eleven of these rams had histological evidence of active inflammation consistent 
with B. ovis infection; the organisam was cultured from the semen of 7. IgA
concentration was high in semen (mean +/- standard deviation of 5.03 +/- 1.78
mg/ml) and ASGF (9.18 +/- 7.28 mg/ml). These levels were much higher than those
recorded in noninfected rams. IgA concentration was low in serum (0.78 +/- 0.55
mg/ml) and TEF (0.59 +/- 0.78 mg/ml). The concentrations of IgG1, IgG2 and IgM
were low in all genital fluids sampled and not significantly different from those
recorded in noninfected rams. This indicated that infection with B. ovis results 
in a pronounced IgA response in secretions, mostly from the accessory sex glands.
Examinations of ICC, however, revealed that the plasma cell infiltrates of the
epididymis, vas deferens, ampulla and seminal vesicle were predominantly
IgG-containing (92.4, 97.2, 79.4 and 91.9% respectively). Fewer IgM-containing
cells were scattered throughout these tissues, constituting 3.9, 6.3, 0.3 and
6.5% of all ICC, respectively. IgA-containing cells were most frequently seen in 
the ampulla (9.6% of ICC) where they were located directly beneath the
epithelium, suggesting the ampulla as the most prominant location for the local
production of IgA.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3355449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Metabolism. 1988 Feb;37(2):145-51.

Polyunsaturated:saturated ratio of diet fat influences energy substrate
utilization in the human.

Jones PJ(1), Schoeller DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

In order to examine the effect of dietary long chain fatty acid composition on
energy substrate utilization, basal metabolism rate (BMR) and the thermogenic
effect of food (TEF) were measured in eight subjects consuming diets varying only
in diet fat polyunsaturated:saturated (P:S) ratio. Subjects consumed the low P:S 
(0.241 +/- 0.02) and high P:S (1.65 +/- 0.28) ratio diets for seven days using a 
crossover design. Fat and carbohydrate oxidation during BMT and TEF over 230
minutes after a breakfast meal were determined on days 1 and 7 of each diet
period using open circuit respiratory gas exchange. On day 7, BMR respiratory
quotient was reduced (P less than .05) for the low P:S (0.826 +/- 0.005) compared
with high P:S (0.853 +/- 0.014) ratio diet, resulting in an increased basal fat
oxidation rate with low P:S (0.074 +/- 0.006 g/min) compared with high P:S (0.059
+/- 0.008 g/min) ratio diet feeding. The cumulative contribution of fat oxidation
to TEF on day 7 was lower (P less than .01) for the low P:S (1.35 +/- 1.6 g)
compared with high P:S (6.49 +/- 0.8 g) ratio diets. This was paralleled by
opposite differences (P less than .05) in the contribution of carbohydrate
oxidation to TEF (21.0 +/- 3.0 g and 13.1 +/- 3.4 g, respectively, for each diet 
treatment). On day 1 in subjects switching from either home and alternate test
diets, and on day 7, caloric expenditure of TEF after low P:S was not
statistically lower compared to the high P:S ratio diet.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 3123874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 1988 Jan;13(1):54-7.

Isokinetic trunk and lifting strength measurements: variability as an indicator
of effort.

Hazard RG(1), Reid S, Fenwick J, Reeves V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, University of Vermont,
Burlington 05401.

This study examines the hypothesis that force/distance curve variability
distinguishes submaximal from maximal efforts in isokinetic trunk and lifting
strength tests. Thirty normal subjects were tested on the Cybex Trunk
Extension/Flexion (TEF) and Liftask (LT) machines during maximal (100%) and
submaximal (50%) efforts. Considering each test separately, visual assessments of
curve variability were indeterminate of degree of effort in 28% of TEF and 34% of
LT tests. Measurement models of curve variability were more clearly
discriminating. When a given subject's test curves were considered together,
scaled visual assessments identified the degree of effort in 91% of TEF and 86%
of LT results. The measurement models were accurate 90-92% of TEF and 79-92% of
LT results. Clinical judgment is required in evaluating effort during tests of
isokinetic trunk and lifting strength.

PMID: 3381140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Pediatr Surg. 1988 Jan;23(1 Pt 2):29-31.

"Waterseal" gastrostomy in the management of premature infants with
tracheoesophageal fistula and pulmonary insufficiency.

Fann JI(1), Hartman GE, Shochat SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Stanford University Medical Center, CA 94305.

The perioperative management of premature infants with esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA/TEF) complicated by pulmonary insufficiency
continues to be a challenge. Definitive repair is usually delayed or staged and a
gastrostomy is initially placed to prevent reflux aspiration. In patients with
decreased pulmonary compliance, gastrostomy placement results in decreased
intragastric pressure leading to a loss of ventilatory pressure via the
tracheoesophageal fistula. A technique using the principle of underwater seal to 
maintain effective ventilatory pressure after gastrostomy placement is described,
and two illustrative cases are presented. After acute respiratory decompensation 
in these patients, the gastrostomy tube was connected to underwater seal
resulting in improved respiratory status. The underwater seal is allowed to
intermittently "bubble," thereby permitting partial gastric decompression. This
technique maintains effective ventilatory pressure after gastrostomy placement in
premature infants with EA/TEF and pulmonary insufficiency until definitive
therapy can be achieved.

PMID: 3351723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Laryngol Rhinol Otol (Stuttg). 1988 Jan;67(1):17-22.

[Identification of middle ear implants in high-resolution computerized
tomography].

[Article in German]

Oberascher G(1), Grobovschek M.

Author information: 
(1)HNO-Abteilung der Landeskrankenanstalten Salzburg.

As a result of the increase in the use of computed tomography and the possibility
of demonstrating very small structures, x-ray diagnosis is becoming more and more
important in investigating complications after examined in patients as well as
cadaver temporal bones by using high resolution middle ear computed tomography:
1. autologous/allogenic ossicular implants, 2. alloplastic implants made of
ceramic, plastic or metal. As can be seen from our investigations the homografts 
and some of the implants are easily identifiable (autologous/allogenic ossicular 
implants, Ceravital and Frialit PORP/TORP and metal devices), are only partly
identifiable (Fisch-Tef Platinum and Stainless Steel as well as Titan stapes
pistons), hardly or not at all identifiable (PORP/TORP and stapes pistons made of
plastic, e.g. teflon, silicone, plasti-pore). The same applies to ventilating
tubes. Thus the position in the middle ear of metal tubes which have slipped can 
be seen clearly, whereas plastic tubes cannot be seen so well. It is of clinical 
importance that prosthesis dislocation is visible in CT so that should
complications occur it is better possible to determine whether revision surgery
is necessary. As, however, identification of various devices in CT is still not
satisfactory, the manufactures must soon fulfil our demands for a contrast agent 
to be added to prosthesis.

PMID: 3347129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Am J Physiol. 1988 Jan;254(1 Pt 2):R90-4.

Effect of clonidine on the thermic effect of feeding in humans.

Schwartz RS(1), Jaeger LF, Veith RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.

Previous studies in humans attempting to assess the role of the sympathetic
nervous system (SNS) in the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) have investigated the
effect of oral or intravenous propranolol on TEF. This approach is potentially
limited, however, because of the direct effects of propranolol on catecholamine
and thyroid metabolism. In the present study we chose instead to evaluate the
effect of clonidine, a centrally acting alpha 2-adrenergic receptor agonist that 
inhibits SNS outflow, on TEF and SNS activity as reflected by both plasma
catecholamines and norepinephrine (NE) kinetics. The TEF and SNS response to an
800-kcal high-carbohydrate liquid meal (85% carbohydrate, 15% protein) was
studied in eight healthy male subjects (27 +/- 6 yr) on two separate occasions
with the subjects wearing either a clonidine or placebo skin patch for 48 h prior
to study. Clonidine significantly suppressed base-line plasma NE concentration
(-46%, P less than 0.01) and NE appearance rate (-47%, P = 0.01) compared with
placebo, whereas there was no significant effect on epinephrine concentrations,
NE clearance rate, or base-line energy expenditure. The expected increments in
plasma NE and NE appearance after a meal were also reduced by 54% (P less than
0.05) and 70% (P less than 0.01) of placebo values, respectively, after
clonidine. Associated with this reduced SNS response to the meal was a blunting
of the expected TEF by 33% (P less than 0.05).(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3337274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nucleic Acids Res. 1987 Dec 10;15(23):9997-10006.

Sequence analysis of the EF-1 alpha gene family of Mucor racemosus.

Sundstrom P(1), Lira LM, Choi D, Linz JE, Sypherd PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine.

Our previous studies have shown that Mucor racemosus possesses three genes
(TEF-1, -2 and -3) for EF-1 alpha, and that all three genes are transcribed.
However, the level of transcription varies markedly between the three genes, with
TEF-1 mRNA levels being approximately two fold higher than TEF-3 and 6 fold
higher than TEF-2. We have now completed the DNA sequence of both strands of all 
three genes and have found that these genes are highly homologous. TEF-2 and
TEF-3 are more similar to each other than they are to TEF-1. The TEF-2 and the
TEF-3 coding regions differ from TEF-1 at 30 and 37 positions respectively out of
1374 nucleotides. Twenty-six of these nucleotide substitutions were common to
both TEF-2 and TEF-3, and the majority of the substitutions were clustered in the
5' region of the coding sequences. While the majority of these changes were
silent, TEF-2 and TEF-3 differed from TEF-1 by having a lysine instead of a
glutamate at amino acid position 41. In addition, TEF-2 and -3, but not TEF-1,
each have an intron located near the 5' end of the coding region, although its
size and sequence is not conserved between the two genes. All three genes have a 
conserved intron near the 3' end of the coding region. The sequence data have
been analyzed with respect to the structure and function of EF-1 alpha in protein
biosynthesis.

PMCID: PMC306546
PMID: 3697088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Teratology. 1987 Dec;36(3):363-9.

A comparison of incidence trends for esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal
fistula, and infectious disease.

Fraser C(1), Baird PA, Sadovnick AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.

There has been a suggestion that esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (EA/TEF) may be related to the occurrence of infectious disease in the
population during the time of early gestation. There is therefore a need for
further data on trends in incidence related to infectious diseases. Data on the
occurrence of EA/TEF with and without additional congenital malformations may
also be relevant. The British Columbia Health Surveillance Registry is
population-based with excellent case ascertainment of birth defects, and data are
available on the incidence of infectious diseases for B.C., allowing comparison
of trends to be made. One hundred forty-nine cases of EA/TEF occurred among
534,834 consecutive livebirths during the period 1966-1980 for an incidence rate 
of 1/3,590. No significant (p less than 0.05) annual, seasonal or monthly
incidence trends were observed. In addition, the occurrence of EA/TEF could not
be correlated with the prior incidence of infectious hepatitis, rubella,
salmonella, or rubeola. Fifty-five percent of individuals with EA/TEF had
congenital malformations in other systems, most frequently cardiovascular,
gastrointestinal, and genitourinary. Most individuals with additional congenital 
malformations had multiple system involvement.

PMID: 3424224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Pediatr Surg. 1987 Nov;22(11):993.

Endoscopic obliteration of a recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula.

Al-Samarrai AY(1), Jessen K, Haque K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Paediatric Surgery, Medical College and King Khalid University
Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

The incidence of recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) following a primary
surgical repair for TEF and esophageal atresia varies between 5% and 15%. Further
surgery is not only associated with a high morbidity and mortality but may cause 
a great deal of stress and anxiety for the parents who in this part of the world 
are reluctant to allow their child to undergo surgery. This is the first
successful endoscopic obliteration of a recurrent TEF in a Saudi child using
Histoacryle (n-butyl-z-cyanoacrylate) and Polidocanol (aethoxysclerol).

PMID: 3430321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Pediatr Surg. 1987 Nov;22(11):988-90.

Membranous atresia of esophagus associated with pyloric stenosis.

Chuang JH(1), Chen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Membranous atresia of the esophagus without tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is
very rare, only four cases have been reported since 1928. We present a case in
whom a thick membrane was present 2 cm proximal to the diaphragm. The membrane
was resected and the longitudinal esophagotomy wound was closed transversely. The
postoperative course was complicated with hyperbilirubinemia and hypertrophic
pyloric stenosis (HPS). The problems of the feeding tube used for diagnostic
evaluation of this rare esophageal anomaly are discussed. In spite of its low
incidence, the potentiality of HPS as a cause of postoperative vomiting in
esophageal atresia should be borne in mind in order to avoid delay in diagnosis.

PMID: 3430319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Ultrasound Med. 1987 Sep;6(9):509-13.

Tracheoesophageal fistula in utero. Twenty-two cases.

Pretorius DH(1), Drose JA, Dennis MA, Manchester DK, Manco-Johnson ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver.

A retrospective review of 22 infants born with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
with in utero sonograms was performed and the literature was reviewed. TEF or
esophageal atresia should be considered when there is polyhydramnios and an
absent fluid-filled stomach; these findings were seen in 32% of our cases.
Amniotic fluid flows freely through some TEFs, resulting in a normal amount of
amniotic fluid and a fluid filled stomach (six of 22 patients), while in other
cases, the fluid does not traverse the fistula easily and polyhydramnios results.
Polyhydramnios was present in 62% of our cases and was the most common
sonographic finding. The earliest age at which polyhydramnios was diagnosed was
24 weeks. Sonography will detect approximately one third of fetuses with TEF; an 
improved outcome is expected in these fetuses.

PMID: 3312629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Pediatr Surg. 1987 Aug;22(8):775-8.

An alternative to an interposition procedure in esophageal atresia.

Marshall DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)St Joseph's Hospital, London, Ontario, Canada.

The suture fistula technique for long gap esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) was described by Shafer and David in 1974.
Schullinger in 1982 reported five cases with fistulization occurring in four
cases. In the past 2 years, we have used this technique in four infants who
ranged from 1,200 to 1,700 g and in one infant who weighed 2,900 g. Successful
luminal continuity was established in four of the cases and a temporary fistula
in the fifth, but this closed. The latter did require a repeat thoracotomy with
resection and end-to-end suture 28 days after the original suture-fistula
technique. She is well. In a recent full-term infant this technique was used
successfully too. All procedures were done transpleurally. We have found that
fistulization usually occurs about the eighth or ninth day. This is apparent when
milk, given by gastrostomy, appears in the mouth. To date, one of our children
(K.C.) has required an antereflux procedure.

PMID: 3309246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 1987 May;7(5):1925-32.

Expression of three genes for elongation factor 1 alpha during morphogenesis of
Mucor racemosus.

Linz JE, Sypherd PS.

Three genes, TEF-1, -2, and -3, encode elongation factor 1 alpha in Mucor
racemosus. Neutral and alkaline S1 nuclease analyses revealed that the genetic
organization is unique for each of the genes. The number and size of the
intervening sequences vary in these closely related genes, which suggests that
complex genetic rearrangements gave rise to the elongation factor 1 alpha gene
family. Nucleotide sequence data from restriction fragments isolated from the 5' 
and 3' ends of TEF-2 and -3 confirmed the presence of a second intervening
sequence in these genes. These data along with S1 nuclease mapping revealed a
region at the 3' end of the three genes which was predicted to be transcribed but
untranslated. Unique oligonucleotides containing 19 bases were synthesized to
hybridize to this unique trailer region in the elongation factor 1 alpha
transcripts. These oligonucleotides were used as probes in standard Northern
analysis of RNA purified from M. racemosus cells of several morphological types. 
It was determined that all three genes were expressed in the cell morphological
types studied. However, the accumulated level of transcript derived from each
gene varied considerably, with TEF-1 mRNA present in approximately twofold
greater quantity than the TEF-3 transcript and up to sixfold greater quantity
than TEF-2. The level of TEF-1 and -2 mRNA varied little among the cell
morphological types studied, whereas TEF-3 mRNA was present in twofold greater
quantity in sporangiospores than in either germlings or yeast cells which had
been induced to undergo morphogenesis to hyphae. These data suggest that there is
differential expression of the genes encoding elongation factor 1 alpha in M.
racemosus. At least one gene, TEF-3, shows a morphology-specific pattern of
transcript accumulation.

PMCID: PMC365297
PMID: 3037339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Clin Exp Immunol. 1987 May;68(2):418-26.

Regulation of IgE receptor expression on human peripheral blood lymphocytes by
lymphocytosis promoting factor (LPF), lectins and dexamethasone.

Kim KM(1), Tanaka M, Yoshimura T, Katamura K, Mayumi M, Mikawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kyoto University, Japan.

Using a monoclonal anti-human Fc epsilon R antibody (H107), we found that
lymphocytosis promoting factor (LPF), phytohaemagglutinin (PHA-P) and
Concanavalin A (Con A) could induce Fc epsilon R, detected by immunofluorescence 
study, on normal human peripheral blood lymphocytes without IgE. The number of Fc
epsilon R bearing lymphocytes was increased by stimulation with 3, 10 and 10
micrograms/ml of LPF, PHA-P and Con A, respectively, from 6.0 +/- 3.0/1000 cells 
to 26.0 +/- 7.9, 54.0 +/- 6.7 and 24.8 +/- 7.1/1000 cells, respectively. Although
the induction of Fc epsilon R occurred neither in the separated T-enriched
fraction (TEF) nor the T-depleted fraction (TDF), it recovered when the two
fractions were mixed. The cell free supernatants from TEF stimulated with LPF or 
PHA-P could increase Fc epsilon R(+) cells in TDF, whereas those from TDF failed 
to increase them in TEF. The results suggest that the induction of Fc epsilon R
occurs mainly on B lymphocytes by the soluble factor(s) formed by T cells
stimulated with LPF or PHA-P. The induction of Fc epsilon R by stimulants was
completely inhibited by 10(-6) M dexamethasone. It was demonstrated that the
effects of dexamethasone on lymphocytes were dual: one was on B cells to inhibit 
responsive increases of Fc epsilon R, and the other was on T cells to suppress
the formation of the soluble factor(s) which induced Fc epsilon R on B cells.

PMCID: PMC1542733
PMID: 2958186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Pediatr Surg. 1987 Feb;22(2):115-6.

Intercostal pedicled flap in esophageal atresia.

Soriano A, Hernández-Siverio N, Carrillo A, Alarcó A, González Hermoso F.

Since 1974 we have used an intercostal pedicled flap (IPF) between the esophageal
anastomosis and the sutured trachea in a single case of recurrent
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and in four cases of primary repair of esophageal
atresia (EA) and TEF in which the distance between both ends was greater than 2.5
cm and with a certain degree of tension in the anastomotic line. Furthermore, in 
the last two cases reported in this article, we have been able to use the IFP in 
an extrapleural approach in a way not previously reported. The short-term and
long-term follow-ups have been excellent without any complications relating to
the esophagus itself or to the pedicle flap of intercostal muscle. The method is 
considered particularly useful in recurrent fistulas.

PMID: 3820003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Int J Obes. 1987;11(3):229-37.

The effect of smoking two cigarettes on resting metabolic rate with and without
food.

Warwick PM(1), Chapple RS, Thomson ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Nutrition, University of New
England, Armidale, NSW, Australia.

Resting metabolic rate (RMR) was measured using a ventilated hood apparatus in 15
subjects before (BMR) and for 5 h after (5HEE) four treatments. In 10 smokers
(five occasional and five habitual) the treatments were: food (600 kcal (2.51 MJ)
breakfast) with and without smoking two cigarettes (F +/- S) and no food with and
without smoking (NF +/- S). In five non-smokers duplicate measurements of food
(F-S) and no food (NF-S) were made. In non-smokers the thermic effect of food
(TEF) averaged 9.35 per cent of the ingested energy. Duplicate measures of 5HEE
showed good reproducibility both with and without food (c.v. 2.5 and 1.3 per cent
respectively). In smokers, RMR did not increase after smoking even during the
first 15-30 min. There were no apparent differences in response between
occasional and habitual smokers. 5HEE and delta 5HEE (5HEE minus BMR) were
significantly lower after food with smoking than without smoking (-16 kcal (67
kJ)/5 h, P less than 0.001 and -14 kcal (59 kJ)/5 h, P less than 0.02
respectively) but not significantly lower after smoking without food. TEF was
lower with smoking (8.6 per cent of ingested energy) than without smoking (10.0
per cent of ingested energy) but the difference was not significant (P = 0.23).
TEF in smokers regardless of treatment averaged 9.3 per cent of the ingested
energy. We conclude that any effects of smoking two cigarettes in isolation after
overnight deprivation are too small or too variable to consistently influence RMR
or the thermic effect of food.

PMID: 3667059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 1986 Nov 15;261(32):15022-9.

The primary structure and the functional domains of an elongation factor-1 alpha 
from Mucor racemosus.

Linz JE, Lira LM, Sypherd PS.

We have determined the complete nucleotide sequence for TEF-1, one of three genes
coding for elongation factor (EF)-1 alpha in Mucor racemosus. The deduced EF-1
alpha protein contains 458 amino acids encoded by two exons. The presence of an
intervening sequence located near the 3' end of the gene was predicted by the
nucleotide sequence data and confirmed by alkaline S1 nuclease mapping. The amino
acid sequence of EF-1 alpha was compared to the published amino acid sequences of
EF-1 alpha proteins from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Artemia salina. These
proteins shared nearly 85% homology. A similar comparison to the functionally
analogous EF-Tu from Escherichia coli revealed several regions of amino acid
homology suggesting that the functional domains are conserved in elongation
factors from these diverse organisms. Secondary structure predictions indicated
that alpha helix and beta sheet conformations associated with the functional
domains in EF-Tu are present in the same relative location in EF-1 alpha from M. 
racemosus. Through this comparative structural analysis we have predicted the
general location of functional domains in EF-1 alpha which interact with GTP and 
tRNA.

PMID: 3021762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Pediatr Surg. 1986 Oct;21(10):838-44.

Abnormal tracheal innervation in patients with esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula: study of the intrinsic tracheal nerve plexuses by a
microdissection technique.

Nakazato Y, Wells TR, Landing BH.

The automatic nervous plexus of the trachea of patients with esophageal atresia
and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) was examined by a microdissection method. 
Of 28 autopsied patients with EA-TEF, four patients who had not had esophageal
anastomosis were selected, to exclude any changes secondary to anastomosis. The
plexus of the pars membranacea of the trachea was hypoplastic in all four
patients, and severely so in one. An extra plexus, similar to the myenteric
plexus of the esophagus, was present in three of the patients, and an abnormal
muscle bundle was seen in the fibroelastic tissue dorsal to the pars membranacea 
of the trachea in two patients. These findings are suggestive of abnormal
separation of the trachea from the esophagus. An abnormal extrachondral plexus
was also observed in two patients. These congenital abnormalities of the
intrinsic tracheal nervous plexus may be related to tracheal dysfunction and
respiratory symptoms in patients who survive EA-TEF.

PMID: 3783366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Pediatr Surg. 1986 Oct;21(10):831-7.

Abnormal Auerbach plexus in the esophagus and stomach of patients with esophageal
atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula.

Nakazato Y, Landing BH, Wells TR.

The Auerbach plexus of the upper gastrointestinal tract of five patients with
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF) who had not had
surgical reconstruction of the esophagus was studied by a microdissection
technique to investigate the etiology of dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux, and 
delayed gastric emptying; common findings in patients with repaired EA-TEF. All
five patients showed a looser than normal Auerbach plexus in the distal
esophagus, and to a lesser degree in the proximal esophagus, confirmed by
point-count morphometric studies. The Auerbach plexus of the gastric fundus of
all the patients was also abnormal. These findings suggest the existence of
congenital functional impairment of the upper gastrointestinal tract in patients 
with EA-TEF, due to abnormal development of the myenteric plexus.

PMID: 3783365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Pediatr Surg. 1986 Sep;21(9):812-4.

Transabdominal closure of tracheoesophageal fistula: a new procedure for the
management of poor-risk esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Ogita S, Tokiwa K, Takahashi T.

Nissen fundoplication results in closure of the tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
without the necessity for a thoracic operation by preventing both the reflux of
gastric contents into the lungs through the distal TEF, and leakage of air into
the stomach of less than 30 cm H2O intrapulmonary pressure. This procedure can
safely be used even for a poor-risk patient and adequate nutritional support
(full-strength milk) can be provided immediately after the fundoplication by a
gastrostomy tube because the gastric contents cannot reflux into the lungs. This 
procedure was performed on two patients with esophageal atresia and distal TEF in
Waterston Group C and gave successful results.

PMID: 3772710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Pediatr Surg. 1986 Sep;21(9):794-7.

Occult coin perforation of the esophagus.

Janik JS, Bailey WC, Burrington JD.

Only a small number of ingested foreign bodies perforate the esophagus and even a
smaller fraction migrate extraluminally with no symptoms. Both of these events
are even rarer after coin ingestion. Between 1972 and 1984, three children (16
months to 5 years), who had unabating upper respiratory symptoms, were found to
have ingested coins. In only one child could the time interval between ingestion 
and appearance of symptoms (3 years) be established, and in this child the
diagnosis was delayed because of failure to x-ray the chest after an ingestion
episode. Surgical evaluation included chest/neck films: tracheal and esophageal
shadows were separated by the object and a soft tissue mass; esphagogram:
deviation of the esophagus, irregularity of the lumen, and no leak or
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) and esophagoscopy: mucosa was intact with no
direct visualization of the coin. Treatment consisted of exploration: cervical,
one; thoracic, two; localization: coin in extraluminal granulomatous soft tissue;
removal: without resection of the soft tissue mass or esophagus, and drainage:
penrose, one; chest tube, two. There was no morbidity or mortality from 1 to 13
years later. Though generally harmless, ingested coins are capable of penetrating
the esophagus. Sporadic literature reports confirm that the clinical findings and
operative results are typical of this seemingly intermediate stage between
perforation with mediastinitis and perforation with TEF.

PMID: 3772705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Laryngoscope. 1986 Sep;96(9 Pt 1):975-7.

Vocal restorative surgery: why wait?

Trudeau MD, Hirsch SM, Schuller DE.

The case histories of 36 laryngectomees with vocal restorative surgery from the
Department of Otolaryngology were reviewed to determine the patient's current
mode of speech and number and type of complications to recovery and
rehabilitation. The patients comprised two groups: 21 with tracheoesophageal
fistula (tef) at the time of laryngectomy (primary) and 15 with tef subsequent to
laryngectomy (secondary). Results of the review indicated that while
approximately 10% fewer patients in the primary group were using a surgically
restored voice, none of the surviving primary group remained aphonic. In
contrast, 27% of the surviving secondary group failed to develop some form of
verbal communication. When the complication rate is identified, vocal restorative
surgery at the time of laryngectomy appeared to be very successful in initiating 
the rehabilitation process without compromising sound oncological procedures.

PMID: 3747697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Med Radiol (Mosk). 1986 Aug;31(8):15-9.

[Determination of left ventricular volumes using radionuclide ventriculography].

[Article in Russian]

Tsygankov AT, Lemysh AV.

The authors described the use of radionuclide ventriculography in dynamic and
static variants to determine left ventricle volumetric values. The results
obtained were correlated with those of roentgeno-contrast ventriculography (the
correlation coefficient R was 86.8%) and literature data on echocardiography. The
end-diastolic, end-systolic and stroke volumes (EDV, ESV and SV), the mean
ejection rate (MER) and the total ejection fraction (TEF) were determined in
controls and patients with chronic CHD. With growing severity of disease, EDV,
ESV were on the increase, whereas SV and MER were on the decrease. The
determination of left ventricle volumetric values permitted improved diagnosis
and differential diagnosis of cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 3747752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Am J Clin Nutr. 1986 Jul;44(1):1-19.

A reappraisal of caloric requirements in healthy women.

Owen OE, Kavle E, Owen RS, Polansky M, Caprio S, Mozzoli MA, Kendrick ZV, Bushman
MC, Boden G.

The caloric expenditure of 44 healthy, lean and obese women, 8 of whom were
trained athletes, was measured by indirect calorimetry. Body composition was
determined. Ages ranged from 18-65 yr and body weights from 43-143 kg. Stepwise, 
multiple-regression analysis was used to determine whether one or several
variables best predicted the resting metabolic rate (RMR) of the women. The RMR
and the thermic effect of food (TEF) were measured before and after the women
consumed a mixed breakfast meal. The results showed that the currently available 
tables and regression equations overestimate the RMR of healthy women by 7-14%.
Body weight was highly related to the RMR, and stepwise inclusions of various
variables did not improve predictions of RMR. The slopes of the regression lines 
for nonathletes and athletes were significantly different. Regression equations
for predicting RMR of women were developed: Nonathletes RMR = 795 + 7.18 kg WT;
Athletes RMR = 50.4 + 21.1 kg WT. The range of RMR per kilogram body weight was
wide for nonathletic, but narrow for athletic women. The metabolism of some lean 
and obese, nonathletic women was highly efficient, predisposing these women for
developing and maintaining body fat. The TEFs were indistinguishable between
nonathletic and athletic women, and formed a continuum from the lightest to the
heaviest woman.

PMID: 3728346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Head Neck Surg. 1986 Jul-Aug;8(6):463-5.

Giant acquired tracheoesophageal fistulas: strategy for successful management.

Freeman MS, Livingstone AS, Goodwin WJ Jr.

Giant tracheoesophageal fistulas (TEF) present a significant management problem
for the head and neck surgeon. Chronic aspiration and sepsis are associated
complications that occur in these patients, who are frequently already
debilitated from pre-existing medical calamities. The combination results in
prolonged morbidity and frequent mortality. Recently, we have managed two
patients with this difficult problem. The first patient was managed using
conventional methods well described in the literature with an unsuccessful
outcome. The second was managed differently using a two-stage approach. The
esophageal stream was first excluded from the respiratory system via a surgical
approach, which to the best of our knowledge has not been previously described in
the literature. After a period of convalescence, the patient's alimentary tract
is reconstituted with a gastric pull-up, reversed gastric tube, or colon
interposition. We propose this as an alternative method of management for TEF.

PMID: 3721889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Am J Clin Nutr. 1986 Jun;43(6):863-9.

Effect of energy and protein intake and exercise intensity on the thermic effect 
of food.

Belko AZ, Barbieri TF, Wong EC.

The effect of energy content and protein concentration of a test meal and
exercise intensity on the thermic effect of food (TEF) was examined. TEF was
measured in eight men in response to meals representing 15, 30, and 45% of daily 
energy requirement; protein concentrations of 15, 30, and 45% of energy of the
meal, and exercise intensities of 35, 50, and 65% of maximum capacity. In
response to energy content of the meals, total 3-h TEF (mean +/- SEM) 4.0 +/-
0.83, 9.7 +/- 1.15, and 10.8 +/- 0.79 1 O2 for the 15, 30, and 45% meals,
respectively, indicating a positive linear and a negative quadratic relationship.
Although the 15% protein meal resulted in the smallest TEF, 150-270 min after the
meal, total 5-h increase in oxygen consumption did not differ among the three
protein meals. Exercise intensity did not alter TEF. Energy content of the test
meal had the greatest effect on TEF.

PMID: 3717060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Pediatr Surg. 1986 Feb;21(2):164-6.

The use of pericardium for the management of recurrent tracheoesophageal fistula.

Botham MJ, Coran AG.

Correction of congenital esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF)
with either a primary or staged repair may result in recurrence of the TEF, most 
often at the site of esophageal anastomosis. Definitive operative repair of a
recurrent TEF involves isolation and resection of the fistula with closure of the
tracheal and esophageal defects. A technique is described, whereby mobilization
of a vascularized pedicle of pericardium allows further enhancement of the
standard repair of a recurrent TEF. The vascularized pedicle of pericardium
serves to isolate the tracheal and esophageal suture lines from each other, as
well as aid in sealing leaks at either or both suture lines. This may
dramatically reduce the incidence of second recurrences and lower the overall
operative mortality, reportedly as high as 59%.

PMID: 3950856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Physiol Behav. 1986;38(5):703-10.

Effects of exercise-training on the thermic effect of food and body fatness of
adult women.

Tagliaferro AR, Kertzer R, Davis JR, Janson C, Tse SK.

Resting metabolic rate (RMR), thermic effect of food (TEF), aerobic capacity
(VO2max), body fat, and food intake were measured in 10 healthy women before and 
after a 10 week graded exercise program of jogging. Pretraining TEF was a linear 
function of VO2max. Following exercise training, the women showed a significant
increase (20%) in VO2max and loss (10.4%) of body fat; body weight did not
change. Fat loss was directly related to changes in VO2max and RMR. The women
showed a wide variation of changes in RMR (-21 to +2%) and TEF (-32 to +66%) from
their pretraining levels. The changes in RMR and TEF were significantly
positively correlated with improvements in VO2max. Analyses using multiple
regression techniques, indicated that the changes in RMR and TEF accounted for
96.2% of the total variation in the changes of VO2max. Analyses of food intake
indicated that diet composition (but not caloric intake) was highly related to
the changes in VO2max, RMR, TEF and body fatness. Present results support further
our hypothesis, that VO2max is an important physiological index of dietary
thermogenesis and fat loss of individuals of normal body weight and fatness.
Possible nutritional and physiological factors that may explain the wide
variation in RMR and TEF of the women are discussed.

PMID: 3823186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ann Nutr Metab. 1986;30(6):386-92.

Influence of propranolol on the acute thermic effect of feeding in man.

Morgan JB, York DA, Wilkin TJ.

The influence of a beta-adrenergic blocker on the thermic effect of feeding (TEF)
a meal was investigated in 7 healthy male volunteers. Metabolic rate (MR) was
measured before and for 180 min after the consumption of 2.0 MJ 'Ensure' (Abbott 
Laboratories, Queensborough, Kent, UK); there were 14, 33 and 53% of energy from 
protein, fat and carbohydrate, respectively. On one occasion propranolol (ICI
plc, Macclesfield, Ches., UK) was administered intravenously at 0.1 mg/kg body
weight at meal feeding. On the second occasion a similar volume of saline was
infused. Serial blood samples (10 ml) were collected before and at 30-min
intervals for 180 min after meal feeding. Mean (+/- SD) resting MR was 104 (13)
and 116 (11) kJ/kg and MR increased by 12.8% and 10.8% after the test meal with
and without propranolol, respectively. These differences were not significant.
The postprandial changes in serum glucose and triiodothyronine were similar in
the two trials. The magnitude of the rise of serum insulin was similar in the two
trials, but the pattern was not. beta-Adrenergenic blockade resulted in an early 
peak in insulin output at 30 min compared with 60 min for the control trial. We
conclude that propranolol had no influence on TEF in this study.

PMID: 3538999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1986;55(5):486-92.

Thermogenic effect of food in physically well-trained elderly men.

Lundholm K, Holm G, Lindmark L, Larsson B, Sjöström L, Björntorp P.

Basal metabolic rate (BMR) and the thermogenic effect of food (TEF) after a
liquid mixed meal of 2092 kJ (500 kcal) were examined in physically well-trained,
elderly men in comparison with sedentary weight- and age-matched controls. BMR
tended to be higher and TEF was significantly higher in the physically
well-trained men than in the controls. No certain differences were found in
plasma thyroid hormones or catecholamines. BMR correlated with whole body
potassium while TEF did not. The tendency to elevated BMR in the well-trained men
might therefore be due to their greater muscle mass. The elevated TEF, however,
probably has other causes and might be associated with the elevated catecholamine
sensitivity associated with the physically trained condition.

PMID: 3095110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Pediatr Surg. 1985 Oct;20(5):511-4.

Morbid musculoskeletal sequelae of thoracotomy for tracheoesophageal fistula.

Jaureguizar E, Vazquez J, Murcia J, Diez Pardo JA.

The standard surgical approach for tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is right
dorso-lateral thoracotomy. The late musculoskeletal consequences of the operation
have been evaluated only rarely. Two hundred and seventy-seven patients with TEF 
were operated upon during the past 16 years, 117 of whom were available for long 
term (3 to 16 year) study. Twenty-nine of the patients had significant
musculoskeletal deformities: (1) Twenty-one patients (23.8%) had prominent
elevation of the right shoulder or "winged" scapula secondary to partial
paralysis of the latissimus dorsi muscle; (2) Eighteen (20%) had marked asymmetry
of the thoracic wall from atrophy of the serratus anterior muscle; (3) Nine (10%)
had fusion of the ribs, in one of whom major respiratory dysfunction was a
consequence; (4) Seven (7.8%) had severe thoracic scoliosis. The deformity was
not of sufficient severity to warrant surgical correction but all patients
required physiotherapy; (5) In two children (2.2%), fixation of the skin cicatrix
to the bony thorax limited the mobility of the ipsilateral shoulder; (6) And
finally, in three girls (3.3%), the thoracotomy scar disfigured the right breast 
leading to mammary maldevelopment in one adolescent. The latter child required
plastic release of the entrapped breast. The dorso-lateral thoracic incision for 
tracheoesophageal atresia may lead to significant musculoskeletal complications
and, since other alternatives are available, should be reevaluated as the
recommended surgical approach.

PMID: 4057018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Pediatr Surg. 1985 Aug;20(4):394-7.

Management of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula in the neonate
with severe respiratory distress syndrome.

Templeton JM Jr, Templeton JJ, Schnaufer L, Bishop HC, Ziegler MM, O'Neill JA Jr.

In a 10-year period, 22 neonates with esophageal atresia (EA) and
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) required high pressure ventilatory support soon
after birth because of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). Eleven of the 22 or
50% survived overall, but if the 5 patients who died before definitive surgical
repair could be attempted are excluded, 11 of 17 or 65% survived. More
importantly, 4 of 7 (57%) patients who had gastrostomy performed first survived
while 7 of 10 (70%) who had fistula ligation performed first survived. The
difficulties with intraoperative management of those who had gastrostomy
performed first were even more impressive. Our experience leads us to conclude
that patients with EA and TEF with severe RDS who require high pressure
ventilation preoperatively represent a group of patients who require special
consideration. The danger to such patients with increased pulmonary resistance is
not gastric distention but sudden loss of intragastric pressure. In the presence 
of poor lung compliance, the upper gastrointestinal tract functions in continuity
with the tracheobronchial tree. A sudden loss of intragastric pressure, as with
placement of a gastrostomy tube, results in an acute loss of effective
ventilating pressure. Resuscitation of such a patient is not possible until
leakage from the esophagus is controlled by ligation of the fistula or
transabdominal occlusion of the distal esophagus. Placement of a Fogarty catheter
into the fistula via a bronchoscope is effective but may not be feasible in every
case. Early thoracotomy and ligation of the fistula in patients with progressive 
RDS provides immediate improvement in ventilatory efficiency and relief of
gastric distention.

PMID: 3900328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Comput Assist Tomogr. 1985 Mar-Apr;9(2):302-4.

CT diagnosis of acquired tracheoesophageal fistula in adults.

Berkmen YM, Auh YH.

Two cases of acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) diagnosed by CT are
presented. In one case TEF was clinically suspected; in the other it was
incidentally discovered. Because of its noninvasive nature and because it can be 
performed without discomfort to the patient, CT should be a preferred diagnostic 
method for demonstration of TEF.

PMID: 3973154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Physiol. 1985 Mar;248(3 Pt 1):E370-4.

Thermic effect of food after ingested versus tube-delivered meals.

Hill JO, DiGirolamo M, Heymsfield SB.

We compared, in six subjects, the thermic effect of food (TEF) after the
ingestion of a test meal with that observed after the delivery of an equivalent
test meal directly into the stomach through a nasogastric tube. TEF was measured 
after each test meal (i.e., ingested or tube delivered) until postprandial
metabolic rate was not different from fasting metabolic rate (as measured at
approximately the same time of day on a previous day). TEF after the
tube-delivered meal was not significantly different in magnitude or duration from
TEF after the ingested meal. The two types of meals also resulted in similar
changes in respiratory quotient. These results suggest that the majority of TEF
arises after the food reaches the stomach and that very little of TEF is produced
by sensory factors or by the mechanical aspects of eating.

PMID: 3919595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int Surg. 1984 Oct-Dec;69(4):351-5.

Tracheoesophageal fistula as a result of bronchial artery infusion therapy.

Yiengpruksawan A, Watanabe G, Ono Y, Tsurumaru M, Akiyama H.

A case of acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is reported. The cause of TEF 
was thought to be multiple bronchial artery infusions of anticancer drugs which
presumably caused necrosis of the trachea and esophageal wall. Recurrent
aspiration pneumonia was the main finding. Definite diagnosis was made by
esophagoscopy and confirmed by bronchoscopy and chest CT scan. Successful
palliative treatment was achieved by bypassing the esophagus with the stomach via
the retrosternal route under epidural anesthesia.

PMID: 6526631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Pediatr Surg. 1984 Oct;19(5):550-4.

Surgical problems in patients with VATER-associated anomalies.

Muraji T, Mahour GH.

From 1960 through 1980, 14 patients with esophageal atresia (EA) with or without 
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) with two or more other associated anomalies of
VATER have been seen. Seventy percent of patients were preterm or low in birth
weight. In addition to the esophageal abnormality, vertebral anomalies were found
in 7 patients, anorectal anomalies in 11, limb anomalies in 9 and renal anomalies
in 9 patients. Three patients had associated duodenal atresia and 4 had cardiac
anomaly. Eight patients are dead, 5 are living, and 1 is lost to follow-up. Six
of the eight deaths occurred during 1960 to 1970. Preliminary gastrostomy was
done in all patients. Primary esophageal repair was carried out in 9 patients--5 
died and 4 survived. Three patients had delayed esophageal repair and two of
these patients survived. Cervical esophagostomy was done in one patient with EA
without TEF after unsuccessful repeated bouginage for elongation of the upper
esophageal pouch. Three of the survivors showed growth retardation--below 5th
percentile. Aggressive nutritional support and management of chronic problems
related to the anomalies are important.

PMID: 6502426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Metabolism. 1984 Aug;33(8):743-9.

Meal size and thermic response to food in male subjects as a function of maximum 
aerobic capacity.

Hill JO, Heymsfield SB, McMannus C 3rd, DiGirolamo M.

The relationship between size of a mixed, liquid meal and the thermic effect of
food (TEF) was studied in two groups of nonobese male subjects differing in
maximum aerobic capacity (VO2 max). A design using repeated measures was chosen
in which each subject received each meal (water, 500 kcal, 1000 kcal, 1500 kcal) 
on a different morning. TEF was measured by indirect calorimetry for three hours 
following each meal and was found to increase systematically, in a nonlinear
fashion, as meal size was increased. Subjects with a high VO2 max responded to
the two higher calorie meals with a greater TEF than did subjects with a low VO2 
max. They also showed a greater increase in TEF for any given increase in meal
size. This study establishes a precise relationship between meal size and the
thermic effect of food. It also identifies an important variable, VO2 max, in
determination of the individual thermic response to food. These findings suggest 
that individuals with a high VO2 max (such as aerobically trained athletes) show 
a greater caloric expenditure after eating, particularly after a large meal, than
do individuals with a low VO2 max. A high thermic response to food could be
beneficial in body weight homeostasis.

PMID: 6748948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Physiol Behav. 1984 Aug;33(2):321-8.

Dietary obesity and exercise in young rats.

Hill JO, Davis JR, Tagliaferro AR, Stewart J.

Food intake, body weight, body composition, resting metabolic rate (RMR) and the 
thermic effect of food (TEF) were measured in young rats, some of which were fed 
a high energy (HE) diet and some of which were forced to swim daily. In general, 
high energy feeding as compared to chow feeding, resulted in higher food intake, 
higher body weight, higher body fat, and a slightly lower TEF. In many cases,
however, the specific effects varied with the age and sex of the animals. Animals
forced to swim weighed less; were leaner; and had higher RMR and TEF than
sedentary animals. The effects of exercise on energy balance were greatest in
males, while the effects of the high energy diet on energy balance were greatest 
in females. All HE-fed rats were switched to lab chow at 104 days of age. Body
weights of sedentary HE-fed rats returned to control levels but those of
exercised HE-fed rats did not. Both HE-fed groups remained fatter than chow-fed
controls, even two months after the diet switch.

PMID: 6505071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Pediatr Surg. 1984 Aug;19(4):414-6.

Management of obstructive tracheal disease in children.

Grillo HC, Zannini P.

Fifty-two patients from seven weeks to 15 years of age were treated for
congenital (six patients) or acquired (46 patients) tracheal lesions. Twenty
underwent tracheal resection and reconstruction: congenital stenosis 3 (5 to 9
yr), postintubation stenosis 9 (11 to 15 yr), TEF 1 (15 yr), posttraumatic 2 (9
to 15 yr) idiopathic 1 (14 yr) and primary tumors 4 (8 to 15 yr). There were two 
carinal resections. There were two deaths and two postoperative stenoses, one of 
which was corrected later, giving 17 final good results. Thirty-two patients were
treated nonoperatively.

PMID: 6481586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Pediatr Surg. 1984 Jun;19(3):243-7.

Delayed primary anastomosis in poor-risk patients with esophageal atresia
associated with tracheoesophageal fistula.

Ito T, Sugito T, Nagaya M.

Twelve patients with esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) who 
were treated with delayed primary anastomosis were reviewed. All patients except 
two were classified as Waterston's group C, for whom multiple staged procedures
usually can be considered. Gastrostomy for decompression was performed as the
initial operation shortly after admission and adequate nutritional support was
provided by a transpyloric or jejunostomy tube. Extrapleural division of the TEF 
and esophagoesophagostomy were delayed until these operations were considered
safe to perform. Delayed primary anastomosis was done at varying ages from the
11th day of life to the 150th day. Eleven patients survived. It is concluded that
the therapeutic program consisting of gastrostomy, enteral feeding and delayed
division of TEF and esophagoesophagostomy is useful in treating poor-risk
patients and should replace multiple staged procedures.

PMID: 6431071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Cancer. 1984 May 15;33(5):563-7.

Tissue type plasminogen activator, but not urokinase, exerts
transformation-enhancing activity.

De Petro G, Vartio T, Salonen EM, Vaheri A, Barlati S.

Previous studies have established that plasma cryoprecipitates of tumor patients,
culture media of transformed cells and defined proteolytic fragments of
fibronectin enhance the morphological cell transformation ( TEF activity) in
cultures of chicken embryo fibroblasts infected with temperature-sensitive
mutants of Rous sarcoma virus. We now report that purified human tissue type
plasminogen activator (t-PA), but not urokinase (u-PA), has a similar TEF
activity, at doses as low as 2 ng/ml (30 pM). Specific antibodies effectively
neutralized the activity. No significant contamination (less than or equal to 1%)
between the preparations of t-PA and fibronectin (FN) or its fragments ( FNdp )
was detected. The results suggest that t-PA may have a direct role in the process
of morphological cell transformation in vitro.

PMID: 6539304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Ann Surg. 1984 May;199(5):532-7.

Esophageal atresia. Prognostic factors and contribution of preoperative
telescopic endoscopy.

Filston HC, Rankin JS, Grimm JK.

In recent years, the surgical correction of esophageal atresia with distal
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) has become increasingly successful. However,
there remains a group of high-risk patients with specific anatomical
abnormalities in whom the mortality remains appreciable. These associated
disorders include cardiac, renal, and chromosomal anomalies as well as severe
respiratory distress syndrome. These factors, rather than low birth weight or
early gestational age, are primarily responsible for surgical mortality.
Preoperative telescopic bronchoscopy has been a useful adjuvant confirming the
diagnosis, identifying unusual variants, and permitting the proper anatomic
placement of the endotracheal tube. A Fogarty balloon catheter can be passed
bronchoscopically into the distal TEF in patients with severe respiratory
distress syndrome to occlude the fistula and facilitate effective positive
pressure ventilation. Thirty-two patients were treated for esophageal atresia
among whom 28 had esophageal atresia with distal TEF, three had esophageal
atresia alone, and one had esophageal atresia with proximal TEF. The higher-risk 
group comprised those with severe respiratory insufficiency as evidenced by a
room air paO2 of less than 60 mmHg; this group accounted for nine of the ten
deaths in the total series. There was one late death following surgical
correction. In summary, in the absence of severe respiratory insufficiency or
associated life-threatening congenital anomalies, the results of surgical
correction for esophageal atresia are remarkably good and survival in this group 
approximates 100%.

PMCID: PMC1353484
PMID: 6721602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Hum Genet. 1984;66(2-3):260-6.

Familial congenital esophageal atresia. Personal case report and review of the
literature.

Van Staey M, De Bie S, Matton MT, De Roose J.

Esophageal atresia with or without tracheoesophageal fistula (EA +/- TEF) usually
occurs sporadically either as an isolated malformation or in conjunction with
other congenital anomalies. Seventy-six familial cases are recorded in the
literature. Two personal cases are additionally reported. An overview of the 33
pedigrees with familial occurrence of EA is presented. All available data of
relevance for genetic analysis are compiled in eight tables. Attention is given
to possible heterogeneity between sporadic and familial and between isolated and 
associated EA. Guidelines for genetic counseling are presented. With exception of
the cases where EA is part of a chromosomal or of a known monogenic or
teratogenic syndrome, the recurrence risks fit into a multifactorial scheme.

PMID: 6714984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Radiat Res. 1984 Jan;97(1):108-31.

Hyperthermic killing and hyperthermic radiosensitization in Chinese hamster ovary
cells: effects of pH and thermal tolerance.

Holahan EV, Highfield DP, Holahan PK, Dewey WC.

To quantitatively relate heat killing and heat radiosensitization, asynchronous
or G1 Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells at pH 7.1 or 6.75 were heated and/or
X-irradiated 10 min later. Since no progression of G1 cells into S phase occurred
during the heat and radiation treatments, cell cycle artifacts were minimized.
However, results obtained for asynchronous and G1 cells were similar.
Hyperthermic radiosensitization was expressed as the thermal enhancement factor
(TEF), defined as the ratio of the D0 of the radiation survival curve to that of 
the D0 of the radiation survival curve for heat plus radiation. The TEF increased
continuously with increased heat killing at 45.5 degrees C, and for a given
amount of heat killing, the amount of heat radiosensitization was the same for
both pH's. When cells were heated chronically at 42.4 degrees C at pH 7.4, the
TEF increased initially to 2.0-2.5 and then returned to near 1.0 during continued
heating as thermal tolerance developed for both heat killing and heat
radiosensitization. However, the shoulder (Dq) of the radiation survival curve
for heat plus radiation did not manifest thermal tolerance; i.e., it decreased
continuously with increased heat killing, independent of temperature, pH, or the 
development of thermotolerance. These results suggest that heat killing and heat 
radiosensitization have a target(s) in common (TEF results), along with either a 
different target(s) or a difference in the manifestation of heat damage (Dq
results). For clinical considerations, the interaction between heat and radiation
was expressed as (1) the thermal enhancement ratio (TER), which is the dose of X 
rays alone divided by the dose of X rays combined with heat to obtain an
isosurvival, e.g., 10(-4), and (2) the thermal gain factor (TGF), the ratio of
the TER at pH 6.75 to the TER at pH 7.4. Since low pH reduced the rate of
development of thermal tolerance during heating at low temperatures, low pH
enhanced heat killing more at 42-42.5 degrees C than at 45.5 degrees C where
thermal tolerance did not develop. Therefore, the increase in the TGF after
chronic heating at 42-42.5 degrees C was greater than after acute heating at 45.5
degrees C, due primarily to the increase in heat killing causing an even greater 
increase in heat radiosensitization. These findings agree with animal experiments
suggesting that in the clinic, a therapeutic gain for tumor cells at low pH may
be greater for temperatures of 42-42.5 degrees C than of 45.5 degrees C.

PMID: 6695037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Ethiop Med J. 1984 Jan;22(1):45-8.

The effect of fermentation on the iron, phosphorus and zinc content of tef
(Eragrostis tef).

Ramachandran K, Bolodia G.

PMID: 6690303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Obes. 1984;8(6):629-40.

Weight-reducing diets, the thermic effect of feeding and energy balance in young 
women.

Morgan JB.

Six healthy women participated in a longitudinal study. In session one baseline
data collection was made: (1) a record of customary food intake by the weighed
inventory method; (2) the measurement of resting metabolic rate (RMR) and the
thermic effect of feeding (TEF) a meal (2.09 MJ Ensure) together with the
collection of blood samples; (3) the measurement of weight, height and assessment
of body composition. On three subsequent occasions similar data were collected
following periods of energy intake restriction, or free diet. Group mean (range) 
energy intake for session one (7 days) was 8.97 MJ (6.93-12.24); for session two 
(14 days) was 4.06 MJ (3.61-4.66); for session three (4 days) 1.75 MJ
(1.15-2.20). No record was made for session four (free diet for 21 days).
Subjects were 98-118 percent of ideal body weight at the study onset. All lost
weight in sessions two and three, mean (range) 2.4 kg (1.0-3.7) and 1.4 kg
(0.7-2.6) respectively. A mean of 2.2 kg (1.3-2.7) was gained in session four.
Mean RMR was 122 kJ per 30 min in session one and fell by 12 percent of the mean 
baseline value in session two. Thereafter values returned to basal levels. TEF in
session one increased mean (range) 30 percent (13-45) over RMR. There were no
changes in session two. In session three TEF was 17 percent (10-28) and similar
results were recorded in session four. The study suggests that TEF can be
sensitive to alterations in energy intake and that this adaptive mechanism is
highly variable among individuals. This has implications for the prediction of
changes in body weight in response to varying levels of food intake.

PMID: 6398317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Acta Derm Venereol. 1984;64(1):35-40.

Quantification of acrosclerosis: measurement of skin thickness and skin-phalanx
distance in females with 15 MHz pulsed ultrasound.

Serup J.

The skin thickness of the extensor and flexor aspects of the forearm (TEF, TFF), 
and the skin-phalanx distance over the middle and proximal phalanges (DMP, DPP)
were measured with a 15 MHz ultrasound (A-scan) apparatus. Twenty-two females
with systemic sclerosis (acrosclerotic type) and 22 healthy females matched for
age were studied. DMP, DPP, TEF and TFF measurements were all increased in
systemic sclerosis (p less than 0.001, p less than 0.001, p less than 0.01, p
less than 0.02). Standards for normal skin-phalanx distance and skin thickness in
females were defined (mean +/- SD). DMP and DPP were not correlated to age in the
controls. TEF and FEF decreased slightly with age, 0.078 and 0.062 mm/10 years of
life respectively. DMP was increased in 18 (82%), DPP in 13 (59%), TEF in 7 (32%)
and TFF in 5 (23%) patients with systemic sclerosis, as compared with standards
defined. Noninvasive measurement of skin-phalanx distance of the digits and skin 
thickness of the forearm with high-frequency ultrasound is concluded to be proper
for the diagnosis of acrosclerosis and for quantification of sclerodermatous skin
changes during medical treatment.

PMID: 6203279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Radiat Res. 1983 Nov;96(2):359-66.

The effect of ultrasound-induced hyperthermia and X irradiation on skin.

Baker D, Constable W, Sager H, Elkon D.

Local hyperthermia for up to 60 min at 42.5-43.0 degrees C was induced in the
skin of the mouse leg using ultrasound (780 kHz, 0.5-2.0 W/cm2). X radiation at
doses of 10 to 30 Gy was delivered either before, during, or after the
hyperthermia and the skin reactions were followed for 50 days. The thermal
enhancement factor (TEF) was estimated using three criteria: (1) the maximum skin
reaction; (2) the skin reaction integrated over the 50-day experimental period;
(3) the skin reaction integrated over Days 8 to 32, which have a larger estimate.
The TEF was independent of the sequence of heat and X radiation for intervals up 
to 1 hr. For 1 hr of hyperthermia, the TEF as measured by the maximum skin
reaction did not change with radiation doses of 10 to 20 Gy. When the skin
reaction integrated over 50 days or Days 8 to 32 was used as the criterion of
response, the TEF varied with radiation dose from 4.7 at 10 Gy to 1.6 at 20 Gy.
For a fixed radiation dose of 20 Gy, the TEF was not increased significantly by
extending the duration of the hyperthermia from 30 to 60 min. The TEF for a
radiation dose of 20 Gy delivered in three fractions over 5 days was smaller than
that for a single 10-Gy fraction.

PMID: 6647764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 1983 Aug;9(8):1125-34.

Tumor control and therapeutic gain with different schedules of combined
radiotherapy and local external hyperthermia in human cancer.

Arcangeli G, Cividalli A, Nervi C, Creton G, Lovisolo G, Mauro F.

Tumor control and therapeutic gain have been evaluated in a series of studies on 
patients with multiple lesions employing different protocols of combined
radiotherapy (RT) and local external hyperthermia (HT). Tumor response has been
evaluated during a follow-up ranging 6 to 18 months. Therapeutic enhancement
factor (TEF) was defined as the ratio of thermal enhancement (TE) of tumors to TE
of skin, where TE was clinically evaluated as the ratio of percent response
(i.e., complete tumor clearance and moist desquamation, respectively) after
combined modality to percent response after RT alone. Local tumor control was
constantly better in lesions treated with any combined modalities in comparison
with RT alone. The use of high RT dose per fraction appeared to increase tumor
control only in the combined modalities groups, the immediate (so called
"simultaneous") schedule (HT at 42.5 degrees C/45 min, applied immediately after 
each RT fraction, twice a week) being more effective than the delayed (so called 
"sequential") treatment (HT at 42.5 degrees C/45 min, delivered 4 h after each RT
fraction, twice a week). The combination of high RT dose per fraction with high
temperature HT (45 degrees C for 30 min) achieved the best tumor control. No
increased radiation skin reaction was observed when a conventional fraction size 
of RT was used (3 daily fractions of 1.5-2 Gy, 4 h interval between fractions) in
association with HT (42.5 degrees C/45 min, every other day, immediately after
the second daily RT fraction). A remarkable enhancement of skin reaction was
observed, however, when using high RT doses per fraction in association with 42.5
degrees C HT, especially with the immediate treatment schedule. No enhancement of
skin reaction was obtained after high RT doses per fractions and 45 degrees C HT 
because an active skin cooling by means of circulating cold water was used in
these cases. Consequently, a good TEF (1.58) was obtained when conventional RT
doses per fraction were used in association with 42.5 degrees C HT. TEF values of
1.40 and 1.15 were observed when high RT doses per fraction were employed in
association with the delayed and immediate 42.5 degrees C HT, respectively. HT at
45 degrees C can be safely employed only when tumors can be heated selectively or
at least preferentially in comparison with normal tissue; in the lesions treated 
with such a schedule a TEF of 2.10 was obtained.

PMID: 6409852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Physiol Behav. 1983 Jul;31(1):133-5.

Effects of diet and exercise training on thermogenesis in adult female rats.

Hill JO, Davis JR, Tagliaferro AR.

The effects of a cafeteria diet on body weight gain, food intake, resting
metabolic rate (RMR) and the thermic effect of food (TEF) were compared in female
Charles River albino rats that were either sedentary or exercise-trained. The
food intakes of the exercise-trained rats on the cafeteria diet were increased to
the same degree as those of the sedentary rats, however, they gained less body
weight and body fat than sedentary controls. The exercise training increased RMR 
independent of diet, but differentially increased TEF in rats given the cafeteria
diet. Conversely, sedentary rats on the cafeteria diet had significantly lower
RMR, but their TEF were not different from control animals on lab chow. Thus, in 
addition to the direct cost of the exercise, training increased thermogenesis
(RMR and TEF) which also helped prevent the dietary obesity which normally occurs
with cafeteria diets.

PMID: 6634973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1983 Apr;85(4):492-8.

Acquired nonmalignant tracheoesophageal fistula.

Hilgenberg AD, Grillo HC.

Acquired tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) caused by cuffed tracheal tubes,
surgical trauma, and blunt injuries is an unusual and serious problem. Several
differing approaches to management have been proposed. We have repaired such
fistulas in 20 patients; 14 of them were related to tracheal intubation, three to
blunt trauma, two followed anterior cervical spine fusions, and one resulted from
a foreign body. Fistula closure on ventilator-dependent patients was usually
delayed until they were weaned from respiratory support. Four patients had
esophageal diversion before repair of their fistulas. There was sufficient
tracheal damage to require resection and end-to-end anastomosis in 13 patients.
The esophageal defect was closed directly in 16 patients, and end-to-end
reconstruction of the esophagus was accomplished in four. There were two deaths, 
and one fistula recurrence required reoperation. These results support our
recommendations to delay fistula closure in most ventilator patients, to use
esophageal diversion selectively, to employ tracheal resection when there is
evidence of extensive damage, and to directly repair the esophagus.

PMID: 6834870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Laryngoscope. 1983 Mar;93(3):364-9.

Cervical tracheoesophageal fistula.

Green RP, Biller HF, Sicular A, Wright M.

Four unusual cases of cervical tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) are presented. The
incidence, diagnosis and treatment of cervical TEF are discussed. Surgically, if 
the location is above the level of T2 a cervical approach may be utilized. The
cases included a cervical "H" type TEF occurring in an adult. Congenital "H" type
TEFs frequently occur in the neck. An adult presenting with a cervical "H" type
TEF, having as an infant undergone repair of a thoracic TEF, is unique. Two layer
closure of both trachea and esophagus with strap muscle interposition is
preferred. The other cases include a TEF secondary to metastatic breast
carcinoma, one associated with a stomal recurrence, and an acquired TEF following
laryngectomy. Metastatic breast carcinoma resulting in a TEF is reported for the 
first time. Malignant TEF's are usually secondary to carcinoma of the esophagus, 
lung, or thyroid. Best palliation is achieved either by esophageal intubation, by
colon bypass, or by gastric pull-up with esophageal exclusion. Stomal recurrence 
with TEF following laryngectomy is treated with one-stage resection and
reconstruction with a pectoralis major myocutaneous flap and gastric pull-up. A
patient 5 years post-laryngectomy illustrates an acquired non-malignant cervical 
TEF, a category which includes fistulas due to trauma, tracheotomy, or
endotracheal tubes, instrumentation, and inflammatory disease. Prompt surgical
closure as in congenital cases is the treatment of choice although select cases
require medical therapy.

PMID: 6834962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1983 Feb;85(2):229-36.

Correction of esophageal atresia with distal tracheoesophageal fistula.

Santos AD, Thompson TR, Johnson DE, Foker JE.

Correction of the full spectrum of esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) remains controversial. Circular myotomy and other lengthening
procedures have shown promise to reduce tension when a relatively wide gap exists
between esophageal segments; nevertheless a relatively high complication rate
persists. We believe anastomotic tension is commonly found with repair of this
anomaly. Therefore, the construction of the anastomosis will be a primary
determinant of success. Twenty-four infants with TEF were admitted, 12 (50%)
weighing 2.5 kg, nine (37%) 1.8 to 2.5 kg, and three (13%) 1.8 kg. All underwent 
gastrostomy and end-to-end single-layer anastomosis. Gaps of up to 4.5 cm were
encountered, and in one case a cervical incision was necessary for mobilization
of the upper pouch. For eight patients (33%) the gap was at least 2.5 cm and
significant anastomotic tension was generated. For the series, there were no
anastomotic leaks (all confirmed by barium swallow), reoperations, or surgical
complications (there were two late, unrelated deaths). Prophylactic dilation was 
routinely performed 6 weeks and 3 months postoperatively. Subsequently, seven of 
the 24 (29%) required additional (one to five) dilatations but are now
asymptomatic at least 2 years later. Follow-up for the entire series is 5 months 
to 5 years. Three infants (13%) required fundoplication for reflux without
stricture and two infants (8%) an aortopexy. For successful esophageal
anastomosis we consider the following technical points important: (1) no-touch
technique to minimize tissue damage, (2) generous (5 to 7 mm) full-thickness
suture depth, (3) fine (6/0) monofilament suture to reduce tissue reactivity, and
(4) in cases of significant tension, the sutures are preplaced and used to
provide traction to eliminate tension during tying. Tension is often unavoidable 
in TEF, yet a carefully constructed anastomosis will withstand this stress. This 
approach provides results at least as satisfactory as the reported experience
with a variety of techniques.

PMID: 6823140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Ann Nutr Metab. 1983;27(1):71-7.

Thermic effect of feeding in relation to energy balance in elderly men.

Morgan JB, York DA.

Resting metabolic rate (RMR) and the thermic effect of feeding (TEF) two meals of
differing energy densities were measured in 8 healthy elderly men aged 63-74
years. Similar measurements were made on 8 healthy young men aged 22-28 years.
TEF was related to the meal size in both groups. Metabolic rate increased by 20.7
and 27.9% in the elderly group (EG) and 25.8 and 37.7% in the control group (CG) 
in response to the 2.0-and 4.0-MJ meals, respectively. Although the EG were
fatter than the CG, they consumed a smaller daily food intake: we suggest that
the decline in RMR and TEF as indicated by the study would explain his paradox.

PMID: 6830144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Pediatr Surg. 1982 Apr;17(2):149-51.

The Fogarty balloon catheter as an aid to management of the infant with
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula complicated by severe RDS or
pneumonia.

Filston HC, Chitwood WR Jr, Schkolne B, Blackmon LR.

Early ventilatory failure in an infant with EA/TEF may prove difficult to manage 
because of the low resistance "vent" provided by the TEF. In this Case Report
Fogarty balloon occlusion of the vent was possible and aided management of the
patient who was not a candidate for primary repair of the anomaly.

PMID: 7077495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Crit Care Med. 1982 Mar;10(3):155-8.

Long-term administration of prostaglandin E1: report of two cases with tetralogy 
of Fallot and esophageal atresia.

Abe K, Shimada Y, Takezawa J, Oka N, Yoshiya I.

The authors continuously administered prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) iv to 2 infants
with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and esophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal
fistula (TEF) for more than 30 days, and observed side effects which could be
attributed to the long-term administration of PGE1. After division of the TEF and
anastomosis of the esophagus, leakage from the anastomosis developed in both
cases. Because of the infectious foci in the thorax, Blalock's procedure was
postponed and PGE1 was continued for 49 and 37 days. The authors believe
radiographs of long bones and ribs demonstrated cortical hyperosteosis in both
cases. Bone abnormalities became apparent approximately 30 days after the start
of PGE1 and were associated with increases in serum alkaline phosphatase (peak
value of about 2000 IU/L). Roentgenographic changes reverted toward normal and
alkaline phosphatase values decreased after the cessation of PGE1 in both cases.

PMID: 7199417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Teratology. 1982 Feb;25(1):53-9.

An epidemiologic study of tracheoesophageal fistula and esophageal atresia in
North Carolina.

Ozimek CD, Grimson RC, Aylsworth AS.

Two hundred and eighty-five cases of TEF/EA occurring in North Carolina from
1952-1978 were reviewed. Except for a greater incidence of low-birth-weight
infants and hydramnios during pregnancy, the cases appeared to be representative 
of the population. Clustering of cases over time was statistically confirmed. The
cyclic variation suggested an association with an infectious agent. The variation
of reported infectious hepatitis cases during the period of this study resembled 
the variation of TEF/EA cases that had no other documented congenital
malformations.

PMID: 7038967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Beitr Trop Landwirtsch Veterinarmed. 1982;20(2):125-9.

[1st results of weed control in teff, Eragrostis tef (Zucc.) Trott].

[Article in German]

Pohlan J.

PMID: 7126131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1981 Aug;78(8):4965-9.

Transformation-enhancing activity of gelatin-binding fragments of fibronectin.

De Petro G, Barlati S, Vartio T, Vaheri A.

Studies have established that cryoprecipitates of the plasma of tumor patients
contain a biological activity enhancing morphological cell transformation
(transformation-enhancing factor; TEF) in cultures of chicken embryo fibroblasts 
infected with temperature-sensitive mutants of Rous sarcoma virus. We report here
that similar TEF activity is effected by defined fragments of human plasma
fibronectin obtained by limited digestion with major humoral or tissue
proteinases. TEF activity was obtained from plasminolytic fragments of
fibronectin and from cathepsin G-treated fibronectin. No activity was recorded
from intact dimeric fibronectin or its reduced and alkylated subunits, from
fibrinogen or its plasminolytic fragments, or from plasmin (EC 3.4.21.7) or
cathepsin G (EC 3.4.21.20) treated or untreated with proteinase inhibitors. All
of the TEF activity of the proteolytic fragments of fibronectin was located on
the gelatin-binding peptides. The minimum effective doses in the TEF assay were
750 ng/ml of plasmin-treated fibronectin, 100 ng/ml of gelatin-binding
plasminolytic fibronectin (enriched in Mr 180,000--190,000 polypeptides), and 100
ng/ml of gelatin-binding fragments of cathepsin G-treated fibronectin (enriched
in a Mr 30,000 fragment). TEF activity of proteinase-treated fibronectin was
inhibited by gelatin and by intact dimeric fibronectin. The potent TEF activity
of proteolytic fragments of fibronectin raises the possibility that they may have
a role in malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC320310
PMID: 6458038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1981 Mar;81(3):358-63.

Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula. Review of thirteen years'
experience.

Hicks LM, Mansfield PB.

A review of the treatment of esophageal atresia (EA) was undertaken to examine
current methods of management and to ascertain the influence of prematurity and
associated medical defects on survival. One hundred patients with EA presented at
The Children's Orthopedic Hospital and Medical Center, Seattle, between 1967 and 
1979. Eighty-two percent had a blind proximal esophageal pouch and distal
tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). Ninety-two patients were initially treated by
gastrostomy. Fifty-nine patients were born at term and had no major medical
problems. They underwent either primary or delayed (up to 1 week) repair of the
esophagus. The survival rate was 93% and surgical mortality was 3%. Twenty-two
patients born prematurely or having major medical problems underwent a staged
repair. Survival in the staged group was 55% with a surgical mortality of 27%.
Overall survival for the entire series was 79% (79/100). The use of air rather
than contrast material for the radiographic diagnosis of EA was associated with
fewer subsequent pulmonary abnormalities. There was an 18% incidence of minor
anastomotic leaks, regardless of technique. The route of approach (transpleural, 
retropleural) did not influence mortality or morbidity in this series. There were
more than three times as many significant strictures among patients who had
double-layer anastomoses (18%) as among those who had single-layer repairs (5%). 
The surgical treatment of infants with EA has reached a level in which associated
illness, anomalies, or prematurity are now the most significant determinants of
survival.

PMID: 7007742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Int J Cancer. 1980 Jun 15;25(6):727-34.

Potential diagnostic and prognostic significance of the transformation-enhancing 
factor(s) in the plasma cryoprecipitate of tumor patients.

Mignatti P(1), Ascari E, Barlati S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Genetica Biochimica ed Evoluzionistica del CNR, and Istituto di
Genetica, University of Pavia, 27100 Pavia, Italy.

A biological activity which enhances cell transformation (TEF) in Rous sarcoma
virus temperature-sensitive mutant-infected cultures has been evidenced in the
plasma cryoprecipitate from patients affected with different types of neoplastic 
disease. In the present paper we report data on the analysis of TEF activity in
the plasma cryoprecipitates from leukemic and tumor patients tested either before
or during specific antineoplastic treatments. The screening of 57 cases of
different neoplastic diseases and of 57 controls, healthy subjects or patients
affected with other non-neoplastic diseases indicates that TEF activity is
generally related to the presence of neoplasia. Furthermore, a follow-up of
patients from the onset of the disease through its evolution during therapy
suggests that variations of TEF activity in the plasma cryoprecipitate correlate 
well with the clinical and pathological conditions, thus indicating the TEF as a 
potential marker for monitoring cancer patients.

PMID: 14768701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 1980 Jun;2(2):133-8.

Peroral endoscopy in neonates.

Schild JA, Holinger LD.

A study was made of 100 neonates examined by 171 procedures in a 5 year period.
Thirty-six patients had vocal cord palsies: unilateral, bilateral, complete or
incomplete. Twenty-four infants had laryngomalacia of which 5 had concomitant
problems of multiple congenital anomalies or palsies of varying severity.
Laryngeal stenosis was encountered in 13 patients. Four of these were congenital,
and two required tracheotomy; 8 of the 9 patients with acquired stenosis required
tracheotomy. Nine infants had cardiovascular anomalies. Three were seen following
TEF repair. Esophageal foreign bodies (endotracheal tube) were removed from two
infants. Of the 28 neonates who had tracheotomies, 13 had vocal cord palsies, 10 
had laryngeal stenosis and 8 had congenital cardiovascular disease. In the 171
procedures, anesthesia was used 18 times for tracheotomy and 7 times for repeated
procedures. There were 3 deaths in this series, all related to the underlying
disease. This study indicates that endoscopic examinations of the neonate can be 
accomplished safely. It further indicates the diverse diseases for which
endoscopy is indicated. General anesthesia is not mandatory for such
examinations.

PMID: 7188058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Ethiop Med J. 1980 Apr;18(2):45-52.

Critical study of the iron content of TEF (Eragrostis tef).

Besrat A, Admasu A, Ogbai M.

PMID: 7418700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1979 Oct;78(4):583-8.

Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula without esophageal atresia.

LaSalle AJ, Andrassy RJ, Ver Steeg K, Ratner I.

Congenital tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) without esophageal atresia, commonly
referred to as H-type fistula, comprises only 4.2% of all TEF's. Four infants
with this entity were surgically treated at Santa Rosa Children's Hospital during
the period of 1974 to 1977, and their diagnosis, surgical management, and
hospital course are described in detail. H-type TEF is characterized by a
clinical triad consisting of paroxysms of coughing precipitated by feeding,
gaseous distention of the gastrointestinal tract, and pneumonitis. Demonstration 
of H-type TEF can be difficult and may be accomplished only by repeated
examinations. The esophagogram using cinefluoroscopy and image intensification is
the primary diagnostic technique utilized. If this is nondiagnostic, then
tracheobronchoscopy should be performed in conjunction with ancillary techniques 
which improve endoscopic yield. Surgical correction can be accomplished through a
cervical approach in 80% of cases. Preoperatival treatment of H-type TEF is
dependent upon a high index of suspicion, an aggressive diagnostic approach, and 
prompt surgical correction. Our series of patients demonstrates that early
diagnosis is feasible.

PMID: 480968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1979 Feb;62(2):323-8.

Enhanced oncornavirus expression in Marek's disease tumors from
specific-pathogen-free chickens.

Campbell WF, Frankel JW.

An oncornavirus was recovered from cell cultures of kidney tumors from
specific-pathogen-free chickens inoculated with Marek's disease herpesvirus
(MDHV). The MDHV inoculum was free of infectious avian leukosis virus (ALV).
Direct examination of a variety of tissues from MDHV-inoculated chickens
demonstrated increased levels of ALV-specific RNA compared to tissues from
diluent-inoculated (control) chickens. DNA from cultured kidney tumor cells
annealed to an ALV complementary DNA probe at the same rate and exhibited the
same extent of homology as DNA from cultured control kidney cells. This finding
indicated the absence of exogenous ALV proviral sequences. As with vertically
transmitted endogenous ALV of subgroup E, the oncornavirus recovered from kidney 
tumor cell cultures failed to replicate in chicken embryo fibroblast (CEF)
cultures of the C/E phenotype, but did replicate in turkey embryo fibroblasts
(TEF), which are permissive for replication of endogenous ALV of subgroup E.
These oncornavirus particles served as a helper virus to form Rous sarcoma virus 
pseudotypes, which produced foci in TEF cultures but not in CEF cultures of the
C/E phenotype. Whether enhanced expression of endogenous oncornavirus contributes
to MDHV-induced tumorigenesis is not known.

PMID: 216833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Arch Surg. 1979 Jan;114(1):48-51.

Gastroesophageal fundoplication for reflux following repair of esophageal
atresia. Experience with nine patients.

Fonkalsrud EW.

Esophageal dysmotility and gastroesophageal reflux (GER) are common sequelae that
may persist for many years in infants and children who have undergone repair of
esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). The slow clearance of
refluxed gastric contents appears to cause a high incidence of aspiration, a high
incidence of esophageal anastomotic stricture or leak, and a slow response to
dilation of esophageal anastomotic strictures. Nissen transabdominal
gastroesophageal fundoplication was performed in nine children (seven who were
less than 4 months of age) subsequent to repair of esophageal atresia because of 
recurrent severe symptoms due to regurgitation. On the basis of this favorable
experience with nine infants and children, we believe that an aggressive surgical
approach should be taken in the management of symptomatic GER in patients at a
young age following repair of esophageal atresia and TEF who fail to respond to
an adequate trial of medical treatment.

PMID: 758877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Surgery. 1978 Sep;84(3):329-34.

Surgical management of tracheosophageal fistula complicating caustic ingestion.

Burrington JD, Raffensperger JG.

This report outlines principles of management for extensive corrosive esophageal 
burns in children complicated by formation of a tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF). 
Direct operative attack on the fistula usually is unsuccessful, since the
tracheal tissues are so damaged that they will not hold sutures. On the basis of 
experiences with six children, we suggest the following plan of management: (1)
early investigation of suspected TEF with thin barium or Dionosil; (2) early
tracheostomy using a short, plastic tube; (3) end cervical esophagostomy with
closure of the distal stump of the cervical esophagus; (4) gastrotomy; (5)
complete disconnection of the intra-abdominal esophagus from the stomach. This
can be completed in a single operation and leaves the thoracic esophagus
containing the fistula completely isolated so that the trachea is protected from 
contamination by saliva and gastric juice. The esophageal mucosa in all cases has
been destroyed so extensively by the corrosive material that the esophagus heals 
as a band of muscle and scar. If protected from continuous contamination by
saliva, the trachea heals itself with little long-term defect. The esophagus is
replaced with colon or a gastric tube 6 to 12 months later when the child is in
good health. All four children treated by this regimen have survived and are able
to eat normally.

PMID: 684624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Pediatr Surg. 1978 Jun;13(3):269-73.

Esophageal atresia with double tracheoesophageal fistula.

Goodwin CD, Ashcraft KW, Holder TM, Johnson FR, Amoury RA.

Ninety cases of esophageal atresia (EA) with double tracheoesophageal fistula
(TEF) from the literature and 4 new cases are examined. The incidence may be more
common than is generally recognized with incidences up to 5.3% reported. The
pre-, intra-, and postoperative diagnosis may be difficult, and half have been
missed initially with almost half of these being first recognized at autopsy.
During repair of EA and TEF the proximal esophagus should be mobilized looking
for a proximal fistula. Many proximal TEF are missed at the initial operation and
discovered in the postoperative period. The symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of 
the unrecognized proximal TEF are similar to that for isolated TEF. Results
should be good since this problem occurs in large babies with fewer and less
complex associated conditions.

PMID: 671192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Antibiotiki. 1978 Feb;23(2):153-8.

[Combined action of antiblastoma preparations on lysozyme activity in animal
organs].

[Article in Russian]

Ievenko NV, Tsyganenko AIa.

The lysozyme activity in the spleen, kidneys and lungs of the mice treated with
neocid, sarcolysine or Tio-Fef in therapeutic doses increased or remained at the 
control level by the 5th or 10th day after the drug administration. The use of
sarcolysine per se or in combination with neocid increased the activity of
lysozyme in the spleen, kidneys and lungs during the whole period of the
experiment as compared to the control. The values of the lysozyme activity in the
spleen and lungs of the animals treated with neocid in combination with
sarcolysine were higher for 5 days, and in all organs examined were higher by the
10the day as compared to the animals treated with neocid alone. Increased
lysozyme activity in the spleen, kidneys and lungs was observed under the effect 
of neocid in combination with sarcolysine as compared to the lysozyme activity in
mice treated with sarcolysine per se (assay on the 10th day). Decreased lysozyme 
activity was determined in the spleen, kidneys and lungs by the 5th day and in
the kidneys by the 10th day in the mice treated with sarcolysine in combination
with Tio-Tel and in the spleen and lungs by the 5th and 10th days in the animals 
treated with neocid in combination with sarcolysine or Tio-Tef as compared to the
animals treated with sarcolysine. The lysozyme activity in the kidneys under the 
effect of sarcolysine combination with Tio-Tef was lower by the 5th days and
higher by the 10th day as compared to that under the effect of Tio-Tef.

PMID: 415659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Acta Paediatr Scand. 1977 Nov;66(6):783-5.

Monozygotic twins concordant for tracheo-esophageal fistula and discordant for
the VATER association.

King SL, Ladda RL, Shochat SJ.

Monozygotic female twins were concordant for tracheo-esophageal fistula (TEF);
and one twin also manifested other anomalies in the VATER association, including 
agenesis of the female reproductive tract. Review of the literature discloses a
familial tendency for recurrence of TEF and a high concordance rate in
monozygotic twins, indicating a significant genetic influence for the isolated
anomaly. In the case of the VATER association, the sporadic occurrence of
affected individuals and discordance in twins implicates the effect of
non-genetic factors.

PMID: 562588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Surgery. 1977 Jul;82(1):116-23.

Motor function of the esophagus after repair of esophageal atresia and
tracheoesophageal fistula.

Duranceau A, Fisher SR, Flye M, Jones RS, Postlethwait RW, Sealy WC.

Eleven patients with previous esophageal atresia repair (TEF) underwent
esophageal motility studies and were compared to 10 normal patients. The upper
sphincters (UES) in the two groups did not differ in resting pressure,
contraction pressure, or coordination. UES relaxation, was 100% in normal
patients and 83+/-8% in the TEF patients (p less than 0.05). In the proximal
esophagus, 100% of the TEF group showed a normal peristaltic wave, coupled with
an abnormal nonperistaltic wave. The normal group did not show this type of
contraction. In the middle esophagus, the mean peak pressure of 30.5+/-2.0 mm Hg 
was greater in controls than the 14.6+/-1.0 in the TEF group (p less than 0.001).
Coordination was observed in 97+/-1% of the controls, while present in only
27+/-4% of the TEF patients (p less than 0.001). In the distal 10 cm of
esophagus, peak contraction pressures were 43.3+/-1.6 in controls and 21.3+/-1.1 
in the TEF group (p less than 0.001). Coordination was 94+/-1% in normal subjects
and 66+/-4% in the TEF patients (p less than 0.001). The resting pressure in TEF 
patients was significantly higher at all three esophageal levels (proximal, mid, 
distal) than in normal patients. In both groups lower esophageal sphincter
function did not show any significant difference, except for closing pressure,
which was significantly higher in controls (39.9+/-6.8 mm Hg) than in the TEF
groups (21.3+/-3.0 mm Hg) (p less than 0.02). These studies suggest that marked
motility abnormalities occur in the repaired esophagus after atresia. These
abnormalities are distinctly different from other motor disorders of the
esophagus.

PMID: 877850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Pediatr Surg. 1977 Apr;12(2):227-32.

Intramural tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) associated with esophageal web.

Jona JZ, Belin RP.

This is a report of the fourth known case of intramural TEF with diaphragmatic
esophageal atresia. These patients present clinically as a typical esophageal
atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula, but in effect have the following unusual 
features: 1) high TEF entering the trachea in the neck; 2) diaphragmatic-type
atresia of the esophagus with uninterrupted muscular coat; 3) the location of
this diaphragm is at the level of the carina producing in effect a long
intramural fistulous tract. It is believed that faulty recannulization of a
segment of the esophagus in association with H-type TEF may explain this uncommon
anomaly.

PMID: 845767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Thoraxchir Vask Chir. 1977 Feb;25(1):17-9.

[Ulcerative tracheo-esophageal fistula--a complication of longterm respiratory
support (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Savic B, Tholen W, Wobser E, Rommelsheim K.

A case of ulcerative tracheoesophageal fistula following long term respiratory
support is described. After establishing the diagnosis of TEF, an attempt at
surgical repair should be made as quickly as patient's condition permits it,
ideally immediately. We suggest right side thoracotomy with the resection of the 
fourth rib, thereby facilitating preparation of a pedicled flap which should be
interponated between trachea and esophagus after the closure of the esophagus
defect by sutures has been performed.

PMID: 402709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Cancer. 1976 Mar 15;17(3):370-9.

Transformation-enhancing factor(s) produced by virus-transformed and established 
cells.

Krycéve C, Vigier P, Barlati S.

Chick embryo fibroblasts (CEF) and hamster BHK21 cells transformed by the
Schmidt-Ruppin strain of Rous sarcoma virus (SR-RSV) release into the culture
medium a factor or factors which enhance 2- to 7-fold the formation of
transformed foci by chich embryo fibroblasts infected with the Bryan strain of
RSV (B-RSV). The factor(s) also increase the number of foci failing to revert to 
normal phenotype at restrictive temperature (41 degrees C) in cultures infected
with a temperature-sensitive mutant (FU-19) of SR-RSV which is defective for
transformation. The factor(s) is produced also by BHK21 cells transformed by
other tumor viruses and by BHK21 cells passaged for a long time, but not by
normal CEF, CEF transformed by B-RSV, CEF infected by FU-19 at 41 degrees C,
normal hamster embryo fibroblasts, established but density-inhibited mouse
fibroblasts, or BHK21 cells of early passages. The relative enhancement of the
number of B-RSV foci can be more than 100-fold when the medium contains fetal
calf serum which suppresses focus formation in controls. The focus-enhacing
factor(s) appears to act after infection and has been termed, operationally,
transformation-enhancing factor(s) or TEF. The factor produced by RS2/3 cells
which enhances the formation of B-RSV foci is non-dialyzable and thermolabile,
and is presumably a protein. Its molecular weight is between 10(5) and 2 X 10(5) 
daltons.

PMID: 176116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Immunol. 1975 Apr;114(4):1248-54.

Activation of T and B lymphocytes in vitro. IV. Regulatory influence on specific 
T cell functions by a thymus extract factor.

Armerding D, Katz DH.

In the presence of a preparation of purified thymus extract factors (TEF), spleen
cells from athymic nude mice develop in vitro immune responses to soluble
DNP-protein conjugates, to particulate sheep red blood cells, and to allogeneic
cells. TEF has similar effects also on the in vitro antibody responses of normal 
mouse spleen cells, enhancing antigen-dependent plaque-forming cells responses to
dinitrophenyl carrier complexes of unprimed and primed mice. TEF fails to
reconstitute helper cell function in cultures of T cell-deprived spleen cells.
The thymic factor increases the reactivity or normal thymus cells in the in vitro
mixed lymphocyte reaction and has at high doses mitogenic effects. The role of
humoral thymus factors on the differentiation process of T cells is discussed.

PMID: 1090671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Vet Res. 1975 Jan;36(1):97-101.

Transmission of marble spleen disease in turkeys and pheasants.

Iltis JP, Jakowski RM, Wyand DS.

Marble spleen disease (MSD) of ring-necked pheasants (Phasianus colchicus L.) was
transmitted in the laboratory to pheasants and turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo L.)
by oral, colonic, and intravenous routes of inoculation, using cell-free
supernatant fluids of splenic suspension from birds with naturally occurring MSD.
Gross lesions consisted of large mottled spleens, a lesion more prominent in
infected pheasants than in turkeys. The only microscopic lesion and also the
criterion of infection were the presence of typical intranuclear inclusions of
MSD. Similar to microscopic observations in naturally infected birds was the
presence of inclusions in cells of spleen, bone marrow, liver, lung, bursa of
Fabricius, and intestine-associated lymphoid tisse (IALT) OF EXPERIMENTALLY
INFECTED BIRDS. Ultrastructural examination of splenic cells with intranuclear
inclusions from turkey and pheasant with experimentally transmitted disease
revealed viral particles and inclusions morphologically indistinguishable from
those observed in naturally infected birds. Results of viral isolation procedures
in turkey embryo chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) and yolk sac, as well as in
turkey embryo fibroblast (TEF) and turkey kidney cell (TKC) cultures, were
negative. Serologic assay by agar gel immunodiffusion tests indicated
cross-reactivity between splenic MSD antigen and spleinic hemorrhagic enteritis
(HE) of turkey antigen. Lines of fusion were formed between the splenic antigen
from naturally occurring MSD in pheasants, experimentally transmitted MSD in
turkeys, and HE of turkeys, using the homologous serum antibody to each of the 3 
antigens.

PMID: 803803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Gen Microbiol. 1970 Nov;64(1):11-7.

Characteristics of ruminococcus and cellulolytic butyrivibrio species from the
rumens of sheep fed differently supplemented teff (Eragrostis tef) hay diets.

Van Gylswyk NO, Roché CE.

PMID: 5516604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Gen Microbiol. 1970 Mar;60(3):381-6.

Characteristics of cellulolytic cillobacteria from the rumens of sheep fed teff
(Eragrostis tef) hay diets.

van Gylswyk NO, Hoffman JP.

PMID: 5487619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Egypt Med Assoc. 1965;48(5):399-404.

The use of tef-wire piston in stapes surgery.

Mostafa H.

PMID: 5851965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


