
1. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Mar 31. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2543. [Epub ahead of print]

Vitamin E confers cytoprotective effects on cardiomyocytes under conditions of
heat stress by increasing the expression of metallothionein.

Wang X(1), Dong W(1), Yuan B(1), Yang Y(1), Yang D(1), Lin X(1), Chen C(1), Zhang
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Cardiovascular Surgery, Guangzhou General Hospital of Guangzhou
Military Command, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510010, P.R. China.

Heat stress (HS) is commonly used to refer to the heat load that an individual is
subjected to due to either metabolic heat, or environmental factors, including
high temperatures and high humidity levels. HS has been reported to affect and
even damage the functioning of various organs; overexposure to high temperatures 
and high humidity may lead to accidental deaths. It has been suggested that the
cardiovascular system is primarily targeted by exposure to HS conditions; the
HS-induced dysfunction of cardiomyocytes, which is characterized by mitochondrial
dysfunction, may result in the development of cardiovascular diseases. The
excessive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) also participates in
mitochondrial dysfunction. However, effective methods for the prevention and
treatment of mitochondrial and cardiovascular dysfunction induced by exposure to 
HS are lacking. In the present study, we hypothesized that vitamin E (VE), an
antioxidant, is capable of preventing oxidative stress and mitochondrial injury
in cardiomyocytes induced by exposure to HS. The results revealed that
pre-treatment with VE increased the expression of metallothionein (MT), which has
previously been reported to confer cytoprotective effects, particularly on the
cardiovascular system. Pre-treatment with VE restored mitochondrial function in
cardiomyocytes under conditions of HS by increasing the expression of peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and by
increasing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels. Furthermore, pre-treatment with
VE decreased the production of ROS, which was induced by exposure to HS and thus 
exerted antioxidant effects. In addition, pre-treatment with VE attenuated
oxidative stress induced by exposure to HS, as demonstrated by the increased
levels of antioxidant enzymes [superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione (GSH)],
and by the decreased levels of markers of oxidative injury [malondialdehyde (MDA)
and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)]. Taken together, these findings suggest that
pre-treatment with VE can prevent mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress 
in cardiomyocytes induced by exposure to HS, by increasing the expression of MT.

PMID: 27035111  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0151884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0151884.
eCollection 2016.

Multimodal MRI Evaluation of the MitoPark Mouse Model of Parkinson's Disease.

Cong L(1,)(2), Muir ER(1,)(3), Chen C(4), Qian Y(4), Liu J(4), Biju KC(4), Clark 
RA(4,)(5), Li S(4,)(5), Duong TQ(1,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Imaging Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas, United States of America. (2)Graduate School of Biomedical
Science, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of
America. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America. (4)Department of Medicine, 
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas, United States of
America. (5)South Texas Veterans Health Care System, Department of Veterans
Affairs, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

The MitoPark mouse, a relatively new genetic model of Parkinson's disease (PD),
has a dopaminergic neuron-specific knock-out that inactivates the mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), a protein essential for mitochondrial DNA
expression and maintenance. This study used multimodal MRI to characterize the
neuroanatomical correlates of PD-related deficits in MitoPark mice, along with
functional behavioral tests. Compared with age-matched wild-type animals,
MitoPark mice at 30 weeks showed: i) reduced whole-brain volume and increased
ventricular volume, indicative of brain atrophy, ii) reduced transverse
relaxation time (T2*) of the substantia nigra and striatum, suggestive of
abnormal iron accumulation, iii) reduced apparent diffusion coefficient in the
substantia nigra, suggestive of neuronal loss, iv) reduced fractional anisotropy 
in the corpus callosum and substantia nigra, indicative of white-matter damages, 
v) cerebral blood flow was not significantly affected, and vi) reduced motor
activity in open-field tests, reduced memory in novel object recognition tests,
as well as decreased mobility in tail suspension tests, an indication of
depression. In sum, MitoPark mice recapitulate changes in many MRI parameters
reported in PD patients. Multimodal MRI may prove useful for evaluating
neuroanatomical correlates of PD pathophysiology in MitoPark mice, and for
longitudinally monitoring disease progression and therapeutic interventions for
PD.

PMCID: PMC4803323
PMID: 27003179  [PubMed - in process]


3. Toxicol Sci. 2016 Mar 15. pii: kfw048. [Epub ahead of print]

Sulfur dioxide contributes to the cardiac and mitochondrial dysfunction in rats.

Qin G(1), Meiqiong W(1), Wang J(1), Xu Z(1), Jin X(1), Sang N(2).

Author information: 
(1)The College of Environmental Science and Resources, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China. (2)The College of Environmental Science and
Resources, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China sangnan@sxu.edu.cn.

Epidemiological studies have demonstrated an association between sulfur dioxide
(SO2) and an increase of morbidity and mortality of cardiovascular diseases, such
as ischemic heart disease, heart failure and arrhythmia. Mitochondrion is the
most sensitive organelle in myocardium of animals exposed to SO2. Here we study
the molecular characterization of mitochondrial dysfunction in cardiac muscles of
rat after SO2 exposure. We found that the cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity,
mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m), ATP contents, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
contents, and mRNA expression of complexes IV and V subunits encoded by mtDNA
were decreased after NaHSO3 treatment in vitro or SO2 inhalation in vivo. The
mitochondrial dysfunctions were accompanied by depressions of co-activator of
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF1), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) mRNA and
protein. We observed swollen mitochondria and lower amounts of cristae in hearts 
of rats after 3.5 mg/m(3) SO2 inhalation for 30 d. Interestingly, NaHSO3 induced 
mitochondrial dysfunctions marked by <U+0394><U+03A8>m and ATP reduction could be inhibited by 
an antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NALC), accompanied by the restoration of
transcriptional factors expressions. The cardiac mitochondrial dysfunctions could
also be alleviated by overexpression of TFAM. SO2 induced abnormal left
ventricular function was restored by NALC in vivo. Our findings demonstrate that 
SO2 induces cardiac and mitochondrial dysfunction. And inhibition of ROS and
enhancing the transcriptional network controlling mitochondrial biogenesis can
mitigate the SO2-induced mitochondrial dysfunction.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26980303  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Neurobiol Aging. 2016 Apr;40:181-90. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.01.132.
Epub 2016 Feb 27.

Rosiglitazone activation of PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent pathways is neuroprotective in human 
neural stem cells against amyloid-beta-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and
oxidative stress.

Chiang MC(1), Nicol CJ(2), Cheng YC(3), Lin KH(4), Yen CH(5), Lin CH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Science and Engineering, Fu Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cmcphd@gmail.com. (2)Division of Cancer Biology & Genetics, Departments of
Pathology & Molecular Medicine and Biomedical & Molecular Sciences, Cancer
Research Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. (3)Graduate
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao
Yuan, Taiwan. (4)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, Chinese Culture University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Department of International Business, Ming Chuan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei City Hospital Zhongxing
Branch, Taipei, Taiwan.

Neuronal cell impairment, such as that induced by amyloid-beta (Aß) protein, is a
process with limited therapeutic interventions and often leads to long-term
neurodegeneration common in disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. Interestingly,
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) is a ligand-activated
nuclear receptor whose ligands control many physiological and pathologic
processes, and may be neuroprotective. We hypothesized that rosiglitazone, a
PPAR<U+03B3> agonist, would prevent Aß-mediated effects in human neural stem cells
(hNSCs). Here, we show that rosiglitazone reverses, via PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent
downregulation of caspase 3 and 9 activity, the Aß-mediated decreases in hNSC
cell viability. In addition, Aß decreases hNSC messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of 2
neuroprotective factors (Bcl-2 and CREB), but co-treatment with rosiglitazone
significantly rescues these effects. Rosiglitazone co-treated hNSCs also showed
significantly increased mitochondrial function (reflected by levels of adenosine 
triphosphate and Mit mass), and PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent mRNA upregulation of PGC1a and
mitochondrial genes (nuclear respiratory factor-1 and Tfam). Furthermore, hNSCs
co-treated with rosiglitazone were significantly rescued from Aß-induced
oxidative stress and correlates with reversal of the Aß-induced mRNA decrease in 
oxidative defense genes (superoxide dismutase 1, superoxide dismutase 2, and
glutathione peroxidase 1). Taken together, these novel findings show that
rosiglitazone-induced activation of PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent signaling rescues Aß-mediated
toxicity in hNSCs and provide evidence supporting a neuroprotective role for
PPAR<U+03B3> activating drugs in Aß-related diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26973118  [PubMed - in process]


5. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2016 Mar 13. pii: gmw014. [Epub ahead of
print]

Akt3 knockdown induces mitochondrial dysfunction in human cancer cells.

Kim M(1), Kim YY(1), Jee HJ(1), Bae SS(2), Jeong NY(3), Um JH(1), Yun J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Dong-A University, Busan
607-714, Republic of Korea Institute of Convergence Bio-Health, Dong-A
University, Busan 607-714, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pharmacology,
School of Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan-si 602-739, Republic of
Korea. (3)Institute of Convergence Bio-Health, Dong-A University, Busan 607-714, 
Republic of Korea Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine,
Dong-A University, Busan 602-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Dong-A University, Busan 607-714, Republic of 
Korea Institute of Convergence Bio-Health, Dong-A University, Busan 607-714,
Republic of Korea yunj@dau.ac.kr.

Akt/PKB plays a pivotal role in cell proliferation and survival. However, the
isotype-specific roles of Akt in mitochondrial function have not been fully
addressed. In this study, we explored the role of Akt in mitochondrial function
after stable knockdown of the Akt isoforms in EJ human bladder cancer cells. We
found that the mitochondrial mass was significantly increased in the Akt1- and
Akt3-knockdown cells, and this increase was accompanied by an increase in TFAM
and NRF1. Akt2 knockdown did not cause a similar effect. Interestingly, Akt3
knockdown also led to severe structural defects in the mitochondria, an increase 
in doxorubicin-induced senescence, and impairment of cell proliferation in
galactose medium. Consistent with these observations, the mitochondrial oxygen
consumption rate was significantly reduced in the Akt3-knockdown cells. An Akt3
deficiency-induced decrease in mitochondrial respiration was also observed in
A549 lung cancer cells. Collectively, these results suggest that the Akt isoforms
play distinct roles in mitochondrial function and that Akt3 is critical for
proper mitochondrial respiration in human cancer cells.

© The Author 2016. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26972278  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Br J Nutr. 2016 Mar 10:1-10. [Epub ahead of print]

Medium-chain TAG improve energy metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis in the
liver of intra-uterine growth-retarded and normal-birth-weight weanling piglets.

Zhang H(1), Li Y(1), Hou X(1), Zhang L(1), Wang T(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology,Nanjing Agricultural
University,Nanjing 210095,People's Republic of China.

We previously reported that medium-chain TAG (MCT) could alleviate hepatic
oxidative damage in weanling piglets with intra-uterine growth retardation
(IUGR). There is a relationship between oxidative status and energy metabolism, a
process involved in substrate availability and glucose flux. Therefore, the aim
of this study was to investigate the effects of IUGR and MCT on hepatic energy
metabolism and mitochondrial function in weanling piglets. Twenty-four IUGR
piglets and twenty-four normal-birth-weight (NBW) piglets were fed a diet of
either soyabean oil (SO) or MCT from 21 d of postnatal age to 49 d of postnatal
age. Then, the piglets' biochemical parameters and gene expressions related to
energy metabolism and mitochondrial function were determined (n 4). Compared with
NBW, IUGR decreased the ATP contents and succinate oxidation rates in the liver
of piglets, and reduced hepatic mitochondrial citrate synthase (CS) activity
(P<0·05). IUGR piglets exhibited reductions in hepatic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
contents and gene expressions related to mitochondrial biogenesis compared with
NBW piglets (P<0·05). The MCT diet increased plasma ghrelin concentration and
hepatic CS and succinate dehydrogenase activities, but decreased hepatic pyruvate
kinase activity compared with the SO diet (P<0·05). The MCT-fed piglets showed
improved mtDNA contents and PPAR<U+03B3> coactivator-1a expression in the liver
(P<0·05). The MCT diet alleviated decreased mRNA abundance of the hepatic PPARa
induced by IUGR (P<0·05). It can therefore be postulated that MCT may have
beneficial effects in improving energy metabolism and mitochondrial function in
weanling piglets.

PMID: 26960981  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Heart Fail Rev. 2016 Mar 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Mitochondrial DNA repair: a novel therapeutic target for heart failure.

Marín-García J(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Molecular Cardiology and Neuromuscular Institute, 75 Raritan Avenue,
Highland Park, NJ, 08904, USA. tmci@att.net.

Mitochondria play a crucial role in a variety of cellular processes ranging from 
energy metabolism, generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and Ca(2+)
handling to stress responses, cell survival and death. Malfunction of the
organelle may contribute to the pathogenesis of neuromuscular, cancer, premature 
aging and cardiovascular diseases (CVD), including myocardial ischemia,
cardiomyopathy and heart failure (HF). Mitochondria contain their own genome
organized into DNA-protein complexes, called "mitochondrial nucleoids," along
with multiprotein machineries, which promote mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
replication, transcription and repair. Although the mammalian organelle possesses
almost all known nuclear DNA repair pathways, including base excision repair,
mismatch repair and recombinational repair, the proximity of mtDNA to the main
sites of ROS production and the lack of protective histones may result in
increased susceptibility to various types of mtDNA damage. These include
accumulation of mtDNA point mutations and/or deletions and decreased mtDNA copy
number, which will impair mitochondrial function and finally, may lead to CVD
including HF.

PMID: 26940911  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Balkan J Med Genet. 2015 Dec 30;18(1):39-46. doi: 10.1515/bjmg-2015-0004.
eCollection 2015.

The relationship between transcript expression levels of nuclear encoded (TFAM,
NRF1) and mitochondrial encoded (MT-CO1) genes in single human oocytes during
oocyte maturation.

Novin MG(1), Allahveisi A(2), Noruzinia M(3), Farhadifar F(4), Yousefian E(5),
Fard AD(6), Salimi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Science, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Anatomical Sciences, Faculty of
Medicine, Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. (3)Department
of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University,
Tehran, Iran. (4)Deptartment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine,
Kurdistan University of Medical Sciences, Sanandaj, Iran. (5)Department of
Anatomical Sciences, School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, 
Isfahan, Iran. (6)Sarem Cell Research Center (SCRC), Sarem Women's Hospital,
Tehran, Iran.

In some cases of infertility in women, human oocytes fail to mature when they
reach the metaphase II (MII) stage. Mitochondria plays an important role in
oocyte maturation. A large number of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), copied in
oocytes, is essential for providing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) during oocyte
maturation. The purpose of this study was to identify the relationship between
transcript expression levels of the mitochondrial encoded gene (MT-CO1) and two
nuclear encoded genes, nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) in various stages of human oocyte maturation. Nine 
consenting patients, age 21-35 years old, with male factors were selected for
ovarian stimulation and intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) procedures. mRNA 
levels of mitochondrial-related genes were performed by singlecell TaqMan®
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). There was no
significant relationship between the relative expression levels in germinal
vesicle (GV) stage oocytes (p = 0.62). On the contrary, a significant
relationship was seen between the relative expression levels of TFAM and NRF1 and
the MT-CO1 genes at the stages of metaphase I (MI) and MII (p = 0.03 and p =
0.002). A relationship exists between the transcript expression levels of TFAM
and NRF1, and MT-CO1 genes in various stages of human oocyte maturation.

PMCID: PMC4768824
PMID: 26929904  [PubMed]


9. Anim Sci J. 2016 Feb 24. doi: 10.1111/asj.12559. [Epub ahead of print]

Oleuropein induces mitochondrial biogenesis and decreases reactive oxygen species
generation in cultured avian muscle cells, possibly via an up-regulation of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a.

Kikusato M(1), Muroi H(1), Uwabe Y(1), Furukawa K(1), Toyomizu M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Nutrition, Life Sciences, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

It has been shown that oleuropein, a phenolic compound in the fruit and leaves of
the olive tree (Olea europaea) induces mammalian uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1)
expression via an increased secretion of noradrenaline and adrenaline. This study
investigated the effects of oleuropein on avian UCP (avUCP) expression as well as
genes related to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and biogenesis in
cultured avian muscle cells, together with reactive oxygen species generation.
Oleuropein induced avUCP as well as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> 
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1), mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) and ATP5a1 (a component of mitochondrial adenosine 
triphosphate synthase) gene expression and cytochrome c oxidase activity,
indicating the induction of mitochondrial biogenesis. Sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) gene
expression was also up-regulated by this compound, which could contribute to an
increase in PGC-1a activity. Oleuropein suppressed the level of superoxide
generation per mitochondrion, possibly via the up-regulation of avUCP and
manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression. Based on these findings, this 
study is the first to show that oleuropein may induce avUCP expression in avian
muscle cells independent of the catecholamines, in which PGC-1a may be involved.

© 2016 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 26916829  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Apr;94(2):167-75. doi: 10.1139/bcb-2015-0077. Epub 2016
Feb 25.

Proteomic study of periovarian adipose tissue in 17ß-estradiol-treated and
untreated ovariectomized rats.

Amengual-Cladera E(1,)(2), Capllonch-Amer G(1), Lladó I(1,)(2), Gianotti
M(1,)(2), Proenza AM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Grup Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i 
Ciències de la Salut, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS), Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. (2)b 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la
Nutrición (CIBERobn, CB06/03/0043), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, C/Sinesio
Delgado 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Taking into account the sexual dimorphism previously found in white adipose
tissue (WAT) regarding mitochondrial function and biogenesis, as well as insulin 
sensitivity, the aim of this study was to go further into the role of sex
hormones in this dimorphism. To achieve this objective, we used ovariectomized
rats and performed a screening by means of proteomic analyses of the periovarian 
WAT, combined with a study of the protein levels of specific factors involved in 
mitochondrial function. Rats were ovariectomized at 5 weeks of age and
subcutaneously injected every 48 h with corn-oil (OVX group) or with
17ß-estradiol (E2, 10 µg/kg body mass; OVX + E2 group) for 4 weeks prior to
sacrifice. Beside proteomic analysis, protein levels of Transcription Factor A,
Mitochondrial (TFAM), cytochrome oxidase (COX)II, and COXIV were determined by
Western blot, and mRNA levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivator (PGC)-1a, ERa, ERß, lipoprotein lipase (LPL), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), and adiponectin were quantified by
real-time PCR. Our results show that ovariectomy leads to an increase in anabolic
processes and inflammatory protein levels as well as to a decrease in some of the
markers of mitochondrial function, which are restored, at least in part, by E2
supplementation. Indeed, this E2 supplementation seems to be counteracted by a
decline in ERa and in the ERa to ERß ratio values that could be directed to avoid
an over-stimulation of the E2 signaling pathway, given the possibility of an
activation of extra-gonadal steroid biosynthetic pathways.

PMID: 26914441  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Metab. 2015 Oct 8;4(12):926-39. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2015.09.010.
eCollection 2015.

Accumulation of 3-hydroxytetradecenoic acid: Cause or corollary of glucolipotoxic
impairment of pancreatic ß-cell bioenergetics?

Doliba NM(1), Liu Q(1), Li C(2), Chen J(3), Chen P(4), Liu C(5), Frederick DW(6),
Baur JA(6), Bennett MJ(7), Naji A(5), Matschinsky FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, United States; Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, United States. (2)Institute for
Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
United States; Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United
States. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. (5)Department of Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, United States; Institute for Diabetes, Obesity
and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, United States.
(6)Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
United States; Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, United States. (7)Institute for Diabetes,
Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, United
States; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States.

OBJECTIVES: Hyperglycemia and elevated blood lipids are the presumed
precipitating causes of ß-cell damage in T2DM as the result of a process termed
"glucolipotoxicity". Here, we tested whether glucolipotoxic pathophysiology is
caused by defective bioenergetics using islets in culture.
METHODS: Insulin secretion, respiration, ATP generation, fatty acid (FA)
metabolite profiles and gene expression were determined in isolated islets
treated under glucolipotoxic culture conditions.
RESULTS: Over time, chronic exposure of mouse islets to FAs with glucose leads to
bioenergetic failure and reduced insulin secretion upon stimulation with glucose 
or amino acids. Islets exposed to glucolipotoxic conditions displayed biphasic
changes of the oxygen consumption rate (OCR): an initial increase in baseline and
Vmax of OCR after 3 days, followed by decreased baseline and glucose stimulated
OCR after 5 days. These changes were associated with lower islet ATP levels,
impaired glucose-induced ATP generation, a trend for reduced mitochondrial DNA
content and reduced expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam). We
discovered the accumulation of carnitine esters of hydroxylated long chain FAs,
in particular 3-hydroxytetradecenoyl-carnitine.
CONCLUSIONS: As long chain 3-hydroxylated FA metabolites are known to uncouple
heart and brain mitochondria [53], [54], [55], we propose that under
glucolipotoxic condition, unsaturated hydroxylated long-chain FAs accumulate,
uncouple and ultimately inhibit ß-cell respiration. This leads to the slow
deterioration of mitochondrial function progressing to bioenergetics ß-cell
failure.

PMCID: PMC4731732
PMID: 26909309  [PubMed]


12. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 16. pii: ddw045. [Epub ahead of print]

Mitochondria-targeted molecules MitoQ and SS31 reduce mutant huntingtin-induced
mitochondrial toxicity and synaptic damage in Huntington's disease.

Yin X(1), Manczak M(1), Reddy PH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Garrison Institute on Aging. (2)Garrison Institute on Aging, Cell Biology and 
Biochemistry, Neuroscience & Pharmacology, Neurology and Speech, Language and
Hearing Sciences Departments, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 
4th Street, MS 9424, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA hemachandra.reddy@ttuhsc.edu.

The objective of this study was to determine the protective effects of the
mitochondria-targeted molecules MitoQ and SS31 in striatal neurons that stably
express mutant huntingtin (Htt) (STHDhQ111/Q111) in Huntington's disease (HD). We
studied mitochondrial and synaptic activities by measuring mRNA and the protein
levels of mitochondrial and synaptic genes, mitochondrial function, and
ultra-structural changes in MitoQ- and SS31-treated mutant Htt neurons relative
to untreated mutant Htt neurons. We used gene expression analysis, biochemical
methods, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and confocal microscopy methods. 
In the MitoQ- and SS31-treated mutant Htt neurons, fission genes Drp1 and Fis1
were down-regulated, and fusion genes Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1 were up-regulated
relative to untreated neurons, suggesting that mitochondria-targeted molecules
reduce fission activity. Interestingly, the mitochondrial biogenesis genes PGC1a,
PGC1ß, Nrf1, Nrf2 and TFAM were up-regulated in MitoQ- and SS31-treated mutant
Htt neurons. The synaptic genes synaptophysin and PSD95 were up-regulated, and
mitochondrial function was normal in the MitoQ- and SS31-treated mutant Htt
neurons. Immunoblotting findings of mitochondrial and synaptic proteins agreed
with the mRNA findings. TEM studies revealed decreased numbers of structurally
intact mitochondria in MitoQ- and SS31-treated mutant Htt neurons. These findings
suggest that mitochondria-targeted molecules MitoQ and SS31 are protective
against mutant Htt-induced mitochondrial and synaptic damage in HD neurons, and
these mitochondria-targeted molecules are potential therapeutic molecules for the
treatment of HD neurons.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26908605  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2016 Mar;41(3):298-306. doi: 10.1139/apnm-2015-0470.
Epub 2015 Nov 17.

Exercise mitigates mitochondrial permeability transition pore and quality control
mechanisms alterations in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis.

Gonçalves IO(1), Passos E(2), Diogo CV(3), Rocha-Rodrigues S(1), Santos-Alves
E(1), Oliveira PJ(3), Ascensão A(1), Magalhães J(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Research Center in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of Sport, 
University of Porto, Rua Dr. Plácido Costa, n° 91 4200-450 Porto, Portugal. (2)b 
Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Al. Prof.
Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal. (3)c CNC-Center for Neuroscience and 
Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Rua Larga Faculty of Medicine, Pólo I,
3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal.

Mitochondrial quality control and apoptosis have been described as key components
in the pathogenesis of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH); exercise is
recognized as a nonpharmacological strategy to counteract NASH-associated
consequences. We aimed to analyze the effect of voluntary physical activity (VPA)
and endurance training (ET) against NASH-induced mitochondrial permeability
transition pore (mPTP) opening and mitochondrial and cellular quality control
deleterious alterations. Forty-eight male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into
standard-diet sedentary (SS, n = 16), standard-diet VPA (n = 8), high-fat diet
sedentary (HS, n = 16), and high-fat diet VPA (n = 8). After 9 weeks of diet
treatment, half of the SS and HS groups were engaged in an ET program for 8
weeks, 5 days/week, 1 h/day. Liver mPTP susceptibility through osmotic swelling, 
mPTP-related proteins (cyclophilin D, Sirtuin3, Cofilin-1), markers of
mitochondrial biogenesis ((mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator protein (PGC-1a)), 
dynamics (Mitofusin 1 (Mfn1), Mitofusin 2 (Mfn2), Dynamin related protein 1, and 
Optic atrophy 1)), auto/mitophagy (Beclin-1, microtubule-associated protein 1
light chain 3, p62, PINK1, and Parkin), and apoptotic signaling (Bax, Bcl-2) and 
caspases-like activities were assessed. HS animals showed an increased
susceptibility to mPTP, compromised expression of Tfam, Mfn1, PINK1, and Parkin
and an increase in Bax content (HS vs. SS). ET and VPA improved
biogenesis-related proteins (PGC-1a) and autophagy signaling (Beclin-1 and
Beclin-1/Bcl-2 ratio) and decreased apoptotic signaling (caspases 8 activity, Bax
content, and Bax/Bcl-2 ratio). However, only ET decreased mPTP susceptibility and
positively modulated Bcl-2, Tfam, Mfn1, Mfn2, PINK1, and Parkin content. In
conclusion, exercise reduces the increased susceptibility to mPTP induced by NASH
and promotes the increase of auto/mitophagy and mitochondrial fusion towards a
protective phenotype.

PMID: 26905378  [PubMed - in process]


14. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Feb 20. [Epub ahead of print]

Neuroprotective Effect of Nanodiamond in Alzheimer's Disease Rat Model: a Pivotal
Role for Modulating NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT3 Signaling.

Alawdi SH(1,)(2), El-Denshary ES(3), Safar MM(4), Eidi H(5), David MO(5),
Abdel-Wahhab MA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Thamar
University, Dhamar, Yemen. shawqialawdi@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Pharmacology 
and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
shawqialawdi@yahoo.com. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of 
Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. (4)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.
marwasafar@gmail.com. (5)Laboratory of Structure and Activity of Normal and
Pathological Biomolecules (SABNP), INSERM U1204, Evry-Val d'Essonne University,
91025, Evry, France. (6)Department of Food Toxicology and Contaminants, National 
Research Center, Dokki, Cairo, Egypt. mosaad_abdelwahhab@yahoo.com.

Current therapeutic approaches of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are symptomatic and of
modest efficacy, and there is no available effective cure or prevention of AD;
hence, the need arise to search for neuroprotective agents to combat AD. The
current study aimed at investigating the neuroprotective effect of nanodiamond
(ND), adamantine-based nanoparticles, in aluminum-induced cognitive impairment in
rats, an experimental model of AD. AD was induced by aluminum chloride (17 mg/kg,
p.o. for 6 weeks) and confirmed by Morris water maze and Y-maze behavioral tests.
Biochemical and histological analyses of the hippocampus were also performed.
Aluminum-treated rats showed behavioral, biochemical, and histological changes
similar to those associated with AD. ND improved learning and memory and reversed
histological alterations. At the molecular levels, ND mitigated the increase of
hippocampal beta-amyloid (Aß42) and beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving 
enzyme-1 (BACE1) together with down-regulation of phosphorylated tau protein. It 
also modulated the excitatory glutamate neurotransmitter level. Furthermore, ND
boosted the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and mitochondrial
transcription factor-A (TFAM), suppressed the proinflammatory cytokine tumor
necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), and curbed oxidative stress
by hampering of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS). Moreover, ND augmented
the hippocampal levels of phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of
transcription-3 (p-STAT3) and B cell leukemia/lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) anti-apoptotic
protein while diminished nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B) and caspase-3 (casp-3)
expression. These findings indicate the protective effect of ND against memory
deficits and AD-like pathological aberrations probably via modulating NF-kB and
STAT3 signaling, effects mediated likely by modulating N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptors.

PMID: 26897372  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Skelet Muscle. 2016 Feb 18;6:10. doi: 10.1186/s13395-016-0083-9. eCollection
2016.

Failed upregulation of TFAM protein and mitochondrial DNA in oxidatively
deficient fibers of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease locomotor muscle.

Konokhova Y(1), Spendiff S(1), Jagoe RT(2), Aare S(3), Kapchinsky S(4), MacMillan
NJ(4), Rozakis P(4), Picard M(5), Aubertin-Leheudre M(6), Pion CH(6), Bourbeau
J(7), Hepple RT(8), Taivassalo T(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, McGill University, 475 Pine Ave West, Room 222,
Montreal, Quebec H2W1S4 Canada ; Department of Critical Care Medicine, McGill
University Health Center, Montreal, Canada. (2)Departments of Oncology and
Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. (3)Department of Critical Care
Medicine, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Canada. (4)Department of
Kinesiology, McGill University, 475 Pine Ave West, Room 222, Montreal, Quebec
H2W1S4 Canada. (5)Division of Behavioral Medicine, Department of Psychiatry,
Department of Neurology, and Columbia Translational Neuroscience Initiative,
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY USA. (6)Département de Kinanthropologie, Université 
du Québec à Montréal, Montreal, Canada. (7)Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical 
Research Unit, Center for Innovative Medicine (CIM), McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Canada. (8)Department of Kinesiology, McGill University, 475
Pine Ave West, Room 222, Montreal, Quebec H2W1S4 Canada ; Department of Critical 
Care Medicine, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, Canada ; Meakins
Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. (9)Department of
Kinesiology, McGill University, 475 Pine Ave West, Room 222, Montreal, Quebec
H2W1S4 Canada ; Respiratory Epidemiology and Clinical Research Unit, Center for
Innovative Medicine (CIM), McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Low mitochondrial content and oxidative capacity are well-established
features of locomotor muscle dysfunction, a prevalent and debilitating systemic
occurrence in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Although the exact cause is not firmly established, physical inactivity and
oxidative stress are among the proposed underlying mechanisms. Here, we assess
the impact of COPD pathophysiology on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) integrity,
biogenesis, and cellular oxidative capacity in locomotor muscle of COPD patients 
and healthy controls. We hypothesized that the high oxidative stress environment 
of COPD muscle would yield a higher presence of deletion-containing mtDNA and
oxidative-deficient fibers and impaired capacity for mitochondrial biogenesis.
METHODS: Vastus lateralis biopsies were analyzed from 29 COPD patients and 19
healthy age-matched controls for the presence of mtDNA deletions, levels of
oxidatively damaged DNA, mtDNA copy number, and regulators of mitochondrial
biogenesis as well the proportion of oxidative-deficient fibers (detected
histologically as cytochrome c oxidase-deficient, succinate dehydrogenase
positive (COX(-)/SDH(+) )). Additionally, mtDNA copy number and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) content were measured in laser captured
COX(-)SDH(+) and normal single fibers of both COPD and controls.
RESULTS: Compared to controls, COPD muscle exhibited significantly higher levels 
of oxidatively damaged DNA (8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) levels<U+2009>=<U+2009>387<U+2009>±<U+2009>41
vs. 258<U+2009>±<U+2009>21 pg/mL) and higher prevalence of mtDNA deletions (74 vs. 15 % of
subjects in each group), which was accompanied by a higher abundance of
oxidative-deficient fibers (8.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.1 vs. 1.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.4 %). Interestingly, COPD
patients with mtDNA deletions had higher levels of 8-OHdG (457<U+2009>±<U+2009>46 pg/mL) and
longer smoking history (66.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>7.5 years) than patients without deletions
(197<U+2009>±<U+2009>29 pg/mL; 38.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>7.3 years). Transcript levels of regulators of
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative metabolism were upregulated in COPD
compared to controls. However, single fiber analyses of COX(-)/SDH(+) and normal 
fibers exposed an impairment in mitochondrial biogenesis in COPD; in healthy
controls, we detected a marked upregulation of mtDNA copy number and TFAM protein
in COX(-)/SDH(+) compared to normal fibers, reflecting the expected compensatory 
attempt by the oxidative-deficient cells to increase energy levels; in contrast, 
they were similar between COX(-)/SDH(+) and normal fibers in COPD patients. Taken
together, these findings suggest that although the signaling factors regulating
mitochondrial biogenesis are increased in COPD muscle, impairment in the
translation of these signals prevents the restoration of normal oxidative
capacity.
CONCLUSIONS: Single fiber analyses provide the first substantive evidence that
low muscle oxidative capacity in COPD cannot be explained by physical inactivity 
alone and is likely driven by the disease pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC4758107
PMID: 26893822  [PubMed]


16. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2016 Feb 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Ovariectomized High Fit Rats Are Protected against Diet-Induced Insulin
Resistance.

Park YM(1), Kanaley JA, Zidon TM, Welly RJ, Scroggins RJ, Britton SL, Koch LG,
Thyfault JP, Booth FW, Padilla J, Vieira-Potter VJ.

Author information: 
(1)1Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO;
2Department of Anesthesiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI; 3Department of Molecular Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, KS; 4Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, 
MO; 5Child Health, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO; 6Dalton Cardiovascular
Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO.

INTRODUCTION: In the absence of exercise training, rats selectively bred for high
intrinsic aerobic capacity (HCR) are protected against ovariectomy (OVX)-induced 
insulin resistance and obesity compared to those bred for low intrinsic aerobic
capacity (LCR).
PURPOSE: This study determined whether OVX HCR rats remain protected with
exposure to high fat diet (HFD) compared to OVX LCR rats.
METHODS: Female HCR and LCR rats (n=36; age 27-33 weeks) underwent OVX and were
randomized to a standard chow diet (NC; 5% kcal fat) or HFD (45% kcal fat), ad
libitum for 11 weeks. Total energy expenditure (TEE), resting energy expenditure 
(REE), spontaneous physical activity (SPA), and glucose tolerance were assessed
midway, while fasting circulating metabolic markers, body composition, adipose
tissue distribution, and skeletal muscle AMPK and mitochondrial markers were
assessed at sacrifice.
RESULTS: Both HCR and LCR experienced HFD-induced increases in total and visceral
adiposity following OVX. Despite similar gains in adiposity, HCR rats were
protected from HFD-induced insulin resistance and reduced TEE observed in LCR
rats (P<0.05). This metabolic protection was likely attributed to a compensatory 
increase in SPA and associated preservation of skeletal muscle AMPK activity in
HCR; whereas, HFD significantly reduced SPA and AMPK activity in LCR (P<0.05). In
both lines, HFD reduced citrate synthase activity, gene expression of markers of 
mitochondrial biogenesis (tFAM, NRF1, and PGC-1a), and protein levels of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation complexes I, II, IV, and V in skeletal
muscle (all P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Following OVX, HCR and LCR rats differentially respond to HFD such
that HCR increase while LCR decrease SPA. This "physical activity compensation"
likely confers protection from HFD-induced insulin resistance and reduced energy 
expenditure in HCR rats.

PMID: 26885638  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Pineal Res. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.1111/jpi.12319. [Epub ahead of print]

Melatonin enhances mitophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis in rats with carbon
tetrachloride-induced liver fibrosis.

Kang JW(1), Hong JM(1), Lee SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, 440-746,
Republic of Korea.

Liver fibrosis leads to liver cirrhosis and failure, and no effective treatment
is currently available. Growing evidence supports a link between mitochondrial
dysfunction and liver fibrogenesis and mitochondrial quality control-based
therapy has emerged as a new therapeutic target. We investigated the protective
mechanisms of melatonin against mitochondria dysfunction-involved liver fibrosis,
focusing on mitophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis. Rats were treated with carbon
tetrachloride (CCl4 ) dissolved in olive oil (0.5 mL/kg, twice a week, i.p.) for 
eight weeks. Melatonin was administered orally at 2.5, 5, and 10 mg/kg once a
day. Chronic CCl4 exposure induced collagen deposition, hepatocellular damage,
and oxidative stress, and melatonin attenuated these increases. Increases in mRNA
and protein expression levels of transforming growth factor ß1 and a-smooth
muscle actin in response to CCl4 were attenuated by melatonin. Melatonin
attenuated hallmarks of mitochondrial dysfunction, such as mitochondrial swelling
and glutamate dehydrogenase release. Chronic CCl4 exposure impaired mitophagy and
mitochondrial biogenesis, and melatonin attenuated this impairment, as indicated 
by increases in mitochondrial DNA and in protein levels of PTEN-induced putative 
kinase 1 (PINK1); Parkin; peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator 1a (PGC-1a); nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1); and transcription
factor A, mitochondrial (TFAM). CCl4 -mediated decreases in mitochondrial
fission- and fusion-related proteins, such as dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1)
and mitofusin 2, were also attenuated by melatonin. Moreover, melatonin induced
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) phosphorylation. These results suggest that
melatonin protects against liver fibrosis via upregulation of mitophagy and
mitochondrial biogenesis, and may be useful as an anti-fibrotic treatment. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26882442  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2016;2016:5923938. doi: 10.1155/2016/5923938. Epub 2016 Jan
6.

Mitochondrial Alterations in Peripheral Mononuclear Blood Cells from Alzheimer's 
Disease and Mild Cognitive Impairment Patients.

Delbarba A(1), Abate G(2), Prandelli C(2), Marziano M(2), Buizza L(2), Arce Varas
N(3), Novelli A(4), Cuetos F(3), Martinez C(5), Lanni C(6), Memo M(2), Uberti
D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Diadem Ltd., Spin Off of Brescia University, Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of 
Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Oviedo, Plaza Feijoo s/n, 33003
Oviedo, Spain. (4)Department of Psychology, University of Oviedo, Plaza Feijoo
s/n, 33003 Oviedo, Spain; Institute of Biotechnology, University of Oviedo, 33006
Oviedo, Spain. (5)Cabueñes General Hospital, Calle Los Prados 395, Gijón, 33203
Asturias, Spain. (6)Department of Experimental and Applied Pharmacology, Centre
of Excellence in Applied Biology, University of Pavia, Viale Taramelli 6, 27100
Pavia, Italy. (7)Diadem Ltd., Spin Off of Brescia University, Brescia, Italy;
Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
Brescia, Italy.

It is well recognized that mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to
neurodegeneration occurring in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, evidences of
mitochondrial defects in AD peripheral cells are still inconclusive. Here, some
mitochondrial-encoded and nuclear-encoded proteins, involved in maintaining the
correct mitochondria machine, were investigated in terms of protein expression
and enzymatic activity in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated
from AD and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) patients and healthy subjects. In
addition mitochondrial DNA copy number was measured by real time PCR. We found
some differences and some similarities between AD and MCI patients when compared 
with healthy subjects. For example, cytochrome C and cytochrome B were decreased 
in AD, while MCI showed only a statistical reduction of cytochrome C. On the
other hand, both AD and MCI blood cells exhibited highly nitrated MnSOD, index of
a prooxidant environment inside the mitochondria. TFAM, a regulator of
mitochondrial genome replication and transcription, was decreased in both AD and 
MCI patients' blood cells. Moreover also the mitochondrial DNA amount was reduced
in PBMCs from both patient groups. In conclusion these data confirmed peripheral 
mitochondria impairment in AD and demonstrated that TFAM and mtDNA amount
reduction could be two features of early events occurring in AD pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4736772
PMID: 26881032  [PubMed - in process]


19. Food Funct. 2016 Mar 16;7(3):1468-76. doi: 10.1039/c5fo00909j.

Fish oil diet modulates epididymal and inguinal adipocyte metabolism in mice.

Bargut TC(1), Souza-Mello V(1), Mandarim-de-Lacerda CA(1), Aguila MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Morphometry, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Disease, Biomedical 
Center, Institute of Biology, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
RJ, Brazil. mandarim@uerj.br.

We aimed to investigate the impact of different high-fat diets containing fish
oil on adiposity and white adipose tissue (WAT) function in mice, comparing the
effects on epididymal (eWAT) and subcutaneous (sWAT) depots. For this, we used
C57BL/6 male mice fed four types of diets for eight weeks: standard chow (SC),
high-fat lard (HF-L), high-fat lard plus fish oil (HF-L + FO), and high-fat fish 
oil (HF-FO). The HF-L group had a greater body mass (BM) gain, insulin
resistance, increased gene expression related to lipogenesis (CD36, aP2, SREBP1c,
and FAS), decreased gene expression of perilipin in both eWAT and sWAT, and
reduced expression of genes related to beta-oxidation (CPT-1a) and to
mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC1alpha, NRF1, and TFAM) in eWAT and sWAT. On the
other hand, the HF-L + FO and HF-FO groups showed a smaller BM gain and
adiposity, and normalization of insulin resistance and lipogenic genes in both
eWAT and sWAT. These animals also showed decreased perilipin gene expression and 
elevated expression of beta-oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis genes in eWAT 
and sWAT. 'Beige' adipocytes were identified in sWAT of the HF-FO animals. In
conclusion, fish oil intake has anti-obesity effects through modulation of both
eWAT and sWAT metabolism in mice and is relevant in diminishing the BM gain,
adiposity, and insulin resistance even in combination with a high-fat lard diet
in mice.

PMID: 26876019  [PubMed - in process]


20. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2475. [Epub ahead of print]

Cannabinoid receptor type 1 mediates high-fat diet-induced insulin resistance by 
increasing forkhead box O1 activity in a mouse model of obesity.

Chen CC(1), Lee TY(2), Kwok CF(3), Hsu YP(4), Shih KC(3), Lin YJ(1), Ho LT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(2)Graduate Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Tao-Yuan, Taiwan, R.O.C. (3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department 
of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.
(4)Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, R.O.C.

Hepatic glucose production is promoted by forkhead box O1 (FoxO1) under
conditions of insulin resistance. The overactivity of cannabinoid receptor
type 1 (CB1R) partly causes increased liver fat deposits and metabolic
dysfunction in obese rodents by decreasing mitochondrial function. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the role of FoxO1 in CB1R-mediated insulin
resistance through the dysregulation of mitochondrial function in the livers of
mice with high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity. For this purpose, male C57BL/6
mice were randomly assigned to groups and either fed a standard diet (STD), a
HFD, or a HFD with 1-week treatment of the CB1R inverse agonist, AM251, at 1 or
5 mg/kg. For in vitro experiments, AML12 hepatocytes were incubated with
FoxO1 siRNA prior to challenge with arachidonyl-2'-chloroethylamide (ACEA) or a
high concentration of free fatty acids (HFFA). Plasma parameters were analyzed
using colorimetric methods. Liver histopathology and hepatic status markers were 
examined. The HFD-fed mice exhibited an increase in CB1R levels in the liver.
Moreover, in response to increased hepatic oxidative stress, the HFD-fed mice
also displayed hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction, as indicated by the decreased
mRNA levels of carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 (CPT-1), mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) and citrate
synthase. On the contrary, these effects in the HFD-fed mice were reversed by
treatment with 5 mg/kg AM251. The administration of AM251 suppressed the
induction of FoxO1, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and
glucose 6-phosphatase (G6Pase) expression in the livers of the mice fed a HFD by 
enhancing the phosphorylation of insulin signaling cascades thus, further
lowering the high level of the homeostatic model assessment of insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR) index. In our in vitro experiments, transfection with
FoxO1 siRNA prevented the HFFA- and ACEA-induced decrease in the gene expression 
of mitochondrial biogenesis-related factors, and abrogated the HFFA- and
ACEA-induced increase in PEPCK and G6Pase expression. Taken together, our
findings suggest that the anti-insulin resistance effect of AM251, which leads to
an improvement of mitochondrial function in hepatic steatosis, is mediated
through FoxO1.

PMID: 26847930  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Eur Biophys J. 2016 Feb 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Delaunay algorithm and principal component analysis for 3D visualization of
mitochondrial DNA nucleoids by Biplane FPALM/dSTORM.

Alán L(1), pacek T(1), Jeek P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Membrane Transport Biophysics, No. 75, Institute of Physiology, 
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, 14220, Prague 4, Czech 
Republic. (2)Department of Membrane Transport Biophysics, No. 75, Institute of
Physiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, 14220,
Prague 4, Czech Republic. jezek@biomed.cas.cz.

Data segmentation and object rendering is required for localization
super-resolution microscopy, fluorescent photoactivation localization microscopy 
(FPALM), and direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (dSTORM). We
developed and validated methods for segmenting objects based on Delaunay
triangulation in 3D space, followed by facet culling. We applied them to
visualize mitochondrial nucleoids, which confine DNA in complexes with
mitochondrial (mt) transcription factor A (TFAM) and gene expression machinery
proteins, such as mt single-stranded-DNA-binding protein (mtSSB). Eos2-conjugated
TFAM visualized nucleoids in HepG2 cells, which was compared with dSTORM
3D-immunocytochemistry of TFAM, mtSSB, or DNA. The localized fluorophores of
FPALM/dSTORM data were segmented using Delaunay triangulation into polyhedron
models and by principal component analysis (PCA) into general PCA ellipsoids. The
PCA ellipsoids were normalized to the smoothed volume of polyhedrons or by the
net unsmoothed Delaunay volume and remodeled into rotational ellipsoids to obtain
models, termed DVRE. The most frequent size of ellipsoid nucleoid model imaged
via TFAM was 35 × 45 × 95 nm; or 35 × 45 × 75 nm for mtDNA cores; and
25 × 45 × 100 nm for nucleoids imaged via mtSSB. Nucleoids encompassed different 
point density and wide size ranges, speculatively due to different activity
stemming from different TFAM/mtDNA stoichiometry/density. Considering twofold
lower axial vs. lateral resolution, only bulky DVRE models with an aspect ratio
>3 and tilted toward the xy-plane were considered as two proximal nucleoids,
suspicious occurring after division following mtDNA replication. The existence of
proximal nucleoids in mtDNA-dSTORM 3D images of mtDNA "doubling"-supported
possible direct observations of mt nucleoid division after mtDNA replication.

PMID: 26846371  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Jan 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Arachidonyl-2-Chloroethylamide Alleviates Cerebral Ischemia Injury Through
Glycogen Synthase Kinase-3ß-Mediated Mitochondrial Biogenesis and Functional
Improvement.

Bai F(1), Guo F(2), Jiang T(1), Wei H(3), Zhou H(1), Yin H(2), Zhong H(1), Xiong 
L(4), Wang Q(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, 710032, Shaanxi Province, China. (2)Department of Radiology,
Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 710032, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, 710004, China. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, Xijing
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 710032, Shaanxi Province,
China. mzkxlz@126.com. (5)Department of Anesthesiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, 710032, Shaanxi Province, China.
wangqiang@fmmu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, China.
wangqiang@fmmu.edu.cn.

Arachidonyl-2-chloroethylamide (ACEA), a highly selective agonist of cannabinoid 
receptor 1 (CB1R), has been reported to protect neurons in ischemic injury. We
sought to investigate whether mitochondrial biogenesis was involved in the
therapeutic effect of ACEA in cerebral ischemia. Focal cerebral ischemic injury
was induced in adult male Sprague Dawley rats. Intraperitoneal injection of
1 mg/kg ACEA improved neurological behavior, reduced infarct volume, and
inhibited apoptosis. The volume and numbers of mitochondria were significantly
increased after ACEA administration. Expression of mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam), nuclear transcription factor-1 (Nrf-1), and cytochrome C oxidase
subunit IV (COX IV) were also significantly up-regulated in animals administered 
ACEA. One thousand nanomoles of ACEA inhibited mitochondrial dysfunction in
primary rat cortical neurons exposed to oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD).
Furthermore, ACEA administration increased phosphorylation of glycogen synthase
kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) after reperfusion. Phosphorylation of GSK-3ß induced
mitochondrial biogenesis and preserved mitochondrial function whereas inhibition 
of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) dampened phosphorylation of GSK-3ß and
reversed induction of mitochondrial biogenesis and function following ACEA
administration. In conclusion, ACEA could induce mitochondrial biogenesis and
improve mitochondrial function at the beginning of cerebral ischemia, thus
alleviating cerebral ischemia injury. Phosphorylation of GSK-3ß might be involved
in the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis induced by ACEA.

PMID: 26820679  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 25. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7018. [Epub ahead of print]

Downregulation of TFAM inhibits the tumorigenesis of non-small cell lung cancer
by activating ROS-mediated JNK/p38MAPK signaling and reducing cellular
bioenergetics.

Xie D(1,)(2), Wu X(2), Lan L(2), Shangguan F(2), Lin X(1), Chen F(2), Xu
S(2,)(3), Zhang Y(2), Chen Z(2), Huang K(4), Wang R(4), Wang L(2), Song X(5), Liu
Y(2), Lu B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China. (2)Protein Quality Control
and Diseases Laboratory, Attardi Institute of Mitochondrial Biomedicine, School
of Life Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China.
(3)Huzhou Health School, Huzhou, Zhejiang 313100, China. (4)Department of
Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang 325035, China. (5)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, China.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is essential for the replication,
transcription and maintenance of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The role of TFAM in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remains largely unknown. Herein, we report
that downregulation of TFAM in NSCLC cells resulted in cell cycle arrest at G1
phase and significantly blocked NSCLC cell growth and migration through the
activation of reactive oxygen species (ROS)-induced c-Jun amino-terminal
kinase(JNK)/p38 MAPK signaling and decreased cellular bioenergetics. We further
found that TFAM downregulation in NSCLC cells led to increased apoptotic cell
death and enhanced the sensitivity of NSCLC cells to cisplatin. Tissue microarray
(TMA) data showed that elevated expression of TFAM was related to the
histological grade and TNM stage of NSCLC patients. We also demonstrated that
TFAM is an independent prognostic factor for overall survival of NSCLC patients. 
Taken together, our findings suggest that TFAM could serve as a potential
diagnostic biomarker and molecular target for the treatment of NSCLC, as well as 
for prediction of the effectiveness of chemotherapy.

PMID: 26820294  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2016 Jan;68(1):119-27. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12487.

Wild ginseng cambial meristematic cells ameliorate hepatic steatosis and
mitochondrial dysfunction in high-fat diet-fed mice.

Lee SB(1), Cho HI(1), Jin YW(2), Lee EK(2), Ahn JY(2), Lee SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Plant Stem Cell Institute, Unhwa Corp., Jeonju, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to determine the protective mechanisms of
wild ginseng cambial meristematic cells (CMCs) on non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease in high-fat diet (HFD)-fed mice.
METHODS: Male C57BL/6 mice received either normal-fat diet or HFD for 10 weeks
along with wild ginseng CMCs (75, 150 and 300<U+2009>mg/kg) or vehicle (0.5% carboxyl
methyl cellulose) by oral administration once a day. Triglyceride and total
cholesterol contents were measured in liver and serum samples. Parameters for
hepatic lipid metabolism and mitochondria biogenesis were assessed.
KEY FINDINGS: Treatment with wild ginseng CMCs markedly attenuated body weight,
serum and hepatic lipid contents, and serum aminotransferase activity. While wild
ginseng CMCs attenuated the increases in sterol regulatory element-binding
transcription factor 1 (SREBP-1) and carbohydrate-responsive element-binding
protein (ChREBP) expression, it enhanced the increases in carnitine
palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha (PPAR-a) expression. HFD decreased glutamate dehydrogenase activity and
glutathione content, and increased lipid peroxidation, which were all attenuated 
by wild ginseng CMCs. Furthermore, wild ginseng CMCs enhanced mitochondrial
biogenesis-related factors, including peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> co activator 1a (PGC1a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM).
CONCLUSIONS: Wild ginseng CMCs protect against HFD-induced liver injury, which
prevents lipid accumulation and mitochondrial oxidative stress, and enhances
mitochondrial biogenesis.

© 2015 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

PMID: 26806698  [PubMed - in process]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 19;470(4):961-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.089. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Carvedilol promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by regulating the PGC-1/TFAM pathway
in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs).

Yao K(1), Zhang WW(2), Yao L(2), Yang S(2), Nie W(1), Huang F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Third Xiang Ya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, 410013, China. (2)Vascular and Endovascular Surgery,
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center-Shreveport, 71103, USA.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The Third Xiang Ya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, 410013, China. Electronic address: huangfz226@yeah.net.

Carvedilol, a third-generation and nonselective ß-adrenoceptor antagonist, is a
licensed drug for treating patients suffering from heart failure in clinics. It
has been shown that Carvedilol protects cells against mitochondrial dysfunction. 
However, it's unknown whether Carvedilol affects mitochondrial biogenesis. In
this study, we found that treatment with Carvedilol in HUVECs resulted in a
significant increase of PGC-1a, NRF1, and TFAM. Notably, Carvedilol significantly
increased mtDNA contents and the two mitochondrial proteins, cytochrome C and COX
IV. In addition, MitoTracker Red staining results indicated that treatment with
Carvedilol increased mitochondria mass. Mechanistically, we found that the effect
of Carvedilol on the expression of PGC-1a is mediated by the PKA-CREB pathway.
Importantly, our results revealed that stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis by
carvedilol resulted in functional gain of the mitochondria by showing increased
oxygen consumption and mitochondrial respiratory rate. The increased expression
of PGC-1a and mitochondrial biogenesis induced by Carvedilol might suggest a new 
mechanism of the therapeutic effects of Carvedilol in heart failure.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26797282  [PubMed - in process]


26. Growth Horm IGF Res. 2016 Feb;26:36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ghir.2015.12.008. Epub
2015 Dec 17.

FNDC5 relates to skeletal muscle IGF-I and mitochondrial function and gene
expression in obese men with reduced growth hormone.

Srinivasa S(1), Suresh C(2), Mottla J(3), Hamarneh SR(4), Irazoqui JE(5),
Frontera W(6), Torriani M(7), Stanley T(8), Makimura H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Nutritional Metabolism, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: ssrinivasa@mgh.harvard.edu. 
(2)Program in Nutritional Metabolism, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Georgetown University, School of Medicine,
Washington, DC, USA. (4)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Laboratory of Comparative Immunology,
Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (6)Department of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN,
USA; Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical
School/Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Department of
Physiology, University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, Puerto Rico.
(7)Division of Musculoskeletal Imaging and Intervention, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (8)Program in Nutritional
Metabolism, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship of skeletal muscle FNDC5 mRNA
expression and circulating irisin to the GH/IGF-I axis and to skeletal muscle
mitochondrial function and mitochondria-related gene expression in obese men.
DESIGN: Fifteen abdominally obese men with reduced growth hormone received
12weeks of recombinant human GH (rhGH). Before and after treatment, they
underwent (31)P-magnetic resonance spectroscopy to evaluate phosphocreatine (PCr)
recovery as a measure of mitochondrial function and skeletal muscle biopsy to
assess expression of mitochondrial-related genes. Serum irisin and IGF-I and
skeletal muscle FNDC5 and IGF-I mRNA were measured.
RESULTS: At baseline, skeletal muscle FNDC5 mRNA was significantly and positively
associated with IGF-I mRNA (<U+03C1>=0.81, P=0.005) and rate of PCr recovery (<U+03C1>=0.79,
P=0.006). Similar relationships of circulating irisin to IGF-I mRNA (<U+03C1>=0.63,
P=0.05) and rate of PCr recovery (<U+03C1>=0.48, P=0.08) were demonstrated, but were not
as robust as those with muscle FNDC5 expression. Both serum irisin and skeletal
muscle FNDC5 mRNA were significantly associated with PPAR<U+03B3> (<U+03C1>=0.73, P=0.02 and
<U+03C1>=0.85, P=0.002), respectively. In addition, FNDC5 mRNA was correlated with
skeletal muscle PGC-1a (<U+03C1>=0.68, P=0.03), NRF1 (<U+03C1>=0.66, P=0.04) and TFAM (<U+03C1>=0.79, 
P=0.007) mRNA. Neither serum irisin nor muscle mRNA expression of FNDC5 changed
with rhGH treatment.
CONCLUSION: These novel data in skeletal muscle demonstrate that local expression
of FNDC5 is associated with mRNA expression of IGF-I and mitochondrial function
and mitochondria-related gene expression in obese subjects with reduced growth
hormone and suggest a potential role for FNDC5 acting locally in muscle in a low 
GH state. Further studies are needed to clarify the relationship between the
GH/IGF-I axis and irisin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4716612 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26774404  [PubMed - in process]


27. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2016 Jan 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Chronic Arsenic Exposure-Induced Oxidative Stress is Mediated by Decreased
Mitochondrial Biogenesis in Rat Liver.

Prakash C(1), Kumar V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana,
-124001, India. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Maharshi Dayanand University,
Rohtak, Haryana, -124001, India. vksiwach.biochem@mdurohtak.ac.in.

The present study was executed to study the effect of chronic arsenic exposure on
generation of mitochondrial oxidative stress and biogenesis in rat liver. Chronic
sodium arsenite treatment (25 ppm for 12 weeks) decreased mitochondrial complexes
activity in rat liver. There was a decrease in mitochondrial superoxide dismutase
(MnSOD) activity in arsenic-treated rats that might be responsible for increased 
protein and lipid oxidation as observed in our study. The messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression of mitochondrial and nuclear-encoded subunits of complexes I (ND1 and 
ND2) and IV (COX I and COX IV) was downregulated in arsenic-treated rats only.
The protein and mRNA expression of MnSOD was reduced suggesting increased
mitochondrial oxidative damage after arsenic treatment. There was activation of
Bax and caspase-3 followed by release of cytochrome c from mitochondria
suggesting induction of apoptotic pathway under oxidative stress. The entire
phenomenon was associated with decrease in mitochondrial biogenesis as evident by
decreased protein and mRNA expression of nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1),
nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF-2), peroxisome proliferator activator receptor 
gamma-coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) in
arsenic-treated rat liver. The results of the present study indicate that
arsenic-induced mitochondrial oxidative stress is associated with decreased
mitochondrial biogenesis in rat liver that may present one of the mechanisms for 
arsenic-induced hepatotoxicity.

PMID: 26767369  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Jan 6;50(3):659-67. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150697.

Lower Prevalence of Alzheimer's Disease among Tibetans: Association with
Religious and Genetic Factors.

Huang F(1), Shang Y(2), Luo Y(1), Wu P(3), Huang X(3), Tan X(3), Lu X(1), Zhen
L(1), Hu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Tibetan Hospital, China Tibet-ology Research Center, Beijing, P.R.
China. (2)Beijing Mentougou Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing,
P.R. China. (3)Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of dementia differs among racial groups, the highest
prevalence being in Latin America (8.5%) compared to sub-Saharan African regions 
(2-4%). The most common type of dementia is Alzheimer's disease (AD).
OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of AD in the Qinghai-Tibet plateau and to
investigate the related factors.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional, multistage cluster sampling design survey.
Data was collected from May 2014 to September 2014 from 4,060 Tibetan aged >60
years. Participants underwent clinical examinations and neuropsychological
evaluations. MALDI-TOF was used to test the genotypes of CLU, TFAM, TP53INP1,
IGHV1-67, CR1, ApoE, and BIN1. Logistic regression models were used to ascertain 
the associations with AD.
RESULTS: The prevalence of AD among Tibetan individuals aged >60 years was 1.33% 
(95% CI: 0.98-1.69). The CLU haplotypes AA+GA (odds ratio (OR)<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.483; 95% CI:
1.069-18.792) of rs2279590 was correlated with AD. The CLU haplotypes GG+GC
(OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.184; 95% CI: 0.038-0.888) of rs9331888 and kowtow (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.203; 95% CI
0.046-0.896) were negatively correlated with AD.
CONCLUSION: A low prevalence of AD was found in Tibetans from the Qinghai-Tibet
plateau. Multivariate analysis might suggest that regular "mind-body" religious
meditative activities may be negatively associated with AD in this population, as
well as the CLU genotype at rs9331888.

PMID: 26757186  [PubMed - in process]


29. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Oct 15;7(10):2099-104. eCollection 2015.

Age-related changes of mitochondrial transcription factor a expression in rotator
cuff degeneration.

Ichiseki T(1), Ueda S(1), Ueda Y(2), Kaneuji A(1), Kawahara N(1), Matsumoto T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kanazawa Medical University Daigaku 1-1,
Uchinada, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa, 920-0293, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology,
Kanazawa Medical University Daigaku 1-1, Uchinada, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa,
920-0293, Japan.

One cause of rotator cuff tears is thought to be age-related degenerative changes
occurring in the rotator cuff. Using Rat rotator cuff we determined age-related
changes in mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) expression in rotator cuff
degeneration to clarify the presence/absence of mitochondrial stress. The
materials used were rotator cuffs (supraspinatus) of 5-, 24-, 48-, and
100-week-old Wistar Rats (five animals each). Histopathological study revealed a 
4-layer structure consisting of a bone layer, calcified cartilage layer,
non-calcified cartilage layer, and tendinous component), with age-related
narrowing of the non-calcified cartilage layer confirmed to be present. In an
immunohistochemical TFAM study positive findings of the non-calcified cartilage
layer were less prominent in the 100-week-old group. In an Enzyme-Linked
Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) study, these were more prominent in the 5-week-old to
24-week-old groups, and slightly less so in the 48-week-old group as compared to 
the 24-week-old one. In the 100-week-old group as compared to the 24-week-old one
they were significantly less prominent (p<0.05). The non-calcified cartilage
layer is a major site for the dispersion of mechanical energy, and the change in 
TFAM expression noted at the same site in the present study and the results of
ELISA suggest that age-related changes in mitochondrial stress may be one cause
of rotator cuff degeneration.

PMCID: PMC4656787
PMID: 26692954  [PubMed]


30. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2016 Jan;24(1):139-47. doi: 10.1002/oby.21334.

CISD1 in association with obesity-associated dysfunctional adipogenesis in human 
visceral adipose tissue.

Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Moreno M(1), Ortega F(1), Sabater M(1), Xifra G(1),
Ricart W(1), Fernández-Real JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Institut D'investigació
Biomèdica De Girona (IdIBGi), CIBEROBN (CB06/03/010) and Instituto De Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII), Girona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate CISD1 mRNA and protein in human adipose tissue in
association with obesity and adipogenesis.
METHODS: Subcutaneous (SAT) and visceral (VAT) adipose tissue CISD1 gene
expression (real-time PCR) and protein (Western blot) levels were investigated in
human adipose tissue and during human adipocyte differentiation.
RESULTS: SAT and VAT CISD1 mRNA and protein levels were significantly decreased
in subjects with obesity and negatively correlated with BMI after controlling for
age and sex. In participants with morbid obesity, VAT CISD1 gene expression was
positively correlated with insulin sensitivity (r<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.47, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01), and
bariatric surgery-induced weight loss led to increased SAT CISD1 mRNA levels. In 
both VAT and SAT, CISD1 gene expression was significantly associated with SIRT1, 
ISCA2, and mitochondrial biogenesis-related (PPARGC1A, TFAM, and MT-CO3) and
browning-related (PRDM16 and UCP1) gene expression. In addition, VAT CISD1 gene
expression was significantly associated with adipogenic and iron
metabolism-related genes. Importantly, these correlations were replicated in a
second cohort. At the cellular level, CISD1 gene expression increased during
human adipocyte differentiation in correlation with adipogenic genes (r<U+2009>><U+2009>0.60,
P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest a possible role of CISD1 in obesity-associated
dysfunctional adipogenesis in human VAT.

© 2015 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 26692580  [PubMed - in process]


31. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2015 Dec 11. pii: S0091-6749(15)01640-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2015.10.031. [Epub ahead of print]

Selective dysfunction of p53 for mitochondrial biogenesis induces cellular
proliferation in bronchial smooth muscle from asthmatic patients.

Trian T(1), Allard B(2), Ozier A(3), Maurat E(2), Dupin I(2), Thumerel M(3),
Ousova O(2), Gillibert-Duplantier J(2), Le Morvan V(4), Begueret H(5), Girodet
PO(3), Marthan R(3), Berger P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Université Bordeaux, Centre de Recherche Cardio-thoracique de Bordeaux, U1045,
Département de Pharmacologie, Bordeaux, France; INSERM, Centre de Recherche
Cardio-thoracique de Bordeaux, U1045, Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
thomas.trian@u-bordeaux.fr. (2)Université Bordeaux, Centre de Recherche
Cardio-thoracique de Bordeaux, U1045, Département de Pharmacologie, Bordeaux,
France; INSERM, Centre de Recherche Cardio-thoracique de Bordeaux, U1045,
Bordeaux, France. (3)Université Bordeaux, Centre de Recherche Cardio-thoracique
de Bordeaux, U1045, Département de Pharmacologie, Bordeaux, France; INSERM,
Centre de Recherche Cardio-thoracique de Bordeaux, U1045, Bordeaux, France; CHU
de Bordeaux, Service d'Exploration Fonctionnelle Respiratoire, Service de
chirurgie thoracique, Service d'anatomopathologie, Pessac, France. (4)Institut
Bergonié de Bordeaux, Unité Inserm VINCO, Bordeaux, France. (5)CHU de Bordeaux,
Service d'Exploration Fonctionnelle Respiratoire, Service de chirurgie
thoracique, Service d'anatomopathologie, Pessac, France.

BACKGROUND: Increase of bronchial smooth muscle (BSM) mass is a crucial feature
of asthma remodeling. The mechanisms of such an increased BSM mass are complex
but involve enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis, leading to increased proliferation
of BSM cells in asthmatic patients. The major tumor suppressor protein p53 is a
key cell regulator involved in cell proliferation and has also been implicated in
mitochondrial biogenesis. However, the role of p53 in BSM cell proliferation and 
mitochondrial biogenesis has not been investigated thus far.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to evaluate the role of p53 in proliferation of BSM cells in
asthmatic patients and mitochondrial biogenesis.
METHODS: The expression of p53 was assessed both in vitro by using flow cytometry
and Western blotting and ex vivo by using RT-PCR after laser microdissection. The
role of p53 was assessed with small hairpin RNA lentivirus in both asthmatic
patients and control subjects with BSM cell proliferation by using
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine and cell counting and in the expression of p21,
BCL2-associated X protein, mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a).
RESULTS: Twenty-nine patients with moderate-to-severe asthma and 26 control
subjects were enrolled in the study. p53 expression was increased in BSM from
asthmatic patients both ex vivo and in vitro, with a decreased interaction with
mouse double minute 2 homolog (Mdm2) and an increased phosphorylation of serine
20. p53 did not inhibit the transcription of both TFAM and PGC-1a in BSM cells
from asthmatic patients. As a consequence, p53 is unable to slow the increased
mitochondrial biogenesis and hence the subsequent increased proliferation of BSM 
cells in asthmatic patients.
CONCLUSION: this study suggests that p53 might act as a new potential therapeutic
target against BSM remodeling in asthmatic patients.

Copyright © 2015 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26688517  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. Curr Biol. 2015 Dec 21;25(24):3170-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.10.065. Epub 2015
Dec 10.

Genetic Control over mtDNA and Its Relationship to Major Depressive Disorder.

Cai N(1), Li Y(1), Chang S(2), Liang J(3), Lin C(3), Zhang X(3), Liang L(3), Hu
J(3), Chan W(1), Kendler KS(4), Malinauskas T(5), Huang GJ(2), Li Q(3), Mott
R(1), Flint J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, Oxfordshire OX3 7BN, UK. (2)Department and Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Tao-Yuan 33302, 
Taiwan. (3)BGI-Shenzhen, Floor 9 Complex Building, Beishan Industrial Zone,
Yantian District, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518083, China. (4)Virginia Institute for
Psychiatric and Behavioral Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, 
VA 23298, USA. (5)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Beckman Building, One Bungtown
Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA. (6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, Oxfordshire OX3 7BN, UK.
Electronic address: jf@well.ox.ac.uk.

Control over the number of mtDNA molecules per cell appears to be tightly
regulated, but the mechanisms involved are largely unknown. Reversible
alterations in the amount of mtDNA occur in response to stress suggesting that
control over the amount of mtDNA is involved in stress-related diseases including
major depressive disorder (MDD). Using low-coverage sequence data from 10,442
Chinese women to compute the normalized numbers of reads mapping to the
mitochondrial genome as a proxy for the amount of mtDNA, we identified two loci
that contribute to mtDNA levels: one within the TFAM gene on chromosome 10
(rs11006126, p value = 8.73 × 10(-28), variance explained = 1.90%) and one over
the CDK6 gene on chromosome 7 (rs445, p value = 6.03 × 10(-16), variance
explained = 0.50%). Both loci replicated in an independent cohort. CDK6 is thus a
new molecule involved in the control of mtDNA. We identify increased rates of
heteroplasmy in women with MDD, and show from an experimental paradigm using mice
that the increase is likely due to stress. Furthermore, at least one
heteroplasmic variant is significantly associated with changes in the amount of
mtDNA (position 513, p value = 3.27 × 10(-9), variance explained = 0.48%)
suggesting site-specific heteroplasmy as a possible link between stress and
increase in amount of mtDNA. These findings indicate the involvement of
mitochondrial genome copy number and sequence in an organism's response to
stress.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4691240
PMID: 26687620  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Dairy Sci. 2016 Feb;99(2):1571-83. doi: 10.3168/jds.2015-9847. Epub 2015 Dec
10.

Mitochondrial DNA copy number and biogenesis in different tissues of early- and
late-lactating dairy cows.

Laubenthal L(1), Hoelker M(2), Frahm J(3), Dänicke S(3), Gerlach K(4), Südekum
KH(4), Sauerwein H(1), Häussler S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Physiology and Hygiene Unit, University of Bonn, 
53115 Bonn, Germany. (2)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and
Husbandry Unit, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. (3)Institute of Animal
Nutrition, Friedrich-Loeffler-Institute (FLI), Federal Research Institute for
Animal Health, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany. (4)Institute of Animal Science,
Animal Nutrition Group, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany. (5)Institute of 
Animal Science, Physiology and Hygiene Unit, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn,
Germany. Electronic address: susanne.haeussler@uni-bonn.de.

Energy balance in dairy cows changes during the course of lactation due to
alterations in voluntary feed intake and energy required for milk synthesis. To
adapt to the demands of lactation, energy metabolism needs to be regulated and
coordinated in key organs such as adipose tissue (AT), liver, and mammary gland. 
Mitochondria are the main sites of energy production in mammalian cells and their
number varies depending on age, organ, and physiological condition. The copy
number of the mitochondrial genome, the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), reflects the
abundance of mitochondria within a cell and is regulated by transcriptional and
translational factors. Environmental, physiological, and energetic conditions
change during lactation and we thus hypothesized that these changes may influence
the mtDNA copy number and the abundance of genes regulating mitochondrial
biogenesis. Therefore, we aimed to provide an overview of mitochondrial
biogenesis in liver, subcutaneous (sc)AT, mammary gland, and peripheral blood
cells during early and late lactation in dairy cows. German Holstein cows (n=21) 
were fed according to their requirements, and biopsies from scAT, liver, mammary 
gland, and blood were collected in early and late lactation and assayed for
relative mtDNA copy numbers and the mRNA abundance of genes regulating
mitochondrial biogenesis, such as nuclear-respiratory factor 1 and 2 (NRF-1,
NRF-2), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1-a (PGC-1a). The number of
mtDNA copies increased from early to late lactation in all tissues, whereas that 
in peripheral blood cells was greater in early compared with late lactation.
Moreover, mitochondrial activity enzymes (i.e., citrate synthase and cytochrome c
oxidase) increased from early to late lactation in scAT. Comparing the number of 
mtDNA copies between tissues and blood in dairy cows, the highest mtDNA content
was observed in liver. The mRNA abundance of genes related to mitochondrial
biogenesis changed in a tissue-specific manner when comparing early versus late
lactation. The mtDNA copy number was associated with transcriptional factors only
in AT, suggesting nontranscriptional regulation of mtDNA in the other tissues. We
detected strong correlations between peripheral blood mtDNA and tissue mtDNA
content in early lactation. Peripheral blood forms an appropriate medium to
display the cellular content of mtDNA copy numbers and consequently the cellular 
energy status of tissues during early lactation.

Copyright © 2016 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26686730  [PubMed - in process]


34. Mitochondrion. 2016 Jan;26:43-57. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2015.12.002. Epub 2015 Dec 
8.

Physical exercise mitigates doxorubicin-induced brain cortex and cerebellum
mitochondrial alterations and cellular quality control signaling.

Marques-Aleixo I(1), Santos-Alves E(2), Balça MM(2), Moreira PI(3), Oliveira
PJ(4), Magalhães J(2), Ascensão A(2).

Author information: 
(1)CIAFEL - Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of 
Sport, University of Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
inesmaleixo@hotmail.com. (2)CIAFEL - Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health
and Leisure, Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal. (3)CNC - Centre for
Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal; Institute of
Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Portugal. (4)CNC - Center
for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, UC Biotech Building,
Biocant Park, Cantanhede, Portugal.

Doxorubicin (DOX) is a highly effective anti-neoplastic agent, whose clinical use
is limited by a dose-dependent mitochondrial toxicity in non-target tissues,
including the brain. Here we analyzed the effects of distinct exercise modalities
(12-week endurance treadmill-TM or voluntary free-wheel activity-FW) performed
before and during sub-chronic DOX treatment on brain cortex and cerebellum
mitochondrial bioenergetics, oxidative stress, permeability transition pore
(mPTP), and proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, apoptosis and
auto(mito)phagy. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into saline-sedentary
(SAL+SED), DOX-sedentary (DOX+SED; 7-week DOX (2mg·kg(-1)per week)), DOX+TM and
DOX+FW. Animal behavior and post-sacrifice mitochondrial function were assessed. 
Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) subunits, oxidative stress markers or related 
proteins (SIRT3, p66shc, UCP2, carbonyls, MDA, -SH, aconitase, Mn-SOD), as well
as proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC1a and TFAM) were evaluated.
Apoptotic signaling was followed through caspases 3, 8 and 9-like activities,
Bax, Bcl2, CypD, ANT and cofilin expression. Mitochondrial dynamics (Mfn1, Mfn2, 
OPA1 and DRP1) and auto(mito)phagy (LC3II, Beclin1, Pink1, Parkin and
p62)-related proteins were measured by semi-quantitative Western blotting. DOX
impaired behavioral performance, mitochondrial function, including lower
resistance to mPTP and increased apoptotic signaling, decreased the content in
OXPHOS complex subunits and increased oxidative stress in brain cortex and
cerebellum. Molecular markers of mitochondrial biogenesis, dynamics and autophagy
were also altered by DOX treatment in both brain subareas. Generally, TM and FW
were able to mitigate DOX-related impairments in brain cortex and cerebellum
mitochondrial activity, mPTP and apoptotic signaling. We conclude that the
alterations in mitochondrial biogenesis, dynamics and autophagy markers induced
by exercise performed before and during treatment may contribute to the observed 
protective brain cortex and cerebellum mitochondrial phenotype, which is more
resistant to oxidative damage and apoptotic signaling in sub-chronically DOX
treated animals.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 26678157  [PubMed - in process]


35. Food Funct. 2016 Feb 17;7(2):805-15. doi: 10.1039/c5fo01062d.

Grape seed procyanidin B2 protects podocytes from high glucose-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis via the AMPK-SIRT1-PGC-1a axis in vitro.

Cai X(1), Bao L(2), Ren J(1), Li Y(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking
University, Beijing, P. R. China. liyongbmu@163.com zhangzhaofeng@126.com.
(2)Department of Clinical Nutrition, Peking University International Hospital,
Beijing, P. R. China.

Grape seed procyanidin B2 (GSPB2) was reported to have protective effects on
diabetic nephropathy (DN) as a strong antioxidant. Our previous studies
demonstrated that GSPB2 was effective in ameliorating podocyte injury in rats
with DN. However, little is known about the benefits of GSPB2 in protecting
against podocyte apoptosis and its molecular mechanisms in vitro. In the present 
study, we investigated whether GSPB2 could protect podocytes from high
glucose-induced apoptosis and explored the possible mechanism. Cell viability and
apoptosis were detected by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium
bromide (MTT) and flow cytometry, respectively. The intracellular reactive oxygen
species (ROS) level was measured using a dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA) 
fluorescent probe. Real-time reverse transcription-PCR was used to determine the 
gene expression of nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), and quantitative real-time PCR was used to detect 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number. Western blots were carried out for the
related protein expression in podocytes. Our results showed that GSPB2
significantly inhibited high glucose-induced podocyte apoptosis and increased the
expression of nephrin and podocalyxin. GSPB2 treatment also suppressed
intracellular ROS production and oxidative stress. The mRNA expressions of NRF-1,
TFAM and mtDNA copy number were markedly increased, and mitochondrial swelling
was effectively reduced in podocytes cultured under high glucose after GSPB2
treatment. The AMPK-SIRT1-PGC-1a axis was also activated by GSPB2 intervention.
In conclusion, GSPB2 protected podocytes from high glucose-induced mitochondrial 
dysfunction and apoptosis via the AMPK-SIRT1-PGC-1a axis in vitro, suggesting a
potential role of GSPB2 in the treatment of DN.

PMID: 26650960  [PubMed - in process]


36. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Nutrient deprivation-related OXPHOS/glycolysis interconversion via HIF-1a/C-MYC
pathway in U251 cells.

Liu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Sun Y(1,)(2), Tan S(1,)(2), Liu L(1,)(2), Hu S(1,)(2), Huo
H(1,)(2), Li M(1,)(2), Cui Q(1,)(2), Yu M(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Life Sciences,
Yunnan University, Kunming, 650091, China. (2)Key Laboratory for Molecular
Biology of High Education in Yunnan Province, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan
University, Kunming, 650091, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic Medicine, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, 610041, China. (4)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, 650091, China.
yumin@ynu.edu.cn. (5)Key Laboratory for Molecular Biology of High Education in
Yunnan Province, School of Life Sciences, Yunnan University, Kunming, 650091,
China. yumin@ynu.edu.cn.

Although the Warburg effect is a dominant metabolic phenotype observed in
cancers, the metabolic changes and adaptation occurring in tumors have been
demonstrated to extend beyond the Warburg effect and thus considered a secondary 
effect to the transformation process of carcinogenesis, including nutritional
deficiencies. However, the role of nutritional deficiencies in this metabolic
reprogramming (e. g., oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)/glycolysis
interconversion) is not completely known yet. Here, we showed that under regular 
culture condition, the proliferation of U251 cells, but not other tumor cell
lines, preferentially performed the Warburg effect and was remarkably inhibited
by oxamic acid which can inhibit the activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH);
whereas under serum starvation, glycolysis was depressed, tricarboxylic acid
cycle (TCA) was enhanced, and the activity of OXPHOS was reinforced to maintain
cellular ATP content in a high level, but interestingly, we observed a decreased 
expression of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Moreover, the upregulated activity
of mitochondrial complex I was confirmed by Western blots and showed that the
mitochondrial-related protein, NDUFA9, NDUFB8, ND1, and VDAC1 were remarkably
increased after serum starved. Mechanistically, nutritional deficiencies could
reduce hypoxia-inducible factor a (HIF-1a) protein expression to increase C-MYC
protein level, which in turn increased nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) transcription to enhance the activity
of OXPHOS, suggesting that metabolic reprogramming by the changes of
microenvironment during the carcinogenesis can provide some novel therapeutic
clues to traditional cancer treatments.

PMID: 26646563  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. J Mol Endocrinol. 2016 Feb;56(2):113-22. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0148. Epub 2015 Dec 
7.

Regulation of human subcutaneous adipocyte differentiation by EID1.

Vargas D(1), Shimokawa N(1), Kaneko R(1), Rosales W(1), Parra A(1), Castellanos
Á(1), Koibuchi N(1), Lizcano F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Biomedical Research (CIBUS)Universidad de La Sabana, Km. 7 Autopista
Norte de Bogota, 140013 Chia, ColombiaDepartment of Integrative PhysiologyGunma
University, Maebashi, JapanInstitute of Experimental Animal ResearchGunma
University, Maebashi, Japan. (2)Center of Biomedical Research (CIBUS)Universidad 
de La Sabana, Km. 7 Autopista Norte de Bogota, 140013 Chia, ColombiaDepartment of
Integrative PhysiologyGunma University, Maebashi, JapanInstitute of Experimental 
Animal ResearchGunma University, Maebashi, Japan
fernando.lizcano@unisabana.edu.co.

Increasing thermogenesis in white adipose tissues can be used to treat
individuals at high risk for obesity and cardiovascular disease. The objective of
this study was to determine the function of EP300-interacting inhibitor of
differentiation (EID1), an inhibitor of muscle differentiation, in the induction 
of beige adipocytes from adipose mesenchymal stem cells (ADMSCs). Subcutaneous
adipose tissue was obtained from healthy women undergoing abdominoplasty. ADMSCs 
were isolated in vitro, grown, and transfected with EID1 or EID1 siRNA, and
differentiation was induced after 48<U+200A>h by administering rosiglitazone. The
effects of EID1 expression under the control of the aP2 promoter (aP2-EID1) were 
also evaluated in mature adipocytes that were differentiated from ADMSCs.
Transfection of EID1 into ADMSCs reduced triglyceride accumulation while
increasing levels of thermogenic proteins, such as PGC1a, TFAM, and mitochondrial
uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), all of which are markers of energy expenditure and
mitochondrial activity. Furthermore, increased expression of the beige phenotype 
markers CITED1 and CD137 was observed. Transfection of aP2-EID1 transfection
induced the conversion of mature white adipocytes to beige adipocytes, as
evidenced by increased expression of PGC1a, UCP1, TFAM, and CITED1. These results
indicate that EID1 can modulate ADMSCs, inducing a brown/beige lineage. EID1 may 
also activate beiging in white adipocytes obtained from subcutaneous human
adipose tissue.

© 2016 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 26643909  [PubMed - in process]


38. Obes Facts. 2015;8(6):373-85. doi: 10.1159/000442399. Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Dynamics of Fat Mass in DUhTP Mice Selected for Running Performance - Fat
Mobilization in a Walk.

Brenmoehl J(1), Ohde D, Walz C, Schultz J, Tuchscherer A, Rieder F, Renne U,
Hoeflich A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Signaling Unit from the Institute for Genome Biology, Leibniz-Institute
for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), Dummerstorf, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Reduction of body fat can be achieved by dietary programs and/or
aerobic exercise training. More convenient methods to rid the body of excess fat 
are needed. However, it is unclear whether it is possible to more easily lose
body weight at all.
METHODS: DUhTP mice bred through phenotype selection for high treadmill
performance and unselected controls were voluntarily physically active in a
running wheel over a period of 3 weeks. Phenotypical data were collected, and
subcutaneous fat was analyzed for expression of mitochondria-relevant proteins.
RESULTS: Voluntary physical activity over 3 weeks exclusively in DUhTP mice
severely reduced subcutaneous (-38%; p < 0.05) and epididymal (-32%; p < 0.05)
fat. Following mild physical activity, subcutaneous fat derived from DUhTP mice
showed increased levels of long chain acyl dehydrogenase (LCAD; +230%; p < 0.05) 
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC1-a;
p < 0.01). Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) expression was similar in 
both sedentary genotypes but physical activity increased Tfam levels exclusively 
in DUhTP (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the mitochondrial mass is highly active in
DUhTP mice and responsive even to mild physical activity. While genetic
predisposition could not prevent fat accretion in DUhTP mice, voluntary activity 
was sufficient to reduce excess body fat almost completely.

© 2015 S. Karger GmbH, Freiburg.

PMID: 26630291  [PubMed - in process]


39. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:643654. doi: 10.1155/2015/643654.
Epub 2015 Nov 4.

The Roots of Atractylodes macrocephala Koidzumi Enhanced Glucose and Lipid
Metabolism in C2C12 Myotubes via Mitochondrial Regulation.

Song MY(1), Kang SY(2), Oh TW(3), Kumar RV(4), Jung HW(2), Park YK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine of Korean Medicine, College of Korean
Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju 707, Republic of Korea ; Korean Medicine
R&D Center, College of Korean Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju 707,
Republic of Korea. (2)Korean Medicine R&D Center, College of Korean Medicine,
Dongguk University, Gyeongju 707, Republic of Korea ; Department of Herbology,
College of Korean Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju 707, Republic of Korea. 
(3)Korean Medicine R&D Center, College of Korean Medicine, Dongguk University,
Gyeongju 707, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Herbology, College of Korean
Medicine, Dongguk University, Gyeongju 707, Republic of Korea.

The root of Atractylodes macrocephala Koidzumi (Atractylodis Rhizoma Alba, ARA)
is a Traditional Korean Medicine and has been commonly used for weight control.
Mitochondrial dysfunction appears to be a key contributor to insulin resistance, 
and therefore mitochondrial targeting drugs represent an important potential
strategy for the treatment of insulin resistance and obesity. In this study, the 
authors investigated the regulatory effects of ARA on mitochondrial function with
respect to the stimulation of glucose and lipid metabolism in C2C12 myotubes.
After differentiating C2C12 myotubes, cells were treated with or without
different concentrations (0.2, 0.5, and 1.0<U+2009>mg/mL) of ARA extract. ARA extract
significantly increased the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor coactivator 1 alpha (PGC1a) and the downregulations of its targets,
nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), transcription factor A (TFAM), and total
ATP content in C2C12 myotubes. ARA extract also increased the expressions of
PGC1a activator and of the metabolic sensors, AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), and acetyl-CoA carboxylase and sirtuin (SIRT) 1. Furthermore, it
significantly increased glucose uptake by enhancing glucose consumption and
subsequently decreased FFA contents and increased carnitine palmitoyltransferase 
(CPT) 1b expression. Our study indicates that ARA has a potential for stimulating
mitochondrial function and energy metabolism in muscle.

PMCID: PMC4649076
PMID: 26617661  [PubMed]


40. Ann Neurol. 2016 Mar;79(3):366-78. doi: 10.1002/ana.24571. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

Mitochondrial DNA Depletion in Respiratory Chain-Deficient Parkinson Disease
Neurons.

Grünewald A(1,)(2,)(3), Rygiel KA(1), Hepplewhite PD(1), Morris CM(4), Picard
M(5), Turnbull DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research and Medical Research
Council/Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council Centre for Ageing 
and Vitality, Institute of Neurosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom. (2)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany. (3)Molecular and Functional Neurobiology Group, Luxembourg
Center for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Campus Belval, Belvaux,
Luxembourg. (4)Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, Campus for Ageing and Vitality,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (5)Division of
Behavioral Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Department of Neurology,
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the extent of respiratory chain abnormalities and
investigate the contribution of mtDNA to the loss of respiratory chain complexes 
(CI-IV) in the substantia nigra (SN) of idiopathic Parkinson disease (IPD)
patients at the single-neuron level.
METHODS: Multiple-label immunofluorescence was applied to postmortem sections of 
10 IPD patients and 10 controls to quantify the abundance of CI-IV subunits
(NDUFB8 or NDUFA13, SDHA, UQCRC2, and COXI) and mitochondrial transcription
factors (TFAM and TFB2M) relative to mitochondrial mass (porin and GRP75) in
dopaminergic neurons. To assess the involvement of mtDNA in respiratory chain
deficiency in IPD, SN neurons, isolated with laser-capture microdissection, were 
assayed for mtDNA deletions, copy number, and presence of
transcription/replication-associated 7S DNA employing a triplex real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay.
RESULTS: Whereas mitochondrial mass was unchanged in single SN neurons from IPD
patients, we observed a significant reduction in the abundances of CI and II
subunits. At the single-cell level, CI and II deficiencies were correlated in
patients. The CI deficiency concomitantly occurred with low abundances of the
mtDNA transcription factors TFAM and TFB2M, which also initiate
transcription-primed mtDNA replication. Consistent with this, real-time PCR
analysis revealed fewer transcription/replication-associated mtDNA molecules and 
an overall reduction in mtDNA copy number in patients. This effect was more
pronounced in single IPD neurons with severe CI deficiency.
INTERPRETATION: Respiratory chain dysfunction in IPD neurons not only involves
CI, but also extends to CII. These deficiencies are possibly a consequence of the
interplay between nDNA and mtDNA-encoded factors mechanistically connected via
TFAM. ANN NEUROL 2016;79:366-378.

© 2016 The Authors. Annals of Neurology published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of American Neurological Association.

PMID: 26605748  [PubMed - in process]


41. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Feb 1;310(3):G205-14. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00270.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Defect of mitochondrial respiratory chain is a mechanism of ROS overproduction in
a rat model of alcoholic liver disease: role of zinc deficiency.

Sun Q(1), Zhong W(2), Zhang W(2), Zhou Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North
Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina; and Center for
Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina. (2)Center for
Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro,
North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina. (3)Department of
Nutrition, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research
Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina; and Center for Translational Biomedical
Research, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina Research
Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina z_zhou@uncg.edu.

Morphological and functional alterations of hepatic mitochondria have been
documented in patients with alcoholic liver disease (ALD). Our recent study
demonstrated that zinc level was decreased in whole liver and mitochondria by
chronic alcohol feeding. The present study was undertaken to determine whether
zinc deficiency mediates alcohol-induced mitochondrial electron transport chain
(ETC) defect and whether defective ETC function may lead to generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Male Wistar rats were pair fed with the
Lieber-DeCarli control or ethanol diet for 5 mo. Chronic alcohol exposure
increased hepatic triglyceride, free fatty acid, and 4-hydroxynonenal (4HNE)
levels; meanwhile hepatic mitochondrial 4HNE level was also increased. Moreover, 
hepatic mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, IV, and V and hepatic ATP
production were decreased by chronic alcohol exposure. Chronic alcohol feeding
decreased peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1-alpha
(PGC1a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1), mitochondrial transcription factor 
A (TFAM), and mitochondrial DNA. HepG2 cells were treated with N,N,N',N'-tetrakis
(2-pyridylmethyl) ethylenediamine (TPEN) for 6 h. Zinc deficiency significantly
decreased mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, and IV. In addition, PGC1a,
NRF1, and TFAM levels as well as mitochondrial DNA were significantly decreased
by TPEN treatment. Knockdown of mitochondrial respiratory complexes I, III, or IV
by shRNA caused a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential and an increase in
ROS production. These results suggest that alcohol-induced hepatic zinc
deficiency could inactivate mitochondrial biogenesis pathway and decrease
mitochondrial DNA replication, which, in turn, decreases mitochondrial complex
protein expression. The defect of mitochondrial respiratory complexes may worsen 
alcohol-induced ROS production.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26585415  [PubMed - in process]


42. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 18;5:16925. doi: 10.1038/srep16925.

Laser controlled singlet oxygen generation in mitochondria to promote
mitochondrial DNA replication in vitro.

Zhou X(1,)(2,)(3), Wang Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Si J(1,)(2,)(3), Zhou R(1,)(2,)(3), Gan
L(1,)(2,)(3), Di C(1,)(2,)(3), Xie Y(1,)(2,)(3), Zhang H(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000,
China. (2)Key laboratory of Heavy Ion Radiation Biology and Medicine Institute of
Nuclear Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. (3)Key laboratory of Heavy-ion
Radiation Medicine of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 730000, China. (4)Graduate School
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100039, China.

Reports have shown that a certain level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) can
promote mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication. However, it is unclear whether it 
is the mitochondrial ROS that stimulate mtDNA replication and this requires
further investigation. Here we employed a photodynamic system to achieve
controlled mitochondrial singlet oxygen ((1)O2) generation. HeLa cells incubated 
with 5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) were exposed to laser irradiation to induce
(1)O2 generation within mitochondria. Increased mtDNA copy number was detected
after low doses of 630 nm laser light in ALA-treated cells. The stimulated mtDNA 
replication was directly linked to mitochondrial (1)O2 generation, as verified
using specific ROS scavengers. The stimulated mtDNA replication was regulated by 
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and mtDNA polymerase <U+03B3>. MtDNA control
region modifications were induced by (1)O2 generation in mitochondria. A marked
increase in 8-Oxoguanine (8-oxoG) level was detected in ALA-treated cells after
irradiation. HeLa cell growth stimulation and G1-S cell cycle transition were
also observed after laser irradiation in ALA-treated cells. These cellular
responses could be due to a second wave of ROS generation detected in
mitochondria. In summary, we describe a controllable method of inducing mtDNA
replication in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4649627
PMID: 26577055  [PubMed - in process]


43. FASEB J. 2016 Feb;30(2):959-70. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-276907. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Training intensity modulates changes in PGC-1a and p53 protein content and
mitochondrial respiration, but not markers of mitochondrial content in human
skeletal muscle.

Granata C(1), Oliveira RS(1), Little JP(1), Renner K(1), Bishop DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Institute of Sport, Exercise and Active Living (ISEAL), College of Sport and 
Exercise Science, Victoria University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; School of 
Health and Exercise Sciences, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna,
British Columbia, Canada; and Department of Internal Medicine III, University
Hospital of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany. (2)*Institute of Sport, Exercise and
Active Living (ISEAL), College of Sport and Exercise Science, Victoria
University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; School of Health and Exercise
Sciences, University of British Columbia Okanagan, Kelowna, British Columbia,
Canada; and Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of
Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany david.bishop@vu.edu.au.

Exercise training has been associated with increased mitochondrial content and
respiration. However, no study to date has compared in parallel how training at
different intensities affects mitochondrial respiration and markers of
mitochondrial biogenesis. Twenty-nine healthy men performed 4 wk (12 cycling
sessions) of either sprint interval training [SIT; 4-10 × 30-s all-out bouts at
~200% of peak power output (WPeak)], high-intensity interval training (HIIT; 4-7 
× 4-min intervals at ~90% WPeak), or sublactate threshold continuous training
(STCT; 20-36 min at ~65% WPeak). The STCT and HIIT groups were matched for total 
work. Resting biopsy samples (vastus lateralis) were obtained before and after
training. The maximal mitochondrial respiration in permeabilized muscle fibers
increased significantly only after SIT (25%). Similarly, the protein content of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator (PGC)-1a, p53, and plant
homeodomain finger-containing protein 20 (PHF20) increased only after SIT
(60-90%). Conversely, citrate synthase activity, and the protein content of TFAM 
and subunits of the electron transport system complexes remained unchanged
throughout. Our findings suggest that training intensity is an important factor
that regulates training-induced changes in mitochondrial respiration and that
there is an apparent dissociation between training-induced changes in
mitochondrial respiration and mitochondrial content. Moreover, changes in the
protein content of PGC-1a, p53, and PHF20 are more strongly associated with
training-induced changes in mitochondrial respiration than mitochondrial
content.-Granata, C., Oliveira, R. S. F., Little, J. P., Renner, K., Bishop, D.
J. Training intensity modulates changes in PGC-1a and p53 protein content and
mitochondrial respiration, but not markers of mitochondrial content in human
skeletal muscle.

© FASEB.

PMID: 26572168  [PubMed - in process]


44. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2016 Jan 15;310(2):G117-27. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00246.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 12.

Iron overload results in hepatic oxidative stress, immune cell activation, and
hepatocellular ballooning injury, leading to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in
genetically obese mice.

Handa P(1), Morgan-Stevenson V(1), Maliken BD(2), Nelson JE(2), Washington S(2), 
Westerman M(3), Yeh MM(4), Kowdley KV(5).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Care Network and Organ Care Research, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle,
Washington; (2)Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Washington; (3)Intrinsic
Life Sciences, La Jolla, California; and. (4)Department of Pathology, University 
of Washington, Seattle, Washington. (5)Liver Care Network and Organ Care
Research, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington; Benaroya Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington; kris.kowdley@swedish.org.

The aim of this study was to determine the effect of iron overload in the
development of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in a genetically obese mouse
model (Lepr(db/db)). Leptin receptor-deficient mice were fed a normal or an
iron-supplemented chow for 8 wk and switched to normal chow for 8 wk. All dietary
iron (DI)-fed mice developed hepatic iron overload predominantly in the
reticuloendothelial system. Hepatocellular ballooning injury was observed in the 
livers of 85% of DI mice, relative to 20% of chow-fed Lepr(db/db). Hepatic
malonyldialdehyde levels and mRNA levels of antioxidant genes (Nrf2, Gpx1, and
Hmox1) were significantly increased in the DI mice. Hepatic mRNA levels of
mitochondrial biogenesis regulators Pgc1a, Tfam, Cox4, and Nrf1 were diminished
in the DI mice. In addition, gene expression levels of cytokines (Il6, Tnfa) and 
several innate and adaptive immune cell markers such as Tlr4, Inos, CD11c, CD4,
CD8, and Ifn<U+03B3> were significantly increased in livers of the DI group. Strikingly,
Nlrp3, a component of the inflammasome and Il18, a cytokine elicited by
inflammasome activation, were significantly upregulated in the livers of DI mice.
In addition, RAW 264.7 macrophages loaded with exogenous iron showed
significantly higher levels of inflammatory markers (Inos, Tnfa, Mcp1, Tlr4).
Thus dietary iron excess leads to hepatic oxidative stress, inflammasome
activation, induction of inflammatory and immune mediators, hepatocellular
ballooning injury, and therefore NASH in this model. Taken together, these
studies indicate a multifactorial role for iron overload in the pathogenesis of
NASH in the setting of obesity and metabolic syndrome.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 26564716  [PubMed - in process]


45. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 6;10(11):e0142436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0142436.
eCollection 2015.

Mitochondrial Transcription Factor A (TFAM) Binds to RNA Containing 4-Way
Junctions and Mitochondrial tRNA.

Brown TA(1), Tkachuk AN(1), Clayton DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Janelia Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, Virginia,
United States of America.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is maintained within nucleoprotein complexes known as
nucleoids. These structures are highly condensed by the DNA packaging protein,
mitochondrial Transcription Factor A (TFAM). Nucleoids also include RNA, RNA:DNA 
hybrids, and are associated with proteins involved with RNA processing and
mitochondrial ribosome biogenesis. Here we characterize the ability of TFAM to
bind various RNA containing substrates in order to determine their role in TFAM
distribution and function within the nucleoid. We find that TFAM binds to
RNA-containing 4-way junctions but does not bind appreciably to RNA hairpins,
internal loops, or linear RNA:DNA hybrids. Therefore the RNA within nucleoids
largely excludes TFAM, and its distribution is not grossly altered with removal
of RNA. Within the cell, TFAM binds to mitochondrial tRNAs, consistent with our
RNA 4-way junction data. Kinetic binding assays and RNase-insensitive TFAM
distribution indicate that DNA remains the preferred substrate within the
nucleoid. However, TFAM binds to tRNA with nanomolar affinity and these complexes
are not rare. TFAM-immunoprecipitated tRNAs have processed ends, suggesting that 
binding is not specific to RNA precursors. The amount of each immunoprecipitated 
tRNA is not well correlated with tRNA celluar abundance, indicating unequal TFAM 
binding preferences. TFAM-mt-tRNA interaction suggests potentially new functions 
for this protein.

PMCID: PMC4636309
PMID: 26545237  [PubMed - in process]


46. Kidney Int. 2015 Nov 4. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.332. [Epub ahead of print]

The inflammatory cytokine TWEAK decreases PGC-1a expression and mitochondrial
function in acute kidney injury.

Ruiz-Andres O(1,)(2), Suarez-Alvarez B(1,)(2), Sánchez-Ramos C(3), Monsalve M(3),
Sanchez-Niño MD(1,)(2), Ruiz-Ortega M(1,)(2,)(4), Egido J(1,)(4,)(5), Ortiz
A(1,)(2,)(4,)(5), Sanz AB(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nephrology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(2)REDinREN, Madrid, Spain. (3)Department of Metabolism and Cellular Signaling,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols' (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain.
(4)School of Medicine, UAM, Madrid, Spain. (5)IRSIN, Madrid, Spain.

Studies of mitochondria-targeted nephroprotective agents suggest a key role of
mitochondrial injury in AKI. Here we tested whether an improved perception of
factors responsible for mitochondrial biogenesis may provide clues to novel
therapeutic approaches to AKI. TWEAK is an inflammatory cytokine which is
upregulated in AKI. Transcriptomic analysis of TWEAK-stimulated cultured murine
tubular epithelial cells and folic acid-induced AKI in mice identified
downregulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivador-1a
(PGC-1a) and its target genes (mitochondrial proteins Ndufs1, Sdha, and Tfam) as 
a shared feature. Neutralizing anti-TWEAK antibodies prevented the decrease in
kidney PGC-1a and its targets during AKI. TWEAK stimulation decreased kidney
PGC-1a expression in healthy mice and decreased expression of PGC-1a and its
targets as well as mitochondrial membrane potential in cultured tubular cells.
Adenoviral-mediated PGC-1a overexpression prevented TWEAK-induced downregulation 
of PGC-1a-dependent genes and the decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential.
TWEAK promoted histone H3 deacetylation at the murine PGC-1a promoter.
TWEAK-induced downregulation of PGC-1a was prevented by histone deacetylase or
NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitors. Thus, TWEAK decreases PGC-1a and target gene expression in
tubular cells in vivo and in vitro. Approaches that preserve mitochondrial
function during kidney injury may be therapeutic for AKI.Kidney International
advance online publication, 4 November 2015; doi:10.1038/ki.2015.332.

PMID: 26535995  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


47. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2015 Oct 25;18(10):1041-6.

[Expression and proliferative regulation of miR-204 related to mitochondrial
transcription factor A in colon cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu K(1), He Y, Li G, Peng J.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Surgery Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China. ylh@medmail.com.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the microRNAs involved in colon cancer proliferation and to 
investigate the expression and regulating function of target miRNA in colon
cancer.
METHODS: Mitochondrial transcription factor A(TFAM), which was proved to be an
oncogene to colon cancer in prior study, was used as target gene. The microRNAs
involved in colon cancer proliferation were screened with miRWalk 2.0 software.
The expression of screened miRNAs was examined in 30 samples of colon cancer
tissue, para-cancer tissue, normal colon cell strain, and 3 colon cancer strains 
(SW480, HT-29, and HCT116) by real-time PCR. MiR-204 presenting lowest expression
was selected to further study in SW480 cells. Dual luciferase reporter assays was
performed to examine the association of TFAM with miR-204. Anti-miR-204
lentivirus and miR-240 lentivirus were used to down-regulate and up-regulate
miR-204 expression respectively. Change of TFAM protein expression in SW480 cells
was detected by Western blotting, and change of SW480 cells proliferation was
detected by MTT and BrdU assay after lentivirus transfection.
RESULTS: After screening, the candidate miRNAs were miR-204, miR-211, miR-214,
miR-381 and miR-590-3p. Expressions of miR-204, miR-211, miR-214 and miR-381 were
lower, but miR-590-3p expression was higher, in colon cancer tissues than those
in para-cancer tissues(all P<0.05). Meanwhile expressions of above 4
miRNAs(miR-204, miR-211, miR-214 and miR-381) were also lower, but miR-590-3p
expression was higher as well, in SW480, HT-29 and HCT116 cells compared to
normal colon cells(all P<0.05). Among above 4 miRNAs, miR-204 showed the lowest
expression in both colon cancer tissues and cell lines. Expression of miR-204 was
negatively correlated with TFAM expression in colon cancer tissues(P<0.05). Dual 
luciferase reporter assays revealed TFAM could be integrated with miR-204
directly, suggesting TFAM as the direct target of miR-204. After up-regulating
miR-204 by lentivirus, expression of TFAM decreased and proliferation increased
in SW480 cells(all P<0.05). After down-regulating miR-204 by lentivirus,
expression of TFAM increased and proliferation decreased in SW480 cells(all
P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: MiR-204 inhibits TFAM expression and up-regulates the proliferation
of colon cancer cells SW480.

PMID: 26499153  [PubMed - in process]


48. Neurotoxicology. 2015 Dec;51:116-37. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.10.002. Epub 2015 
Oct 19.

Quercetin protects against aluminium induced oxidative stress and promotes
mitochondrial biogenesis via activation of the PGC-1a signaling pathway.

Sharma DR(1), Sunkaria A(1), Wani WY(1), Sharma RK(1), Verma D(1), Priyanka K(1),
Bal A(2), Gill KD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. (2)Department of Histopathology, Postgraduate
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. (3)Department of 
Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research,
Chandigarh 160012, India. Electronic address: kdgill2002@yahoo.co.in.

The present investigation was carried out to elucidate a possible molecular
mechanism related to the protective effect of quercetin administration against
aluminium-induced oxidative stress on various mitochondrial respiratory complex
subunits with special emphasis on the role of PGC-1a and its downstream targets, 
i.e. NRF-1, NRF-2 and Tfam in mitochondrial biogenesis. Aluminium lactate
(10mg/kg b.wt./day) was administered intragastrically to rats, which were
pre-treated with quercetin 6h before aluminium (10mg/kg b.wt./day,
intragastrically) for 12 weeks. We found a decrease in ROS levels, mitochondrial 
DNA oxidation and citrate synthase activity in the hippocampus (HC) and corpus
striatum (CS) regions of rat brain treated with quercetin. Besides this an
increase in the mRNA levels of the mitochondrial encoded subunits - ND1, ND2,
ND3, Cyt b, COX1, COX3 and ATPase6 along with increased expression of nuclear
encoded subunits COX4, COX5A and COX5B of electron transport chain (ETC). In
quercetin treated group an increase in the mitochondrial DNA copy number and
mitochondrial content in both the regions of rat brain was observed. The PGC-1a
was up regulated in quercetin treated rats along with NRF-1, NRF-2 and Tfam,
which act downstream from PGC-1a. Electron microscopy results revealed a
significant decrease in the mitochondrial cross-section area, mitochondrial
perimeter length and increase in mitochondrial number in case of quercetin
treated rats as compared to aluminium treated ones. Therefore it seems quercetin 
increases mitochondrial biogenesis and makes it an almost ideal flavanoid to
control or limit the damage that has been associated with the defective
mitochondrial function seen in many neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26493151  [PubMed - in process]


49. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 3;112(44):E6000-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1505036112. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Mitochondrial retrograde signaling regulates neuronal function.

Cagin U(1), Duncan OF(1), Gatt AP(1), Dionne MS(2), Sweeney ST(3), Bateman JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Guy's Campus, King's College London, 
London SE1 1UL, United Kingdom; (2)Department of Life Sciences, South Kensington 
Campus, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom; (3)Department of
Biology, University of York, Heslington York YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. (4)Wolfson
Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Guy's Campus, King's College London, London SE1 
1UL, United Kingdom; joseph_matthew.bateman@kcl.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 15;112(50):E7032.

Mitochondria are key regulators of cellular homeostasis, and mitochondrial
dysfunction is strongly linked to neurodegenerative diseases, including
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's. Mitochondria communicate their bioenergetic status
to the cell via mitochondrial retrograde signaling. To investigate the role of
mitochondrial retrograde signaling in neurons, we induced mitochondrial
dysfunction in the Drosophila nervous system. Neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction 
causes reduced viability, defects in neuronal function, decreased redox
potential, and reduced numbers of presynaptic mitochondria and active zones. We
find that neuronal mitochondrial dysfunction stimulates a retrograde signaling
response that controls the expression of several hundred nuclear genes. We show
that the Drosophila hypoxia inducible factor alpha (HIFa) ortholog Similar (Sima)
regulates the expression of several of these retrograde genes, suggesting that
Sima mediates mitochondrial retrograde signaling. Remarkably, knockdown of Sima
restores neuronal function without affecting the primary mitochondrial defect,
demonstrating that mitochondrial retrograde signaling is partly responsible for
neuronal dysfunction. Sima knockdown also restores function in a Drosophila model
of the mitochondrial disease Leigh syndrome and in a Drosophila model of familial
Parkinson's disease. Thus, mitochondrial retrograde signaling regulates neuronal 
activity and can be manipulated to enhance neuronal function, despite
mitochondrial impairment.

PMCID: PMC4640732 [Available on 2016-05-03]
PMID: 26489648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Dec;89:852-62. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.10.412. Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Vitamin C and E supplementation prevents some of the cellular adaptations to
endurance-training in humans.

Morrison D(1), Hughes J(1), Della Gatta PA(1), Mason S(1), Lamon S(1), Russell
AP(1), Wadley GD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Physical Activity and Nutrition (C-PAN) Research, School of
Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood,
Victoria, Australia. (2)Centre for Physical Activity and Nutrition (C-PAN)
Research, School of Exercise and Nutrition Sciences, Deakin University, 221
Burwood Highway, Burwood, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
glenn.wadley@deakin.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: It is clear that reactive oxygen species (ROS) produced during
skeletal muscle contraction have a regulatory role in skeletal muscle adaptation 
to endurance exercise. However, there is much controversy in the literature
regarding whether attenuation of ROS by antioxidant supplementation can prevent
these cellular adaptations. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine
whether vitamin C and E supplementation attenuates performance and cellular
adaptations following acute endurance exercise and endurance training.
METHODS: A double-blinded, placebo-controlled randomized control trial was
conducted in eleven healthy young males. Participants were matched for peak
oxygen consumption (VO2peak) and randomly allocated to placebo or antioxidant
(vitamin C (2×500mg/day) and E (400IU/day)) groups. Following a four-week
supplement loading period, participants completed acute exercise (10×4min cycling
at 90% VO2peak, 2min active recovery). Vastus lateralis muscle samples were
collected pre-, immediately-post- and 3h-post-exercise. Participants then
completed four weeks of training (3 days/week) using the aforementioned exercise 
protocol while continuing supplementation. Following exercise training,
participants again completed an acute exercise bout with muscle biopsies.
RESULTS: Acute exercise tended to increase skeletal muscle oxidative stress as
measured by oxidized glutathione (GSSG) (P=0.058) and F2-isoprostanes (P=0.056), 
with no significant effect of supplementation. Acute exercise significantly
increased mRNA levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and PGC
related coactivator (PRC), with no effect of supplementation. Following endurance
training, supplementation did not prevent significantly increased VO2peak,
skeletal muscle levels of citrate synthase activity or mRNA or protein abundance 
of cytochrome oxidase subunit 4 (COX IV) (P<0.05). However, following training,
vitamin C and E supplementation significantly attenuated increased skeletal
muscle superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity and protein abundance of SOD2 and
TFAM.
CONCLUSION: Following acute exercise, supplementation with vitamin C and E did
not attenuate skeletal muscle oxidative stress or increased gene expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis markers. However, supplementation attenuated some (SOD, 
TFAM) of the increased skeletal muscle adaptations following training in healthy 
young men.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26482865  [PubMed - in process]


51. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Oct 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Acute Carnosine Administration Increases Respiratory Chain Complexes and Citric
Acid Cycle Enzyme Activities in Cerebral Cortex of Young Rats.

Macedo LW(1), Cararo JH(1), Maravai SG(1), Gonçalves CL(2), Oliveira GM(3,)(4),
Kist LW(3,)(4), Guerra Martinez C(5), Kurtenbach E(5), Bogo MR(3,)(4), Hipkiss
AR(6), Streck EL(2), Schuck PF(1), Ferreira GC(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Erros Inatos do Metabolismo, Universidade do Extremo Sul
Catarinense, Criciúma, SC, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de Bioenergética, Universidade 
do Extremo Sul Catarinense, Criciúma, SC, Brazil. (3)Laboratório de Biologia
Genômica e Molecular, Faculdade de Biociências, Pontifícia Universidade Católica 
do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (4)Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Medicina e Ciências da Saúde, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do
Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (5)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho,
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (6)School of 
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, The
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK. (7)Laboratório de
Bioenergética, Instituto de Bioquímica Médica Leopoldo de Meis, Universidade
Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho, 373, Cidade Universitária -
Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 21941-902, Brazil.
gustavo.ferreira@bioqmed.ufrj.br.

Carnosine (ß-alanyl-L-histidine) is an imidazole dipeptide synthesized in
excitable tissues of many animals, whose biochemical properties include carbonyl 
scavenger, anti-oxidant, bivalent metal ion chelator, proton buffer, and
immunomodulating agent, although its precise physiological role(s) in skeletal
muscle and brain tissues in vivo remain unclear. The aim of the present study was
to investigate the in vivo effects of acute carnosine administration on various
aspects of brain bioenergetics of young Wistar rats. The activity of
mitochondrial enzymes in cerebral cortex was assessed using a spectrophotometer, 
and it was found that there was an increase in the activities of complexes I-III 
and II-III and succinate dehydrogenase in carnosine-treated rats, as compared to 
vehicle-treated animals. However, quantitative real-time RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) data on
mRNA levels of mitochondrial biogenesis-related proteins (nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (Nrf1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1-a
(Ppargc1a), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam)) were not altered
significantly and therefore suggest that short-term carnosine administration does
not affect mitochondrial biogenesis. It was in agreement with the finding that
immunocontent of respiratory chain complexes was not altered in animals receiving
carnosine. These observations indicate that acute carnosine administration
increases the respiratory chain and citric acid cycle enzyme activities in
cerebral cortex of young rats, substantiating, at least in part, a neuroprotector
effect assigned to carnosine against oxidative-driven disorders.

PMID: 26476839  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


52. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 8;10(10):e0139416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139416.
eCollection 2015.

Mitochondrial ROS Induces Cardiac Inflammation via a Pathway through mtDNA Damage
in a Pneumonia-Related Sepsis Model.

Yao X(1), Carlson D(1), Sun Y(1), Ma L(1), Wolf SE(1), Minei JP(1), Zang QS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 
Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.

We have previously shown that mitochondria-targeted vitamin E (Mito-Vit-E), a
mtROS specific antioxidant, improves cardiac performance and attenuates
inflammation in a pneumonia-related sepsis model. In this study, we applied the
same approaches to decipher the signaling pathway(s) of mtROS-dependent cardiac
inflammation after sepsis. Sepsis was induced in Sprague Dawley rats by
intratracheal injection of S. pneumoniae. Mito-Vit-E, vitamin E or vehicle was
administered 30 minutes later. In myocardium 24 hours post-inoculation,
Mito-Vit-E, but not vitamin E, significantly protected mtDNA integrity and
decreased mtDNA damage. Mito-Vit-E alleviated sepsis-induced reduction in
mitochondria-localized DNA repair enzymes including DNA polymerase <U+03B3>, AP
endonuclease, 8-oxoguanine glycosylase, and uracil-DNA glycosylase. Mito-Vit-E
dramatically improved metabolism and membrane integrity in mitochondria,
suppressed leakage of mtDNA into the cytoplasm, inhibited up-regulation of
Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) pathway factors MYD88 and RAGE, and limited RAGE
interaction with its ligand TFAM in septic hearts. Mito-Vit-E also deactivated
NF-<U+03BA>B and caspase 1, reduced expression of the essential inflammasome component
ASC, and decreased inflammatory cytokine IL-1ß. In vitro, both Mito-Vit-E and
TLR9 inhibitor OND-I suppressed LPS-induced up-regulation in MYD88, RAGE, ASC,
active caspase 1, and IL-1ß in cardiomyocytes. Since free mtDNA escaped from
damaged mitochondria function as a type of DAMPs to stimulate inflammation
through TLR9, these data together suggest that sepsis-induced cardiac
inflammation is mediated, at least partially, through mtDNA-TLR9-RAGE. At last,
Mito-Vit-E reduced the circulation of myocardial injury marker troponin-I,
diminished apoptosis and amended morphology in septic hearts, suggesting that
mitochondria-targeted antioxidants are a potential cardioprotective approach for 
sepsis.

PMCID: PMC4598156
PMID: 26448624  [PubMed - in process]


53. Genes Cells. 2015 Dec;20(12):1017-27. doi: 10.1111/gtc.12306. Epub 2015 Oct 7.

Interaction of human mitochondrial transcription factor A in mitochondria: its
involvement in the dynamics of mitochondrial DNA nucleoids.

Kasashima K(1), Endo H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, 329-0498, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a key regulator of mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA). TFAM interacts with itself and forms dimers; however, the precise
interaction domain in vivo has not yet been determined. We herein showed that
human TFAM formed oligomers in mitochondria by in situ chemical cross-linking. We
used the separated fluorescent protein, monomeric Kusabira-Green, as a reporter
to monitor their self-association in mitochondria. This reporter successfully
detected the TFAM-TFAM interaction in cells as fluorescent signals on
mitochondria. We also found that the N-terminal high-mobility group box domain
was sufficient for this interaction. The expression of the dimer-defective mutant
induced enlarged mtDNA nucleoids, suggesting the importance of dimerization in
the distribution of mtDNA. The reporter system also supported the association and
mixture between independent nucleoids through TFAM by a cell fusion assay using
hemagglutinating virus of Japan. We here, for the first time, visualized the
interaction of TFAM molecules in mitochondria and proposed its implications for
the dynamics of mtDNA nucleoids.

© 2015 The Molecular Biology Society of Japan and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 26445116  [PubMed - in process]


54. Mitochondrion. 2015 Nov;25:67-75. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2015.10.001. Epub 2015 Oct 
3.

Regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis through TFAM-mitochondrial DNA
interactions: Useful insights from aging and calorie restriction studies.

Picca A(1), Lezza AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of
Bari, Via Orabona, 4, 70125, Bari, Italy. (2)Department of Biosciences,
Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari, Via Orabona, 4, 70125, 
Bari, Italy. Electronic address: angelamariaserena.lezza@uniba.it.

Mitochondrial biogenesis is regulated to adapt mitochondrial population to cell
energy demands. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) performs several
functions for mtDNA and interactions between TFAM and mtDNA participate to
regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis. Such interactions are modulated through
different mechanisms: regulation of TFAM expression and turnover, modulation of
TFAM binding activity to mtDNA through post-translational modifications and
differential affinity of TFAM, occurrence of TFAM sliding on mtDNA filaments and 
of cooperative binding among TFAM molecules, modulation of protein-protein
interactions. The tissue-specific regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis in aging
and calorie restriction (CR) highlights the relevance of modulation of TFAM-mtDNA
interactions.

PMID: 26437364  [PubMed - in process]


55. Nutrition. 2015 Nov-Dec;31(11-12):1402-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2015.05.011. Epub
2015 Jun 6.

Vitamin A exerts its antiinflammatory activities in colitis through preservation 
of mitochondrial activity.

Reifen R(1), Levy E(2), Berkovich Z(2), Tirosh O(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. Electronic address:
ram.reifen@mail.huji.ac.il. (2)The Robert H. Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food
and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to assess the protective effects of vitamin
A in a rat model of colitis to elucidate a possible mechanism of action.
METHODS: Male rats were fed for 21 d with either a normal diet or high vitamin A 
diet (5000 IU/d). On day 22, colitis was induced with
2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS). Rats were sacrificed after 24 h and
colonic tissue was removed for evaluation.
RESULTS: Morphologically, in the supplemented group preservation of tissue
architecture, no vasculitis or necroses were detected. Biochemically, decreased
myeloperoxidase activity and protection of the mitochondria as evaluated by
preserving tissue oxygen consumption, mitochondrial DNA, and expression of
cytochrome c, was observed. Vitamin A supplementation also increased the levels
of nuclear respiratory factor (NFR)-1 and mitochondrial transcription factor-A
(TFAM) in normal colon tissue and in colon tissue under inflammatory conditions.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that tissue damage in colitis is accompanied by 
the arrest of mitochondrial respiration, loss of mitochondrial DNA, and the
expression of mitochondrial proteins. Vitamin A effectively protects colon
mitochondria by upregulation of mitochondrial transcription factors, NFR-1 and
TFAM, and prevents inflammatory and necrotic changes in colitis. Vitamin A is
therefore a potential therapeutic agent in inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26429662  [PubMed - in process]


56. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 3):650-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.039. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

Association of DNA sequence variation in mitochondrial DNA polymerase with
mitochondrial DNA synthesis and risk of oral cancer.

Datta S(1), Ray A(1), Roy R(1), Roy B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, 203 BT Road, Kolkata
700108, India. (2)Human Genetics Unit, Indian Statistical Institute, 203 BT Road,
Kolkata 700108, India. Electronic address: broy@isical.ac.in.

Enzymes responsible for mitochondrial (mt) DNA synthesis and transcription are
encoded by nuclear genome and inherited mutations in these genes may play
important roles in enhancing risk of precancer and cancer. Here, genetic
variations in 23 functionally relevant tagSNPs in 6 genes responsible for mtDNA
synthesis and transcription were studied in 522 cancer and 241 precancer (i.e.
leukoplakia) patients and 525 healthy controls using Illumina Golden Gate assay
to explore association with risk of oral precancer and cancer. Two SNPs,
rs41553913 at POLRMT and rs9905016 at POLG2, significantly increased risk of oral
leukoplakia and cancer, respectively, at both genotypic and allelic levels.
Gene-environment interaction models also revealed that tobacco habits and SNPs at
POLG2 and TFAM may modulate risk of both leukoplakia and cancer. In silico
analysis of published data-set also revealed that variant heterozygote (TC)
significantly increased transcription of POLG2 compared to wild genotype
(p=0.03). Cancer tissues having variant allele genotypes (TC+CC) at POLG2
contained 1.6 times (p<0.01) more mtDNA compared to cancer tissues having wild
genotype (TT). In conclusion, polymorphisms at POLG2 and POLRMT increased risk of
oral cancer and leukoplakia, respectively, probably modulating synthesis and
activity of the enzymes. Enhanced synthesis of mtDNA in cancer tissues may have
implication in carcinogenesis, but the mechanism is yet to be explored.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26403317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nutrients. 2015 Sep 22;7(9):8152-69. doi: 10.3390/nu7095385.

Rutin Increases Muscle Mitochondrial Biogenesis with AMPK Activation in High-Fat 
Diet-Induced Obese Rats.

Seo S(1), Lee MS(2), Chang E(3), Shin Y(4), Oh S(5), Kim IH(6), Kim Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Science and Food Management, Ewha Womans University,
Seoul 120-750, Korea. sjseo27@naver.com. (2)Department of Nutritional Science and
Food Management, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea. troph@hanmail.net.
(3)Department of Nutritional Science and Food Management, Ewha Womans University,
Seoul 120-750, Korea. eugenics77@hotmail.com. (4)Department of Nutritional
Science and Food Management, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.
yjin19@hotmail.com. (5)Department of Nutritional Science and Food Management,
Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea. ohsjmay@naver.com. (6)Department of
Food and Nutrition, Korea University, Seoul 136-703, Korea. k610in@korea.ac.kr.
(7)Department of Nutritional Science and Food Management, Ewha Womans University,
Seoul 120-750, Korea. yhmoon@ewha.ac.kr.

Decreased mitochondrial number and dysfunction in skeletal muscle are associated 
with obesity and the progression of obesity-associated metabolic disorders. The
specific aim of the current study was to investigate the effects of rutin on
mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle of high-fat diet-induced obese rats. 
Supplementation with rutin reduced body weight and adipose tissue mass, despite
equivalent energy intake (p < 0.05). Rutin significantly increased mitochondrial 
size and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content as well as gene expression related to 
mitochondrial biogenesis, such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), transcription
factor A (Tfam), and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent
deacetylase, sirtulin1 (SIRT1) in skeletal muscle (p < 0.05). Moreover, rutin
consumption increased muscle adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) activity by 40% (p < 0.05). Taken together, these results suggested at
least partial involvement of muscle mitochondria and AMPK activation in the
rutin-mediated beneficial effect on obesity.

PMCID: PMC4586580
PMID: 26402699  [PubMed - in process]


58. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Nov;36(5):1223-32. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2345. Epub 2015 Sep
15.

Beneficial effects of astragaloside IV against angiotensin II-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction in rat vascular smooth muscle cells.

Lu Y(1), Li S(1), Wu H(1), Bian Z(2), Xu J(1), Gu C(2), Chen X(2), Yang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China. (2)Research Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

Angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced mitochondrial dysfunction is a prominent
characteristic of the majority of cardiovascular diseases. Astragaloside IV
(As-IV), the major active ingredient of Astragalus membranaceus (Fisch.) Bge. (a 
traditional Chinese herbal medicine), possesses antioxidant properties. The
present study was carried out to examine whether As-IV can reverse Ang II-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and to
elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms. Cultured rat aortic VSMCs treated 
with Ang II (1 µM) for 24 h exhibited mitochondrial dysfunction, including a
decrease in mitochondrial oxygen consumption rates (OCRs), adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) production and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) levels, as well as the disruption 
of mitochondrial structural integrity. Following treatment with Ang II, As-IV (50
µg/ml) was added to the culture medium followed by incubation for a further 24 h.
The administration of As-IV significantly increased the mitochondrial OCRs, ATP
production and the mtDNA levels, and reversed the mitochondrial morphological
changes which occurred in the VSMCs. Treatment with As-IV also reversed the Ang
II-induced increase in the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), the
increase in NADPH oxidase and xanthine oxidase activity, as well as the decrease 
in mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m) and manganese superoxide dismutase
(Mn-SOD) activity. Furthermore, treatment with As-IV led to an increase in the
mRNA expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), and in
the protein expression of PGC-1a, parkin and dynamin 1-like protein 1 (Drp1) in
the VSMCs. These results indicate that As-IV exerts beneficial effects on Ang
II-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in rat VSMCs and that these effects are
mediated through the inhibition of ROS overproduction, as well as the promotion
of mitochondrial autophagy and mitochondrial biogenesis. These data demonstrate
the antioxidant properties of As-IV.

PMCID: PMC4601744
PMID: 26398547  [PubMed - in process]


59. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Dec 1;24(23):6580-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv361. Epub 2015 Sep
14.

Cyclophilin D, a target for counteracting skeletal muscle dysfunction in
mitochondrial myopathy.

Gineste C(1), Hernandez A(1), Ivarsson N(1), Cheng AJ(1), Naess K(2), Wibom R(3),
Lesko N(3), Bruhn H(3), Wedell A(4), Freyer C(5), Zhang SJ(1), Carlström M(1),
Lanner JT(1), Andersson DC(1), Bruton JD(1), Wredenberg A(6), Westerblad H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology. (2)Department of Laboratory
Medicine. (3)Center for Inherited Metabolic Disease (CMMS), Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery,
Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden and Center 
for Inherited Metabolic Disease (CMMS), Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Center for Inherited
Metabolic Disease (CMMS), Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Center for Inherited Metabolic Disease
(CMMS), Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden anna.wredenberg@ki.se
hakan.westerblad@ki.se. (7)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,
anna.wredenberg@ki.se hakan.westerblad@ki.se.

Muscle weakness and exercise intolerance are hallmark symptoms in mitochondrial
disorders. Little is known about the mechanisms leading to impaired skeletal
muscle function and ultimately muscle weakness in these patients. In a mouse
model of lethal mitochondrial myopathy, the muscle-specific Tfam knock-out (KO)
mouse, we previously demonstrated an excessive mitochondrial Ca(2+) uptake in
isolated muscle fibers that could be inhibited by the cyclophilin D (CypD)
inhibitor, cyclosporine A (CsA). Here we show that the Tfam KO mice have
increased CypD levels, and we demonstrate that this increase is a common feature 
in patients with mitochondrial myopathy. We tested the effect of CsA treatment on
Tfam KO mice during the transition from a mild to terminal myopathy. CsA
treatment counteracted the development of muscle weakness and improved muscle
fiber Ca(2+) handling. Importantly, CsA treatment prolonged the lifespan of these
muscle-specific Tfam KO mice. These results demonstrate that CsA treatment is an 
efficient therapeutic strategy to slow the development of severe mitochondrial
myopathy.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4634369 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26374844  [PubMed - in process]


60. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Nov 1;338(2):183-93. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.09.005. Epub
2015 Sep 8.

Rosiglitazone activation of PPAR<U+03B3>-dependent signaling is neuroprotective in
mutant huntingtin expressing cells.

Chiang MC(1), Cheng YC(2), Nicol CJ(3), Lin KH(4), Yen CH(5), Chen SJ(6), Huang
RN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Science and Engineering, Fu Jen
Catholic University, New Taipei City 242, Taiwan. Electronic address:
cmcphd@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chang Gung
University, Tao Yuan 333, Taiwan. (3)Departments of Pathology & Molecular
Medicine and Biomedical & Molecular Sciences, and Cancer Biology and Genetics
Division, Cancer Research Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada K7L
3N6. (4)Graduate Institute of Biotechnology, Chinese Culture University, Taipei
111, Taiwan. (5)Department of International Business, Ming Chuan University,
Taipei 111, Taiwan. (6)Department of Life Science and Institute of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology, College of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei
106, Taiwan. (7)Department of Entomology and Research Center for Plant-Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) is a crucial
transcription factor for neuroprotection in several brain diseases. Using a mouse
model of Huntington's Disease (HD), we recently showed that PPAR<U+03B3> not only played
a major function in preventing HD, but also oral intake of a PPAR<U+03B3> agonist
(thiazolidinedione, TZD) significantly reduced the formation of mutant Huntingtin
(mHtt) aggregates in the brain (e.g., cortex and striatum). The molecular
mechanisms by which PPAR<U+03B3> exerts its HD neuroprotective effects remain
unresolved. We investigated whether the PPAR<U+03B3> agonist (rosiglitazone) mediates
neuroprotection in the mHtt expressing neuroblastoma cell line (N2A). Here we
show that rosiglitazone upregulated the endogenous expression of PPAR<U+03B3>, its
downstream target genes (including PGC1a, NRF-1 and Tfam) and mitochondrial
function in mHtt expressing N2A cells. Rosiglitazone treatment also significantly
reduced mHtt aggregates that included ubiquitin (Ub) and heat shock factor 1
(HSF1), as assessed by a filter-retardation assay, and increased the levels of
the functional ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS), HSF1 and heat shock protein
27/70 (HSP27/70) in N2A cells. Moreover, rosiglitazone treatment normalized
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress sensors Bip, CHOP and ASK1, and significantly
increased N2A cell survival. Taken together, these findings unveil new insights
into the mechanisms by which activation of PPAR<U+03B3> signaling protects against the
HD-mediated neuronal impairment. Further, our data also support the concept that 
PPAR<U+03B3> may be a novel therapeutic target for treating HD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26362846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Hepatol. 2016 Jan;64(1):171-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.08.022. Epub 2015 Aug
29.

Gestational exercise protects adult male offspring from high-fat diet-induced
hepatic steatosis.

Sheldon RD(1), Nicole Blaize A(2), Fletcher JA(1), Pearson KJ(3), Donkin SS(4),
Newcomer SC(5), Rector RS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO, USA; Research Service-Harry S Truman Memorial VA Hospital,
Columbia, MO, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA. (3)Department of Pharmacology and Nutritional Sciences, 
College of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. (4)Department of
Nutrition, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA. (5)Department of
Kinesiology, California State - San Marcos, San Marcos, CA, USA. (6)Department of
Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA;
Department of Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA; Research
Service-Harry S Truman Memorial VA Hospital, Columbia, MO, USA. Electronic
address: rectors@health.missouri.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Mounting evidence indicates that maternal exercise confers
protection to adult offspring against various diseases. Here we hypothesized that
maternal exercise during gestation would reduce high-fat diet (HFD)-induced
hepatic steatosis in adult rat offspring.
METHODS: Following conception, pregnant dams were divided into either voluntary
wheel running exercise (GE) or wheel-locked sedentary (GS) groups throughout
gestation (days 4-21). Post-weaning, offspring received either normal chow diet
(CD; 10% fat, 70% carbohydrate, 20% protein) or HFD (45% fat, 35% carbohydrate,
and 20% protein) until sacrificed at 4- or 8-months of age.
RESULTS: GE did not affect offspring birth weight or litter size. HFD feeding in 
offspring increased weight gain, body fat percentage, and glucose tolerance test 
area under the curve (GTT-AUC). Male offspring from GE dams had reduced body fat 
percentage across all ages (p<0.05). In addition, 8-month male offspring from GE 
dams were protected against HFD-induced hepatic steatosis, which was associated
with increased markers of hepatic mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1a and TFAM),
autophagic potential (ATG12:ATG5 conjugation) and hepatic triacylglycerol
secretion (MTTP).
CONCLUSIONS: The current study provides the first evidence that gestational
exercise can reduce susceptibility to HFD-induced hepatic steatosis in adult male
offspring.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4691424 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26325536  [PubMed - in process]


62. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Oct 1;222:124-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.08.011.
Epub 2015 Aug 24.

FSH and bFGF regulate the expression of genes involved in Sertoli cell energetic 
metabolism.

Regueira M(1), Riera MF(1), Galardo MN(1), Camberos Mdel C(1), Pellizzari EH(1), 
Cigorraga SB(1), Meroni SB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas "Dr. César Bergadá",
CONICET-FEI-División de Endocrinología, Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez,
Gallo 1330, C1425EDF Buenos Aires, Argentina. (2)Centro de Investigaciones
Endocrinológicas "Dr. César Bergadá", CONICET-FEI-División de Endocrinología,
Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, Gallo 1330, C1425EDF Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Electronic address: smeroni@cedie.org.ar.

The purpose of this study was to investigate if FSH and bFGF regulate fatty acid 
(FA) metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis in Sertoli cells (SC). SC cultures
obtained from 20-day-old rats were incubated with 100ng/ml FSH or 30ng/ml bFGF
for 6, 12, 24 and 48h. The expression of genes involved in transport and
metabolism of FA such as: fatty acid transporter CD36 (FAT/CD36),
carnitine-palmitoyltransferase 1 (CPT1), long- and medium-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenases (LCAD, MCAD), and of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis
such as: nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF1, NRF2) and transcription
factor A (Tfam), was analyzed. FSH stimulated FAT/CD36, CPT1, MCAD, NRF1, NRF2
and Tfam mRNA levels while bFGF only stimulated CPT1 expression. A possible
participation of PPARß/d activation in the regulation of gene expression and
lactate production was then evaluated. SC cultures were incubated with FSH or
bFGF in the presence of the PPARß/d antagonist GSK3787 (GSK; 20µM). bFGF
stimulation of CPT1 expression and lactate production were inhibited by GSK. On
the other hand, FSH effects were not inhibited by GSK indicating that FSH
regulates the expression of genes involved in FA transport and metabolism and in 
mitochondrial biogenesis, independently of PPARß/d activation. FA oxidation and
mitochondrial biogenesis as well as lactate production are essential for the
energetic metabolism of the seminiferous tubule. The fact that these processes
are regulated by hormones in a different way reflects the multifarious regulation
of molecular mechanisms involved in Sertoli cell function.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26315388  [PubMed - in process]


63. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 26;10(8):e0136441. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136441.
eCollection 2015.

Kidney-Specific Reduction of Oxidative Phosphorylation Genes Derived from
Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat.

Collett JA(1), Paulose JK(1), Cassone VM(1), Osborn JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, the United
States of America.

Mitochondrial (Mt) dysfunction contributes to the pathophysiology of renal
function and promotes cardiovascular disease such as hypertension. We hypothesize
that renal Mt-genes derived from female spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR)
that exhibit hypertension have reduced expression specific to kidney cortex.
After breeding a female Okamoto-Aoki SHR (SAP = 188mmHg) with Brown Norway (BN)
males (SAP = 100 and 104 mmHg), hypertensive female progeny were backcrossed with
founder BN for 5 consecutive generations in order to maintain the SHR
mitochondrial genome in offspring that contain over increasing BN nuclear genome.
Mt-protein coding genes (13 total) and nuclear transcription factors mediating
Mt-gene transcription were evaluated in kidney, heart and liver of normotensive
(NT: n = 20) vs. hypertensive (HT: n = 20) BN/SHR-mtSHR using quantitative
real-time PCR. Kidney cortex, but not liver or heart Mt-gene expression was
decreased ~2-5 fold in 12 of 13 protein encoding genes of HT BN/SHR-mtSHR. Kidney
cortex but not liver mRNA expression of the nuclear transcription factors Tfam,
NRF1, NRF2 and Pgc1a were also decreased in HT BN/SHR-mtSHR. Kidney cortical
tissue of HT BN/SHR-mtSHR exhibited lower cytochrome oxidase histochemical
staining, indicating a reduction in renal oxidative phosphorylation but not in
liver or heart. These results support the hypothesis that renal cortex of rats
with SHR mitochondrial genome has specifically altered renal expression of genes 
encoding mitochondrial proteins. This kidney-specific coordinated reduction of
mitochondrial and nuclear oxidative metabolism genes may be associated with
heritable hypertension in SHR.

PMCID: PMC4550288
PMID: 26308211  [PubMed - in process]


64. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 8;112(36):11288-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1512131112. Epub 2015 Aug 24.

Cross-strand binding of TFAM to a single mtDNA molecule forms the mitochondrial
nucleoid.

Kukat C(1), Davies KM(2), Wurm CA(3), Spåhr H(4), Bonekamp NA(4), Kühl I(4), Joos
F(2), Polosa PL(5), Park CB(6), Posse V(7), Falkenberg M(7), Jakobs S(8),
Kühlbrandt W(2), Larsson NG(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of
Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany; FACS & Imaging Core Facility, Max Planck
Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany; (2)Department of
Structural Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysics, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, 
Germany; (3)Department of NanoBiophotonics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical 
Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany; (4)Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max 
Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany; (5)Department of 
Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari Aldo Moro, 
70125 Bari, Italy; (6)Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute
for Biology of Ageing, 50931 Cologne, Germany; Institute for Medical Sciences,
Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon 443-721, Korea; (7)Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, 405 30
Gothenburg, Sweden; (8)Department of NanoBiophotonics, Max Planck Institute for
Biophysical Chemistry, 37077 Göttingen, Germany; Department of Neurology,
University of Göttingen Medical School, 37073 Göttingen, Germany; (9)Department
of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, 50931
Cologne, Germany; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 171
77 Stockholm, Sweden larsson@age.mpg.de.

Mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is packaged by mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) into mitochondrial nucleoids that are of key importance in
controlling the transmission and expression of mtDNA. Nucleoid ultrastructure is 
poorly defined, and therefore we used a combination of biochemistry,
superresolution microscopy, and electron microscopy to show that mitochondrial
nucleoids have an irregular ellipsoidal shape and typically contain a single copy
of mtDNA. Rotary shadowing electron microscopy revealed that nucleoid formation
in vitro is a multistep process initiated by TFAM aggregation and cross-strand
binding. Superresolution microscopy of cultivated cells showed that increased
mtDNA copy number increases nucleoid numbers without altering their sizes.
Electron cryo-tomography visualized nucleoids at high resolution in isolated
mammalian mitochondria and confirmed the sizes observed by superresolution
microscopy of cell lines. We conclude that the fundamental organizational unit of
the mitochondrial nucleoid is a single copy of mtDNA compacted by TFAM, and we
suggest a packaging mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4568684
PMID: 26305956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2015;2015:789710. doi: 10.1155/2015/789710. Epub 2015 Aug
2.

Dietary Tocotrienol/<U+03B3>-Cyclodextrin Complex Increases Mitochondrial Membrane
Potential and ATP Concentrations in the Brains of Aged Mice.

Schloesser A(1), Esatbeyoglu T(1), Piegholdt S(1), Dose J(1), Ikuta N(2), Okamoto
H(3), Ishida Y(3), Terao K(4), Matsugo S(5), Rimbach G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, University of Kiel,
Hermann-Rodewald-Straße 6, 24118 Kiel, Germany. (2)Graduate School of Medicine,
Kobe University, 7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0017, Japan. (3)CycloChem
Bio Co., Ltd., KIBC, 5-5-2 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe University, 7-5-1, Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku,
Kobe 650-0017, Japan ; CycloChem Bio Co., Ltd., KIBC, 5-5-2
Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan. (5)School of Natural
System, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan.

Brain aging is accompanied by a decrease in mitochondrial function. In vitro
studies suggest that tocotrienols, including <U+03B3>- and d-tocotrienol (T3), may
exhibit neuroprotective properties. However, little is known about the effect of 
dietary T3 on mitochondrial function in vivo. In this study, we monitored the
effect of a dietary T3/<U+03B3>-cyclodextrin complex (T3CD) on mitochondrial membrane
potential and ATP levels in the brain of 21-month-old mice. Mice were fed either 
a control diet or a diet enriched with T3CD providing 100<U+2009>mg T3 per kg diet for 6
months. Dietary T3CD significantly increased mitochondrial membrane potential and
ATP levels compared to those of controls. The increase in MMP and ATP due to
dietary T3CD was accompanied by an increase in the protein levels of the
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Furthermore, dietary T3CD slightly
increased the mRNA levels of superoxide dismutase, <U+03B3>-glutamyl cysteinyl
synthetase, and heme oxygenase 1 in the brain. Overall, the present data suggest 
that T3CD increases TFAM, mitochondrial membrane potential, and ATP synthesis in 
the brains of aged mice.

PMCID: PMC4537756
PMID: 26301044  [PubMed - in process]


66. Cell Metab. 2015 Sep 1;22(3):485-98. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.07.020. Epub 2015
Aug 20.

Mitochondrial Respiration Controls Lysosomal Function during Inflammatory T Cell 
Responses.

Baixauli F(1), Acín-Pérez R(2), Villarroya-Beltrí C(1), Mazzeo C(3),
Nuñez-Andrade N(1), Gabandé-Rodriguez E(4), Ledesma MD(4), Blázquez A(5), Martin 
MA(5), Falcón-Pérez JM(6), Redondo JM(7), Enríquez JA(2), Mittelbrunn M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Signaling and Inflammation Program, Centro Nacional Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III (CNIC), Madrid 28029, Spain; Servicio de Inmunología,
Instituto Investigación Sanitaria Princesa, Madrid 28006, Spain.
(2)Cardiovascular Metabolism Program, Centro Nacional Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III (CNIC), Madrid 28029, Spain. (3)Department of
Immunology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid 28040, Spain. (4)Department of
Molecular Neurobiology, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM),
Madrid 28049, Spain. (5)Instituto de Investigación Hospital Universitario 12 de
Octubre, Madrid 28041, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid 28029, Spain. (6)CIC bioGUNE, CIBERehd,
Derio 48160, Spain; IKERBASQUE Research Foundation, Bilbao 48011, Spain.
(7)Signaling and Inflammation Program, Centro Nacional Investigaciones
Cardiovasculares Carlos III (CNIC), Madrid 28029, Spain. (8)Signaling and
Inflammation Program, Centro Nacional Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Carlos III
(CNIC), Madrid 28029, Spain. Electronic address: mmittelbrunn@externo.cnic.es.

The endolysosomal system is critical for the maintenance of cellular homeostasis.
However, how endolysosomal compartment is regulated by mitochondrial function is 
largely unknown. We have generated a mouse model with defective mitochondrial
function in CD4(+) T lymphocytes by genetic deletion of the mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam). Mitochondrial respiration deficiency impairs
lysosome function, promotes p62 and sphingomyelin accumulation, and disrupts
endolysosomal trafficking pathways and autophagy, thus linking a primary
mitochondrial dysfunction to a lysosomal storage disorder. The impaired lysosome 
function in Tfam-deficient cells subverts T cell differentiation toward
proinflammatory subsets and exacerbates the in vivo inflammatory response.
Restoration of NAD(+) levels improves lysosome function and corrects the
inflammatory defects in Tfam-deficient T cells. Our results uncover a mechanism
by which mitochondria regulate lysosome function to preserve T cell
differentiation and effector functions, and identify strategies for intervention 
in mitochondrial-related diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26299452  [PubMed - in process]


67. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Jan;40(1):36-48. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10520. Epub 2015 Sep 1.

Time-course effect of high-glucose-induced reactive oxygen species on
mitochondrial biogenesis and function in human renal mesangial cells.

Al-Kafaji G(1), Sabry MA(2), Skrypnyk C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine/Al-Jawhara Centre for Molecular Medicine,
Genetics and Inherited Disorders, College of Medicine and Medical Sciences,
Arabian Gulf University, Salmaniya Avenue, Road 2904, Building 293, Block 329,
Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain. (2)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine
and Medical Sciences, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain.

The present study investigated the time-course effect of high-glucose-induced
reactive oxygen species (ROS) on mitochondrial biogenesis and function in human
renal mesangial cells and the effect of direct inhibition of ROS on mitochondria.
The cells were cultured for 1, 4, and 7 days in normal glucose or high glucose in
the presence and absence of Mn(III)tetrakis(4-benzoic acid)porphyrin chloride
(MnTBAP) or catalase. Mitochondrial ROS production was assessed by confocal
microscope. mtDNA copy number and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory factors 1 (NRF-1), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) transcripts were analyzed by
real-time PCR. PGC-1a, NRF-1, and TFAM proteins were analyzed by Western
blotting. Mitochondrial function was determined by assessing mitochondrial
membrane potential and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) levels. High glucose induced 
significant increases in mitochondrial superoxide and hydrogen peroxide (H2 O2 ) 
at day 1, which remained significantly elevated at days 4 and 7. The copy number 
of mtDNA and expression of PGC-1a, NRF-1, and TFAM were significantly increased
at 1 day in high glucose but were significantly decreased at 4 and 7 days. A
progressive decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential was observed at 1, 4,
and 7 days in high glucose, and this was associated with decreased ATP levels.
Treatment of cells with MnTBAP or catalase during high-glucose incubation
attenuated ROS production and reversed the alterations in mitochondrial
biogenesis and function. Increased mitochondrial biogenesis in human renal
mesangial cells may be an early adaptive response to high-glucose-induced ROS,
and prolonged ROS production induced by chronic high glucose decreased
mitochondrial biogenesis and impaired mitochondrial function. Protection of
mitochondria from high-glucose-induced ROS may provide a potential approach to
retard the development and progression of diabetic nephropathy.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 26251331  [PubMed - in process]


68. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Aug 6;6:e1839. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.180.

DRP1 inhibition rescues retinal ganglion cells and their axons by preserving
mitochondrial integrity in a mouse model of glaucoma.

Kim KY(1), Perkins GA(1), Shim MS(2), Bushong E(1), Alcasid N(1), Ju S(1),
Ellisman MH(1), Weinreb RN(2), Ju WK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Center for Research in Biological Systems,
National Center for Microscopy and Imaging Research, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)Laboratory for Optic Nerve Biology, Department
of Ophthalmology, Hamilton Glaucoma Center, University of California, San Diego, 
La Jolla, CA, USA.

Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness and is characterized by
slow and progressive degeneration of the optic nerve head axons and retinal
ganglion cell (RGC), leading to loss of visual function. Although oxidative
stress and/or alteration of mitochondrial (mt) dynamics induced by elevated
intraocular pressure (IOP) are associated with this neurodegenerative disease,
the mechanisms that regulate mt dysfunction-mediated glaucomatous
neurodegeneration are poorly understood. Using a mouse model of glaucoma, DBA/2J 
(D2), which spontaneously develops elevated IOP, as well as an in vitro RGC
culture system, we show here that oxidative stress, as evidenced by increasing
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) and mt transcription factor A (Tfam) protein
expression, triggers mt fission and loss by increasing dynamin-related protein 1 
(DRP1) in the retina of glaucomatous D2 mice as well as in cultured RGCs exposed 
to elevated hydrostatic pressure in vitro. DRP1 inhibition by overexpressing DRP1
K38A mutant blocks mt fission and triggers a subsequent reduction of oxidative
stress, as evidenced by decreasing SOD2 and Tfam protein expression. DRP1
inhibition promotes RGC survival by increasing phosphorylation of Bad at serine
112 in the retina and preserves RGC axons by maintaining mt integrity in the
glial lamina of glaucomatous D2 mice. These findings demonstrate an important
vicious cycle involved in glaucomatous neurodegeneration that starts with
elevated IOP producing oxidative stress; the oxidative stress then leads to mt
fission and a specific form of mt dysfunction that generates further oxidative
stress, thus perpetuating the cycle. Our findings suggest that DRP1 is a
potential therapeutic target for ameliorating oxidative stress-mediated mt
fission and dysfunction in RGC and its axons during glaucomatous
neurodegeneration. Thus, DRP1 inhibition may provide a new therapeutic strategy
for protecting both RGCs and their axons in glaucoma and other optic
neuropathies.

PMCID: PMC4558491
PMID: 26247724  [PubMed - in process]


69. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5185-90. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4085. Epub 2015 Jul
16.

Coupled aggregation of mitochondrial single-strand DNA-binding protein tagged
with Eos fluorescent protein visualizes synchronized activity of mitochondrial
nucleoids.

Olejár T(1), Pajuelo-Reguera D(1), Alán L(1), Dlasková A(1), Jeek P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Membrane Transport Biophysics, Institute of Physiology, The
Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague 14220, Czech Republic.

Oligomer aggregation of green-to-red photoconvertible fluorescent protein Eos
(EosFP) is a natural feature of the wild-type variant. The aim of the present
study was to follow up mitochondrial nucleoid behavior under natural conditions
of living cells transfected with mitochondrial single-strand DNA-binding protein 
(mtSSB) conjugated with EosFP. HEPG2 and SH-SY5Y cells were subjected to
lentiviral transfection and subsequently immunostained with anti-DNA,
anti-transcription factor A, mitochondrial (TFAM) or anti-translocase of the
inner membrane 23 antibodies. Fluorescent microscopy, conventional confocal
microscopy, superresolution biplane fluorescence photo-activation localization
microscopy and direct stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy were used for 
imaging. In the two cell types, apparent couples of equally-sized
mtSSB-EosFP-visualized dots were observed. During the time course of the ongoing 
transfection procedure, however, a small limited number of large aggregates of
mtSSB-EosFP-tagged protein started to form in the cells, which exhibited a great 
co-localization with the noted coupled positions. Antibody staining and 3D
immunocytochemistry confirmed that nucleoid components such as TFAM and DNA were 
co-localized with these aggregates. Furthermore, the observed reduction of the
mtDNA copy number in mtSSB-EosFP-transfected cells suggested a possible
impairment of nucleoid function. In conclusion, the present study demonstrated
that coupled nucleoids are synchronized by mtSSB-EosFP overexpression and
visualized through their equal binding capacity to mtSSB-EosFP-tagged protein.
This observation suggested parallel replication and transcription activity of
nucleoid couples native from a parental one. Preserved coupling in late stages of
artificial EosFP-mediated aggregation of tagged proteins suggested a rational
manner of mitochondrial branching that may be cell-type specifically dependent on
hierarchical nucleoid replication.

PMID: 26239383  [PubMed - in process]


70. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 31;10(7):e0134162. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134162.
eCollection 2015.

Mitofusin 2 Deficiency Affects Energy Metabolism and Mitochondrial Biogenesis in 
MEF Cells.

Kawalec M(1), Boratynska-Jasinska A(1), Beresewicz M(1), Dymkowska D(2), Zablocki
K(2), Zablocka B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Unit, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, PAS, Warsaw,
Poland. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 
PAS, Warsaw, Poland.

Mitofusin 2 (Mfn2), mitochondrial outer membrane protein which is involved in
rearrangement of these organelles, was first described in pathology of
hypertension and diabetes, and more recently much attention is paid to its
functions in Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2A neuropathy (CMT2A). Here, cellular
energy metabolism was investigated in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) differing
in the presence of the Mfn2 gene; control (MEFwt) and with Mfn2 gene depleted
MEFMfn2-/-. These two cell lines were compared in terms of various parameters
characterizing mitochondrial bioenergetics. Here, we have shown that relative
rate of proliferation of MEFMfn2-/- cells versus control fibroblasts depend on
serum supplementation of the growth media. Moreover, MEFMfn2-/- cells exhibited
significantly increased respiration rate in comparison to MEFwt, regardless of
serum supplementation of the medium. This effect was correlated with increased
level of mitochondrial markers (TOM20 and NAO) as well as mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC-1a) protein levels and unchanged total ATP
content. Interestingly, mitochondrial DNA content in MEFMfn2-/- cells was not
reduced. Fundamentally, these results are in contrast to a commonly accepted
belief that mitofusin 2 deficiency inevitably results in debilitation of
mitochondrial energy metabolism. However, we suggest a balance between negative
metabolic consequences of mitofusin 2 deficiency and adaptive processes
exemplified by increased level of PGC-1a and TFAM transcription factor which
prevent an excessive depletion of mtDNA and severe impairment of cell metabolism.

PMCID: PMC4521854
PMID: 26230519  [PubMed - in process]


71. Aging Cell. 2015 Oct;14(5):896-906. doi: 10.1111/acel.12376. Epub 2015 Jul 29.

Changes in neuronal CycD/Cdk4 activity affect aging, neurodegeneration, and
oxidative stress.

Icreverzi A(1), de la Cruz AF(2), Walker DW(1), Edgar BA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA. (2)Basic Science Division, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. (3)German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ) & Center for Molecular Biology Heidelberg (ZMBH), Im Neuenheimer Feld 282,
D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in human diseases, including
cancer, and proposed to accelerate aging. The Drosophila Cyclin-dependent protein
kinase complex cyclin D/cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CycD/Cdk4) promotes cellular
growth by stimulating mitochondrial biogenesis. Here, we examine the
neurodegenerative and aging consequences of altering CycD/Cdk4 function in
Drosophila. We show that pan-neuronal loss or gain of CycD/Cdk4 increases
mitochondrial superoxide, oxidative stress markers, and neurodegeneration and
decreases lifespan. We find that RNAi-mediated depletion of the mitochondrial
transcription factor, Tfam, can abrogate CycD/Cdk4's detrimental effects on both 
lifespan and neurodegeneration. This indicates that CycD/Cdk4's pathological
consequences are mediated through altered mitochondrial function and a
concomitant increase in reactive oxygen species. In support of this, we
demonstrate that CycD/Cdk4 activity levels in the brain affect the expression of 
a set of 'oxidative stress' genes. Our results indicate that the precise
regulation of neuronal CycD/Cdk4 activity is important to limit mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species production and prevent neurodegeneration.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4568977
PMID: 26219626  [PubMed - in process]


72. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):15995-6018.

miR-504 mediated down-regulation of nuclear respiratory factor 1 leads to
radio-resistance in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Zhao L(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Tang M(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Hu Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Yan
B(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Pi W(5,)(6), Li Z(5), Zhang J(6), Zhang L(7), Jiang W(6), Li
G(8), Qiu Y(8), Hu F(9), Liu F(9), Lu J(1,)(6), Chen X(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Xiao
L(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Xu Z(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Tao Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Yang
L(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Bode AM(10), Dong Z(10), Zhou J(11), Fan J(11), Sun L(4,)(5),
Cao Y(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Invasion,
Ministry of Education, Changsha, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis,
Ministry of Health, Changsha, China. (4)Molecular Imaging Research Center,
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China. (5)Center for
Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China. 
(6)Department of Oncology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 
China. (7)Department of Radiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China. (8)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China. (9)Metabolism Endocrinology 
Research Institute, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China. (10)The Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN,
USA. (11)Department of Live Surgery, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, 
Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in the various processes of DNA damage repair and
play crucial roles in regulating response of tumors to radiation therapy. Here,
we used nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) radio-resistant cell lines as models and
found that the expression of miR-504 was significantly up-regulated. In contrast,
the expression of nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and other mitochondrial
metabolism factors, including mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complex III were down-regulated in these cell 
lines. At the same time, the Seahorse cell mitochondrial stress test results
indicated that the mitochondrial respiratory capacity was impaired in NPC
radio-resistant cell lines and in a miR-504 over-expressing cell line. We also
conducted dual luciferase reporter assays and verified that miR-504 could
directly target NRF1. Additionally, miR-504 could down-regulate the expression of
TFAM and OXPHOS complexes I, III, and IV and impaired the mitochondrial
respiratory function of NPC cells. Furthermore, serum from NPC patients showed
that miR-504 was up-regulated during different weeks of radiotherapy and
correlated with tumor, lymph nodes and metastasis (TNM) stages and total tumor
volume. The radio-therapeutic effect at three months after radiotherapy was
evaluated. Results indicated that patients with high expression of miR-504
exhibited a relatively lower therapeutic effect ratio of complete response (CR), 
but a higher ratio of partial response (PR), compared to patients with low
expression of miR-504. Taken together, these results demonstrated that miR-504
affected the radio-resistance of NPC by down-regulating the expression of NRF1
and disturbing mitochondrial respiratory function. Thus, miR-504 might become a
promising biomarker of NPC radio-resistance and targeting miR-504 might improve
tumor radiation response.

PMCID: PMC4599252
PMID: 26201446  [PubMed - in process]


73. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Oct 15;309(8):L857-71. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00104.2015. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

The HO-1/CO system regulates mitochondrial-capillary density relationships in
human skeletal muscle.

Pecorella SR(1), Potter JV(1), Cherry AD(1), Peacher DF(1), Welty-Wolf KE(2),
Moon RE(3), Piantadosi CA(4), Suliman HB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina; Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Environmental Physiology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; and. (2)Department of
Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; (3)Department
of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina;
Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina;
Center for Hyperbaric Medicine and Environmental Physiology, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; and. (4)Department of Medicine, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina; Center for Hyperbaric Medicine
and Environmental Physiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina; and Department of Pathology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina claude.piantadosi@dm.duke.edu.

The heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1)/carbon monoxide (CO) system induces mitochondrial
biogenesis, but its biological impact in human skeletal muscle is uncertain. The 
enzyme system generates CO, which stimulates mitochondrial proliferation in
normal muscle. Here we examined whether CO breathing can be used to produce a
coordinated metabolic and vascular response in human skeletal muscle. In 19
healthy subjects, we performed vastus lateralis muscle biopsies and tested
one-legged maximal O2 uptake (V<U+0307>o2max) before and after breathing air or CO (200 
ppm) for 1 h daily for 5 days. In response to CO, there was robust HO-1 induction
along with increased mRNA levels for nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcription 
factor A (Tfam), cytochrome c, cytochrome oxidase subunit IV (COX IV), and
mitochondrial-encoded COX I and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 1 (NDI). CO breathing 
did not increase V<U+0307>o2max (1.96 ± 0.51 pre-CO, 1.87 ± 0.50 post-CO l/min; P = not 
significant) but did increase muscle citrate synthase, mitochondrial density
(139.0 ± 34.9 pre-CO, 219.0 ± 36.2 post-CO; no. of mitochondrial profiles/field),
myoglobin content and glucose transporter (GLUT4) protein level and led to GLUT4 
localization to the myocyte membrane, all consistent with expansion of the tissue
O2 transport system. These responses were attended by increased cluster of
differentiation 31 (CD31)-positive muscle capillaries (1.78 ± 0.16 pre-CO, 2.37 ±
0.59 post-CO; capillaries/muscle fiber), implying the enrichment of microvascular
O2 reserve. The findings support that induction of the HO-1/CO system by CO not
only improves muscle mitochondrial density, but regulates myoglobin content,
GLUT4 localization, and capillarity in accordance with current concepts of
skeletal muscle plasticity.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4609945 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 26186946  [PubMed - in process]


74. Biosci Rep. 2015 May 19;35(3). pii: e00221. doi: 10.1042/BSR20150073.

The regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) expression during
skeletal muscle cell differentiation.

Collu-Marchese M(1), Shuen M(1), Pauly M(1), Saleem A(1), Hood DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, Muscle Health Research Centre, York 
University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M3J 1P3. (2)School of Kinesiology and Health
Science, Muscle Health Research Centre, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
M3J 1P3 dhood@yorku.ca.

The ATP demand required for muscle development is accommodated by elevations in
mitochondrial biogenesis, through the co-ordinated activities of the nuclear and 
mitochondrial genomes. The most important transcriptional activator of the
mitochondrial genome is mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam); however, the
regulation of Tfam expression during muscle differentiation is not known. Thus,
we measured Tfam mRNA levels, mRNA stability, protein expression and localization
and Tfam transcription during the progression of muscle differentiation. Parallel
2-fold increases in Tfam protein and mRNA were observed, corresponding with
2-3-fold increases in mitochondrial content. Transcriptional activity of a 2051
bp promoter increased during this differentiation period and this was accompanied
by a 3-fold greater Tfam mRNA stabilization. Interestingly, truncations of the
promoter at 1706 bp, 978 bp and 393 bp promoter all exhibited 2-3-fold higher
transcriptional activity than the 2051 bp construct, indicating the presence of
negative regulatory elements within the distal 350 bp of the promoter. Activation
of AMP kinase augmented Tfam transcription within the proximal promoter,
suggesting the presence of binding sites for transcription factors that are
responsive to cellular energy state. During differentiation, the accumulating
Tfam protein was progressively distributed to the mitochondrial matrix where it
augmented the expression of mtDNA and COX (cytochrome c oxidase) subunit I, an
mtDNA gene product. Our data suggest that, during muscle differentiation, Tfam
protein levels are regulated by the availability of Tfam mRNA, which is
controlled by both transcription and mRNA stability. Changes in energy state and 
Tfam localization also affect Tfam expression and action in differentiating
myotubes.

© 2015 Authors.

PMCID: PMC4613705
PMID: 26182383  [PubMed - in process]


75. Adipocyte. 2015 Jan 7;4(2):129-34. doi: 10.4161/21623945.2014.989748.

Acute induction of uncoupling protein 1 by citrulline in cultured explants of
white adipose tissue from lean and high-fat-diet-fed rats.

Joffin N(1), Jaubert AM(2), Bamba J(1), Barouki R(1), Noirez P(3), Forest C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité ; Paris, France ; Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale UMR-S 1124; Faculté des Sciences
Fondamentales et Biomédicales; Pharmacologie Toxicologie et Signalisation
Cellulaire ; Paris, France. (2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale UMR-S 1124; Faculté des Sciences Fondamentales et Biomédicales;
Pharmacologie Toxicologie et Signalisation Cellulaire ; Paris, France ;
Département de Biochimie et de Biologie Moléculaire; Faculté de Médecine
Paris-Ile de France-Ouest; Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin en Yvelines ;
Versailles, France. (3)Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité ; Paris,
France ; Institut de Recherche Biomédicale et d'Epidémiologie du Sport, EA 7329 ;
Paris, France ; Faculté des Sciences et Techniques des Activités Physiques et
Sportives ; Paris, France.

A diet enriched with citrulline (CIT) reduces white adipose tissue (WAT) mass. We
recently showed that CIT stimulated ß-oxidation in rat WAT explants from young
(2-4 months) but not old (25 months) rats. Here we show that both in old rats and
high-fat-diet-fed young rats, uncoupling protein one (UCP1) mRNA and protein
expressions were weaker than those in young control rats. Selectively in WAT from
young rats, a 24h CIT treatment up-regulated expressions of UCP1, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa), PPAR<U+03B3>-coactivator-1-a and
mitochondrial-transcription-factor-A whereas it down-regulated PPAR<U+03B3>2 gene
expression, whatever the diet. These results suggest that CIT induces a new
metabolic status in WAT, with increased ß-oxidation and uncoupling of respiratory
chain, resulting in energy expenditure that favors fat mass reduction.

PMCID: PMC4497294
PMID: 26167416  [PubMed]


76. J Nutr Biochem. 2015 Nov;26(11):1193-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2015.05.010. Epub 
2015 Jun 16.

Dietary isoflavone daidzein promotes Tfam expression that increases mitochondrial
biogenesis in C2C12 muscle cells.

Yoshino M(1), Naka A(2), Sakamoto Y(1), Shibasaki A(1), Toh M(1), Tsukamoto S(1),
Kondo K(2), Iida K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Graduate School of Humanities and
Sciences, Ochanomizu University, 2-1-1 Otsuka, Bunkyo, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan.
(2)Institute of Environmental Science for Human Life, Ochanomizu University,
2-1-1 Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan. (3)Department of Nutrition and
Food Science, Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences, Ochanomizu University, 
2-1-1 Otsuka, Bunkyo, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan. Electronic address:
iida.kaoruko@ocha.ac.jp.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in muscles leads to a wide range of metabolic and
age-related disorders. Recently, it has been reported that a natural polyphenol, 
resveratrol, affects mitochondrial biogenesis. This study aimed to identify other
natural polyphenolic compounds that regulate mitochondrial biogenesis in muscles.
For this purpose, we used the C2C12 murine muscle cell line. Screening involved a
reporter assay based on the promoter of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(Tfam). We found that several polyphenols exhibited the ability to increase Tfam 
promoter activity and that the soy isoflavone daidzein was a most potent
candidate that regulated mitochondrial biogenesis. When C2C12 myotubes were
treated with 25-50 µM daidzein for 24h, there were significant increases in the
expression of Tfam and mitochondrial genes such as COX1 and Cytb as well as the
mitochondrial content. Using several mutant Tfam promoter fragments, we found
that the transcription factor, nuclear respiratory factor (NRF) and its
coactivator, PGC1a, were necessary for the effect of daidzein on Tfam expression.
Finally, silencing of sirtuin-1 (SIRT1) by shRNA resulted in inhibition of the
daidzein effects on mitochondrial gene expression. In conclusion, daidzein
regulates mitochondrial biogenesis in muscle cells by regulating transcriptional 
networks through a SIRT1-associated pathway. These results suggest that daidzein 
would be beneficial to protect against a wide range of diseases caused by muscle 
mitochondrial dysfunction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26166229  [PubMed - in process]


77. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Oct;87:336-45. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.07.008. Epub 2015 Jul 10.

Identification of interacting partners of Human Mpv17-like protein with a
mitigating effect of mitochondrial dysfunction through mtDNA damage.

Iida R(1), Ueki M(2), Yasuda T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui,
Fukui 910-1193, Japan; Organization for Life Science Advancement Programs,
Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.
Electronic address: riida@u-fukui.ac.jp. (2)Division of Medical Genetics and
Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui 910-1193,
Japan. (3)Organization for Life Science Advancement Programs, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui 910-1193, Japan; Division of Medical
Genetics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui,
Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

Human Mpv17-like protein (M-LPH) has been suggested to participate in
mitochondrial function. In this study, we investigated the proteins that interact
with M-LPH, and identified four: H2A histone family, member X (H2AX), ribosomal
protein S14 (RPS14), ribosomal protein S3 (RPS3) and B-cell receptor-associated
protein 31 (Bap31). Immunofluorescence and subcellular fractionation studies
revealed that M-LPH is localized predominantly in the nucleus, to some extent in 
a subset of mitochondria, and marginally in the cytosol. Mitochondrial M-LPH
appeared as punctate foci, and these were co-localized with a subset of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and mtDNA, indicating that M-LPH is
localized in or in close proximity to mitochondrial nucleoids. RNAi-mediated
knockdown of M-LPH resulted in an increase of mtDNA damage and reduced the
expression of mtDNA-encoded genes. A ROS inducer, antimycin A, caused an increase
in both the number and size of the mitochondrial M-LPH foci, and these foci were 
co-localized with two enzymes, DNA polymerase <U+03B3> (POLG) and DNA ligase III (LIG3),
both involved in mtDNA repair. Furthermore, knockdown of M-LPH hampered
mitochondrial localization of these enzymes. Taken together, these observations
suggest that M-LPH is involved in the maintenance of mtDNA and protects cells
from mitochondrial dysfunction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26165189  [PubMed - in process]


78. Reproduction. 2015 Oct;150(4):367-82. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0633. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

Distinct profiles of human embryonic stem cell metabolism and mitochondria
identified by oxygen.

Lees JG(1), Rathjen J(2), Sheedy JR(1), Gardner DK(1), Harvey AJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of BiosciencesUniversity of Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Victoria,
AustraliaMenzies Institute of Medical ResearchUniversity of Tasmania, Hobart
7000, Tasmania, Australia. (2)School of BiosciencesUniversity of Melbourne,
Parkville 3010, Victoria, AustraliaMenzies Institute of Medical
ResearchUniversity of Tasmania, Hobart 7000, Tasmania, Australia School of
BiosciencesUniversity of Melbourne, Parkville 3010, Victoria, AustraliaMenzies
Institute of Medical ResearchUniversity of Tasmania, Hobart 7000, Tasmania,
Australia. (3)School of BiosciencesUniversity of Melbourne, Parkville 3010,
Victoria, AustraliaMenzies Institute of Medical ResearchUniversity of Tasmania,
Hobart 7000, Tasmania, Australia ajharvey@unimelb.edu.au.

Oxygen is a powerful regulator of cell function and embryonic development. It has
previously been determined that oxygen regulates human embryonic stem (hES) cell 
glycolytic and amino acid metabolism, but the effects on mitochondria are as yet 
unknown. Two hES cell lines (MEL1, MEL2) were analyzed to determine the role of
5% (physiological) and 20% (atmospheric) oxygen in regulating mitochondrial
activity. In response to extended physiological oxygen culture, MEL2 hES cells
displayed reduced mtDNA content, mitochondrial mass and expression of metabolic
genes TFAM, NRF1, PPARa and MT-ND4. Furthermore, MEL2 hES cell glucose
consumption, lactate production and amino acid turnover were elevated under
physiological oxygen. In stark contrast, MEL1 hES cell amino acid and
carbohydrate use and mitochondrial function were relatively unaltered in response
to oxygen. Furthermore, differentiation kinetics were delayed in the MEL1 hES
cell line following BMP4 treatment. Here we report the first incidence of
metabolic dysfunction in a hES cell population, defined as a failure to respond
to oxygen concentration through the modulation of metabolism, demonstrating that 
hES cells can be perturbed during culture despite exhibiting the defining
characteristics of pluripotent cells. Collectively, these data reveal a central
role for oxygen in the regulation of hES cell metabolism and mitochondrial
function, whereby physiological oxygen promotes glucose flux and suppresses
mitochondrial biogenesis and gene expression.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26159831  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 2016 Jan;21(1):114-26. doi:
10.1177/1074248415590440. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

ß3-Adrenoceptor Impairs Mitochondrial Biogenesis and Energy Metabolism During
Rapid Atrial Pacing-Induced Atrial Fibrillation.

Dong J(1), Zhao J(1), Zhang M(1), Liu G(1), Wang X(1), Liu Y(1), Yang N(2), Liu
Y(3), Zhao G(1), Sun J(1), Tian J(1), Cheng C(4), Wei L(5), Li Y(1), Li W(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China. (2)Ultrasonic Cardiogram Room, First Affiliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China. (3)Centre for Drug Safety
Evaluation, Heilongjiang University of Chinese Medicine, Harbin, China.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. (5)Department of Cardiology, First Hospital
of Harbin City, Harbin, China. (6)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated
Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China liweimin_2009@163.com.

BACKGROUND: The ß3-adrenoceptor (ß3-AR) is implicated in cardiac remodeling.
Since metabolic dysfunction due to loss of mitochondria plays an important role
in heart diseases, we examined the effects of ß3-AR on mitochondrial biogenesis
and energy metabolism in atrial fibrillation (AF).
METHODS: Atrial fibrillation was created by rapid atrial pacing in adult rabbits.
Rabbits were randomly divided into 4 groups: control, pacing (P7), ß3-AR
antagonist (L748337), and ß3-AR agonist (BRL37344) groups. Atrial effective
refractory period (AERP) and AF induction rate were measured. Atrial
concentrations of adenine nucleotides and phosphocreatine were quantified through
high-performance liquid chromatography. Mitochondrial DNA content was determined.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot were used to examine the
expression levels of signaling intermediates related to mitochondrial biogenesis.
RESULTS: After pacing for 7 days, ß3-AR was significantly upregulated, AERP was
reduced, and the AF induction rate was increased. The total adenine nucleotides
pool was significantly reduced due to the decrease in adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). The P7 group showed decreased activity of F0F1-ATPase. Mitochondrial DNA
content was decreased and mitochondrial respiratory chain subunits were
downregulated after pacing. Furthermore, expression of transcription factors
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, including peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), was lower in the P7 group in
response to ß3-AR activation. Further stimulation of ß3-AR with BRL37344
exacerbated these effects, together with a significant decrease in the levels of 
phosphocreatine. In contrast, inhibition of ß3-AR with L748337 partially restored
mitochondrial biogenesis and energy metabolism of atria in the paced rabbits.
CONCLUSION: The activation of ß3-AR contributes to atrial metabolic remodeling
via transcriptional downregulation of PGC-1a/NRF-1/Tfam pathway that are involved
in mitochondrial biogenesis, which ultimately perturbs mitochondrial function in 
rapid pacing-induced AF. The ß3-AR is therefore a potential novel therapeutic
target for the treatment or prevention of AF.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26130614  [PubMed - in process]


80. Anim Reprod Sci. 2015 Aug;159:172-83. doi: 10.1016/j.anireprosci.2015.06.015.
Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Effect of peroxiredoxin II on the quality and mitochondrial activity of
pre-implantation bovine embryos.

Fakruzzaman M(1), Ghanem N(2), Bang JI(3), Ha AN(3), Lee KL(3), Sohn SH(4), Wang 
Z(5), Lee DS(6), Kong IK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied Life Science (BK21Plus),
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of
Korea; Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Faculty of Animal Science and 
Veterinary Medicine, Patuakhali Science and Technology University, Barisal 8210, 
Bangladesh. (2)Animal Production Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo
University, Giza, Egypt. (3)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied
Life Science (BK21Plus), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Animal Science and
Biotechnology, College of Science and Natural Resource, Gyeongnam National
University of Science and Technology, Jinju 660-758, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic
of Korea. (5)Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State
University, Logan, UT 84322-4700, USA. (6)School of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 
702-701, Republic of Korea. (7)Department of Animal Science, Division of Applied 
Life Science (BK21Plus), Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea; Institute of Agriculture and Life Science,
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju 660-701, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: ikong7900@gmail.com.

Endogenous peroxiredoxin II (PRDX II) protein plays a vital role in early
embryonic development. This study assessed the beneficial effects of exogenous
PRDX II on bovine embryo development at the cellular and molecular levels. To
this end, in vitro maturation (IVM) medium was supplemented with various
concentrations of PRDX II (0, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100µg/mL). Of these,
12.5µg/mL PRDX II was the most effective and significantly promoted embryonic
development. Therefore, this concentration of PRDX II was used in subsequent
experiments. The percentage of embryos that developed into Day 8 blastocysts and 
the total number of cells per blastocyst (38.2% and 150.6±5.1) was higher in the 
PRDX II-treated group than in the control (26.4% and 128.9±3.9, respectively).
Moreover, the percent of TUNEL positive cells was higher (P<0.05) in the control 
than in the PRDX II-treated. Furthermore, PRDX II added to the IVM media
increased mitochondria content in blastocysts and decreased the intracellular ROS
levels in oocytes and blastocysts compared with the control (P<0.05). The
expression of genes associated with blastocyst quality (CDX2 and IFNt),
antioxidant activity (SOD2), and mitochondrial activity (TFAM) was higher,
whereas the expression of a gene involved in the apoptotic pathway (c-FOS) was
lower, in the PRDX II-treated than in the control group. In conclusion,
supplementation of IVM medium with PRDX II promotes development to the blastocyst
stage and improves blastocyst quality through reducing ROS, enhancing embryonic
mitochondrial activity, and modulating development- related target genes
expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26130600  [PubMed - in process]


81. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 15;24(18):5270-84. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv247. Epub 2015 Jun
29.

Diabetogenic milieus induce specific changes in mitochondrial transcriptome and
differentiation of human pancreatic islets.

Brun T(1), Li N(2), Jourdain AA(3), Gaudet P(4), Duhamel D(2), Meyer J(5), Bosco 
D(5), Maechler P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Medical
Center, Geneva, Switzerland, thierry.brun@unige.ch pierre.maechler@unige.ch.
(2)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Medical
Center, Geneva, Switzerland. (3)Department of Cell Biology, University of Geneva,
Sciences III, Geneva, Switzerland. (4)Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB),
Geneva, Switzerland, University of Geneva, Medical Center, Geneva, Switzerland
and. (5)Cell Isolation and Transplantation Center, Department of Surgery, Geneva 
University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland.

In pancreatic ß-cells, mitochondria play a central role in coupling glucose
metabolism to insulin secretion. Chronic exposure of ß-cells to metabolic
stresses impairs their function and potentially induces apoptosis. Little is
known on mitochondrial adaptation to metabolic stresses, i.e. high glucose, fatty
acids or oxidative stress; being all highlighted in the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes. Here, human islets were exposed for 3 days to 25 mm glucose, 0.4 mm
palmitate, 0.4 mm oleate and transiently to H2O2. Culture at physiological 5.6 mm
glucose served as no-stress control. Expression of mitochondrion-associated genes
was quantified, including the transcriptome of mitochondrial inner membrane
carriers. Targets of interest were further evaluated at the protein level. Three 
days after acute oxidative stress, no significant alteration in ß-cell function
or apoptosis was detected in human islets. Palmitate specifically increased
expression of the pyruvate carriers MPC1 and MPC2, whereas the glutamate carrier 
GC1 and the aspartate/glutamate carrier AGC1 were down-regulated by palmitate and
oleate, respectively. High glucose decreased mRNA levels of key transcription
factors (HNF4A, IPF1, PPARA and TFAM) and energy-sensor SIRT1. High glucose also 
reduced expression of 11 mtDNA-encoded respiratory chain subunits. Interestingly,
transcript levels of the carriers for aspartate/glutamate AGC2, malate DIC and
malate/oxaloacetate/aspartate UCP2 were increased by high glucose, a profile
suggesting important mitochondrial anaplerotic/cataplerotic activities and
NADPH-generating shuttles. Chronic exposure to high glucose impaired
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, decreased insulin content, promoted
caspase-3 cleavage and cell death, revealing glucotoxicity. Overall, expression
profile of mitochondrion-associated genes was selectively modified by glucose,
delineating a glucotoxic-specific signature.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26123492  [PubMed - in process]


82. Cell Rep. 2015 Jul 7;12(1):116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.006. Epub 2015
Jun 25.

Suppression of PGC-1a Is Critical for Reprogramming Oxidative Metabolism in Renal
Cell Carcinoma.

LaGory EL(1), Wu C(1), Taniguchi CM(1), Ding CK(2), Chi JT(2), von Eyben R(1),
Scott DA(3), Richardson AD(3), Giaccia AJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation and Cancer Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (2)Duke Center for Genomic and
Computational Biology, Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27708, USA. (3)NCI-Designated Cancer
Center, Sanford Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(4)Division of Radiation and Cancer Biology, Department of Radiation Oncology,
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address:
giaccia@stanford.edu.

Erratum in
    Cell Rep. 2015 Jul 28;12(4):717.

Long believed to be a byproduct of malignant transformation, reprogramming of
cellular metabolism is now recognized as a driving force in tumorigenesis. In
clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), frequent activation of HIF signaling
induces a metabolic switch that promotes tumorigenesis. Here, we demonstrate that
PGC-1a, a central regulator of energy metabolism, is suppressed in VHL-deficient 
ccRCC by a HIF/Dec1-dependent mechanism. In VHL wild-type cells, PGC-1a
suppression leads to decreased expression of the mitochondrial transcription
factor Tfam and impaired mitochondrial respiration. Conversely, PGC-1a expression
in VHL-deficient cells restores mitochondrial function and induces oxidative
stress. ccRCC cells expressing PGC-1a exhibit impaired tumor growth and enhanced 
sensitivity to cytotoxic therapies. In patients, low levels of PGC-1a expression 
are associated with poor outcome. These studies demonstrate that suppression of
PGC-1a recapitulates key metabolic phenotypes of ccRCC and highlight the
potential of targeting PGC-1a expression as a therapeutic modality for the
treatment of ccRCC.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4518559 [Available on 2016-07-07]
PMID: 26119730  [PubMed - in process]


83. Neuroscience. 2015 Aug 20;301:480-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.06.027.
Epub 2015 Jun 24.

Physical exercise improves brain cortex and cerebellum mitochondrial
bioenergetics and alters apoptotic, dynamic and auto(mito)phagy markers.

Marques-Aleixo I(1), Santos-Alves E(2), Balça MM(2), Rizo-Roca D(2), Moreira
PI(3), Oliveira PJ(4), Magalhães J(2), Ascensão A(2).

Author information: 
(1)CIAFEL - Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of 
Sport, University of Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
inesmaleixo@hotmail.com. (2)CIAFEL - Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health
and Leisure, Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal. (3)CNC - Centre for
Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal; Institute of
Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Portugal. (4)CNC - Centre
for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, UC Biotech Building,
Biocant Park, Cantanhede, Portugal.

We here investigate the effects of two exercise modalities (endurance treadmill
training-TM and voluntary free-wheel activity-FW) on the brain cortex and
cerebellum mitochondrial bioenergetics, permeability transition pore (mPTP),
oxidative stress, as well as on proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis,
apoptosis, and quality control. Eighteen male rats were assigned to
sedentary-SED, TM and FW groups. Behavioral alterations and ex vivo brain
mitochondrial function endpoints were assessed. Proteins involved in oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS, including the adenine nucleotide translocator),
oxidative stress markers and regulatory proteins (SIRT3, p66shc, UCP2, carbonyls,
MDA, -SH, aconitase, Mn-SOD), as well as proteins involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis (PGC1a, TFAM) were evaluated. Apoptotic signaling was measured through
quantifying caspase 3, 8 and 9-like activities, Bax, Bcl2, CypD, and cofilin
expression. Mitochondrial dynamics (Mfn1/2, OPA1 and DRP1) and auto(mito)phagy
(LC3II, Beclin1, Pink1, Parkin, p62)-related proteins were also measured by
Western blotting. Only the TM exercise group showed increased spontaneous
alternation and exploratory activity. Both exercise regimens improved
mitochondrial respiratory activity, increased OXPHOS complexes I, III and V
subunits in both brain subareas and decreased oxidative stress markers. Increased
resistance to mPTP and decreased apoptotic signaling were observed in the brain
cortex from TM and in the cerebellum from TM and FW groups. Also, exercise
increased the expression of proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis,
autophagy and fusion, simultaneous with decreased expression of mitochondrial
fission-related protein DRP1. In conclusion, physical exercise improves brain
cortex and cerebellum mitochondrial function, decreasing oxidative stress and
apoptotic related markers. It is also possible that favorable alterations in
mitochondrial biogenesis, dynamics and autophagy signaling induced by exercise
contributed to increased mitochondrial plasticity leading to a more robust
phenotype.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116519  [PubMed - in process]


84. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2015;33 Suppl 1:15-6. doi: 10.1080/07391102.2015.1032566.

26 Sequence-specific DNA looping by mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM).

Murugesapillai D(1), Lodeiro MF, James Maher L 3rd, Cameron CE, Williams MC.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Physics , Northeastern University , Boston , MA 02115 , USA.

PMID: 26103237  [PubMed]


85. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 12;10(6):e0129972. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129972.
eCollection 2015.

Stimulatory Effects of Balanced Deep Sea Water on Mitochondrial Biogenesis and
Function.

Ha BG(1), Park JE(1), Cho HJ(1), Shon YH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-Medical Research Institute, Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu,
Korea.

The worldwide prevalence of metabolic diseases, including obesity and diabetes,
is increasing. Mitochondrial dysfunction is recognized as a core feature of these
diseases. Emerging evidence also suggests that defects in mitochondrial
biogenesis, number, morphology, fusion, and fission, contribute to the
development and progression of metabolic diseases. Our previous studies revealed 
that balanced deep-sea water (BDSW) has potential as a treatment for diabetes and
obesity. In this study, we aimed to investigate the mechanism by which BDSW
regulates diabetes and obesity by studying its effects on mitochondrial
metabolism. To determine whether BDSW regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and
function, we investigated its effects on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content,
mitochondrial enzyme activity, and the expression of transcription factors and
mitochondria specific genes, as well as on the phosphorylation of signaling
molecules associated with mitochondria biogenesis and its function in C2C12
myotubes. BDSW increased mitochondrial biogenesis in a time and dose-dependent
manner. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that BDSW enhances gene expression of
PGC-1a, NRF1, and TFAM for mitochondrial transcription; MFN1/2 and DRP1 for
mitochondrial fusion; OPA1 for mitochondrial fission; TOMM40 and TIMM44 for
mitochondrial protein import; CPT-1a and MCAD for fatty acid oxidation; CYTC for 
oxidative phosphorylation. Upregulation of these genes was validated by increased
mitochondria staining, CS activity, CytC oxidase activity, NAD+ to NADH ratio,
and the phosphorylation of signaling molecules such as AMPK and SIRT1. Moreover, 
drinking BDSW remarkably improved mtDNA content in the muscles of HFD-induced
obese mice. Taken together, these results suggest that the stimulatory effect of 
BDSW on mitochondrial biogenesis and function may provide further insights into
the regulatory mechanism of BDSW-induced anti-diabetic and anti-obesity action.

PMCID: PMC4466323
PMID: 26068191  [PubMed - in process]


86. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):987-1002. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.05.010. Epub 2015 Jun 8.

Structural models of mammalian mitochondrial transcription factor B2.

Moustafa IM(1), Uchida A(2), Wang Y(2), Yennawar N(3), Cameron CE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. Electronic address: ria2@psu.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. (3)Huck Institutes of Life Sciences, 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA 16802, USA. Electronic address: cec9@psu.edu.

Mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes 13 core proteins of oxidative
phosphorylation, 12S and 16S ribosomal RNAs, and 22 transfer RNAs. Mutations and 
deletions of mtDNA and/or nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins have been
implicated in a wide range of diseases. Thus, cell survival and health of the
organism require some steady-state level of the mitochondrial genome and its
expression. In mammalian systems, the mitochondrial transcription factor B2
(mtTFB2 or TFB2M) is indispensable for transcription initiation. TFB2M along with
two other proteins, mitochondrial RNA polymerase (mtRNAP or POLRMT) and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA or TFAM), are key components of the
core mitochondrial transcription apparatus. Structural information for POLRMT and
TFAM from humans is available; however, there is no available structure for
TFB2M. In the present study, three-dimensional structure of TFB2M from humans was
modeled using a combination of homology modeling and small-angle X-ray scattering
(SAXS). The TFB2M structural model adds substantively to our understanding of
TFB2M function. An explanation for the low or absent RNA methyltransferase
activity is provided. A putative nucleic acid-binding site is revealed. The amino
and carboxy termini, while likely lacking defined secondary structure, appear to 
adopt compact, globular conformations, thus "capping" the ends of the protein.
Finally, sites of interaction of TFB2M with other factors, protein and/or nucleic
acid, are suggested by the identification of species-specific clusters on the
surface of the protein.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26066983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 Aug 15;309(4):C228-38. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00266.2014. Epub 2015 Jun 10.

Effect of denervation on the regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor A
expression in skeletal muscle.

Tryon LD(1), Crilly MJ(1), Hood DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Health Research Centre, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; and 
School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Muscle Health Research Centre, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; and School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada dhood@yorku.ca.

The purpose of this study was to determine how the expression of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), a protein that governs mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
transcription and replication, is regulated during a state of reduced organelle
content imposed by muscle disuse. We measured Tfam expression at 8 h, 16 h, 24 h,
3 days, or 7 days following denervation and hypothesized that decreases in Tfam
expression would precede mitochondrial loss. Muscle mass was lowered by 13% and
38% at 3 and 7 days postdenervation, while cytochrome c oxidase activity fell by 
33% and 39% at the same time points. Tfam promoter activation in vivo was reduced
by 30-65% between 8 h and 3 days of denervation, while Tfam transcript half-life 
was increased following 8-24 h of denervation. Protein expression of RNA-binding 
proteins that promote mRNA degradation (CUG repeat-binding protein and K homology
splicing regulator protein) was elevated at 3 and 7 days of denervation. Tfam
localization within subsarcolemmal mitochondria was reduced after 3 and 7 days of
denervation and was associated with suppression of the cytochrome c oxidase type 
I transcript at 3 days, indicating that denervation impairs both mitochondrial
Tfam import and mtDNA transcription during an early period following denervation.
These data suggest that putative signals downregulate Tfam transcription during
the earliest stages following denervation but are counteracted by increases in
Tfam mRNA stability. Import of Tfam into the mitochondrion seems to be the most
critical point of regulation of this protein during the early onset of
denervation, an impairment of which is coincident with the loss of mitochondria
during muscle disuse.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4537931 [Available on 2016-08-15]
PMID: 26063705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Jan;36(1):83-91. doi: 10.1007/s10571-015-0222-6. Epub
2015 Jun 9.

Aß25-35 Suppresses Mitochondrial Biogenesis in Primary Hippocampal Neurons.

Dong W(1), Wang F(2), Guo W(3), Zheng X(2), Chen Y(2), Zhang W(2), Shi H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Traditional Chinese and Western Medicine, Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, 350122, Fujian, People's
Republic of China. fjdwg601@163.com. (2)Department of Integrated Traditional
Chinese and Western Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Fuzhou, 350122, Fujian, People's Republic of China. (3)The Third People's
Hospital of Fujian Province, Fuzhou, 350122, Fujian, People's Republic of China.

Mitochondrial biogenesis is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial content, 
morphology, and function. Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis has been observed in 
Alzheimer's disease. Amyloid-ß (Aß) has been shown to cause mitochondrial
dysfunction in cultured neurons, but its role in mitochondrial biogenesis in
neurons remains poorly defined. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and sirtuin 1
(SIRT1) are key energy-sensing molecules regulating mitochondrial biogenesis. In 
addition, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1-alpha
(PGC-1a), the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, is a target for SIRT1
deacetylase activity. In this study, we investigated the effects of Aß25-35 on
mitochondrial biogenesis in cultured hippocampal neurons and the underlying
mechanisms. In primary hippocampal neurons, we found that 24-h incubation with
Aß25-35 suppressed both phosphorylations of AMPK and SIRT1 expression and
increased PGC-1a acetylation expression. In addition, Aß25-35 also resulted in a 
decrease in mitochondrial DNA copy number, as well as decreases in the expression
of mitochondrial biogenesis factors (PGC-1a, NRF 1, NRF 2, and Tfam). Taken
together, these data show that Aß25-35 suppresses mitochondrial biogenesis in
hippocampal neurons. Aß25-35-induced impairment of mitochondrial biogenesis may
be associated with the inhibition of the AMPK-SIRT1-PGC-1a pathway.

PMID: 26055049  [PubMed - in process]


89. Hum Reprod. 2015 Aug;30(8):1850-60. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev121. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Assessing embryo quality by combining non-invasive markers: early time-lapse
parameters reflect gene expression in associated cumulus cells.

Hammond ER(1), Stewart B(2), Peek JC(2), Shelling AN(1), Cree LM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand. (2)Fertility
Associates, Greenlane, Auckland 1051, New Zealand. (3)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, 
Auckland 1023, New Zealand Fertility Associates, Greenlane, Auckland 1051, New
Zealand l.cree@auckland.ac.nz.

STUDY QUESTION: Are there associations between early time-lapse parameters,
expression of candidate embryo viability genes in cumulus cells and embryo
quality on Day 5?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Early time-lapse parameters correlate to the expression levels of
candidate embryo viability genes in cumulus cells but a combined analysis
including both time-lapse and candidate gene expression did not identify
significant predictors of embryo quality on Day 5.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Recent evidence suggests that early time-lapse parameters 
are predictive of blastocyst development. Similarly, a number of candidate genes 
in cumulus cells have been identified as potential markers of embryo viability.
Relationships between time-lapse parameters and candidate gene expression in
cumulus cells have not been investigated, and a combined analysis of these
markers has not been attempted in relation to embryo quality.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A total of 78 embryos obtained by ICSI from 22
patients were studied by time-lapse and measurement of cumulus cell gene
expression of known markers of embryo viability. Time-lapse and cumulus cell gene
expression data were assessed in relation to embryo quality on Day 5.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: All women, aged 32-40 years, underwent 
ICSI treatment for male infertility. Embryos with annotatable time to pronuclear 
breakdown (tPNB), division to two cells (t2C), three cells (t3C), four cells
(t4C) and five cells (t5C) were included in the study. Expression levels of 27
candidate genes for embryo viability were measured in 78 associated cumulus cell 
masses using quantitative real-time PCR.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Cumulus cell expression of 11 candidate
genes involved in energy metabolism (ATPase, H+ transporting, lysosomal 70 kDa,
V1 subunit A (ATP6V1A), NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) 1 alpha subcomplex, 1,
7.5 kDa (NDUFA1), lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHA), phosphofructokinase platelet
(PFKP) and solute carrier family 2 member 4 (SLC2A4), mitochondrial biogenesis
(DNA directed RNA polymerase, mitochondrial (POLRMT) and transcription factor A, 
mitochondrial (TFAM), signalling (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2),
steroidogenesis (cytochrome P450, family 11, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (CYP11A1)
and cell stress (heat shock 70 kDa protein 5 (HSPA5) and peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3))
correlated to time-lapse parameters of the developing embryo, largely for t3C
onwards (all P < 0.05). Expression of ATP synthase, H+ transporting,
mitochondrial Fo complex, subunit E (ATP51), HSPA5, PFKP, PRDX3 and versican
(VCAN) and the parameter t4C were also related to embryo quality on Day 5 (all P 
< 0.05). Ordinal logistic regression, where gene expression and time-lapse
parameters were combined, did not identify any significant predictors of embryo
quality on Day 5.
LIMITATIONS AND REASON FOR CAUTION: Data are from a preliminary study, limited by
a small sample size and using more than one ovarian stimulation protocol. A
possible limitation is that each follicle was treated as an independent
observation, although a considerable fraction of embryos were from the same
patient.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Results presented in this study suggest that 
some of the variation of time-lapse parameters may be related to cumulus cell
gene expression and thus the ovarian microenvironment in which the oocyte
developed. Although the current study did not identify significant predictors of 
embryo quality on Day 5, investigation in a larger cohort may determine whether
cumulus cell gene expression and time-lapse parameters can be combined to predict
embryo quality.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: Funding was provided by Fertility Associates
Ltd, the Auckland Medical Research Foundation and the University of Auckland.
J.C.P. has a 0.5% shareholding in Fertility Associates. All other authors of this
manuscript have nothing to declare and no conflict of interest that could be
perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research reported.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26040474  [PubMed - in process]


90. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Mar;24(3):367-72. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.112. Epub 2015 May
27.

Severe encephalopathy associated to pyruvate dehydrogenase mutations and
unbalanced coenzyme Q10 content.

Asencio C(1,)(2), Rodríguez-Hernandez MA(1,)(2), Briones P(2,)(3), Montoya
J(2,)(4), Cortés A(1,)(2), Emperador S(2,)(4), Gavilán A(1,)(2), Ruiz-Pesini
E(2,)(4), Yubero D(2,)(3), Montero R(2,)(5), Pineda M(2,)(5), O'Callaghan
MM(2,)(5), Alcázar-Fabra M(1,)(2), Salviati L(6), Artuch R(2,)(5), Navas
P(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de Olavide-CSIC
and CIBERER, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Sevilla, Spain. (2)Center for
Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. (3)Sección
de Errores Congénitos del Metabolismo (IBC U737), Servicio de Bioquímica y
Genética Molecular, Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS and CSIC, Barcelona,
Spain. (4)Departamento de Bioquímica, Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad
de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain. (5)Clinical Chemistry, Departments of Pathology and
Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Clinical Genetics
Unit, Department of Woman and Child Health, University of Padova, and IRP Città
della Speranza, Padova, Italy.

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency is associated to a variety of clinical phenotypes
including neuromuscular and nephrotic disorders. We report two unrelated boys
presenting encephalopathy, ataxia, and lactic acidosis, who died with necrotic
lesions in different areas of brain. Levels of CoQ10 and complex II+III activity 
were increased in both skeletal muscle and fibroblasts, but it was a consequence 
of higher mitochondria mass measured as citrate synthase. In fibroblasts, oxygen 
consumption was also increased, whereas steady state ATP levels were decreased.
Antioxidant enzymes such as NQO1 and MnSOD and mitochondrial marker VDAC were
overexpressed. Mitochondria recycling markers Fis1 and mitofusin, and mtDNA
regulatory Tfam were reduced. Exome sequencing showed mutations in PDHA1 in the
first patient and in PDHB in the second. These genes encode subunits of pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex (PDH) that could explain the compensatory increase of CoQ10
and a defect of mitochondrial homeostasis. These two cases describe, for the
first time, a mitochondrial disease caused by PDH defects associated with
unbalanced of both CoQ10 content and mitochondria homeostasis, which severely
affects the brain. Both CoQ10 and mitochondria homeostasis appears as new markers
for PDH associated mitochondrial disorders.

PMCID: PMC4755364 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26014431  [PubMed - in process]


91. Circ Res. 2015 Jul 17;117(3):266-78. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.117.305624. Epub
2015 May 22.

Macrophage Mitochondrial Energy Status Regulates Cholesterol Efflux and Is
Enhanced by Anti-miR33 in Atherosclerosis.

Karunakaran D(1), Thrush AB(1), Nguyen MA(1), Richards L(1), Geoffrion M(1),
Singaravelu R(1), Ramphos E(1), Shangari P(1), Ouimet M(1), Pezacki JP(1), Moore 
KJ(1), Perisic L(1), Maegdefessel L(1), Hedin U(1), Harper ME(1), Rayner KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (D.K., 
M.-A.N., L.R., M.G., E.R., P.S., K.J.R.); Department of Biochemistry,
Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
(A.B.T., M.-A.N., R.S., J.P.P., M.-E.H., K.J.R.); National Research Council of
Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (R.S., J.P.P.); Marc and Ruti Bell Program for
Vascular Biology and Disease, The Leon H. Charney Division of Cardiology, New
York University School of Medicine (M.O., K.J.M.); and Department of Molecular
Medicine and Surgery (L.P., U.H.) and Department of Medicine (L.M.), Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)From the University of Ottawa Heart Institute,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (D.K., M.-A.N., L.R., M.G., E.R., P.S., K.J.R.);
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (A.B.T., M.-A.N., R.S., J.P.P., M.-E.H., K.J.R.);
National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada (R.S., J.P.P.); Marc
and Ruti Bell Program for Vascular Biology and Disease, The Leon H. Charney
Division of Cardiology, New York University School of Medicine (M.O., K.J.M.);
and Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery (L.P., U.H.) and Department of
Medicine (L.M.), Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. krayner@ottawaheart.ca.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Jul 17;117(3):225-8.

RATIONALE: Therapeutically targeting macrophage reverse cholesterol transport is 
a promising approach to treat atherosclerosis. Macrophage energy metabolism can
significantly influence macrophage phenotype, but how this is controlled in foam 
cells is not known. Bioinformatic pathway analysis predicts that miR-33 represses
a cluster of genes controlling cellular energy metabolism that may be important
in macrophage cholesterol efflux.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that cellular energy status can influence cholesterol 
efflux from macrophages, and that miR-33 reduces cholesterol efflux via
repression of mitochondrial energy metabolism pathways.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In this study, we demonstrated that macrophage cholesterol
efflux is regulated by mitochondrial ATP production, and that miR-33 controls a
network of genes that synchronize mitochondrial function. Inhibition of
mitochondrial ATP synthase markedly reduces macrophage cholesterol efflux
capacity, and anti-miR33 required fully functional mitochondria to enhance
ABCA1-mediated cholesterol efflux. Specifically, anti-miR33 derepressed the novel
target genes PGC-1a, PDK4, and SLC25A25 and boosted mitochondrial respiration and
production of ATP. Treatment of atherosclerotic Apoe(-/-) mice with anti-miR33
oligonucleotides reduced aortic sinus lesion area compared with controls, despite
no changes in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol or other circulating lipids.
Expression of miR-33a/b was markedly increased in human carotid atherosclerotic
plaques compared with normal arteries, and there was a concomitant decrease in
mitochondrial regulatory genes PGC-1a, SLC25A25, NRF1, and TFAM, suggesting these
genes are associated with advanced atherosclerosis in humans.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that anti-miR33 therapy derepresses genes
that enhance mitochondrial respiration and ATP production, which in conjunction
with increased ABCA1 expression, works to promote macrophage cholesterol efflux
and reduce atherosclerosis.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4578799 [Available on 2016-07-17]
PMID: 26002865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Reproduction. 2015 Aug;150(2):97-104. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0037. Epub 2015 May 20.

Mitochondrial biogenesis and degradation are induced by CCCP treatment of porcine
oocytes.

Itami N(1), Shiratsuki S(1), Shirasuna K(1), Kuwayama T(1), Iwata H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal ReproductionTokyo University of Agriculture, Funako 1737,
Atsugi, Kanagawa, 243-0034, Japan. (2)Department of Animal ReproductionTokyo
University of Agriculture, Funako 1737, Atsugi, Kanagawa, 243-0034, Japan
h1iwata@nodai.ac.jp.

In this study, we investigated the mitochondrial quality control system in
porcine oocytes during meiotic maturation. Cumulus cell oocyte complexes (COCs)
collected from gilt ovaries were treated with 10<U+200A> µM carbonyl
cyanide-m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP; a mitochondrial uncoupler) for 2 <U+200A>h. The
CCCP treatment was found to significantly reduce ATP content, increase the amount
of phosphorylated AMP-activated protein kinase and elevate reactive oxygen
species levels in oocytes. When the CCCP-treated COCs were cultured further for
44<U+200A> h in maturation medium, the ATP levels were restored and the parthenogenetic 
developmental rate of oocytes to the blastocyst stage was comparable with that of
untreated COCs. To examine the effects of CCCP treatment of oocytes on the
kinetics of mitochondrial DNA copy number (Mt number), COCs treated with 0 or 10 
<U+200A>µM CCCP were cultured for 44 <U+200A>h, after which the Mt number was determined by
RT-PCR. CCCP treatment was found to increase the Mt number in the modified
maturation medium in which mitochondrial degradation was inhibited by MG132,
whereas CCCP treatment did not affect the Mt number in the maturation medium
lacking MG132. The relative gene expression of TFAM was furthermore shown to be
significantly higher in CCCP-treated oocytes than in untreated oocytes. Taken
together, the finding presented here suggest that when the mitochondria are
injured, mitochondrial biogenesis and degradation are induced, and that these
processes may contribute to the recuperation of oocytes.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25995440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Hum Reprod. 2015 Jul;30(7):1653-64. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev114. Epub 2015 May 20.

Relationship between diminished ovarian reserve and mitochondrial biogenesis in
cumulus cells.

Boucret L(1), Chao de la Barca JM(2), Morinière C(3), Desquiret V(4),
Ferré-L'Hôtellier V(1), Descamps P(3), Marcaillou C(5), Reynier P(4), Procaccio
V(4), May-Panloup P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
d'Angers, 49933 Angers Cedex 9, France. (2)Département de Biochimie et Génétique,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, 49933 Angers Cedex 9, France.
(3)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers,
49933 Angers Cedex 9, France. (4)Département de Biochimie et Génétique, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, 49933 Angers Cedex 9, France UMR CNRS
6214-INSERM U1083, 49933 Angers Cedex 9, France. (5)Integragen SA, Evry, France. 
(6)Laboratoire de Biologie de la Reproduction, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
d'Angers, 49933 Angers Cedex 9, France UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM U1083, 49933 Angers
Cedex 9, France pamaypanloup@chu-angers.fr.

STUDY QUESTION: What part do mitochondria play in cases of diminished ovarian
reserve (DOR)?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Mitochondrial biogenesis in cumulus cells may be linked with
impaired oocyte competence in patients with DOR.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: DOR, one of the causes of infertility even in young women,
is characterized by the depletion of the ovarian pool associated with a decline
in oocyte competence. Mitochondria, which play a role in oocyte quality, could be
involved in the pathogenesis of DOR. The study of cumulus cells offers an
interesting non-invasive approach for evaluating oocyte quality and the metabolic
processes on which it depends. If mitochondrial dysfunction is involved in DOR,
it is likely to have an impact on the functioning of cumulus cells.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: This is an observational study of 74 immature
oocyte-cumulus complexes retrieved from 47 women undergoing in vitro
fertilization with intracytoplasmic sperm injection at the University Hospital of
Angers, France, from March 2013 to March 2014. The women were divided into two
groups: one group included 26 women with DOR, and the other, which included 21
women with a normal ovarian reserve (NOR), served as a control group.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTINGS, METHODS: The oocyte mitochondrial content and
the average mitochondrial content of the cumulus cells were assessed by
mitochondrial (mt)DNA quantification using a quantitative real-time PCR
technique. Microfluidic-based quantitative RT-PCR assays were used to quantify
the expression of 13 genes involved in mitochondrial functions such as apoptosis 
and antioxidant activity or in mitochondrial biogenesis. We used orthogonal
partial least-squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) to distinguish between the 
DOR group and the NOR group of patients, and an OPLS model to predict the value
of the oocyte mtDNA content that could be used as a critical marker of oocyte
quality.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The OPLS-DA model showed a good predictive
capability (Q2 = 0.543). Using the variable importance in projection (VIP) metric
we found three mitochondrial variables distinguishing the DOR group from the NOR 
group of patients, i.e. the oocyte mtDNA content (VIP = 0.92), the cumulus cell
mtDNA content (VIP = 0.95) and the expression in cumulus cells of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1 alpha (PPARGC-1A) (VIP = 1.10),
all of which were lower in the DOR group than in the NOR group of patients. The
OPLS model was able to satisfactorily predict the oocyte mtDNA content in only
the NOR group of patients (Q2 = 0.506). We found four new variables positively
linked to the oocyte mitochondrial mass, i.e. the cumulus cell mtDNA content (VIP
= 1.19), and the expression in cumulus cells of three factors of mitochondrial
biogenesis: polymerase gamma (POLG) (VIP = 2.13), optic atrophy 1 (OPA1) (VIP =
1.89) and the transcription factor associated with mitochondria (TFAM) (VIP =
1.32).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS OF CAUTION: This is a descriptive study. Because of ethical 
concerns in human clinical practice, this study has been performed only on
immature oocytes and corresponding cumulus cells, which are usually discarded
during in vitro fertilization procedures.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Cumulus cells may govern mitochondrial
biogenesis, creating an adequate oocyte mitochondrial pool to promote embryonic
development. The alteration of this process in patients with DOR may account for 
the impairment of oocyte quality. This suggests that some mitochondrial
characteristics of cumulus cells may serve as indicators of oocyte competence and
that oocyte quality may be improved by products enhancing mitochondrial
biogenesis.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported by a grant from the
University Hospital of Angers, France: 'Appel d'offre interne à la recherche
2014'.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: N/A.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25994667  [PubMed - in process]


94. Biosci Rep. 2015 May 19. [Epub ahead of print]

The regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) expression during
skeletal muscle cell differentiation.

Collu-Marchese M, Shuen M, Pauly M, Saleem A, Hood DA.

The ATP demand required for muscle development is accommodated by elevations in
mitochondrial biogenesis, through the coordinated activities of the nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes. The most important transcriptional activator of the
mitochondrial genome is mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), however the 
regulation of Tfam expression during muscle differentiation is not known. Thus,
we measured Tfam mRNA levels, mRNA stability, protein expression and
localization, and Tfam transcription during the progression of muscle
differentiation. Parallel 2-fold increases in Tfam protein and mRNA were
observed, corresponding with 2-3-fold increases in mitochondrial content.
Transcriptional activity of a 2051 bp promoter increased during this
differentiation period, and this was accompanied by a 3-fold greater Tfam mRNA
stabilization. Interestingly, truncations of the promoter at 1706 bp, 978 bp, and
393 bp promoter all exhibited 2-3-fold higher transcriptional activity than the
2051 bp construct, indicating the presence of negative regulatory elements within
the distal 350 bp of the promoter. Activation of AMP kinase augmented Tfam
transcription within the proximal promoter, suggesting the presence of binding
sites for transcription factors that are responsive to cellular energy state.
During differentiation, the accumulating Tfam protein was progressively
distributed to the mitochondrial matrix where it augmented the expression of
mtDNA and COX subunit I, a mtDNA gene product. Our data suggest that, during
muscle differentiation, Tfam protein levels are regulated by the availability of 
Tfam mRNA, which is controlled by both transcription and mRNA stability. Changes 
in energy state and Tfam localization also impact Tfam expression and action in
differentiating myotubes.

PMID: 25989201  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


95. Obes Surg. 2015 Dec;25(12):2376-85. doi: 10.1007/s11695-015-1708-5.

Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass Acutely Decreases Protein Carbonylation and Increases
Expression of Mitochondrial Biogenesis Genes in Subcutaneous Adipose Tissue.

Jahansouz C(1), Serrot FJ(1), Frohnert BI(2), Foncea RE(3), Dorman RB(1),
Slusarek B(1), Leslie DB(1), Bernlohr DA(3), Ikramuddin S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE, MMC 195, 
Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA. (2)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department
of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE, MMC 195,
Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and
Biophysics, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware St. SE, MMC 195, Minneapolis,
MN, 55455, USA. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, 420 Delaware
St. SE, MMC 195, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA. ikram001@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial dysfunction in adipose tissue has been implicated as a 
pathogenic step in the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). In adipose
tissue, chronic nutrient overload results in mitochondria driven increased
reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to carbonylation of proteins that impair
mitochondrial function and downregulation of key genes linked to mitochondrial
biogenesis. In patients with T2DM, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) surgery leads 
to improvements in glycemic profile prior to significant weight loss.
Consequently, we hypothesized that improved glycemia early after RYGB would be
paralleled by decreased protein carbonylation and increased expression of genes
related to mitochondrial biogenesis in adipose tissue.
METHODS: To evaluate this hypothesis, 16 obese individuals were studied before
and 7-8 days following RYGB and adjustable gastric banding (AGB). Subcutaneous
adipose tissue was obtained pre- and post-bariatric surgery as well as from eight
healthy, non-obese individual controls.
RESULTS: Prior to surgery, adipose tissue expression of PGC1a, NRF1, Cyt C, and
eNOS (but not Tfam) showed significantly lower expression in the obese bariatric 
surgery group when compared to lean controls (p < 0.05). Following RYGB, but not 
after AGB, patients showed significant decrease in HOMA-IR, reduction in adipose 
protein carbonylation, and increased expression of genes linked to mitochondrial 
biogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that rapid reduction in protein carbonylation 
and increased mitochondrial biogenesis may explain postoperative metabolic
improvements following RYGB.

PMCID: PMC4648364
PMID: 25975200  [PubMed - in process]


96. Int J Toxicol. 2015 May-Jun;34(3):274-83. doi: 10.1177/1091581815584165. Epub
2015 May 13.

Beneficial Effect of Flavone Derivatives on Aß-Induced Memory Deficit Is Mediated
by Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor <U+03B3> Coactivator 1a: A Comparative
Study.

Arsalandeh F(1), Ahmadian S(1), Foolad F(2), Khodagholi F(2), Farimani MM(3),
Shaerzadeh F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran. 
(2)NeuroBiology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Phytochemistry, Medicinal Plants and Drugs
Research Institute, Shahid Beheshti University, G. C., Evin, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Neurophysiology Research
Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
fatima.shaerzadeh@gmail.com.

In the present study, the neuroprotective effect of
5-hydroxy-6,7,4'-trimethoxyflavone (flavone 1), a natural flavone, was
investigated in comparison with another flavone, 5,7,4'-trihydroxyflavone
(flavone 2) on the hippocampus of amyloid beta (Aß)-injected rats. Rats were
treated with the 2 flavones (1 mg/kg/d) for 1 week before Aß injection. Seven
days after Aß administration, memory function of rats was assessed in a passive
avoidance test (PAT). Changes in the levels of mitochondrial transcription factor
A (TFAM), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1 a (PGC-1a), 
phospho-adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (pAMPK), AMPK,
phospho-cAMP-responsive element-binding protein (CREB), CREB, and nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) proteins were determined by Western blot analysis.
Our results showed an improvement in memory in rats pretreated with flavonoids.
At the molecular level, phosphorylation of CREB, known as the master modulator of
memory processes, increased. On the other hand, the level of mitochondrial
biogenesis factors, PGC-1a and its downstream molecules NRF-1 and TFAM
significantly increased by dietary administration of 2 flavones. In addition,
flavone 1 and flavone 2 prevented mitochondrial swelling and mitochondrial
membrane potential reduction. Our results provided evidence that flavone 1 is
more effective than flavone 2 presumably due to its O-methylated groups. In
conclusion, it seems that in addition to classical antioxidant effect, flavones
exert part of their protective effects through mitochondrial biogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25972379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell Biochem Funct. 2015 Jun;33(4):249-56. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3111. Epub 2015 May
11.

PPAR-a agonist elicits metabolically active brown adipocytes and weight loss in
diet-induced obese mice.

Rachid TL(1), Penna-de-Carvalho A(1), Bringhenti I(1), Aguila MB(1),
Mandarim-de-Lacerda CA(1), Souza-Mello V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Morphometry, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases, Biomedical
Center, Institute of Biology, State University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.

Obesity is considered a public health problem worldwide. Fenofibrate, a selective
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPAR-a) agonist, elicits weight
loss in animal models. This study aimed to examine the effects of fenofibrate on 
energy expenditure, body mass (BM) and gene expression of thermogenic factors in 
brown adipose tissue of diet-induced obese mice. Male C57BL/6 mice were fed a
standard chow (SC; 10% lipids) diet or a high-fat (HF; 50% lipids) diet for
10<U+2009>weeks. Afterwards, groups were subdivided as SC, SC-F, HF and HF-F (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10,
each). Treatment with fenofibrate (100<U+2009>mg<U+2009>kg(-1) BM mixed into the diet) lasted
5<U+2009>weeks. Treated groups had reduced final BM compared with their counterparts
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05), explained by the increase in energy expenditure, CO2 production and
O2 consumption after treatment with fenofibrate (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05). Similarly, genes
involved in thermogenesis as PPAR-a, PPAR-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a, nuclear respiratory
factor 1, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), PR domain containing 16
(PRDM16), ß-3 adrenergic receptor (ß3-AR), bone morphogenetic protein 8B and
uncoupling protein 1 were significantly expressed in brown adipocytes after the
treatment (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05). All observations ensure that selective PPAR-a agonist can
induce thermogenesis by increasing energy expenditure and enhancing the
expression of genes involved in the thermogenic pathway. These results suggest
fenofibrate as a coadjutant drug for the treatment of obesity.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25959716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Chin J Integr Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):928-37. doi: 10.1007/s11655-015-2078-5. Epub
2015 May 9.

Yishen Jiangzhuo Granules affect tubulointerstitial fibrosis via a
mitochondrion-mediated apoptotic pathway.

Xu YF(1), Ruan SW(2,)(3), Lin JM(2), Zhang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian Medical
University, Fuzhou, 350005, China. xuyanfang99@hotmail.com. (2)Academy of
Integrative Medicine, Fujian University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, 
350108, China. (3)People Hospital Affiliated to Fujian University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, 350004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of Yishen Jiangzhuo Granules, YSJZG) on
mitochondrial injury and regeneration and renal tubular epithelial cell apoptosis
in chronic renal failure (CRF) rats and explore its mechanism from molecular
pathology, gene, protein levels, and relative pathway.
METHODS: The CRF rat model was established using 5/6 nephrectomy. Sixty rats were
randomly divided into six groups: sham-operation group, model (CRF) group,
Niaoduqing Granules-treated group [5 g/(kg.day)], low-, moderate-, and high-dose 
[L-YSJZG, M-YSJZG, H-YSJZG at 3, 6, and 9 g/(kg day)] YSJZG-treated group (n=10
each). The levels of serum creatinine (Scr), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and 24-h 
urine protein were assessed after 10 weeks of treatment. The tubulointerstitial
injury and collagen deposition were evaluated using periodic acid-schiff stain
and Masson staining. Renal tubular epithelial cell apoptosis was assessed using
the terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling assay,
mitochondrial injury was observed using an electron microscope, and superoxide
dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH) and malondialdehyde (MDA) levels were assessed
using chromometry. Transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) expression was assessed
using immunohistochemistry. The expressions of Bax, Bcl-2, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator- 1a (PGC-1a), mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK)
phosphorylation were evaluated by Western blot.
RESULTS: YSJZG decreased the 24-h urine protein, BUN, Scr, remnant kidney
weight-to-body weight ratio, renal tubular injury, deposition of collagen, and
the apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells in a dose-dependent manner. YSJZG
dose-dependently restored the number and structure of mitochondria and the
expression of Tfam and PCG-1a, up-regulated the expression of Bcl-2, and
inhibited the expression of Bax. YSJZG also dose-dependently inhibited TGF-ß1
expression, increased SOD and GSH activity, decreased the MDA level, and
inhibited p38MAPK and pERK1/2 phosphorylation (all P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: YSJZG improved the renal function in rats with CRF and inhibited the 
progression of tubulointerstitial fibrosis by dose-dependently alleviating
mitochondrial injury, restoring the expression of Tfam and PCG-1a, and inhibiting
renal tubular epithelial cell apoptosis through inhibiting activation of reactive
oxygen species-MAPK signaling.

PMID: 25956968  [PubMed - in process]


99. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Jul 1;309(1):G21-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00307.2014. Epub 2015 May 7.

Cilostazol attenuates murine hepatic ischemia and reperfusion injury via heme
oxygenase-dependent activation of mitochondrial biogenesis.

Joe Y(1), Zheng M(2), Kim HJ(1), Uddin MJ(1), Kim SK(1), Chen Y(1), Park J(1),
Cho GJ(3), Ryter SW(4), Chung HT(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, Korea; (2)School of
Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, Korea; Department of Neurology, 
Affiliated Hospital of YanBian University, YanJi, China; (3)Department of
Anatomy, School of Medicine, and Institute of Health Sciences, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Korea; and. (4)Joan and Sanford I. Weill Department
of Medicine, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, and Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical Center, New York, New York.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan, Korea;
chung@ulsan.ac.kr.

Hepatic ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) can cause hepatocellular injury associated
with the inflammatory response and mitochondrial dysfunction. We studied the
protective effects of the phosphodiesterase inhibitor cilostazol in hepatic I/R
and the roles of mitochondria and the Nrf2/heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) system.
Wild-type, Hmox1(-/-), or Nrf2(-/-) mice were subjected to hepatic I/R in the
absence or presence of cilostazol followed by measurements of liver injury.
Primary hepatocytes were subjected to cilostazol with the HO-1 inhibitor ZnPP, or
Nrf2-specific siRNA, followed by assessment of mitochondrial biogenesis.
Preconditioning with cilostazol prior to hepatic I/R protected against
hepatocellular injury and mitochondrial dysfunction. Cilostazol reduced the serum
levels of alanine aminotransferase, TNF-a, and liver myeloperoxidase content
relative to control I/R-treated mice. In primary hepatocytes, cilostazol
increased the expression of HO-1, and markers of mitochondrial biogenesis,
PGC-1a, NRF-1, and TFAM, induced the mitochondrial proteins COX III and COX IV
and increased mtDNA and mitochondria content. Pretreatment of primary hepatocytes
with ZnPP inhibited cilostazol-induced PGC-1a, NRF-1, and TFAM mRNA expression
and reduced mtDNA and mitochondria content. Genetic silencing of Nrf2 prevented
the induction of HO-1 and mitochondrial biogenesis by cilostazol in HepG2 cells. 
Cilostazol induced hepatic HO-1 production and mitochondrial biogenesis in
wild-type mice, but not in Hmox1(-/-) or Nrf2(-/-) mice, and failed to protect
against liver injury in Nrf2(-/-) mice. These results suggest that I/R injury can
impair hepatic mitochondrial function, which can be reversed by cilostazol
treatment. These results also suggest that cilostazol-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis was mediated by an Nrf-2- and HO-1-dependent pathway.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25951827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jul 15;309(2):E132-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00620.2014. Epub 2015 May 5.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A regulation of mitochondrial degeneration in 
experimental diabetic neuropathy.

Chandrasekaran K(1), Anjaneyulu M(2), Inoue T(3), Choi J(1), Sagi AR(4), Chen
C(1), Ide T(5), Russell JW(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland; Veterans
Affiars Maryland Health Care System; (2)Department of Neurology, University of
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland; Veterans Affiars Maryland Health Care System;
Principal Investigator, Preclinical Division, Syngene International Ltd.,
Bangalore, India; (3)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
Maryland; Veterans Affiars Maryland Health Care System; Daiichi Sankyo Co. Ltd., 
Tokyo, Japan; and. (4)Veterans Affiars Maryland Health Care System; (5)Department
of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kyushu University, Maidashi Higashi-ku, Fukuoka,
Japan. (6)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland;
Veterans Affiars Maryland Health Care System; JRussell@som.umaryland.edu.

Oxidative stress-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
damage in peripheral neurons is considered to be important in the development of 
diabetic neuropathy. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) wraps mtDNA and 
promotes mtDNA replication and transcription. We studied whether overexpression
of TFAM reverses experimental peripheral diabetic neuropathy using TFAM
transgenic mice (TFAM Tg) that express human TFAM (hTFAM). Levels of mouse mtDNA 
and the total TFAM (mouse TFAM + hTFAM) in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG)
increased by approximately twofold in the TFAM Tg mice compared with control (WT)
mice. WT and TFAM Tg mice were made diabetic by the administration of
streptozotocin. Neuropathy end points were motor and sensory nerve conduction
velocities, mechanical allodynia, thermal nociception, and intraepidermal nerve
fiber density (IENFD). In the DRG neurons, mtDNA copy number and damage to mtDNA 
were quantified by qPCR, and TFAM levels were measured by Western blot. Mice with
16-wk duration of diabetes developed motor and sensory nerve conduction deficits,
behavioral deficits, and intraepidermal nerve fiber loss. All of these changes
were mostly prevented in diabetic TFAM Tg mice and were independent of changes in
blood parameters. Mice with 16 wk of diabetes had a 40% decrease in mtDNA copy
number compared with nondiabetic mice (P < 0.01). Importantly, the mtDNA copy
number in diabetic TFAM Tg mice reached the same level as that of WT nondiabetic 
mice. In comparison, there was upregulation of mtDNA and TFAM in 6-wk diabetic
mice, suggesting that TFAM activation could be a therapeutic strategy to treat
peripheral neuropathy.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4504935 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 25944881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Apr 30;16(5):9831-49. doi: 10.3390/ijms16059831.

Abnormal mitochondrial function and impaired granulosa cell differentiation in
androgen receptor knockout mice.

Wang RS(1), Chang HY(2), Kao SH(3), Kao CH(4), Wu YC(5), Yeh S(6), Tzeng CR(7),
Chang C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine & Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
d102094001@tmu.edu.tw. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
hychang@tmu.edu.tw. (3)School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology,
College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110,
Taiwan. kaosh@tmu.edu.tw. (4)Center of General Education, Chang Gung University, 
Taoyuan 333, Taiwan. kao@mail.cgu.edu.tw. (5)Graduate Institute of Clinical
Medicine & Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, Taipei
Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan. vvichern@yahoo.com.tw. (6)George H.
Whipple Lab for Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology and Radiation 
Oncology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
shuyuan_yeh@urmc.rochester.edu. (7)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine &
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 110, Taiwan. tzengcr@tmu.edu.tw. (8)George H. Whipple Lab for 
Cancer Research, Departments of Pathology, Urology and Radiation Oncology,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
chang@urmc.rochester.edu.

In the ovary, the paracrine interactions between the oocyte and surrounded
granulosa cells are critical for optimal oocyte quality and embryonic
development. Mice lacking the androgen receptor (AR<U+207B>/<U+207B>) were noted to have
reduced fertility with abnormal ovarian function that might involve the promotion
of preantral follicle growth and prevention of follicular atresia. However, the
detailed mechanism of how AR in granulosa cells exerts its effects on oocyte
quality is poorly understood. Comparing in vitro maturation rate of oocytes, we
found oocytes collected from AR<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice have a significantly poor maturating rate
with 60% reached metaphase II and 30% remained in germinal vesicle breakdown
stage, whereas 95% of wild-type AR (AR<U+207A>/<U+207A>) oocytes had reached metaphase II.
Interestingly, we found these AR<U+207B>/<U+207B> female mice also had an increased frequency
of morphological alterations in the mitochondria of granulosa cells with reduced 
ATP generation (0.18 ± 0.02 vs. 0.29 ± 0.02 µM/mg protein; p < 0.05) and aberrant
mitochondrial biogenesis. Mechanism dissection found loss of AR led to a
significant decrease in the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) co-activator 1-ß (PGC1-ß) and its sequential downstream genes,
nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), in controlling mitochondrial biogenesis. These results indicate that AR
may contribute to maintain oocyte quality and fertility via controlling the
signals of PGC1-ß-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis in granulosa cells.

PMCID: PMC4463620
PMID: 25941928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 May;67(8):2141-53. doi: 10.1002/art.39182.

Mitochondrial biogenesis is impaired in osteoarthritis chondrocytes but
reversible via peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a.

Wang Y(1), Zhao X(2), Lotz M(3), Terkeltaub R(4), Liu-Bryan R(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of California at San Diego, La Jolla. (2)VA San Diego Healthcare
System, San Diego, California. (3)The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California. (4)University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, and VA San Diego 
Healthcare System, San Diego, California.

OBJECTIVE: The etiology of chondrocyte mitochondrial dysfunction in
osteoarthritis (OA) is not completely understood. OA chondrocytes are deficient
in the metabolic biosensors active AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) and
sirtuin 1 (SIRT-1), which modulate the mitochondrial biogenesis "master
regulator" peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a). 
Moreover, PGC-1a critically mediates AMPK anticatabolic activity in chondrocytes.
The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that mitochondrial biogenesis is
deficient in human OA chondrocytes and that this deficiency functionally
increases chondrocyte procatabolic responses, which are reversed by activation of
the AMPK/SIRT-1/PGC-1a pathway.
METHODS: We assessed the expression and activity (phosphorylation) of AMPKa,
SIRT-1, and PGC-1a in human knee chondrocytes and human and mouse knee cartilage,
and we defined and compared the content and function of mitochondria, including
oxidative phosphorylation and expression of mitochondrial biogenesis factors
(mitochondrial transcriptional factor A [TFAM] and nuclear respiratory factors
[NRFs]).
RESULTS: Human knee OA chondrocytes had a decreased mitochondrial biogenesis
capacity, which was linked to reduced AMPKa activity and decreased expression of 
SIRT-1, PGC-1a, TFAM, NRF-1, and NRF-2. Human knee OA and aging mouse knee
cartilage had decreased expression of TFAM and ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase
core protein, a subunit of mitochondrial complex III, in situ. Chondrocyte TFAM
knockdown inhibited mitochondrial biogenesis and enhanced procatabolic responses 
to interleukin-1ß. Finally, activation of AMPK by A-769662 increased PGC-1a
expression via SIRT-1 and reversed impairments in mitochondrial biogenesis,
oxidative phosphorylation, and intracellular ATP in human knee OA chondrocytes.
CONCLUSION: Mitochondrial biogenesis is deficient in human OA chondrocytes, and
this deficiency promotes chondrocyte procatabolic responses. TFAM-mediated
activation of the AMPK/SIRT-1/PGC-1a pathway reverses these effects, suggesting
translational potential of pharmacologic AMPK activators to limit OA progression.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4519411 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25940958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cells. 2015 May;38(5):452-6. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2015.0005. Epub 2015 Apr 
28.

Increased methylation of interleukin 6 gene is associated with obesity in Korean 
women.

Na YK(1), Hong HS(1), Lee WK(2), Kim YH(3), Kim DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-422, Korea. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine,
Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-422, Korea. (3)Department of Anatomy and
BK21 Plus KNU Biomedical Convergence Program, School of Medicine, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu 702-422, Korea.

Obesity is the fifth leading risk for death globally, and a significant challenge
to global health. It is a common, complex, non-malignant disease and develops due
to interactions between the genes and the environment. DNA methylation can act as
a downstream effector of environmental signals; analysis of this process
therefore holds substantial promise for identifying mechanisms through which
genetic and environmental factors jointly contribute to disease risk. To assess
the effects of excessive weight and obesity on gene-specific methylation levels
of promoter regions, we determined the methylation status of four genes involved 
in inflammation and oxidative stress [interleukin 6 (IL6), tumor necrosis factor 
a (TNFa), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and glucose transport 4
(GLUT4)] in blood cell-derived DNA from healthy women volunteers with a range of 
body mass indices (BMIs) by methylation-specific PCR. Interestingly, the samples 
from obese individuals (BMI = 30 kg/m(2)) showed significantly increased
hypermethylation for IL6 gene compared to normal weight (BMI < 23 kg/m(2)) and
overweight samples (23 kg/m(2) = BMI < 30 kg/m(2)) (P = 0.034 and P = 0.026).
However, there was no statistically significant difference in promoter
methylation of the other 3 genes between each group. These findings suggest that 
aberrant DNA methylation of IL6 gene promoter may play an important role in the
etiology and pathogenesis of obesity and IL6 methylation could be used as
molecular biomarker for obesity risk assessment. Further studies are required to 
elucidate the potential mechanisms underlying this relationship.

PMCID: PMC4443287
PMID: 25921605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Jul;405(1-2):223-32. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2413-3. Epub 
2015 Apr 26.

Transcriptional modulation of mitochondria biogenesis pathway at and above
critical speed in mice.

Mille-Hamard L(1), Breuneval C, Rousseau AS, Grimaldi P, Billat VL.

Author information: 
(1)UBIAE, INSERM U902, Université Evry-Val d'Essonne, Bd Francois Mitterrand,
Batiment Maupertuis, 91025, Evry, France, laurence.hamard@inserm.fr.

High- or moderate-intensity endurance training leads to mitochondrial biogenesis 
via the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> co-activator 1a
(PGC-1a)/mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) signaling pathway. Although 
this pathway is stimulated during acute exercise, the relationship between its
activity and the intensity of the exercise has not been characterized. In animal 
studies, individualized running speeds have not previously been assessed. Here,
we sought to determine whether this pathway was modulated after a bout of
exhaustive exercise at different relative intensities (at and over critical speed
(CS)). Our starting hypotheses were that (i) exercise-induced overexpression of
PGC-1a in skeletal muscle falls at intensities above CS, and (ii) transcriptional
activity of the mitochondrial biogenesis signaling cascade is intensity-sensitive
at and above CS. To test these hypothesis, male Friend Virus B-Type mice were
divided into a control group and three exercise groups (exercising at CS, peak
velocity (vPeak) and 150 % CS, respectively). mRNA expression levels for genes
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis signaling were analyzed in the quadriceps
muscle. PGC-1a was overexpressed at all exercise intensities. We also identified 
that, PGC-1a mRNA expression was negatively correlated with exercise intensity
and blood lactate levels but not with maximal oxygen uptake, vPeak, or CS.
Expression of the PGC-1a co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
ß was negatively correlated with the exercise intensity. In contrast, expression 
levels of Tfam were dissociated from exercise intensity. Our data indicate that
at the intensities used in endurance training, the expression of mitochondrial
biogenesis genes is finely modulated by the relative intensity of exhaustive
exercise.

PMID: 25912548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Acta Trop. 2015 Aug;148:13-23. doi: 10.1016/j.actatropica.2015.04.004. Epub 2015 
Apr 21.

Mitochondrial dynamics in the mouse liver infected by Schistosoma mansoni.

Chen TT(1), Wu LS(1), Hsu PW(2), Pang CY(1), Lee KM(3), Cheng PC(4), Peng SY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(2)Bioinformatics Core Laboratory, Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Pharmaceutical Science and
Technology, Central Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taichung,
Taiwan. (4)Department of Parasitology and Center for International Tropical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan; Department
of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
Electronic address: pengsy@mail.tcu.edu.tw.

Mitochondrial dynamics is crucial for regulation of cell homeostasis. Schistosoma
mansoni is one of the most common parasites known to cause liver disease. Mice
infected by S. mansoni show acute symptoms of schistosomiasis after 8 weeks.
Hence, in this study, we attempted to assess the direct effects of S. mansoni
infection on mice liver, and to explore the expression of mitochondrial
morphology, dynamics, and function. Our recent findings show that S. mansoni
infection changes mitochondrial morphology and affects mitochondrial functions,
which attenuates mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP generation. S.
mansoni-infected mice increases mitochondrial numbers by upregulating of genes
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, including peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor c co-activator 1a (PGC1a) and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(Tfam). This may promote mitochondria generation for accelerating the recovery of
mitochondrial functions. Moreover, S. mansoni would disrupt mitochondrial
dynamics including induced mitochondrial fission and promoted mitochondrial
fragmentation in mice liver. More importantly, S. mansoni further stimulated
upregulation both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptosis pathway in infected mice
liver. The intrinsic pathway was triggered by cytochrome c release. Additionally,
NF<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor-kappa B, p65) could play a protective role to inhibit
apoptosis through reducing active caspase-3 expression. Therefore, our results
confirmed the liver damage mechanism of experimental schistosomiasis in mice
model.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25910628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Apr 17. doi: 10.1071/RD14450. [Epub ahead of print]

Maternal age and in vitro culture affect mitochondrial number and function in
equine oocytes and embryos.

Hendriks WK, Colleoni S, Galli C, Paris DB, Colenbrander B, Roelen BA, Stout TA.

Advanced maternal age and in vitro embryo production (IVP) predispose to
pregnancy loss in horses. We investigated whether mare age and IVP were
associated with alterations in mitochondrial (mt) DNA copy number or function
that could compromise oocyte and embryo development. Effects of mare age (TFAM), 
mtDNA polymerase ? subunit B (mtPOLB) and mitochondrial single-stranded
DNA-binding protein (SSB)), energy production (ATP synthase-coupling factor 6,
mitochondrial-like (ATP-synth_F6)) and oxygen free radical scavenging
(glutathione peroxidase 3 (GPX3)) were investigated in oocytes before and after
in vitro maturation (IVM), and in early embryos. Expression of TFAM, mtPOLB and
ATP-synth-F6 declined after IVM (PP=0.01) and lower mtDNA:total DNA ratios (Pin
vivo embryos, but higher mtPOLB (P=0.013) and a tendency to reduced GPX3
expression (P=0.09). The lower mtDNA number in embryos from older mares may
compromise development, but could be an effect rather than cause of developmental
retardation. The general down-regulation of genes involved in mitochondrial
replication and function after IVM may compromise resulting embryos.

PMID: 25881326  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


107. Mol Med. 2015 Apr 13;21:305-12. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00013.

Resveratrol Improves Survival and Prolongs Life Following Hemorrhagic Shock.

Ayub A(1), Poulose N(1), Raju R(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Sciences, Georgia Regents University, Augusta,
Georgia, United States of America. (2)Department of Surgery, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia,
United States of America.

Resveratrol has been shown to potentiate mitochondrial function and extend
longevity; however, there is no evidence to support whether resveratrol can
improve survival or prolong life following hemorrhagic shock. We sought to
determine whether (a) resveratrol can improve survival following hemorrhage and
resuscitation and (b) prolong life in the absence of resuscitation. Using a
hemorrhagic injury (HI) model in the rat, we describe for the first time that the
naturally occurring small molecule, resveratrol, may be an effective adjunct to
resuscitation fluid. In a series of three sets of experiments we show that
resveratrol administration during resuscitation improves survival following HI (p
< 0.05), resveratrol and its synthetic mimic SRT1720 can significantly prolong
life in the absence of resuscitation fluid (<30 min versus up to 4 h; p < 0.05), 
and resveratrol as well as SRT1720 restores left ventricular function following
HI. We also found significant changes in the expression level of
mitochondria-related transcription factors Ppar-a and Tfam, as well as Pgc-1a in 
the left ventricular tissues of rats subjected to HI and treated with
resveratrol. The results indicate that resveratrol is a strong candidate adjunct 
to resuscitation following severe hemorrhage.

PMCID: PMC4503654
PMID: 25879628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jul;1852(7):1420-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.04.004.
Epub 2015 Apr 11.

Chromosome 21-derived hsa-miR-155-5p regulates mitochondrial biogenesis by
targeting Mitochondrial Transcription Factor A (TFAM).

Quiñones-Lombraña A(1), Blanco JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo, The State
University of New York, USA. (2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University
at Buffalo, The State University of New York, USA. Electronic address:
jgblanco@buffalo.edu.

The regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis is under the control of nuclear genes 
including the master Mitochondrial Transcription Factor A (TFAM). Recent evidence
suggests that the expression of TFAM is regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs) in
various cellular contexts. Here, we show that hsa-miR-155-5p, a prominent miRNA
encoded in chromosome 21, controls the expression of TFAM at the
post-transcriptional level. In human fibroblasts derived from a diploid donor,
downregulation of TFAM by hsa-miR-155-5p decreased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
content. In contrast, downregulation of TFAM by hsa-miR-155-5p did not decrease
mtDNA content in fibroblasts derived from a donor with Down syndrome (DS, trisomy
21). In line, downregulation of mitochondrial TFAM levels through hsa-miR-155-5p 
decreased mitochondrial mass in diploid fibroblasts but not in trisomic cells.
Due to the prevalence of mitochondrial dysfunction and cardiac abnormalities in
subjects with DS, we examined the presence of potential associations between
hsa-miR-155-5p and TFAM expression in heart samples from donors with and without 
DS. There were significant negative associations between hsa-miR-155-5p and TFAM 
expression in heart samples from donors with and without DS. These results
suggest that regulation of TFAM by hsa-miR-155-5p impacts mitochondrial
biogenesis in the diploid setting but not in the DS setting.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4433801 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25869329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Metab. 2015 Apr 7;21(4):596-608. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2015.03.010.

BMPR2 preserves mitochondrial function and DNA during reoxygenation to promote
endothelial cell survival and reverse pulmonary hypertension.

Diebold I(1), Hennigs JK(1), Miyagawa K(1), Li CG(1), Nickel NP(1), Kaschwich
M(1), Cao A(1), Wang L(1), Reddy S(2), Chen PI(1), Nakahira K(3), Alcazar MA(1), 
Hopper RK(1), Ji L(2), Feldman BJ(2), Rabinovitch M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; The Vera Moulton Wall Center for
Pulmonary Vascular Disease, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics and Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Department
of Pediatrics and Cardiovascular Institute, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; The Vera Moulton Wall Center for Pulmonary
Vascular Disease, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305,
USA. Electronic address: marlener@stanford.edu.

Mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation, and mutant bone morphogenetic protein
receptor 2 (BMPR2) are associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), an 
incurable disease characterized by pulmonary arterial (PA) endothelial cell (EC) 
apoptosis, decreased microvessels, and occlusive vascular remodeling. We
hypothesized that reduced BMPR2 induces PAEC mitochondrial dysfunction, promoting
a pro-inflammatory or pro-apoptotic state. Mice with EC deletion of BMPR2 develop
hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension that, in contrast to non-transgenic
littermates, does not reverse upon reoxygenation and is associated with reduced
PA microvessels and lung EC p53, PGC1a and TFAM, regulators of mitochondrial
biogenesis, and mitochondrial DNA. Decreasing PAEC BMPR2 by siRNA during
reoxygenation represses p53, PGC1a, NRF2, TFAM, mitochondrial membrane potential,
and ATP and induces mitochondrial DNA deletion and apoptosis. Reducing PAEC BMPR2
in normoxia increases p53, PGC1a, TFAM, mitochondrial membrane potential, ATP
production, and glycolysis, and induces mitochondrial fission and a
pro-inflammatory state. These features are recapitulated in PAECs from PAH
patients with mutant BMPR2.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4394191 [Available on 2016-04-07]
PMID: 25863249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. PPAR Res. 2015;2015:720383. doi: 10.1155/2015/720383. Epub 2015 Mar 11.

Huaier Cream Protects against Adriamycin-Induced Nephropathy by Restoring
Mitochondrial Function via PGC-1a Upregulation.

Che R(1), Zhu C(2), Ding G(2), Zhao M(2), Bai M(2), Jia Z(2), Zhang A(2), Huang
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China. (2)Department of
Nephrology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, 72 Guangzhou
Road, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, China ; Institute of Pediatrics, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008, China.

The mechanism by which Huaier, a Chinese traditional medicine, protects podocytes
remains unclear. We designed the present study to examine whether mitochondrial
function restored by PGC-1a serves as the major target of Huaier cream in
protecting ADR nephropathy. After ADR administration, the podocytes exhibited
remarkable cell injury and mitochondrial dysfunction. Additionally, ADR also
reduced PGC-1a both in vivo and in vitro. Following the Huaier treatment, the
notable downregulation of PGC-1a and its downstream molecule mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) were almost entirely blocked. Correspondingly,
Huaier markedly ameliorated ADR-induced podocyte injury and mitochondrial
dysfunction in both rat kidneys and incubated cells as it inhibited the decrease 
of nephrin and podocin expression, mtDNA copy number, MMP, and ATP content.
Transmission electron microscopy result also showed that Huaier protected
mitochondria against ADR-induced severe mitophagy and abnormal changes of
ultrastructural morphology. In conclusion, Huaier can protect podocytes against
ADR-induced cytotoxicity possibly by reversing the dysfunction of mitochondria
via PGC-1a overexpression, which may be a novel therapeutic drug target in
glomerular diseases.

PMCID: PMC4377481
PMID: 25861251  [PubMed]


111. Pharm Biol. 2016;54(2):237-42. doi: 10.3109/13880209.2015.1029052. Epub 2015 Apr 
10.

Cryptotanshinone protects against adriamycin-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in
cardiomyocytes.

Zhang Y(1), Chen L(2), Li F(3), Wang H(4), Yao Y(5), Shu J(6), Ying MZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Tumor Surgery , Wuwei Tumor Hospital , Wuwei, Gansu PR China .
(2)b Department of Paediatrics , Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical
University , Shanghai , PR China . (3)c International Medical Center, Chinese PLA
General Hospital , Beijing PR China . (4)d Department of Tumor Chemotherapy ,
Wuwei Tumor Hospital , Wuwei, Gansu , PR China . (5)e Research Center for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Brain Disease
Bioinformation, Xuzhou Medical College , Xuzhou, Jiangsu , PR China , and. (6)f
Department of Cardiology , The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University ,
Suzhou, Jiangsu PR China.

CONTEXT: The serious side effect of Adriamycin (ADR) is cardiomyopathy.
Cryptotanshinone (CRY) is widely and safely used as antioxidant with MTD more
than 5<U+2009>mg/g in rats (p.o).
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to study the protection effects of CRY 
against ADR-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in cardiomyocytes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The chemical administration lasted for 20 days with an
effective dose of CRY (p.o.) at 50 mg/kg in rats. Mitochondrial respiratory chain
complex activities, ATP generation, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP),
superoxide anion free radical, oxidative stress-relative enzymes, and
mitochondrial biogenesis-relative factors in normal control, ADR (i.p.,
1.25<U+2009>mg/kg), and ADR (i.p., 1.25<U+2009>mg/kg)<U+2009>+<U+2009>CYP (p.o., 50<U+2009>mg/kg) groups were
detected.
RESULTS: 50<U+2009>mg/kg CRY significantly promoted the energy production of ATP
(16.99<U+2009>±<U+2009>2.38<U+2009>nmol/g Pro) (Pro: Protein) by increasing the complexes activities
except II (p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05). After the treatment of CRY, the suppressed MMP was
increased while superoxide anion free radical (0.57<U+2009>±<U+2009>0.07/mg Pro) was inhibited 
markedly. Mitochondrial biogenesis-relative factors PGC-1a, NRF-1, and TFAM were 
also promoted. Remarkable augmentations of NO, inducible nitric oxide synthase
(iNOS), and increased activity of GSH-PX (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) were also detected after the 
treatment of CRY, while no obvious changes on the activity of nitric oxide
synthase (cNOS; p<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05) were observed.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: These results suggest that CRY protects against
ADR-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in cardiomyocytes. It could be an ideal
potential drug of cardioprotection.

PMID: 25858002  [PubMed - in process]


112. Mol Biol Evol. 2015 Aug;32(8):1962-76. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msv076. Epub 2015 Apr 
7.

Adaptive Modifications of Muscle Phenotype in High-Altitude Deer Mice Are
Associated with Evolved Changes in Gene Regulation.

Scott GR(1), Elogio TS(2), Lui MA(2), Storz JF(3), Cheviron ZA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada
scottg2@mcmaster.ca cheviron@illinois.edu. (2)Department of Biology, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. (3)School of Biological Sciences, University of
Nebraska, Lincoln. (4)Department of Animal Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign scottg2@mcmaster.ca cheviron@illinois.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Biol Evol. 2015 Aug;32(8):2217.

At high-altitude, small mammals are faced with the energetic challenge of
sustaining thermogenesis and aerobic exercise in spite of the reduced O2
availability. Under conditions of hypoxic cold stress, metabolic demands of
shivering thermogenesis and locomotion may require enhancements in the oxidative 
capacity and O2 diffusion capacity of skeletal muscle to compensate for the
diminished tissue O2 supply. We used common-garden experiments involving highland
and lowland deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) to investigate the transcriptional
underpinnings of genetically based population differences and plasticity in
muscle phenotype. We tested highland and lowland mice that were sampled in their 
native environments as well as lab-raised F1 progeny of wild-caught mice.
Experiments revealed that highland natives had consistently greater oxidative
fiber density and capillarity in the gastrocnemius muscle. RNA sequencing
analyses revealed population differences in transcript abundance for 68 genes
that clustered into two discrete transcriptional modules, and a large suite of
transcripts (589 genes) with plastic expression patterns that clustered into five
modules. The expression of two transcriptional modules was correlated with the
oxidative phenotype and capillarity of the muscle, and these phenotype-associated
modules were enriched for genes involved in energy metabolism, muscle plasticity,
vascular development, and cell stress response. Although most of the individual
transcripts that were differentially expressed between populations were
negatively correlated with muscle phenotype, several genes involved in energy
metabolism (e.g., Ckmt1, Ehhadh, Acaa1a) and angiogenesis (Notch4) were more
highly expressed in highlanders, and the regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis, 
PGC-1a (Ppargc1a) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), were
positively correlated with muscle oxidative phenotype. These results suggest that
evolved population differences in the oxidative capacity and capillarity of
skeletal muscle involved expression changes in a small suite of coregulated
genes.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4592356 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25851956  [PubMed - in process]


113. Int J Oncol. 2015;46(6):2409-18. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2953. Epub 2015 Apr 6.

Dichloroacetate stimulates changes in the mitochondrial network morphology via
partial mitophagy in human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells.

Pajuelo-Reguera D(1), Alán L(1), Olejár T(1), Jeek P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Membrane Transport Biophysics, No. 75, Institute of Physiology, 
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.

Dichloroacetate (DCA) is beneficial in cancer therapy because it induces
apoptosis and decreases cancer growth in vitro and in vivo without affecting
non-cancer cells. DCA stimulates the activity of the enzyme pyruvate
dehydrogenase by inhibiting pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. Consequently, DCA
promotes oxidative phosphorylation after glycolysis. Therefore, DCA produces
changes in energy metabolism that could affect the mitochondrial network and
mitophagy. This investigation determined the effects of DCA treatment on
mitophagy in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells. SH-SY5Y cells were cultured and
distributed into 3 groups: control, NH4Cl and chloroquine. Each group was treated
with DCA at 0, 5, 30 and 60 mM for 16 h. Samples were analyzed for cell
viability, mtDNA copy number, mitochondrial network morphology and expression of 
key proteins involved in mitochondrial dynamics, such as LC3b, FIS1, OPA1, PARKIN
and PINK1. In all groups, DCA caused a decrease in cell viability, an induction
of autophagy in a dose-dependent manner and a decrease in Tim23, FIS1 and PARKIN 
protein expression, leading to profound morphological changes in the
mitochondrial network resulting in shorter and more fragmented filaments.
However, TFAM protein levels remained unchanged. Similarly, the mitochondrial
copy number was not significantly different among the treatment groups. In
conclusion, DCA induces mitophagy and remodeling of the mitochondrial network. In
this remodeling, DCA induces a decrease in the expression of key proteins
involved in protein degradation and mitochondrial dynamics but does not
significantly affect the mtDNA density. Blocking late phase autophagy increases
the effects of DCA, suggesting that autophagy protects the cell, at least
partially, against DCA.

PMID: 25846762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Death Dis. 2015 Apr 2;6:e1710. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.78.

Reduced mtDNA copy number increases the sensitivity of tumor cells to
chemotherapeutic drugs.

Mei H(1), Sun S(1), Bai Y(2), Chen Y(1), Chai R(3), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Research Center, Key Laboratory of Hearing 
Science, Ministry of Health, Affiliated Eye and ENT Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Children's Hospital,
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China. (3)Co-innovation Center of
Neuroregeneration, Key Laboratory for Developmental Genes and Human Disease,
Ministry of Education, Institute of Life Sciences, Southeast University, Nanjing 
210096, China.

Many cancer drugs are toxic to cells by activating apoptotic pathways. Previous
studies have shown that mitochondria have key roles in apoptosis in mammalian
cells, but the role of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number variation in the
pathogenesis of tumor cell apoptosis remains largely unknown. We used the HEp-2, 
HNE2, and A549 tumor cell lines to explore the relationship between mtDNA copy
number variation and cell apoptosis. We first induced apoptosis in three tumor
cell lines and one normal adult human skin fibroblast cell line (HSF) with
cisplatin (DDP) or doxorubicin (DOX) treatment and found that the mtDNA copy
number significantly increased in apoptotic tumor cells, but not in HSF cells. We
then downregulated the mtDNA copy number by transfection with shRNA-TFAM plasmids
or treatment with ethidium bromide and found that the sensitivity of tumor cells 
to DDP or DOX was significantly increased. Furthermore, we observed that levels
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) increased significantly in tumor cells with
lower mtDNA copy numbers, and this might be related to a low level of antioxidant
gene expression. Finally, we rescued the increase of ROS in tumor cells with
lipoic acid or N-acetyl-L-cysteine and found that the apoptosis rate decreased.
Our studies suggest that the increase of mtDNA copy number is a self-protective
mechanism of tumor cells to prevent apoptosis and that reduced mtDNA copy number 
increases ROS levels in tumor cells, increases the tumor cells' sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic drugs, and increases the rate of apoptosis. This research
provides evidence that mtDNA copy number variation might be a promising new
therapeutic target for the clinical treatment of tumors.

PMCID: PMC4650546
PMID: 25837486  [PubMed - in process]


115. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2015 Jun;47(3):255-63. doi: 10.1007/s10863-015-9610-3. Epub 
2015 Apr 2.

Distribution of mitochondrial DNA nucleoids inside the linear tubules vs. bulk
parts of mitochondrial network as visualized by 4Pi microscopy.

Dlasková A(1), Engstová H, Plecitá-Hlavatá L, Lessard M, Alán L, Reguera DP,
Jaburek M, Jeek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Membrane Transport Biophysics, No.75, Institute of Physiology,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, 14220, Prague 4, Czech 
Republic.

Mitochondrial nucleoids are confined sites of mitochondrial DNA existing in
complex clusters with the DNA-compacting mitochondrial (mt) transcription factor 
A (TFAM) and other accessory proteins and gene expression machinery proteins,
such as a mt single-stranded-DNA-binding protein (mtSSB). To visualize nucleoid
distribution within the mt reticular network, we have employed three-dimensional 
(3D) double-color 4Pi microscopy. The mt network was visualized in hepatocellular
carcinoma HepG2 cells via mt-matrix-addressed GFP, while 3D immunocytochemistry
of mtSSB was performed. Optimization of iso-surface computation threshold for
nucleoid 4Pi images to 30 led to an average nucleoid diameter of 219<U+2009>±<U+2009>110 and
224<U+2009>±<U+2009>100 nm in glucose- and galactose-cultivated HepG2 cells (the latter with
obligatory oxidative phosphorylation). We have positioned mtDNA nucleoids within 
the mt reticulum network and refined our model for nucleoid redistribution within
the fragmented network--clustering of up to ten nucleoids in 2 µm diameter
mitochondrial spheroids of a fragmented mt network, arising from an original 10
µm mt tubule of a 400 nm diameter. However, the theoretically fragmented bulk
parts were observed most frequently as being reintegrated into the continuous mt 
network in 4Pi images. Since the predicted nucleoid counts within the bulk parts 
corresponded to the model, we conclude that fragmentation/reintegration cycles
are not accompanied by mtDNA degradation or that mtDNA degradation is equally
balanced by mtDNA replication.

PMID: 25833036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Physiol Biochem. 2015 Sep;71(3):569-76. doi: 10.1007/s13105-015-0403-2. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Liver delipidating effect of a combination of resveratrol and quercetin in rats
fed an obesogenic diet.

Arias N(1), Macarulla MT, Aguirre L, Miranda J, Portillo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Obesity Group, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty
of Pharmacy and Lucio Lascaray Research Center, University of the Basque Country 
(UPV/EHU), Vitoria, Spain.

Liver steatosis is characterized by an abnormal accumulation of triacylglycerols 
in this organ. This metabolic disorder is closely associated with obesity. In the
present study, we aimed to analyse the effect of a combination of resveratrol and
quercetin on liver steatosis in an animal model of dietetic obesity, and to
compare it with one induced by the administration of each polyphenol separately. 
Rats were divided into four dietary groups of nine animals each and fed a
high-fat, high-sucrose diet: an untreated control group and three groups treated 
either with resveratrol (RSV; 15 mg/kg/day), with quercetin (Q; 30 mg/kg/day), or
with both (RSV<U+2009>+<U+2009>Q; 15 mg resveratrol/kg/day and 30 mg quercetin/kg/day) for
6 weeks. Liver weight and triacylglycerol content decreased only in the RSV<U+2009>+<U+2009>Q
group. A significant reduction in acetyl-CoA carboxylase activity was observed in
RSV and RSV<U+2009>+<U+2009>Q groups, without changes in fatty acid synthase activity. A
significant increase in carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1a activity was observed
only in rats treated with the combination of resveratrol and quercetin,
suggesting increased fatty acid oxidation. Citrate synthase, a marker of
mitochondrial density, remained unchanged in all groups. No significant changes
were observed in the expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a
(PPARa), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and transcription factor A
mitochondrial (TFAM). In conclusion, resveratrol and quercetin together,
combining two doses which were shown to be ineffective singly, is an interesting 
tool to prevent liver steatosis associated with high-fat high-sucrose feeding.
The delipidating effect seems to be mediated by increased fatty acid oxidation
not associated with increased mitochondriogenesis, and by reduced de novo
lipogenesis.

PMID: 25827944  [PubMed - in process]


117. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 30;10(3):e0119687. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119687.
eCollection 2015.

Overexpression of TFAM or twinkle increases mtDNA copy number and facilitates
cardioprotection associated with limited mitochondrial oxidative stress.

Ikeda M(1), Ide T(1), Fujino T(1), Arai S(1), Saku K(1), Kakino T(1), Tyynismaa
H(2), Yamasaki T(3), Yamada K(3), Kang D(4), Suomalainen A(2), Sunagawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Research Programs Unit, Molecular
Neurology, University of Helsinki, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(3)Department of Biofunctional Science, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (4)Department of Clinical Chemistry and
Laboratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number decreases in animal and human
heart failure (HF), yet its role in cardiomyocytes remains to be elucidated.
Thus, we investigated the cardioprotective function of increased mtDNA copy
number resulting from the overexpression of human transcription factor A of
mitochondria (TFAM) or Twinkle helicase in volume overload (VO)-induced HF.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Two strains of transgenic (TG) mice, one overexpressing TFAM
and the other overexpressing Twinkle helicase, exhibit an approximately 2-fold
equivalent increase in mtDNA copy number in heart. These TG mice display similar 
attenuations in eccentric hypertrophy and improved cardiac function compared to
wild-type (WT) mice without any deterioration of mitochondrial enzymatic
activities in response to VO, which was accompanied by a reduction in
matrix-metalloproteinase (MMP) activity and reactive oxygen species after 8 weeks
of VO. Moreover, acute VO-induced MMP-2 and MMP-9 upregulation was also
suppressed at 24 h in both TG mice. In isolated rat cardiomyocytes, mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species (mitoROS) upregulated MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression, and
human TFAM (hTFAM) overexpression suppressed mitoROS and their upregulation.
Additionally, mitoROS were equally suppressed in H9c2 rat cardiomyoblasts that
overexpress hTFAM or rat Twinkle, both of which exhibit increased mtDNA copy
number. Furthermore, mitoROS and mitochondrial protein oxidation from both TG
mice were suppressed compared to WT mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The overexpression of TFAM or Twinkle results in increased mtDNA
copy number and facilitates cardioprotection associated with limited
mitochondrial oxidative stress. Our findings suggest that increasing mtDNA copy
number could be a useful therapeutic strategy to target mitoROS in HF.

PMCID: PMC4379048
PMID: 25822152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Mar 13;6:43. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00043. eCollection
2015.

(-)-Epicatechin combined with 8 weeks of treadmill exercise is associated with
increased angiogenic and mitochondrial signaling in mice.

Lee I(1), Hüttemann M(2), Kruger A(3), Bollig-Fischer A(4), Malek MH(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Dankook University , Cheonan-si, South Korea. (2)Center
for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of Medicine , 
Detroit, MI, USA ; Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine , Detroit, MI, USA. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Wayne State University , Detroit, MI, USA. (4)Department of Oncology,
Wayne State University , Detroit, MI, USA. (5)Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
Wayne State University School of Medicine , Detroit, MI, USA ; Integrative
Physiology of Exercise Laboratory, Department of Health Care Sciences, Wayne
State University Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences ,
Detroit, MI, USA.

The purpose of this study was to conduct an 8 week endurance training program
with and without (-)-epicatechin treatment and to determine whether there is a
possible cumulative effect on protein markers of angiogenesis and mitochondrial
biogenesis. Thirty-four 14-month old male mice (C57BL/6N) were randomized into
four groups: control (C); (-)-epicatechin only ((-)-Epi); control with endurance 
training (CE); and (-)-epicatechin with endurance training ((-)-Epi-Ex). Mice in 
the training groups performed treadmill exercise for 8 weeks (5 × /week for 60
min/session), whereas mice in the (-)-epicatechin group received 1.0 mg/kg of
body mass twice daily during the training period. At 8 weeks, distance ran on the
treadmill increased by 46, 69, and 84% in the (-)-Epi, CE, and (-)-Epi-Ex groups,
respectively compared to the control group (p < 0.001 for all comparisons).
Furthermore, the (-)-Epi-Ex group had significantly higher exercise capacity than
the (-)-Epi and CE group. For angiogenic regulators, the (-)-Epi-Ex group had
significantly higher VEGF-R2 protein expression with a concomitant reduction in
TSP-1 protein expression than the exercise group. Interestingly, FoxO1 protein
expression was significantly reduced for all three experimental groups compared
to the control group. Protein markers such as PGC-1ß and TFAM were significantly 
higher in the (-)-Epi-Ex group compared to the three other groups. These findings
suggest that (-)-epicatechin treatment combined with 8 weeks of endurance
training provide a cumulative effect on a number of angiogenic and mitochondrial 
signaling which functionally translates to enhanced exercise tolerance.

PMCID: PMC4358069
PMID: 25821434  [PubMed]


119. Hum Reprod. 2015 Jun;30(6):1410-20. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev066. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

Maternal age and ovarian stimulation independently affect oocyte mtDNA copy
number and cumulus cell gene expression in bovine clones.

Cree LM(1), Hammond ER(2), Shelling AN(2), Berg MC(3), Peek JC(4), Green MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand Fertility
Associates, Remuera, Auckland 1051, New Zealand l.cree@auckland.ac.nz.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand. (3)AgResearch Ltd, 
Ruakura Research Centre, Hamilton 3240, New Zealand. (4)Fertility Associates,
Remuera, Auckland 1051, New Zealand. (5)AgResearch Ltd, Ruakura Research Centre, 
Hamilton 3240, New Zealand The Liggins Institute, University of Auckland,
Auckland 1023, New Zealand Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne,
Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia.

STUDY QUESTION: Does maternal ageing and ovarian stimulation alter mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) copy number and gene expression of oocytes and cumulus cells from a
novel bovine model for human IVF?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Oocytes collected from females with identical nuclear genetics
show decreased mtDNA copy number and increased expression of an endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress gene with repect to ovarian stimulation, whilst differences
in the expression of genes involved in mitochondrial function, antioxidant
protection and apoptosis were evident in relation to maternal ageing and the
degree of ovarian stimulation in cumulus cells.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Oocyte quality declines with advancing maternal age;
however, the underlying mechanism, as well as the effects of ovarian stimulation 
are poorly understood. Human studies investigating these effects are often
limited by differences in age and ovarian stimulation regimens within a patient
cohort, as well as genetic and environmental variability.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A novel bovine cross-sectional maternal age model
for human IVF was undertaken. Follicles were aspirated from young (3 years of
age; n = 7 females) and old (10 years of age; n = 5 females) Holstein Freisian
clones following multiple unstimulated, mild and standard ovarian stimulation
cycles. These bovine cloned females were generated by the process of somatic cell
nuclear transfer (SCNT) from the same founder and represent a homogeneous
population with reduced genetic and environmental variability. Maternal age and
ovarian stimulation effects were investigated in relation to mtDNA copy number,
and the expression of 19 genes involved in mitochondrial function, antioxidant
protection, oocyte-cumulus cell signalling and follicle development in both
oocytes and cumulus cells.
MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Young (3 years of age; n = 7 females) and old (10
years of age; n = 5 females) Holstein Freisian bovine clones were maintained as
one herd. Stimulation cycles were based on the long GnRH agonist down-regulation 
regimen used in human fertility clinics. Follicle growth rates, numbers and
diameters were monitored by ultrasonography and aspirated when the lead follicles
were >14 mm in diameter. Follicle characteristics were analysed using a mixed
model procedure. Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to determine mtDNA copy number 
and reverse transcriptase-qPCR (RT-qPCR) was used to measure gene expression in
oocytes and cumulus cells.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Method of ovarian stimulation (P = 0.04),
but not maternal age (P > 0.1), was associated with a lower mtDNA copy number in 
oocytes. Neither factor affected mtDNA copy number in cumulus cells. In oocytes, 
maternal age had no effect on gene expression; however, ovarian stimulation in
older females increased the expression of GRP78 (P = 0.02), a gene involved in ER
stress. In cumulus cells, increasing maternal age was associated with the higher 
expression of genes involved in mitochondrial maintenance (TXN2 P = 0.008 and
TFAM P = 0.03), whereas ovarian stimulation decreased the expression of genes
involved in mitochondrial oxidative stress and apoptosis (TXN2 P = 0.002, PRDX3 P
= 0.03 and BAX P = 0.03).
LIMITATIONS, REASON FOR CAUTION: The low number of oocyte and cumulus cell
samples collected from the unstimulated cycles limited the analysis.
Fertilization and developmental potential of the oocytes was not assessed because
these were used for mtDNA and gene expression quantification.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Delineation of the independent effects of
maternal age and ovarian stimulation regimen on mtDNA copy number gene expression
in oocytes and cumulus cells was enabled by the removal of genetic and
environmental variability in this bovine model for human IVF. Therefore, these
extend upon previous knowledge and findings provide relevant insights that are
applicable for improving human ovarian stimulation regimens.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: Funding was provided by Fertility Associates
and the University of Auckland. J.C.P. is a shareholder of Fertility Associates
and M.P.G. received a fellowship from Fertility Associates. The other authors of 
this manuscript declare no conflict of interest that could be perceived as
prejudicing the impartiality of the reported research.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25820694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0120711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120711.
eCollection 2015.

C-C chemokine receptor 2 inhibitor ameliorates hepatic steatosis by improving ER 
stress and inflammation in a type 2 diabetic mouse model.

Kim HM(1), Lee ES(1), Lee BR(2), Yadav D(1), Kim YM(1), Ko HJ(2), Park KS(3), Lee
EY(4), Chung CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea;
Institute of Lifestyle Medicine, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea. (4)Department
of Internal Medicine, Soonchunhyang University Cheonan Hospital, Cheonan, Korea. 
(5)Department of Medicine, Graduate School, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea;
Institute of Lifestyle Medicine, Yonsei University, Wonju, Korea.

Hepatic steatosis is the accumulation of excess fat in the liver. Recently,
hepatic steatosis has become more important because it occurs in the patients
with obesity, type 2 diabetes, and hyperlipidemia and is associated with
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and insulin resistance. C-C chemokine receptor 
2 (CCR2) inhibitor has been reported to improve inflammation and glucose
intolerance in diabetes, but its mechanisms remained unknown in hepatic
steatosis. We examined whether CCR2 inhibitor improves ER stress-induced hepatic 
steatosis in type 2 diabetic mice. In this study, db/db and db/m (n = 9) mice
were fed CCR2 inhibitor (2 mg/kg/day) for 9 weeks. In diabetic mice, CCR2
inhibitor decreased plasma and hepatic triglycerides levels and improved insulin 
sensitivity. Moreover, CCR2 inhibitor treatment decreased ER stress markers
(e.g., BiP, ATF4, CHOP, and XBP-1) and inflammatory cytokines (e.g., TNFa, IL-6, 
and MCP-1) while increasing markers of mitochondrial biogenesis (e.g., PGC-1a,
Tfam, and COX1) in the liver. We suggest that CCR2 inhibitor may ameliorate
hepatic steatosis by reducing ER stress and inflammation in type 2 diabetes
mellitus.

PMCID: PMC4376739
PMID: 25816097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr 20;43(7):3726-35. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv235. Epub 2015 
Mar 23.

A model for transcription initiation in human mitochondria.

Morozov YI(1), Parshin AV(1), Agaronyan K(1), Cheung AC(2), Anikin M(1), Cramer
P(3), Temiakov D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University, 
2 Medical Center Dr., Stratford, NJ 08084, USA. (2)Institute of Structural and
Molecular Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK. 
(3)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Department of Molecular
Biology, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Gottingen, Germany. (4)Department of Cell Biology,
School of Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University, 2 Medical Center Dr.,
Stratford, NJ 08084, USA d.temiakov@rowan.edu.

Regulation of transcription of mtDNA is thought to be crucial for maintenance of 
redox potential and vitality of the cell but is poorly understood at the
molecular level. In this study we mapped the binding sites of the core
transcription initiation factors TFAM and TFB2M on human mitochondrial RNA
polymerase, and interactions of the latter with promoter DNA. This allowed us to 
construct a detailed structural model, which displays a remarkable level of
interaction between the components of the initiation complex (IC). The
architecture of the mitochondrial IC suggests mechanisms of promoter binding and 
recognition that are distinct from the mechanisms found in RNAPs operating in all
domains of life, and illuminates strategies of transcription regulation developed
at the very early stages of evolution of gene expression.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4402542
PMID: 25800739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Mar 13. doi: 10.1071/RD14376. [Epub ahead of print]

Developmental competence of 8?16-cell stage bison embryos produced by
interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer.

González-Grajales LA, Favetta LA, King WA, Mastromonaco GF.

Altered communication between nuclear and cytoplasmic components has been linked 
to impaired development in interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT)
embryos as a result of genetic divergence between the two species. This study
investigated the developmental potential and mitochondrial function of cattle
(Bos taurus), plains bison (Bison bison bison) and wood bison (Bison bison
athabascae) embryos produced by iSCNT using domestic cattle oocytes as
cytoplasts. Embryos in all groups were analysed for development, accumulation of 
ATP, apoptosis and gene expression of nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded genes at
the 8-16-cell stage. The results of this study showed no significant differences 
in the proportion of developed embryos at the 2-, 4- and 8-16-cell stages between
groups. However, significantly higher ATP levels were observed in cattle SCNT
embryos compared with bison iSCNT embryos. Significantly more condensed and
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labelling
(TUNEL)-positive nuclei were found in plains bison iSCNT embryos. No significant 
differences in the expression levels of nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF2) or
mitochondrial subunit 2 of cytochrome c oxidase (mt-COX2) were found in any of
the groups. However, mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) expression
significantly differed between groups. The results of this study provide insights
into the potential causes that might lead to embryonic arrest in bison iSCNT
embryos, including mitochondrial dysfunction, increased apoptosis and abnormal
gene expression.

PMID: 25763855  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


123. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 12;5:9037. doi: 10.1038/srep09037.

Allostery through protein-induced DNA bubbles.

Traverso JJ(1), Manoranjan VS(2), Bishop AR(3), Rasmussen KØ(3), Voulgarakis
NK(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Mathematics, Washington State University, Richland, WA 99354,
USA [2] Department of Mechanical Engineering, Washington State University,
Richland, WA 99354, USA. (2)Department of Mathematics, Washington State
University, Pullman, WA 99163, USA. (3)Theoretical Division, Los Alamos National 
Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA. (4)Department of Mathematics, Washington
State University, Richland, WA 99354, USA.

Allostery through DNA is increasingly recognized as an important modulator of DNA
functions. Here, we show that the coalescence of protein-induced DNA bubbles can 
mediate allosteric interactions that drive protein aggregation. We propose that
such allostery may regulate DNA's flexibility and the assembly of the
transcription machinery. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a
dual-function protein involved in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) packaging and
transcription initiation, is an ideal candidate to test such a hypothesis owing
to its ability to locally unwind the double helix. Numerical simulations
demonstrate that the coalescence of TFAM-induced bubbles can explain
experimentally observed TFAM oligomerization. The resulting melted DNA segment,
approximately 10 base pairs long, around the joints of the oligomers act as
flexible hinges, which explains the efficiency of TFAM in compacting DNA. Since
mitochondrial polymerase (mitoRNAP) is involved in melting the transcription
bubble, TFAM may use the same allosteric interaction to both recruit mitoRNAP and
initiate transcription.

PMCID: PMC4356955
PMID: 25762409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015 Sep 1;23(7):630-42. doi: 10.1089/ars.2014.6186. Epub 
2015 May 14.

Hydrogen Sulfide Maintains Mitochondrial DNA Replication via Demethylation of
TFAM.

Li S(1,)(2), Yang G(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research Unit, Lakehead University , Thunder
Bay, Ontario, Canada . (2)2 The School of Kinesiology, Lakehead University ,
Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada .

AIMS: Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) exerts a wide range of actions in the body,
especially in the modulation of mitochondrial functions. The normal replication
of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is critical for cellular energy metabolism and
mitochondrial biogenesis. The aim of this study was to investigate whether H2S
affects mtDNA replication and the underlying mechanisms. We hypothesize that H2S 
maintains mtDNA copy number via inhibition of Dnmt3a transcription and TFAM
promoter methylation.
RESULTS: Here, we demonstrated that deficiency of cystathionine gamma-lyase
(CSE), a major H2S-producing enzyme, reduces mtDNA copy number and mitochondrial 
contents, and it inhibits the expressions of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) and mitochondrial marker genes in both smooth muscle cells and aorta
tissues from mice. Supply of exogenous H2S stimulated mtDNA copy number and
strengthened the expressions of TFAM and mitochondrial marker genes. TFAM
knockdown diminished H2S-enhanced mtDNA copy number. In addition, CSE deficiency 
induced the expression of DNA methyltransferase 3a (Dnmt3a) and TFAM promoter DNA
methylation, and H2S repressed Dnmt3a expression, resulting in TFAM promoter
demethylation. We further found that H2S S-sulfhydrates transcription repressor
interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) and enhances the binding of IRF-1 with
Dnmt3a promoter after reduced Dnmt3a transcription. H2S had little effects on the
expression of Dnmt1 and Dnmt3b as well as on ten-eleven translocation
methylcytosine dioxygenase 1, 2, and 3.
INNOVATION: A sufficient level of H2S is able to inhibit TFAM promoter
methylation and maintain mtDNA copy number.
CONCLUSION: CSE/H2S system contributes to mtDNA replication and cellular
bioenergetics and provides a novel therapeutic avenue for cardiovascular
diseases.

PMCID: PMC4554549 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25758951  [PubMed - in process]


125. Lipids. 2015 Apr;50(4):329-38. doi: 10.1007/s11745-015-4000-5. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis signaling by
the upregulation of PPAR<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) in C2C12 cells.

Kim Y(1), Park Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science, University of Massachusetts, 102 Holdsworth Way,
Amherst, MA, 01003, USA.

Along with its effect on body fat reduction, dietary conjugated linoleic acid
(CLA) has been reported to improve physical activity and endurance capacity in
mice. It has been suggested these effects may in part be due to physiological
changes in skeletal muscle, however, the mode of action is not completely
understood. Thus, the purpose of this study was to determine the relevant
mechanisms of CLA isomers for mitochondrial biogenesis, one of the most important
adaptive responses in skeletal muscle. Both cis-9,trans-11 (c9,t11) and
trans-10,cis-12 (t10,c12) CLA isomers increased the expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), however, only the
t10,c12 isomer, but not c9,t11, increased phosphorylation of AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK) compared to the control. Among downstream biomarkers of
PGC-1a, the CLA mixed isomer enhanced the expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-d (PPARd). Both c9,t11 and t10,c12 CLA isomers
increased expression of nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), while the c9,t11 increased expression of
cytochrome c (Cyt C) and t10,c12 CLA increased expression of voltage-dependent
anion channel (VDAC), respectively. Both CLA isomers significantly increased
mitochondrial DNA copy number compared to that of control. These findings suggest
that the individual CLA isomers potentiate mitochondrial biogenesis via
PGC-1a-NRF-1-Tfam signaling cascade, although downstream regulation may be isomer
dependent.

PMID: 25720738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Exp Neurol. 2015 Apr;266:22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.02.004. Epub 2015
Feb 12.

Selective striatal mtDNA depletion in end-stage Huntington's disease R6/2 mice.

Hering T(1), Birth N(1), Taanman JW(2), Orth M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Ulm University, Germany. (2)Department of Clinical
Neurosciences, Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, UK.

In Huntington's disease (HD) the striatum and cortex seem particularly
vulnerable. Mitochondrial dysfunction can also cause neurodegeneration with
prominent striatal involvement very similar to HD. We first examined if
mitochondrial biogenesis, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription, and the
implications for mitochondrial respiratory chain (MRC) assembly and function
differ between the striatum and cortex compared with the whole brain average in
the healthy mouse brain. We then examined the effects of the mutant huntingtin
transgene in end-stage R6/2 mice. In wild-type mice, mitochondrial mass (citrate 
synthase levels, mtDNA copy number) was higher in the striatum than in the cortex
or whole brain average. PGC-1a and TFAM mRNA levels were also higher in the
striatum than the whole brain average and cortex. mRNA reserve for MRC Complex
proteins was higher in the striatum and cortex. In addition, in the cortex a
greater part of mitochondrial mass was dedicated to the generation of ATP by
oxidative phosphorylation than in the striatum or on average in the brain. In the
HD transgenic striatum there was selective mtDNA depletion without evidence that 
this translated to abnormalities of steady-state MRC function. Our data indicate 
that in mice the striatum differs from the cortex, or whole brain average, in
potentially important aspects of mitochondrial biology. This may contribute to
the increased vulnerability of the striatum to insults such as the HD mutation,
causing selective striatal mtDNA depletion in end-stage R6/2 mice.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25682918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Physiol Rep. 2015 Feb 12;3(2). pii: e12184. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12184. Print 2015 
Feb 1.

Carbohydrate restricted recovery from long term endurance exercise does not
affect gene responses involved in mitochondrial biogenesis in highly trained
athletes.

Jensen L(1), Gejl KD(2), Ørtenblad N(3), Nielsen JL(2), Bech RD(4), Nygaard T(5),
Sahlin K(6), Frandsen U(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, SDU Muscle Research
Cluster, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark Institute of Clinical
Research, Clinical Pathology, SDU Muscle Research Cluster, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (2)Institute of Sports Science and Clinical
Biomechanics, SDU Muscle Research Cluster, University of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark. (3)Institute of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, SDU
Muscle Research Cluster, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
Department of Health Sciences, Swedish Winter Sports Research Centre, Mid Sweden 
University, Östersund, Sweden. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Odense
University Hospital, Odense, Denmark. (5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. (6)The Åstrand Laboratory of Work
Physiology, GIH, The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences, Stockholm,
Sweden.

The aim was to determine if the metabolic adaptations, particularly PGC-1a and
downstream metabolic genes were affected by restricting CHO following an
endurance exercise bout in trained endurance athletes. A second aim was to
compare baseline expression level of these genes to untrained. Elite endurance
athletes (VO2max 66 ± 2 mL·kg(-1)·min(-1), n = 15) completed 4 h cycling at ~56% 
VO2max. During the first 4 h recovery subjects were provided with either CHO or
only H2O and thereafter both groups received CHO. Muscle biopsies were collected 
before, after, and 4 and 24 h after exercise. Also, resting biopsies were
collected from untrained subjects (n = 8). Exercise decreased glycogen by 67.7 ± 
4.0% (from 699 ± 26.1 to 239 ± 29.5 mmol·kg(-1)·dw(-1)) with no difference
between groups. Whereas 4 h of recovery with CHO partly replenished glycogen, the
H2O group remained at post exercise level; nevertheless, the gene expression was 
not different between groups. Glycogen and most gene expression levels returned
to baseline by 24 h in both CHO and H2O. Baseline mRNA expression of NRF-1,
COX-IV, GLUT4 and PPAR-a gene targets were higher in trained compared to
untrained. Additionally, the proportion of type I muscle fibers positively
correlated with baseline mRNA for PGC-1a, TFAM, NRF-1, COX-IV, PPAR-a, and GLUT4 
for both trained and untrained. CHO restriction during recovery from glycogen
depleting exercise does not improve the mRNA response of markers of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Further, baseline gene expression of key metabolic pathways is higher
in trained than untrained.

© 2015 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4393183
PMID: 25677542  [PubMed]


128. Development. 2015 Feb 15;142(4):681-91. doi: 10.1242/dev.114850.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in oocytes of obese mothers: transmission to offspring 
and reversal by pharmacological endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibitors.

Wu LL(1), Russell DL(1), Wong SL(1), Chen M(1), Tsai TS(2), St John JC(2), Norman
RJ(1), Febbraio MA(3), Carroll J(4), Robker RL(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Research Institute,
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia. (2)Centre for Genetic 
Diseases, MIMR-PHI Institute of Medical Research, and Department of Molecular and
Translational Science, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3168, Australia.
(3)Cellular and Molecular Metabolism Laboratory, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes
Institute, Melbourne, VIC, 3004, Australia. (4)School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
(5)School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, Robinson Research Institute,
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, 5005, Australia
Rebecca.robker@adelaide.edu.au.

Over-nutrition in females causes altered fetal growth during pregnancy and
permanently programs the metabolism of offspring; however, the temporal and
mechanistic origins of these changes, and whether they are reversible, are
unknown. We now show that, in obese female mice, cumulus-oocyte complexes exhibit
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, high levels of intracellular lipid, spindle
abnormalities and reduced PTX3 extracellular matrix protein production. Ovulated 
oocytes from obese mice contain normal levels of mitochondrial (mt) DNA but have 
reduced mitochondrial membrane potential and high levels of autophagy compared
with oocytes from lean mice. After in vitro fertilization, the oocytes of obese
female mice demonstrate reduced developmental potential and form blastocysts with
reduced levels of mtDNA. Blastocysts transferred to normal weight surrogates that
were then analyzed at E14.5 showed that oocytes from obese mice gave rise to
fetuses that were heavier than controls and had reduced liver and kidney mtDNA
content per cell, indicating that maternal obesity before conception had altered 
the transmission of mitochondria to offspring. Treatment of the obese females
with the ER stress inhibitor salubrinal or the chaperone inducer BGP-15 before
ovulation increased the amount of the mitochondrial replication factors TFAM and 
DRP1, and mtDNA content in oocytes. Salubrinal and BGP-15 also completely
restored oocyte quality, embryo development and the mtDNA content of fetal tissue
to levels equivalent to those derived from lean mice. These results demonstrate
that obesity before conception imparts a legacy of mitochondrial loss in
offspring that is caused by ER stress and is reversible during the final stages
of oocyte development and maturation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25670793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 May;1852(5):862-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.01.018.
Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Flavonoid derivative 7,8-DHF attenuates TBI pathology via TrkB activation.

Agrawal R(1), Noble E(1), Tyagi E(1), Zhuang Y(2), Ying Z(1), Gomez-Pinilla F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, UCLA Brain Injury Research
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, 
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, UCLA 
Brain Injury Research Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address:
fgomezpi@ucla.edu.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is followed by a state of metabolic dysfunction,
affecting the ability of neurons to use energy and support brain plasticity;
there is no effective therapy to counteract the TBI pathology. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) has an exceptional capacity to support metabolism and 
plasticity, which highly contrasts with its poor pharmacological profile. We
evaluated the action of a flavonoid derivative 7,8-dihydroxyflavone (7,8-DHF), a 
BDNF receptor (TrkB) agonist with the pharmacological profile congruent for
potential human therapies. Treatment with 7,8-DHF (5mg/kg, ip, daily for 7 days) 
was effective to ameliorate the effects of TBI on plasticity markers (CREB
phosphorylation, GAP-43 and syntaxin-3 levels) and memory function in Barnes maze
test. Treatment with 7,8-DHF restored the decrease in protein and phenotypic
expression of TrkB phosphorylation after TBI. In turn, intrahippocampal
injections of K252a, a TrkB antagonist, counteracted the 7,8-DHF induced TrkB
signaling activation and memory improvement in TBI, suggesting the pivotal role
of TrkB signaling in cognitive performance after brain injury. A potential action
of 7,8-DHF on cell energy homeostasis was corroborated by the normalization in
levels of PGC-1a, TFAM, COII, AMPK and SIRT1 in animals subjected to TBI. Results
suggest a potential mechanism by which 7,8-DHF counteracts TBI pathology via
activation of the TrkB receptor and engaging the interplay between cell energy
management and synaptic plasticity. Since metabolic dysfunction is an important
risk factor for the development of neurological and psychiatric disorders, these 
results set a precedent for the therapeutic use of 7,8-DHF in a larger context.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4754355 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25661191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Sep;230(9):2128-41. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24941.

Mitochondrial DNA oxidative damage contributes to cardiomyocyte
ischemia/reperfusion-injury in rats: cardioprotective role of lycopene.

Yue R(1,)(2), Xia X(1,)(2), Jiang J(1,)(2), Yang D(1,)(2), Han Y(1,)(2), Chen
X(1,)(3), Cai Y(1,)(2), Li L(1,)(2), Wang WE(1,)(2), Zeng C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, 
Chongqing, China. (2)Chongqing Institute of Cardiology, Chongqing, China.
(3)Cardiovascular Research Center & Department of Physiology, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Mitochondrial (mt) dysfunction and oxidative stress are involved in the
pathogenesis of ischemia/reperfusion (I/R)-injury. Lycopene, a lipophilic
antioxidant found mainly in tomatoes and in other vegetables and fruits, can
protect mtDNA against oxidative damage. However, the role of mtDNA in myocardial 
I/R-injury is unclear. In the present study, we aimed to determine if and how
lycopene protects cardiomyocytes from I/R-injury. In both in vitro and in vivo
studies, I/R-injury increased mt 8-hydroxyguanine (8-OHdG) content, decreased
mtDNA content and mtDNA transcription levels, and caused mitochondrial
dysfunction in cardiomyocytes. These effects of I/R injury on cardiomycoytes were
blocked by pre-treatment with lycopene. MtDNA depletion alone was sufficient to
induce cardiomyocyte death. I/R-injury decreased the protein level of a key
activator of mt transcription, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), which
was blocked by lycopene. The protective effect of lycopene on mtDNA was
associated with a reduction in mitochondrial ROS production and stabilization of 
Tfam. In conclusion, lycopene protects cardiomyocytes from the oxidative damage
of mtDNA induced by I/R-injury.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25656550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. EMBO Rep. 2015 Apr;16(4):520-7. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439636. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

The cAMP phosphodiesterase Prune localizes to the mitochondrial matrix and
promotes mtDNA replication by stabilizing TFAM.

Zhang F(1), Qi Y(1), Zhou K(1), Zhang G(2), Linask K(1), Xu H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and
Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (3)Laboratory
of Molecular Genetics, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD,
USA hong.xu@nih.gov.

Compartmentalized cAMP signaling regulates mitochondrial dynamics, morphology,
and oxidative phosphorylation. However, regulators of the mitochondrial cAMP
pathway, and its broad impact on organelle function, remain to be explored. Here,
we report that Drosophila Prune is a cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase that
localizes to the mitochondrial matrix. Knocking down prune in cultured cells
reduces mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
levels. Our data suggest that Prune stabilizes TFAM and promotes mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) replication through downregulation of mitochondrial cAMP signaling.
In addition, our work demonstrates the prevalence of mitochondrial cAMP signaling
in metazoan and its new role in mitochondrial biogenesis.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4388618
PMID: 25648146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Nature. 2015 Apr 23;520(7548):553-7. doi: 10.1038/nature14156. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune response.

West AP(1), Khoury-Hanold W(2), Staron M(2), Tal MC(2), Pineda CM(1), Lang SM(1),
Bestwick M(1), Duguay BA(3), Raimundo N(1), MacDuff DA(4), Kaech SM(5), Smiley
JR(3), Means RE(1), Iwasaki A(5), Shadel GS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA. (2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA. (3)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G
2S2, Canada. (4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. (5)1] Department of
Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA [2]
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815-6789, USA. (6)1]
Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
USA [2] Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Mar;15(3):134.
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 May-Jun;93(5):427-8.
    Cell Metab. 2015 Jun 2;21(6):793-4.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is normally present at thousands of copies per cell and
is packaged into several hundred higher-order structures termed nucleoids. The
abundant mtDNA-binding protein TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial)
regulates nucleoid architecture, abundance and segregation. Complete mtDNA
depletion profoundly impairs oxidative phosphorylation, triggering
calcium-dependent stress signalling and adaptive metabolic responses. However,
the cellular responses to mtDNA instability, a physiologically relevant stress
observed in many human diseases and ageing, remain poorly defined. Here we show
that moderate mtDNA stress elicited by TFAM deficiency engages cytosolic
antiviral signalling to enhance the expression of a subset of
interferon-stimulated genes. Mechanistically, we find that aberrant mtDNA
packaging promotes escape of mtDNA into the cytosol, where it engages the DNA
sensor cGAS (also known as MB21D1) and promotes STING (also known as
TMEM173)-IRF3-dependent signalling to elevate interferon-stimulated gene
expression, potentiate type I interferon responses and confer broad viral
resistance. Furthermore, we demonstrate that herpesviruses induce mtDNA stress,
which enhances antiviral signalling and type I interferon responses during
infection. Our results further demonstrate that mitochondria are central
participants in innate immunity, identify mtDNA stress as a cell-intrinsic
trigger of antiviral signalling and suggest that cellular monitoring of mtDNA
homeostasis cooperates with canonical virus sensing mechanisms to fully engage
antiviral innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC4409480
PMID: 25642965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Neuroscience. 2015 Apr 2;290:636-48. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.01.032.
Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Sphingosine kinase 2 and sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes mitochondrial function 
in dopaminergic neurons of mouse model of Parkinson's disease and in MPP+
-treated MN9D cells in vitro.

Sivasubramanian M(1), Kanagaraj N(1), Dheen ST(1), Tay SS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Health System, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117594, Singapore.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
Health System, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117594, Singapore.
Electronic address: anttaysw@nus.edu.sg.

Dysregulation of sphingolipid metabolism has been shown to trigger the
pathophysiology of many neurodegenerative disorders. The present study focuses on
the role of one of the two sphingosine kinases, Sphk2 and its metabolite
sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) signaling in Parkinson's disease (PD). Our study
indicated a marked down regulation of Sphk2 expression in the substantia nigra
region of the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced PD
mouse model and in the cellular PD model. Localization studies indicated that
Sphk2 was predominantly present in mitochondria, proposing for its potential role
in mitochondrial functions. Since mitochondrial dysfunction has been described to
be the major pathological event in PD, the present study focused on the role of
Sphk2/S1P signaling in promoting mitochondrial functions in the MPTP-induced
mouse model of PD and in 1-methyl-4 phenylpyridinium (MPP(+))-treated MN9D cells.
Our study demonstrated that inhibition of Sphk2 decreased the expression of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and its
downstream targets nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) which are the key genes regulating mitochondrial
function. In addition, there was also a significant reduction in the total
cellular adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD 2) with an 
associated increase in levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the absence of 
Sphk2. Interestingly, it was found that treating the cells with exogenous S1P
along with MPP(+) exerted a neuroprotective effect by activation of p-CREB,
PGC-1a and NRF-1 in the MN9D cells. Moreover, the level of ATP was unaffected in 
the MPP(+)-treated cells in the presence of S1P. It was also observed that levels
of ROS were significantly decreased in the MPP(+)-treated cells in the presence
of exogenous S1P. Our study also demonstrated that S1P exerted its protective
effect through the S1P1 receptor. Taken together, these results show that
Sphk2/S1P has an important role to play in the survival of the dopaminergic
neurons, in the pathogenesis of PD.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25637806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Diabetologia. 2015 Apr;58(4):758-70. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3503-1. Epub 2015
Jan 31.

Inhibitor of differentiation proteins protect against oxidative stress by
regulating the antioxidant-mitochondrial response in mouse beta cells.

Bensellam M(1), Montgomery MK, Luzuriaga J, Chan JY, Laybutt DR.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria
Street, Darlinghurst, Sydney, NSW, 2010, Australia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Oxidative stress is implicated in beta cell glucotoxicity in
type 2 diabetes. Inhibitor of differentiation (ID) proteins are transcriptional
regulators induced by hyperglycaemia in islets, but the mechanisms involved and
their role in beta cells are not clear. Here we investigated whether or not
oxidative stress regulates ID levels in beta cells and the role of ID proteins in
beta cells during oxidative stress.
METHODS: MIN6 cells were cultured in H2O2 or ribose to induce oxidative stress.
ID1, ID3 and small MAF proteins (MAFF, MAFG and MAFK) were inhibited using small 
interfering RNA. Isolated islets from Id1(-/-), Id3(-/-) and diabetic db/db mice 
were used.
RESULTS: ID1-4 expression was upregulated in vivo in the islets of diabetic db/db
mice and stimulated in vitro by ribose and H2O2. Id1/3 inhibition reduced the
expression of multiple antioxidant genes and potentiated oxidative stress-induced
apoptosis. This finding was associated with increased levels of intracellular
reactive oxygen species, altered mitochondrial morphology and reduced expression 
of Tfam, which encodes a mitochondrial transcription factor, and respiratory
chain components. Id1/3 inhibition also reduced the expression of small MAF
transcription factors (MafF, MafG and MafK), interacting partners of nuclear
factor, erythroid 2-like 2 (NFE2L2), master regulator of the antioxidant
response. Inhibition of small MAFs reduced the expression of antioxidant genes
and potentiated oxidative stress-induced apoptosis, thus recapitulating the
effects of Id1/3 inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study identifies IDs as a novel family of
oxidative stress-responsive proteins in beta cells. IDs are crucial regulators of
the adaptive antioxidant-mitochondrial response that promotes beta cell survival 
during oxidative stress through a novel link to the NFE2L2-small MAF pathway.

PMID: 25636209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Skelet Muscle. 2014 Oct 30;4:20. doi: 10.1186/2044-5040-4-20. eCollection 2014.

Protein phosphatase 2C-alpha knockdown reduces angiotensin II-mediated skeletal
muscle wasting via restoration of mitochondrial recycling and function.

Tabony AM(1), Yoshida T(1), Sukhanov S(1), Delafontaine P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Tulane University Department of Medicine, Heart and Vascular Institute, New
Orleans, LA 70112, USA. (2)Tulane University Department of Medicine, Heart and
Vascular Institute, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA ; Heart and Vascular Institute,
Tulane University School of Medicine, 1430 Tulane Ave. SL-48, New Orleans, LA,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Circulating angiotensin II (AngII) is elevated in congestive heart
failure (CHF), and leads to skeletal muscle wasting, which is strongly associated
with poor patient outcomes. We previously found that AngII upregulates protein
phosphatase 2C-alpha (PP2Ca) and dephosphorylates AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK), a critical regulator of cellular metabolism, in skeletal muscle.
METHODS: To determine the role of PP2Ca in AngII-induced wasting, gastrocnemius
(Gas) muscles of FVB mice were injected with scrambled or PP2Ca siRNA and mice
were infused with saline or AngII for 4 days.
RESULTS: Knockdown of PP2Ca reduced AngII wasting, blocked AngII upregulation of 
PP2Ca, increased p-T172-AMPK, and inhibited AngII-mediated reductions in
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF1), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), in
complex IV activity, and in ATP levels. AngII impaired the rate of autophagy as
determined by a 2.4-fold increase in p62/SQSTM1 (p62) accumulation. This
induction was reduced by PP2Ca knockdown, which also increased beclin-1
expression and microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3)-II conversion
in AngII-infused Gas. AngII reduced activating S555 phosphorylation of
UNC-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1), a critical regulator of autophagosome formation, and
increased inhibitory S757 ULK1 phosphorylation and these effects were prevented
by PP2Ca siRNA.
CONCLUSIONS: AngII inhibited AMPK activity and reduced PGC-1a and TFAM expression
(thereby inhibiting mitochondrial biogenesis) and impaired ULK1 activation and
autophagy (thereby also inhibiting clearance of damaged mitochondria), resulting 
in mitochondrial dysfunction, decreased ATP, and wasting. Knockdown of PP2Ca
normalized AMPK activity, PGC-1a, NRF1, and TFAM levels and blocked AngII
inhibition of ULK1, leading to improved mitochondrial
biogenesis/recycling/function, energy production, and inhibition of AngII-induced
wasting. These results demonstrate novel effects of AngII on cellular metabolism 
that are likely critical in mediating the muscle wasting that is a hallmark of
CHF.

PMCID: PMC4306116
PMID: 25625009  [PubMed]


136. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 23;5:7990. doi: 10.1038/srep07990.

Suppression of Mic60 compromises mitochondrial transcription and oxidative
phosphorylation.

Yang RF(1), Sun LH(1), Zhang R(1), Zhang Y(1), Luo YX(1), Zheng W(1), Zhang
ZQ(1), Chen HZ(1), Liu DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences &Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, P.R. China.

Precise regulation of mtDNA transcription and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) 
is crucial for human health. As a component of mitochondrial contact site and
cristae organizing system (MICOS), Mic60 plays a central role in mitochondrial
morphology. However, it remains unclear whether Mic60 affects mitochondrial
transcription. Here, we report that Mic60 interacts with mitochondrial
transcription factors TFAM and TFB2M. Furthermore, we found that Mic60 knockdown 
compromises mitochondrial transcription and OXPHOS activities. Importantly, Mic60
deficiency decreased TFAM binding and mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT)
recruitment to the mtDNA promoters. In addition, through mtDNA
immunoprecipitation (mIP)-chromatin conformation capture (3C) assays, we found
that Mic60 interacted with mtDNA and was involved in the architecture of mtDNA
D-loop region. Taken together, our findings reveal a previously unrecognized
important role of Mic60 in mtDNA transcription.

PMCID: PMC4303897
PMID: 25612828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Iran Biomed J. 2015;19(1):23-8.

Comparison of mitochondrial-related transcriptional levels of TFAM, NRF1 and
MT-CO1 genes in single human oocytes at various stages of the oocyte maturation.

Ghaffari Novin M(1), Noruzinia M, Allahveisi A, Saremi A, Fadaei Fathabadi F,
Mastery Farahani R, Dehghani Fard A, Pooladi A, Mazaherinezhad Fard R, Yousefian 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology and Anatomical Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of
Medical Sciences, Velenjak, Tehran, Iran. allavaisie@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The aim of the current study was to assess the mRNA levels of two
mitochondria-related genes, including nuclear-encoded NRF1 (nuclear respiratory
factor 1), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and mitochondrial-encoded
cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1 (MT-CO1) genes in various stages of the human
oocyte maturation.
METHODS: Oocytes were obtained from nine infertile women with male factor
undergoing in vitro fertilization (IVF)/intra-cytoplasmic sperm injection
protocol. Mitochondrial-related mRNA levels were performed by single-cell TaqMan 
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: the expression level of the target genes was low at the germinal vesicle
stage (P>0.05). Although the mRNA level of NRF1gene remained stable in metaphase 
I, the mRNA level of TFAM and MT-CO1 increased significantly (P<0.05).In
metaphase II, the expression level of all genes increased compared to metaphase I
(P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The overexpression levels of NRF1, TFAM, and MT-CO1 genes are related
to the oocyte maturation. Therefore, the current study could be used clinically
to improve the success rate of IVF.

PMCID: PMC4322229
PMID: 25605486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Neuroscience. 2015 Mar 19;289:224-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.12.061.
Epub 2015 Jan 13.

Necrostatin-1 mitigates mitochondrial dysfunction post-spinal cord injury.

Wang Y(1), Wang J(2), Yang H(3), Zhou J(4), Feng X(2), Wang H(2), Tao Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 188 Shizi St., Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China; Department of
Orthopedics, Clinical Medical College of Yangzhou University, Subei People's
Hospital of Jiangsu Province, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225001, China. (2)Department of
Orthopedics, Clinical Medical College of Yangzhou University, Subei People's
Hospital of Jiangsu Province, Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225001, China. (3)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 188
Shizi St., Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China. Electronic address:
suzhouspine@163.com. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Soochow University, 188 Shizi St., Suzhou, Jiangsu 215006, China.

Necrostatin-1 (Nec-1) is an inhibitor of necroptosis, playing an important role
in inhibition of pathological death in the central nervous system (CNS). Our
earlier study suggests that Nec-1 protects the injured spinal cord. In this
study, we found that Nec-1 reduces the elevated Ca(2+) concentration in
mitochondria post-injury and preserves the remarkably decreased mitochondrial
membrane potential (MMP) level post-spinal cord injury (SCI). It also increases
the generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) by promoting the activity of
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex I instead of other complexes, which are
significantly decreased due to the injury. Nec-1 also inhibits the release of
cytochrome c in the mitochondria and protects the spinal cord from mitochondrial 
swelling post-SCI. Nec-1 promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by up-regulating
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), in accordance with the mtDNA
content. It also inhibits the up-regulation of mitochondrial fusion genes Mnf1,
Mnf2 within 6h post-injury and adjusts the abnormal expression of mitochondrial
fission gene Fis1. All these results indicate the improvement of mitochondrial
functions in injured spinal cord after the treatment of Nec-1. This research
revealed the mechanisms of functional protection of Nec-1 by mitigating
mitochondrial dysfunction post-SCI.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25595990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 May;1852(5):720-31. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2015.01.006.
Epub 2015 Jan 13.

The neuroprotective role of metformin in advanced glycation end product treated
human neural stem cells is AMPK-dependent.

Chung MM(1), Chen YL(2), Pei D(1), Cheng YC(3), Sun B(4), Nicol CJ(5), Yen CH(6),
Chen HM(7), Liang YJ(8), Chiang MC(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardinal Tien Hospital, School of Medicine,
Fu-Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City, Taiwan. (2)Department of Pathology, 
Cardinal Tien Hospital, School of Medicine, Fu-Jen Catholic University, New
Taipei City, Taiwan. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Chang
Gung University, Tao Yuan 333, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Neuroscience, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Zhejiang, China. (5)Department of Pathology and
Molecular Medicine, Cancer Biology and Genetics Division, Cancer Research
Institute, Queen's University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada; Department of
Biomedical and Molecular Sciences (Pharmacology and Toxicology), Queen's
University, Kingston, ON K7L 3N6, Canada. (6)Department of International
Business, Ming Chuan University, Taipei 111, Taiwan. (7)Graduate Institute of
Applied Science and Engineering, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 242,
Taiwan; Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City
242, Taiwan. (8)Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New
Taipei City 242, Taiwan. (9)Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic
University, New Taipei City 242, Taiwan. Electronic address: cmcphd@gmail.com.

Diabetic neuronal damage results from hyperglycemia followed by increased
formation of advanced glycosylation end products (AGEs), which leads to
neurodegeneration, although the molecular mechanisms are still not well
understood. Metformin, one of the most widely used anti-diabetic drugs, exerts
its effects in part by activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK). AMPK is
a critical evolutionarily conserved enzyme expressed in the liver, skeletal
muscle and brain, and promotes cellular energy homeostasis and biogenesis by
regulating several metabolic processes. While the mechanisms of AMPK as a
metabolic regulator are well established, the neuronal role for AMPK is still
unknown. In the present study, human neural stem cells (hNSCs) exposed to AGEs
had significantly reduced cell viability, which correlated with decreased AMPK
and mitochondria associated gene/protein (PGC1a, NRF-1 and Tfam) expressions, as 
well as increased activation of caspase 3 and 9 activities. Metformin prevented
AGEs induced cytochrome c release from mitochondria into cytosol in the hNSCs.
Co-treatment with metformin significantly abrogated the AGE-mediated effects in
hNSCs. Metformin also significantly rescued hNSCs from AGE-mediated mitochondrial
deficiency (lower ATP, D-loop level, mitochondrial mass, maximal respiratory
function, COX activity, and mitochondrial membrane potential). Furthermore,
co-treatment of hNSCs with metformin significantly blocked AGE-mediated
reductions in the expression levels of several neuroprotective genes (PPAR<U+03B3>,
Bcl-2 and CREB). These findings extend our understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of both AGE-induced neuronal toxicity, and AMPK-dependent
neuroprotection by metformin. This study further suggests that AMPK may be a
potential therapeutic target for treating diabetic neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25595658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(4):473-80. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.991572.

mTOR coordinates protein synthesis, mitochondrial activity and proliferation.

Morita M(1), Gravel SP, Hulea L, Larsson O, Pollak M, St-Pierre J, Topisirovic I.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer Research Centre ; McGill
University ; Montreal , QC Canada.

Protein synthesis is one of the most energy consuming processes in the cell. The 
mammalian/mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a serine/threonine kinase
that integrates a multitude of extracellular signals and intracellular cues to
drive growth and proliferation. mTOR activity is altered in numerous pathological
conditions, including metabolic syndrome and cancer. In addition to its
well-established role in regulating mRNA translation, emerging studies indicate
that mTOR modulates mitochondrial functions. In mammals, mTOR coordinates energy 
consumption by the mRNA translation machinery and mitochondrial energy production
by stimulating synthesis of nucleus-encoded mitochondria-related proteins
including TFAM, mitochondrial ribosomal proteins and components of complexes I
and V. In this review, we highlight findings that link mTOR, mRNA translation and
mitochondrial functions.

PMCID: PMC4615141
PMID: 25590164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Feb;42(2):559-65. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3801-6. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Expression of genes related to mitochondrial function in Nellore cattle
divergently ranked on residual feed intake.

Fonseca LF(1), Gimenez DF, Mercadante ME, Bonilha SF, Ferro JA, Baldi F, de Souza
FR, de Albuquerque LG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Zootecnia, Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e Veterinárias,
UNESP Univ Estadual Paulista, Campus Jaboticabal, Via de Acesso Prof. Paulo
Donato Castellane, Jaboticabal, SP, 14884-900, Brazil.

Several measures have been proposed to investigate and improve feed efficiency in
cattle. One of the most commonly used measure of feed efficiency is residual feed
intake (RFI), which is estimated as the difference between actual feed intake and
expected feed intake based on the animal's average live weight. This measure
permits to identify and select the most efficient animals without selecting for
higher mature weight. Mitochondrial function has been indicated as a major factor
that influences RFI. The analysis of genes involved in mitochondrial function is 
therefore an alternative to identify molecular markers associated with higher
feed efficiency. This study analyzed the expression of PGC1a, TFAM, UCP2 and UCP3
genes by quantitative real-time PCR in liver and muscle tissues of two groups of 
Nellore cattle divergently ranked on RFI values in order to evaluate the
relationship of these genes with RFI. In liver tissue, higher expression of TFAM 
and UCP2 genes was observed in the negative RFI group. Expression of PGC1a gene
did not differ significantly between the two groups, whereas UCP3 gene was not
expressed in liver tissue. In muscle tissue, higher expression of TFAM gene was
observed in the positive RFI group. Expression of PGC1a, UCP2 and UCP3 genes did 
not differ significantly between the two groups. These results suggest the use of
TFAM and UCP2 as possible candidate gene markers in breeding programs designed to
increase the feed efficiency of Nellore cattle.

PMID: 25586767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2015 Apr 10;22(11):883-900. doi: 10.1089/ars.2013.5594.
Epub 2015 Feb 25.

Mitochondrially targeted vitamin E succinate modulates expression of
mitochondrial DNA transcripts and mitochondrial biogenesis.

Truksa J(1), Dong LF, Rohlena J, Stursa J, Vondrusova M, Goodwin J, Nguyen M,
Kluckova K, Rychtarcikova Z, Lettlova S, Spacilova J, Stapelberg M, Zoratti M,
Neuzil J.

Author information: 
(1)1 Molecular Therapy Group, Institute of Biotechnology , Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic .

AIMS: To assess the effect of mitochondrially targeted vitamin E (VE) analogs on 
mitochondrial function and biogenesis.
RESULTS: Mitochondrially targeted vitamin E succinate (MitoVES) is an efficient
inducer of apoptosis in cancer cells. Here, we show that unlike its untargeted
counterpart a-tocopheryl succinate, MitoVES suppresses proliferation of cancer
cells at sub-apoptotic doses by way of affecting the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
transcripts. We found that MitoVES strongly suppresses the level of the
displacement loop transcript followed by those of mtDNA genes coding for subunits
of mitochondrial complexes. This process is coupled to the inhibition of
mitochondrial respiration, dissipation of the mitochondrial membrane potential,
and generation of reactive oxygen species. In addition, exposure of cancer cells 
to MitoVES led to decreased expression of TFAM and diminished mitochondrial
biogenesis. The inhibition of mitochondrial transcription was replicated in vivo 
in a mouse model of HER2(high) breast cancer, where MitoVES lowered the level of 
mtDNA transcripts in cancer cells but not in normal tissue.
INNOVATION: Our data show that mitochondrially targeted VE analogs represent a
novel class of mitocans that not only induce apoptosis at higher concentrations
but also block proliferation and suppress normal mitochondrial function and
transcription at low, non-apoptogenic doses.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate a novel, selective anti-cancer activity of
compounds that act by targeting mitochondria of cancer cells, inducing
significant alterations in mitochondrial function associated with transcription
of mtDNA-coded genes. These changes subsequently result in the arrest of cell
proliferation.

PMID: 25578105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Exerc Nutrition Biochem. 2014 Sep;18(3):259-66. doi:
10.5717/jenb.2014.18.3.259. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

NAMPT regulates mitochondria biogenesis via NAD metabolism and calcium binding
proteins during skeletal muscle contraction.

Kim JS(1), Yoon CS(1), Park DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of physical education, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Korea. 
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Chonbuk National University Medical school,
Jeonju, Korea.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect that muscle
contraction induced NAD metabolism via NAMPT has on mitochondrial biogenesis.
METHODS: Primary skeletal muscle cells were isolated from the gastrocnemius in
C57BL/6 mice. The muscle cells were stimulated by electrical current at 1Hz for 3
minutes in conditions of normal or NAD metabolism related inhibitor treatment.
NAD/NADH level, Sirt1 and mitochondria biogenesis related signal factor's changes
were examined in normal or NAD metabolism related inhibitor treated cells.
RESULTS: Electrical stimulation (ES) induced muscle contractions significantly
increased NAD/NADH levels, NAMPT inhibitor FK-866 inhibited ES-induced NAD
formation, which caused SIRT1 expression and PGC-1a deacetylation to decrease.
Moreover, NAMPT inhibition decreased mitochondrial biogenesis related mRNA, COX-1
and Tfam levels. Along with AMPK inhibitor, compound C decreases SIRT1
expression, PGC-1a deacetylation and muscle contraction induced mitochondrial
biogenesis related mRNA increment. These results indicated that the AMPK-NAMPT
signal is a key player for muscle contraction induced SIRT1 expression and PGC-1a
deacetylation, which influences mitochondrial biogenesis. Inhibition of the AMPK 
upregulator, Camkkß, STO-609 decreased AMPK phosphorylation and SIRT1 expression 
but did not decrease PGC-1a deacetylation. However, CAMKII inhibition via AIP
decreased PGC-1a deacetylation.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, the results indicate that NAMPT plays an important
role in NAD metabolism and mitochondrial biogenesis. However, mitochondrial
biogenesis is also controlled by different calcium binding protein signals
including Camkkß and CAMKII. [Keyword] Muscle contraction, NAD metabolism, SIRT1,
PGC-1 a, mitochondria biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4241898
PMID: 25566462  [PubMed]


144. J Exerc Nutrition Biochem. 2014 Mar;18(1):51-60. doi: 10.5717/jenb.2014.18.1.51. 
Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Exercise, but not quercetin, ameliorates inflammation, mitochondrial biogenesis, 
and lipid metabolism in skeletal muscle after strenuous exercise by high-fat diet
mice.

Kwon SM(1), Park HG(1), Jun JK(1), Lee WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sports Science, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to investigate whether moderate exercise
and quercetin intake with a low fat diet contribute to inflammatory cytokine
production, mitochondrial biogenesis, and lipid metabolism in skeletal muscle
after strenuous exercise by high-fat diet mice.
METHODS: Male C57BL/6 mice were randomly divided into four groups: (1) High-fat
for 12 weeks and low-fat diet control (C; n = 6); (2) high-fat diet for 12 weeks 
and low-fat diet with quercetin (Q; n = 4); (3) high-fat diet for 12 weeks and
low-fat diet with exercise (E; n = 4); or (4) high-fat diet for 12 weeks and
low-fat diet with exercise and quercetin (EQ; n = 5). Quercetin (10 mg/kg) was
administered once per day, 5 day/week for 8 weeks. Exercise training was
performed at moderate intensity for 8 weeks, 5 days/week for 30-60 min/day. Mice 
were subjected to a strenuous exercise bout of 60 min at a speed of 25 m/min (VO2
max 85%) conducted as an exercise-induced fatigue just before sacrifice.
RESULTS: As results, body weights were significantly different among the groups. 
Exercise training significantly reduced inflammatory cytokines after strenuous
exercise in skeletal muscle of high-fat diet mice. Exercise training increased
Tfam mRNA in the soleus muscle after strenuous exercise. Exercise training
significantly decreased lipogenesis markers in skeletal muscle of obese mice
after strenuous exercise. Moderate exercise significantly increased lipolysis
markers in the tibialis anterior muscle.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that exercise training reduced inflammatory
cytokine levels and improved mitochondrial biogenesis and lipid metabolism.
However quercetin supplementation did not affect these parameters. Thus,
long-term moderate exercise training has positive effects on obesity.

PMCID: PMC4241935
PMID: 25566439  [PubMed]


145. Eur J Pharmacol. 2015 Feb 15;749:12-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.12.020. Epub
2014 Dec 31.

Aspirin may influence cellular energy status.

Kamble P(1), Litvinov D(1), Aluganti Narasimhulu C(1), Jiang X(1), Parthasarathy 
S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, USA. (2)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College 
of Medicine, University of Central Florida, Orlando, USA. Electronic address:
spartha@ucf.edu.

In our previous findings, we have demonstrated that aspirin/acetyl salicylic acid
(ASA) might induce sirtuins via aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ah receptor).
Induction effects included an increase in cellular paraoxonase 1 (PON1) activity 
and apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) gene expression. As predicted, ASA and salicylic
acid (SA) treatment resulted in generation of H2O2, which is known to be an
inducer of mitochondrial gene Sirt4 and other downstream target genes of Sirt1.
Our current mass spectroscopic studies further confirm the metabolism of the
drugs ASA and SA. Our studies show that HepG2 cells readily converted ASA to SA, 
which was then metabolized to 2,3-DHBA. HepG2 cells transfected with aryl
hydrocarbon receptor siRNA upon treatment with SA showed the absence of a DHBA
peak as measured by LC-MS/MS. MS studies for Sirt1 action also showed a peak at
180.9 m/z for the deacetylated and chlorinated product formed from N-acetyl
le-lysine. Thus an increase in Sirt4, Nrf2, Tfam, UCP1, eNOS, HO1 and STAT3 genes
could profoundly affect mitochondrial function, cholesterol homeostasis, and
fatty acid oxidation, suggesting that ASA could be beneficial beyond simply its
ability to inhibit cyclooxygenase.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4352341
PMID: 25557764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2014;35(6):676-82.

The inhibitory role of miR-214 in cervical cancer cells through directly
targeting mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM).

Wen Z(1), Lei Z, Jin-An M, Xue-Zhen L, Xing-Nan Z, Xiu-Wen D.

Author information: 
(1)Department ofOncology, The Second Hospital of Central South University,
Changsha, China.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a high-mobility group (HMG)
protein and acts as a key regulator in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication,
transcription, and inheritance. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that TFAM 
plays an important role in tumorigenesis; however, the regulatory mechanism of
TFAM in cervical cancer has not been revealed. In the current study, the au-
thors found that with malignancy of cervical cancer, the protein expression of
TFAM was gradually increased, while the expression of miRNA-214 was gradually
downregulated. They further identified that TFAM is a target of miR-214. Forced
overexpression of miRNA-214 significantly suppressed cell proliferation, cell
cycle progression, colony-formation, and migration of cervical cancer Hela and
Caski cells; however, upregulation of TFAM notably promoted cell proliferation,
cell cycle progression, colony-formation, and migration of Hela and Caski cells. 
The authors further showed that miR-214 enhanced the susceptibility of Hela and
Caski cells to the chemotherapy drug cisplatin. In conclusion, the current study 
provides a new sight for the regulatory pattern of miRNA-214 and TFAM in cervical
cancer in vitro, indicating that miRNA-214 and MTFA may become important
candidates for developing promising therapeutic strategies for the treatment of
cervical cancer.

PMID: 25556274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Med Sci. 2015 Jan 1;12(1):48-56. doi: 10.7150/ijms.10035. eCollection 2015.

Astrocytes protect neurons from Aß1-42 peptide-induced neurotoxicity increasing
TFAM and PGC-1 and decreasing PPAR-<U+03B3> and SIRT-1.

Aguirre-Rueda D(1), Guerra-Ojeda S(1), Aldasoro M(1), Iradi A(1), Obrador E(1),
Ortega A(1), Mauricio MD(1), Vila JM(1), Valles SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology. School of Medicine, University of Valencia. Spain.

One of the earliest neuropathological events in Alzheimer's disease is
accumulation of astrocytes at sites of Aß1-42 depositions. Our results indicate
that Aß1-42 toxic peptide increases lipid peroxidation, apoptosis and cell death 
in neurons but not in astrocytes in primary culture. Aß1-42-induced deleterious
neuronal effects are not present when neurons and astrocytes are mixed cultured. 
Stimulation of astrocytes with toxic Aß1-42 peptide increased p-65 and decreased 
I<U+03BA>B resulting in inflammatory process. In astrocytes Aß1-42 decreases protein
expressions of sirtuin 1 (SIRT-1) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
<U+03B3> (PPAR-<U+03B3>) and over-expresses peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator 1 (PGC-1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), protecting
mitochondria against Aß1-42-induced damage and promoting mitochondrial
biogenesis. In summary our data suggest that astrocytes may have a key role in
protecting neurons, increasing neural viability and mitochondrial biogenesis,
acquiring better oxidative stress protection and perhaps modulating inflammatory 
processes against Aß1-42 toxic peptide. This might be a sign of a complex
epigenetic process in Alzheimer's disease development.

PMCID: PMC4278875
PMID: 25552918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mech Ageing Dev. 2015 Jan;145:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 Dec
24.

Histone methylation codes involved in stemness, multipotency, and senescence in
budding tunicates.

Kawamura K(1), Kinoshita M(2), Sekida S(3), Sunanaga T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Kochi 
University, Kochi 780-8520, Japan. Electronic address: kazuk@kochi-u.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Kochi 
University, Kochi 780-8520, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Graduate School
of Kuroshio Science, Kochi University, Kochi 780-8520, Japan.

We examined the dynamics of nuclear histone H3 trimethylation related to cell
differentiation and aging in a budding tunicate, Polyandrocarpa misakiensis.
Throughout zooidal life, multipotent epithelial and coelomic cell nuclei showed
strong trimethylation signals at H3 lysine27 (H3K27me3), consistent with the
results of western blotting. Epidermal H3K27me3 repeatedly appeared in protruding
buds and disappeared in senescent adult zooids. The budding-specific cytostatic
factor TC14-3 allowed aging epidermal cells to restore H3K27me3 signals and
mitochondrial gene activities via mitochondrial transcription factor a, all of
which were made ineffective by an H3K27me3 inhibitor. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that TC14-3 enhances H3K27me3 of
transdifferentiation-related genes and consequently downregulates the expression 
of these genes. In contrast, trimethylation signals at H3 lysine4 (H3K4me3)
appeared transiently in transdifferentiating bud cells and stably lasted in
undifferentiated adult cells without affecting H3K27me3. A
transdifferentiation-related gene external signal-regulated kinase heavily
underwent H3K4me3 in developing buds, which could be reproduced by retinoic acid.
These results indicate that in P. misakiensis, TC14-3-driven H3K27 trimethylation
is a default state of bud and zooid cells, which serves as the histone code for
cell longevity. H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 double-positive signals are involved in cell
stemness, and absence of signals is the indication of senescence.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25543066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1851(3):273-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.12.013.
Epub 2014 Dec 24.

a-Lipoic acid treatment increases mitochondrial biogenesis and promotes beige
adipose features in subcutaneous adipocytes from overweight/obese subjects.

Fernández-Galilea M(1), Pérez-Matute P(2), Prieto-Hontoria PL(3), Houssier M(4), 
Burrell MA(5), Langin D(6), Martínez JA(7), Moreno-Aliaga MJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain. (2)HIV and Associated Metabolic Alterations Unit, Infectious
Diseases Department, Center for Biomedical Research of La Rioja (CIBIR), Logroño,
Spain. (3)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Faculty of Health and Physical Activity Science,
University SEK, Santiago, Chile. (4)INSERM, UMR1048, Obesity Research Laboratory,
Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular Diseases, Toulouse, France; University 
of Toulouse, UMR1048, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France. (5)Department
of Histology and Pathology, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. (6)INSERM,
UMR1048, Obesity Research Laboratory, Institute of Metabolic and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Toulouse, France; University of Toulouse, UMR1048, Paul Sabatier
University, Toulouse, France; Toulouse University Hospitals, Laboratory of
Clinical Biochemistry, Toulouse, France. (7)Department of Nutrition, Food Science
and Physiology, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Center for Nutrition
Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la
Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERObn), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Nutrition, Food Science and Physiology, University of Navarra,
Pamplona, Spain; Center for Nutrition Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain; CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERObn), Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: mjmoreno@unav.es.

a-Lipoic acid (a-Lip) is a natural occurring antioxidant with beneficial
anti-obesity properties. The aim of this study was to investigate the putative
effects of a-Lip on mitochondrial biogenesis and the acquirement of brown-like
characteristics by subcutaneous adipocytes from overweight/obese subjects. Thus, 
fully differentiated human subcutaneous adipocytes were treated with a-Lip (100
and 250µM) for 24h for studies on mitochondrial content and morphology,
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, fatty acid oxidation enzymes and
brown/beige characteristic genes. The involvement of the Sirtuin1/Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma, coactivator 1 alpha (SIRT1/PGC-1a) pathway
was also evaluated. Our results showed that a-Lip increased mitochondrial content
in cultured human adipocytes as revealed by electron microscopy and by
mitotracker green labeling. Moreover, an enhancement in mtDNA content was
observed. This increase was accompanied by an up-regulation of SIRT1 protein
levels, a decrease in PGC-1a acetylation and up-regulation of Nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (Nrf1) and Mitochondrial transcription factor (Tfam) transcription
factors. Enhanced oxygen consumption and fatty acid oxidation enzymes, Carnitine 
palmitoyl transferase 1 and Acyl-coenzyme A oxidase (CPT-1 and ACOX) were also
observed. Mitochondria from a-Lip-treated adipocytes exhibited some morphological
characteristics of brown mitochondria, and a-Lip also induced up-regulation of
some brown/beige adipocytes markers such as cell death-inducing DFFA-like
effector a (Cidea) and T-box 1 (Tbx1). Moreover, a-Lip up-regulated PR domain
containing 16 (Prdm16) mRNA levels in treated adipocytes. Therefore, our study
suggests the ability of a-Lip to promote mitochondrial biogenesis and brown-like 
remodeling in cultured white subcutaneous adipocytes from overweight/obese
donors.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25542506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Jun;116(6):1090-100. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25064.

Adiponectin prevents reduction of lipid-induced mitochondrial biogenesis via
AMPK/ACC2 pathway in chicken adipocyte.

Gan L(1), Yan J, Liu Z, Feng M, Sun C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
Shaanxi, China.

Adiponectin (APN) stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis and reduces lipid content
in human and animal adipocytes. However, the mechanism of adiponectin in
regulating mitochondrial biogenesis in chicken adipocytes has never been
reported. The objective of this study is to examine the mechanism that
adiponectin plays in lipid-induced mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial
function in chicken adipocytes. We found that the overexpression of adiponectin
reduced the membrane DAG content and elevated the membrane translocation of PKC<U+03B8>.
In contrast to control groups, the overexpression of adiponectin increased
mitochondrial density and mitochondrial DNA contents and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor acoactivator 1a (PGC1-a) expression.
Mitochondrial membrane potential and cytochrome C (Cyt<U+2009>C) content were detected
by JC-1 fluorescent staining and immunofluorescence which indicated that
overexpression of adiponectin enhanced mitochondrial ATP synthesis. Moreover,
AMPK/ACC2 signaling pathway was activated along with the elevation of PGC1-a and 
TFAM by the overexpression of adiponectin, meanwhile the lipid transcription
marker genes were down-regulated. This effect was alleviated by reducing
adiponectin and a specific inhibitor of AMPK pathway. We concluded that
adiponectin could prevent reduction of lipid-induced mitochondrial biogenesis via
AMPK/ACC2 pathway in chicken adipocytes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25536013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 22;9(12):e115433. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115433.
eCollection 2014.

Age-related mitochondrial DNA depletion and the impact on pancreatic Beta cell
function.

Nile DL(1), Brown AE(1), Kumaheri MA(1), Blair HR(1), Heggie A(1), Miwa S(2),
Cree LM(3), Payne B(4), Chinnery PF(4), Brown L(5), Gunn DA(5), Walker M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2
4HH, United Kingdom. (2)Newcastle University Institute for Ageing, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, United Kingdom. (3)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of
Auckland, Auckland 1142, New Zealand. (4)Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial
Research, Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom. (5)Unilever R&D, Colworth Science Park,
Sharnbrook, Bedford, MK44 1LQ, United Kingdom.

Type 2 diabetes is characterised by an age-related decline in insulin secretion. 
We previously identified a 50% age-related decline in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
copy number in isolated human islets. The purpose of this study was to mimic this
degree of mtDNA depletion in MIN6 cells to determine whether there is a direct
impact on insulin secretion. Transcriptional silencing of mitochondrial
transcription factor A, TFAM, decreased mtDNA levels by 40% in MIN6 cells. This
level of mtDNA depletion significantly decreased mtDNA gene transcription and
translation, resulting in reduced mitochondrial respiratory capacity and ATP
production. Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion was impaired following partial
mtDNA depletion, but was normalised following treatment with glibenclamide. This 
confirms that the deficit in the insulin secretory pathway precedes K+ channel
closure, indicating that the impact of mtDNA depletion is at the level of
mitochondrial respiration. In conclusion, partial mtDNA depletion to a degree
comparable to that seen in aged human islets impaired mitochondrial function and 
directly decreased insulin secretion. Using our model of partial mtDNA depletion 
following targeted gene silencing of TFAM, we have managed to mimic the degree of
mtDNA depletion observed in aged human islets, and have shown how this correlates
with impaired insulin secretion. We therefore predict that the age-related mtDNA 
depletion in human islets is not simply a biomarker of the aging process, but
will contribute to the age-related risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4274008
PMID: 25532126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(1):86-98. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.974419.

Metabolic reprogramming orchestrates cancer stem cell properties in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Shen YA(1), Wang CY, Hsieh YT, Chen YJ, Wei YH.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology ; Taipei , Taiwan.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) represent a subpopulation of tumor cells endowed with
self-renewal capacity and are considered as an underlying cause of tumor
recurrence and metastasis. The metabolic signatures of CSCs and the mechanisms
involved in the regulation of their stem cell-like properties still remain
elusive. We utilized nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) CSCs as a model to dissect
their metabolic signatures and found that CSCs underwent metabolic shift and
mitochondrial resetting distinguished from their differentiated counterparts. In 
metabolic shift, CSCs showed a greater reliance on glycolysis for energy supply
compared with the parental cells. In mitochondrial resetting, the quantity and
function of mitochondria of CSCs were modulated by the biogenesis of the
organelles, and the round-shaped mitochondria were distributed in a peri-nuclear 
manner similar to those seen in the stem cells. In addition, we blocked the
glycolytic pathway, increased the ROS levels, and depolarized mitochondrial
membranes of CSCs, respectively, and examined the effects of these metabolic
factors on CSC properties. Intriguingly, the properties of CSCs were curbed when 
we redirected the quintessential metabolic reprogramming, which indicates that
the plasticity of energy metabolism regulated the balance between acquisition and
loss of the stemness status. Taken together, we suggest that metabolic
reprogramming is critical for CSCs to sustain self-renewal, deter from
differentiation and enhance the antioxidant defense mechanism. Characterization
of metabolic reprogramming governing CSC properties is paramount to the design of
novel therapeutic strategies through metabolic intervention of CSCs.

PMCID: PMC4352969
PMID: 25483072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS Genet. 2014 Dec 4;10(12):e1004832. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004832.
eCollection 2014.

In vivo occupancy of mitochondrial single-stranded DNA binding protein supports
the strand displacement mode of DNA replication.

Miralles Fusté J(1), Shi Y(1), Wanrooij S(2), Zhu X(1), Jemt E(1), Persson Ö(1), 
Sabouri N(2), Gustafsson CM(1), Falkenberg M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå
University, Umeå, Sweden.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes for proteins required for oxidative
phosphorylation, and mutations affecting the genome have been linked to a number 
of diseases as well as the natural ageing process in mammals. Human mtDNA is
replicated by a molecular machinery that is distinct from the nuclear replisome, 
but there is still no consensus on the exact mode of mtDNA replication. We here
demonstrate that the mitochondrial single-stranded DNA binding protein (mtSSB)
directs origin specific initiation of mtDNA replication. MtSSB covers the
parental heavy strand, which is displaced during mtDNA replication. MtSSB blocks 
primer synthesis on the displaced strand and restricts initiation of light-strand
mtDNA synthesis to the specific origin of light-strand DNA synthesis (OriL). The 
in vivo occupancy profile of mtSSB displays a distinct pattern, with the highest 
levels of mtSSB close to the mitochondrial control region and with a gradual
decline towards OriL. The pattern correlates with the replication products
expected for the strand displacement mode of mtDNA synthesis, lending strong in
vivo support for this debated model for mitochondrial DNA replication.

PMCID: PMC4256270
PMID: 25474639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Autophagy. 2014;10(12):2279-96. doi: 10.4161/15548627.2014.991665.

TSPO interacts with VDAC1 and triggers a ROS-mediated inhibition of mitochondrial
quality control.

Gatliff J(1), East D, Crosby J, Abeti R, Harvey R, Craigen W, Parker P,
Campanella M.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences; The Royal Veterinary College 
; University of London ; London , UK.

The 18-kDa TSPO (translocator protein) localizes on the outer mitochondrial
membrane (OMM) and participates in cholesterol transport. Here, we report that
TSPO inhibits mitochondrial autophagy downstream of the PINK1-PARK2 pathway,
preventing essential ubiquitination of proteins. TSPO abolishes mitochondrial
relocation of SQSTM1/p62 (sequestosome 1), and consequently that of the
autophagic marker LC3 (microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3), thus
leading to an accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria, altering the appearance
of the network. Independent of cholesterol regulation, the modulation of
mitophagy by TSPO is instead dependent on VDAC1 (voltage-dependent anion channel 
1), to which TSPO binds, reducing mitochondrial coupling and promoting an
overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that counteracts PARK2-mediated
ubiquitination of proteins. These data identify TSPO as a novel element in the
regulation of mitochondrial quality control by autophagy, and demonstrate the
importance for cell homeostasis of its expression ratio with VDAC1.

PMCID: PMC4502750
PMID: 25470454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Jan;91:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2014.10.007. Epub 2014 Nov 3.

Lipophilic antioxidants prevent lipopolysaccharide-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction through mitochondrial biogenesis improvement.

Bullón P(1), Román-Malo L(2), Marín-Aguilar F(2), Alvarez-Suarez JM(3), Giampieri
F(4), Battino M(5), Cordero MD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Dental School, University of Sevilla, Spain;
Research Laboratory, Dental School, University of Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Research Laboratory, Dental School, University of Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche Specialistiche ed Odontostomatologiche
(DISCO)-Sez. Biochimica, Facoltà di Medicina, Università Politecnica delle
Marche, Ancona 60131, Italy; Area de Nutrición y Salud, Universidad Internacional
Iberoamericana (UNINI), Campeche C.P. 24040, Mexico; Facultad de Ciencias de la
Salud, Universidad Nacional de Chimborazo, Riobamba, Ecuador. (4)Dipartimento di 
Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari e Ambientali (D3A), Università Politecnica delle
Marche, Via Ranieri 65, Ancona 60131, Italy. (5)Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche 
Specialistiche ed Odontostomatologiche (DISCO)-Sez. Biochimica, Facoltà di
Medicina, Università Politecnica delle Marche, Ancona 60131, Italy; Director
Centre for Nutrition & Health, Universidad Europea del Atlantico (UEA), Santander
39011, Spain. Electronic address: m.a.battino@univpm.it. (6)Research Laboratory, 
Dental School, University of Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain. Electronic address:
mdcormor@us.es.

Oxidative stress is implicated in several infectious diseases. In this regard,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), an endotoxic component, induces mitochondrial
dysfunction and oxidative stress in several pathological events such as
periodontal disease or sepsis. In our experiments, LPS-treated fibroblasts
provoked increased oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced oxygen
consumption and mitochondrial biogenesis. After comparing coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10)
and N-acetylcysteine (NAC), we observed a more significant protection of CoQ10
than of NAC, which was comparable with other lipophilic and hydrophilic
antioxidants such as vitamin E or BHA respectively. CoQ10 improved mitochondrial 
biogenesis by activating PGC-1a and TFAM. This lipophilic antioxidant protection 
was observed in mice after LPS injection. These results show that
mitochondria-targeted lipophilic antioxidants could be a possible specific
therapeutic strategy in pharmacology in the treatment of infectious diseases and 
their complications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mitochondrion. 2015 Jan;20:22-33. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.10.008. Epub 2014 Nov 
7.

Physical exercise prior and during treatment reduces sub-chronic
doxorubicin-induced mitochondrial toxicity and oxidative stress.

Marques-Aleixo I(1), Santos-Alves E(2), Mariani D(3), Rizo-Roca D(4), Padrão
AI(5), Rocha-Rodrigues S(3), Viscor G(4), Torrella JR(4), Ferreira R(5), Oliveira
PJ(6), Magalhães J(3), Ascensão A(3).

Author information: 
(1)CIAFEL - Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of 
Sport, University of Porto, Portugal. Electronic address:
inesmaleixo@hotmail.com. (2)CIAFEL - Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health
and Leisure, Faculty of Sport, University of Porto, Portugal; CNC - Centre for
Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal. (3)CIAFEL -
Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of Sport,
University of Porto, Portugal. (4)Department of Physiology and Immunology,
Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona, Spain. (5)QOPNA Chemistry
Department, University of Aveiro, Portugal. (6)CNC - Centre for Neuroscience and 
Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal.

Doxorubicin (DOX) is an anti-cancer agent whose clinical usage results in a
cumulative and dose-dependent cardiotoxicity. We have previously shown that
exercise performed prior to DOX treatment reduces the resulting cardiac(mito)
toxicity. We sought to determine the effects on cardiac mitochondrial toxicity of
two distinct chronic exercise models (endurance treadmill training-TM and
voluntary free-wheel activity-FW) when used prior and during DOX treatment.
Male-young Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into six groups (n=6 per group):
SAL+SED (saline sedentary), SAL+TM (12-weeks TM), SAL+FW (12-weeks FW), DOX+SED
(7-weeks of chronic DOX treatment 2mg/kg per week), DOX+TM and DOX+FW. DOX
administration started 5weeks after the beginning of the exercise protocol. Heart
mitochondrial ultrastructural alterations, mitochondrial function (oxygen
consumption and membrane potential), semi-quantification of oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) proteins and their in-gel activity, as well as proteins 
involved in mitochondrial oxidative stress (SIRT3, p66shc and UCP2), biogenesis
(PGC1a and TFAM), acetylation and markers for oxidative damage (carbonyl groups, 
MDA,SH, aconitase, Mn-SOD activity) were evaluated. DOX treatment resulted in
ultrastructural and functional alterations and decreased OXPHOS. Moreover, DOX
decreased complex I activity and content, mitochondrial biogenesis (TFAM),
increased acetylation and oxidative stress. TM and FW prevented DOX-induced
alteration in OXPHOS, the increase in oxidative stress, the decrease in complex V
activity and in complex I activity and content. DOX-induced decreases in TFAM and
SIRT3 content were prevented by TM only. Both chronic models of physical exercise
performed before and during the course of sub-chronic DOX treatment translated
into an improved mitochondrial bioenergetic fitness, which may result in part
from the prevention of mitochondrial oxidative stress and damage.

Copyright © 2014 © Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Cell Probes. 2015 Feb;29(1):43-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mcp.2014.11.003. Epub 2014
Nov 28.

Effects of long-term football training on the expression profile of genes
involved in muscle oxidative metabolism.

Alfieri A(1), Martone D(2), Randers MB(3), Labruna G(4), Mancini A(1), Nielsen
JJ(3), Bangsbo J(3), Krustrup P(5), Buono P(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Movement Sciences and Wellness (DiSMEB), University Parthenope, 
Naples, Italy; CEINGE - Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. (2)CEINGE -
Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. (3)Copenhagen Centre for Team Sport and
Health, Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)IRCCS SDN, Naples, Italy. (5)Copenhagen Centre for Team
Sport and Health, Department of Nutrition, Exercise and Sports, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Sport and Health Sciences, College of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom. (6)Department of
Movement Sciences and Wellness (DiSMEB), University Parthenope, Naples, Italy;
IRCCS SDN, Naples, Italy. Electronic address: buono@uniparthenope.it.

We investigated whether long-term recreational football training affects the
expression of health-related biochemical and molecular markers in healthy
untrained subjects. Five untrained healthy men trained for 1 h 2.4 times/week for
12 weeks and 1.3 times/week for another 52 weeks. Blood samples and a muscle
biopsy from the vastus lateralis were collected at T0 (pre intervention) and at
T1 (post intervention). Gene expression was measured by RTqPCR on RNA extracted
from muscle biopsies. The expression levels of the genes principally involved in 
energy metabolism (PPAR<U+03B3>, adiponectin, AMPKa1/a2, TFAM, NAMPT, PGC1a and SIRT1)
were measured at T0 and T1. Up-regulation of PPAR<U+03B3> (p < 0.0005), AMPKa1
(p < 0.01), AMPKa2 (p < 0.0005) and adiponectin was observed at T1 vs T0.
Increases were also found in the expression of TFAM (p < 0.001), NAMPT
(p < 0.01), PGC1a (p < 0.01) and SIRT1 (p < 0.01), which are directly or
indirectly involved in the glucose and lipid oxidative metabolism. Multiple
linear regression analysis revealed that fat percentage was independently
associated with NAMPT, PPAR<U+03B3> and adiponectin expression. In conclusion, long-term
recreational football training could be a useful tool to improve the expression
of muscle molecular biomarkers that are correlated to oxidative metabolism in
healthy males.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25444938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):575-86. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0349. Epub 2015
Jan 14.

Umbilical cord mesenchymal stromal cells affected by gestational diabetes
mellitus display premature aging and mitochondrial dysfunction.

Kim J(1), Piao Y, Pak YK, Chung D, Han YM, Hong JS, Jun EJ, Shim JY, Choi J, Kim 
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)1 Departments of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College
of Medicine , Seoul, Korea.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells Dev. 2015 May 15;24(10):1263.

Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stromal cells (hUC-MSCs) of Wharton's jelly
origin undergo adipogenic, osteogenic, and chondrogenic differentiation in vitro.
Recent studies have consistently shown their therapeutic potential in various
human disease models. However, the biological effects of major pregnancy
complications on the cellular properties of hUC-MSCs remain to be studied. In
this study, we compared the basic properties of hUC-MSCs obtained from
gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) patients (GDM-UC-MSCs) and normal pregnant
women (N-UC-MSCs). Assessments of cumulative cell growth, MSC marker expression, 
cellular senescence, and mitochondrial function-related gene expression were
performed using a cell count assay, senescence-associated ß-galactosidase
staining, quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction,
immunoblotting, and cell-based mitochondrial functional assay system. When
compared with N-UC-MSCs, GDM-UC-MSCs showed decreased cell growth and earlier
cellular senescence with accumulation of p16 and p53, even though they expressed 
similar levels of CD105, CD90, and CD73 MSC marker proteins. GDM-UC-MSCs also
displayed significantly lower osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation
potentials than N-UC-MSCs. Furthermore, GDM-UC-MSCs exhibited a low mitochondrial
activity and significantly reduced expression of the mitochondrial function
regulatory genes ND2, ND9, COX1, PGC-1a, and TFAM. Here, we report intriguing and
novel evidence that maternal metabolic derangement during gestation affects the
biological properties of fetal cells, which may be a component of fetal
programming. Our findings also underscore the importance of the critical
assessment of the biological impact of maternal-fetal conditions in biological
studies and clinical applications of hUC-MSCs.

PMCID: PMC4333320
PMID: 25437179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Mar;135(3):679-89. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.475. Epub 2014
Nov 5.

Mitochondrial function in murine skin epithelium is crucial for hair follicle
morphogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

Kloepper JE(1), Baris OR(2), Reuter K(3), Kobayashi K(4), Weiland D(2), Vidali
S(1), Tobin DJ(5), Niemann C(3), Wiesner RJ(6), Paus R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (2)Institute
for Vegetative Physiology, University of Köln, Köln, Germany. (3)1] Center for
Biochemistry, Medical Faculty at the University of Köln, Köln, Germany [2] Center
for Molecular Medicine Köln, University of Köln, Köln, Germany. (4)Laboratory of 
Dairy Food Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan. 
(5)Centre for Skin Sciences, University of Bradford, Bradford, UK. (6)1]
Institute for Vegetative Physiology, University of Köln, Köln, Germany [2] Center
for Molecular Medicine Köln, University of Köln, Köln, Germany [3] Cologne
Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-associated Diseases
(CECAD), Köln, Germany. (7)1] Department of Dermatology, University of Lübeck,
Lübeck, Germany [2] Institute of Inflammation and Repair, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Here, we studied how epithelial energy metabolism impacts overall skin
development by selectively deleting intraepithelial mtDNA in mice by ablating a
key maintenance factor (Tfam(EKO)), which induces loss of function of the
electron transport chain (ETC). Quantitative (immuno)histomorphometry
demonstrated that Tfam(EKO) mice showed significantly reduced hair follicle (HF) 
density and morphogenesis, fewer intrafollicular keratin15+ epithelial progenitor
cells, increased apoptosis, and reduced proliferation. Tfam(EKO) mice also
displayed premature entry into (aborted) HF cycling by apoptosis-driven HF
regression (catagen). Ultrastructurally, Tfam(EKO) mice exhibited severe HF
dystrophy, pigmentary abnormalities, and telogen-like condensed dermal papillae. 
Epithelial HF progenitor cell differentiation (Plet1, Lrig1 Lef1, and ß-catenin),
sebaceous gland development (adipophilin, Scd1, and oil red), and key
mediators/markers of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions during skin
morphogenesis (NCAM, versican, and alkaline phosphatase) were all severely
altered in Tfam(EKO) mice. Moreover, the number of mast cells, major
histocompatibility complex class II+, or CD11b+ immunocytes in the skin
mesenchyme was increased, and essentially no subcutis developed. Therefore, in
contrast to their epidermal counterparts, pilosebaceous unit stem cells depend on
a functional ETC. Most importantly, our findings point toward a frontier in skin 
biology: the coupling of HF keratinocyte mitochondrial function with the
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions that drive overall development of the skin
and its appendages.

PMID: 25371971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Microscopy (Oxf). 2014 Nov;63 Suppl 1:i35. doi: 10.1093/jmicro/dfu079.

Correlative light and electron microscopic observation of mitochondrial DNA in
mammalian cells by using focused-ion beam scanning electron microscopy.

Okayama S(1), Ohta K(1), Higashi R(2), Nakamura K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microscopic and Developmental Anatomy, Department of Anatomy,
Kurume University School of Medicine. (2)Electron microscopic Unit, Kurume
University School of Medicine 830-0011 67 Asahimachi, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Division of Microscopic and Developmental Anatomy, Department of Anatomy,
Kurume University School of Medicine Electron microscopic Unit, Kurume University
School of Medicine 830-0011 67 Asahimachi, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.

IntroductionMitochondrial fission and fusion events are fundamental mechanisms
for quality control of mitochondrial functions. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) usually
divides in offspring mitochondria after fission and mtDNA dynamics are thought to
be coordinated with mitochondrial turnover. Recently, several candidate
mechanisms for the relationship between mtDNA division and mitochondrial fission 
have been suggested ([1], 2012). The dynamics of mtDNA or nucleoids can be
observed using fluorescent microscopy, but the ultrastructural aspects of their
coordination remain unclear. Although visualization of mtDNA at the electron
microscopic level is an important step in understanding how mtDNA division and
mitochondrial division are coordinated, it is quite difficult to observe using
conventional electron microscopic methods. In the present study, we attempted to 
establish correlative light and electron microscopy (CLEM) observation to
visualize the three-dimensional localization of the mtDNA /nucleoid within
mitochondria at electron microscopic resolution using a combination of
immuno-electron and focused-ion beam scanning electron microscopy (FIB/SEM)
tomography methods. Materials & methodsHeLa cells were fixed using 4%
paraformaldehyde and 0.05% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, and then
immunohistochemically labeled with anti-TFAM IgG antibody (Abnova, USA) or
anti-DNA IgM antibody (Progen, Germany). The cells were then reacted with
biotin-labeled secondary antibodies. The immunoreactivities were visualized using
two methods: the ABC method and streptavidin Fluoro-Nanogold.
Immunohistochemically labeled specimens were then observed using light
microscopy. These specimens were then developed using a Gold Enhancement kit
(Nanoprobe, USA) for 150 s. Specimens for electron microscopy were stained using 
the ROTO method, embedded in resin, and subjected to FIB/SEM tomography (Quanta
3D FEG, FEI). 3D reconstruction was performed using the software Amira (FEI).
Results & discussionWe were not able to identify a nucleoid-like structure within
mitochondria, even in a complete 3D reconstruction using FIB/SEM with
conventional staining. In CLEM observations, immunoreaction (IR) products were
correlatively observed under LM and EM. Pre-embedding immuno-electron microscopy 
showed DAB and gold IR in the matrix of some mitochondria. Interestingly, IR
products were observed in the globular region of the mitochondrial matrix
(approximately 0.4 µm in diameter), frequently localizing in the peripheral end
of the mitochondrial matrix, adjacent to the inner membrane. Using the
post-embedding immunogold method, gold labels were also observed in a portion of 
the matrix adjacent to the mitochondrial inner membrane. These immunocytochemical
results were concordant with our fluorescent microscopic observations.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The Japanese
Society of Microscopy. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25359841  [PubMed]


161. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 14;9(10):e110580. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110580.
eCollection 2014.

Lin28a protects against hypoxia/reoxygenation induced cardiomyocytes apoptosis by
alleviating mitochondrial dysfunction under high glucose/high fat conditions.

Zhang M(1), Niu X(2), Hu J(1), Yuan Y(1), Sun S(3), Wang J(1), Yu W(1), Wang
C(1), Sun D(1), Wang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Corps Hospital,
Chinese People's Armed Police Forces, Xi'an, China.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to investigate the role of Lin28a in
protecting against hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R)-induced cardiomyocytes apoptosis
under high glucose/high fat (HG/HF) conditions.
METHODS: Primary cardiomyocytes which were isolated from neonatal mouse were
randomized to be treated with lentivirus carrying Lin28a siRNA, Lin28acDNA 72 h
before H/R (9 h/2 h). Cardiomyocytes biomarkers release (LDH and CK),
cardiomyocytes apoptosis, mitochondria biogenesis and morphology, intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, ATP content and inflammatory cytokines 
levels after H/R injury in high glucose/high fat conditions were compared between
groups. The target proteins of Lin28a were examined by western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Our results revealed that Lin28a cDNA transfection (overexpression)
significantly inhibited cardiomyocyte apoptotic index, improved mitochondria
biogenesis, increased ATP production and reduced ROS production as compared with 
the H/R group in HG/HF conditions. Lin28a siRNA transfection (knockdown) rendered
the cardiomyocytes more susceptible to H/R injury as evidenced by increased
apoptotic index, impaired mitochondrial biogenesis, decreased ATP production and 
increased ROS level. Interestingly, these effects of Lin28a were blocked by
pretreatment with the PI3K inhibitor wortmannin. Lin28a overexpression increased,
while Lin28a knockdown inhibited IGF1R, Nrf-1, Tfam, p-IRS-1, p-Akt, p-mTOR,
p-p70s6k, p-AMPK expression levels after H/R injury in HG/HF conditions.
Moreover, pretreatment with wortmannin abolished the effects of Lin28a on the
expression levels of p-AKT, p-mTOR, p-p70s6k, p-AMPK.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results suggest that Lin28a inhibits cardiomyocytes
apoptosis by enhancing mitochondrial biogenesis and function under high
glucose/high fat conditions. The mechanism responsible for the effects of Lin28a 
is associated with the PI3K/Akt dependent pathway.

PMCID: PMC4196990
PMID: 25313561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Oct 9;5:e1453. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.405.

Transformations of the macromolecular landscape at mitochondria during
DNA-damage-induced apoptotic cell death.

Yadav N(1), Pliss A(2), Kuzmin A(2), Rapali P(1), Sun L(3), Prasad P(2), Chandra 
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Center for Genetics and
Pharmacology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo,
NY, USA. (2)Institute for Lasers, Photonics and Biophotonics, University at
Buffalo, State University of New York, Buffalo, NY, USA. (3)1] Department of
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Center for Genetics and Pharmacology, Roswell Park
Cancer Institute, Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY, USA [2] Gastrointestinal 
Division, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University Medical School,
Hangzhou, China.

Apoptosis is a dynamic process regulated by mitochondrion critical for cellular
respiration and survival. Execution of apoptosis is mediated by multiple protein 
signaling events at mitochondria. Initiation and progression of apoptosis require
numerous apoptogenic factors that are either released from or sequestered in
mitochondria, which may transform the biomolecular makeup of the organelle. In
this communication, using Raman microspectroscopy, we demonstrate that
transformation in biomolecular composition of mitochondrion may be used as
apoptosis marker in an individual cell. For the first time, we show that
significant changes occur in the concentrations of RNA, DNA, protein, and lipid
constituents of mitochondria during apoptosis. The structural analysis of
proteins on mitochondria demonstrated a decrease in a-helix secondary structure
content, and an increase in the levels of random coils and ß-sheets on
mitochondria. This may represent an additional hallmark of apoptosis. Strikingly,
we observed nearly identical changes in macromolecular content of mitochondria
both in the presence and absence of a key proapoptotic protein, Bax
(Bcl-2-associated X protein). Increased DNA level in mitochondria corresponded
with higher mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), cellular reactive oxygen species (ROS),
and mitochondrial ROS production. Upregulation of polymerase-<U+03B3> (POLG),
mitochondrial helicase Twinkle, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam)
in response to DNA damage correlated with increased mtDNA and RNA synthesis.
Elevated activity of oxidative phosphorylation complexes supports functional
mitochondrial respiration during apoptosis. Thus, we define previously unknown
dynamic correlation of macromolecular structure of mitochondria and apoptosis
progression in the presence and absence of Bax protein. These findings open up a 
new approach for monitoring physiological status of cells by non invasive
single-cell method.

PMCID: PMC4649512
PMID: 25299778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochem J. 2015 Jan 1;465(1):49-61. doi: 10.1042/BJ20131608.

Bioenergetic differences between MCF-7 and T47D breast cancer cells and their
regulation by oestradiol and tamoxifen.

Radde BN(1), Ivanova MM(1), Mai HX(1), Salabei JK(2), Hill BG(2), Klinge CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY
40292, U.S.A. (2)Deptartment of Medicine, University of Louisville School of
Medicine, Louisville, KY 40292, U.S.A.

Oestrogen receptor a (ERa+) breast tumours rely on mitochondria (mt) to generate 
ATP. The goal of the present study was to determine how oestradiol (E2) and
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT) affect cellular bioenergetic function in MCF-7 and
T47D ERa+ breast cancer cells in serum-replete compared with dextran-coated
charcoal (DCC)-stripped foetal bovine serum (FBS)-containing medium
('serum-starved'). Serum-starvation reduced oxygen consumption rate (OCR),
extracellular acidification rate (ECAR), ATP-linked OCR and maximum mt capacity, 
reflecting lower ATP demand and mt respiration. Cellular respiratory
stateapparent was unchanged by serum deprivation. 4-OHT reduced OCR independent
of serum status. Despite having a higher mt DNA/nuclear DNA ratio than MCF-7
cells, T47D cells have a lower OCR and ATP levels and higher proton leak. T47D
express higher nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) and NRF-1-regulated,
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM and cytochrome c, but
lower levels of cytochrome c oxidase, subunit IV, isoform 1 (COX4, COX4I1).
Mitochondrial reserve capacity, reflecting tolerance to cellular stress, was
higher in serum-starved T47D cells and was increased by 4-OHT, but was decreased 
by 4-OHT in MCF-7 cells. These data demonstrate critical differences in cellular 
energetics and responses to 4-OHT in these two ERa+ cell lines, likely reflecting
cancer cell avoidance of apoptosis.

PMID: 25279503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Anesthesiology. 2014 Dec;121(6):1236-47. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000000470.

Importance of Toll-like receptor 2 in mitochondrial dysfunction during
polymicrobial sepsis.

Gong Y(1), Zou L, Feng Y, Li D, Cai J, Chen D, Chao W.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Anesthesia, Critical Care, and Pain Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(Y.G., L.Z., Y.F., D.L., J.C., W.C.); and Key Laboratory for Major Obstetric
Diseases, Institute of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital
of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China (Y.G., D.C.).

Comment in
    Anesthesiology. 2014 Dec;121(6):1147-9.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) contributes to sepsis pathogenesis such
as deleterious systemic inflammation, cardiac dysfunction, and high mortality in 
animal studies. Mitochondrial dysfunction is a key molecular event that is
associated with organ injury in sepsis. The role of TLR2 in sepsis-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction remains unclear.
METHODS: Intracellular hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), mitochondrial superoxide (O2),
mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m), and intracellular adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) were measured in peritoneal leukocytes. A mouse model of polymicrobial
sepsis was generated by cecum ligation and puncture (CLP). Wild-type and
TLR2-deficient (TLR2) mice were subjected to sham or CLP. Mitochondrial functions
including reactive oxygen species (ROS), <U+0394><U+03A8>m, intracellular ATP, and complex III 
activity were measured.
RESULTS: TLR2/1 activation by Pam3Cys enhanced intracellular H2O2 and
mitochondrial O2 production in leukocytes, but had no effect on mitochondrial <U+0394><U+03A8>m
and ATP production. The effect was specific for TLR2/1 as TLR3 or TLR9 ligands
did not induce ROS production. Polymicrobial sepsis induced mitochondrial
dysfunction in leukocytes, as demonstrated by increased H2O2 and mitochondrial
O2- production (CLP vs. sham; H2O2: 3,173±498, n=5 vs. 557±38, n=4; O2-: 707±66, 
n=35 vs. 485±35, n=17, mean fluorescence intensity, mean±SEM), attenuated complex
III activity (13±2, n=16 vs. 30±3, n=7, millioptical densities/min), loss of
mitochondrial <U+0394><U+03A8>m, and depletion of intracellular ATP (33±6, n=11 vs. 296±29,
n=4, nmol/mg protein). In comparison, there was significant improvement in
mitochondrial function in septic TLR2-/- mice as evidenced by attenuated
mitochondrial ROS production, better-maintained mitochondrial <U+0394><U+03A8>m, and higher
cellular ATP production.
CONCLUSIONS: TLR2 signaling plays a critical role in mediating mitochondrial
dysfunction in peritoneal leukocytes during polymicrobial sepsis.

PMCID: PMC4237710
PMID: 25272245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 22;9(9):e107109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107109.
eCollection 2014.

Expression of mitochondrial regulators PGC1a and TFAM as putative markers of
subtype and chemoresistance in epithelial ovarian carcinoma.

Gabrielson M(1), Björklund M(1), Carlson J(2), Shoshan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer Center Karolinska CCK, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer Center
Karolinska CCK, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of
Pathology-Cytology, Radiumhemmet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC), the major cause of gynaecological cancer
death, is a heterogeneous disease classified into five subtypes. Each subtype has
distinct clinical characteristics and is associated with different genetic risk
factors and molecular events, but all are treated with surgery and
platinum/taxane regimes. Tumour progression and chemoresistance is generally
associated with major metabolic alterations, notably altered mitochondrial
function(s). Here, we report for the first time that the expression of the
mitochondrial regulators PGC1a and TFAM varies between EOC subtypes; furthermore,
we have identified a profile in clear-cell carcinoma consisting of
undetectability of PGC1a/TFAM, and low ERa/Ki-67. By contrast, high-grade serous 
carcinomas were characterised by a converse state of PGC1a/TFAM, ERa positivity
and a high Ki-67 index. Interestingly, loss of PGC1a/TFAM and ERa was found also 
in a non-clear cell EOC cell line made highly resistant to platinum in vitro.
Similar to clear-cell carcinomas, these resistant cells also showed accumulation 
of glycogen. Altogether, our data provide mechanistic insights into the
chemoresistant nature of ovarian clear-cell carcinomas. Furthermore, these
findings corroborate the need to take into account the diversity of EOC and to
develop subtype specific treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC4170973
PMID: 25243473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Dec;77:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.08.009.
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis in endotoxemia is not accompanied by
mitochondrial function recovery.

Vanasco V(1), Saez T(2), Magnani ND(1), Pereyra L(1), Marchini T(1), Corach A(3),
Vaccaro MI(1), Corach D(3), Evelson P(1), Alvarez S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Pharmacy and
Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires-CONICET, Junín 956, C1113AAD Buenos
Aires, Argentina. (2)Institute of Cellular Biology and Neuroscience, School of
Medicine, University of Buenos Aires-CONICET, Paraguay 2155, C1121ABG Buenos
Aires, Argentina. (3)Servicio de Huellas Digitales Genéticas, School of Pharmacy 
and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires-CONICET, Junín 956, C1113AAD Buenos 
Aires, Argentina. (4)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of 
Pharmacy and Biochemistry, University of Buenos Aires-CONICET, Junín 956,
C1113AAD Buenos Aires, Argentina. Electronic address: salvarez@ffyb.uba.ar.

Mitochondrial biogenesis emerges as a compensatory mechanism involved in the
recovery process in endotoxemia and sepsis. The aim of this work was to analyze
the time course of the cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis process occurring during 
endotoxemia, with emphasis on the quantitative analysis of mitochondrial
function. Female Sprague-Dawley rats (45 days old) were ip injected with LPS (10 
mg/kg). Measurements were performed at 0-24 h after LPS administration. PGC-1a
and mtTFA expression for biogenesis and p62 and LC3 expression for autophagy were
analyzed by Western blot; mitochondrial DNA levels by qPCR, and mitochondrial
morphology by transmission electron microscopy. Mitochondrial function was
evaluated as oxygen consumption and respiratory chain complex activity. PGC-1a
and mtTFA expression significantly increased in every time point analyzed, and
mitochondrial mass was increased by 20% (P<0.05) at 24 h. p62 expression was
significantly decreased in a time-dependent manner. LC3-II expression was
significantly increased at all time points analyzed. Ultrastructurally,
mitochondria displayed several abnormalities (internal vesicles, cristae
disruption, and swelling) at 6 and 18 h. Structures compatible with
fusion/fission processes were observed at 24 h. A significant decrease in state 3
respiration was observed in every time point analyzed (LPS 6h: 20%, P<0.05).
Mitochondrial complex I activity was found decreased by 30% in LPS-treated
animals at 6 and 24h. Complex II and complex IV showed decreased activity only at
24 h. The present results show that partial restoration of cardiac mitochondrial 
architecture is not accompanied by improvement of mitochondrial function in acute
endotoxemia. The key implication of our study is that cardiac failure due to
bioenergetic dysfunction will be overcome by therapeutic interventions aimed to
restore cardiac mitochondrial function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25224040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochimie. 2014 Nov;106:157-66. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.08.014. Epub 2014 Sep 
8.

Pro-oxidant effect of ALA is implicated in mitochondrial dysfunction of HepG2
cells.

Laafi J(1), Homedan C(2), Jacques C(3), Gueguen N(4), Schmitt C(5), Puy H(6),
Reynier P(7), Carmen Martinez M(8), Malthièry Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)LUNAM Université, INSERM UMR 1063, IBIS, IRIS, rue des capucins, 49100 Angers,
France. Electronic address: laafi_jihane@hotmail.com. (2)LUNAM Université, INSERM
UMR 1063, IBIS, IRIS, rue des capucins, 49100 Angers, France; Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire, Département de Biochimie et Génétique, IBIS, IRIS, rue des
capucins, 49100 Angers, France. Electronic address: chhomedan@chu-angers.fr.
(3)LUNAM Université, INSERM UMR 1063, IBIS, IRIS, rue des capucins, 49100 Angers,
France. Electronic address: caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr. (4)Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire, Département de Biochimie et Génétique, IBIS, IRIS, rue
des capucins, 49100 Angers, France; CNRS UMR 6214 - INSERM 1083, IBIS, IRIS, rue 
des capucins, 49100 Angers, France. Electronic address: nagueguen@chu-angers.fr. 
(5)Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre Français des Porphyries, Hôpital
Louis Mourier, Université Paris Diderot, 178 rue des Renouillers, 92700 Colombes,
France; INSERM U773, Centre de Recherche Biomédicale Bichat-Beaujon, Paris,
France; Université Paris Diderot, 5 Rue Thomas Mann, 75013 Paris, France.
Electronic address: caroline.schmitt@lmr.aphp.fr. (6)Assistance Publique Hôpitaux
de Paris, Centre Français des Porphyries, Hôpital Louis Mourier, Université Paris
Diderot, 178 rue des Renouillers, 92700 Colombes, France; INSERM U773, Centre de 
Recherche Biomédicale Bichat-Beaujon, Paris, France; Université Paris Diderot, 5 
Rue Thomas Mann, 75013 Paris, France. Electronic address: herve.puy@bch.aphp.fr. 
(7)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, Département de Biochimie et Génétique, IBIS,
IRIS, rue des capucins, 49100 Angers, France; CNRS UMR 6214 - INSERM 1083, IBIS, 
IRIS, rue des capucins, 49100 Angers, France. Electronic address:
pareynier@chu-angers.fr. (8)LUNAM Université, INSERM UMR 1063, IBIS, IRIS, rue
des capucins, 49100 Angers, France. Electronic address:
carmen.martinez@univ-angers.fr. (9)LUNAM Université, INSERM UMR 1063, IBIS, IRIS,
rue des capucins, 49100 Angers, France; Centre Hospitalier Universitaire,
Département de Biochimie et Génétique, IBIS, IRIS, rue des capucins, 49100
Angers, France. Electronic address: yves.malthiery@univ-angers.fr.

Heme biosynthesis begins in the mitochondrion with the formation of
delta-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). In acute intermittent porphyria, hereditary
tyrosinemia type I and lead poisoning patients, ALA is accumulated in plasma and 
in organs, especially the liver. These diseases are also associated with
neuromuscular dysfunction and increased incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Many studies suggest that this damage may originate from ALA-induced oxidative
stress following its accumulation. Using the MnSOD as an oxidative stress marker,
we showed here that ALA treatment of cultured cells induced ROS production,
increasing with ALA concentration. The mitochondrial energetic function of
ALA-treated HepG2 cells was further explored. Mitochondrial respiration and ATP
content were reduced compared to control cells. For the 300 µM treatment, ALA
induced a mitochondrial mass decrease and a mitochondrial network imbalance
although neither necrosis nor apoptosis were observed. The up regulation of
PGC-1, Tfam and ND5 genes was also found; these genes encode mitochondrial
proteins involved in mitochondrial biogenesis activation and OXPHOS function. We 
propose that ALA may constitute an internal bioenergetic signal, which initiates 
a coordinated upregulation of respiratory genes, which ultimately drives
mitochondrial metabolic adaptation within cells. The addition of an antioxidant, 
Manganese(III) tetrakis(1-methyl-4-pyridyl)porphyrin (MnTMPyP), resulted in
improvement of maximal respiratory chain capacity with 300 µM ALA. Our results
suggest that mitochondria, an ALA-production site, are more sensitive to
pro-oxidant effect of ALA, and may be directly involved in pathophysiology of
patients with inherited or acquired porphyria.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25220386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Acta Diabetol. 2014 Dec;51(6):963-72. doi: 10.1007/s00592-014-0645-4. Epub 2014
Sep 14.

Enhanced insulin sensitivity and acute regulation of metabolic genes and
signaling pathways after a single electrical or manual acupuncture session in
female insulin-resistant rats.

Benrick A(1), Maliqueo M, Johansson J, Sun M, Wu X, Mannerås-Holm L,
Stener-Victorin E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Box 434, 405 30, Göteborg, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Acta Diabetol. 2015 Feb;52(1):219-20.
    Acta Diabetol. 2015 Feb;52(1):219-20.

AIM: To compare the effect of a single session of acupuncture with either
low-frequency electrical or manual stimulation on insulin sensitivity and
molecular pathways in the insulin-resistant dihydrotestosterone-induced rat
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) model. Both stimulations cause activation of
afferent nerve fibers. In addition, electrical stimulation causes muscle
contractions, enabling us to differentiate changes induced by activation of
sensory afferents from contraction-induced changes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Control and PCOS rats were divided into no-stimulation,
manual-, and electrical stimulation groups and insulin sensitivity was measured
by euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp. Manually stimulated needles were rotated
180° ten times every 5 min, or low-frequency electrical stimulation was applied
to evoke muscle twitches for 45 min. Gene and protein expression were analyzed by
real-time PCR and Western blot.
RESULTS: The glucose infusion rate (GIR) was lower in PCOS rats than in controls.
Electrical stimulation was superior to manual stimulation during treatment but
both methods increased GIR to the same extent in the post-stimulation period.
Electrical stimulation decreased mRNA expression of Adipor2, Adrb1, Fndc5, Erk2, 
and Tfam in soleus muscle and increased ovarian Adrb2 and Pdf. Manual stimulation
decreased ovarian mRNA expression of Erk2 and Sdnd. Electrical stimulation
increased phosphorylated ERK levels in soleus muscle.
CONCLUSIONS: One acupuncture session with electrical stimulation improves insulin
sensitivity and modulates skeletal muscle gene and protein expression more than
manual stimulation. Although electrical stimulation is superior to manual in
enhancing insulin sensitivity during stimulation, they are equally effective
after stimulation indicating that it is activation of sensory afferents rather
than muscle contraction per se leading to the observed changes.

PMID: 25218925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Mar Drugs. 2014 Aug 21;12(8):4602-15. doi: 10.3390/md12084602.

Echinochrome a increases mitochondrial mass and function by modulating
mitochondrial biogenesis regulatory genes.

Jeong SH(1), Kim HK(2), Song IS(3), Noh SJ(4), Marquez J(5), Ko KS(6), Rhee
BD(7), Kim N(8), Mishchenko NP(9), Fedoreyev SA(10), Stonik VA(11), Han J(12).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center (CMDC), National Research
Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Inje University, Busan 614-735, Korea.
shejeong96@gmail.com. (2)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center (CMDC),
National Research Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Inje University, Busan 
614-735, Korea. estrus74@gmail.com. (3)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease
Center (CMDC), National Research Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Inje
University, Busan 614-735, Korea. microvirus@hanmail.net. (4)Department of Health
Sciences and Technology, Graduate School of Inje University, Busan 614-735,
Korea. msns6336@gmail.com. (5)Department of Health Sciences and Technology,
Graduate School of Inje University, Busan 614-735, Korea.
jcuevas.marquez@gmail.com. (6)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center (CMDC),
National Research Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Inje University, Busan 
614-735, Korea. kskomd@paik.ac.kr. (7)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center
(CMDC), National Research Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Inje
University, Busan 614-735, Korea. bdrhee@hanmail.net. (8)Cardiovascular and
Metabolic Disease Center (CMDC), National Research Laboratory for Mitochondrial
Signaling, Inje University, Busan 614-735, Korea. narikim43@gmail.com. (9)George 
B. Elyakov Pacific Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Far-Eastern Branch of the
Russian Academy of Science, Prospect 100 let Vladivostoku, 159, Vladivostok
690022, Russia. mischenkonp@mail.ru. (10)George B. Elyakov Pacific Institute of
Bioorganic Chemistry, Far-Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Science,
Prospect 100 let Vladivostoku, 159, Vladivostok 690022, Russia.
fedoreev-s@mail.ru. (11)George B. Elyakov Pacific Institute of Bioorganic
Chemistry, Far-Eastern Branch of the Russian Academy of Science, Prospect 100 let
Vladivostoku, 159, Vladivostok 690022, Russia. stonik@piboc.dvo.ru.
(12)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center (CMDC), National Research
Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Inje University, Busan 614-735, Korea.
phyhanj@gmail.com.

Echinochrome A (Ech A) is a natural pigment from sea urchins that has been
reported to have antioxidant properties and a cardio protective effect against
ischemia reperfusion injury. In this study, we ascertained whether Ech A enhances
the mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation in rat cardio myoblast
H9c2 cells. To study the effects of Ech A on mitochondrial biogenesis, we
measured mitochondrial mass, level of oxidative phosphorylation, and
mitochondrial biogenesis regulatory gene expression. Ech A treatment did not
induce cytotoxicity. However, Ech A treatment enhanced oxygen consumption rate
and mitochondrial ATP level. Likewise, Ech A treatment increased mitochondrial
contents in H9c2 cells. Furthermore, Ech A treatment up-regulated biogenesis of
regulatory transcription genes, including proliferator-activated receptor gamma
co-activator (PGC)-1a, estrogen-related receptor (ERR)-a, peroxisome
proliferator-activator receptor (PPAR)-<U+03B3>, and nuclear respiratory factor (NRF)-1 
and such mitochondrial transcription regulatory genes as mitochondrial
transcriptional factor A (TFAM), mitochondrial transcription factor B2 (TFB2M),
mitochondrial DNA direct polymerase (POLMRT), single strand binding protein
(SSBP) and Tu translation elongation factor (TUFM). In conclusion, these data
suggest that Ech A is a potentiated marine drug which enhances mitochondrial
biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4145333
PMID: 25196935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Nov;71:359-69. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.08.024. Epub 2014 Aug 
27.

Loss of dopamine disrupts circadian rhythms in a mouse model of Parkinson's
disease.

Fifel K(1), Cooper HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM 846, Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, Department of
Chronobiology, 18 Avenue du Doyen Lépine, 69500 Bron, France; Laboratory of
Neurophysiology, Molecular Cell Biology Department, Leiden University Medical
Center, PO Box 9600 Mailbox S5-P. 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: fifel-k@hotmail.com. (2)INSERM 846, Stem Cell and Brain Research
Institute, Department of Chronobiology, 18 Avenue du Doyen Lépine, 69500 Bron,
France. Electronic address: howard.cooper@inserm.fr.

Although a wide range of physiological functions regulated by dopamine (DA)
display circadian variations, the role of DA in the generation and/or modulation 
of these rhythms is unknown. In Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, in addition to
the classical motor symptoms, disturbances of the pattern of daily rest/wake
cycles are common non-motor symptoms. We investigated daily and circadian rhythms
of rest/activity behaviors in a transgenic MitoPark mouse model with selective
inactivation of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) resulting in a slow
and progressive degeneration of DA neurons in midbrain structures. Correlated
with this, MitoPark mice show a gradual reduction in locomotor activity beginning
at about 20weeks of age. In a light-dark cycle, MitoPark mice exhibit a daily
pattern of rest/activity rhythms that shows an age-dependent decline in both the 
amplitude and the stability of the rhythm, coupled with an increased
fragmentation of day/night activities. When the circadian system is challenged by
exposure to constant darkness or constant light conditions, control littermates
retain a robust free-running circadian locomotor rhythm, whereas in MitoPark
mice, locomotor rhythms are severely disturbed or completely abolished.
Re-exposure to a light/dark cycle completely restores daily locomotor rhythms.
MitoPark mice and control littermates express similar masking behaviors under a
1h light/1h dark regime, suggesting that the maintenance of a daily pattern of
rest/activity in arrhythmic MitoPark mice can be attributed to the acute
inhibitory and stimulatory effects of light and darkness. These results imply
that, in addition to the classical motor abnormalities observed in PD, the loss
of the midbrain DA neurons leads to impairments of the circadian control of
rest/activity rhythms.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25171792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2015 Apr;25(2):184-95. doi: 10.1111/sms.12188. Epub 2014 
Feb 20.

PGC-related gene variants and elite endurance athletic status in a Chinese
cohort: a functional study.

He ZH(1), Hu Y, Li YC, Gong LJ, Cieszczyk P, Maciejewska-Karlowska A,
Leonska-Duniec A, Muniesa CA, Marín-Peiro M, Santiago C, Garatachea N, Eynon N,
Lucia A.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Centre, China Institute of Sport Science, Beijing, China.

This study aims to examine the association between proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PGC)-gene family-related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
elite endurance runners' status in a Chinese cohort, and to gain insights into
the functionality of a subset of SNPs. Genotype distributions of 133 SNPs in
PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, PPRC1, TFAM, TFB1M, TFB2M, NRF1, GABPA, GABPB1, ERRa, and
SIRT1 genes were compared between 235 elite Chinese (Han) endurance runners (127 
women) and 504 healthy non-athletic controls (237 women). Luciferase gene
reporter activity was determined in 20 SNPs. After adjusting for multiple
comparisons (in which threshold P-value was set at 0.00041), no significant
differences were found in allele/genotype frequencies between athletes and
controls (when both sexes were analyzed either together or separately). The
lowest P-value was found in PPARGC1A rs4697425 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001 for the comparison of
allele frequencies between elite female endurance runners and their
gender-matched controls). However, no association (all P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05) was observed for
this SNP in a replication cohort from Poland (194 endurance athletes and 190
controls). Using functional genomics tool, the following SNPs were found to have 
functional significance: PPARGC1A rs6821591, rs12650562, rs12374310, rs4697425,
rs13113110, and rs4452416; PPARGC1B rs251466 and rs17110586; and PPRC1 rs17114388
(all P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). This study found no significant association between PGC-related 
SNPs and elite endurance athlete status in the Chinese population, despite some
SNPs showing potential functional significance and the strong biological
rationale to hypothesize that this gene pathway is a candidate to influence
endurance exercise capacity.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25170593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2014 Jul 24;5:122. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2014.00122.
eCollection 2014.

Inhibition of mTOR Prevents ROS Production Initiated by Ethidium Bromide-Induced 
Mitochondrial DNA Depletion.

Nacarelli T(1), Azar A(1), Sell C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Drexel University College of Medicine , Philadelphia,
PA , USA.

The regulation of mitochondrial mass and DNA content involves a complex
interaction between mitochondrial DNA replication machinery, functional
components of the electron transport chain, selective clearance of mitochondria, 
and nuclear gene expression. In order to gain insight into cellular responses to 
mitochondrial stress, we treated human diploid fibroblasts with ethidium bromide 
at concentrations that induced loss of mitochondrial DNA over a period of 7<U+2009>days.
The decrease in mitochondrial DNA was accompanied by a reduction in steady state 
levels of the mitochondrial DNA binding protein, TFAM, a reduction in several
electron transport chain protein levels, increased mitochondrial and total
cellular ROS, and activation of p38 MAPK. However, there was an increase in
mitochondrial mass and voltage dependent anion channel levels. In addition,
mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) activity, as judged by p70S6K targets, was
decreased while steady state levels of p62/SQSTM1 and Parkin were increased.
Treatment of cells with rapamycin created a situation in which cells were better 
able to adapt to the mitochondrial dysfunction, resulting in decreased ROS and
increased cell viability but did not prevent the reduction in mitochondrial DNA. 
These effects may be due to a more efficient flux through the electron transport 
chain, increased autophagy, or enhanced AKT signaling, coupled with a reduced
growth rate. Together, the results suggest that mTOR activity is affected by
mitochondrial stress, which may be part of the retrograde signal system required 
for normal mitochondrial homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4109433
PMID: 25104948  [PubMed]


173. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2015 Apr;47(1-2):1-11. doi: 10.1007/s10863-014-9570-z. Epub 
2014 Aug 8.

Effect of one month duration ketogenic and non-ketogenic high fat diets on mouse 
brain bioenergetic infrastructure.

Selfridge JE(1), Wilkins HM, E L, Carl SM, Koppel S, Funk E, Fields T, Lu J, Tang
EP, Slawson C, Wang W, Zhu H, Swerdlow RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, 66160, USA.

Diet composition may affect energy metabolism in a tissue-specific manner. Using 
C57Bl/6J mice, we tested the effect of ketosis-inducing and non-inducing high fat
diets on genes relevant to brain bioenergetic infrastructures, and on proteins
that constitute and regulate that infrastructure. At the end of a one-month study
period the two high fat diets appeared to differentially affect peripheral
insulin signaling, but brain insulin signaling was not obviously altered. Some
bioenergetic infrastructure parameters were similarly impacted by both high fat
diets, while other parameters were only impacted by the ketogenic diet. For both 
diets, mRNA levels for CREB, PGC1a, and NRF2 increased while NRF1, TFAM, and
COX4I1 mRNA levels decreased. PGC1ß mRNA increased and TNFa mRNA decreased only
with the ketogenic diet. Brain mtDNA levels fell in both the ketogenic and
non-ketogenic high fat diet groups, although TOMM20 and COX4I1 protein levels
were maintained, and mRNA and protein levels of the mtDNA-encoded COX2 subunit
were also preserved. Overall, the pattern of changes observed in mice fed
ketogenic and non-ketogenic high fat diets over a one month time period suggests 
these interventions enhance some aspects of the brain's aerobic infrastructure,
and may enhance mtDNA transcription efficiency. Further studies to determine
which diet effects are due to changes in brain ketone body levels, fatty acid
levels, glucose levels, altered brain insulin signaling, or other factors such as
adipose tissue-associated hormones are indicated.

PMCID: PMC4320989
PMID: 25104046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Neuromolecular Med. 2014 Dec;16(4):714-26. doi: 10.1007/s12017-014-8321-y. Epub
2014 Aug 1.

Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation transcriptome alterations in human
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cord and blood.

Ladd AC(1), Keeney PM, Govind MM, Bennett JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's and Movement Disorders Center, Virginia Commonwealth University,
P.O. Box 980312, Richmond, VA, 23298, USA, acladd@vcu.edu.

Origins of onset and progression of motor neurodegeneration in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) are not clearly known, but may include impairment of
mitochondrial bioenergetics. We used quantitative PCR approaches to analyze the
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) transcriptomes of spinal cord
tissue and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from persons with sporadic
ALS compared with those without neurological disease. Expression measurements of 
88 different nuclear (n) and mitochondrial (mt) DNA-encoded OXPHOS genes showed
mtDNA-encoded respiratory gene expression was significantly decreased in ALS
spinal cord by 78-84% (ANOVA p < 0.002). We observed the same phenomenon in
freshly isolated PBMC from ALS patients (reduced 24-35%, ANOVA p < 0.001) and
reproduced it in a human neural stem cell model treated with
2',3'-dideoxycytidine (ddC) (reduced 52-78%, ANOVA p < 0.001). nDNA-encoded
OXPHOS genes showed heterogeneously and mostly decreased expression in ALS spinal
cord tissue. In contrast, ALS PBMC and ddC-treated stem cells showed no
significant change in expression of nDNA OXPHOS genes compared with controls.
Genes related to mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1a, TFAM, ERRa, NRF1, NRF2 and
POLG) were queried with inconclusive results. Here, we demonstrate there is a
systemic decrease in mtDNA gene expression in ALS central and peripheral tissues 
that support pursuit of bioenergetic-enhancing therapies. We also identified a
combined nDNA and mtDNA gene set (n = 26), downregulated in spinal cord tissue
that may be useful as a biomarker in the development of cell-based ALS models.

PMID: 25081190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Pediatr Exerc Sci. 2015 Feb;27(1):102-12. doi: 10.1123/pes.2014-0050. Epub 2014
Jul 15.

Physical-capacity-related genetic polymorphisms in children with cystic fibrosis.

Yvert T(1), Santiago C, Santana-Sosa E, Verde Z, Gómez-Gallego F, López-Mojares
LM, Pérez M, Garatachea N, Lucia A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Doctorate Studies and Research, Universidad Europea de Madrid,
Madrid, Spain.

In patients with cystic fibrosis (CF), physical capacity (PC) has been correlated
with mortality risk. In turn, PC is dependent on genetic factors. This study
examines several polymorphisms associated with PC and health-related phenotype
traits (VO2peak, FEV1, FVC, PImax and muscular strength) in a group of children
with CF (n = 66, primary purpose). The same analyses were also performed in a
control group of healthy children (n = 113, secondary purpose). The polymorphisms
determined were classified as muscle function polymorphisms (ACE rs1799752; AGT
rs699; ACTN3 rs1815739; PTK2 rs7843014 and rs7460; MSTN rs1805086; TRHR
rs7832552; NOS3 rs2070744) or energy metabolism polymorphisms (PPARGC1A
rs8192678; NRF1 rs6949152; NRF2 rs12594956; TFAM rs1937; PPARD rs2267668; ACSL1
rs6552828). No significant polymorphism/phenotype correlations were detected in
children with CF, with marginal associations being observed between NOS3
rs2070744 and VO2peak and FEV1, as well as between PPARGC1A rs8192678 and FEV1.
Overall, similar findings were observed in the control group, i.e., no major
associations. The PC-related polymorphisms examined seem to have no effects on
the PC or health of children with CF.

PMID: 25051205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Placenta. 2014 Sep;35(9):665-72. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.06.371. Epub 2014
Jul 10.

Variation of DNA methylation in candidate age-related targets on the
mitochondrial-telomere axis in cord blood and placenta.

Janssen BG(1), Byun HM(2), Cox B(1), Gyselaers W(3), Izzi B(4), Baccarelli AA(2),
Nawrot TS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium.
(2)Laboratory of Environmental Epigenetics, Exposure Epidemiology and Risk
Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of
Obstetrics, East-Limburg Hospital, Genk, Belgium; Department of Physiology,
Hasselt University, Diepenbeek, Belgium. (4)Department of Cardiovascular
Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven
(KULeuven), Leuven, Belgium. (5)Centre for Environmental Sciences, Hasselt
University, Diepenbeek, Belgium; Department of Public Health & Primary Care,
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, Leuven University (KULeuven), Leuven,
Belgium. Electronic address: bram.janssen@uhasselt.be.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetics is tissue-specific and potentially even cell-specific,
but little information is available from human reproductive studies about the
concordance of DNA methylation patterns in cord blood and placenta, as well as
within-placenta variations. We evaluated methylation levels at promoter regions
of candidate genes in biological ageing pathways (SIRT1, TP53, PPARG, PPARGC1A,
and TFAM), a subtelomeric region (D4Z4) and the mitochondrial genome (MT-RNR1,
D-loop).
METHODS: Ninety individuals were randomly chosen from the ENVIRONAGE birth cohort
to evaluate methylation concordance between cord blood and placenta using highly 
quantitative bisulfite-PCR pyrosequencing. In a subset of nineteen individuals, a
more extensive sampling scheme was performed to examine within-placenta
variation.
RESULTS: The DNA methylation levels of the subtelomeric region and mitochondrial 
genome showed concordance between cord blood and placenta with correlation
coefficients ranging from r = 0.31 to 0.43, p = 0.005, and also between the
maternal and foetal sides of placental tissue (r = 0.53 to 0.72, p = 0.05). For
the majority of targets, an agreement in methylation levels between four foetal
biopsies was found (with intra-class correlation coefficients ranging from 0.16
to 0.72), indicating small within-placenta variation.
CONCLUSIONS: The methylation levels of the subtelomeric region (D4Z4) and
mitochondrial genome (MT-RNR1, D-loop) showed concordance between cord blood and 
placenta, suggesting a common epigenetic signature of these targets between
tissues. Concordance was lacking between the other genes that were studied. In
placental tissue, methylation patterns of most targets on the
mitochondrial-telomere axis were not strongly influenced by sample location.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4356989
PMID: 25047690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 15;23(24):6528-41. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu371. Epub 2014 Jul
15.

Oxaloacetate activates brain mitochondrial biogenesis, enhances the insulin
pathway, reduces inflammation and stimulates neurogenesis.

Wilkins HM(1), Harris JL(2), Carl SM(3), E L(4), Lu J(5), Eva Selfridge J(6), Roy
N(6), Hutfles L(3), Koppel S(3), Morris J(1), Burns JM(7), Michaelis ML(8),
Michaelis EK(8), Brooks WM(9), Swerdlow RH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Alzheimer's Disease Center.
(2)Hoglund Brain Imaging Center. (3)University of Kansas Alzheimer's Disease
Center. (4)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine. (5)Department of Neurology.
(6)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology. (7)Department of
Neurology, University of Kansas Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of
Molecular and Integrative Physiology. (8)University of Kansas Alzheimer's Disease
Center, Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kansas,
Lawrence, KS 66045, USA. (9)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas
Alzheimer's Disease Center, Hoglund Brain Imaging Center. (10)Department of
Neurology, University of Kansas Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of
Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA and
rswerdlow@kumc.edu.

Brain bioenergetic function declines in some neurodegenerative diseases, this may
influence other pathologies and administering bioenergetic intermediates could
have therapeutic value. To test how one intermediate, oxaloacetate (OAA) affects 
brain bioenergetics, insulin signaling, inflammation and neurogenesis, we
administered intraperitoneal OAA, 1-2 g/kg once per day for 1-2 weeks, to C57Bl/6
mice. OAA altered levels, distributions or post-translational modifications of
mRNA and proteins (proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1a, PGC1
related co-activator, nuclear respiratory factor 1, transcription factor A of the
mitochondria, cytochrome oxidase subunit 4 isoform 1, cAMP-response element
binding, p38 MAPK and adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase) in ways
that should promote mitochondrial biogenesis. OAA increased Akt, mammalian target
of rapamycin and P70S6K phosphorylation. OAA lowered nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratios and CCL11 mRNA. Hippocampal vascular endothelial
growth factor mRNA, doublecortin mRNA, doublecortin protein,
doublecortin-positive neuron counts and neurite length increased in OAA-treated
mice. (1)H-MRS showed OAA increased brain lactate, GABA and glutathione thereby
demonstrating metabolic changes are detectable in vivo. In mice, OAA promotes
brain mitochondrial biogenesis, activates the insulin signaling pathway, reduces 
neuroinflammation and activates hippocampal neurogenesis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4271074
PMID: 25027327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. FASEB J. 2014 Oct;28(10):4408-19. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-253971. Epub 2014 Jul 8.

Adipose tissue mitochondrial dysfunction triggers a lipodystrophic syndrome with 
insulin resistance, hepatosteatosis, and cardiovascular complications.

Vernochet C(1), Damilano F(2), Mourier A(3), Bezy O(1), Mori MA(1), Smyth G(1),
Rosenzweig A(2), Larsson NG(3), Kahn CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; (2)Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; and. (3)Department
of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne,
Germany. (4)Section on Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes
Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA; c.ronald.kahn@joslin.harvard.edu.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in adipose tissue occurs in obesity, type 2 diabetes,
and some forms of lipodystrophy, but whether this dysfunction contributes to or
is the result of these disorders is unknown. To investigate the physiological
consequences of severe mitochondrial impairment in adipose tissue, we generated
mice deficient in mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in adipocytes by
using mice carrying adiponectin-Cre and TFAM floxed alleles. These adiponectin
TFAM-knockout (adipo-TFAM-KO) mice had a 75-81% reduction in TFAM in the
subcutaneous and intra-abdominal white adipose tissue (WAT) and interscapular
brown adipose tissue (BAT), causing decreased expression and enzymatic activity
of proteins in complexes I, III, and IV of the electron transport chain (ETC).
This mitochondrial dysfunction led to adipocyte death and inflammation in WAT and
a whitening of BAT. As a result, adipo-TFAM-KO mice were resistant to weight
gain, but exhibited insulin resistance on both normal chow and high-fat diets.
These lipodystrophic mice also developed hypertension, cardiac hypertrophy, and
cardiac dysfunction. Thus, isolated mitochondrial dysfunction in adipose tissue
can lead a syndrome of lipodystrophy with metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular
complications.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4202105
PMID: 25005176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Sep;74:129-44. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.06.023. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Insulin and IGF-1 improve mitochondrial function in a PI-3K/Akt-dependent manner 
and reduce mitochondrial generation of reactive oxygen species in Huntington's
disease knock-in striatal cells.

Ribeiro M(1), Rosenstock TR(1), Oliveira AM(1), Oliveira CR(2), Rego AC(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-504 
Coimbra, Portugal. (2)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of
Coimbra, 3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, 
3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal. (3)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology,
University of Coimbra, 3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal; Faculty of Medicine,
University of Coimbra, 3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal. Electronic address:
a.cristina.rego@gmail.com.

Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction have been described in
Huntington's disease, a disorder caused by expression of mutant huntingtin
(mHtt). IGF-1 was previously shown to protect HD cells, whereas insulin prevented
neuronal oxidative stress. In this work we analyzed the role of insulin and IGF-1
in striatal cells derived from HD knock-in mice on mitochondrial production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and related antioxidant and signaling pathways
influencing mitochondrial function. Insulin and IGF-1 decreased mitochondrial ROS
induced by mHtt and normalized mitochondrial SOD activity, without affecting
intracellular glutathione levels. IGF-1 and insulin promoted Akt phosphorylation 
without changing the nuclear levels of phosphorylated Nrf2 or Nrf2/ARE activity. 
Insulin and IGF-1 treatment also decreased mitochondrial Drp1 phosphorylation,
suggesting reduced mitochondrial fragmentation, and ameliorated mitochondrial
function in HD cells in a PI-3K/Akt-dependent manner. This was accompanied by
increased total and phosphorylated Akt, Tfam, and mitochondrial-encoded
cytochrome c oxidase II, as well as Tom20 and Tom40 in mitochondria of insulin-
and IGF-1-treated mutant striatal cells. Concomitantly, insulin/IGF-1-treated
mutant cells showed reduced apoptotic features. Hence, insulin and IGF-1 improve 
mitochondrial function and reduce mitochondrial ROS caused by mHtt by activating 
the PI-3K/Akt signaling pathway, in a process independent of Nrf2 transcriptional
activity, but involving enhanced mitochondrial levels of Akt and
mitochondrial-encoded complex IV subunit.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24992836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Sci Rep. 2014 Jul 3;4:5555. doi: 10.1038/srep05555.

Protective effect of Dl-3n-butylphthalide on learning and memory impairment
induced by chronic intermittent hypoxia-hypercapnia exposure.

Min JJ(1), Huo XL(2), Xiang LY(3), Qin YQ(3), Chai KQ(3), Wu B(4), Jin L(3), Wang
XT(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Center of Neurology and Rehabilitation, The Second Affiliated Hospital 
of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China [2] The First People's
Hospital of Huzhou, Huzhou 313000, China [3]. (2)1] The Center of Neurology and
Rehabilitation, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University,
Wenzhou 325027, China [2]. (3)The Center of Neurology and Rehabilitation, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China. 
(4)Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou 325027, China.

Cognitive impairment is a common finding in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), but little attention has been focused on therapeutic
intervention for this complication. Chronic intermittent hypoxia hypercapnia
(CIHH) exposure is considered to be responsible for the pathogenesis of COPD.
Dl-3n-Butylphthalide (NBP), extracted from Apium graveolens Linn, has displayed a
broad spectrum of neuroprotective properties. Our study aimed to investigate the 
potential of NBP on CIHH-induced cognitive deficits. The cognitive function of
rats after CIHH exposure was evaluated by the Morris water maze, which showed
that the NBP treated group performed better in the navigation test. NBP activated
BDNF and phosphorylated CREB, the both are responsible for neuroprotection.
Additionally, NBP decreased CIHH induced apoptosis. Moreover, NBP further induced
the expression of HIF-1a, accompanied by the up-regulation of the autophagy
proteins Bnip3, Beclin-1 and LC3-II. Finally, NBP also reversed the decreased
expression of SIRT1 and PGC-1a, but the expression of Tfam, Cox II and mtDNA
remained unchanged. These results suggested that the neuroprotective effects of
NBP under CIHH condition possibly occurred through the inhibition of apoptosis,
promotion of hypoxia-induced autophagy, and activation of the SIRT1/PGC-1a
signalling pathway, while stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis may not be a
characteristic response.

PMCID: PMC4080197
PMID: 24990154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 2;9(7):e100530. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100530. eCollection
2014.

Transcutaneous carbon dioxide induces mitochondrial apoptosis and suppresses
metastasis of oral squamous cell carcinoma in vivo.

Takeda D(1), Hasegawa T(1), Ueha T(2), Imai Y(1), Sakakibara A(1), Minoda M(3),
Kawamoto T(3), Minamikawa T(1), Shibuya Y(1), Akisue T(3), Sakai Y(4), Kurosaka
M(3), Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. (2)NeoChemir, Kobe, Japan. (3)Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan. (4)Division of
Rehabilitation Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.

Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the main histological type of oral cancer. Its
growth rate and incidence of metastasis to regional lymph nodes is influenced by 
various factors, including hypoxic conditions. We have previously reported that
transcutaneous CO2 induces mitochondrial apoptosis and decreases lung metastasis 
by reoxygenating sarcoma cells. However, previous studies have not determined the
sequential mechanism by which transcutaneous CO2 suppresses growth of epithelial 
tumors, including SCCs. Moreover, there is no report that transcutaneous CO2
suppresses lymphogenous metastasis using human cell lines xenografts. In this
study, we examined the effects of transcutaneous CO2 on cancer apoptosis and
lymphogenous metastasis using human SCC xenografts. Our results showed that
transcutaneous CO2 affects expressions of PGC-1a and TFAM and protein levels of
cleavage products of caspase-3, caspase-9 and PARP, which relatives mitochondrial
apoptosis. They also showed that transcutaneous CO2 significantly inhibits SCC
tumor growth and affects expressions of HIF-1a, VEGF, MMP-2 and MMP-9, which play
essential roles in tumor angiogenesis, invasion and metastasis. In conclusion,
transcutaneous CO2 suppressed tumor growth, increased mitochondrial apoptosis and
decreased the number of lymph node metastasis in human SCC by decreasing
intra-tumoral hypoxia and suppressing metastatic potential with no observable
effect in vivo. Our findings indicate that transcutaneous CO2 could be a novel
therapeutic tool for treating human SCC.

PMCID: PMC4079455
PMID: 24988190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Rep. 2014 Jul 10;8(1):66-74. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.05.046. Epub 2014
Jun 26.

In vitro-reconstituted nucleoids can block mitochondrial DNA replication and
transcription.

Farge G(1), Mehmedovic M(2), Baclayon M(1), van den Wildenberg SM(3), Roos WH(1),
Gustafsson CM(2), Wuite GJ(4), Falkenberg M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy and LaserLaB, VU University, De Boelelaan 
1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg, P.O. Box 440, SE-405 30 Gothenburg,
Sweden. (3)Institut Langevin, ESPCI ParisTech, 1, rue Jussieu, 75238 Paris Cedex 
05, France. (4)Department of Physics and Astronomy and LaserLaB, VU University,
De Boelelaan 1081, 1081 HV Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
g.j.l.wuite@vu.nl. (5)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
University of Gothenburg, P.O. Box 440, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden. Electronic 
address: maria.falkenberg@medkem.gu.se.

The mechanisms regulating the number of active copies of mtDNA are still unclear.
A mammalian cell typically contains 1,000-10,000 copies of mtDNA, which are
packaged into nucleoprotein complexes termed nucleoids. The main protein
component of these structures is mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM).
Here, we reconstitute nucleoid-like particles in vitro and demonstrate that small
changes in TFAM levels dramatically impact the fraction of DNA molecules
available for transcription and DNA replication. Compaction by TFAM is highly
cooperative, and at physiological ratios of TFAM to DNA, there are large
variations in compaction, from fully compacted nucleoids to naked DNA. In
compacted nucleoids, TFAM forms stable protein filaments on DNA that block
melting and prevent progression of the replication and transcription machineries.
Based on our observations, we suggest that small variations in the TFAM-to-mtDNA 
ratio may be used to regulate mitochondrial gene transcription and DNA
replication.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24981867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Eukaryot Cell. 2014 Sep;13(9):1143-57. doi: 10.1128/EC.00092-14. Epub 2014 Jun
27.

The strictly aerobic yeast Yarrowia lipolytica tolerates loss of a mitochondrial 
DNA-packaging protein.

Bakkaiova J(1), Arata K(2), Matsunobu M(2), Ono B(2), Aoki T(2), Lajdova D(1),
Nebohacova M(1), Nosek J(1), Miyakawa I(2), Tomaska L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences,
Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovak Republic. (2)Department of Biology,
Faculty of Science, Yamaguchi University, Yamaguchi, Japan. (3)Departments of
Genetics and Biochemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University,
Bratislava, Slovak Republic tomaska@fns.uniba.sk.

Erratum in
    Eukaryot Cell. 2015 Jan;14(1):113.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly compacted into DNA-protein structures termed 
mitochondrial nucleoids (mt-nucleoids). The key mt-nucleoid components
responsible for mtDNA condensation are HMG box-containing proteins such as
mammalian mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and Abf2p of the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. To gain insight into the function and organization of
mt-nucleoids in strictly aerobic organisms, we initiated studies of these
DNA-protein structures in Yarrowia lipolytica. We identified a principal
component of mt-nucleoids in this yeast and termed it YlMhb1p (Y. lipolytica
mitochondrial HMG box-containing protein 1). YlMhb1p contains two putative HMG
boxes contributing both to DNA binding and to its ability to compact mtDNA in
vitro. Phenotypic analysis of a <U+0394>mhb1 strain lacking YlMhb1p resulted in three
interesting findings. First, although the mutant exhibits clear differences in
mt-nucleoids accompanied by a large decrease in the mtDNA copy number and the
number of mtDNA-derived transcripts, its respiratory characteristics and growth
under most of the conditions tested are indistinguishable from those of the
wild-type strain. Second, our results indicate that a potential imbalance between
subunits of the respiratory chain encoded separately by nuclear DNA and mtDNA is 
prevented at a (post)translational level. Third, we found that mtDNA in the <U+0394>mhb1
strain is more prone to mutations, indicating that mtHMG box-containing proteins 
protect the mitochondrial genome against mutagenic events.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187616
PMID: 24972935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Pflugers Arch. 2015 Apr;467(4):779-88. doi: 10.1007/s00424-014-1554-7. Epub 2014 
Jun 19.

Mitochondrial biogenesis-associated factors underlie the magnitude of response to
aerobic endurance training in rats.

Marton O(1), Koltai E, Takeda M, Koch LG, Britton SL, Davies KJ, Boldogh I, Radak
Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Sport Science, Faculty of Physical Education and Sport
Science, Semmelweis University, Alkotas u. 44.TF, Budapest, Hungary.

Trainability is important in elite sport and in recreational physical activity,
and the wide range for response to training is largely dependent on genotype. In 
this study, we compare a newly developed rat model system selectively bred for
low and high gain in running distance from aerobic training to test whether
genetic segregation for trainability associates with differences in factors
associated with mitochondrial biogenesis. Low response trainer (LRT) and high
response trainer (HRT) rats from generation 11 of artificial selection were
trained five times a week, 30 min per day for 3 months at 70 % VO2max to study
the mitochondrial molecular background of trainability. As expected, we found
significant differential for the gain in running distance between LRT and HRT
groups as a result of training. However, the changes in VO2max, COX-4, redox
homeostasis associated markers (reactive oxygen species (ROS)), silent
mating-type information regulation 2 homolog (SIRT1), NAD(+)/NADH ratio,
proteasome (R2 subunit), and mitochondrial network related proteins such as
mitochondrial fission protein 1 (Fis1) and mitochondrial fusion protein (Mfn1)
suggest that these markers are not strongly involved in the differences in
trainability between LRT and HRT. On the other hand, according to our results, we
discovered that differences in basal activity of AMP-activated protein kinase
alpha (AMPKa) and differential changes in aerobic exercise-induced responses of
citrate synthase, carbonylated protein, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1a (PGC1-a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1),
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and Lon protease limit trainability 
between these selected lines. From this, we conclude that mitochondrial
biogenesis-associated factors adapt differently to aerobic exercise training in
training sensitive and training resistant rats.

PMCID: PMC4272336
PMID: 24943897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):604-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.06.022. Epub 2014 Jun 12.

14,15-EET promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and protects cortical neurons against
oxygen/glucose deprivation-induced apoptosis.

Wang L(1), Chen M(1), Yuan L(1), Xiang Y(1), Zheng R(2), Zhu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China. (2)Department 
of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing, China. Electronic address:
rmzheng@pku.edu.cn. (3)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of
Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China. 
Electronic address: sgzhu@bjmu.edu.cn.

14,15-Epoxyeicosatrienoic acid (14,15-EET), a metabolite of arachidonic acid, is 
enriched in the brain cortex and exerts protective effect against neuronal
apoptosis induced by ischemia/reperfusion. Although apoptosis has been well
recognized to be closely associated with mitochondrial biogenesis and function,
it is still unclear whether the neuroprotective effect of 14,15-EET is mediated
by promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis and function in cortical neurons under
the condition of oxygen-glucose deprivation (OGD). In this study, we found that
14,15-EET improved cell viability and inhibited apoptosis of cortical neurons.
14,15-EET significantly increased the mitochondrial mass and the ratio of
mitochondrial DNA to nuclear DNA. Key makers of mitochondrial biogenesis,
peroxisome proliferator activator receptor gamma-coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1a),
nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), were elevated at both mRNA and protein levels in the cortical neurons
treated with 14,15-EET. Moreover, 14,15-EET markedly attenuated the decline of
mitochondrial membrane potential, reduced ROS, while increased ATP synthesis.
Knockdown of cAMP-response element binding protein (CREB) by siRNA blunted the
up-regulation of PGC-1a and NRF-1 stimulated by 14,15-EET, and consequently
abolished the neuroprotective effect of 14,15-EET. Our results indicate that
14,15-EET protects neurons from OGD-induced apoptosis by promoting mitochondrial 
biogenesis and function through CREB mediated activation of PGC-1a and NRF-1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24931672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1842(9):1556-66. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.025. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Early alterations in energy metabolism in the hippocampus of APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse 
model of Alzheimer's disease.

Pedrós I(1), Petrov D(2), Allgaier M(2), Sureda F(1), Barroso E(3), Beas-Zarate
C(4), Auladell C(5), Pallàs M(2), Vázquez-Carrera M(3), Casadesús G(6), Folch
J(1), Camins A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Unitats de Bioquímica i Farmacologia, Facultat de Medicina i Ciències de la
Salut, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Reus, Tarragona, Spain; Centros de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED),
Spain; Laboratorio de Regeneración y Desarrollo Neural, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, CUCBA, Mexico.
(2)Unitat de Farmacologia i Farmacognòsia, Facultat de Farmàcia, Institut de
Biomedicina de la UB (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centros 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Spain; Laboratorio de Regeneración y Desarrollo Neural, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, CUCBA, Mexico.
(3)Unitat de Farmacologia i Farmacognòsia, Facultat de Farmàcia, Institut de
Biomedicina de la UB (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Centros 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas
Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Spain; Laboratorio de Regeneración y Desarrollo Neural,
Instituto de Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, CUCBA, 
Mexico. (4)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University,
Cleveland OH USA; Laboratorio de Neurobiología Celular y Molecular, División de
Neurociencias, CIBO, IMSS, Mexico; Laboratorio de Regeneración y Desarrollo
Neural, Instituto de Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular,
CUCBA, Mexico. (5)Departament de Biologia Cellular, Facultat de Biologia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Laboratorio de Regeneración y
Desarrollo Neural, Instituto de Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y
Molecular, CUCBA, Mexico. (6)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland OH USA; Laboratorio de Regeneración y Desarrollo Neural,
Instituto de Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, CUCBA, 
Mexico. (7)Unitat de Farmacologia i Farmacognòsia, Facultat de Farmàcia, Institut
de Biomedicina de la UB (IBUB), Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain;
Centros de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Spain; Laboratorio de Regeneración y Desarrollo Neural, Instituto de 
Neurobiología, Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, CUCBA, Mexico.
Electronic address: camins@ub.edu.

The present study had focused on the behavioral phenotype and gene expression
profile of molecules related to insulin receptor signaling in the hippocampus of 
3 and 6 month-old APPswe/PS1dE9 (APP/PS1) transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's
disease (AD). Elevated levels of the insoluble Aß (1-42) were detected in the
brain extracts of the transgenic animals as early as 3 months of age, prior to
the Aß plaque formation (pre-plaque stage). By the early plaque stage (6 months) 
both the soluble and insoluble Aß (1-40) and Aß (1-42) peptides were detectable. 
We studied the expression of genes related to memory function (Arc, Fos), insulin
signaling, including insulin receptor (Insr), Irs1 and Irs2, as well as genes
involved in insulin growth factor pathways, such as Igf1, Igf2, Igfr and Igfbp2. 
We also examined the expression and protein levels of key molecules related to
energy metabolism (PGC1-a, and AMPK) and mitochondrial functionality (OXPHOS,
TFAM, NRF1 and NRF2). 6 month-old APP/PS1 mice demonstrated impaired cognitive
ability, were glucose intolerant and showed a significant reduction in
hippocampal Insr and Irs2 transcripts. Further observations also suggest
alterations in key cellular energy sensors that regulate the activities of a
number of metabolic enzymes through phosphorylation, such as a decrease in the
Prkaa2 mRNA levels and in the pAMPK (Thr172)/Total APMK ratio. Moreover, mRNA and
protein analysis reveals a significant downregulation of genes essential for
mitochondrial replication and respiratory function, including PGC-1a in
hippocampal extracts of APP/PS1 mice, compared to age-matched wild-type controls 
at 3 and 6 months of age. Overall, the findings of this study show early
alterations in genes involved in insulin and energy metabolism pathways in an
APP/PS1 model of AD. These changes affect the activity of key molecules like NRF1
and PGC-1a, which are involved in mitochondrial biogenesis. Our results reinforce
the hypothesis that the impairments in both insulin signaling and energy
metabolism precede the development of AD amyloidogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24887203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Eukaryot Cell. 2014 Jul;13(7):919-32. doi: 10.1128/EC.00260-13. Epub 2014 May 30.

TbKAP6, a mitochondrial HMG box-containing protein in Trypanosoma brucei, is the 
first trypanosomatid kinetoplast-associated protein essential for kinetoplast DNA
replication and maintenance.

Wang J(1), Pappas-Brown V(2), Englund PT(3), Jensen RE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA jwang117@jhu.edu. (2)Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins Medical
School, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns
Hopkins Medical School, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Kinetoplast DNA (kDNA), the mitochondrial genome of trypanosomatids, is a giant
planar network of catenated minicircles and maxicircles. In vivo kDNA is
organized as a highly condensed nucleoprotein disk. So far, in Trypanosoma
brucei, proteins involved in the maintenance of the kDNA condensed structure
remain poorly characterized. In Crithidia fasciculata, some small basic histone
H1-like kinetoplast-associated proteins (CfKAP) have been shown to condense
isolated kDNA networks in vitro. High-mobility group (HMG) box-containing
proteins, such as mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in mammalian cells 
and Abf2 in the budding yeast, have been shown essential for the packaging of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) into mitochondrial nucleoids, remodeling of
mitochondrial nucleoids, gene expression, and maintenance of mtDNA. Here, we
report that TbKAP6, a mitochondrial HMG box-containing protein, is essential for 
parasite cell viability and involved in kDNA replication and maintenance. The RNA
interference (RNAi) depletion of TbKAP6 stopped cell growth. Replication of both 
minicircles and maxicircles was inhibited. RNAi or overexpression of TbKAP6
resulted in the disorganization, shrinkage, and loss of kDNA. Minicircle release,
the first step in kDNA replication, was inhibited immediately after induction of 
RNAi, but it quickly increased 3-fold upon overexpression of TbKAP6. Since the
release of covalently closed minicircles is mediated by a type II topoisomerase
(topo II), we examined the potential interactions between TbKAP6 and topo II.
Recombinant TbKAP6 (rTbKAP6) promotes the topo II-mediated decatenation of kDNA. 
rTbKAP6 can condense isolated kDNA networks in vitro. These results indicate that
TbKAP6 is involved in the replication and maintenance of kDNA.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135736
PMID: 24879122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:632986. doi: 10.1155/2014/632986. Epub 2014 May 4.

Impairment of electron transfer chain induced by acute carnosine administration
in skeletal muscle of young rats.

Macarini JR(1), Maravai SG(1), Cararo JH(1), Dimer NW(1), Gonçalves CL(2), Kist
LW(3), Bogo MR(3), Schuck PF(1), Streck EL(4), Ferreira GC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Erros Inatos do Metabolismo, Programa de Pós-Graduação em
Ciências da Saúde, Unidade Acadêmica de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade do
Extremo Sul Catarinense, 88801-600 Criciúma, SC, Brazil. (2)Laboratório de
Bioenergética, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Unidade Acadêmica 
de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade do Extremo Sul Catarinense, 88806-000
Criciúma, SC, Brazil. (3)Laboratório de Biologia Genômica e Molecular, Faculdade 
de Biociências, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, 90619-900 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil ; Programa de Pós-Graduação em Medicina e Ciências da
Saúde, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, 90619-900 Porto
Alegre, RS, Brazil ; Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia Translacional em 
Medicina (INCT-TM), 90035-003 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (4)Laboratório de
Bioenergética, Programa de Pós-Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Unidade Acadêmica 
de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade do Extremo Sul Catarinense, 88806-000
Criciúma, SC, Brazil ; Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia Translacional
em Medicina (INCT-TM), 90035-003 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. (5)Laboratório de
Neuroquímica, Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do
Rio de Janeiro, Avenida Carlos Chagas Filho 373, Cidade Universitária, Ilha do
Fundão, 21941-902 Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.

Serum carnosinase deficiency is an inherited disorder that leads to an
accumulation of carnosine in the brain tissue, cerebrospinal fluid, skeletal
muscle, and other tissues of affected patients. Considering that high levels of
carnosine are associated with neurological dysfunction and that the
pathophysiological mechanisms involved in serum carnosinase deficiency remain
poorly understood, we investigated the in vivo effects of carnosine on
bioenergetics parameters, namely, respiratory chain complexes (I-III, II, and
II-III), malate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase, and creatine kinase
activities and the expression of mitochondrial-specific transcription factors
(NRF-1, PGC-1a , and TFAM) in skeletal muscle of young Wistar rats. We observed a
significant decrease of complexes I-III and II activities in animals receiving
carnosine acutely, as compared to control group. However, no significant
alterations in respiratory chain complexes, citric acid cycle enzymes, and
creatine kinase activities were found between rats receiving carnosine
chronically and control group animals. As compared to control group, mRNA levels 
of NRF-1, PGC-1a , and TFAM were unchanged. The present findings indicate that
electron transfer through the respiratory chain is impaired in skeletal muscle of
rats receiving carnosine acutely. In case these findings are confirmed by further
studies and ATP depletion is also observed, impairment of bioenergetics could be 
considered a putative mechanism responsible for the muscle damage observed in
serum carnosinase-deficient patients.

PMCID: PMC4024420
PMID: 24877122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jul 18;450(1):166-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.05.082. Epub 2014 May 26.

Negative transcriptional regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) by nuclear TFAM.

Lee EJ(1), Kang YC(1), Park WH(1), Jeong JH(1), Pak YK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Department of Physiology, College of Medicine,
Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-731, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Neuroscience, Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-731, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
ykpak@khu.ac.kr.

The nuclear DNA-encoded mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is
synthesized in cytoplasm and transported into mitochondria. TFAM enhances both
transcription and replication of mitochondrial DNA. It is unclear, however,
whether TFAM plays a role in regulating nuclear gene expression. Here, we
demonstrated that TFAM was localized to the nucleus and mitochondria by
immunostaining, subcellular fractionation, and TFAM-green fluorescent protein
hybrid protein studies. In HT22 hippocampal neuronal cells, human TFAM (hTFAM)
overexpression suppressed human Tfam promoter-mediated luciferase activity in a
dose-dependent manner. The mitochondria targeting sequence-deficient hTFAM also
repressed Tfam promoter activity to the same degree as hTFAM. It indicated that
nuclear hTFAM suppressed Tfam expression without modulating mitochondrial
activity. The repression required for nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), but
hTFAM did not bind to the NRF-1 binding site of its promoter. TFAM was
co-immunoprecipitated with NRF-1. Taken together, we suggest that nuclear TFAM
down-regulate its own gene expression as a NRF-1 repressor, showing that TFAM may
play different roles depending on its subcellular localizations.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24875355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014;2014:904834. doi: 10.1155/2014/904834. Epub 2014 Apr
24.

Salidroside stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis and protects against H2O2-induced
endothelial dysfunction.

Xing S(1), Yang X(1), Li W(1), Bian F(1), Wu D(1), Chi J(1), Xu G(1), Zhang Y(1),
Jin S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China ; The Key Laboratory of Drug Target
Research and Pharmacodynamic Evaluation of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430030, China.

Salidroside (SAL) is an active component of Rhodiola rosea with documented
antioxidative properties. The purpose of this study is to explore the mechanism
of the protective effect of SAL on hydrogen peroxide- (H2O2-) induced endothelial
dysfunction. Pretreatment of the human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) 
with SAL significantly reduced the cytotoxicity brought by H2O2. Functional
studies on the rat aortas found that SAL rescued the endothelium-dependent
relaxation and reduced superoxide anion (O2(·-)) production induced by H2O2.
Meanwhile, SAL pretreatment inhibited H2O2-induced nitric oxide (NO) production. 
The underlying mechanisms involve the inhibition of H2O2-induced activation of
endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), and Akt, as well as the redox sensitive transcription
factor, NF-kappa B (NF- <U+03BA> B). SAL also increased mitochondrial mass and
upregulated the mitochondrial biogenesis factors, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma-coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1 a ), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in the endothelial cells.
H2O2-induced mitochondrial dysfunction, as demonstrated by reduced mitochondrial 
membrane potential (<U+0394> <U+03C8> m) and ATP production, was rescued by SAL pretreatment.
Taken together, these findings implicate that SAL could protect endothelium
against H2O2-induced injury via promoting mitochondrial biogenesis and function, 
thus preventing the overactivation of oxidative stress-related downstream
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4020198
PMID: 24868319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2014 Jul 5;369(1646):20130442. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2013.0442.

Quality matters: how does mitochondrial network dynamics and quality control
impact on mtDNA integrity?

Busch KB(1), Kowald A(2), Spelbrink JN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mitochondrial Dynamics, School of Biology and Chemistry,
University of Osnabrück, 49069 Osnabrück, Germany. (2)Centre for Integrated
Systems Biology of Ageing and Nutrition, Institute for Ageing and Health,
Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4
5PL, UK. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Centre for Mitochondrial
Disorders, Radboud University Medical Centre, Geert Grooteplein 10, PO Box 9101, 
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands FinMIT Centre of Excellence, Institute of
Biomedical Technology and Tampere University Hospital, Pirkanmaa Hospital
District, 33014 Tampere, Finland hans.spelbrink@radboudumc.nl.

Mammalian mtDNA encodes for 13 core proteins of oxidative phosphorylation.
Mitochondrial DNA mutations and deletions cause severe myopathies and
neuromuscular diseases. Thus, the integrity of mtDNA is pivotal for cell survival
and health of the organism. We here discuss the possible impact of mitochondrial 
fusion and fission on mtDNA maintenance as well as positive and negative
selection processes. Our focus is centred on the important question of how the
quality of mtDNA nucleoids can be assured when selection and mitochondrial
quality control works on functional and physiological phenotypes constituted by
oxidative phosphorylation proteins. The organelle control theory suggests a link 
between phenotype and nucleoid genotype. This is discussed in the light of new
results presented here showing that mitochondrial transcription factor
A/nucleoids are restricted in their intramitochondrial mobility and probably have
a limited sphere of influence. Together with recent published work on
mitochondrial and mtDNA heteroplasmy dynamics, these data suggest first, that
single mitochondria might well be internally heterogeneous and second, that
nucleoid genotypes might be linked to local phenotypes (although the link might
often be leaky). We discuss how random or site-specific mitochondrial fission can
isolate dysfunctional parts and enable their elimination by mitophagy, stressing 
the importance of fission in the process of mtDNA quality control. The role of
fusion is more multifaceted and less understood in this context, but the mixing
and equilibration of matrix content might be one of its important functions.

© 2014 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4032518
PMID: 24864312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;42(1):301-12. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140237.

Modulation of the AMPK/Sirt1 axis during neuronal infection by herpes simplex
virus type 1.

Martin C(1), Leyton L(1), Arancibia Y(1), Cuevas A(1), Zambrano A(2), Concha
MI(2), Otth C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral 
de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. (2)Instituto de Bioquímica y Microbiología, Facultad
de Ciencias, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. (3)Instituto de
Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral de Chile,
Valdivia, Chile Centro de Investigación Sur-Austral en Enfermedades del Sistema
Nervioso (CISNe), Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile.

Currently, it is unclear whether a neuron that undergoes viral reactivation and
produces infectious particles survives and resumes latency or is killed, which is
intriguing even if still unanswered. Previous reports have shown that herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) inhibits apoptosis during early infection, but is
pro-apoptotic during productive infection. Taking in consideration that the
stress sensors AMPK and Sirt1 are involved in neuronal survival and
neuroprotection, we hypothesized that HSV-1 could activate the AMPK/Sirt1 axis as
a strategy to establish latency through inhibition of apoptosis and restoration
of the energy status. These effects could be accomplished through deacetylation
of pro-apoptotic protein p53 and regulation of the master regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis and function PGC-1a and its target gene TFAM.
Accordingly, we evaluated the AMPK/Sirt1 axis and its targets p53, PGC-1a, and
acetyl CoA carboxylase in mice neuronal cultures infected with HSV-1 by western
blot, RT-qPCR, and immunofluorescence analyses. Herein, we show that HSV-1
differentially modulates the AMPK/Sirt1 axis during the course of infection. In
fact, during early infection (2 hpi) activated AMPK (p-AMPK) was down-regulated, 
but thereafter recovered gradually. In contrast, the levels of acetylated-p53
increased during the first hours post infection, but afterwards were reduced in
parallel with the activation of Sirt1. However, acetylated-p53 peaked again at 18
hpi during productive infection, suggesting an activation of apoptosis.
Strikingly, acetylated-p53, Sirt1, and p-AMPK apparently translocate from the
nucleus to the cytoplasm after 4 hpi, where they accumulate in discrete foci in
the perinuclear region. These results suggest that HSV-1 modulates the AMPK/Sirt1
axis differentially during the course of infection interfering with pro-apoptotic
signaling and regulating mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 24858404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Aug 15;737:117-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.05.017. Epub 
2014 May 22.

Cardioprotection against doxorubicin by metallothionein Is associated with
preservation of mitochondrial biogenesis involving PGC-1a pathway.

Guo J(1), Guo Q(1), Fang H(1), Lei L(1), Zhang T(1), Zhao J(1), Peng S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Evaluation and Research Centre for Toxicology, Institute of Disease Control
and Prevention, the Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China.
(2)Evaluation and Research Centre for Toxicology, Institute of Disease Control
and Prevention, the Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing, PR China.
Electronic address: pengsq@hotmail.com.

Metallothionein (MT) has been shown to inhibit cardiac oxidative stress and
protect against the cardiotoxicity induced by doxorubicin (DOX), a potent and
widely used chemotherapeutic agent. However, the mechanism of MT<U+05F3>s protective
action against DOX still remains obscure. Mitochondrial biogenesis impairment has
been implicated to play an important role in the etiology and progression of
DOX-induced cardiotoxicity. Increasing evidence indicates an intimate link
between MT-mediated cardioprotection and mitochondrial biogenesis. This study was
aimed to explore the possible contribution of mitochondrial biogenesis in MT<U+05F3>s
cardioprotective action against DOX. Adult male MT-I/II-null (MT(-/-)) and
wild-type (MT(+/+)) mice were given a single dose of DOX intraperitoneally. Our
results revealed that MT deficiency significantly sensitized mice to DOX-induced 
cardiac dysfunction, ultrastructural alterations, and mortality. DOX disrupted
cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis indicated by mitochondrial DNA copy number and
decreased mitochondrial number, and these effects were greater in MT(-/-) mice.
Basal MT effectively protected against DOX-induced inhibition on the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), a key regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis, and its downstream factors including mitochondrial
transcription factor A. Moreover, MT was found to preserve the protein expression
of manganese superoxide dismutase, a transcriptional target of PGC-1a. in vitro
study showed that MT absence augmented DOX-induced increase of mitochondrial
superoxide production in primary cultured cardiomyocytes. These findings suggest 
that MT<U+05F3>s cardioprotection against DOX is mediated, at least in part, by
preservation of mitochondrial biogenesis involving PGC-1a pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24858368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Sep;1842(9):1313-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.05.007. Epub 2014 May 16.

Deterioration of plasticity and metabolic homeostasis in the brain of the
UCD-T2DM rat model of naturally occurring type-2 diabetes.

Agrawal R(1), Zhuang Y(2), Cummings BP(3), Stanhope KL(3), Graham JL(3), Havel
PJ(3), Gomez-Pinilla F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, UCLA Brain Injury Research
Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biosciences, School of
Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis, CA, USA; Department of
Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA, USA. (4)Department of Integrative
Biology & Physiology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA; Department 
of Neurosurgery, UCLA Brain Injury Research Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Electronic address: fgomezpi@mednet.ucla.edu.

The rising prevalence of type-2 diabetes is becoming a pressing issue based on
emerging reports that T2DM can also adversely impact mental health. We have
utilized the UCD-T2DM rat model in which the onset of T2DM develops spontaneously
across time and can serve to understand the pathophysiology of diabetes in
humans. An increased insulin resistance index and plasma glucose levels
manifested the onset of T2DM. There was a decrease in hippocampal insulin
receptor signaling in the hippocampus, which correlated with peripheral insulin
resistance index along the course of diabetes onset (r=-0.56, p<0.01). T2DM
increased the hippocampal levels of 4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE; a marker of lipid
peroxidation) in inverse proportion to the changes in the mitochondrial regulator
PGC-1a. Disrupted energy homeostasis was further manifested by a concurrent
reduction in energy metabolic markers, including TFAM, SIRT1, and AMPK
phosphorylation. In addition, T2DM influenced brain plasticity as evidenced by a 
significant reduction of BDNF-TrkB signaling. These results suggest that the
pathology of T2DM in the brain involves a progressive and coordinated disruption 
of insulin signaling, and energy homeostasis, with profound consequences for
brain function and plasticity. All the described consequences of T2DM were
attenuated by treatment with the glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist,
liraglutide. Similar results to those of liraglutide were obtained by exposing
T2DM rats to a food energy restricted diet, which suggest that normalization of
brain energy metabolism is a crucial factor to counteract central insulin
sensitivity and synaptic plasticity associated with T2DM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4372388
PMID: 24840661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2014 Jul-Aug;10(4):671-8. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2013.12.019. 
Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Altered promoter methylation of PDK4, IL1 B, IL6, and TNF after Roux-en Y gastric
bypass.

Kirchner H(1), Nylen C(1), Laber S(1), Barrès R(2), Yan J(1), Krook A(3), Zierath
JR(4), Näslund E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (2)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. (3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic
Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Division of Surgery, Department of Clinical
Sciences, Danderyd Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden. Electronic address:
Erik.Naslund@ki.se.

Erratum in
    Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2015 May-Jun;11(3):735.

BACKGROUND: Early benefits of Roux-en Y gastric bypass (RYGB) are partly mediated
by the caloric restriction that patients undergo before and acutely after the
procedure. Altered DNA methylation occurs in metabolic diseases including
obesity, as well as in skeletal, muscle eight months after RYGB. The objective of
this study was to test whether promoter methylation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PPARGC1 A), pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase isozyme-4 (PDK4), transcription factor A (TFAM),
interleukin-1 beta (IL1 B), interleukin-6 (IL6) and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF)
is altered in blood after a very low calorie diet (VLCD) or RYGB.
METHODS: Obese nondiabetic patients (n = 18, body mass index [BMI] 42.3 ± 4.9
kg/m(2)) underwent a 14-day VLCD followed by RYGB. Nonobese patients (n = 6, BMI 
25.7 ± 2.1 kg/m(2)) undergoing elective cholecystectomy served as controls. DNA
methylation of selected promoter regions was measured in whole blood before and
after VLCD. A subgroup of seven patients was studied 1-2 days and 12 ± 3 months
after RYGB. Promoter methylation was measured using methylated DNA capture and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
RESULTS: VLCD decreased promoter methylation of PPARGC1 A. Methylation of PPARGC1
A, TFAM, IL1 B, IL6, and TNF promoters was changed two days after RYGB. Similar
changes were also seen on day one after cholecystectomy. Moreover, methylation
increased in PDK4, IL1 B, IL6, and TNF promoters 12 months after RYGB.
CONCLUSION: RYGB induced more profound epigenetic changes than VLCD in promoters 
of the tested genes in whole blood. Changes in DNA methylation may contribute to 
the improved overall metabolic health after RYGB.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Bariatric Surgery. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24837562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Chin Med J (Engl). 2014;127(10):1837-42.

Mitochondrial biogenesis of astrocytes is increased under experimental septic
conditions.

Wang Y(1), Chen Z(1), Zhang Y(1), Fang S(1), Zeng Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510280, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Zhujiang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510280, China. Email:
ZQY_88@163.com).

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial dysfunction has been reported to be one of the
contributing factors of sepsis-associated encephalopathy (SAE). Mitochondrial
biogenesis controls mitochondrial homeostasis and responds to changes in cellular
energy demand. In addition, it is enhanced or decreased due to mitochondrial
dysfunction during SAE. The aim of this study was to explore the changes of
mitochondrial biogenesis of astrocytes under septic conditions.
METHODS: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 50 ng/ml) and interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>; 200 U/ml)
were incubated with astrocytes to model the effects of a septic insult on
astrocytes in vitro. The mitochondrial ultrastructure and volume density were
evaluated by transmission electron microscopy. Intracellular adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) levels were detected by the firefly luciferase system. The
expression of protein markers of mitochondrial biogenesis and the binding ability
of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) were determined by western blot
and electrophoretic mobility shift assays, respectively. The mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) content was detected by real-time polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The number of mildly damaged mitochondria was found to be significantly 
greater after treatment for 6 hours, as compared with at 0 hour (P < 0.05). The
mitochondrial volume density was significantly elevated at 24 hours, as compared 
with at 0 hour (P < 0.05). The ATP levels at 6 hours, 12 hours, and 24 hours were
significantly greater than those at 0 hour (P < 0.05). The protein markers of
mitochondrial biogenesis were significantly increased at 6 hours and 12 hours, as
compared with at 0 hour (P < 0.05). The TFAM binding activity was not
significantly changed among the four time points analyzed. The mtDNA contents
were significantly increased at 12 hours and 24 hours, as compared with at 0 hour
(P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Under septic conditions, mitochondrial biogenesis of astrocytes
increased to meet the high-energy demand and to promote mitochondrial recovery.
Furthermore, the TFAM-DNA binding ability was not sensitive to sepsis-induced
injury.

PMID: 24824241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Hepatol. 2014 Oct;61(4):859-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.04.035. Epub 2014 May 
5.

CD147 promotes reprogramming of glucose metabolism and cell proliferation in HCC 
cells by inhibiting the p53-dependent signaling pathway.

Huang Q(1), Li J(1), Xing J(2), Li W(1), Li H(3), Ke X(3), Zhang J(4), Ren T(4), 
Shang Y(3), Yang H(5), Jiang J(6), Chen Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Cell Engineering Research Center &
Department of Cell Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032,
China; Experimental Teaching Center of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Cell 
Engineering Research Center & Department of Cell Biology, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, China; Experimental Teaching Center of Basic Medicine, 
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. Electronic address:
xingjl@fmmu.edu.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Cell Engineering
Research Center & Department of Cell Biology, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an 710032, China. (4)Experimental Teaching Center of Basic Medicine, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. (5)Division of Population
Science, Department of Medical Oncology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. (6)State Key Laboratory of Cancer
Biology, Cell Engineering Research Center & Department of Cell Biology, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China. Electronic address:
jiangjl@fmmu.edu.cn. (7)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Cell Engineering 
Research Center & Department of Cell Biology, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an 710032, China. Electronic address: zhinanchen@fmmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cancer cells exhibit the reprogrammed metabolism characterized
by high level of glycolysis even in the presence of oxygen. Aerobic glycolysis,
known as the Warburg effect, supplies cancer cells with the substrates required
for biomass generation. To date, several intracellular signaling mediators have
been identified in metabolic regulation of cancer cells. However, it remains
largely ambiguous how molecules on the cell surface are involved in regulation of
cancer metabolism.
METHODS: In the current study, we established several HCC cell lines differing in
their CD147 (a typical transmembrane glycoprotein) expression status by
zinc-finger nuclease and RNAi techniques. Then, we systematically investigated
the role of CD147 in the regulation of the Warburg effect in HCC cells and
explored the underlying mechanism.
RESULTS: We found that CD147 significantly contributed to the reprogramming of
glucose metabolism in HCC cells through a p53-dependent way. CD147 facilitated
the cell surface expression of MCT1 and lactate export, which led to activation
of the PI3K/Akt/MDM2 pathway and thus increased p53 degradation. The
gain/loss-of-function studies demonstrated that while CD147 promoted glycolysis, 
mediated by p53-dependent upregulation of GLUT1 and activation of PFKL, it
inhibited mitochondrial biogenesis and functions, mediated by p53-dependent
downregulation of PGC1a, TFAM, and p53R2. Additionally, proliferation of HCC
cells was suppressed by blocking CD147 and/or MCT1, which resulted in
down-regulation of glucose metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that CD147 is a crucial regulator of glucose
metabolism.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24801417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;53:9-14. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.03.030.
Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Delphinidin inhibits VEGF induced-mitochondrial biogenesis and Akt activation in 
endothelial cells.

Duluc L(1), Jacques C(2), Soleti R(3), Andriantsitohaina R(4), Simard G(5).

Author information: 
(1)LUNAM, Inserm U1063, F-49100 Angers, France; UFR Médecine, Université
d'Angers, rue haute de Reculée, F-49045 Angers, France. Electronic address:
l.duluc@imperial.ac.uk. (2)LUNAM, Inserm U1063, F-49100 Angers, France; UFR
Médecine, Université d'Angers, rue haute de Reculée, F-49045 Angers, France.
Electronic address: caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr. (3)LUNAM, Inserm U1063,
F-49100 Angers, France; UFR Médecine, Université d'Angers, rue haute de Reculée, 
F-49045 Angers, France. Electronic address: raffaella.soleti@univ-angers.fr.
(4)LUNAM, Inserm U1063, F-49100 Angers, France; UFR Médecine, Université
d'Angers, rue haute de Reculée, F-49045 Angers, France. Electronic address:
ramaroson.andriantsitohaina@univ-angers.fr. (5)LUNAM, Inserm U1063, F-49100
Angers, France; UFR Médecine, Université d'Angers, rue haute de Reculée, F-49045 
Angers, France; Laboratoire de Biochimie, IBS, PBH, CHU d'Angers, rue Larrey,
F-49033 Angers, France. Electronic address: gisimard@chu-angers.fr.

Delphinidin, an anthocyanin present in red wine, has been reported to exert
vasculoprotective properties on endothelial cells, including vasorelaxing and
anti-apoptotic effects. Moreover, delphinidin treatment in a rat model of
post-ischemic neovascularization has been described to exert anti-angiogenic
property. Angiogenesis is an energetic process and VEGF-induced angiogenesis is
associated with mitochondrial biogenesis. However, whether delphinidin induces
changes in mitochondrial biogenesis has never been addressed. Effects of
delphinidin were investigated in human endothelial cells at a concentration
described to be anti-angiogenic in vitro (10(-2)g/l). mRNA expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis factors, mitochondrial respiration, DNA content and
enzyme activities were assessed after 48 h of stimulation. Delphinidin increased 
mRNA expression of several mitochondrial biogenesis factors, including NRF1,
ERRa, Tfam, Tfb2m and PolG but did not affect neither mitochondrial respiration, 
DNA content nor enzyme activities. In presence of delphinidin, VEGF failed to
increase mitochondrial respiration, DNA content, complex IV activity and Akt
activation in endothelial cells. These results suggest a possible association
between inhibition of VEGF-induced mitochondrial biogenesis through Akt pathway
by delphinidin and its anti-angiogenic effect, providing a novel mechanism
sustaining the beneficial effect of delphinidin against pathologies associated
with excessive angiogenesis such as cancers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2014 May;170(5):390-400. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2014.03.005.
Epub 2014 May 1.

Perspectives of drug-based neuroprotection targeting mitochondria.

Procaccio V(1), Bris C(1), Chao de la Barca JM(1), Oca F(1), Chevrollier A(1),
Amati-Bonneau P(1), Bonneau D(1), Reynier P(2).

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS6214, Inserm1083 and department of biochemistry and genetics, CHU
d'Angers, 4, rue Larrey, 49933 Angers, France. (2)UMR CNRS6214, Inserm1083 and
department of biochemistry and genetics, CHU d'Angers, 4, rue Larrey, 49933
Angers, France. Electronic address: pareynier@chu-angers.fr.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been reported in most neurodegenerative diseases.
These anomalies include bioenergetic defect, respiratory chain-induced oxidative 
stress, defects of mitochondrial dynamics, increase sensitivity to apoptosis, and
accumulation of damaged mitochondria with instable mitochondrial DNA. Significant
progress has been made in our understanding of the pathophysiology of inherited
mitochondrial disorders but most have no effective therapies. The development of 
new metabolic treatments will be useful not only for rare mitochondrial disorders
but also for the wide spectrum of common age-related neurodegenerative diseases
shown to be associated with mitochondrial dysfunction. A better understanding of 
the mitochondrial regulating pathways raised several promising perspectives of
neuroprotection. This review focuses on the pharmacological approaches to
modulate mitochondrial biogenesis, the removal of damaged mitochondria through
mitophagy, scavenging free radicals and also dietary measures such as ketogenic
diet.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Neuroscience. 2014 Jun 20;271:56-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.04.027.
Epub 2014 Apr 26.

Effects of exercise on mitochondrial function, neuroplasticity and
anxio-depressive behavior of mice.

Aguiar AS Jr(1), Stragier E(2), da Luz Scheffer D(3), Remor AP(3), Oliveira
PA(4), Prediger RD(4), Latini A(3), Raisman-Vozari R(5), Mongeau R(2), Lanfumey
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, UFSC,
Centro de Ciências Biológicas, CCB, Florianópolis, SC 88049-900, Brazil;
Departamento de Farmacologia, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, UFSC,
Centro de Ciências Biológicas, CCB, Florianópolis, SC 88049-900, Brazil.
Electronic address: aderbalaguiar@gmail.com. (2)INSERM UMR 894, Centre de
Psychiatrie et Neurosciences, CPN, Paris 75634, France; Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, UPMC, Site Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris 75634, France. (3)Departamento
de Bioquímica, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, UFSC, Centro de Ciências
Biológicas, CCB, Florianópolis, SC 88049-900, Brazil. (4)Departamento de
Farmacologia, Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, UFSC, Centro de Ciências
Biológicas, CCB, Florianópolis, SC 88049-900, Brazil. (5)Université Pierre et
Marie Curie, UPMC, Site Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris 75634, France; INSERM UMR 975,
Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, CRICM,
Paris 75634, France.

The present study was aimed at analyzing the effects of physical exercise on
mitochondrial physiology, anxio-depressive-like behaviors and neuroplasticity in 
mice. Adult C57BL/6J male mice were isolated in home cages equipped or not with
free-running wheels. After 6weeks of exercise, mice were tested in various
behavioral paradigms to evaluate anxiety- and depressive-like behaviors. The
hippocampi were dissected for neurochemical assays, including mitochondrial
activity, monoamines content and the expression of genes involved in energy
metabolism and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) regulation. Exercise
decreased anxiety-like behaviors in the open field and elevated plus maze, and
exerted antidepressant-like effects in the tail suspension test. Exercise
stimulated brain mitochondrial activity and increased resistance against
rotenone, an inhibitor of complex I activity. Furthermore, mRNA expression of
Bdnf, Gdnf, Tfam (mitochondrial transcription factor A), and Ndufa6
(mitochondrial I subunit) genes, as well as the phosphorylation of cAMP response 
element-binding protein were increased after exercise. In summary, exercise
appears to engage mitochondrial pathways and to potentiate neuroplasticity and
might be associated to mood improvement.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2014 May;60:88-96. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2014.04.003. Epub 2014
Apr 23.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is a pro-inflammatory extracellular
signaling molecule recognized by brain microglia.

Little JP(1), Simtchouk S(2), Schindler SM(3), Villanueva EB(3), Gill NE(3),
Walker DG(4), Wolthers KR(5), Klegeris A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus,
Kelowna, BC, Canada; School of Health and Exercise Sciences, University of
British Columbia Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC, Canada. (2)School of Health and
Exercise Sciences, University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC,
Canada; Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia Okanagan Campus, 
Kelowna, BC, Canada. (3)Department of Biology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC, Canada. (4)Banner Sun Health Research Institute,
Sun City, AZ, USA. (5)Department of Chemistry, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC, Canada. (6)Department of Biology, University of
British Columbia Okanagan Campus, Kelowna, BC, Canada. Electronic address:
andis.klegeris@ubc.ca.

Microglia represent mononuclear phagocytes in the brain and perform immune
surveillance, recognizing a number of signaling molecules released from
surrounding cells in both healthy and pathological situations. The microglia
interact with several damage-associated molecular pattern molecules (DAMPs) and
recent data indicate that mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) could act
as a specific DAMP in peripheral tissues. This study tested the hypothesis that
extracellular Tfam induces pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic responses of the
microglia. Three different types of human mononuclear phagocytes were used to
model human microglia: human peripheral blood monocytes from healthy donors,
human THP-1 monocytic cells, and human primary microglia obtained from autopsy
samples. When combined with interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>, recombinant human Tfam (rhTfam)
induced secretions that were toxic to human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells in all
three models. Similar cytotoxic responses were observed when THP-1 cells and
human microglia were exposed to human mitochondrial proteins in the presence of
IFN-<U+03B3>. rhTfam alone induced expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin 
(IL)-1ß, IL-6 and IL-8 by THP-1 cells. This induction was further enhanced in the
presence of IFN-<U+03B3>. Upregulated secretion of IL-6 in response to rhTfam plus IFN-<U+03B3>
was confirmed in primary human microglia. Use of specific inhibitors showed that 
the rhTfam-induced cytotoxicity of human THP-1 cells depended partially on
activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), but not p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK). Overall, our data support the hypothesis that, in the
human brain, Tfam could act as an intercellular signaling molecule that is
recognized by the microglia to cause pro-inflammatory and cytotoxic responses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jul;17:132-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.04.008. Epub 2014 Apr
24.

ERK-mediated phosphorylation of TFAM downregulates mitochondrial transcription:
implications for Parkinson's disease.

Wang KZ(1), Zhu J(1), Dagda RK(1), Uechi G(2), Cherra SJ 3rd(1), Gusdon AM(1),
Balasubramani M(2), Chu CT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (2)The Genomics and Proteomics Core Laboratories,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, 
Division of Neuropathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; 
The McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; The Center for Neuroscience, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; The Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative
Diseases, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. Electronic
address: ctc4@pitt.edu.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) regulates mitochondrial biogenesis,
which is downregulated by extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases (ERK1/2)
in cells treated chronically with the complex I inhibitor
1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP+). We utilized mass spectrometry to identify
ERK1/2-dependent TFAM phosphorylation sites. Mutation of TFAM at serine 177 to
mimic phosphorylation recapitulated the effects of MPP+ in decreasing the binding
of TFAM to the light strand promoter, suppressing mitochondrial transcription.
Mutant TFAM was unable to affect respiratory function or rescue the effects of
MPP+ on respiratory complexes. These data disclose a novel mechanism by which
ERK1/2 regulates mitochondrial function through direct phosphorylation of TFAM.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134365
PMID: 24768991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Sports Med Phys Fitness. 2014 Jun;54(3):362-9.

Effects of continuous and intermittent aerobic exercise upon mRNA expression of
metabolic genes in human skeletal muscle.

Popov D(1), Zinovkin R, Karger E, Tarasova O, Vinogradova O.

Author information: 
(1)State Research Center of Russian Federation Institute for Biomedical Problems 
RAS, Moscow, Russia - danil-popov@yandex.ru.

AIM: It is known that intermittent aerobic exercise training program is more
efficient for the improvement of aerobic performance than continuous one but
molecular mechanisms of such effects are purely understood. The aim of the
present study was to compare gene expression of mitochondrial biogenesis
regulators (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a),
mitochondrial transcription factors A (TFAM) and B2 (TFB2M) and genes involved in
exercise-induced catabolic events (forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) and Atrogin-1) in
human skeletal muscle after single continuous (CE) and intermittent (IE) aerobic 
exercise sessions, equalized thoroughly in duration and mean power output.
METHODS: Twelve physically active males performed CE (workload at lactate
threshold [LT], 50 min) or IE ([3 min 81% LT+2 min 125% LT]x10). The biopsies
were taken from m. vastus lateralis before and 1 h, 3 h, 5 h after the exercise.
RESULTS: The IE induced a 2-fold greater increase of PGC-1a and TFAM gene
expression after 3 h and 5 h of recovery than CE. The increments of Atrogin-1
mRNA abundance were observed 3 and 5 h after IE only. The increments in FOXO1
mRNA level were revealed 1 h and 3 h after the IE and 3 h after the CE.
CONCLUSION: The results of the study suggest that higher potential of IE for the 
improvement of mitochondrial biogenesis than CE associated with more pronounced
increase of PGC-1a and TFAM mRNA expression. Along with that, IE induces a higher
increment of expression of FOXO1 and Atrogin-1 genes involved with
exercise-induced catabolic events compared to CE.

PMID: 24739300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2014;114(7):1463-71. doi: 10.1007/s00421-014-2879-9. Epub
2014 Apr 8.

Metabolic adaptations in skeletal muscle, adipose tissue, and whole-body
oxidative capacity in response to resistance training.

Alvehus M(1), Boman N, Söderlund K, Svensson MB, Burén J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Medicine, Umeå University, 
Umeå, Sweden, malin.alvehus@medicin.umu.se.

PURPOSE: The effects of resistance training on mitochondrial biogenesis and
oxidative capacity in skeletal muscle are not fully characterized, and even less 
is known about alterations in adipose tissue. We aimed to investigate adaptations
in oxidative metabolism in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue after 8 weeks of
heavy resistance training in apparently healthy young men.
METHODS: Expression of genes linked to oxidative metabolism in the skeletal
muscle and adipose tissue was assessed before and after the training program.
Body composition, peak oxygen uptake (VO2 peak), fat oxidation, activity of
mitochondrial enzyme in muscle, and serum adiponectin levels were also determined
before and after resistance training.
RESULTS: In muscle, the expression of the genes AdipoR1 and COX4 increased after 
resistance training (9 and 13 %, respectively), whereas the expression levels of 
the genes PGC-1a, SIRT1, TFAM, CPT1b, and FNDC5 did not change. In adipose
tissue, the expression of the genes SIRT1 and CPT1b decreased after training (20 
and 23 %, respectively). There was an increase in lean mass (from 59.7 ± 6.1 to
61.9 ± 6.2 kg), VO2 peak (from 49.7 ± 5.5 to 56.3 ± 5.0 ml/kg/min), and fat
oxidation (from 6.8 ± 2.1 to 9.1 ± 2.7 mg/kg fat-free mass/min) after training,
whereas serum adiponectin levels decreased significantly and enzyme activity of
citrate synthase and 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase did not change.
CONCLUSION: Despite significant increases in VO2 peak, fat oxidation, and lean
mass following resistance training, the total effect on gene expression and
enzyme activity linked to oxidative metabolism was moderate.

PMID: 24711079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. DNA Cell Biol. 2014 May;33(5):291-300. doi: 10.1089/dna.2013.2132. Epub 2014 Mar 
31.

microRNA-200a inhibits cell proliferation by targeting mitochondrial
transcription factor A in breast cancer.

Yao J(1), Zhou E, Wang Y, Xu F, Zhang D, Zhong D.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of General Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South 
University , Changsha, China .

microRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous 19-25 nucleotide noncoding single-stranded RNAs
that regulate gene expression by blocking the translation or decreasing the
stability of mRNAs. In this study, we showed that miR-200a expression levels were
decreased while mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) mRNA expression
levels were increased in breast cancer (BC) tissues and cell lines, and
identified TFAM as a novel direct target of miR-200a. Overexpression of miR-200a 
suppressed TFAM protein expression, mtDNA copy number, and attenuated cell
proliferation. Forced expression of TFAM can partly rescue the inhibitory effect 
of miR-200a in the cells. Taken together, these findings will shed light on the
role and mechanism of miR-200a in regulating BC cells growth and mtDNA copy
number via miR-200a/TFAM axis, and miR-200a may serve as a potential therapeutic 
target in BC in the future.

PMID: 24684598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2015 Nov;70(11):1360-9. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glu014. Epub 2014 Mar 28.

Sexual Dimorphism in the Alterations of Cardiac Muscle Mitochondrial
Bioenergetics Associated to the Ageing Process.

Colom B(1), Oliver J(2), Garcia-Palmer FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS), Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
Present address: Centre for Microvascular Research, William Harvey Research
Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. b.colom@qmul.ac.uk. (2)Grup de Metabolisme
Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i Ciències de la Salut, 
Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut (IUNICS),
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. CIBERobn
Fisiopatología Obesidad y Nutrición (CB06/03), Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

The incidence of cardiac disease is age and sex dependent, but the mechanisms
governing these associations remain poorly understood. Mitochondria are the
organelles in charge of producing energy for the cells, and their malfunction has
been linked to cardiovascular disease and heart failure. Interestingly, heart
mitochondrial content and functionality are also age and sex dependent. Here we
investigated the combinatory effects of age and sex in mitochondrial
bioenergetics that could help to understand their role on cardiac disease.
Cardiac mitochondria from 6- and 24-month-old male and female Wistar rats were
isolated, and the enzymatic activities of the oxidative-phosphorylative complexes
I, III, and IV and ATPase, as well as the protein levels of complex IV, ß-ATPase,
and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), were measured. Furthermore,
heart DNA content, citrate synthase activity, mitochondrial protein content,
oxygen consumption, and H2O2 generation were also determined. Results showed a
reduction in heart mitochondrial mass and functionality with age that correlated 
with increased H2O2 generation. Moreover, sex-dependent differences were found in
several of these parameters. In particular, old females exhibited a significant
loss of mitochondrial function and increased relative H2O2 production compared
with their male counterparts. The results demonstrate a sex dimorphism in the
age-associated defects on cardiac mitochondrial function.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24682352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Genes Nutr. 2014 May;9(3):397. doi: 10.1007/s12263-014-0397-3. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Adenosine triphosphate concentrations are higher in the brain of APOE3- compared 
to APOE4-targeted replacement mice and can be modulated by curcumin.

Chin D(1), Hagl S, Hoehn A, Huebbe P, Pallauf K, Grune T, Frank J, Eckert GP,
Rimbach G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, Christian-Albrechts-University 
Kiel, Hermann-Rodewald-Strasse 6-8, 24118, Kiel, Germany,
chin@foodsci.uni-kiel.de.

Curcumin from Curcuma longa may exert putative neuroprotective properties in the 
brain. Impaired mitochondrial function is implicated in Alzheimer's disease and
the presence of the apolipoprotein (APO) E4 genotype, which is a risk factor for 
late-onset Alzheimer's disease, may aggravate mitochondrial malfunction. Here, we
report that in the brain of 16-month-old APOE4-targeted replacement mice,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentrations were significantly lower than in
APOE3 mice. A 3-month dietary supplementation of 0.2 % curcumin numerically
increased ATP concentrations in APOE3 and significantly in APOE4 mice compared to
the respective controls. Curcumin significantly induced the transcription of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) <U+03B3> and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) in APOE3, but not in APOE4 mice. Moreover, PPAR<U+03B3>
coactivator (PGC)-1a and guanine-adenine repeat binding protein a (GABPa) mRNA
was only increased in APOE3 mice. Consistent with these observations, protein
expression of mitochondrial respiratory complexes, especially of complex IV, also
appeared to be increased in APOE3 mice. In conclusion, we provide evidence that
curcumin affects mitochondrial function and gene and protein expression in the
murine brain despite its low bioavailability and carriers of the Alzheimer's
disease-risk genotype APOE4 may be less responsive to dietary curcumin than APOE3
carriers.

PMCID: PMC4026431
PMID: 24671632  [PubMed]


208. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 26;9(3):e92927. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092927. eCollection
2014.

Overexpression of S100A7 protects LPS-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and
stimulates IL-6 and IL-8 in HaCaT cells.

Sun W(1), Zheng Y(2), Lu Z(1), Cui Y(1), Tian Q(2), Xiao S(2), Liu F(3), Liu
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Mitochondrial Biology and Medicine, The Key Laboratory of
Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Life
Science and Technology and Frontier Institute of Science and Technology, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, P. R. China. (2)Department of Dermatology, the 2nd
Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, P. R. China.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California Irvine Medical School,
Irvine, United States of America; Chao Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of California Irvine Medical School, Irvine, United States of America.
(4)Center for Mitochondrial Biology and Medicine, The Key Laboratory of
Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of Education, School of Life
Science and Technology and Frontier Institute of Science and Technology, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, P. R. China; Department of Pharmacology and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: S100A7 (or psoriasin) is distributed in the cytoplasm of
keratinocytes of normal human epidermis, and it is overexpressed in many
epidermal inflammatory diseases. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces mitochondrial
function changes, which play important roles in multiple cellular mechanisms
including inflammation. Although S100A7 expression is regulated by various
factors in the human epidermis during inflammation, whether S100A7 interacts with
mitochondria in keratinocytes is not clear.
OBJECTIVES: Our study was designed to investigate whether S100A7 could prohibit
mitochondrial dysfunction and stimulate cytokines in cultured normal HaCaT cells 
treated with LPS.
RESULTS: We generated HaCaT cells that constitutively express enhanced green
fluorescence protein (EGFP)-S100A7 (S100A7-EGFP) or EGFP alone, as a control.
Here, we show that S100A7-EGFP HaCaT cells exhibit an increase in mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) copy number and mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). qRT-PCR
revealed that expression of three main mitochondrial biogenesis-associated genes 
was significantly increased: PPAR-coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1a), the mitochondrial 
transcription factor A (Tfam) and nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1). S100A7
overexpression increased mtDNA content and effectively increased intracellular
adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) production, while decreasing reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation. S100A7 overexpression also significantly decreased the 
expression of Mfn2 and increased DRP1 expression compared with control EGFP
cells. S100A7 down-regulated the expression of the autophagy-related proteins
Beclin-1 and LC3B. S100A7 also increased expression of IL-6 and IL-8 cytokines.
Knockdown of S100A7 decreased MMP and disrupted mitochondrial homeostasis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that S100A7 stimulates mitochondrial
biogenesis and increases mitochondrial function in HaCaT cells treated with LPS; 
and S100A7 also promotes secretion of IL-6 and IL-8.

PMCID: PMC3966836
PMID: 24671027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Dose Response. 2013 Jun 4;12(1):57-71. doi: 10.2203/dose-response.13-010.Radak.
eCollection 2014.

Resveratrol attenuates exercise-induced adaptive responses in rats selectively
bred for low running performance.

Hart N(1), Sarga L(1), Csende Z(1), Koch LG(2), Britton SL(2), Davies KJ(3),
Radak Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Sport Science, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA. (3)Ethel Percy Andrus Gerontology Center of the Davis
School of Gerontology; and Division of Molecular & Computational Biology,
Department of Biological Sciences of the College of Letters, Arts & Sciences: the
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA.

Low capacity runner (LCR) rats have been developed by divergent artificial
selection for treadmill endurance capacity to explore an aerobic biology-disease 
connection. The beneficial effects of resveratrol supplementation have been
demonstrated in endurance running. In this study it was examined whether 12 weeks
of treadmill exercise training and/or resveratrol can retrieve the low running
performance of the LCR and impact mitochondrial biogenesis and quality control.
Resveratrol regressed running performance in trained LCR (p<0.05). Surprisingly, 
exercise and resveratrol treatments significantly decreased pAMPK/AMPK, SIRT1,
SIRT4, forkhead transcription factor 1 (FOXO1) and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) levels in these animals (p<0.05). Mitochondrial fusion protein,
HSP78 and polynucleotide phosphorylase were significantly induced in LCR-trained,
LCR-resveratrol treated, LCR-trained and resveratol treated groups compared to
LCR-controls. The data indicate that the AMPK-SIRT1-NAMPT-FOXO1 axis could be
important to the limited aerobic endurance capacity of low running capacity rats.
Resveratrol supplementation was not beneficial in terms of aerobic endurance
performance, mitochondrial biogenesis, or quality control.

PMCID: PMC3960954
PMID: 24659933  [PubMed]


210. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1840(7):2184-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.03.004. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

A comparison among the tissue-specific effects of aging and calorie restriction
on TFAM amount and TFAM-binding activity to mtDNA in rat.

Picca A(1), Pesce V(2), Fracasso F(2), Joseph AM(1), Leeuwenburgh C(1), Lezza
AM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, Institute on Aging, Division of
Biology of Aging, University of Florida, 2004 Mowry Rd, Gainesville, FL 32611,
USA. (2)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics,
University of Bari, Via Orabona, 4, 70125 Bari, Italy. (3)Department of
Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Biopharmaceutics, University of Bari, Via
Orabona, 4, 70125 Bari, Italy. Electronic address:
angelamariaserena.lezza@uniba.it.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial Transcription Factor A (TFAM) is regarded as a
histone-like protein of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), performing multiple functions 
for this genome. Aging affects mitochondria in a tissue-specific manner and only 
calorie restriction (CR) is able to delay or prevent the onset of several
age-related changes also in mitochondria.
METHODS: Samples of the frontal cortex and soleus skeletal muscle from 6- and
26-month-old ad libitum-fed and 26-month-old calorie-restricted rats and of the
livers from 18- and 28-month-old ad libitum-fed and 28-month-old
calorie-restricted rats were used to detect TFAM amount, TFAM-binding to mtDNA
and mtDNA content.
RESULTS: We found an age-related increase in TFAM amount in the frontal cortex,
not affected by CR, versus an age-related decrease in the soleus and liver, fully
prevented by CR. The semi-quantitative analysis of in vivo binding of TFAM to
specific mtDNA regions, by mtDNA immunoprecipitation assay and following PCR,
showed a marked age-dependent decrease in TFAM-binding activity in the frontal
cortex, partially prevented by CR. An age-related increase in TFAM-binding to
mtDNA, fully prevented by CR, was found in the soleus and liver. MtDNA content
presented a common age-related decrease, completely prevented by CR in the soleus
and liver, but not in the frontal cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: The modulation of TFAM expression, TFAM-binding to mtDNA and mtDNA
content with aging and CR showed a trend shared by the skeletal muscle and liver,
but not by the frontal cortex counterpart.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Aging and CR appear to induce similar mitochondrial
molecular mechanisms in the skeletal muscle and liver, different from those
elicited in the frontal cortex.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4335656
PMID: 24631828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Free Radic Res. 2014 Jul;48(7):729-39. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2014.903562. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

Sciadopitysin alleviates methylglyoxal-mediated glycation in osteoblastic
MC3T3-E1 cells by enhancing glyoxalase system and mitochondrial biogenesis.

Choi EM(1), Suh KS, Rhee SY, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Kyung Hee University , Seoul , Republic of
Korea.

Methylglyoxal (MG) is a precursor of advanced glycation end products, which
contribute to diabetic complications, including bone defects. In the present
study, the effect of sciadopitysin on MG-induced cytotoxicity was investigated
using osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Pretreatment of MC3T3-E1 cells with
sciadopitysin prevented the MG-induced cell death and protein adducts formation. 
Sciadopitysin restored the MG-induced change in glyoxalase activity almost to the
control level and increased glutathione levels. In addition, sciadopitysin
decreased MG-induced formation of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS),
mitochondrial superoxide, and cardiolipin peroxidation. These findings suggest
that sciadopitysin provides a protective action against MG-induced glycation by
increasing MG detoxification system and by reducing oxidative stress.
Pretreatment with sciadopitysin prior to MG exposure reduced MG-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction by preventing mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP)
dissipation and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) loss. The nitric oxide (NO) level
was decreased by MG treatment, but it was significantly increased by
sciadopitysin, suggesting that sciadopitysin may induce NO-dependent
mitochondrial biogenesis. Furthermore, sciadopitysin treatment increased the
levels of sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). These findings indicate that
sciadopitysin might exert its therapeutic effects via upregulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis. Therefore, sciadopitysin may prevent the development of
diabetic osteopathy.

PMID: 24628445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2014;2014:971890. doi: 10.1155/2014/971890.
Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Olive leaf extract attenuates obesity in high-fat diet-fed mice by modulating the
expression of molecules involved in adipogenesis and thermogenesis.

Shen Y(1), Song SJ(1), Keum N(1), Park T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project, Yonsei
University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea.

The present study aimed to investigate whether olive leaf extract (OLE) prevents 
high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity in mice and to explore the underlying
mechanisms. Mice were randomly divided into groups that received a chow diet
(CD), HFD, or 0.15% OLE-supplemented diet (OLD) for 8 weeks. OLD-fed mice showed 
significantly reduced body weight gain, visceral fat-pad weights, and plasma
lipid levels as compared with HFD-fed mice. OLE significantly reversed the
HFD-induced upregulation of WNT10b- and galanin-mediated signaling molecules and 
key adipogenic genes (PPAR <U+03B3> , C/EBP a , CD36, FAS, and leptin) in the epididymal
adipose tissue of HFD-fed mice. Furthermore, the HFD-induced downregulation of
thermogenic genes involved in uncoupled respiration (SIRT1, PGC1 a , and UCP1)
and mitochondrial biogenesis (TFAM, NRF-1, and COX2) was also significantly
reversed by OLE. These results suggest that OLE exerts beneficial effects against
obesity by regulating the expression of genes involved in adipogenesis and
thermogenesis in the visceral adipose tissue of HFD-fed mice.

PMCID: PMC3927866
PMID: 24624222  [PubMed]


213. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2014 Jun;28(6):256-62. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21561. Epub 2014
Mar 10.

Shortwave UV-induced damage as part of the solar damage spectrum is not a major
contributor to mitochondrial dysfunction.

Gebhard D(1), Matt K, Burger K, Bergemann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Albstadt-Sigmaringen University of Applied
Sciences, 72488 Sigmaringen, Germany. gebhard@hs-albsig.de.

Because of the absence of a nucleotide excision repair in mitochondria,
ultraviolet (UV)-induced bulky mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) lesions persist for
several days before they would eventually be removed by mitophagy. Long
persistence of this damage might disturb mitochondrial functions, thereby
contributing to skin ageing. In this study, we examined the influence of
shortwave UV-induced damage on mitochondrial parameters in normal human skin
fibroblasts. We irradiated cells with either sun-simulating light (SSL) or with
ultraviolet C to generate bulky DNA lesions. At equivalent antiproliferative
doses, both irradiation regimes induced gene expression of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) and matrix metallopeptidase 1 (MMP-1). Only
irradiation with SSL, however, caused significant changes in mtDNA copy number
and a decrease in mitochondrial respiration. Our results indicate that shortwave 
UV-induced damage as part of the solar spectrum is not a major contributor to
mitochondrial dysfunction.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24615805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Apr 15;116(8):1078-87. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01270.2013. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Cachectic skeletal muscle response to a novel bout of low-frequency stimulation.

Puppa MJ(1), Murphy EA, Fayad R, Hand GA, Carson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise Science, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South 
Carolina;

While exercise benefits have been well documented in patients with chronic
diseases, the mechanistic understanding of cachectic muscle's response to
contraction is essentially unknown. We previously demonstrated that treadmill
exercise training attenuates the initiation of cancer cachexia and the
development of metabolic syndrome symptoms (Puppa MJ, White JP, Velazquez KT,
Baltgalvis KA, Sato S, Baynes JW, Carson JA. J Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle 3:
117-137, 2012). However, cachectic muscle's metabolic signaling response to a
novel, acute bout of low-frequency contraction has not been determined. The
purpose of this study was to determine whether severe cancer cachexia disrupts
the acute contraction-induced response to low-frequency muscle contraction
[low-frequency stimulation (LoFS)]. Metabolic gene expression and signaling was
examined 3 h after a novel 30-min bout of contraction (10 Hz) in cachectic
Apc(Min/+) (Min) and C57BL/6 (BL-6) mice. Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate, a
STAT/NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor and free radical scavenger, was administered systemically to
a subset of mice to determine whether this altered the muscle contraction
response. Although glucose transporter-4 mRNA was decreased by cachexia, LoFS
increased muscle glucose transporter-4 mRNA in both BL-6 and Min mice. LoFS also 
induced muscle peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a coactivator-1 mRNA. However, in Min mice, LoFS 
was not able to induce muscle proliferator-activated receptor-a coactivator-1
targets nuclear respiratory factor-1 and mitochondrial transcription factor A
mRNA. LoFS induced phosphorylated-S6 in BL-6 mice, but this induction was blocked
by cachexia. Administration of pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate for 24 h rescued
LoFS-induced phosphorylated-S6 in cachectic muscle. LoFS increased muscle
phosphorylated-AMP-activated protein kinase and p38 in BL-6 and Min mice. These
data demonstrate that cachexia alters the muscle metabolic response to acute
LoFS, and combination therapies in concert with muscle contraction may be
beneficial for improving muscle mass and function during cachexia.

PMCID: PMC4035786
PMID: 24610533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Exp Eye Res. 2014 Apr;121:168-77. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2014.02.010. Epub 2014 Mar 
4.

Posttranslational modification of mitochondrial transcription factor A in
impaired mitochondria biogenesis: implications in diabetic retinopathy and
metabolic memory phenomenon.

Santos JM(1), Mishra M(1), Kowluru RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University, 4717 St. Antoine, Detroit, MI
48201, USA. (2)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University, 4717 St. Antoine,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA. Electronic address: rkowluru@med.wayne.edu.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is one of the key regulators of the
transcription of mtDNA. In diabetes, despite increase in gene transcripts of
TFAM, its protein levels in the mitochondria are decreased and mitochondria copy 
numbers become subnormal. The aim of this study is to investigate the
mechanism(s) responsible for decreased mitochondrial TFAM in diabetes. Using
retinal endothelial cells, we have investigated the effect of overexpression of
cytosolic chaperone, Hsp70, and TFAM on glucose-induced decrease in mitochondrial
TFAM levels, and the transcription of mtDNA-encoded genes, NADH dehydrogenase
subunit 6 (ND6) and cytochrome b (Cytb). To investigate the role of
posttranslational modifications in subnormal mitochondrial TFAM, ubiquitination
of TFAM was assessed, and the results were confirmed in the retina from
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. While overexpression of Hsp70 failed to
prevent glucose-induced decrease in mitochondrial TFAM and transcripts of ND6 and
Cytb, overexpression of TFAM ameliorated decrease in its mitochondrial protein
levels and transcriptional activity. TFAM was ubiquitinated by high glucose, and 
PYR-41, an inhibitor of ubiquitination, prevented TFAM ubiquitination and
restored the transcriptional activity. Similarly, TFAM was ubiquitinated in the
retina from diabetic rats, and it continued to be modified after reinstitution of
normal glycemia. Our results clearly imply that the ubiquitination of TFAM
impedes its transport to the mitochondria resulting in subnormal mtDNA
transcription and mitochondria dysfunction, and inhibition of ubiquitination
restores mitochondrial homeostasis. Reversal of hyperglycemia does not provide
any benefit to TFAM ubiquitination. Thus, strategies targeting posttranslational 
modification could provide an avenue to preserve mitochondrial homeostasis, and
inhibit the development/progression of diabetic retinopathy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4036231
PMID: 24607487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(35):5507-9.

Mitochondrial biogenesis: pharmacological approaches.

Valero T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biotechnology Agriculture University of Athens Iera Odos 75 11855
Athens Greece. teretavale@yahoo.es.

Organelle biogenesis is concomitant to organelle inheritance during cell
division. It is necessary that organelles double their size and divide to give
rise to two identical daughter cells. Mitochondrial biogenesis occurs by growth
and division of pre-existing organelles and is temporally coordinated with cell
cycle events [1]. However, mitochondrial biogenesis is not only produced in
association with cell division. It can be produced in response to an oxidative
stimulus, to an increase in the energy requirements of the cells, to exercise
training, to electrical stimulation, to hormones, during development, in certain 
mitochondrial diseases, etc. [2]. Mitochondrial biogenesis is therefore defined
as the process via which cells increase their individual mitochondrial mass [3]. 
Recent discoveries have raised attention to mitochondrial biogenesis as a
potential target to treat diseases which up to date do not have an efficient
cure. Mitochondria, as the major ROS producer and the major antioxidant producer 
exert a crucial role within the cell mediating processes such as apoptosis,
detoxification, Ca2+ buffering, etc. This pivotal role makes mitochondria a
potential target to treat a great variety of diseases. Mitochondrial biogenesis
can be pharmacologically manipulated. This issue tries to cover a number of
approaches to treat several diseases through triggering mitochondrial biogenesis.
It contains recent discoveries in this novel field, focusing on advanced
mitochondrial therapies to chronic and degenerative diseases, mitochondrial
diseases, lifespan extension, mitohormesis, intracellular signaling, new
pharmacological targets and natural therapies. It contributes to the field by
covering and gathering the scarcely reported pharmacological approaches in the
novel and promising field of mitochondrial biogenesis. There are several diseases
that have a mitochondrial origin such as chronic progressive external
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO) and the Kearns- Sayre syndrome (KSS), myoclonic epilepsy
with ragged-red fibers (MERRF), mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis 
and strokelike episodes (MELAS), Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON), the 
syndrome of neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia and retinitis pigmentosa (NARP),
and Leigh's syndrome. Likewise, other diseases in which mitochondrial dysfunction
plays a very important role include neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes or
cancer. Generally, in mitochondrial diseases a mutation in the mitochondrial DNA 
leads to a loss of functionality of the OXPHOS system and thus to a depletion of 
ATP and overproduction of ROS, which can, in turn, induce further mtDNA
mutations. The work by Yu-Ting Wu, Shi-Bei Wu, and Yau-Huei Wei (Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan) [4]
focuses on the aforementioned mitochondrial diseases with special attention to
the compensatory mechanisms that prompt mitochondria to produce more energy even 
under mitochondrial defect-conditions. These compensatory mechanisms include the 
overexpression of antioxidant enzymes, mitochondrial biogenesis and
overexpression of respiratory complex subunits, as well as metabolic shift to
glycolysis. The pathways observed to be related to mitochondrial biogenesis as a 
compensatory adaptation to the energetic deficits in mitochondrial diseases are
described (PGC- 1, Sirtuins, AMPK). Several pharmacological strategies to trigger
these signaling cascades, according to these authors, are the use of bezafibrate 
to activate the PPAR-PGC-1a axis, the activation of AMPK by resveratrol and the
use of Sirt1 agonists such as quercetin or resveratrol. Other strategies
currently used include the addition of antioxidant supplements to the diet
(dietary supplementation with antioxidants) such as L-carnitine, coenzyme
Q10,MitoQ10 and other mitochondria-targeted antioxidants,N-acetylcysteine (NAC), 
vitamin C, vitamin E vitamin K1, vitamin B, sodium pyruvate or -lipoic acid. As
aforementioned, other diseases do not have exclusively a mitochondrial origin but
they might have an important mitochondrial component both on their onset and on
their development. This is the case of type 2 diabetes or neurodegenerative
diseases. Type 2 diabetes is characterized by a peripheral insulin resistance
accompanied by an increased secretion of insulin as a compensatory system. Among 
the explanations about the origin of insulin resistance Mónica Zamora and Josep
A. Villena (Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra / Laboratory of Metabolism and Obesity, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Spain) [5] consider the hypothesis that mitochondrial dysfunction, e.g. impaired 
(mitochondrial) oxidative capacity of the cell or tissue, is one of the main
underlying causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes. Although this
hypothesis is not free of controversy due to the uncertainty on the sequence of
events during type 2 diabetes onset, e.g. whether mitochondrial dysfunction is
the cause or the consequence of insulin resistance, it has been widely observed
that improving mitochondrial function also improves insulin sensitivity and
prevents type 2 diabetes. Thus restoring oxidative capacity by increasing
mitochondrial mass appears as a suitable strategy to treat insulin resistance.
The effort made by researchers trying to understand the signaling pathways
mediating mitochondrial biogenesis has uncovered new potential pharmacological
targets and opens the perspectives for the design of suitable treatments for
insulin resistance. In addition some of the current used strategies could be used
to treat insulin resistance such as lifestyle interventions (caloric restriction 
and endurance exercise) and pharmacological interventions (thiazolidinediones and
other PPAR agonists, resveratrol and other calorie restriction mimetics, AMPK
activators, ERR activators). Mitochondrial biogenesis is of special importance in
modern neurochemistry because of the broad spectrum of human diseases arising
from defects in mitochondrial ion and ROS homeostasis, energy production and
morphology [1]. Parkinson´s Disease (PD) is a very good example of this important
mitochondrial component on neurodegenerative diseases. Anuradha Yadav, Swati
Agrawal, Shashi Kant Tiwari, and Rajnish K. Chaturvedi (CSIR-Indian Institute of 
Toxicology Research / Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, India) [6]
remark in their review the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in PD with special
focus on the role of oxidative stress and bioenergetic deficits. These
alterations may have their origin on pathogenic gene mutations in important genes
such as DJ-1, -syn, parkin, PINK1 or LRRK2. These mutations, in turn, may cause
defects in mitochondrial dynamics (key events like fission/fusion, biogenesis,
trafficking in retrograde and anterograde directions, and mitophagy). This work
reviews different strategies to enhance mitochondrial bioenergetics in order to
ameliorate the neurodegenerative process, with an emphasis on clinical trials
reports that indicate their potential. Among them creatine, Coenzyme Q10 and
mitochondrial targeted antioxidants/peptides are reported to have the most
remarkable effects in clinical trials. They highlight a dual effect of PGC-1a
expression on PD prognosis. Whereas a modest expression of this transcriptional
co-activator results in positive effects, a moderate to substantial overexpession
may have deleterious consequences. As strategies to induce PGC-1a activation,
these authors remark the possibility to activate Sirt1 with resveratrol, to use
PPAR agonists such as pioglitazone, rosiglitazone, fenofibrate and bezafibrate.
Other strategies include the triggering of Nrf2/antioxidant response element
(ARE) pathway by triterpenoids (derivatives of oleanolic acid) or by Bacopa
monniera, the enhancement of ATP production by carnitine and -lipoic acid.
Mitochondrial dysfunctions are the prime source of neurodegenerative diseases and
neurodevelopmental disorders. In the context of neural differentiation, Martine
Uittenbogaard and Anne Chiaramello (Department of Anatomy and Regenerative
Biology, George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
USA) [7] thoroughly describe the implication of mitochondrial biogenesis on
neuronal differentiation, its timing, its regulation by specific signaling
pathways and new potential therapeutic strategies. The maintenance of
mitochondrial homeostasis is crucial for neuronal development. A mitochondrial
dynamic balance is necessary between mitochondrial fusion, fission and quality
control systems and mitochondrial biogenesis. Concerning the signaling pathways
leading to mitochondrial biogenesis this review highlights the implication of
different regulators such as AMPK, SIRT1, PGC-1a, NRF1, NRF2, Tfam, etc. on the
specific case of neuronal development, providing examples of diseases in which
these pathways are altered and transgenic mouse models lacking these regulators. 
A common hallmark of several neurodegenerative diseases (Huntington´s Disease,
Alzheimer´s Disease and Parkinson´s Disease) is the impaired function or
expression of PGC-1a, the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. Among the
promising strategies to ameliorate mitochondrial-based diseases these authors
highlight the induction of PGC-1a via activation of PPAR receptors
(rosiglitazone, bezafibrate) or modulating its activity by AMPK (AICAR,
metformin, resveratrol) or SIRT1 (SRT1720 and several isoflavone-derived
compounds). This article also presents a review of the current animal and
cellular models useful to study mitochondriogenesis. Although it is known that
many neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental diseases are originated in
mitochondria, the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis has never been
extensively studied. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 24606795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. FEBS J. 2014 May;281(9):2202-13. doi: 10.1111/febs.12774. Epub 2014 Apr 1.

Role of testis-specific high-mobility-group protein in transcriptional regulation
of inducible nitric oxide synthase expression in the liver of endotoxic shock
mice.

Liu Z(1), Liu J, Wang J, Xu J, Liu Y, Sun X, Su L, Wang JH, Jiang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Functional Proteomics of Guangdong Province, Department of
Pathophysiology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Department of
Intensive Care Unit, General Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command, Guangzhou,
China.

Inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) plays a central role in tissue damage
during endotoxic shock. However, the underlying mechanisms that control
transcription of iNOS are not completely defined. A screening strategy with DNA
pull-down technology and two-dimensional difference in gel electrophorcsis
(2D-DIGE) analysis was used to identify regulators that interact with the iNOS
promoter. We found 14 proteins that bind to the iNOS promoter in the liver of
endotoxic shock mice. After matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of
flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) analysis, one of these proteins was
identified as testis-specific high-mobility-group protein (tsHMG), an alternative
splicing isoform encoded by the mitochondrial transcription factor A gene. We
identified the binding sites of tsHMG on the iNOS promoter using a LiquiChip
system, and further confirmed interactions between tsHMG and iNOS by RT-PCR,
western blotting and immunofluorescence. Functional analysis by over-expression
and RNA interference of tsHMG revealed that tsHMG regulates
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated iNOS expression. These results indicate that tsHMG 
participates in modulation of iNOS expression in the early stage of endotoxic
shock.

© 2014 FEBS.

PMID: 24605775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Mar 6;5:e1105. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.80.

Inhibition of cyclophilin D by cyclosporin A promotes retinal ganglion cell
survival by preventing mitochondrial alteration in ischemic injury.

Kim SY(1), Shim MS(1), Kim KY(2), Weinreb RN(1), Wheeler LA(3), Ju WK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Optic Nerve Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, Hamilton
Glaucoma Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)Center
for Research on Biological Systems, National Center for Microscopy and Imaging
Research and Department of Neuroscience, University of California San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Allergan Inc., Irvine, CA, 
USA.

Cyclosporin A (CsA) inhibits the opening of the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore (MPTP) by interacting with cyclophilin D (CypD) and ameliorates
neuronal cell death in the central nervous system against ischemic injury.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying CypD/MPTP opening-mediated cell
death in ischemic retinal injury induced by acute intraocular pressure (IOP)
elevation remain unknown. We observed the first direct evidence that acute IOP
elevation significantly upregulated CypD protein expression in ischemic retina at
12<U+2009>h. However, CsA prevented the upregulation of CypD protein expression and
promoted retinal ganglion cell (RGC) survival against ischemic injury. Moreover, 
CsA blocked apoptotic cell death by decreasing cleaved caspase-3 protein
expression in ischemic retina. Of interest, although the expression level of
Bcl-xL protein did not show a significant change in ischemic retina treated with 
vehicle or CsA at 12<U+2009>h, ischemic damage induced the reduction of Bcl-xL
immunoreactivity in RGCs. More importantly, CsA preserved Bcl-xL immunoreactivity
in RGCs of ischemic retina. In parallel, acute IOP elevation significantly
increased phosphorylated Bad (pBad) at Ser112 protein expression in ischemic
retina at 12<U+2009>h. However, CsA significantly preserved pBad protein expression in
ischemic retina. Finally, acute IOP elevation significantly increased
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) protein expression in ischemic retina
at 12<U+2009>h. However, CsA significantly preserved Tfam protein expression in ischemic
retina. Studies on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content in ischemic retina showed
that there were no statistically significant differences in mtDNA content among
control and ischemic groups treated with vehicle or CsA. Therefore, these results
provide evidence that the activation of CypD-mediated MPTP opening is associated 
with the apoptotic pathway and the mitochondrial alteration in RGC death of
ischemic retinal injury. On the basis of these observations, our findings suggest
that CsA-mediated CypD inhibition may provide a promising therapeutic potential
for protecting RGCs against ischemic injury-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3973219
PMID: 24603333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Curr Genomics. 2013 Dec;14(8):543-59. doi: 10.2174/1389202914666131210211033.

The impact of mitochondrial DNA and nuclear genes related to mitochondrial
functioning on the risk of Parkinson's disease.

Gaweda-Walerych K(1), Zekanowski C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5 str., 02-106 Warszawa, Poland.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress are the major factors implicated
in Parkinson's disease (PD) pathogenesis. The maintenance of healthy mitochondria
is a very complex process coordinated bi-genomically. Here, we review association
studies on mitochondrial haplogroups and subhaplogroups, discussing the
underlying molecular mechanisms. We also focus on variation in the nuclear genes 
(NDUFV2, PGC-1alpha, HSPA9, LRPPRC, MTIF3, POLG1, and TFAM encoding NADH
dehydrogenase (ubiquinone) flavoprotein 2, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha, mortalin, leucine-rich pentatricopeptide
repeat containing protein, translation initiation factor 3, mitochondrial DNA
polymerase gamma, and mitochondrial transcription factor A, respectively)
primarily linked to regulation of mitochondrial functioning that recently have
been associated with PD risk. Possible interactions between mitochondrial and
nuclear genetic variants and related proteins are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3924249
PMID: 24532986  [PubMed]


220. Am J Pathol. 2014 Apr;184(4):1017-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.12.012. Epub
2014 Feb 5.

PGC-1a signaling coordinates susceptibility to metabolic and oxidative injury in 
the inner retina.

Guo X(1), Dason ES(1), Zanon-Moreno V(2), Jiang Q(3), Nahirnyj A(1), Chan D(1),
Flanagan JG(4), Sivak JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vision Sciences, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Vision Sciences, Toronto
Western Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Genetic
and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Preventive Medicine and Public
Health, University of Valencia School of Medicine, Valencia, Spain; Spanish
Biomedical Research Center in Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition (CIBER),
University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain. (3)Department of Vision Sciences,
Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada;
Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology Unit, Department of Preventive Medicine and
Public Health, University of Valencia School of Medicine, Valencia, Spain;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Vision Sciences, Toronto Western
Hospital, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of
Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; Department of Optometry, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario,
Canada. (5)Department of Vision Sciences, Toronto Western Hospital, University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Genetic and Molecular Epidemiology
Unit, Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, University of Valencia
School of Medicine, Valencia, Spain; Department of Ophthalmology and Vision
Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address:
jsivak@uhnres.utoronto.ca.

Retinal ganglion cells (RGCs), used as a common model of central nervous system
injury, are particularly vulnerable to metabolic and oxidative damage. However,
molecular mechanisms underlying this sensitivity have not been determined in
vivo. PGC-1a (encoded by PPARGC1A) regulates adaptive metabolism and oxidative
stress responses in a tissue- and cell-specific manner. Aberrant PGC-1a signaling
is implicated in neurodegeneration, but the mechanism underlying its role in
central nervous system injury remains unclear. We provide evidence from a mouse
model that PGC-1a expression and activity are induced in adult retina in response
to metabolic and oxidative challenge. Deletion of Ppargc1a dramatically increased
RGC loss, in association with dysregulated expression of PGC-1a target metabolic 
and oxidative stress response genes, including Hmox1 (encoding HO-1), Tfam, and
Vegfa. Vehicle-treated and naive Ppargc1a(-/-) mice also showed mild RGC loss,
and surprisingly prominent and consistent retinal astrocyte reactivity. These
cells critically regulate metabolic homeostasis in the inner retina. We show that
PGC-1a signaling (not previously studied in glia) regulates detoxifying astrocyte
responses to hypoxic and oxidative stresses. Finally, PGC-1a expression was
modulated in the inner retina with age and in a model of chronic optic
neuropathy. These data implicate PGC-1a signaling as an important regulator of
astrocyte reactivity and RGC homeostasis to coordinate pathogenic susceptibility 
to metabolic and oxidative injury in the inner retina.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 5;9(2):e88243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088243. eCollection 
2014.

Tetramethylpyrazine ameliorates high glucose-induced endothelial dysfunction by
increasing mitochondrial biogenesis.

Xu Q(1), Xia P(1), Li X(2), Wang W(1), Liu Z(3), Gao X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine,
Ministry of Education, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan
University Shanghai Medical College, Shanghai, China. (3)Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University of Virginia
Health System, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of America.

Tetramethylpyrazine (TMP) is an active compound isolated from a Chinese herbal
prescription that is widely used in traditional Chinese medicine for the
treatment of inflammatory and cardiovascular diseases. We have previously
reported that TMP acts as a potent antioxidant protecting endothelial cells
against high glucose-induced damages. However, the molecular mechanism
responsible for the antioxidant effect of TMP remains to be elucidated. In this
study, we show that TMP increases nitric oxide production in endothelial cells
and promotes endothelium-dependent relaxation in rate aortic rings. The
antioxidant effect of TMP appears attributable to its ability to activate the
mitochondrial biogenesis, as reflected in an up-regulation of complex III and
amelioration of mitochondrial membrane potential. Furthermore, TMP is able to
reverse high glucose-induced suppression of SIRT1 and the biogenesis-related
factors, including PGC-1a, NRF1 and TFAM, suggesting a new molecular mechanism
underlying the protective effect of TMP on the endothelium.

PMCID: PMC3914961
PMID: 24505445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Apr 5;728:24-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.01.053. Epub
2014 Jan 31.

Effects of (-)-epicatechin on a diet-induced rat model of cardiometabolic risk
factors.

Gutiérrez-Salmeán G(1), Ortiz-Vilchis P(1), Vacaseydel CM(1), Garduño-Siciliano
L(2), Chamorro-Cevallos G(2), Meaney E(1), Villafaña S(1), Villarreal F(3),
Ceballos G(1), Ramírez-Sánchez I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación, Escuela Superior de Medicina,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico. (2)Departamento de Farmacia, Escuela
Nacional de Ciencias Biológicas, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico.
(3)University of California San Diego, Department of Medicine, United States.
(4)Sección de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación, Escuela Superior de Medicina,
Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico. Electronic address:
israel.ramirez14@hotmail.com.

Overweight and obesity have been associated with increase in cardiometabolic
risk. Therapeutics include lifestyle changes and/or pharmacologic agents.
However, such interventions are often limited by poor compliance and/or
significant side effects. The consumption of certain dietary products, such as
cocoa, exerts positive effects on cardiometabolic risk factors. (-)-Epicatechin
(EPI), the most abundant flavonoid in cacao has been reported to replicate such
effects. However its mechanisms of action have not been fully elucidated.In a rat
model of high-fat diet-induced obesity and its associated cardiometabolic risk
factors, we administered 1mg/kg of EPI, by gavage, for 2 weeks. Endpoints
included weight-gain, glycemia, triglyceridemia, and systolic blood pressure. We 
also assessed food intake and fecal excretion. Mitochondrial function and
structure related proteins were measured by Westerns.Obesity, hyperglycemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, and systolic hypertension were developed after the
administration of the high-fat diet for five weeks. EPI significantly decreased
the rate of weight gain, glycemia and hypertriglyceridemia. The ratio between
energy intake and excretion was not significantly modified by treatment. EPI
restored the obesity-induced decreases in the levels of skeletal muscle and
abdominal tissue sirtuins (SIRTs), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
coactivator (PGC-1a), mitofilin, transcription factor A mitochondrial (TFAM),
uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), and deiodinase.EPI treatment yielded beneficial
effects on high fat diet-induced endpoints thus may be considered as a potential 
agent for the treatment of obesity and its cardiometabolic associated
abnormalities. Mechanism of action may be attributed to the modulation of
cellular/mitochondrial function, thus improving overall metabolism.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24491839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;38(20):3539-43.

[Effect of euodiae fructus on hepatic energy metabolism-related mechanisms of
reserpine-induced asthenia cold syndrome rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang LP(1), Yu RY(2), Peng SH(2), Li S(2), Zhao YJ(2), Liu HN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangxi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanchang 330004, China.
jxnchlp@163.com (2)Jiangxi University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanchang
330004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To discuss the effect of Euodiae Fructus on hepatic energy
metabolism-related mechanisms of mitochondria of hepatic tissues of asthenia cold
syndrome rats.
METHOD: Rats were subcutaneously injected with Reserpine to establish the model. 
After the oral administration with Euodiae Fructus for 12 d, the oxygen electrode
method was adopted to determine the respiration efficiency. The expressions of
Cox4, Atp5b, Ucp2,Pgc-1alpha, Nrf1, Tfam mRNA were assayed by using RT-PCR
method.
RESULT: Euodiae Fructus 4.2 g x kg(-1) could obviously increase ST3 and RCR of
asthenia cold syndrome rats, and expressions of Cox4, Ucp2 Nrf1 mRNA. It could
also increase expressions of Atp5b and Pgc-1alpha mRNA, but with no statistical
significance. No obvious change was observed in Tfam mRNA expression. Euodiae
Fructus 4.2 g x kg(-1) could significantly increase ST3 and RCR of asthenia cold 
syndrome rats and Pgc-1alpha mRNA and Nrf1 mRNA expressions, and significantly
decrease P/O, with no obvious impact on Cox4, AtpSb, Ucp2, Tfam mRNA expressions.
CONCLUSION: Euodiae Fructus can promote mitochondrial respiratory function and
oxidative phosphorylation efficiency by improving Pgc-1alpha mRNA and Nrf1 mRNA
expressions and regulating Cox4 and Atp5b mRNA in mitochondrial respiratory
chain. It can also strengthen mitochondrial uncoupling respiration and add heat
production by activating Ucp2 mRNA expression in liver.

PMID: 24490569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Reprod Med Biol. 2014;13:11-20. Epub 2013 Jul 18.

Dynamic regulation of mitochondrial genome maintenance in germ cells.

Kasashima K(1), Nagao Y(2), Endo H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498 Japan. (2)Center for Experimental Medicine, Jichi
Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498 Japan.

Mitochondria play a crucial role in the development and function of germ cells.
Mitochondria contain a maternally inherited genome that should be transmitted to 
offspring without reactive oxygen species-induced damage during germ line
development. Germ cells are also involved in the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
bottleneck; thus, the appropriate regulation of mtDNA in these cells is very
important for this characteristic transmission. In this review, we focused on
unique regulation of the mitochondrial genome in animal germ cells; paternal
elimination and the mtDNA bottleneck in females. We also summarized the
mitochondrial nucleoid factors involved in various mtDNA regulation pathways.
Among them, mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which has pleiotropic
and essential roles in mtDNA maintenance, appears to have putative roles in germ 
cell regulation.

PMCID: PMC3890057
PMID: 24482608  [PubMed]


225. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2014 Aug;16(8):711-8. doi: 10.1111/dom.12268. Epub 2014 Feb 
18.

Characterization of the metabolic effects of irisin on skeletal muscle in vitro.

Vaughan RA(1), Gannon NP, Barberena MA, Garcia-Smith R, Bisoffi M, Mermier CM,
Conn CA, Trujillo KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health, Exercise and Sports Science, University of New Mexico,
Albuquerque, NM, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA; Department
of Individual, Family, and Community Education: Nutrition, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque, NM, USA.

AIMS: This work explored the effects of irisin on metabolism, gene expression and
mitochondrial content in cultured myocytes.
METHODS: C2C12 myocytes were treated with various concentrations of irisin for
various durations. Glycolysis and oxidative metabolism were quantified by
measurement of extracellular acidification and oxygen consumption, respectively. 
Metabolic gene expression was measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) and mitochondrial content was assessed by flow cytometry and
confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Cells treated with irisin exhibited significantly increased oxidative
metabolism. Irisin treatment also significantly increased mitochondrial
uncoupling at various doses and durations. Lastly, treatment with irisin also
significantly elevated metabolic gene expression including peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1a), nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF1), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), irisin,
glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) and mitochondrial uncoupling protein 3 (UCP3)
leading to increased mitochondrial biogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations are the first to document increased metabolism in
myocytes through irisin-mediated induction of mitochondrial biogenesis and
uncoupling with corresponding gene expression. These observations support the
need for further investigation into the therapeutic and pharmacological effects
of irisin, as well as development of irisin-based therapy.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24476050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Cell Logist. 2013 Jan 1;3(1):e25456. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

Mitochondrial metabolism as a regulator of keratinocyte differentiation.

Hamanaka RB(1), Chandel NS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology; Northwestern University Medical School;
Chicago, IL USA.

Mitochondrial metabolism has traditionally been thought of as a source of
cellular energy in the form of ATP. The recent renaissance in the study of
cellular metabolism, particularly in the cancer field, has highlighted the fact
that mitochondria are also critical biosynthetic and signaling hubs, making these
organelles key governors of cellular outcomes.(1) (-) (5) Using the epidermis as 
a model system, our recent study looked into the role that mitochondrial
metabolism and ROS production play in cellular differentiation in vivo.(6) We
showed that conditional deletion of the mitochondrial transcription factor, TFAM 
within the basal cells of the epidermis results in loss of mitochondrial ROS
production and impairs epidermal differentiation and hair growth. We demonstrated
that mitochondrial ROS generation is required for the propagation of Notch and
ß-catenin signals which promote epidermal differentiation and hair follicle
development respectively. This study bolsters accumulating evidence that
oxidative mitochondrial metabolism plays a causal role in cellular
differentiation programs. It also provides insights into the role that
mitochondrial oxidative signaling plays in a cell type-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3891634
PMID: 24475371  [PubMed]


227. Hepatology. 2014 Jul;60(1):133-45. doi: 10.1002/hep.26946. Epub 2014 May 27.

Reduced adiponectin signaling due to weight gain results in nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis through impaired mitochondrial biogenesis.

Handa P(1), Maliken BD, Nelson JE, Morgan-Stevenson V, Messner DJ, Dhillon BK,
Klintworth HM, Beauchamp M, Yeh MM, Elfers CT, Roth CL, Kowdley KV.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Center of Excellence, Digestive Disease Institute, and Benaroya Research
Institute, Virginia Mason Medical Center, Seattle, WA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Jul;60(1):22-5.

Obesity and adiponectin depletion have been associated with the occurrence of
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). The goal of this study was to identify 
the relationship between weight gain, adiponectin signaling, and development of
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) in an obese, diabetic mouse model.
Leptin-receptor deficient (Lepr(db/db) ) and C57BL/6 mice were administered a
diet high in unsaturated fat (HF) (61%) or normal chow for 5 or 10 weeks. Liver
histology was evaluated using steatosis, inflammation, and ballooning scores.
Serum, adipose tissue, and liver were analyzed for changes in metabolic
parameters, messenger RNA (mRNA), and protein levels. Lepr(db/db) HF mice
developed marked obesity, hepatic steatosis, and more than 50% progressed to NASH
at each timepoint. Serum adiponectin level demonstrated a strong inverse
relationship with body mass (r =<U+2009>-0.82; P < 0.0001) and adiponectin level was an 
independent predictor of NASH (13.6 µg/mL; P < 0.05; area under the receiver
operating curve (AUROC)<U+2009>= 0.84). White adipose tissue of NASH mice was
characterized by increased expression of genes linked to oxidative stress,
macrophage infiltration, reduced adiponectin, and impaired lipid metabolism. HF
lepr (db/db) NASH mice exhibited diminished hepatic adiponectin signaling
evidenced by reduced levels of adiponectin receptor-2, inactivation of adenosine 
monophosphate activated protein kinase (AMPK), and decreased expression of genes 
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and ß-oxidation (Cox4, Nrf1, Pgc1a, Pgc1ß
and Tfam). In contrast, recombinant adiponectin administration up-regulated the
expression of mitochondrial genes in AML-12 hepatocytes, with or without
lipid-loading.CONCLUSION: Lepr(db/db) mice fed a diet high in unsaturated fat
develop weight gain and NASH through adiponectin depletion, which is associated
with adipose tissue inflammation and hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction. We
propose that this murine model of NASH may provide novel insights into the
mechanism for development of human NASH.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24464605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mitochondrion. 2014 Mar;15:52-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2014.01.002. Epub 2014 Jan
23.

Upregulation of TFAM and mitochondria copy number in human lymphoblastoid cells.

Chakrabarty S(1), D'Souza RR(2), Kabekkodu SP(3), Gopinath PM(4), Rossignol R(5),
Satyamoorthy K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences Centre, Manipal University,
Manipal 576104, Karnataka State, India. Electronic address: sanjiban.c@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences Centre, Manipal University,
Manipal 576104, Karnataka State, India. Electronic address: reshdsouza@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences Centre, Manipal University,
Manipal 576104, Karnataka State, India. Electronic address: spbhat81@gmail.com.
(4)Division of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences Centre, Manipal University,
Manipal 576104, Karnataka State, India. Electronic address: gopinathpm@yahoo.com.
(5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherché Médicale (INSERM), U688
Physiopathologie Mitochondriale, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, 146 rue
Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux cedex, France. Electronic address:
rossig@u-bordeaux2.fr. (6)Division of Biotechnology, Manipal Life Sciences
Centre, Manipal University, Manipal 576104, Karnataka State, India. Electronic
address: ksatyamoorthy@manipal.edu.

Mitochondria are central to several physiological and pathological conditions in 
humans. In the present study, we performed copy number analysis of nuclear
encoded mitochondrial genes, in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and
its representative lymphoblastoid cells (LCLs). We have observed hyper diploid
copies of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) gene in the LCLs along with
increased mtDNA copy number, mitochondrial mass, intracellular ROS and
mitochondrial membrane potential, suggesting elevated mitochondrial biogenesis in
LCLs. Gene expression analysis confirmed TFAM over-expression in LCLs when
compared to PBMC. Based on our observation, we suggest that increased copy number
of TFAM gene upregulates its expression, increases mtDNA copy numbers and
protects it from oxidative stress induced damage in the transformed LCLs.

Copyright © 2014 © Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2014 Feb 18;55(2):993-1005. doi:
10.1167/iovs.13-12564.

Coenzyme Q10 inhibits glutamate excitotoxicity and oxidative stress-mediated
mitochondrial alteration in a mouse model of glaucoma.

Lee D(1), Shim MS, Kim KY, Noh YH, Kim H, Kim SY, Weinreb RN, Ju WK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Optic Nerve Biology, Hamilton Glaucoma Center and Department of
Ophthalmology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.

PURPOSE: To test whether a diet supplemented with coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10)
ameliorates glutamate excitotoxicity and oxidative stress-mediated retinal
ganglion cell (RGC) degeneration by preventing mitochondrial alterations in the
retina of glaucomatous DBA/2J mice.
METHODS: Preglaucomatous DBA/2J and age-matched control DBA/2J-Gpnmb(+) mice were
fed with CoQ10 (1%) or a control diet daily for 6 months. The RGC survival and
axon preservation were measured by Brn3a and neurofilament immunohistochemistry
and by conventional transmission electron microscopy. Glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP), superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2), heme oxygenase-1 (HO1),
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NR) 1 and 2A, and Bax and phosphorylated Bad
(pBad) protein expression was measured by Western blot analysis. Apoptotic cell
death was assessed by TUNEL staining. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam)/oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS)
complex IV protein expression were measured by real-time PCR and Western blot
analysis.
RESULTS: Coenzyme Q10 promoted RGC survival by approximately 29% and preserved
the axons in the optic nerve head (ONH), as well as inhibited astroglial
activation by decreasing GFAP expression in the retina and ONH of glaucomatous
DBA/2J mice. Intriguingly, CoQ10 significantly blocked the upregulation of NR1
and NR2A, as well as of SOD2 and HO1 protein expression in the retina of
glaucomatous DBA/2J mice. In addition, CoQ10 significantly prevented apoptotic
cell death by decreasing Bax protein expression or by increasing pBad protein
expression. More importantly, CoQ10 preserved mtDNA content and Tfam/OXPHOS
complex IV protein expression in the retina of glaucomatous DBA/2J mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that CoQ10 may be a promising therapeutic
strategy for ameliorating glutamate excitotoxicity and oxidative stress in
glaucomatous neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3929080
PMID: 24458150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;40(2):319-30. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131715.

Mitochondrial DNA copy numbers in pyramidal neurons are decreased and
mitochondrial biogenesis transcriptome signaling is disrupted in Alzheimer's
disease hippocampi.

Rice AC(1), Keeney PM(2), Algarzae NK(2), Ladd AC(2), Thomas RR(2), Bennett JP
Jr(3).

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's Disease Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA,
USA Department of Neurology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA.
(2)Parkinson's Disease Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA,
USA. (3)Parkinson's Disease Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond,
VA, USA Department of Neurology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, 
USA Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the major cause of adult-onset dementia and is
characterized in its pre-diagnostic stage by reduced cerebral cortical glucose
metabolism and in later stages by reduced cortical oxygen uptake, implying
reduced mitochondrial respiration. Using quantitative PCR we determined the
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) gene copy numbers from multiple groups of 15 or 20
pyramidal neurons, GFAP(+) astrocytes and dentate granule neurons isolated using 
laser capture microdissection, and the relative expression of mitochondrial
biogenesis (mitobiogenesis) genes in hippocampi from 10 AD and 9 control (CTL)
cases. AD pyramidal but not dentate granule neurons had significantly reduced
mtDNA copy numbers compared to CTL neurons. Pyramidal neuron mtDNA copy numbers
in CTL, but not AD, positively correlated with cDNA levels of multiple
mitobiogenesis genes. In CTL, but not in AD, hippocampal cDNA levels of PGC1a
were positively correlated with multiple downstream mitobiogenesis factors.
Mitochondrial DNA copy numbers in pyramidal neurons did not correlate with
hippocampal Aß1-42 levels. After 48 h exposure of H9 human neural stem cells to
the neurotoxic fragment Aß25-35, mtDNA copy numbers were not significantly
altered. In summary, AD postmortem hippocampal pyramidal neurons have reduced
mtDNA copy numbers. Mitochondrial biogenesis pathway signaling relationships are 
disrupted in AD, but are mostly preserved in CTL. Our findings implicate complex 
alterations of mitochondria-host cell relationships in AD.

PMID: 24448779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(6):3638-47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1397. Epub 2014
Jan 20.

The amino terminal extension of mammalian mitochondrial RNA polymerase ensures
promoter specific transcription initiation.

Posse V(1), Hoberg E, Dierckx A, Shahzad S, Koolmeister C, Larsson NG,
Wilhelmsson LM, Hällberg BM, Gustafsson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg,
PO Box 440, Gothenburg, Sweden, Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering/Physical Chemistry, Chalmers University of Technology, S-41296
Gothenburg, Sweden, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden, Department of Laboratory Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, SE-17177 Stockholm, Sweden, Max Planck Institute for
Biology of Ageing, Gleueler Str. 50 a D-50931 Cologne, Germany, Centre for
Structural Systems Biology, DESY-Campus, D-22603 Hamburg, Germany and European
Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hamburg Unit, 22603 Hamburg, Germany.

Mammalian mitochondrial transcription is executed by a single subunit
mitochondrial RNA polymerase (Polrmt) and its two accessory factors,
mitochondrial transcription factors A and B2 (Tfam and Tfb2m). Polrmt is
structurally related to single-subunit phage RNA polymerases, but it also
contains a unique N-terminal extension (NTE) of unknown function. We here
demonstrate that the NTE functions together with Tfam to ensure promoter-specific
transcription. When the NTE is deleted, Polrmt can initiate transcription in the 
absence of Tfam, both from promoters and non-specific DNA sequences.
Additionally, when in presence of Tfam and a mitochondrial promoter, the
NTE-deleted mutant has an even higher transcription activity than wild-type
polymerase, indicating that the NTE functions as an inhibitory domain. Our
studies lead to a model according to which Tfam specifically recruits wild-type
Polrmt to promoter sequences, relieving the inhibitory effect of the NTE, as a
first step in transcription initiation. In the second step, Tfb2m is recruited
into the complex and transcription is initiated.

PMCID: PMC3973307
PMID: 24445803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Metab Brain Dis. 2014 Mar;29(1):47-58. doi: 10.1007/s11011-013-9475-2. Epub 2014 
Jan 18.

Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase by metformin protects against global
cerebral ischemia in male rats: interference of AMPK/PGC-1a pathway.

Ashabi G(1), Khodagholi F, Khalaj L, Goudarzvand M, Nasiri M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of 
Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

Here, we have investigated the effect of metformin pretreatment in the rat models
of global cerebral ischemia. Cerebral ischemia which leads to brain dysfunction
is one of the main causes of neurodegeneration and death worldwide. Metformin is 
used in clinical drug therapy protocols of diabetes. It is suggested that
metformin protects cells under hypoxia and ischemia in non-neuronal contexts.
Protective effects of metformin may be modulated via activating the AMP activated
protein kinase (AMPK). Our results showed that induction of 30 min global
cerebral I/R injury using 4-vesseles occlusion model led to significant cell
death in the rat brain. Metformin pretreatment (200 mg kg/once/day, p.o., 2
weeks) attenuated apoptotic cell death and induced mitochondrial biogenesis
proteins in the ischemic rats, analyzed using histological and Western blot
assays. Besides, inhibition of AMPK by compound c showed that metformin resulted 
in apoptosis attenuation via AMPK activation. Interestingly, AMPK activation was 
also involved in the induction of mitochondrial biogenesis proteins using
metformin, inhibition of AMPK by compound c reversed such effect, further
supporting the role of AMPK upstream of mitochondrial biogenesis proteins. In
summary, Metformin pretreatment is able to modulate mitochondrial biogenesis and 
apoptotic cell death pathways through AMPK activation in the context of global
cerebral ischemia, conducting the outcome towards neuroprotection.

PMID: 24435937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3077. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4077.

Distinct structural features of TFAM drive mitochondrial DNA packaging versus
transcriptional activation.

Ngo HB(1), Lovely GA(2), Phillips R(2), Chan DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
California Institute of Technology, 1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena,
California 91125, USA. (2)1] Division of Biology and Biological Engineering,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA [2]
Department of Applied Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California 91125, USA.

TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial) is a DNA-binding protein that
activates transcription at the two major promoters of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA)--the light strand promoter (LSP) and the heavy strand promoter 1 (HSP1). 
Equally important, it coats and packages the mitochondrial genome. TFAM has been 
shown to impose a U-turn on LSP DNA; however, whether this distortion is relevant
at other sites is unknown. Here we present crystal structures of TFAM bound to
HSP1 and to nonspecific DNA. In both, TFAM similarly distorts the DNA into a
U-turn. Yet, TFAM binds to HSP1 in the opposite orientation from LSP explaining
why transcription from LSP requires DNA bending, whereas transcription at HSP1
does not. Moreover, the crystal structures reveal dimerization of DNA-bound TFAM.
This dimerization is dispensable for DNA bending and transcriptional activation
but is important in DNA compaction. We propose that TFAM dimerization enhances
mitochondrial DNA compaction by promoting looping of the DNA.

PMCID: PMC3936014
PMID: 24435062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;306(6):E615-26. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00452.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 14.

Activation of alternative NF-<U+03BA>B signaling during recovery of disuse-induced loss 
of muscle oxidative phenotype.

Remels AH(1), Pansters NA, Gosker HR, Schols AM, Langen RC.

Author information: 
(1)NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology, and Metabolism, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Center +, Maastricht, The
Netherlands.

Physical inactivity-induced loss of skeletal muscle oxidative phenotype (OXPHEN),
often observed in chronic disease, adversely affects physical functioning and
quality of life. Potential therapeutic targets remain to be identified, since the
molecular mechanisms involved in reloading-induced recovery of muscle OXPHEN
remain incompletely understood. We hypothesized a role for alternative NF-<U+03BA>B, as 
a recently identified positive regulator of muscle OXPHEN, in reloading-induced
alterations in muscle OXPHEN. Markers and regulators (including alternative NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling) of muscle OXPHEN were investigated in gastrocnemius muscle of mice
subjected to a hindlimb suspension/reloading (HLS/RL) protocol. Expression levels
of oxidative phosphorylation subunits and slow myosin heavy chain isoforms I and 
IIA increased rapidly upon RL. After an initial decrease upon HLS, mRNA levels of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-<U+03B3> coactivator (PGC) molecules
PGC-1a and PGC-1ß and mRNA levels of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) 
and estrogen-related receptor a increased upon RL. PPAR-d, nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1), NRF-2a, and sirtuin 1 mRNA levels increased during RL although 
expression levels were unaltered upon HLS. In addition, both Tfam and NRF-1
protein levels increased significantly during the RL period. Moreover, upon RL,
IKK-a mRNA and protein levels increased, and phosphorylation of P100 and
subsequent processing to P52 were elevated, reflecting alternative NF-<U+03BA>B
activation. We conclude that RL-induced recovery of muscle OXPHEN is associated
with activation of alternative NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

PMID: 24425759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Apr;64:118-30. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.01.001. Epub 2014 Jan 
11.

PGC-1a regulation of mitochondrial degeneration in experimental diabetic
neuropathy.

Choi J(1), Chandrasekaran K(1), Inoue T(1), Muragundla A(1), Russell JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)VA Maryland Health Care System, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA;
Department of Neurology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)VA
Maryland Health Care System, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA;
Department of Neurology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA. Electronic
address: JRussell@som.umaryland.edu.

Mitochondrial degeneration is considered to play an important role in the
development of diabetic peripheral neuropathy in humans. Mitochondrial
degeneration and the corresponding protein regulation associated with the
degeneration were studied in an animal model of diabetic neuropathy. PGC-1a and
its-regulated transcription factors including TFAM and NRF1, which are master
regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis, are significantly downregulated in
streptozotocin diabetic dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons. Diabetic mice develop
peripheral neuropathy, loss of mitochondria, decreased mitochondrial DNA content 
and increased protein oxidation. Importantly, this phenotype is exacerbated in
PGC-1a (-/-) diabetic mice, which develop a more severe neuropathy with reduced
mitochondrial DNA and a further increase in protein oxidation. PGC-1a (-/-)
diabetic mice develop an increase in total cholesterol and triglycerides, and a
decrease in TFAM and NRF1 protein levels. Loss of PGC-1a causes severe
mitochondrial degeneration with vacuolization in DRG neurons, coupled with
reduced state 3 and 4 respiration, reduced expression of oxidative stress
response genes and an increase in protein oxidation. In contrast, overexpression 
of PGC-1a in cultured adult mouse neurons prevents oxidative stress associated
with increased glucose levels. The study provides new insights into the role of
PGC-1a in mitochondrial regeneration in peripheral neurons and suggests that
therapeutic modulation of PGC-1a function may be an attractive approach for
treatment of diabetic neuropathy.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4023837
PMID: 24423644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(6):4100-12. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1360. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

Organization of the human mitochondrial transcription initiation complex.

Yakubovskaya E(1), Guja KE, Eng ET, Choi WS, Mejia E, Beglov D, Lukin M, Kozakov 
D, Garcia-Diaz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook,
NY 11794, Cryo-Electron Microscopy Facility, New York Structural Biology Center, 
New York, NY 10027 and Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Initiation of transcription in human mitochondria involves two factors, TFAM and 
TFB2M, in addition to the mitochondrial RNA polymerase, POLRMT. We have
investigated the organization of the human mitochondrial transcription initiation
complex on the light-strand promoter (LSP) through solution X-ray scattering,
electron microscopy (EM) and biochemical studies. Our EM results demonstrate a
compact organization of the initiation complex, suggesting that protein-protein
interactions might help mediate initiation. We demonstrate that, in the absence
of DNA, only POLRMT and TFAM form a stable interaction, albeit one with low
affinity. This is consistent with the expected transient nature of the
interactions necessary for initiation and implies that the promoter DNA acts as a
scaffold that enables formation of the full initiation complex. Docking of known 
crystal structures into our EM maps results in a model for transcriptional
initiation that strongly correlates with new and existing biochemical
observations. Our results reveal the organization of TFAM, POLRMT and TFB2M
around the LSP and represent the first structural characterization of the entire 
mitochondrial transcriptional initiation complex.

PMCID: PMC3973321
PMID: 24413562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. BMC Neurosci. 2014 Jan 10;15:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-15-9.

Sex differences in mitochondrial biogenesis determine neuronal death and survival
in response to oxygen glucose deprivation and reoxygenation.

Sharma J, Johnston MV, Hossain MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Hugo W, Moser Research Institute at Kennedy
Krieger, Baltimore, MD, USA. hossain@kennedykrieger.org.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial dysfunction has been linked to neuronal death and a
wide array of neurodegenerative diseases. Previously, we have shown sex
differences in mitochondria-mediated cell death pathways following
hypoxia-ischemia. However, the role of mitochondrial biogenesis in
hypoxic-ischemic brain injury between male vs. female has not been studied yet.
RESULTS: Primary cerebellar granule neurons (CGNs), isolated from P7 male and
female mice (CD-1) segregated based on visual inspection of sex, were exposed to 
2 h of oxygen glucose deprivation (OGD) followed by 6-24 h of reoxygenation
(Reox). Mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m) and cellular ATP levels were
reduced significantly in XX CGNs as compared to XY CGNs. Mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) content was increased (>2-fold) at 2 h OGD in XY CGNs and remained
increased up to 24 h of Reox compared to XX neurons and normoxia controls. The
expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), the nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, were
up-regulated (2-fold, ***p < 0.001) in XY CGNs but slightly reduced or remained
unchanged in XX neurons. Similarly, the TFAM and PGC-1a protein levels and the
mitochondrial proteins HSP60 and COXIV were increased in XY neurons only.
Supportively, a balanced stimulation of fusion (Mfn 1and Mfn 2) and fission (Fis 
1 and Drp 1) genes and enhanced formation of donut-shaped mitochondria were
observed in XY CGNs vs. XX neurons (**p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that OGD/Reox alters mitochondrial
biogenesis and morphological changes in a sex-specific way, influencing neuronal 
injury/survival differently in both sexes.

PMCID: PMC3898007
PMID: 24410996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Rejuvenation Res. 2014 Feb;17(1):62-9. doi: 10.1089/rej.2014.1546.

Partial reversal of skeletal muscle aging by restoration of normal NAD<U+207A> levels.

Mendelsohn AR(1), Larrick JW.

Author information: 
(1)Panorama Research Institute and Regenerative Sciences Institute , Sunnyvale,
California.

That some aging-associated phenotypes may be reversible is an emerging theme in
contemporary aging research. Gomes et al. report that age-associated oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) defects in murine skeletal muscle are biphasic. In the
first phase, OXPHOS is decreased because of reduced expression of mitochondrially
encoded genes. Treatment of moderately old mice (first-phase OXPHOS defects) with
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD<U+207A>) precursor nicotinamide mononucleotide
(NMN) for 1 week restores oxidative phosphorylation activity and other markers of
mitochondrial function in skeletal muscle. However, muscle strength is not
restored. In very old animals (second-phase OXPHOS defects), expression of OXPHOS
genes from both the nucleus and mitochondria is reduced and mitochondrial DNA
integrity is diminished. Gomes et al. propose a model linking decreased NAD<U+207A> to
loss of nuclear SIRT1 activity to stabilization of the hypoxia-associated
transcription factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF-1a). HIF-1a promotes
an hypoxic-like (Warburg effect) state in the cell. The HIF-1a protein interacts 
with c-Myc, decreasing c-Myc-regulated transcription of the key mitochondrial
regulator mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Low levels of TFAM lead to
first-phase OXPHOS dysfunction. The transition to irreversible phase 2
dysfunction remains to be characterized, but may be related to increased reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production. This model suggests that intervention in
mitochondrial aging may be possible using appropriate NAD<U+207A> precursors such as
nicotinamide riboside. Restoring NAD<U+207A> levels may be beneficial throughout the
organism. For example, aging-associated disturbances in circadian rhythm are
linked to diminished SIRT1 activity, and loss of hematopoietic stem cell function
to reduced SIRT3. Work to elucidate other biphasic aging mechanisms is strongly
encouraged.

PMID: 24410488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(6):3884-93. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1356. Epub 2014
Jan 6.

A novel intermediate in transcription initiation by human mitochondrial RNA
polymerase.

Morozov YI(1), Agaronyan K, Cheung AC, Anikin M, Cramer P, Temiakov D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Osteopathic Medicine, Rowan University, 
Medical Center Dr, Stratford, NJ 08084, USA and Gene Center and Department of
Biochemistry, Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM),
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 81377 Munich,
Germany.

The mitochondrial genome is transcribed by a single-subunit T7 phage-like RNA
polymerase (mtRNAP), structurally unrelated to cellular RNAPs. In higher
eukaryotes, mtRNAP requires two transcription factors for efficient
initiation-TFAM, a major nucleoid protein, and TFB2M, a transient component of
mtRNAP catalytic site. The mechanisms behind assembly of the mitochondrial
transcription machinery and its regulation are poorly understood. We isolated and
identified a previously unknown human mitochondrial transcription intermediate-a 
pre-initiation complex that includes mtRNAP, TFAM and promoter DNA. Using
protein-protein cross-linking, we demonstrate that human TFAM binds to the
N-terminal domain of mtRNAP, which results in bending of the promoter DNA around 
mtRNAP. The subsequent recruitment of TFB2M induces promoter melting and
formation of an open initiation complex. Our data indicate that the
pre-initiation complex is likely to be an important target for transcription
regulation and provide basis for further structural, biochemical and biophysical 
studies of mitochondrial transcription.

PMCID: PMC3973326
PMID: 24393772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Apr;1843(4):675-84. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.12.017.
Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Regulation of the biogenesis of OXPHOS complexes in cell transition from
replicating to quiescent state: involvement of PKA and effect of hydroxytyrosol.

Signorile A(1), Micelli L(2), De Rasmo D(3), Santeramo A(2), Papa F(2), Ficarella
R(2), Gattoni G(2), Scacco S(2), Papa S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs,
University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari 70124,Italy. Electronic address:
anna.signorile@uniba.it. (2)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences
and Sense Organs, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", Bari 70124,Italy. (3)Institute 
of Biomembrane and Bioenergetics, CNR, Bari, Italy. (4)Department of Basic
Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs, University of Bari "Aldo Moro",
Bari 70124,Italy; Institute of Biomembrane and Bioenergetics, CNR, Bari, Italy.

A study is presented on the expression of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
complexes in exponentially growing and serum-starved, quiescent human fibroblast 
cultures. The functional levels of respiratory complexes I and III and complex V 
(adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase) were found to be severely depressed in
serum-starved fibroblasts. The depression of oxidative phosphorylation system
(OXPHOS) complexes was associated with reduced levels of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC-1a) and the
down-stream nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial transcription
factors (TFAM). In serum-starved fibroblasts decrease of the catalytic activity
of AMP cyclic dependent protein kinase (PKA) and phosphorylation of cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), the transcription coactivator of the PGC-1a gene,
was found. Hydroxytyrosol prevented the decline in the expression of the PGC-1a
transcription cascade of OXPHOS complexes in serum-starved fibroblast cultures.
The positive effect of HT was associated with activation of PKA and CREB
phosphorylation. These results show involvement of PKA, CREB and PGC-1a in the
regulation of OXPHOS in cell transition from the replicating to the quiescent
state.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24389246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar 1;306(5):E519-28. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00617.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Exercise training boosts eNOS-dependent mitochondrial biogenesis in mouse heart: 
role in adaptation of glucose metabolism.

Vettor R(1), Valerio A, Ragni M, Trevellin E, Granzotto M, Olivieri M, Tedesco L,
Ruocco C, Fossati A, Fabris R, Serra R, Carruba MO, Nisoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine Unit and Center for the Study and Integrated Treatment of
Obesity, Department of Medicine, Padua University, Padua, Italy;

Erratum in
    Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Dec 1;307(11):E1084.

Endurance exercise training increases cardiac energy metabolism through poorly
understood mechanisms. Nitric oxide (NO) produced by endothelial NO synthase
(eNOS) in cardiomyocytes contributes to cardiac adaptation. Here we demonstrate
that the NO donor diethylenetriamine-NO (DETA-NO) activated mitochondrial
biogenesis and function, as assessed by upregulated peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory
factor 1, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) expression, and by
increased mitochondrial DNA content and citrate synthase activity in primary
mouse cardiomyocytes. DETA-NO also induced mitochondrial biogenesis and function 
and enhanced both basal and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in HL-1
cardiomyocytes. The DETA-NO-mediated effects were suppressed by either PGC-1a or 
Tfam small-interference RNA in HL-1 cardiomyocytes. Wild-type and eNOS(-/-) mice 
were subjected to 6 wk graduated swim training. We found that eNOS expression,
mitochondrial biogenesis, mitochondrial volume density and number, and both basal
and insulin-stimulated glucose uptake were increased in left ventricles of
swim-trained wild-type mice. On the contrary, the genetic deletion of eNOS
prevented all these adaptive phenomena. Our findings demonstrate that exercise
training promotes eNOS-dependent mitochondrial biogenesis in heart, which behaves
as an essential step in cardiac glucose transport.

PMID: 24381004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jan;14(1):7-17. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.12.003. Epub 2013
Dec 24.

Rosiglitazone promotes neurite outgrowth and mitochondrial function in N2A cells 
via PPARgamma pathway.

Chiang MC(1), Cheng YC(2), Chen HM(3), Liang YJ(4), Yen CH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 242,
Taiwan. Electronic address: cmcphd@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Chang Gung University, Tao Yuan 333, Taiwan. (3)Department of 
Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 242, Taiwan; Graduate
Institute of Applied Science and Engineering, Fu Jen Catholic University, New
Taipei City 242, Taiwan. (4)Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic
University, New Taipei City 242, Taiwan. (5)Department of International Business,
Ming Chuan University, Taipei 111, Taiwan.

Several pieces of evidence indicate that peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) stimulation promotes neuronal differentiation. However, to
date, the effects of a synthetic PPAR<U+03B3> agonist (Rosiglitazone, Rosi) on neurite
outgrowth have not yet been well described. Here we have evaluated the effects of
Rosi on neurite outgrowth and mitochondrial function in the mouse neuroblastoma
Neuro 2a (N2A) cell line. Our results show that Rosi promotes neurite outgrowth
of N2A cells and significantly increases the population of neurite-bearing cells,
with apparent increase of intracellular calcium and the expression of
calmodulin-dependent kinase I (CaMKI). Rosi also increases the intracellular cAMP
and expression of both protein kinase A (PKA) and cAMP response element binding
protein (CREB). Phosphorylation of CREB was also detected in the Rosi treated N2A
cells. Moreover, Rosi significantly increases the transcription of AMP-activated 
kinase (AMPK) and Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1). Besides, the expression of PPAR coactivator 
1a (PGC1a), as well as the mRNA level its downstream genes, including nuclear
respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF1 and NRF2) and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) were induced by Rosi treatments. Furthermore, Rosi increases the 
level of ATP, D-loop, and mitochondrial mass in N2A cells. Collectively, these
findings provide an array of evidence that PPAR<U+03B3> activation provides beneficial
neuronal networks within neurite outgrowth.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24370585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jan;14(1):18-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.12.004. Epub 2013
Dec 22.

Loss of MED1 triggers mitochondrial biogenesis in C2C12 cells.

Yu J(1), Xiao Y(1), Liu J(1), Ji Y(1), Liu H(1), Xu J(1), Jin X(1), Liu L(1),
Guan MX(1), Jiang P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (2)Department of Genetics, College of Life Sciences,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address:
ppjiang@zju.edu.cn.

Under stress conditions transcription factors, including their coactivators, play
major roles in mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation. MED1
(Mediator complex subunit 1) functions as a coactivator of several transcription 
factors and is implicated in adipogenesis of the lipid and glucose metabolism.
This suggests that MED1 may play a role in mitochondrial function. In this study,
we found that both the mtDNA content and mitochondrial mass were markedly
increased and cell proliferation markedly suppressed in MED1-deficient cells.
Upon MED1 loss, Nrf1 and its downstream target genes involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis (Tfam, Plormt, Tfb1m), were up-regulated as were those genes in the
OXPHOS pathway. Moreover, the knockdown of MED1 resulted in significant changes
in the profile of mitochondrial respiration, accompanied by a prominent decrease 
in the generation of ATP. Collectively, these observations strongly suggest that 
MED1 has an important affect on mitochondrial function. This further elucidates
the role of MED1, particularly its role in the energy metabolism.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Mar;1837(3):335-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bbabio.2013.12.008.
Epub 2013 Dec 20.

Pre-diabetes alters testicular PGC1-a/SIRT3 axis modulating mitochondrial
bioenergetics and oxidative stress.

Rato L(1), Duarte AI(2), Tomás GD(3), Santos MS(4), Moreira PI(5), Socorro S(3), 
Cavaco JE(3), Alves MG(3), Oliveira PF(6).

Author information: 
(1)CICS-UBI-Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior,
6201-506 Covilhã, Portugal; CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology,
University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal. (2)CNC-Center for Neuroscience
and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Institute
for Interdisciplinary Research (IIIUC), University of Coimbra, 3030-789 Coimbra, 
Portugal. (3)CICS-UBI-Health Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira
Interior, 6201-506 Covilhã, Portugal. (4)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell
Biology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Life Sciences
Department, Faculty of Sciences and Technology, University of Coimbra, 3004-517
Coimbra, Portugal. (5)CNC-Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of
Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal; Laboratory of Physiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Coimbra, 3004-504 Coimbra, Portugal. (6)CICS-UBI-Health
Sciences Research Centre, University of Beira Interior, 6201-506 Covilhã,
Portugal. Electronic address: pfobox@gmail.com.

Pre-diabetes, a risk factor for type 2 diabetes development, leads to metabolic
changes at testicular level. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator 1 a (PGC-1a) and Sirtuin 3 (Sirt3) are pivotal in mitochondrial
function. We hypothesized that pre-diabetes disrupts testicular PGC-1a/Sirt3
axis, compromising testicular mitochondrial function. Using a high-energy-diet
induced pre-diabetic rat model, we evaluated testicular levels of PGC-1a and its 
downstream targets, nuclear respiratory factors 1 (NRF-1) and 2 (NRF-2),
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and Sirt3. We also assessed
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content, mitochondrial function, energy levels and
oxidative stress parameters. Protein levels were quantified by Western Blot,
mtDNA content was determined by qPCR. Mitochondrial complex activity and
oxidative stress parameters were spectrophotometrically evaluated. Adenine
nucleotide levels, adenosine and its metabolites (inosine and hypoxanthine) were 
determined by reverse-phase HPLC. Pre-diabetic rats showed increased blood
glucose levels and impaired glucose tolerance. Both testicular PGC-1a and Sirt3
levels were decreased. NRF-1, NRF-2 and TFAM were not altered. Testicular mtDNA
content was decreased. Mitochondrial complex I activity was increased, whereas
mitochondrial complex III activity was decreased. Adenylate energy charge was
decreased in pre-diabetic rats, as were ATP and ADP levels. Conversely, AMP
levels were increased, evidencing a decreased ATP/AMP ratio. Concerning to
oxidative stress pre-diabetes decreased testicular antioxidant capacity and
increased lipid and protein oxidation. In sum, pre-diabetes compromises
testicular mitochondrial function by repressing PGC-1a/Sirt3 axis and mtDNA copy 
number, declining respiratory capacity and increasing oxidative stress. This
study gives new insights into overall testicular bioenergetics at this prodromal 
stage of disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2014 Feb 1;192:74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2013.12.007. 
Epub 2013 Dec 17.

Altered mitochondrial biogenesis and its fusion gene expression is involved in
the high-altitude adaptation of rat lung.

Chitra L(1), Boopathy R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology and Biotechnology Division, DRDO - BU Center for Life
Sciences, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore 641 046, Tamil Nadu, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore 641 046, Tamil 
Nadu, India. Electronic address: boopathybiotech@gmail.com.

Intermittent hypobaric hypoxia-induced preconditioning (IHH-PC) of rat favored
the adaption of lungs to severe HH conditions, possibly through stabilization of 
mitochondrial function. This is based on the data generated on regulatory
coordination of nuclear DNA-encoded mitochondrial biogenesis; dynamics, and
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded oxidative phosphorylation (mtOXPHOS) genes
expression. At 16th day after start of IHH-PC (equivalent to 5000m, 6h/d, 2w of
treatment), rats were exposed to severe HH stimulation at 9142m for 6h. The
IHH-PC significantly counteracted the HH-induced effect of increased lung: water 
content; tissue damage; and oxidant injury. Further, IHH-PC significantly
increased the mitochondrial number, mtDNA content and mtOXPHOS complex activity
in the lung tissues. This observation is due to an increased expression of genes 
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1a, ERRa, NRF1, NRF2 and TFAM), fusion 
(Mfn1 and Mfn2) and mtOXPHOS. Thus, the regulatory pathway formed by
PGC-1a/ERRa/Mfn2 axes is required for the mitochondrial adaptation provoked by
IHH-PC regimen to counteract subsequent HH stress.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Apr;1842(4):535-46. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.12.004.
Epub 2013 Dec 15.

Coupling energy homeostasis with a mechanism to support plasticity in brain
trauma.

Agrawal R(1), Tyagi E(1), Vergnes L(2), Reue K(2), Gomez-Pinilla F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA. (2)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (3)Department of Integrative Biology & Physiology, UCLA, 
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Neurosurgery, UCLA Brain Injury
Research Center, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address:
fgomezpi@ucla.edu.

Metabolic dysfunction occurring after traumatic brain injury (TBI) is an
important risk factor for the development of psychiatric illness. In the present 
study, we utilized an omega-3 diet during early life as a metabolic
preconditioning to alter the course of TBI during adulthood. TBI animals under
omega-3 deficiency were more prone to alterations in energy homeostasis
(adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase; AMPK phosphorylation and
cytochrome C oxidase II; COII levels) and mitochondrial biogenesis (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha; PGC-1a and
mitochondrial transcription factor A; TFAM). A similar response was found for
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and its signaling through tropomyosin
receptor kinase B (TrkB). The results from in vitro studies showed that
7,8-dihydroxyflavone (7,8-DHF), a TrkB receptor agonist, upregulates the levels
of biogenesis activator PGC-1a, and CREB phosphorylation in neuroblastoma cells
suggesting that BDNF-TrkB signaling is pivotal for engaging signals related to
synaptic plasticity and energy metabolism. The treatment with 7,8-DHF elevated
the mitochondrial respiratory capacity, which emphasizes the role of BDNF-TrkB
signaling as mitochondrial bioenergetics stimulator. Omega-3 deficiency worsened 
the effects of TBI on anxiety-like behavior and potentiated a reduction of
anxiolytic neuropeptide Y1 receptor (NPY1R). These results highlight the action
of metabolic preconditioning for building long-term neuronal resilience against
TBI incurred during adulthood. Overall, the results emphasize the interactive
action of metabolic and plasticity signals for supporting neurological health.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24345766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Apr;176(1):66-77. doi: 10.1111/cei.12256.

Increased 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine in plasma and decreased mRNA expression of 
human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1, anti-oxidant enzymes, mitochondrial
biogenesis-related proteins and glycolytic enzymes in leucocytes in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Lee HT(1), Lin CS, Lee CS, Tsai CY, Wei YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan; Division of
Allergy, Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mackay
Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Medicine, Mackay Medical
College, New Taipei City, Taiwan.

We measured plasma levels of the oxidative DNA damage marker
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and leucocyte mRNA expression levels of the 
genes encoding the 8-OHdG repair enzyme human 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1
(hOGG1), the anti-oxidant enzymes copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (Cu/ZnSOD),
manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), catalase, glutathione peroxidase-1
(GPx-1), GPx-4, glutathione reductase (GR) and glutathione synthetase (GS), the
mitochondrial biogenesis-related proteins mtDNA-encoded ND 1 polypeptide (ND1),
ND6, ATPase 6, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), nuclear respiratory
factor 1(NRF-1), pyruvate dehydrogenase E1 component alpha subunit (PDHA1),
pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase isoenzyme 1 (PDK-1) and hypoxia inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a) and the glycolytic enzymes hexokinase-II (HK-II), glucose 6-phosphate
isomerase (GPI), phosphofructokinase (PFK), glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and lactate dehydrogenase A (LDHa). We analysed their
relevance to oxidative damage in 85 systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients, 
four complicated SLE patients undergoing rituximab treatment and 45 healthy
individuals. SLE patients had higher plasma 8-OHdG levels (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·01) but lower
leucocyte expression of the genes encoding hOGG1(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·01), anti-oxidant enzymes 
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05), mitochondrial biogenesis-related proteins (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05) and glycolytic
enzymes (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05) than healthy individuals. The increase in plasma 8-OHdG was
correlated positively with the elevation of leucocyte expression of the genes
encoding hOGG1 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05), anti-oxidant enzymes (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05), several mitochondrial
biogenesis-related proteins (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05) and glycolytic enzymes (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05) in lupus
patients. The patients, whose leucocyte mtDNA harboured D310 heteroplasmy,
exhibited a positive correlation between the mtDNA copy number and expression of 
ND1, ND6 and ATPase 6 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05) and a negative correlation between mtDNA copy
number and systemic lupus erythematosus disease activity index (SLEDAI)
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05), as well as plasma 8-OHdG (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0·05). In particular, four complicated 
SLE patients with increased expression of the genes encoding the anti-oxidant
enzymes, GAPDH, Tfam and PDHA1, experienced better therapeutic outcomes after
rituximab therapy. In conclusion, higher oxidative damage with suboptimal
increases in DNA repair, anti-oxidant capacity, mitochondrial biogenesis and
glucose metabolism may be implicated in SLE deterioration, and this impairment
might be improved by targeted biological therapy.

© 2013 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC3958155
PMID: 24345202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Dec 17;8:193. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-193.

Phenotypic variability and identification of novel YARS2 mutations in YARS2
mitochondrial myopathy, lactic acidosis and sideroblastic anaemia.

Riley LG, Menezes MJ, Rudinger-Thirion J, Duff R, de Lonlay P, Rotig A, Tchan MC,
Davis M, Cooper ST, Christodoulou J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Metabolic Disorders Research Unit, Kids Research Institute, Children's
Hospital at Westmead 2145, Sydney, Australia.
john.christodoulou@health.nsw.gov.au.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase (YARS2) gene
have previously been identified as a cause of the tissue specific mitochondrial
respiratory chain (RC) disorder, Myopathy, Lactic Acidosis, Sideroblastic Anaemia
(MLASA). In this study, a cohort of patients with a mitochondrial RC disorder for
who anaemia was a feature, were screened for mutations in YARS2.
METHODS: Twelve patients were screened for YARS2 mutations by Sanger sequencing. 
Clinical data were compared. Functional assays were performed to confirm the
pathogenicity of the novel mutations and to investigate tissue specific effects.
RESULTS: PathogenicYARS2 mutations were identified in three of twelve patients
screened. Two patients were found to be homozygous for the previously reported
p.Phe52Leu mutation, one severely and one mildly affected. These patients had
different mtDNA haplogroups which may contribute to the observed phenotypic
variability. A mildly affected patient was a compound heterozygote for two novel 
YARS2 mutations, p.Gly191Asp and p.Arg360X. The p.Gly191Asp mutation resulted in 
a 38-fold loss in YARS2 catalytic efficiency and the p.Arg360X mutation did not
produce a stable protein. The p.Phe52Leu and p.Gly191Asp/p.Arg360X mutations
resulted in more severe RC deficiency of complexes I, III and IV in muscle cells 
compared to fibroblasts, but had relatively normal YARS2 protein levels. The
muscle-specific RC deficiency can be related to the increased requirement for RC 
complexes in muscle. There was also a failure of mtDNA proliferation upon
myogenesis in patient cells which may compound the RC defect. Patient muscle had 
increased levels of PGC1-a and TFAM suggesting mitochondrial biogenesis was
activated as a potential compensatory mechanism.
CONCLUSION: In this study we have identified novel YARS2 mutations and noted
marked phenotypic variability among YARS2 MLASA patients, with phenotypes ranging
from mild to lethal, and we suggest that the background mtDNA haplotype may be
contributing to the phenotypic variability. These findings have implications for 
diagnosis and prognostication of the MLASA and related phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3878580
PMID: 24344687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Genes Nutr. 2014 Jan;9(1):361. doi: 10.1007/s12263-013-0361-7. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Quercetin can reduce insulin resistance without decreasing adipose tissue and
skeletal muscle fat accumulation.

Arias N(1), Macarulla MT, Aguirre L, Martínez-Castaño MG, Portillo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Obesity Group, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty
of Pharmacy, Lascaray Research Center, University of the Basque Country
(UPV/EHU), Vitoria, Spain.

Quercetin exhibits a wide range of biological functions. The first aim of the
present work was to analyze the effects of quercetin on fat accumulation in
adipose tissue and glycemic control in rats. Any potential involvement of muscle 
fatty acid oxidation in its effect on glycemic control was also assessed. Animals
were fed a high-fat high-sucrose diet either supplemented with quercetin
(30 mg/kg body weight/day), or not supplemented, for 6 weeks. One week before
killing, a glucose tolerance test was carried out. Muscle triacylglycerol
content, serum glucose, insulin, fructosamine and free fatty acids were measured,
and homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) was calculated.
The activities of lipogenic enzymes and lipoprotein lipase in adipose tissue,
carnitine palmitoyl transferase-1b (CPT-1b) and citrate synthase in skeletal
muscle, and the expression of several genes, ACO, CD36, CPT-1b, PPAR-a, PGC-1a,
UCP3, TFAM and COX-2 in skeletal muscle were analyzed. Quercetin caused no
significant reduction in body weight or adipose tissue sizes. However,
fructosamine, basal glucose and insulin, and consequently HOMA-IR, were
significantly reduced by quercetin. No changes were observed in the activity of
lipogenic enzymes and lipoprotein lipase. Muscle triacylglycerol content was
similar in both experimental groups. The expression of ACO, CD36, CPT-1b, PPAR-a,
PGC-1a, UCP3, TFAM and COX-2 remained unchanged. It can be concluded that
quercetin is more effective as an anti-diabetic than as an anti-obesity
biomolecule. The improvement in insulin resistance induced by this flavonoid is
not mediated by a delipidating effect in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC3896623
PMID: 24338341  [PubMed]


250. Apoptosis. 2014 Apr;19(4):603-14. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0956-x.

Coenzyme Q10 ameliorates oxidative stress and prevents mitochondrial alteration
in ischemic retinal injury.

Lee D(1), Kim KY, Shim MS, Kim SY, Ellisman MH, Weinreb RN, Ju WK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Optic Nerve Biology, Department of Ophthalmology, Hamilton
Glaucoma Center, University of California San Diego, 9415 Campus Point Drive, La 
Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) acts by scavenging reactive oxygen species for protecting
neuronal cells against oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases. We tested 
whether a diet supplemented with CoQ10 ameliorates oxidative stress and
mitochondrial alteration, as well as promotes retinal ganglion cell (RGC)
survival in ischemic retina induced by intraocular pressure elevation. A CoQ10
significantly promoted RGC survival at 2 weeks after ischemia. Superoxide
dismutase 2 (SOD2) and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) expression were significantly
increased at 12 h after ischemic injury. In contrast, the CoQ10 significantly
prevented the upregulation of SOD2 and HO-1 protein expression in ischemic
retina. In addition, the CoQ10 significantly blocked activation of astroglial and
microglial cells in ischemic retina. Interestingly, the CoQ10 blocked apoptosis
by decreasing caspase-3 protein expression in ischemic retina. Bax and
phosphorylated Bad (pBad) protein expression were significantly increased in
ischemic retina at 12 h. Interestingly, while CoQ10 significantly decreased Bax
protein expression in ischemic retina, CoQ10 showed greater increase of pBad
protein expression. Of interest, ischemic injury significantly increased
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) protein expression in the retina at
12 h, however, CoQ10 significantly preserved Tfam protein expression in ischemic 
retina. Interestingly, there were no differences in mitochondrial DNA content
among control- or CoQ10-treated groups. Our findings demonstrate that CoQ10
protects RGCs against oxidative stress by modulating the Bax/Bad-mediated
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway as well as prevents mitochondrial alteration by
preserving Tfam protein expression in ischemic retina. Our results suggest that
CoQ10 may provide neuroprotection against oxidative stress-mediated mitochondrial
alterations in ischemic retinal injury.

PMCID: PMC3938850
PMID: 24337820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2014 Feb 15;116(4):364-75. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01177.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Mitochondrial uncoupling reduces exercise capacity despite several skeletal
muscle metabolic adaptations.

Schlagowski AI(1), Singh F, Charles AL, Gali Ramamoorthy T, Favret F, Piquard F, 
Geny B, Zoll J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Strasbourg, Faculty of Medicine, FMTS, EA 3072, Strasbourg,
France;

The effects of mitochondrial uncoupling on skeletal muscle mitochondrial
adaptation and maximal exercise capacity are unknown. In this study, rats were
divided into a control group (CTL, n = 8) and a group treated with
2,4-dinitrophenol, a mitochondrial uncoupler, for 28 days (DNP, 30
mg·kg(-1)·day(-1) in drinking water, n = 8). The DNP group had a significantly
lower body mass (P < 0.05) and a higher resting oxygen uptake (Vo2, P < 0.005).
The incremental treadmill test showed that maximal running speed and running
economy (P < 0.01) were impaired but that maximal Vo2 (Vo2max) was higher in the 
DNP-treated rats (P < 0.05). In skinned gastrocnemius fibers, basal respiration
(V0) was higher (P < 0.01) in the DNP-treated animals, whereas the acceptor
control ratio (ACR, Vmax/V0) was significantly lower (P < 0.05), indicating a
reduction in OXPHOS efficiency. In skeletal muscle, DNP activated the
mitochondrial biogenesis pathway, as indicated by changes in the mRNA expression 
of PGC1-a and -ß, NRF-1 and -2, and TFAM, and increased the mRNA expression of
cytochrome oxidase 1 (P < 0.01). The expression of two mitochondrial proteins
(prohibitin and Ndufs 3) was higher after DNP treatment. Mitochondrial fission 1 
protein (Fis-1) was increased in the DNP group (P < 0.01), but mitofusin-1 and -2
were unchanged. Histochemical staining for NADH dehydrogenase and succinate
dehydrogenase activity in the gastrocnemius muscle revealed an increase in the
proportion of oxidative fibers after DNP treatment. Our study shows that
mitochondrial uncoupling induces several skeletal muscle adaptations,
highlighting the role of mitochondrial coupling as a critical factor for maximal 
exercise capacities. These results emphasize the importance of investigating the 
qualitative aspects of mitochondrial function in addition to the amount of
mitochondria.

PMID: 24336883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 6;8(12):e81879. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081879. eCollection
2013.

Elevated mitochondrial oxidative stress impairs metabolic adaptations to exercise
in skeletal muscle.

Crane JD(1), Abadi A, Hettinga BP, Ogborn DI, MacNeil LG, Steinberg GR,
Tarnopolsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada ;
Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Mitochondrial oxidative stress is a complex phenomenon that is inherently tied to
energy provision and is implicated in many metabolic disorders. Exercise training
increases mitochondrial oxidative capacity in skeletal muscle yet it remains
unclear if oxidative stress plays a role in regulating these adaptations. We
demonstrate that the chronic elevation in mitochondrial oxidative stress present 
in Sod2 (+/-) mice impairs the functional and biochemical mitochondrial
adaptations to exercise. Following exercise training Sod2 (+/-) mice fail to
increase maximal work capacity, mitochondrial enzyme activity and mtDNA copy
number, despite a normal augmentation of mitochondrial proteins. Additionally,
exercised Sod2 (+/-) mice cannot compensate for their higher amount of basal
mitochondrial oxidative damage and exhibit poor electron transport chain complex 
assembly that accounts for their compromised adaptation. Overall, these results
demonstrate that chronic skeletal muscle mitochondrial oxidative stress does not 
impact exercise induced mitochondrial biogenesis, but impairs the resulting
mitochondrial protein function and can limit metabolic plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3855701
PMID: 24324727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jan;14(1):54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.11.003. Epub 2013
Dec 4.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) controls deoxyglucose-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.

Ngamsiri P(1), Watcharasit P(2), Satayavivad J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Chulabhorn Research Institute, 54 KamphaengPhet6
Rd, Bangkok, 10210, Thailand; Chulabhorn Graduate Institute, 54 KamphaengPhet6
Rd, Bangkok 10210, Thailand. (2)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Chulabhorn Research
Institute, 54 KamphaengPhet6 Rd, Bangkok, 10210, Thailand; Chulabhorn Graduate
Institute, 54 KamphaengPhet6 Rd, Bangkok 10210, Thailand; Center of Excellence on
Environmental Health and Toxicology (EHT), Office of the Higher Education
Commission, Thailand. Electronic address: Piyajit@cri.or.th. (3)Laboratory of
Pharmacology, Chulabhorn Research Institute, 54 KamphaengPhet6 Rd, Bangkok,
10210, Thailand; Chulabhorn Graduate Institute, 54 KamphaengPhet6 Rd, Bangkok
10210, Thailand; Center of Excellence on Environmental Health and Toxicology
(EHT), Office of the Higher Education Commission, Thailand.

Mitochondrial biogenesis, a mitochondrial growth and division process, is crucial
for adaptation to metabolic stress. The present study demonstrated that treatment
with a specific inhibitor of GSK3, SB216763, attenuated induction of
mitochondrial biogenesis by a glycolysis inhibitor, 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG),
without affecting this biogenesis at basal condition. Additionally,
overexpression of WT-GSK3ß promoted whereas GSK3ß-KD attenuated 2-DG-induced
mitochondrial protein expression. The mitochondrial biogenesis attenuation by
GSK3 inhibitor was not due to inhibition of protein degradation. Furthermore,
GSK3 inhibition further reduced transcription of mitochondrial (COXII), but not
nuclear (VDAC) gene by 2-DG suggesting its participation in 2-DG-induced
mitochondrial transcription. Together, our results show that GSK3 regulates
mitochondrial biogenesis induced by glycolysis inhibition.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24316184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2014 Jul;19(4):541-8. doi: 10.1007/s12192-013-0480-5.
Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) promotes mitochondrial biogenesis in Hep G2 cells
by activating Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a
(PGC-1a).

Shen Z(1), Liu C, Liu P, Zhao J, Xu W.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Hospital of Weifang Medical University, Weifang, China.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P), a potent bioactive phospholipid, has been reported
to regulate a broad spectrum of biological processes. However, little is known
regarding S1P's effects on mitochondrial function. In this study, we investigated
the S1P's effects on the Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator
1a (PGC-1a) signaling pathway and mitochondrial biogenesis in Hep G2 cells. Our
results indicate that administration of S1P leads to a significant upregulation
of mitochondrial DNA replication and transcription, increased mitochondrial mass,
and elevated adenosine triphosphate synthesis. In addition, we found that
treatment with S1P stimulates expression of PGC-1a, a master regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis, as well as its downstream targets: nuclear respiratory 
factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Moreover, our
data demonstrate that S1P's effects on PGC-1a and mitochondrial biogenesis are
mediated by the protein kinase A/cAMP response element-binding protein (PKA/CREB)
pathway. Importantly, we also revealed that S1P's effects on mitochondrial
biogenesis are dependent on its type 2 receptor (S1P2), though not on either its 
type 1 (S1P1) or type 3 (S1P3) receptors. Based on these observations, we
concluded that S1P activates the PKA/CREB pathway through S1P2, which then
promotes expression of PGC-1a/NRF1/TFAM and subsequent mitochondrial biogenesis
in Hep G2 cells.

PMCID: PMC4041936
PMID: 24293320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013;2013:154279. doi: 10.1155/2013/154279. Epub 2013 Oct
31.

Quercetin induces mitochondrial biogenesis through activation of HO-1 in HepG2
cells.

Rayamajhi N(1), Kim SK, Go H, Joe Y, Callaway Z, Kang JG, Ryter SW, Chung HT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, Republic of
Korea ; Chitwan Medical College, Bharatpur-10, Chitwan, Nepal.

The regeneration of mitochondria by regulated biogenesis plays an important
homeostatic role in cells and tissues and furthermore may provide an adaptive
mechanism in certain diseases such as sepsis. The heme oxygenase (HO-1)/carbon
monoxide (CO) system is an inducible cytoprotective mechanism in mammalian cells.
Natural antioxidants can provide therapeutic benefit, in part, by inducing the
HO-1/CO system. This study focused on the mechanism by which the natural
antioxidant quercetin can induce mitochondrial biogenesis in HepG2 cells. We
found that quercetin treatment induced expression of mitochondrial biogenesis
activators (PGC-1 a , NRF-1, TFAM), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and proteins (COX 
IV) in HepG2 cells. The HO inhibitor SnPP and the CO scavenger hemoglobin
reversed the effects of quercetin on mitochondrial biogenesis in HepG2 cells. The
stimulatory effects of quercetin on mitochondrial biogenesis could be
recapitulated in vivo in liver tissue and antagonized by SnPP. Finally, quercetin
conferred an anti-inflammatory effect in the liver of mice treated with LPS and
prevented impairment of mitochondrial biogenesis by LPS in vivo. These salutary
effects of quercetin in vivo were also antagonized by SnPP. Thus, our results
suggest that quercetin enhances mitochondrial biogenesis mainly via the HO-1/CO
system in vitro and in vivo. The beneficial effects of quercetin may provide a
therapeutic basis in inflammatory diseases and sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3833383
PMID: 24288584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Toxicol Lett. 2014 Jan 30;224(3):326-32. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2013.11.014. Epub 
2013 Nov 22.

Suppressed mitochondrial biogenesis in folic acid-induced acute kidney injury and
early fibrosis.

Stallons LJ(1), Whitaker RM(2), Schnellmann RG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Death, Injury, and Regeneration, Department of Drug Discovery 
and Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 280 Calhoun
Street, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address: stallons@musc.edu.
(2)Center for Cell Death, Injury, and Regeneration, Department of Drug Discovery 
and Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 280 Calhoun
Street, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. Electronic address: whitakr@musc.edu.
(3)Center for Cell Death, Injury, and Regeneration, Department of Drug Discovery 
and Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 280 Calhoun
Street, Charleston, SC 29425, USA; Ralph H. Johnson Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, 109 Bee Street, Charleston, SC 29401, USA. Electronic address:
schnell@musc.edu.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a disease with mitochondrial dysfunction and a newly
established risk factor for the development of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and
fibrosis. We examined mitochondrial homeostasis in the folic acid (FA)-induced
AKI model that develops early fibrosis over a rapid time course. Mice given a
single dose of FA had elevated serum creatinine (3-fold) and urine glucose
(2.2-fold) 1 and 2 d after injection that resolved by 4d. In contrast, peroxisome
proliferator gamma coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) and mitochondrial transcription factor
A (TFAM), critical transcriptional regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis (MB),
were down-regulated ~80% 1d after FA injection and remained depressed through 14 
d. Multiple electron transport chain and ATP synthesis genes were also
down-regulated from 1 to 14 d after FA, including NADH dehydrogenase (ubiquinone)
1 beta subcomplex 8 (NDUFß8), ATP synthase subunit ß (ATPS-ß), and cytochrome C
oxidase subunit I (COXI). Mitochondrial DNA copy number was reduced ~50% from 2
to 14 d after FA injection. Protein levels of early fibrosis markers a-smooth
muscle actin and transforming growth factor ß1 were elevated at 6 and 14 d after 
FA. Picrosirius red staining and collagen 1A2 (COL1A2) IHC revealed staining for 
mature collagen deposition at 14 d. We propose that mitochondrial dysfunction
induced by AKI is a persistent cellular injury that promotes progression to
fibrosis and CKD, and that this model can be used to test mitochondrial
therapeutics that limit progression to fibrosis and CKD.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3987699
PMID: 24275386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Jan 15;723:322-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.11.009. Epub
2013 Nov 22.

Genomic and non-genomic regulation of PGC1 isoforms by estrogen to increase
cerebral vascular mitochondrial biogenesis and reactive oxygen species
protection.

Kemper MF(1), Stirone C(1), Krause DN(2), Duckles SP(1), Procaccio V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California at
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625 USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, University of California at Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697-4625 USA.
Electronic address: dnkrause@uci.edu.

We previously found that estrogen exerts a novel protective effect on
mitochondria in brain vasculature. Here we demonstrate in rat cerebral blood
vessels that 17ß-estradiol (estrogen), both in vivo and ex vivo, affects key
transcriptional coactivators responsible for mitochondrial regulation. Treatment 
of ovariectomized rats with estrogen in vivo lowered mRNA levels of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1a) but increased
levels of the other PGC-1 isoforms: PGC-1ß and PGC-1 related coactivator (PRC).
In vessels ex vivo, estrogen decreased protein levels of PGC-1a via activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). Estrogen treatment also increased
phosphorylation of forkhead transcription factor, FoxO1, a known pathway for
PGC-1a downregulation. In contrast to the decrease in PGC-1a, estrogen increased 
protein levels of nuclear respiratory factor 1, a known PGC target and mediator
of mitochondrial biogenesis. The latter effect of estrogen was independent of
PI3K, suggesting a separate mechanism consistent with increased expression of
PGC-1ß and PRC. We demonstrated increased mitochondrial biogenesis following
estrogen treatment in vivo; cerebrovascular levels of mitochondrial transcription
factor A and electron transport chain subunits as well as the
mitochondrial/nuclear DNA ratio were increased. We examined a downstream target
of PGC-1ß, glutamate-cysteine ligase (GCL), the rate-limiting enzyme for
glutathione synthesis. In vivo estrogen increased protein levels of both GCL
subunits and total glutathione levels. Together these data show estrogen
differentially regulates PGC-1 isoforms in brain vasculature, underscoring the
importance of these coactivators in adapting mitochondria in specific tissues. By
upregulating PGC-1ß and/or PRC, estrogen appears to enhance mitochondrial
biogenesis, function and reactive oxygen species protection.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4028038
PMID: 24275351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Sports Med. 2014 Mar;44(3):303-9. doi: 10.1007/s40279-013-0127-9.

The emerging role of p53 in exercise metabolism.

Bartlett JD(1), Close GL, Drust B, Morton JP.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores
University, Tom Reilly Building, Byrom St Campus, Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK.

The major tumour suppressor protein, p53, is one of the most well-studied
proteins in cell biology. Often referred to as the Guardian of the Genome, the
list of known functions of p53 include regulatory roles in cell cycle arrest,
apoptosis, angiogenesis, DNA repair and cell senescence. More recently, p53 has
been implicated as a key molecular player regulating substrate metabolism and
exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle. In this context,
the study of p53 therefore has obvious implications for both human health and
performance, given that impaired mitochondrial content and function is associated
with the pathology of many metabolic disorders such as ageing, type 2 diabetes,
obesity and cancer, as well as reduced exercise performance. Studies on p53
knockout (KO) mice collectively demonstrate that ablation of p53 content reduces 
intermyofibrillar (IMF) and subsarcolemmal (SS) mitochondrial yield, reduces
cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma co-activator 1-a protein content whilst also reducing
mitochondrial respiration and increasing reactive oxygen species production
during state 3 respiration in IMF mitochondria. Additionally, p53 KO mice exhibit
marked reductions in exercise capacity (in the magnitude of 50 %) during
fatiguing swimming, treadmill running and electrical stimulation protocols. p53
may regulate contractile-induced increases in mitochondrial content via
modulating mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) content and/or activity,
given that p53 KO mice display reduced skeletal muscle mitochondrial DNA, Tfam
messenger RNA and protein levels. Furthermore, upon muscle contraction, p53 is
phosphorylated on serine 15 and subsequently translocates to the mitochondria
where it forms a complex with Tfam to modulate expression of
mitochondrial-encoded subunits of the COX complex. In human skeletal muscle, the 
exercise-induced phosphorylation of p53(Ser15) is enhanced in conditions of
reduced carbohydrate availability in association with enhanced upstream
signalling through 5'adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase but not p38
mitogen-activated protein kinase. In this way, undertaking regular exercise in
carbohydrate restricted states may therefore be a practical approach to achieve
the physiological benefits of consistent p53 signalling. Although our knowledge
of p53 in exercise metabolism has advanced considerably, much of our current
understanding of p53 regulation and associated targets is derived from various
non-muscle cells and tissues. As such, many fundamental questions remain
unanswered in contracting skeletal muscle. Detailed studies concerning the
time-course of p53 activation (including additional post-translational
modifications and subsequent subcellular translocation), as well as the effects
of exercise modality (endurance versus resistance), intensity, duration, fibre
type, age, training status and nutrient availability, must now be performed so
that we can optimise exercise prescription guidelines to strategically target p53
signalling. The emerging role of p53 in skeletal muscle metabolism therefore
represents a novel and exciting research area for exercise and muscle
physiologists.

PMID: 24264057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jan;14(1):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.11.001. Epub 2013
Nov 15.

Effect of near-infrared light exposure on mitochondrial signaling in C2C12 muscle
cells.

Nguyen LM(1), Malamo AG(1), Larkin-Kaiser KA(1), Borsa PA(1), Adhihetty PJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32611, United States. (2)Department of Applied Physiology and
Kinesiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, United States.
Electronic address: padhihetty@hhp.ufl.edu.

Near-infrared (NIR) light is a complementary therapy used to treat
musculoskeletal injuries but the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Acute NIR
light treatment (~800-950 nm; 22.8 J/cm(2)) induced a dose-dependent increase in 
mitochondrial signaling (AMPK, p38 MAPK) in differentiated muscle cells. Repeated
NIR light exposure (4 days) appeared to elevate oxidative stress and increase the
upstream mitochondrial regulatory proteins AMPK (3.1-fold), p38 (2.8-fold),
PGC-1a (19.7%), Sirt1 (26.8%), and reduced RIP140 (23.2%), but downstream
mitochondrial regulation/content (Tfam, NRF-1, Sirt3, cytochrome c, ETC subunits)
was unaltered. Our data indicates that NIR light alters mitochondrial biogenesis 
signaling and may represent a mechanistic link to the clinical benefits.

Copyright © 2013 Mitochondria Research Society and Elsevier B.V. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 24246911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 3;289(1):365-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.506733. Epub 2013
Nov 14.

Nuclear recruitment of neuronal nitric-oxide synthase by a-syntrophin is crucial 
for the induction of mitochondrial biogenesis.

Aquilano K(1), Baldelli S, Ciriolo MR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biology, University of Rome "Tor Vergata," 00133 Rome, 
Italy and.

Neuronal nitric-oxide synthase (nNOS) has various splicing variants and different
subcellular localizations. nNOS can be found also in the nucleus; however, its
exact role in this compartment is still not completely defined. In this report,
we demonstrate that the PDZ domain allows the recruitment of nNOS to nuclei, thus
favoring local NO production, nuclear protein S-nitrosylation, and induction of
mitochondrial biogenesis. In particular, overexpression of PDZ-containing nNOS
(nNOSa) increases S-nitrosylated CREB with consequent augmented binding on cAMP
response element consensus sequence on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
<U+03B3> co-activator (PGC)-1a promoter. The resulting PGC-1a induction is accompanied
by the expression of mitochondrial genes (e.g., TFAM, MtCO1) and increased
mitochondrial mass. Importantly, full active nNOS lacking PDZ domain (nNOSß) does
not localize in nuclei and fails in inducing the expression of PGC-1a. Moreover, 
we substantiate that the mitochondrial biogenesis normally accompanying
myogenesis is associated with nuclear translocation of nNOS. We demonstrate that 
a-Syntrophin, which resides in nuclei of myocytes, functions as the upstream
mediator of nuclear nNOS translocation and nNOS-dependent mitochondrial
biogenesis. Overall, our results indicate that altered nNOS splicing and nuclear 
localization could be contributing factors in human muscular diseases associated 
with mitochondrial impairment.

PMCID: PMC3879559
PMID: 24235139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2014 Mar;9(2):245-58.

The novel tetramethylpyrazine bis-nitrone (TN-2) protects against
MPTP/MPP+-induced neurotoxicity via inhibition of mitochondrial-dependent
apoptosis.

Xu D, Duan H, Zhang Z, Cui W, Wang L, Sun Y, Lang M, Hoi PM, Han Y, Wang Y, Lee
SM.

Mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis plays an important role in the degeneration of 
dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD). Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetra- 
hydropyridine (MPTP), the most widely used neurotoxin to simulate PD, is
converted to 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) in vivo. MPP(+) induces
excessive intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS), leading to
mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis via sequentially opening mitochondria
permeability transition pore (mPTP) to release cytochrome c from mitochondria
into cytoplasm and activate pro-apoptotic caspase proteins. We have previously
synthesized 2,5-[[(1,1-dimethylethyl)oxidoimino]methyl]-3,6-trimethylpyrazine
(TN-2), a novel derivative of the Chinese herb medicine tetramethylpyrazine
(TMP). TN-2 is armed with two powerful free radical-scavenging nitrone moieties. 
TN-2 significantly reversed the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia
nigra and the decrease in dopamine level in the striatum induced by MPTP in mice.
TN-2 ameliorated the MPTP-induced decrease of brain superoxide dismutase activity
and glutathione concentration and increase of brain malondialdehyde. In addition,
TN-2 inhibited MPP(+)-induced neuronal damage/apoptosis in primary cerebellum
granular neurons (CGNs) and SH-SY5Y cells. TN-2 decreased excessive intracellular
ROS, prevented the loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, blocked the release 
of mitochondrial cytochrome c and inhibited the activation of caspase-3 and
caspase-9. Moreover, TN-2 treatment increased the mRNA expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis factors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)-<U+03B3> coactivator-1 (PGC- 1a and ß) and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(Tfam) in SH-SY5Y cells and CGNs. These results suggest that TN-2 protects
dopaminergic neurons against MPTP/MPP(+)-induced neurotoxicity via the inhibition
of mitochondrial-dependent apoptosis and possibly via the activation of
mitochondrial biogenesis, indicating that TN-2 is a potential new treatment for
PD.

PMID: 24233519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1842(2):175-85. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.001.
Epub 2013 Nov 8.

Classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation impairs skeletal muscle oxidative phenotype by
reducing IKK-a expression.

Remels AH(1), Gosker HR(2), Langen RC(3), Polkey M(4), Sliwinski P(5), Galdiz
J(6), van den Borst B(7), Pansters NA(8), Schols AM(9).

Author information: 
(1)NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology & Metabolism, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, the
Netherlands. Electronic address: a.remels@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (2)NUTRIM
School for Nutrition, Toxicology & Metabolism, Department of Respiratory
Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
Electronic address: h.gosker@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (3)NUTRIM School for
Nutrition, Toxicology & Metabolism, Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: r.langen@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (4)NIHR Respiratory Biomedical
Research unit, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust and Imperial
College, London SW3 6NP, UK. Electronic address: M.Polkey@rbht.nhs.uk.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Institute of Tuberculosis and Lung
Diseases, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address: p.sliwinski@wp.pl. (6)Pneumology
Department and Research Unit, Cruces Hospital, Basque Country University,
Barakaldo, Spain. Electronic address: med001901@hotmail.com. (7)NUTRIM School for
Nutrition, Toxicology & Metabolism, Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: b.vdborst@maastrichtuniversity.nl. (8)NUTRIM School for Nutrition,
Toxicology & Metabolism, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht
University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, the Netherlands. (9)NUTRIM School for
Nutrition, Toxicology & Metabolism, Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: a.schols@maastrichtuniversity.nl.

BACKGROUND: Loss of quadriceps muscle oxidative phenotype (OXPHEN) is an evident 
and debilitating feature of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). We
recently demonstrated involvement of the inflammatory classical NF-<U+03BA>B pathway in 
inflammation-induced impairments in muscle OXPHEN. The exact underlying
mechanisms however are unclear. Interestingly, I<U+03BA>B kinase a (IKK-a: a key kinase 
in the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway) was recently identified as a novel positive
regulator of skeletal muscle OXPHEN. We hypothesised that inflammation-induced
classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation contributes to loss of muscle OXPHEN in COPD by
reducing IKK-a expression.
METHODS: Classical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling was activated (molecularly or by tumour
necrosis factor a: TNF-a) in cultured myotubes and the impact on muscle OXPHEN
and IKK-a levels was investigated. Moreover, the alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway was
modulated to investigate the impact on muscle OXPHEN in absence or presence of an
inflammatory stimulus. As a proof of concept, quadriceps muscle biopsies of COPD 
patients and healthy controls were analysed for expression levels of IKK-a,
OXPHEN markers and TNF-a.
RESULTS: IKK-a knock-down in cultured myotubes decreased expression of OXPHEN
markers and key OXPHEN regulators. Moreover, classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation (both by 
TNF-a and IKK-ß over-expression) reduced IKK-a levels and IKK-a over-expression
prevented TNF-a-induced impairments in muscle OXPHEN. Importantly, muscle IKK-a
protein abundance and OXPHEN was reduced in COPD patients compared to controls,
which was more pronounced in patients with increased muscle TNF-a mRNA levels.
CONCLUSION: Classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation impairs skeletal muscle OXPHEN by reducing
IKK-a expression. TNF-a-induced reductions in muscle IKK-a may accelerate muscle 
OXPHEN deterioration in COPD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24215713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell Metab. 2013 Nov 5;18(5):698-711. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.10.001.

mTORC1 controls mitochondrial activity and biogenesis through 4E-BP-dependent
translational regulation.

Morita M(1), Gravel SP, Chénard V, Sikström K, Zheng L, Alain T, Gandin V,
Avizonis D, Arguello M, Zakaria C, McLaughlan S, Nouet Y, Pause A, Pollak M,
Gottlieb E, Larsson O, St-Pierre J, Topisirovic I, Sonenberg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada;
Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada.

mRNA translation is thought to be the most energy-consuming process in the cell. 
Translation and energy metabolism are dysregulated in a variety of diseases
including cancer, diabetes, and heart disease. However, the mechanisms that
coordinate translation and energy metabolism in mammals remain largely unknown.
The mechanistic/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) stimulates mRNA 
translation and other anabolic processes. We demonstrate that mTORC1 controls
mitochondrial activity and biogenesis by selectively promoting translation of
nucleus-encoded mitochondria-related mRNAs via inhibition of the eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E)-binding proteins (4E-BPs). Stimulating
the translation of nucleus-encoded mitochondria-related mRNAs engenders an
increase in ATP production capacity, a required energy source for translation.
These findings establish a feed-forward loop that links mRNA translation to
oxidative phosphorylation, thereby providing a key mechanism linking aberrant
mTOR signaling to conditions of abnormal cellular energy metabolism such as
neoplasia and insulin resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24206664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 28;8(10):e77847. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077847.
eCollection 2013.

Downregulation of nuclear-encoded genes of oxidative metabolism in dialyzed
chronic kidney disease patients.

Zaza G(1), Granata S, Masola V, Rugiu C, Fantin F, Gesualdo L, Schena FP, Lupo A.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Department of Medicine, University-Hospital of Verona, Verona,
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondria, essential eukaryotic cells organelles defined as the
"powerhouse of the cell" because of their ability to produce the vast majority of
energy necessary for cellular metabolism, may have a primary role in the
oxidative stress-related intracellular machinery associated to chronic kidney
disease (CKD).
METHODS: To better assess this research assumption, we decided to study the key
factors regulating mitochondrial oxidative metabolism in CKD patients in
peritoneal dialysis (PD, n = 15) using several bio-molecular methodologies.
RESULTS: RT-PCR experiments demonstrate that the expression level of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1a) and nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), two genes primarily involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis and functions, were significantly hypo-expressed in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of PD patients compared to healthy subjects (HS, n = 15).
Additionally, mRNA levels of several PGC1-a downstream target genes (TFAM,
COX6C,COX7C, UQCRH and MCAD) were profoundly down-regulated in PD cells. TFAM
protein analysis confirmed gene-expression results. High plasmatic concentration 
of Malondialdehyde found in PD patients, confirmed the contribution of the
oxidative stress to these biological effects. Finally, Nuclear factor
erythroid-derived 2-like 2 (NRF2 or NFE2L2), a transcription factor for numerous 
antioxidant/detoxifying enzymes and one of its target genes, superoxide
dismutase-2 mitochondrial (SOD2) were up-regulated in PD compared to HS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results revealed, for the first time, that CKD-PD patients'
PBMC, through a complex intracellular biochemical machinery, are able to modulate
their mitochondrial functions probably in the attempt to reduce oxidative
metabolic damage and to turn on a valuable defense cellular strategy against
oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC3810143
PMID: 24204994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 18;8(10):e77077. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077077.
eCollection 2013.

Mitochondrial respiration regulates adipogenic differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells.

Zhang Y(1), Marsboom G, Toth PT, Rehman J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are adult multipotent stem cells which can be
isolated from bone marrow, adipose tissue as well as other tissues and have the
capacity to differentiate into a variety of mesenchymal cell types such as
adipocytes, osteoblasts and chondrocytes. Differentiation of stem cells into
mature cell types is guided by growth factors and hormones, but recent studies
suggest that metabolic shifts occur during differentiation and can modulate the
differentiation process. We therefore investigated mitochondrial biogenesis,
mitochondrial respiration and the mitochondrial membrane potential during
adipogenic differentiation of human MSCs. In addition, we inhibited mitochondrial
function to assess its effects on adipogenic differentiation. Our data show that 
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxygen consumption increase markedly during
adipogenic differentiation, and that reducing mitochondrial respiration by
hypoxia or by inhibition of the mitochondrial electron transport chain
significantly suppresses adipogenic differentiation. Furthermore, we used a novel
approach to suppress mitochondrial activity using a specific siRNA-based
knockdown of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which also resulted
in an inhibition of adipogenic differentiation. Taken together, our data
demonstrates that increased mitochondrial activity is a prerequisite for MSC
differentiation into adipocytes. These findings suggest that metabolic modulation
of adult stem cells can maintain stem cell pluripotency or direct adult stem cell
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3800007
PMID: 24204740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 6;33(45):5238-50. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.467. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

Mitochondrial retrograde signaling induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and 
generates breast cancer stem cells.

Guha M(1), Srinivasan S(1), Ruthel G(2), Kashina AK(1), Carstens RP(3), Mendoza
A(4), Khanna C(4), Van Winkle T(5), Avadhani NG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology and Marie Lowe Center for Comparative Oncology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)Penn Vet Imaging Core,
School of Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Tumor and Metastasis Biology Section, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. (5)Department of Pathobiology, School of
Veterinary Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Metastatic breast tumors undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
which renders them resistant to therapies targeted to the primary cancers. The
mechanistic link between mtDNA (mitochondrial DNA) reduction, often seen in
breast cancer patients, and EMT is unknown. We demonstrate that reducing mtDNA
content in human mammary epithelial cells (hMECs) activates Calcineurin
(Cn)-dependent mitochondrial retrograde signaling pathway, which induces EMT-like
reprogramming to fibroblastic morphology, loss of cell polarity, contact
inhibition and acquired migratory and invasive phenotype. Notably, mtDNA
reduction generates breast cancer stem cells. In addition to retrograde signaling
markers, there is an induction of mesenchymal genes but loss of epithelial
markers in these cells. The changes are reversed by either restoring the mtDNA
content or knockdown of CnAa mRNA, indicating the causal role of retrograde
signaling in EMT. Our results point to a new therapeutic strategy for metastatic 
breast cancers targeted to the mitochondrial retrograde signaling pathway for
abrogating EMT and attenuating cancer stem cells, which evade conventional
therapies. We report a novel regulatory mechanism by which low mtDNA content
generates EMT and cancer stem cells in hMECs.

PMID: 24186204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Dec 17;557 Pt B:177-80. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.045.
Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Association of a polymorphism in mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) with
Parkinson's disease dementia but not dementia with Lewy bodies.

Gatt AP(1), Jones EL, Francis PT, Ballard C, Bateman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London SE1 1UL, UK.

Erratum in
    Neurosci Lett. 2014 Mar 20;563:44.

The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) A>G rs2306604 in the gene encoding
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) has been associated with Alzheimer's 
disease, with the A allele being recognised as a risk factor, but has not been
studied in other types of dementia. We hypothesised that TFAM SNP rs2306604 might
also be associated with Lewy body dementias. To test this hypothesis rs2306604
genotype was determined in 141 controls and 135 patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) or Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). rs2306604 genotype
frequencies were significantly different to controls in PDD (p=0.042), but not in
DLB (p=0.529). The A allele was also associated with PDD (p=0.024, OR=2.092), but
not DLB (p=0.429, OR=1.308). Moreover, the A allele was strongly associated with 
PDD in males (p=0.001, OR=5.570), but not in females (p=0.832, OR=1.100).
Mitochondrial DNA copy number in the prefrontal cortex was also significantly
reduced in PDD patients, but this reduction was not associated with rs2306604
genotype. These data show that the TFAM SNP rs2306604 A allele may be a risk
factor for PDD, particularly in males, but not for DLB. Therefore, the genetic
factors that predispose individuals to develop dementia may differ in PDD and
DLB.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24184878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mitochondrion. 2014 Jan;14(1):34-41. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.10.003. Epub 2013
Nov 1.

Characterization of the sea urchin mitochondrial transcription factor A reveals
unusual features.

Deceglie S(1), Lionetti C(1), Stewart JB(2), Habermann B(2), Roberti M(1),
Cantatore P(1), Loguercio Polosa P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università degli 
Studi di Bari Aldo Moro, Via Orabona, 4, 70125 Bari, Italy. (2)Max Planck
Institute for Biology of Ageing, Robert-Koch-Strasse 21, 50931 Cologne, Germany. 
(3)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Biotecnologie e Biofarmaceutica, Università degli 
Studi di Bari Aldo Moro, Via Orabona, 4, 70125 Bari, Italy. Electronic address:
paolaannamaria.loguerciopolosa@uniba.it.

Sea urchin mtDNA is transcribed via a different mechanism compared to
vertebrates. To gain information on the apparatus of sea urchin mitochondrial
transcription we have characterized the DNA binding properties of the
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). The protein contains two HMG box
domains but, differently from vertebrates, displays a very short C-terminal tail.
Phylogenetic analysis showed that the distribution of tail length is mixed in the
different lineages, indicating that it is a trait that undergoes rapid changes
during evolution. Homology modeling suggests that the protein adopts the same
configuration of the human counterpart and possibly a similar mode of binding to 
DNA. DNase I footprinting showed that TFAM specifically contacts mtDNA at a fixed
distance from three AT-rich consensus sequences that were supposed to act as
transcriptional initiation sites. Bound sequences are homologous and contain an
inverted repeat motif, which resembles that involved in the intercalation of
human TFAM in LSP DNA. The here reported data indicate that sea urchin TFAM
specifically binds mtDNA. The protein could intercalate residues at the DNA
inverted motif and, despite its short tail, might have a role in mitochondrial
transcription.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24184823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Clin Calcium. 2013 Nov;23(11):1577-83. doi: CliCa131115771583.

[Role of mitochondria in osteoclast function].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyazaki T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine and Orthopaedic Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan
Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology, Japan.

Mitochondria, membrane-enclosed structures found in most eukaryotic cells,
generate most of the cell's supply of ATP, used as a source of chemical energy.
In addition to supplying cellular energy, mitochondria are involved in signaling,
cellular differentiation, cell death, and the aging process. Osteoclasts, highly 
differentiated bone-resorbing cells of hematopoietic origin, have two conflicting
tendencies : a lower capacity to survive and a higher capacity to execute
energy-consuming activities such as bone resorption. We here highlight the role
of mitochondria in osteoclast function. Recent studies have revealed that ATP
depletion following Tfam (mitochondrial transcription factor A) deficiency leads 
to increased bone-resorbing activity despite accelerated apoptosis, and the
release of endogenous ATP negatively regulates osteoclast function through an
autocrine/paracrine feedback loop. These findings provide evidence for a
previously unknown mechanism by which mitochondria regulate the inverse
correlation between osteoclast survival and bone resorption.

PMID: 24162597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 8;441(1):169-74. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.039. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Ginsenoside Rg3 improves cardiac mitochondrial population quality: mimetic
exercise training.

Sun M(1), Huang C, Wang C, Zheng J, Zhang P, Xu Y, Chen H, Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of State General Administration of Sport, Shanghai Research
Institute of Sports Science, Shanghai 200031, China.

Emerging evidence indicates exercise training could mediate mitochondrial quality
control through the improvement of mitochondrial dynamics. Ginsenoside Rg3 (Rg3),
one of the active ingredients in Panax ginseng, is well known in herbal medicine 
as a tonic and restorative agent. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the
beneficial effects of Rg3 has been elusive. In the present study, we compared the
effects of Rg3 administration with aerobic exercise on mitochondrial adaptation
in cardiac muscle tissue of Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats. Three groups of SD rats
were studied: (1) sedentary control, (2) Rg3-treated and (3) aerobic exercise
trained. Both aerobic exercise training and Rg3 supplementation enhanced
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor coactivator 1 alpha (PGC-1a) and
nuclear factor-E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) protein levels in cardiac muscle. The
activation of PGC-1a led to increased mRNA levels of mitochondrial transcription 
factor A (Tfam) and nuclear related factor 1(Nrf1), these changes were
accompanied by increases in mitochondrial DNA copy number and complex protein
levels, while activation of Nrf2 increased levels of phase II detoxifying
enzymes, including nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate:quinone
oxidoreductase 1(NQO1), superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and catalase. Aerobic
exercise also enhanced mitochondrial autophagy pathway activity, including
increased conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II and greater expression of beclin1 and
autophagy-related protein 7 (ATG7), these effects of aerobic exercise are
comparable to that of Rg3. These results demonstrate that Rg3 mimics improved
cardiac adaptations to exercise by regulating mitochondria dynamic remodeling and
enhancing the quantity and quality of mitochondria.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Oncol Lett. 2013 Aug;6(2):617-623. Epub 2013 Jun 21.

Roles of mitochondrial transcription factor A and microRNA-590-3p in the
development of bladder cancer.

Mo M(1), Peng F, Wang L, Peng L, Lan G, Yu S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Organ Transplantation, The Second Xiangya Hospital of
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China ;

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is required for mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) replication and transcription. microRNAs (miRNAs) act as key factors in
the regulation of gene expression. However, the roles of TFAM and certain miRNAs 
and their association in cancer development remain unclear. The present study
reported that the expression of TFAM was significantly increased in bladder
cancer, while the expression of miRNA-590-3p was downregulated. The luciferase
assay showed that TFAM was the direct target of miRNA-590-3p. Furthermore, the
forced overexpression of miRNA-590-3p significantly inhibited the proliferation, 
migration and colony-forming ability of 5637 cells, which was in contrast with
the results from the forced overexpression of TFAM in the 5637 cells.
Furthermore, cell proliferation- and migration-related genes, including
phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K), Akt, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP9,
were significantly downregulated in the miRNA-590-3p-overex-pressing 5637 cells, 
but upregulated in the TFAM-overexpressing cells. In conclusion, the present
study suggested that TFAM, a direct target of miRNA-590-3p, may play a
significant role in the tumorigenesis of bladder cancer and thus may be a
promising target for cancer therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3789041
PMID: 24137381  [PubMed]


272. Int J Obes (Lond). 2014 Jun;38(6):865-72. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.171. Epub 2013
Sep 12.

CIDEC/FSP27 and PLIN1 gene expression run in parallel to mitochondrial genes in
human adipose tissue, both increasing after weight loss.

Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Ortega F(1), Serrano M(1), Rodriguez-Hermosa JI(1),
Ricart W(1), Mingrone G(2), Fernández-Real JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Girona (IdIBGi), CIBEROBN (CB06/03/010) and Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII), Girona, Spain. (2)Institute of Internal Medicine, Catholic
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: FSP27 KO mice showed enhanced expression of mitochondrial genes,
increased mitochondrial activity and smaller lipid droplets. Here, we aimed to
investigate lipid droplet protein (CIDEC/FSP27 and perilipinA (PLIN1)) gene
expression in human adipose tissue in association with obesity, insulin
resistance and mitochondrial gene expression.
DESIGN AND SUBJECTS: In cohort 1, CIDEC/FSP27, PLIN1, adipogenic (FASN, ACACA,
PPARG, GLUT4) and mitochondrial (PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, TFAM, MT-CO3) gene
expression were analyzed in 171 adipose tissue samples (88 visceral adipose
tissue (VAT) and 83 subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) depots) and in a time
course experiment in human subcutaneous and visceral preadipocytes using
real-time PCR. In cohort 2, the effects of bariatric surgery-induced weight loss 
were also evaluated in six caucasian morbidly obese women. Additionally, in
cohort 2 FSP27 and PLIN1 protein levels were measured using western blotting.
RESULTS: CIDEC/FSP27 (1.03±0.52 vs 0.49±0.23 relative gene expression unit
(R.U.), P<0.0001) and PLIN1 (1.32±0.82 vs 0.63±0.42 R.U., P<0.0001) gene were
significantly more expressed in SAT than in VAT. In VAT, CIDEC/FSP27 and PLIN1
gene expression decreased with body mass index, percent fat mass, fasting
glucose, fasting insulin, HOMA and were positively associated with adipogenic
(PPARG, GLUT4, FASN and ACACA) and mitochondrial biogenesis (PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, 
TFAM and MT-CO3)-related genes. Mitochondrial gene expression increased during
adipocyte differentiation in parallel to FSP27 and PLIN1 and other adipogenic
genes. After bariatric surgery-induced weight loss, PLIN1 and CIDEC/FSP27 gene
and protein expression in SAT increased significantly in parallel to adipogenic
and mitochondrial genes.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest a positive functional interaction between
CIDEC/FSP27, PLIN1 and mitochondrial biogenesis-related genes in human adipose
tissue.

PMID: 24126816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Dec;65:1435-46. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.09.019. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B inhibition ameliorates palmitate-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis in skeletal muscle cells.

Taheripak G(1), Bakhtiyari S, Rajabibazl M, Pasalar P, Meshkani R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran 1416753955, Iran.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase 1B (PTP1B) is a negative regulator of the insulin
signaling pathway and is considered a promising therapeutic target in the
treatment of diabetes. However, the role of PTP1B in palmitate-induced
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis in skeletal muscle cells has not been
studied. Here we investigate the effects of PTP1B modulation on mitochondrial
function and apoptosis and elucidate the underlying mechanisms in skeletal muscle
cells. PTP1B inhibition significantly reduced palmitate-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction and apoptosis in C2C12 cells, as these cells had increased expression
levels of PGC-1a, Tfam, and NRF-1; enhanced ATP level and cellular viability;
decreased TUNEL-positive cells; and decreased caspase-3 and -9 activity.
Alternatively, overexpression of PTP1B resulted in mitochondrial dysfunction and 
apoptosis in these cells. PTP1B silencing improved mitochondrial dysfunction by
an increase in the expression of SIRT1 and a reduction in the phosphorylation of 
p65 NF-<U+03BA>B. The protection from palmitate-induced apoptosis by PTP1B inhibition
was also accompanied by a decrease in protein level of serine palmitoyl
transferase, thus resulting in lower ceramide content in muscle cells. Exogenous 
addition of C2-ceramide to PTP1B-knockdown cells led to a reduced generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), whereas PTP1B overexpression demonstrated an
elevated ROS production in myotubes. In addition, PTP1B inhibition was
accompanied by decreased JNK phosphorylation and increased insulin-stimulated Akt
(Ser473) phosphorylation, whereas overexpression of PTP1B had the opposite
effect. The overexpression of PTP1B also induced the nuclear localization of
FOXO-1, but in contrast, suppression of PTP1B reduced palmitate-induced nuclear
localization of FOXO-1. In summary, our results indicate that PTP1B modulation
results in (1) alterations in mitochondrial function by changes in the activity
of SIRT1/NF-<U+03BA>B/PGC-1a pathways and (2) changes in apoptosis that result from
either a direct effect of PTP1B on the insulin signaling pathway or an indirect
influence on ceramide content, ROS generation, JNK activation, and FOXO-1 nuclear
translocation.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2014 Jun 1;20(16):2572-88. doi: 10.1089/ars.2013.5334.
Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Biphasic response of mitochondrial biogenesis to oxidative stress in visceral fat
of diet-induced obesity mice.

Wang PW(1), Kuo HM, Huang HT, Chang AY, Weng SW, Tai MH, Chuang JH, Chen IY,
Huang SC, Lin TK, Liou CW.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, 
Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital , Kaohsiung, Taiwan .

AIMS: Studies in skeletal muscle demonstrate a strong association of
mitochondrial dysfunction with insulin resistance (IR). However, there is still a
paucity of knowledge regarding the alteration of mitochondria in adipose tissue
(AT) in the pathogenesis of IR in obesity. We investigated the mitochondrial
biogenesis in visceral fat (VF) and subcutaneous fat (SF) in C57BL/6J mice fed a 
high-fat high-sucrose diet for 12 months.
RESULTS: Impairment of glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity developed after 
1 month of the diet and was associated with a prompt increase of VF. The VF
adipocytes were larger than those in the SF and had increased expressions of
HIF-1a and p-NF<U+03BA>B p65. However, the alteration of mitochondrial biogenesis did
not occur in the early stage when increased intracellular reactive oxygen species
(ROS), mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate, and mitochondrial ROS emerged at
the 1st, 2nd and 2nd month, respectively. Until the 6th month, the VF had
markedly increased mitochondrial DNA content and expression of PGC-1a, Tfam,
ATP5A, and MnSOD. This increase of mitochondrial biogenesis was followed by a
generalized decrease at the 12th month and the mitochondrial morphology altered
markedly. In the late stage, although mitochondrial ROS decreased, the increased 
expression of 8-OHdG in VF continued.
INNOVATION AND CONCLUSION: These data suggest that IR and ROS production occur
before the biphasic changes of mitochondrial biogenesis in AT, and the VF plays a
more crucial role.

PMCID: PMC4025601
PMID: 24111683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 1;273(2):365-80. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2013.09.012. Epub 2013 Sep 29.

Aluminium induced oxidative stress results in decreased mitochondrial biogenesis 
via modulation of PGC-1a expression.

Sharma DR(1), Sunkaria A, Wani WY, Sharma RK, Kandimalla RJ, Bal A, Gill KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.

The present investigation was carried out to elucidate a possible molecular
mechanism related to the effects of aluminium-induced oxidative stress on various
mitochondrial respiratory complex subunits with special emphasis on the role of
Peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma co-activator 1a (PGC-1a) and its
downstream targets i.e. Nuclear respiratory factor-1(NRF-1), Nuclear respiratory 
factor-2(NRF-2) and Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) in mitochondrial 
biogenesis. Aluminium lactate (10mg/kgb.wt./day) was administered
intragastrically to rats for 12 weeks. After 12 weeks of exposure, we found an
increase in ROS levels, mitochondrial DNA oxidation and decrease in citrate
synthase activity in the Hippocampus (HC) and Corpus striatum (CS) regions of rat
brain. On the other hand, there was a decrease in the mRNA levels of the
mitochondrial encoded subunits-NADH dehydrogenase (ND) subunits i.e. ND1, ND2,
ND3, Cytochrome b (Cytb), Cytochrome oxidase (COX) subunits i.e. COX1, COX3, ATP 
synthase (ATPase) subunit 6 along with reduced expression of nuclear encoded
subunits COX4, COX5A, COX5B of Electron transport chain (ETC). Besides, a
decrease in mitochondrial DNA copy number and mitochondrial content in both
regions of rat brain was observed. The PGC-1a was down-regulated in aluminium
treated rats along with NRF-1, NRF-2 and Tfam, which act downstream from PGC-1a
in aluminium treated rats. Electron microscopy results revealed a significant
increase in the mitochondrial swelling, loss of cristae, chromatin condensation
and decreases in mitochondrial number in case of aluminium treated rats as
compared to control. So, PGC-1a seems to be a potent target for aluminium
neurotoxicity, which makes it an almost ideal target to control or limit the
damage that has been associated with the defective mitochondrial function seen in
neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2013.

PMID: 24084166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biochimie. 2014 May;100:219-26. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2013.09.017. Epub 2013 Sep 
25.

To be or not to be a nucleoid protein: a comparison of mass-spectrometry based
approaches in the identification of potential mtDNA-nucleoid associated proteins.

Hensen F(1), Cansiz S(1), Gerhold JM(1), Spelbrink JN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Centre for Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Geert Grooteplein 10, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Nijmegen Centre for
Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Geert
Grooteplein 10, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Institute of
Biomedical Technology & Tampere University Hospital, Pirkanmaa Hospital District,
University of Tampere, FI-33014, Finland. Electronic address:
hans.spelbrink@radboudumc.nl.

In the last decade it has become increasingly clear that mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) is not naked but associated with proteins in poorly defined structures
called nucleoids that are essential for mtDNA maintenance. The function of
nucleoids is not simply to package mtDNA but also to provide a stable environment
for its replication, transcription and repair. Even though their properties and
dynamics have begun to be revealed in recent years, their structural and
molecular organization remains largely unknown in mammals. Although, there are a 
number of proteins identified to be nucleoid associated by using several
biochemical isolation methods combined with mass spectrometric analysis, the main
difficulties in the identification of these proteins are their low abundance and 
the assumed dynamic composition of nucleoids. Considering various purification
methods, there is a thin line between the stringency and specificity in the
identification of potential nucleoid associated proteins. In this review, the
main focus is to provide a comprehensive comparison of the so far published
purification and analysis methods to generate a list of potentially nucleoid
associated proteins, but also, to discuss the disadvantages and possible
improvements in proteomic analyses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24076128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e74644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074644. eCollection
2013.

Aging and calorie restriction oppositely affect mitochondrial biogenesis through 
TFAM binding at both origins of mitochondrial DNA replication in rat liver.

Picca A(1), Pesce V, Fracasso F, Joseph AM, Leeuwenburgh C, Lezza AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging and Geriatric Research, Institute on Aging, Division of
Biology of Aging, University of Florida, Gainesville, United States of America.

Aging affects mitochondria in a tissue-specific manner. Calorie restriction (CR) 
is, so far, the only intervention able to delay or prevent the onset of several
age-related changes also in mitochondria. Using livers from middle age
(18-month-old), 28-month-old and 32-month-old ad libitum-fed and 28-month-old
calorie-restricted rats we found an age-related decrease in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) content and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) amount, fully
prevented by CR. We revealed also an age-related decrease, completely prevented
by CR, for the proteins PGC-1a NRF-1 and cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV,
supporting the efficiency of CR to forestall the age-related decrease in
mitochondrial biogenesis. Furthermore, CR counteracted the age-related increase
in oxidative damage to proteins, represented by the increased amount of oxidized 
peroxiredoxins (PRX-SO3) in the ad libitum-fed animals. An unexpected age-related
decrease in the mitochondrial proteins peroxiredoxin III (Prx III) and superoxide
dismutase 2 (SOD2), usually induced by increased ROS and involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis, suggested a prevailing relevance of the age-reduced
mitochondrial biogenesis above the induction by ROS in the regulation of
expression of these genes with aging. The partial prevention of the decrease in
Prx III and SOD2 proteins by CR also supported the preservation of mitochondrial 
biogenesis in the anti-aging action of CR. To investigate further the age- and
CR-related effects on mitochondrial biogenesis we analyzed the in vivo binding of
TFAM to specific mtDNA regions and demonstrated a marked increase in the
TFAM-bound amounts of mtDNA at both origins of replication with aging, fully
prevented by CR. A novel, positive correlation between the paired amounts of
TFAM-bound mtDNA at these sub-regions was found in the joined middle age ad
libitum-fed and 28-month-old calorie-restricted groups, but not in the
28-month-old ad libitum-fed counterpart suggesting a quite different modulation
of TFAM binding at both origins of replication in aging and CR.

PMCID: PMC3772924
PMID: 24058615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Eur J Pharm Sci. 2014 Jan 23;51:137-45. doi: 10.1016/j.ejps.2013.09.005. Epub
2013 Sep 18.

Treatment with glucokinase activator, YH-GKA, increases cell proliferation and
decreases glucotoxic apoptosis in INS-1 cells.

Oh YS(1), Lee YJ, Park K, Choi HH, Yoo S, Jun HS.

Author information: 
(1)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong,
Yeonsu-ku, Incheon, Republic of Korea; Gachon Medical Research Institute, Gil
Hospital, 1198, Guwol-dong, Namdong-Gu, Incheon, Republic of Korea.

Glucokinase (GK), an enzyme that phosphorylates glucose to form
glucose-6-phosphate, has a role in regulating insulin secretion and proliferation
in beta cells. GK activators (GKAs) have been developed as new therapies for type
2 diabetes. In this study, we evaluated the proliferation and anti-apoptotic
actions of YH-GKA, a novel and potent GKA, in INS-1 pancreatic ß-cells. YH-GKA
treatment increased cell numbers at 3 mM glucose via upregulation of insulin
receptor substrate-2 and subsequent activation of AKT/protein kinase B
phosphorylation. YH-GKA also increased beta-catenin and cyclin D2 mRNA expression
and inactivated GSK3ß by increasing phosphorylation. These proliferative effects 
of YH-GKA were attenuated by IRS-2 downregulation. Moreover, YH-GKA reduced
annexin-V-stained cells and expression levels of cleaved poly (ADP-ribose)
polymerase and caspase-3 induced by glucotoxicity. YH-GKA inhibited apoptotic
signaling via induction of ATP content, mitochondrial membrane potential, and
citrate synthase activity and was correlated with changes of the mitochondrial
function-related genes. YH-GKA also increased interaction between GK and
voltage-dependent anion-selective channel protein. Our results suggest that the
novel GKA, YH-GKA, promotes beta cell growth and prevents glucotoxic beta cell
apoptosis. Therefore, YH-GKA may provide a therapy that compensates for beta cell
loss in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24056026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Neurochem. 2013 Nov;127(4):496-508. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12433. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Neuron-specific specificity protein 4 bigenomically regulates the transcription
of all mitochondria- and nucleus-encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunit genes in
neurons.

Johar K(1), Priya A, Dhar S, Liu Q, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

Neurons are highly dependent on oxidative metabolism for their energy supply, and
cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is a key energy-generating enzyme in the mitochondria.
A unique feature of COX is that it is one of only four proteins in mammalian
cells that are bigenomically regulated. Of its thirteen subunits, three are
encoded in the mitochondrial genome and ten are nuclear-encoded on nine different
chromosomes. The mechanism of regulating this multisubunit, bigenomic enzyme
poses a distinct challenge. In recent years, we found that nuclear respiratory
factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and NRF-2) mediate such bigenomic coordination. The latest
candidate is the specificity factor (Sp) family of proteins. In N2a cells, we
found that Sp1 regulates all 13 COX subunits. However, we discovered recently
that in primary neurons, it is Sp4 and not Sp1 that regulates some of the key
glutamatergic receptor subunit genes. The question naturally arises as to the
role of Sp4 in regulating COX in primary neurons. The present study utilized
multiple approaches, including chromatin immunoprecipitation, promoter mutational
analysis, knockdown and over-expression of Sp4, as well as functional assays to
document that Sp4 indeed functionally regulate all 13 subunits of COX as well as 
mitochondrial transcription factors A and B. The present study discovered that
among the specificity family of transcription factors, it is the less known
neuron-specific Sp4 that regulates the expression of all 13 subunits of
mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase (COX) enzyme in primary neurons. Sp4 also
regulates the three mitochondrial transcription factors (TFAM, TFB1M, and TFB2M) 
and a COX assembly protein SURF-1 in primary neurons.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3820366
PMID: 24032355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2013 Oct;65(10):1555-62. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12116. Epub 2013
Jul 25.

Dietary supplementation with Salvia sahendica attenuates acetylcholinesterase
activity and increases mitochondrial transcription factor A and antioxidant
proteins in the hippocampus of amyloid beta-injected rats.

Foolad F(1), Khodagholi F.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitory and potential
antioxidant effects of Salvia sahendica extract to investigate whether these
molecules are involved in learning and memory improvement in rats injected with
fibrillar amyloid beta (Aß) peptide in the CA1 region of their hippocampus.
METHODS: Rats were fed with S. sahendica (100 mg/kg/day) for 1 week before Aß
injection. Western blot analysis and enzymatic assays were carried out 7 days
after injections.
KEY FINDINGS: Our results indicated that S. sahendica extract decreased AChE
activity. Besides, S. sahendica prevented reduction in the level of nuclear
respiratory factor-1 and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Our data
indicated the lack of sensitivity in citrate synthase and reduction in the
activity of malate dehydrogenase in the presence of Aß that was prevented with S.
sahendica consumption. Pretreatment with S. sahendica extract impeded reduction
of glutathione redox ratio, catalase and superoxide dismutase activity, while
decreased the malondialdehyde level.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the importance of AChE activity inhibition and increased
TFAM level in the prevention of cognitive impairment, the use of S. sahendica
could open a new protective issue in therapeutic fields of neurodegenerative
disease.

© 2013 Royal Pharmaceutical Society.

PMID: 24028623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Oncol Rep. 2013 Nov;30(5):2105-10. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2712. Epub 2013 Aug 30.

TFAM is directly regulated by miR-23b in glioma.

Jiang J(1), Yang J, Wang Z, Wu G, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Third Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a high-mobility group (HMG) protein,
plays a central role in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication, transcription and 
inheritance. It has been shown that TFAM is associated with tumorigenesis.
However, little is known regarding the posttranscriptional regulation of TFAM in 
glioma. In the present study, we found that the protein levels of TFAM were
gradually increased, while the expression of miRNA-23b was gradually
downregulated with the malignancy of glioma. Luciferase assay data demonstrated
that miRNA-23b directly regulated TFAM. Furthermore, forced overexpression of
miRNA-23b in U251 cells markedly inhibited the proliferation, cell cycle
progression, migration and colony formation, while overexpression of TFAM
significantly enhanced these biological processes. We further examined the
related molecular mechanism, and found that the activity of the PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway, critical for cell proliferation and migration, was suppressed 
in miRNA-23b-overexpressing U251 cells but was upregulated in TFAM-overexpressing
cells. In addition, the expression levels of invasion-related MMP2 and MMP9 were 
decreased in miRNA-23b-overexpressing U251 cells but were increased in
TFAM-overexpressing cells. Taken together, the present study provides a new
regulatory mechanism as well as a promising therapy target for glioma.

PMID: 24002170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Nov;48(11):1343-50. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.08.004. Epub
2013 Aug 30.

Exercise training attenuates aging-associated mitochondrial dysfunction in rat
skeletal muscle: role of PGC-1a.

Kang C(1), Chung E, Diffee G, Ji LL.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Physiological Hygiene and Exercise Science, School of
Kinesiology, University of Minnesota at Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; 
The Biodynamics Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Aged skeletal muscle demonstrates declines in muscle mass and deterioration of
mitochondrial content and function. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> 
co-activator 1a (PGC-1a) plays an important role in promoting muscle
mitochondrial biogenesis in response to exercise training, but its role in
senescent muscle is not clear. In the present study we hypothesize that a
downregulation of the PGC-1a signaling pathway contributes to mitochondrial
deterioration in aged muscle whereas endurance training ameliorates the deficits.
Three groups of Fischer 344/BNF1 rats were used: young, sedentary (Y, 4 months); 
old, sedentary (O, 22 months); and old trained (OT, 22 months), subjected to
treadmill running at 17.5 m/min, 10% grade for 45 min/day, 5 days/week for
12-weeks. PGC-1a mRNA and nuclear PGC-1a protein content in the soleus muscle
were both decreased in O vs. Y rats, whereas OT rats showed a 2.3 and 1.8-fold
higher PGC-1a content than O and Y rats, respectively (P<0.01). Mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), cytochrome c (Cyt c) and mitochondrial (mt) DNA
contents were significantly decreased in O vs. Y rats, but elevated by 2.2
(P<0.01), 1.4 (P<0.05) and 2.4-fold (P<0.01), respectively, in OT vs. O rats. In 
addition, Tfam and mtDNA showed 1.6 and 1.8-fold (P<0.01) higher levels,
respectively, in OT vs. Y rats. These adaptations were accompanied by significant
increases in the expression of the phosphorylated form of AMP-activated kinase
(AMPK) (P<0.01), p38 mitogen-activated kinase (MAPK) (P<0.05) and silent mating
type information regulator 2 homolog 1 (SIRT1) (P<0.01) in OT rats. Furthermore, 
OT rats showed great levels of phosphorylation in cAMP responsive element binding
protein (p-CREB) and DNA binding compared to O and Y rats. These data indicate
that endurance training can attenuate aging-associated decline in mitochondrial
protein synthesis in skeletal muscle partly due to upregulation of PGC-1a
signaling.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23994518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 26;8(8):e74513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074513. eCollection
2013.

Genome-wide analysis reveals coating of the mitochondrial genome by TFAM.

Wang YE(1), Marinov GK, Wold BJ, Chan DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
USA.

Mitochondria contain a 16.6 kb circular genome encoding 13 proteins as well as
mitochondrial tRNAs and rRNAs. Copies of the genome are organized into nucleoids 
containing both DNA and proteins, including the machinery required for mtDNA
replication and transcription. The transcription factor TFAM is critical for
initiation of transcription and replication of the genome, and is also thought to
perform a packaging function. Although specific binding sites required for
initiation of transcription have been identified in the D-loop, little is known
about the characteristics of TFAM binding in its nonspecific packaging state. In 
addition, it is unclear whether TFAM also plays a role in the regulation of
nuclear gene expression. Here we investigate these questions by using ChIP-seq to
directly localize TFAM binding to DNA in human cells. Our results demonstrate
that TFAM uniformly coats the whole mitochondrial genome, with no evidence of
robust TFAM binding to the nuclear genome. Our study represents the first
high-resolution assessment of TFAM binding on a genome-wide scale in human cells.

PMCID: PMC3753274
PMID: 23991223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e72354. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072354. eCollection
2013.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A, an endogenous danger signal, promotes TNFa 
release via RAGE- and TLR9-responsive plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Julian MW(1), Shao G, Vangundy ZC, Papenfuss TL, Crouser ED.

Author information: 
(1)Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, Division of Pulmonary,
Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Wexner Medical Center, the Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is normally bound to and
remains associated with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) when released from damaged
cells. We hypothesized that TFAM, bound to mtDNA (or equivalent CpG-enriched
DNA), amplifies TNFa release from TLR9-expressing plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDCs) by engaging RAGE.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Murine Flt3 ligand-expanded splenocytes obtained from
C57BL/6 mice were treated with recombinant human TFAM, alone or in combination
with CpG-enriched DNA with subsequent TNFa release measured by ELISA. The role of
RAGE was determined by pre-treatment with soluble RAGE or heparin or by employing
matching RAGE (-/-) splenocytes. TLR9 signaling was evaluated using a specific
TLR9-blocking oligonucleotide and by inhibiting endosomal processing, PI3K and
NF-<U+03BA>B. Additional studies examined whether heparin sulfate moieties or endothelin
converting enzyme-1 (ECE-1)-dependent recycling of endosomal receptors were
required for TFAM and CpG DNA recognition.
MAIN RESULTS: TFAM augmented splenocyte TNFa release in response to CpGA DNA,
which was strongly dependent upon pDCs and regulated by RAGE and TLR9 receptors. 
Putative TLR9 signaling pathways, including endosomal acidification and signaling
through PI3K and NF-<U+03BA>B, were essential for splenocyte TNFa release in response to
TFAM+CpGA DNA. Interestingly, TNFa release depended upon endothelin converting
enzyme (ECE)-1, which cleaves and presumably activates TLR9 within endosomes.
Recognition of the TFAM-CpGA DNA complex was dependent upon heparin sulfate
moieties, and recombinant TFAM Box 1 and Box 2 proteins were equivalent in terms 
of augmenting TNFa release.
CONCLUSIONS: TFAM promoted TNFa release in a splenocyte culture model
representing complex cell-cell interactions in vivo with pDCs playing a critical 
role. To our knowledge, this study is the first to incriminate ECE-1-dependent
endosomal cleavage of TLR9 as a critical step in the signaling pathway leading to
TNFa release. These findings, and others reported herein, significantly advance
our understanding of sterile immune responses triggered by mitochondrial danger
signals.

PMCID: PMC3741150
PMID: 23951313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 12;8(8):e70810. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070810. eCollection
2013.

The MRC1/CD68 ratio is positively associated with adipose tissue lipogenesis and 
with muscle mitochondrial gene expression in humans.

Moreno-Navarrete JM(1), Ortega F, Gómez-Serrano M, García-Santos E, Ricart W,
Tinahones F, Mingrone G, Peral B, Fernández-Real JM.

Author information: 
(1)Service of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica de Girona (IdIBGi), CIBEROBN (CB06/03/010) and Instituto de Salud
Carlos III (ISCIII), Girona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Alternative macrophages (M2) express the cluster differentiation (CD)
206 (MCR1) at high levels. Decreased M2 in adipose tissue is known to be
associated with obesity and inflammation-related metabolic disturbances. Here we 
aimed to investigate MCR1 relative to CD68 (total macrophages) gene expression in
association with adipogenic and mitochondrial genes, which were measured in human
visceral [VWAT, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>147] and subcutaneous adipose tissue [SWAT, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>76] and in
rectus abdominis muscle (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>23). The effects of surgery-induced weight loss were
also longitudinally evaluated (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6).
RESULTS: MCR1 and CD68 gene expression levels were similar in VWAT and SWAT. A
higher proportion of CD206 relative to total CD68 was present in subjects with
less body fat and lower fasting glucose concentrations. The ratio MCR1/CD68was
positively associated with IRS1gene expression and with the expression of
lipogenic genes such as ACACA, FASN and THRSP, even after adjusting for BMI. The 
ratio MCR1/CD68 in SWAT increased significantly after the surgery-induced weight 
loss (+44.7%; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005) in parallel to the expression of adipogenic genes. In
addition, SWAT MCR1/CD68ratio was significantly associated with muscle
mitochondrial gene expression (PPARGC1A, TFAM and MT-CO3). AT CD206 was confirmed
by immunohistochemistry to be specific of macrophages, especially abundant in
crown-like structures.
CONCLUSION: A decreased ratio MCR1/CD68 is linked to adipose tissue and muscle
mitochondrial dysfunction at least at the level of expression of adipogenic and
mitochondrial genes.

PMCID: PMC3741275
PMID: 23951013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Invest Dermatol. 2014 Jan;134(1):33-42. doi: 10.1038/jid.2013.286. Epub 2013
Jun 27.

Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis hormones stimulate mitochondrial function and
biogenesis in human hair follicles.

Vidali S(1), Knuever J(1), Lerchner J(2), Giesen M(3), Bíró T(4), Klinger M(5),
Kofler B(6), Funk W(7), Poeggeler B(1), Paus R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.
(2)Institute of Physical Chemistry, TU Bergakademie, Freiberg, Germany. (3)Henkel
Beauty Care, Henkel AG and Co. KGaA, Dusseldorf, Germany. (4)Department of
Physiology, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. (5)Department of Anatomy, 
University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. (6)Research Program for Receptor
Biochemistry and Tumor Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical
University, Salzburg, Austria. (7)Klinik Dr Koslowski, Munich, Germany. (8)1]
Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany [2] Institute 
of Inflammation and Repair, University of Manchester, and The Dermatology Centre,
Salford Royal NHS Trust, Manchester, UK.

Thyroid hormones regulate mitochondrial function. As other
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis hormones, i.e., thyrotropin-releasing
hormone (TRH) and thyrotropin (TSH), are expressed in human hair follicles (HFs) 
and regulate mitochondrial function in human epidermis, we investigated in
organ-cultured human scalp HFs whether TRH (30 nM), TSH (10 mU ml(-1)), thyroxine
(T4) (100 nM), and triiodothyronine (T3) (100 pM) alter intrafollicular
mitochondrial energy metabolism. All HPT-axis members increased gene and protein 
expression of mitochondrial-encoded subunit 1 of cytochrome c oxidase (MTCO1), a 
subunit of respiratory chain complex IV, mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), and Porin. All hormones also stimulated intrafollicular complex I/IV
activity and mitochondrial biogenesis. The TSH effects on MTCO1, TFAM, and porin 
could be abolished by K1-70, a TSH-receptor antagonist, suggesting a TSH
receptor-mediated action. Notably, as measured by calorimetry, T3 and TSH
increased follicular heat production, whereas T3/T4 and TRH stimulated ATP
production in cultured HF keratinocytes. HPT-axis hormones did not increase
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Rather, T3 and T4 reduced ROS
formation, and all tested HPT-axis hormones increased the transcription of ROS
scavengers (catalase, superoxide dismutase 2) in HF keratinocytes. Thus,
mitochondrial biology, energy metabolism, and redox state of human HFs are
subject to profound (neuro-)endocrine regulation by HPT-axis hormones. The
neuroendocrine control of mitochondrial biology in a complex human mini-organ
revealed here may be therapeutically exploitable.

PMID: 23949722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 23;8(7):e69327. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069327. Print 2013.

Dysregulation of mitochondrial quality control processes contribute to sarcopenia
in a mouse model of premature aging.

Joseph AM(1), Adhihetty PJ, Wawrzyniak NR, Wohlgemuth SE, Picca A, Kujoth GC,
Prolla TA, Leeuwenburgh C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology of Aging, Department of Aging and Geriatric Research,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
amjoseph@ufl.edu

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations lead to decrements in mitochondrial function 
and accelerated rates of these mutations has been linked to skeletal muscle loss 
(sarcopenia). The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of mtDNA
mutations on mitochondrial quality control processes in skeletal muscle from
animals (young; 3-6 months and older; 8-15 months) expressing a
proofreading-deficient version of mtDNA polymerase gamma (PolG). This progeroid
aging model exhibits elevated mtDNA mutation rates, mitochondrial dysfunction,
and a premature aging phenotype that includes sarcopenia. We found increased
expression of the mitochondrial biogenesis regulator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and its target
proteins, nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) in PolG animals compared to wild-type (WT) (P<0.05). Muscle from 
older PolG animals displayed higher mitochondrial fission protein 1 (Fis1)
concurrent with greater induction of autophagy, as indicated by changes in Atg5
and p62 protein content (P<0.05). Additionally, levels of the Tom22 import
protein were higher in PolG animals when compared to WT (P<0.05). In contrast,
muscle from normally-aged animals exhibited a distinctly different expression
profile compared to PolG animals. Older WT animals appeared to have higher fusion
(greater Mfn1/Mfn2, and lower Fis1) and lower autophagy (Beclin-1 and p62)
compared to young WT suggesting that autophagy is impaired in aging muscle. In
conclusion, muscle from mtDNA mutator mice display higher mitochondrial fission
and autophagy levels that likely contribute to the sarcopenic phenotype observed 
in premature aging and this differs from the response observed in normally-aged
muscle.

PMCID: PMC3720551
PMID: 23935986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 10;51(2):233-46. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0051. Print 2013 
Oct.

Estradiol and tamoxifen regulate NRF-1 and mitochondrial function in mouse
mammary gland and uterus.

Ivanova MM(1), Radde BN, Son J, Mehta FF, Chung SH, Klinge CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville,
Kentucky 40292, USA Department of Biology and Biochemistry, Center for Nuclear
Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of Houston, 3605 Cullen Blvd, Houston,
Texas 77204, USA.

Nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) stimulates the transcription of
nuclear-encoded genes that regulate mitochondrial (mt) genome transcription and
biogenesis. We reported that estradiol (E2) and 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT)
stimulate NRF-1 transcription in an estrogen receptor a (ERa)- and ERß-dependent 
manner in human breast cancer cells. The aim of this study was to determine
whether E2 and 4-OHT increase NRF-1 in vivo. Here, we report that E2 and 4-OHT
increase NRF-1 expression in mammary gland (MG) and uterus of ovariectomized
C57BL/6 mice in a time-dependent manner. E2 increased NRF-1 protein in the uterus
and MG; however, in MG, 4-OHT increased Nrf1 mRNA but not protein. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed increased in vivo recruitment of ERa to the
Nrf1 promoter and intron 3 in MG and uterus 6<U+200A>h after E2 and 4-OHT treatment,
commensurate with increased NRF-1 expression. E2- and 4-OHT-induced increases in 
NRF-1 and its target genes Tfam, Tfb1m, and Tfb2m were coordinated in MG but not 
in uterus due to uterine-selective inhibition of the expression of the NRF-1
coactivators Ppargc1a and Ppargc1b by E2 and 4-OHT. E2 transiently increased
NRF-1 and PGC-1a nuclear staining while reducing PGC-1a in uterus. E2, not 4-OHT,
activates mt biogenesis in MG and uterus in a time-dependent manner. E2 increased
mt outer membrane Tomm40 protein levels in MG and uterus whereas 4-OHT increased 
Tomm40 only in uterus. These data support the hypothesis of tissue-selective
regulation of NRF-1 and its downstream targets by E2 and 4-OHT in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3772954
PMID: 23892277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Aug 16;438(1):211-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.07.055. Epub 2013 Jul 22.

Nebivolol stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Huang C(1), Chen D, Xie Q, Yang Y, Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Vascular 
Biology, Department of Hypertension, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200025, PR China.

Nebivolol is a third-generation ß-adrenergic receptor (ß-AR) blocker with
additional beneficial effects, including the improvement of lipid and glucose
metabolism in obese individuals. However, the underlying mechanism of nebivolol's
role in regulating the lipid profile remains largely unknown. In this study, we
investigated the role of nebivolol in mitochondrial biogenesis in 3T3-L1
adipocytes. Exposure of 3T3-L1 cells to nebivolol for 24h increased mitochondrial
DNA copy number, mitochondrial protein levels and the expression of transcription
factors involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, including PPAR-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a
(PGC-1a), Sirtuin 3 (Sirt3), mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) and
nuclear related factor 1 (Nrf1). These changes were accompanied by an increase in
oxygen consumption and in the expression of genes involved in fatty acid
oxidation and antioxidant enzymes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, including
nebivolol-induced endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), as well as an
increase in the formation of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). Pretreatment 
with NG-nitro-L-arginine methyl ester (L-NAME) attenuated nebivolol-induced
mitochondrial biogenesis, as did the soluble guanylate cyclase inhibitor, ODQ.
Treatment with nebivolol and ß3-AR blocker SR59230A markedly attenuated PGC-1a,
Sirt3 and manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) protein levels in comparison to 
treatment with nebivolol alone. These data indicate that the mitochondrial
synthesis and metabolism in adipocytes that is promoted by nebivolol is primarily
mediated through the eNOS/cGMP-dependent pathway and is initiated by the
activation of ß3-AR receptors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23886954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Nucl Med. 2013 Sep;54(9):1661-7. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.119099. Epub 2013 Jul 
25.

Bioenergetic profiles diverge during macrophage polarization: implications for
the interpretation of 18F-FDG PET imaging of atherosclerosis.

Tavakoli S(1), Zamora D, Ullevig S, Asmis R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

Conventional cardiovascular imaging is invaluable for the assessment of late
sequelae of atherosclerosis, such as diminished perfusion reserve and luminal
stenosis. Molecular imaging provides complementary information about plaque
composition and ongoing biologic processes in the vessel wall, allowing the early
diagnosis and risk stratification of patients. Detection of enhanced glucose
uptake, using (18)F-FDG PET, has been proposed as a noninvasive approach to track
macrophage activation as a critical event in the development and progression of
atherosclerosis. In this study, we determined the impact of macrophage
polarization on glucose metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation.METHODS: Murine 
peritoneal macrophages were incubated in the presence of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>)
plus tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), lipopolysaccharide (LPS), or interleukin-4 
(IL-4) to induce classic (M1 and M(LPS)) or alternative (M2) polarization,
respectively. Glucose uptake was measured using (3)H-deoxyglucose. Oxidative
phosphorylation was evaluated using an extracellular flux analyzer. Mitochondrial
DNA copy numbers were quantified by polymerase chain reaction. The expression of 
glucose transporter-1 (Glut-1), hexokinase-1 and -2 (Hk-1 and Hk-2,
respectively), mitochondrial transcription factor-1 (Tfam), and cytochrome c
oxidase subunit I (Cox-1) was determined by quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Stimulation of macrophages by LPS, but not polarization with either
IFN-<U+03B3> plus TNF-a (M1) or IL-4 (M2), resulted in a 2.5-fold increase in
(3)H-deoxyglucose uptake. Enhanced glucose uptake by M(LPS) macrophages
paralleled the overexpression of rate-limiting proteins involved in transmembrane
transport and intracellular trapping of glucose--that is, Glut-1, Hk-1, and Hk-2.
Alternatively polarized M2 macrophages developed a markedly higher spare
respiratory capacity than both nonpolarized and classically polarized M1
macrophages. M2 polarization was associated with a 4.6-fold increase in
mitochondrial content of the cells, compared with nonpolarized macrophages. The
expression of Tfam, a major regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, and Cox-1, a
critical component of respiratory chain, was significantly increased in M2
polarized macrophages.
CONCLUSION: Polarization of macrophages induces distinct metabolic profiles with 
respect to glycolysis versus oxidative phosphorylation, with alternatively
polarized macrophages shifting to mitochondria as their main source of adenosine 
triphosphate. Only M(LPS), but not M1 or M2 polarized macrophages, showed
increased glucose uptake, suggesting that glucose metabolism is regulated
independent of the polarization state and macrophage polarization may not be
detectable by (18)F-FDG PET.

PMCID: PMC4037161
PMID: 23886729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 6;110(32):E2967-76. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1303872110. Epub 2013 Jul 22.

Impaired complex IV activity in response to loss of LRPPRC function can be
compensated by mitochondrial hyperfusion.

Rolland SG(1), Motori E, Memar N, Hench J, Frank S, Winklhofer KF, Conradt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biology II, Center for Integrated Protein Science,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
rolland@bio.lmu.de

Mitochondrial morphology changes in response to various stimuli but the
significance of this is unclear. In a screen for mutants with abnormal
mitochondrial morphology, we identified MMA-1, the Caenorhabditis elegans homolog
of the French Canadian Leigh Syndrome protein LRPPRC (leucine-rich
pentatricopeptide repeat containing). We demonstrate that reducing mma-1 or
LRPPRC function causes mitochondrial hyperfusion. Reducing mma-1/LRPPRC function 
also decreases the activity of complex IV of the electron transport chain,
however without affecting cellular ATP levels. Preventing mitochondrial
hyperfusion in mma-1 animals causes larval arrest and embryonic lethality.
Furthermore, prolonged LRPPRC knock-down in mammalian cells leads to
mitochondrial fragmentation and decreased levels of ATP. These findings indicate 
that in a mma-1/LRPPRC-deficient background, hyperfusion allows mitochondria to
maintain their functions despite a reduction in complex IV activity. Our data
reveal an evolutionary conserved mechanism that is triggered by reduced complex
IV function and that induces mitochondrial hyperfusion to transiently compensate 
for a drop in the activity of the electron transport chain.

PMCID: PMC3740885
PMID: 23878239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 9;219(1):69-78. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0127. Print 2013 Oct.

Triiodothyronine induces lipid oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis in rat
Harderian gland.

Santillo A(1), Burrone L, Falvo S, Senese R, Lanni A, Chieffi Baccari G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Ambientali, Biologiche e Farmaceutiche,
Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, via Vivaldi, 43, 81100 Caserta, Italy.

The rat Harderian gland (HG) is an orbital gland producing a copious lipid
secretion. Recent studies indicate that its secretory activity is regulated by
thyroid hormones. In this study, we found that both isoforms of the thyroid
hormone receptor (Tra (Thra) and Trß (Thrb)) are expressed in rat HGs. Although
Thra is expressed at a higher level, only Thrb is regulated by triiodothyronine
(T3). Because T3 induces an increase in lipid metabolism in rat HGs, we
investigated the effects of an animal's thyroid state on the expression levels of
carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A (Cpt1a) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1B
(Cpt1b) and acyl-CoA oxidase (Acox1) (rate-limiting enzymes in mitochondrial and 
peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation respectively), as well as on the mitochondrial
compartment, thereby correlating mitochondrial activity and biogenesis with
morphological analysis. We found that hypothyroidism decreased the expression of 
Cpt1b and Acox1 mRNA, whereas the administration of T3 to hypothyroid rats
increased transcript levels. Respiratory parameters and catalase protein levels
provided further evidence that T3 modulates mitochondrial and peroxisomal
activities. Furthermore, in hypothyroid rat HGs, the mitochondrial number and
their total area decreased with respect to the controls, whereas the average area
of the individual mitochondrion did not change. However, the average area of the 
individual mitochondrion was reduced by ~50% in hypothyroid T3-treated HGs, and
the mitochondrial number and the total area of the mitochondrial compartment
increased. The mitochondrial morphometric data correlated well with the molecular
results. Indeed, hypothyroid status did not modify the expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis genes such as Ppargc1a, Nrf1 and Tfam, whereas T3
treatment increased the expression level of these genes.

PMID: 23873539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Physiol. 2013 Jul 15;591(14):3455-6. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.259481.

p53: the tumour suppressor turns mitochondrial regulator.

Bartlett JD(1), Morton JP.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John Moores
University, Tom Reilly Building, Byrom St Campus, Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK.
j.p.morton@ljmu.ac.uk

Comment on
    J Physiol. 2013 Jul 15;591(14):3625-36.

PMCID: PMC3731606
PMID: 23858041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Brain Res. 2013 Aug 21;1527:117-30. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.06.041. Epub
2013 Jul 11.

Gemfibrozil pretreatment proved protection against acute restraint stress-induced
changes in the male rats' hippocampus.

Khalaj L(1), Nejad SC, Mohammadi M, Zadeh SS, Pour MH, Ahmadiani A, Khodagholi F,
Ashabi G, Alamdary SZ, Samami E.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Alborz University of Medical Sciences, Alborz, Iran.
lkhalaj@yahoo.com

Stress predisposes the brain to various neuropathological disorders. Fibrates
like gemfibrozil, commonly used for hyperlipidemia, have not yet been examined
for their protective/deteriorative potential against restraint stress-induced
disturbances. Pretreatment of rats with a range of gemfibrozil concentrations
showed significant protection against stress consequences at 90 mg/kg of
gemfibrozil, as it resulted in the highest level of antioxidant defense system
potentiation among other doses. It also reduced plasma corticosterone compared
with the stressed animals. Administration of gemfibrozil (90 mg/kg) before stress
induction was able to significantly induce the protein levels of some protective 
factors including hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1) and NAD(P)H dehydrogenase quinone-1
(NQO-1) in the antioxidant nuclear factor erythroid-derived 2-like 2 (Nrf-2)
pathway, as well as mitochondrial pro-survival proteins, including peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC-1a) and nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1). In parallel, the level of cleaved caspase-3 and
apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF), two proteins involved in apoptotic cell death,
and the number of damaged neurons detected in hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) stained
hippocampus sections were suppressed in the presence of gemfibrozil. Herein,
although gemfibrozil demonstrated protection against the restraint stress,
considering its dose and context-dependent effects reported in the previous
studies, as well as its common application in clinic, further investigations are 
essential to unravel its exact beneficial/deleterious effects in various neuronal
contexts.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23850768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Oct;45(10):2288-301. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.06.024. Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and sarcopenia of aging: from signaling pathways to
clinical trials.

Marzetti E(1), Calvani R, Cesari M, Buford TW, Lorenzi M, Behnke BJ, Leeuwenburgh
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Neurosciences and Orthopedics, Catholic University
of the Sacred Heart School of Medicine, Rome 00168, Italy. emarzetti@live.com

Sarcopenia, the age-related loss of muscle mass and function, imposes a dramatic 
burden on individuals and society. The development of preventive and therapeutic 
strategies against sarcopenia is therefore perceived as an urgent need by health 
professionals and has instigated intensive research on the pathophysiology of
this syndrome. The pathogenesis of sarcopenia is multifaceted and encompasses
lifestyle habits, systemic factors (e.g., chronic inflammation and hormonal
alterations), local environment perturbations (e.g., vascular dysfunction), and
intramuscular specific processes. In this scenario, derangements in skeletal
myocyte mitochondrial function are recognized as major factors contributing to
the age-dependent muscle degeneration. In this review, we summarize prominent
findings and controversial issues on the contribution of specific mitochondrial
processes - including oxidative stress, quality control mechanisms and apoptotic 
signaling - on the development of sarcopenia. Extramuscular alterations
accompanying the aging process with a potential impact on myocyte mitochondrial
function are also discussed. We conclude with presenting methodological and
safety considerations for the design of clinical trials targeting mitochondrial
dysfunction to treat sarcopenia. Special emphasis is placed on the importance of 
monitoring the effects of an intervention on muscle mitochondrial function and
identifying the optimal target population for the trial. This article is part of 
a Directed Issue entitled: Molecular basis of muscle wasting.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3759621
PMID: 23845738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Immun Ageing. 2013 Jul 11;10(1):28. doi: 10.1186/1742-4933-10-28.

Enhancement of mitochondrial biogenesis with polyphenols: combined effects of
resveratrol and equol in human endothelial cells.

Davinelli S(1), Sapere N, Visentin M, Zella D, Scapagnini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Molise, Campobasso
86100, Italy. g.scapagnini@gmail.com.

Emerging evidence suggests that combinatorial action of numerous biologically
active compounds may be a valuable source in a variety of therapeutic
applications. Several nutraceuticals have demonstrated to augment the efficacy of
pharmacological approaches or provide physiological benefit to improve
age-related decline. Recently, the possibilities of anti-ageing interventions
have multiplied also to ameliorate the mitochondrial alterations in
ageing-associated diseases. In this report, we approached a novel treatment
strategy by combining two bioactive dietary constituents (resveratrol and equol) 
to determine their effect on mitochondrial function. Taking into account that the
biological activities of resveratrol and equol has been observed in a wide range 
of biological processes, they were selected to examine whether combining them
would be more effective to modulate mitochondrial function. In HUVEC cells our
results demonstrate that the co-administration of these natural products
increased mitochondrial mass and mitochondrial DNA content. Additionally,
combined use of both compounds increased SIRT1 enzymatic activity and induced
mitochondrial biogenesis factors such as PGC1-a, TFAM and NRF-1. Therefore,
identification of this novel synergism may provide a new perspective for future
treatments aiming to modulate the mitochondrial activity with implications in
maintaining endothelial function which is crucial in the regulation of immune
response. Further studies to discover the molecular details of this crosstalk and
to identify new combinations of active compounds affecting the mitochondrial
function will be extremely beneficial to prevent mitochondrial decline.

PMCID: PMC3750512
PMID: 23842073  [PubMed]


297. Toxicology. 2013 Sep 15;311(3):191-204. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.06.012. Epub 2013
Jul 4.

Early and delayed cardioprotective intervention with dexrazoxane each show
different potential for prevention of chronic anthracycline cardiotoxicity in
rabbits.

Jirkovský E(1), Lencová-Popelová O, Hroch M, Adamcová M, Mazurová Y, Vávrová J,
Micuda S, imunek T, Gerl V, terba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine in Hradec Králové, Charles
University in Prague, imkova 870, Hradec Králové 500 38, Czech Republic.

Despite incomplete understanding to its mechanism of action, dexrazoxane (DEX) is
still the only clearly effective cardioprotectant against chronic anthracycline
(ANT) cardiotoxicity. However, its clinical use is currently restricted to
patients exceeding significant ANT cumulative dose (300mg/m(2)), although each
ANT cycle may induce certain potentially irreversible myocardial damage.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to compare early and delayed DEX
intervention against chronic ANT cardiotoxicity and study the molecular events
involved. The cardiotoxicity was induced in rabbits with daunorubicin (DAU;
3mg/kg/week for 10 weeks); DEX (60mg/kg) was administered either before the 1st
or 7th DAU dose (i.e. after 300mg/m(2) cumulative dose). While both DEX
administration schedules prevented DAU-induced premature deaths and severe
congestive heart failure, only the early intervention completely prevented the
left ventricular dysfunction, myocardial morphological changes and mitochondrial 
damage. Further molecular analyses did not support the assumption that DEX
cardioprotection is based and directly proportional to protection from
DAU-induced oxidative damage and/or deletions in mtDNA. Nevertheless, DAU induced
significant up-regulation of heme oxygenase 1 pathway while heme synthesis was
inversely regulated and both changes were schedule-of-administration preventable 
by DEX. Early and delayed DEX interventions also differed in ability to prevent
DAU-induced down-regulation of expression of mitochondrial proteins encoded by
both nuclear and mitochondrial genome. Hence, the present functional,
morphological as well as the molecular data highlights the enormous
cardioprotective effects of DEX and provides novel insights into the molecular
events involved. Furthermore, the data suggests that currently recommended
delayed intervention may not be able to take advantage of the full
cardioprotective potential of the drug.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23831762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2013;73(2):199-224.

Integrated pathways of parkin control over mitochondrial maintenance - relevance 
to Parkinson's disease pathogenesis.

Gaweda-Walerych K(1), Zekanowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. kasiawal@libero.it

Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress are considered among the main
molecular mechanisms implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD) pathogenesis. Here,
we focus on the deficiency of PARK2 and its product parkin, which is relevant to 
both familial and sporadic PD pathogenesis. Parkin emerges as an important
regulator of processes that maintain mitochondrial quality. We focus on the
parkin-dependent aspects of mitochondrial biogenesis, including mtDNA
replication, transcription, mitophagy, mitochondrial fusion, fission, and
transport. We discuss possible underlying molecular mechanisms, exerted by parkin
in cooperation with other mitochondrial maintenance factors such as TFAM,
PGC-1alpha, mortalin, HSP70/HSC70 and LRPPRC, all of them implicated in PD
pathogenesis. We review numerous models of lipopolysaccharide toxicity that
demonstrate how mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy are induced simultaneously
to cope with mitochondrial dysfunction. The spatial and temporal interdependence 
of mitochondrial quality pathways underscores the importance of an integrative
approach for future studies.

PMID: 23823983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Food Chem. 2013 Nov 15;141(2):1530-5. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.03.085. Epub
2013 Apr 13.

Thermogenesis is involved in the body-fat lowering effects of resveratrol in
rats.

Alberdi G(1), Rodríguez VM, Miranda J, Macarulla MT, Churruca I, Portillo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Obesity Group, Department of Nutrition and Food Science,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Paseo de la Universidad, 7, 01006
Vitoria, Spain. ggooiiuurrii@yahoo.es

The effect of resveratrol on thermogenesis in skeletal muscle and interscapular
brown adipose tissue (IBAT) was investigated. Rats were fed an obesogenic diet
supplemented with resveratrol (30mg/kg/day) or not supplemented for 6weeks.
Resveratrol intake led to increased gene expression of
mitochondrial-transcription-factor-A (TFAM),
mitochondrial-protein-cytochrome-C-oxidase subunit-2 (COX2), sirtuin-1 (SIRT1),
peroxisome-proliferator-activated-receptor-ß/d (PPARß/d) and
proliferator-activated-receptor-gamma-coactivator1-a (PGC-1a) in IBAT and
increased UCP1protein expression; however,
peroxisome-proliferator-activated-receptor-a (PPARa) expression remained
unchanged. In gastrocnemius muscle, resveratrol increased the gene expression of 
TFAM and COX2; however, no changes were observed in levels of SIRT1, PGC-1a and
PPARß/d. Acetylated-PGC-1a was decreased in the resveratrol-treated group,
indicating a higher level of activation, and a significant increase of UCP3
protein expression was observed in this group. The increases in UCP protein
expression in two important thermogenic tissues after resveratrol treatment may
contribute to increased whole-body energy dissipation, which may help to better
understand the body-fat lowering effect of this polyphenol.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23790948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Fiziol Cheloveka. 2013 Mar-Apr;39(2):92-8.

[The effects of aerobic exercise upon genes expression in skeletal muscle of
trained and untrained men].

[Article in Russian]

Popov DB, Zinovkin RA, Karger EM, Tarasova OS, Vinogradova OL.

It is well recognized the PGC-1 alpha is a key regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Mechanical and metabolic perturbations in a skeletal muscle during
and after aerobic exercise lead to increase PGC-1alpha expression. In addition to
that an increase of PGC-1alpha expression after exercise depends on relative
workload intensity and does not depend on fitness level. The aim of the study was
to compare the expression of regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis PGC-1alpha,
TFAM and TFB2M and of proteolysis-related genes FOXO1 and Atrogin-1 in skeletal
muscle untrained and trained men after aerobic exercise with the same relative
workload. The study showed that after exercise the PGC-1alpha expression did not 
differ between groups but TFAM and TFB2M expression was higher in untrained
muscle than trained. On the contrary proteolysis-related genes FOXO1 and
Atrogin-1 expression increased only in the muscle of trained men.

PMID: 23789389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. BMC Med Genomics. 2013 Jun 18;6:22. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-6-22.

Genome-wide expression profiling and functional characterization of SCA28
lymphoblastoid cell lines reveal impairment in cell growth and activation of
apoptotic pathways.

Mancini C(1), Roncaglia P, Brussino A, Stevanin G, Lo Buono N, Krmac H, Maltecca 
F, Gazzano E, Bartoletti Stella A, Calvaruso MA, Iommarini L, Cagnoli C, Forlani 
S, Le Ber I, Durr A, Brice A, Ghigo D, Casari G, Porcelli AM, Funaro A, Gasparre 
G, Gustincich S, Brusco A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University of Torino, Via Santena 19, 10126
Torino, Italy.

BACKGROUND: SCA28 is an autosomal dominant ataxia associated with AFG3L2 gene
mutations. We performed a whole genome expression profiling using lymphoblastoid 
cell lines (LCLs) from four SCA28 patients and six unrelated healthy controls
matched for sex and age.
METHODS: Gene expression was evaluated with the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Genome 
U133A 2.0 Arrays and data were validated by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: We found 66 genes whose expression was statistically different in SCA28 
LCLs, 35 of which were up-regulated and 31 down-regulated. The differentially
expressed genes were clustered in five functional categories: (1) regulation of
cell proliferation; (2) regulation of programmed cell death; (3) response to
oxidative stress; (4) cell adhesion, and (5) chemical homeostasis. To validate
these data, we performed functional experiments that proved an impaired SCA28
LCLs growth compared to controls (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005), an increased number of cells in the
G0/G1 phase (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and an increased mortality because of apoptosis
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). We also showed that respiratory chain activity and reactive oxygen
species levels was not altered, although lipid peroxidation in SCA28 LCLs was
increased in basal conditions (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). We did not detect mitochondrial DNA
large deletions. An increase of TFAM, a crucial protein for mtDNA maintenance,
and of DRP1, a key regulator of mitochondrial dynamic mechanism, suggested an
alteration of fission/fusion pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Whole genome expression profiling, performed on SCA28 LCLs, allowed 
us to identify five altered functional categories that characterize the SCA28
LCLs phenotype, the first reported in human cells to our knowledge.

PMCID: PMC3689607
PMID: 23777634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Aug 15;305(4):F520-31. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00570.2012. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is an early event in aldosterone-induced podocyte
injury.

Su M(1), Dhoopun AR, Yuan Y, Huang S, Zhu C, Ding G, Liu B, Yang T, Zhang A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Nephrology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Affiliated to Nanjing
Medical Univ., 72 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu Province, P. R. of
China. zhaihua@njmu.edu.cn.

We previously showed that mitochondrial dysfunction (MtD) is involved in an
aldosterone (Aldo)-induced podocyte injury. Here, the potential role of MtD in
the initiation of podocyte damage was investigated. We detected the dynamic
changes of urinary protein, urinary F2-isoprostane and renal malondialdehyde
levels, kidney ultrastructure morphology, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, 
mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+0394><U+03A8>m), and nephrin and podocin expressions in
Aldo-infused mice. Aldo infusion first induced renal oxidative stress, as
evidenced by increased levels of urinary F2-isoprostane and renal
malondialdehyde, and MtD, as demonstrated by reduced mtDNA, <U+0394><U+03A8>m, and ATP
production. Later, at 5 days after Aldo infusion, proteinuria and podocyte injury
began to appear. In cultured podocytes, Aldo or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) induced 
MtD after 2-8 h of treatment, whereas the podocyte damage, as shown by decreased 
nephrin and podocin expressions, occurred later after 12 h of treatment. Thus
Aldo treatment both in vitro and in vivo indicated that MtD occurred before
podocyte damage. Additionally, MtDNA depletion by ethidium bromide or
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) RNAi induced MtD, further promoting
podocyte damage. TFAM expression was found to be reduced in Aldo-infused mice and
Aldo-treated podocytes. Adenoviral vector-mediated overexpression of TFAM
prevented Aldo-induced MtD and protected against podocyte injury. Together, these
findings support MtD as an early event in podocyte injury, and manipulation of
TFAM may be a novel strategy for treatment of glomerular diseases such as
podocytopathy.

PMID: 23761667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 3;8(6):e65029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065029. Print 2014.

Green tea polyphenols stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis and improve renal
function after chronic cyclosporin a treatment in rats.

Rehman H(1), Krishnasamy Y, Haque K, Thurman RG, Lemasters JJ, Schnellmann RG,
Zhong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery & Biomedical Sciences, Medical University of
South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of America.

Our previous studies showed that an extract from Camellia sinenesis (green tea), 
which contains several polyphenols, attenuates nephrotoxicity caused by
cyclosporine A (CsA). Since polyphenols are stimulators of mitochondrial
biogenesis (MB), this study investigated whether stimulation of MB plays a role
in green tea polyphenol protection against CsA renal toxicity. Rats were fed a
powdered diet containing green tea polyphenolic extract (0.1%) starting 3 days
prior to CsA treatment (25 mg/kg, i.g. daily for 3 weeks). CsA alone decreased
renal nuclear DNA-encoded oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) protein ATP
synthase-ß (AS-ß) by 42%, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded OXPHOS protein NADH
dehydrogenase-3 (ND3) by 87% and their associated mRNAs. Mitochondrial DNA copy
number was also decreased by 78% by CsA. Immunohistochemical analysis showed
decreased cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (COX-IV), an OXPHOS protein, in tubular
cells. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator (PGC)-1a, the
master regulator of MB, and mitochondrial transcription factor-A (Tfam), the
transcription factor that regulates mtDNA replication and transcription, were 42%
and 90% lower, respectively, in the kidneys of CsA-treated than in untreated
rats. These results indicate suppression of MB by chronic CsA treatment. Green
tea polyphenols alone and following CsA increased AS-ß, ND3, COX-IV, mtDNA copy
number, PGC-1a mRNA and protein, decreased acetylated PGC-1a, and increased Tfam 
mRNA and protein. In association with suppressed MB, CsA increased serum
creatinine, caused loss of brush border and dilatation of proximal tubules,
tubular atrophy, vacuolization, apoptosis, calcification, and increased
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin expression, leukocyte infiltration,
and renal fibrosis. Green tea polyphenols markedly attenuated CsA-induced renal
injury and improved renal function. Together, these results demonstrate that
green tea polyphenols attenuate CsA-induced kidney injury, at least in part,
through the stimulation of MB.

PMCID: PMC3670924
PMID: 23755172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:159-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.05.061. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

Dietary whey protein stimulates mitochondrial activity and decreases oxidative
stress in mouse female brain.

Shertzer HG(1), Krishan M, Genter MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, OH 45267,
USA. shertzhg@ucmail.uc.edu

In humans and experimental animals, protein-enriched diets are beneficial for
weight management, muscle development, managing early stage insulin resistance
and overall health. Previous studies have shown that in mice consuming a high fat
diet, whey protein isolate (WPI) reduced hepatosteatosis and insulin resistance
due in part to an increase in basal metabolic rate. In the current study, we
examined the ability of WPI to increase energy metabolism in mouse brain. Female 
C57BL/6J mice were fed a normal AIN-93M diet for 12 weeks, with (WPI group) or
without (Control group) 100g WPI/L drinking water. In WPI mice compared to
controls, the oxidative stress biomarkers malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxyalkenals
were 40% lower in brain homogenates, and the production of hydrogen peroxide and 
superoxide were 25-35% less in brain mitochondria. Brain mitochondria from WPI
mice remained coupled, and exhibited higher rates of respiration with
proportionately greater levels of cytochromes a+a3 and c+c1. These results
suggested that WPI treatment increased the number or improved the function of
brain mitochondria. qRT-PCR revealed that the gene encoding a master regulator of
mitochondrial activity and biogenesis, Pgc-1alpha (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha) was elevated 2.2-fold, 
as were the PGC-1alpha downstream genes, Tfam (mitochondrial transcription factor
A), Gabpa/Nrf-2a (GA-binding protein alpha/nuclear respiratory factor-2a), and
Cox-6a1 (cytochrome oxidase-6a1). Each of these genes had twice the levels of
transcript in brain tissue from WPI mice, relative to controls. There was no
change in the expression of the housekeeping gene B2mg (beta-2 microglobulin). We
conclude that dietary whey protein decreases oxidative stress and increases
mitochondrial activity in mouse brain. Dietary supplementation with WPI may be a 
useful clinical intervention to treat conditions associated with oxidative stress
or diminished mitochondrial activity in the brain.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3749878
PMID: 23748211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2013 Jul;83(3):127-37. doi: 10.1002/arch.21101. Epub
2013 May 31.

Muscle-specific overexpression of the catalytic subunit of DNA polymerase <U+03B3>
induces pupal lethality in Drosophila melanogaster.

Martínez-Azorín F(1), Calleja M, Hernández-Sierra R, Farr CL, Kaguni LS, Garesse 
R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto
Sols CSIC-UAM, Facultad de Medicina CIBERER ISCIII, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Madrid, Spain. fmartinez@h12o.es

We show the physiological effects and molecular characterization of
overexpression of the catalytic core of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) polymerase (pol
<U+03B3>-a) in muscle of Drosophila melanogaster. Muscle-specific overexpression of pol 
<U+03B3>-a using the UAS/GAL4 (where UAS is upstream activation sequence) system
produced more than 90% of lethality at the end of pupal stage at 25°C, and the
survivor adult flies showed a significant reduction in life span. The survivor
flies displayed a decreased mtDNA level that is accompanied by a corresponding
decrease in the levels of the nucleoid-binding protein mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA). Furthermore, an increase in apoptosis is detected
in larvae and adults overexpressing pol <U+03B3>-a. We suggest that the pupal lethality 
and reduced life span of survivor adult flies are both caused mainly by massive
apoptosis of muscle cells induced by mtDNA depletion.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4703106
PMID: 23729397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Trends Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;23(9):457-63. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2013.04.009. Epub
2013 May 27.

mtDNA makes a U-turn for the mitochondrial nucleoid.

Kukat C(1), Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of
Ageing, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 9b, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

Mitochondria contain mtDNA derived from the ancestral endosymbiont genome.
Important subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation system, which supplies cells 
with the energy currency ATP, are encoded by mtDNA. A naked mtDNA molecule is
longer than a typical mitochondrion and is therefore compacted in vivo to form a 
nucleoprotein complex, denoted the mitochondrial nucleoid. Mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) is the main factor packaging mtDNA into nucleoids
and is also essential for mtDNA transcription initiation. The crystal structure
of TFAM shows that it bends mtDNA in a sharp U-turn, which likely provides the
structural basis for its dual functions. Super-resolution imaging studies have
revealed that the nucleoid has an average diameter of ~100nm and frequently
contains a single copy of mtDNA. In this review the structure of the
mitochondrial nucleoid and its possible regulatory roles in mtDNA expression will
be discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23721879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Reprod Domest Anim. 2013 Dec;48(6):881-7. doi: 10.1111/rda.12180. Epub 2013 May
21.

In vitro development of bison embryos using interspecies somatic cell nuclear
transfer.

Seaby RP(1), Alexander B, King WA, Mastromonaco GF.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.

Interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer (interspecies SCNT) has been explored 
in many domestic and non-domestic animal species. However, problems arise during 
the development of these embryos, which may be related to species-specific
differences in nuclear-cytoplasmic communication. The objectives of this study
were to investigate the possibility of producing bison embryos in vitro using
interspecies SCNT and assess the developmental potential of these embryos.
Treatment groups consisted of cattle in vitro fertilization (IVF) and cattle SCNT
as controls and wood bison SCNT, plains bison SCNT and wisent SCNT as
experimental groups. Cleavage and blastocyst rates were assessed, and blastocyst 
quality was determined using total cell number, apoptotic incidence and relative 
quantification of mitochondria-related genes NRF1, MT-CYB and TFAM. These results
indicate that embryos can be produced by interspecies SCNT in all bison
species/subspecies (13.34-33.54% blastocyst rates). Although increased incidence 
of apoptosis was observed in bison SCNT blastocysts compared to cattle SCNT
controls (10.45-12.69 vs 8.76, respectively) that corresponded with significantly
lower cell numbers (80-87 cells vs >100 cells, respectively), no major
differences were observed in the expression of NRF1, MT-CYB and TFAM. This study 
is the first to report the production of bison embryos by interspecies SCNT.
Blastocyst development in all three bison species/subspecies was greater than the
rates obtained in previous studies by IVF, which supports the potential role of
SCNT for in vitro embryo production in this species. Yet, further investigation
of developmental competence and the factors influencing blastocyst quality and
viability is required.

© 2013 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 23692072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2013 May 15;8(5):e64436. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064436. Print 2013.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor d agonist, HPP593, prevents renal
necrosis under chronic ischemia.

Fedorova LV(1), Sodhi K, Gatto-Weis C, Puri N, Hinds TD Jr, Shapiro JI, Malhotra 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Toledo School of Medicine, Toledo,
Ohio, United States of America. Larisa.fedorova@utoledo.edu

The Goldblatt's 2 kidney 1 clip (2K1C) rat animal model of renovascular
hypertension is characterized by ischemic nephropathy of the clipped kidney. 2K1C
rats were treated with a specific peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor d
(PPARd) agonist, HPP593. Clipped kidneys from untreated rats developed tubular
and glomerular necrosis and massive interstitial, periglomerular and perivascular
fibrosis. HPP593 kidneys did not exhibit any histochemical features of necrosis; 
fibrotic lesions were present only in perivascular areas. Necrosis in the
untreated clipped kidneys was associated with an increased oxidative stress, up
regulation and mitochondrial translocation of the pro-death protein BNIP3
specifically in tubules. In the kidneys of HPP593-treated rats oxidative stress
was attenuated and BNIP3 protein decreased notably in the mitochondrial fraction 
when compared to untreated animals. In untreated clipped kidneys, mitochondria
were dysfunctional as revealed by perturbations in the levels of MCAD, COXIV,
TFAM, and Parkin proteins and AMPK activation, while in HPP593-treated rats these
proteins remained at the physiological levels. Nuclear amounts of oxidative
stress-responsive proteins, NRF1 and NRF2 were below physiological levels in
treated kidneys. Mitochondrial biogenesis and autophagy were inhibited similarly 
in both treated and untreated 2K1C kidneys as indicated by a decrease in PGC1-a
and deficiency of the autophagy-essential proteins LC3-II and ATG5. However,
HPP593 treatment resulted in increased accumulation of p62 protein, an autophagic
substrate and an enhancer of NRF2 activity. Therefore, inhibition of BNIP3
activation by the preservation of mitochondrial function and control of oxidative
stress by PPARd is the most likely mechanism to account for the prevention of
necrotic death in the kidney under conditions of persistent ischemia.

PMCID: PMC3654981
PMID: 23691217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Physiol. 2013 Jul 15;591(14):3625-36. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.252791. Epub
2013 May 20.

Acute exercise induces tumour suppressor protein p53 translocation to the
mitochondria and promotes a p53-Tfam-mitochondrial DNA complex in skeletal
muscle.

Saleem A(1), Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, Muscle Health Research Centre, York 
University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2013 Jul 15;591(14):3455-6.

The major tumour suppressor protein p53 plays an important role in maintaining
mitochondrial content and function in skeletal muscle. p53 has been shown to
reside in the mitochondria complexed with mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA); however, the
physiological repercussions of mitochondrial p53 remain unknown. We endeavoured
to elucidate whether an acute bout of endurance exercise could mediate an
increase in mitochondrial p53 levels. C57Bl6 mice (n = 6 per group) were randomly
assigned to sedentary, acute exercise (AE, 15 m min(-1) for 90 min) or acute
exercise + 3 h recovery (AER) groups. Exercise concomitantly increased the mRNA
content of nuclear-encoded (PGC-1a, Tfam, NRF-1, COX-IV, citrate synthase) and
mtDNA-encoded (COX-I) genes in the AE group, and further by ~5-fold in the AER
group. Nuclear p53 protein levels were reduced in the AE and AER groups, while in
contrast, the abundance of p53 was drastically enhanced by ~2.4-fold and
~3.9-fold in subsarcolemmal and intermyofibrillar mitochondria, respectively, in 
the AER conditions. Within the mitochondria, the interaction of p53 with mtDNA at
the D-loop and with Tfam was elevated by ~4.6-fold and ~3.6-fold, respectively,
in the AER group. In the absence of p53, the enhanced COX-I mRNA content observed
with AE and AER was abrogated. This study is the first to indicate that endurance
exercise can signal to localize p53 to the mitochondria where it may serve to
positively modulate the activity of the mitochondrial transcription factor Tfam. 
Our findings help us understand the mechanisms underlying the effects of exercise
as a therapeutic intervention designed to trigger the pro-metabolic functions of 
p53.

PMCID: PMC3731618
PMID: 23690562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mitochondrion. 2013 Nov;13(6):762-71. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2013.05.001. Epub 2013 
May 9.

Lipidomic characterization of streptozotocin-induced heart mitochondrial
dysfunction.

Ferreira R(1), Guerra G, Padrão AI, Melo T, Vitorino R, Duarte JA, Remião F,
Domingues P, Amado F, Domingues MR.

Author information: 
(1)QOPNA, Department of Chemistry, University of Aveiro, Aveiro, Portugal.
Electronic address: ritaferreira@ua.pt.

Myocardial mitochondria dysfunction seems to represent an important pathogenic
factor underlying cardiomyopathy, a common complication of type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM). Despite significant progress in the understanding of the
molecular mechanisms of mitochondrial function in the heart, the interplay
between phospholipids and membrane proteins of this organelle is still poorly
comprehended. Using a well-characterized animal model of T1DM obtained by the
administration of streptozotocin, phospholipid profiling of isolated mitochondria
was performed using MS-based approaches, which was analyzed together with
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complexes activities and their susceptibility 
to oxidation, and the expression of cytochrome c, the uncoupling protein UCP-3
and the mitochondrial transcription factor Tfam. Although in higher amounts,
mitochondria from T1DM heart presented lower OXPHOS activity and lower
transcription ability. This profile was related to phospholipid (PL) remodeling
characterized by higher phosphatidylcholine levels, lower phosphatidylglycerol,
phosphatidylinositol and sphingomyelin content, higher amounts of long fatty acyl
side chains and increased lipid peroxidation, particularly of cardiolipin (CL).
CL peroxidation was paralleled by lower cytochrome c content. Though in higher
levels, UCP-3 does not seem to protect heart mitochondrial PL and membrane
proteins from the oxidative damage induced by four weeks of hyperglycemia. Taken 
together, our data suggest that PL remodeling of heart mitochondria is an early
event in T1DM pathogenesis and is related with OXPHOS dysfunction.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Metabolism. 2013 Sep;62(9):1258-67. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.04.001. Epub 2013
May 8.

Effect of leptin treatment on mitochondrial function in obese leptin-deficient
ob/ob mice.

Holmström MH(1), Tom RZ, Björnholm M, Garcia-Roves PM, Zierath JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Section for Integrative
Physiology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Leptin stimulates peripheral lipid oxidation, but the influence on
mitochondrial function is partly unknown. We investigated tissue-specific
mitochondrial function in leptin-deficient obese C57BL/6J-ob/ob mice compared to 
lean littermates following leptin treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Lean and obese ob/ob mice were treated with saline or
leptin for 5 days. At day six, liver, extensor digitorum longus (EDL) and soleus 
muscle were dissected and mitochondrial respiration analyzed in freshly dissected
tissues. Expression of key proteins in the regulation of mitochondrial function
was determined.
RESULTS: In liver, mitochondrial respiration was reduced in ob/ob mice compared
to lean mice. Expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) was
decreased in ob/ob mice, but increased with leptin treatment. In glycolytic EDL
muscle, mitochondrial respiration was increased in ob/ob mice. Protein markers of
complex II, IV and ATP synthase were increased in EDL muscle from both saline-
and leptin-treated ob/ob mice. TFAM protein abundance was decreased, while
dynamin-1-like protein was increased in EDL muscle from saline-treated ob/ob mice
and restored by leptin treatment. In oxidative soleus muscle, mitochondrial
respiration and electron transport system protein abundance were unchanged, while
TFAM was reduced in ob/ob mice.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, leptin-deficient ob/ob mice display tissue-specific
mitochondrial adaptations under basal conditions and in response to leptin
treatment. Mitochondrial respiration was decreased in liver, increased in
glycolytic muscle and unaltered in oxidative muscle from ob/ob mice. Insight into
the tissue-specific regulation of mitochondrial function in response to energy
supply and demand may provide new opportunities for the treatment of insulin
resistance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23664724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Nov;48(11):1212-7. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.04.010. Epub 2013
May 3.

Light-dark condition regulates sirtuin mRNA levels in the retina.

Ban N(1), Ozawa Y, Inaba T, Miyake S, Watanabe M, Shinmura K, Tsubota K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Retinal Cell Biology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; Department of Ophthalmology, Keio 
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Sirtuins (Sirt1-7) are nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)-dependent protein 
deacetylases/ADP-ribosyltransferases that modulate many metabolic responses
affecting aging. Sirtuins expressed in tissues and organs involved in systemic
metabolism have been extensively studied. However, the characteristics of
sirtuins in the retina, where local energy expenditure changes dynamically in
response to light stimuli, are largely unknown. Here we analyzed sirtuin mRNA
levels by real-time PCR, and found that all seven sirtuins are highly expressed
in the retina compared with other tissues, such as liver. We then analyzed the
sirtuin mRNA profiles in the retina over time, under a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle
(LD condition) and in constant darkness (DD condition). All seven sirtuins showed
significant daily variation under the LD condition, with all except Sirt6 being
increased in the dark phase. The expression patterns were different under the DD 
condition, suggesting that sirtuin mRNA levels except Sirt6 are affected by
light-dark condition. These findings were not obtained in the brain and liver. In
addition, the mRNA expression patterns of Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase 
(Nampt), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator (PGC1a),
and transcription factor A, mitochondrial (Tfam) in the retina, were similar to
those of the sirtuins except Sirt6. Our observations provide new insights into
the metabolic mechanisms of the retina and the sirtuins' regulatory systems.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23648587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Radiat Res. 2013 Nov 1;54(6):998-1004. doi: 10.1093/jrr/rrt046. Epub 2013 May
3.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A regulated ionizing radiation-induced
mitochondrial biogenesis in human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells.

Yu J(1), Wang Q, Chen N, Sun Y, Wang X, Wu L, Chen S, Yuan H, Xu A, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology
of China, Hefei 230027, PR China.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), the first well-characterized
transcription factor from vertebrate mitochondria, is closely related to
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) maintenance and repair. Recent evidence has shown that 
the ratio of mtDNA to nuclearDNA (nDNA) is increased in both human cells and
murine tissues after ionizing radiation (IR). However, the underlying mechanism
has not as yet been clearly identified. In the present study, we demonstrated
that in human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells, expression of TFAM was upregulated,
together with the increase of the relative mtDNA copy number and cytochrome c
oxidase (COX) activity after a-particle irradiation. Furthermore, short hairpin
RNA (shRNA)-mediated TFAM knockdown inhibited the enhancement of the relative
mtDNA copy number and COX activity caused by a-particles. Taken together, our
data suggested that TFAM plays a crucial role in regulating mtDNA amplification
and mitochondrial biogenesis under IR conditions.

PMCID: PMC3823773
PMID: 23645454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Trends Biochem Sci. 2013 Jun;38(6):283-91. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2013.03.006. Epub 
2013 Apr 27.

Accessorizing the human mitochondrial transcription machinery.

Bestwick ML(1), Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

The human genome comprises large chromosomes in the nucleus and mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) housed in the dynamic mitochondrial network. Human cells contain up to
thousands of copies of the double-stranded, circular mtDNA molecule that encodes 
essential subunits of the oxidative phosphorylation complexes and the rRNAs and
tRNAs needed to translate these in the organelle matrix. Transcription of human
mtDNA is directed by a single-subunit RNA polymerase, POLRMT, which requires two 
primary transcription factors, TFB2M (transcription factor B2, mitochondrial) and
TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial), to achieve basal regulation of the 
system. Here, we review recent advances in understanding the structure and
function of the primary human transcription machinery and the other factors that 
facilitate steps in transcription beyond initiation and provide more intricate
control over the system.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3698603
PMID: 23632312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Mar;26(3):441-52. doi: 10.1071/RD12303.

Developmental competence of equine oocytes: impacts of zona pellucida
birefringence and maternally derived transcript expression.

Mohammadi-Sangcheshmeh A(1), Held E(1), Rings F(1), Ghanem N(2), Salilew-Wondim
D(1), Tesfaye D(1), Sieme H(3), Schellander K(1), Hoelker M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, Endenicher Allee 15, 53115 Bonn, Germany. (2)Animal Production
Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, 12613 Giza, Egypt.
(3)Clinic for Horses, Unit of Reproductive Medicine of Clinics, University of
Veterinary Medicine Hannover Foundation, 30559 Hannover, Germany.

In the present study, equine oocytes were classified into groups of presumably
high and low developmental competence according to cumulus morphology, as well as
oocyte ability to metabolise brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) stain. All oocytes were 
evaluated individually in terms of morphometry, zona pellucida birefringence
(ZPB) and relative abundance of selected candidate genes. Oocytes with an
expanded cumulus (Ex), representing those with presumably high developmental
competence, had a significantly thicker zona (18.2 vs 17.3µm) and a significantly
higher ZPB (64.6 vs 62.1) than oocytes with a compacted cumulus (Cp).
Concurrently, oocytes classified as highly developmentally competent (BCB+) had a
significantly thicker zona (18.8 vs 16.1µm) and significantly higher ZPB (63.1 vs
61.3) compared with oocytes classified as having low developmental competence.
Expression of TFAM, STAT3 and CKS2 was significantly higher in Ex compared with
Cp oocytes, whereas expression of COX1, ATPV6E and DNMT1 was lower. Together, the
data reveal that developmentally competent equine oocytes are larger in size,
have higher ZPB values and exhibit a typical genetic signature of maternally
derived transcripts compared with oocytes with lower in vitro developmental
competence.

PMID: 23622680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2013 Dec;209(4):272-82. doi: 10.1111/apha.12110. Epub 2013
May 10.

Effect of hypoxia exposure on the phenotypic adaptation in remodelling skeletal
muscle submitted to functional overload.

Chaillou T(1), Koulmann N, Meunier A, Malgoyre A, Serrurier B, Beaudry M, Bigard 
X.

Author information: 
(1)Département Environnements opérationnels, Institut de Recherche Biomédicale
des Armées, antenne de La Tronche, La Tronche, France.

AIM: To determine whether hypoxia influences the phenotypic adaptation of
skeletal muscle induced by mechanical overload.
METHODS: Plantaris muscles of female rats were submitted to mechanical overload
following synergist ablation. After 3 days of overload, rats were exposed to
either hypobaric hypoxia (equivalent to 5500 m) or normoxia. Muscles were
collected after 5, 12 and 56 days of overload (i.e. after 3, 9 and 53 days of
hypoxia). We determined the myosin heavy chain (MHC) distribution, mRNA levels of
myocyte-enriched calcineurin-integrating protein 1 (MCIP1) to indirectly assess
calcineurin activity, the changes in oxidative capacity from the activities of
citrate synthase (CS) and cytochrome c oxidase (COX), and the expression of
regulators involved in mitochondrial biogenesis (Pgc-1a, NRF1 and Tfam) and
degradation (BNIP-3).
RESULTS: Hypoxia did not alter the fast-to-slow MHC shift and the increase in
calcineurin activity induced by overload; it only transiently slowed down the
overload-induced transition in MHC isoforms. Hypoxia similarly decreased CS and
COX activities in overloaded and control muscles. Nuclear respiratory factor 1
(NRF1) and transcription factor A (Tfam) mRNA and BNIP-3 protein were not
influenced by hypoxia in overloaded muscles, whereas Pgc-1a mRNA and protein
contents did not correlate with changes in oxidative capacity.
CONCLUSION: Hypoxia is not a critical stimulus to modulate the fast-to-slow MHC
transition associated with overload. Thus, the impairment of the fast-to-slow
fibre shift often observed during post-natal development in hypoxia could be
explained by the lower voluntary locomotor activity associated with hypoxia.
Hypoxia alters mitochondrial oxidative capacity, but this adaptive response is
similar in overloaded and control muscles.

© 2013 Scandinavian Physiological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23621297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Oct;63:1-29. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.03.018. 
Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Mitochondrial diseases of the brain.

Chaturvedi RK(1), Flint Beal M.

Author information: 
(1)CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research, 80 MG Marg, Lucknow 226001,
India. rajnish@iitr.res.in

Neurodegenerative disorders are debilitating diseases of the brain, characterized
by behavioral, motor and cognitive impairments. Ample evidence underpins
mitochondrial dysfunction as a central causal factor in the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, 
Alzheimer's disease, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Friedreich's ataxia and
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. In this review, we discuss the role of mitochondrial
dysfunction such as bioenergetics defects, mitochondrial DNA mutations, gene
mutations, altered mitochondrial dynamics (mitochondrial fusion/fission,
morphology, size, transport/trafficking, and movement), impaired transcription
and the association of mutated proteins with mitochondria in these diseases. We
highlight the therapeutic role of mitochondrial bioenergetic agents in toxin and 
in cellular and genetic animal models of neurodegenerative disorders. We also
discuss clinical trials of bioenergetics agents in neurodegenerative disorders.
Lastly, we shed light on PGC-1a, TORC-1, AMP kinase, Nrf2-ARE, and Sirtuins as
novel therapeutic targets for neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1832(8):1313-25. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.03.018. Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Regulation of skeletal muscle oxidative phenotype by classical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling.

Remels AH(1), Gosker HR, Bakker J, Guttridge DC, Schols AM, Langen RC.

Author information: 
(1)NUTRIM School for Nutrition, Toxicology and Metabolism, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre +, Maastricht, The
Netherlands. a.remels@maastrichtuniversity.nl

BACKGROUND: Impairments in skeletal muscle oxidative phenotype (OXPHEN) have been
linked to the development of insulin resistance, metabolic inflexibility and
progression of the metabolic syndrome and have been associated with progressive
disability in diseases associated with chronic systemic inflammation. We
previously showed that the inflammatory cytokine tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a)
directly impairs muscle OXPHEN but underlying molecular mechanisms remained
unknown. Interestingly, the inflammatory signalling pathway classical nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) is activated in muscle in abovementioned disorders. Therefore, 
we hypothesised that muscle activation of classical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling is
sufficient and required for inflammation-induced impairment of muscle OXPHEN.
METHODS: Myotubes from mouse and human muscle cell lines were subjected to
activation or blockade of the classical NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. In addition, wild-type and
MISR (muscle-specific inhibition of classical NF-<U+03BA>B) mice were injected
intra-muscularly with TNF-a. Markers and key regulators of muscle OXPHEN were
investigated.
RESULTS: Classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation diminished expression of oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) sub-units, slow myosin heavy chain expression, activity 
of mitochondrial enzymes and potently reduced intra-cellular ATP levels.
Accordingly, PGC-1/PPAR/NRF-1/Tfam signalling, the main pathway controlling
muscle OXPHEN, was impaired upon classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation which required intact
p65 trans-activation domains and depended on de novo gene transcription. Unlike
wild-type myotubes, I<U+03BA>Ba-SR myotubes (blocked classical NF-<U+03BA>B signalling) were
refractory to TNF-a-induced impairments in OXPHEN and its regulation by the
PGC-1/PPAR/NRF-1/Tfam cascade. In line with in vitro data, NF-<U+03BA>B blockade in vivo
abrogated TNF-a-induced reductions in PGC-1a expression.
CONCLUSION: Classical NF-<U+03BA>B activation impairs skeletal muscle OXPHEN.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23563317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Discov Med. 2013 Mar;15(82):141-9.

Novel therapeutic approaches for Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.

Iyer S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, Virginia Commonwealth
University, Richmond, Virginia 23284, USA. siyer@vcu.edu

Many human childhood mitochondrial disorders result from abnormal mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) and altered bioenergetics. These abnormalities span most of the
mtDNA, demonstrating that there are no "unique" positions on the mitochondrial
genome that when deleted or mutated produce a disease phenotype. This diversity
implies that the relationship between mitochondrial genotype and clinical
phenotype is very complex. The origins of clinical phenotypes are thus unclear,
fundamentally difficult-to-treat, and are usually clinically devastating. Current
treatment is largely supportive and the disorders progress relentlessly causing
significant morbidity and mortality. Vitamin supplements and pharmacological
agents have been used in isolated cases and clinical trials, but the efficacy of 
these interventions is unclear. In spite of recent advances in the understanding 
of the pathogenesis of mitochondrial diseases, a cure remains elusive. An optimal
cure would be gene therapy, which involves introducing the missing gene(s) into
the mitochondria to complement the defect. Our recent research results indicate
the feasibility of an innovative protein-transduction ("protofection")
technology, consisting of a recombinant mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) that avidly binds mtDNA and permits efficient targeting into mitochondria 
in situ and in vivo. Thus, the development of gene therapy for treating
mitochondrial disease offers promise, because it may circumvent the clinical
abnormalities and the current inability to treat individual disorders in affected
individuals. This review aims to focus on current treatment options and future
therapeutics in mitochondrial disease treatment with a special emphasis on
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy.

PMID: 23545042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Apoptosis. 2013 Jul;18(7):786-99. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0837-3.

Dynamic mobilization of PGC-1a mediates mitochondrial biogenesis for the
protection of RGC-5 cells by resveratrol during serum deprivation.

Chen S(1), Fan Q, Li A, Liao D, Ge J, Laties AM, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Glaucoma, State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-Sen University, 54S Xianlie Road, 510060 Guangzhou,
China.

Mitochondrial dysfunction contributing to the pathogenesis of glaucomatous
neurodegeneration has stimulated considerable interest recently. In this study,
we explored the role of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-<U+03B3> co-activator
1a (PGC-1a) in resveratrol-triggered mitochondrial biogenesis for preventing
apoptosis in a retinal ganglion cell line RGC-5. Our results showed that serum
deprivation induced cell apoptosis in a time-dependent manner. Applying
resveratrol maintained the normal mitochondrial membrane potential, decreased the
levels of both total and cleaved caspase-3, and inhibited the release of
cytochrome c, which subsequently enhanced cell survival. Moreover, resveratrol
stimulated mitochondrial biogenesis by increasing the absolute quantity of
mitochondria as well as their DNA copies. Treatment with resveratrol promoted the
protein expression of SIRT1, but not PGC-1a; instead, resveratrol facilitated
PGC-1a translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus and up-regulated NRF1 and 
TFAM, which were blocked by nicotinamide. Collectively, we demonstrate that the
SIRT1-dependent PGC-1a subcellular translocation following resveratrol
application potentially attenuates serum deprivation-elicited RGC-5 cell death,
thereby raising the possibility of mitigating glaucomatous retinopathy by
enhancement of mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 23525928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Open Biol. 2013 Mar 20;3(3):120176. doi: 10.1098/rsob.120176.

Bigenomic transcriptional regulation of all thirteen cytochrome c oxidase subunit
genes by specificity protein 1.

Dhar SS(1), Johar K, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is one of only four known bigenomic proteins, with
three mitochondria-encoded subunits and 10 nucleus-encoded ones derived from nine
different chromosomes. The mechanism of regulating this multi-subunit, bigenomic 
enzyme is not fully understood. We hypothesize that specificity protein 1 (Sp1)
functionally regulates the 10 nucleus-encoded COX subunit genes directly and the 
three mitochondrial COX subunit genes indirectly by regulating mitochondrial
transcription factors A and B (TFAM, TFB1M and TFB2M) in neurons. By means of in 
silico analysis, electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation, RNA interference and over-expression experiments, the
present study documents that Sp1 is a critical regulator of all 13 COX subunit
genes in neurons. This regulation is intimately associated with neuronal
activity. Silencing of Sp1 prevented the upregulation of all COX subunits by KCl,
and over-expressing Sp1 rescued all COX subunits from being downregulated by
tetrodotoxin. Thus, Sp1 and our previously described nuclear respiratory factors 
1 and 2 are the three key regulators of all 13 COX subunit genes in neurons. The 
binding sites for Sp1 on all 10 nucleus-encoded COX subunits, TFAM, TFB1M and
TFB2M are highly conserved among mice, rats and humans.

PMCID: PMC3718336
PMID: 23516108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 29;433(1):52-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.068. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Cilostazol promotes mitochondrial biogenesis in human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells through activating the expression of PGC-1a.

Zuo L(1), Li Q, Sun B, Xu Z, Ge Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University, 44# Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is frequently observed in vascular diseases. Cilostazol
is a drug approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of
intermittent claudication. Cilostazol increases intracellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) levels through inhibition of type III phosphodiesterase. The
effects of cilostazol in mitochondrial biogenesis in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells (HUVECs) were investigated in this study. Cilostazol treated
HUVECs displayed increased levels of ATP, mitochondrial DNA/nuclear DNA ratio,
expressions of cytochrome B, and mitochondrial mass, suggesting an enhanced
mitochondrial biogenesis induced by cilostazol. The promoted mitochondrial
biogenesis could be abolished by Protein kinase A (PKA) specific inhibitor H-89, 
implying that PKA pathway played a critical role in increased mitochondrial
biogenesis after cilostazol treatment. Indeed, expression levels of peroxisome
proliferator activator receptor gamma-coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), NRF 1 and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) were significantly increased in
HUVECs after incubation with cilostazol at both mRNA levels and protein levels.
Importantly, knockdown of PGC-1a could abolish cilostazol-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis. Enhanced expression of p-CREB and PGC-1a induced by cilostazol could 
be inhibited by H-89. Moreover, the increased expression of PGC-1a induced by
cilostazol could be inhibited by downregulation of CREB using CREB siRNA at both 
mRNA and protein levels. All the results indicated that cilostazol promoted
mitochondrial biogenesis through activating the expression of PGC-1a in HUVECs,
which was mediated by PKA/CREB pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Physiol Genomics. 2013 May 1;45(9):351-66. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00148.2012. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Female mice lacking p47phox have altered adipose tissue gene expression and are
protected against high fat-induced obesity.

Ronis MJ(1), Sharma N, Vantrease J, Borengasser SJ, Ferguson M, Mercer KE, Cleves
MA, Gomez-Acevedo H, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA. RonisMartinJ@uams.edu

The current study was designed to determine if the NADPH-oxidase NOX2 plays a
role in development of obesity after high fat feeding. Wild-type (WT) mice and
mice lacking the essential cytosolic NOX2 system component p47(phox) (P47KO mice)
were fed AIN-93G diets or high-fat diets (HFD) containing 45% fat and 0.5%
cholesterol for 13 wk from weaning. Fat mass was increased to a similar degree by
HFD in males of both genotypes (P < 0.05). However, female P47KO-HFD mice had no 
increase in adiposity or adipocyte size relative to female WT-HFD mice.
Resistance to HFD-driven obesity in P47KO females was associated with increased
expression of hepatic TFAM and UCP-2 mRNA, markers of mitochondrial number and
uncoupling, and increased expression of hepatic mitochondrial respiratory
complexes and whole body energy expenditure in response to HFD. Microarray
analysis revealed significantly lower expression of mRNA encoding genes linked to
energy metabolism, adipocyte differentiation (PPAR<U+03B3>), and fatty acid uptake
(CD36, lipoprotein lipase), in fat pads from female P47KO-HFD mice compared with 
WT-HFD females. Moreover, differentiation of preadipocytes ex vivo was suppressed
more by 17ß-estradiol in cells from P47KO compared with cells from WT females in 
conjunction with overexpression of mRNA for Pref-1 (P < 0.05). HFD mice of both
sexes were resistant to the development of hyperglycemia and hepatic steatosis (P
< 0.05) and had reduced serum triglycerides, leptin, and adiponectin relative to 
WT-HFD mice (P < 0.05). These data suggest that NOX2 is an important regulator of
metabolic homeostasis and diet-induced obesity.

PMID: 23482812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Neuron. 2013 Mar 6;77(5):886-98. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.012.

Aberrant Schwann cell lipid metabolism linked to mitochondrial deficits leads to 
axon degeneration and neuropathy.

Viader A(1), Sasaki Y, Kim S, Strickland A, Workman CS, Yang K, Gross RW,
Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2013 Mar 6;77(5):801-3.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is a common cause of peripheral neuropathy. Much effort
has been devoted to examining the role played by neuronal/axonal mitochondria,
but how mitochondrial deficits in peripheral nerve glia (Schwann cells [SCs])
contribute to peripheral nerve diseases remains unclear. Here, we investigate a
mouse model of peripheral neuropathy secondary to SC mitochondrial dysfunction
(Tfam-SCKOs). We show that disruption of SC mitochondria activates a maladaptive 
integrated stress response (ISR) through the actions of heme-regulated inhibitor 
(HRI) kinase, and causes a shift in lipid metabolism away from fatty acid
synthesis toward oxidation. These alterations in SC lipid metabolism result in
depletion of important myelin lipid components as well as in accumulation of
acylcarnitines (ACs), an intermediate of fatty acid ß-oxidation. Importantly, we 
show that ACs are released from SCs and induce axonal degeneration. A maladaptive
ISR as well as altered SC lipid metabolism are thus underlying pathological
mechanisms in mitochondria-related peripheral neuropathies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3594792
PMID: 23473319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Basic Res Cardiol. 2013 May;108(3):329. doi: 10.1007/s00395-013-0329-1. Epub 2013
Mar 5.

Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis due to dysfunctional adiponectin-AMPK-PGC-1a
signaling contributing to increased vulnerability in diabetic heart.

Yan W(1), Zhang H, Liu P, Wang H, Liu J, Gao C, Liu Y, Lian K, Yang L, Sun L, Guo
Y, Zhang L, Dong L, Lau WB, Gao E, Gao F, Xiong L, Wang H, Qu Y, Tao L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, 147 West Changle Rd, Xian, 710032, China.

Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis causes skeletal muscle damage in diabetes.
However, whether and how mitochondrial biogenesis is impaired in the diabetic
heart remains largely unknown. Whether adiponectin (APN), a potent
cardioprotective molecule, regulates cardiac mitochondrial function has also not 
been previously investigated. In this study, electron microscopy revealed
significant mitochondrial disorders in ob/ob cardiomyocytes, including
mitochondrial swelling and cristae disorientation and breakage. Moreover,
mitochondrial biogenesis of ob/ob cardiomyocytes is significantly impaired, as
evidenced by reduced Ppargc-1a/Nrf-1/Tfam mRNA levels, mitochondrial DNA content,
ATP content, citrate synthase activity, complexes I/III/V activity, AMPK
phosphorylation, and increased PGC-1a acetylation. Since APN is an upstream
activator of AMPK and APN plasma levels are significantly reduced in ob/ob mice, 
we further tested the hypothesis that reduced APN in ob/ob mice is causatively
related to mitochondrial biogenesis impairment. One week of APN treatment of
ob/ob mice activated AMPK, reduced PGC-1a acetylation, increased mitochondrial
biogenesis, and attenuated mitochondrial disorders. In contrast, knocking out APN
inhibited AMPK-PGC-1a signaling and impaired both mitochondrial biogenesis and
function. The ob/ob mice exhibited lower survival rates and exacerbated
myocardial injury after MI, when compared to controls. APN supplementation
improved mitochondrial biogenesis and attenuated MI injury, an effect that was
almost completely abrogated by the AMPK inhibitor compound C. In high
glucose/high fat treated neonatal rat ventricular myocytes, siRNA-mediated
knockdown of PGC-1a blocked gAd-enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis and function
and attenuated protection against hypoxia/reoxygenation injury. In conclusion,
hypoadiponectinemia impaired AMPK-PGC-1a signaling, resulting in dysfunctional
mitochondrial biogenesis that constitutes a novel mechanism for rendering
diabetic hearts more vulnerable to enhanced MI injury.

PMID: 23460046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Jun;9(6):1210-9. doi: 10.1039/c3mb25556e. Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Postnatal cardiomyocyte growth and mitochondrial reorganization cause multiple
changes in the proteome of human cardiomyocytes.

Pohjoismäki JL(1), Krüger M, Al-Furoukh N, Lagerstedt A, Karhunen PJ, Braun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Development and Remodelling, Max-Planck-Institute for
Heart and Lung Research, Ludwigstrasse 43, 61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.
Jaakko.Pohjoismaki@uef.fi

Fetal (fCM) and adult cardiomyocytes (aCM) significantly differ from each other
both by structure and biochemical properties. aCM own a higher mitochondrial mass
compared to fCM due to increased energy demand and show a greater density and
higher degree of structural organization of myofibrils. The energy metabolism in 
aCM relies virtually completely on ß-oxidation of fatty acids while fCM use
carbohydrates. Rewinding of the aCM phenotype (de-differentiation) arises
frequently in diseased hearts spurring questions about its functional relevance
and the extent of de-differentiation. Yet, surprisingly little is known about the
changes in the human proteome occurring during maturation of fCM to aCM. Here, we
examined differences between human fetal and adult hearts resulting in the
quantification of 3500 proteins. Moreover, we analyzed mitochondrial proteomes
from both stages to obtain more detailed insight into underlying biochemical
differences. We found that the majority of changes between fCM and aCM were
attributed to growth and maturation of cardiomyocytes. As expected, adult hearts 
showed higher mitochondrial mass and expressed increased levels of proteins
involved in energy metabolism but relatively lower copy numbers of mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) per total cell volume. We uncovered that the TFAM/mtDNA ratio was
kept constant during postnatal development despite a significant increase of
mitochondrial protein per mtDNA in adult mitochondria, which revises previous
concepts.

PMID: 23459711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cryobiology. 2013 Jun;66(3):250-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2013.02.005. Epub 2013
Feb 22.

Effects of post-exercise recovery in a cold environment on muscle glycogen,
PGC-1a, and downstream transcription factors.

Slivka D(1), Heesch M, Dumke C, Cuddy J, Hailes W, Ruby B.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Physical Education and Recreation, University of Nebraska at 
Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA. dslivka@unomaha.edu

PURPOSE: The purpose of this investigation was to determine the impact of
post-exercise environmental cold exposure on muscle glycogen, PGC-1a, and
downstream transcription factors.
METHODS: Eight males cycled for 1h and recovered in either 7 °C (cold) or 20 °C
(room temp) environment for 4h. Muscle biopsies were obtained pre, post, and 4h
post exercise for the analysis of muscle glycogen and mRNA. During recovery
participants consumed 1.8 g kg<U+207B>¹ of body weight of an oral dextrose solution
immediately following the post biopsy and 2h into recovery. Blood samples were
obtained post exercise and at 30, 60, 120, 150, 180, and 240 min post exercise
for the analysis of serum glucose and insulin AUC.
RESULTS: Oxygen uptake was lower during room temp than during cold recovery (0.40
± 0.05 L x min<U+207B>¹ vs. 0.80 ± 0.12 L x min<U+207B>¹; p<0.01). There was no effect of
temperature on muscle glycogen recovery or glucose AUC. However, insulin AUC was 
greater during the room temp trial compared to the cold trial (5139 ± 1412 vs.
4318 ± 1272, respectively; p=0.025). PGC-1a gene expression was higher (p=0.029),
but ERRa and NRF2 were lower (p=0.019 and p=0.046, respectively) after recovery
in the cold. There were no differences in NRF1 (p=.173) or TFAM (p=0.694).
CONCLUSIONS: This investigation shows no effect of a cold recovery environment on
glycogen re-synthesis but does demonstrate reduced ERRa and NRF2 mRNA despite
elevations in PGC-1a mRNA when recovery post-exercise takes place in a cold
environment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23438722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Apr;114(8):1076-84. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01505.2012. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Endurance training ameliorates the metabolic and performance characteristics of
circadian Clock mutant mice.

Pastore S(1), Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Health Research Center, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Circadian locomotor output cycles kaput (CLOCK) is a nuclear transcription factor
that is a component of the central autoregulatory feedback loop that governs the 
generation of biological rhythms. Homozygous Clock mutant mice contain a
truncated CLOCK(<U+0394>19) protein within somatic cells, subsequently causing an
impaired ability to rhythmically transactivate circadian genes. The present study
sought to investigate whether the Clock mutation affects mitochondrial physiology
within skeletal muscle, as well as the responsiveness of these mutant animals to 
adapt to a chronic voluntary endurance training protocol. Within muscle, Clock
mutant mice displayed 44% and 45% reductions in peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1-a (PGC-1a) and mitochondrial transcription factor-A
protein content, respectively, and an accompanying 16% decrease in mitochondrial 
content, as determined by cytochrome c oxidase enzyme activity. These decrements 
contributed to a 50% decrease in exercise tolerance in Clock mutant mice.
Interestingly, the Clock mutation did not appear to alter subsarcolemmal or
intermyofibrillar mitochondrial respiration within muscle or systemic glucose
tolerance. Daily locomotor activity levels were similar between wild-type and
Clock mutant mice throughout the training protocol. Endurance training
ameliorated the decrease in PGC-1a protein expression and mitochondrial content
in the Clock mutant mice, eliciting a 2.9-fold improvement in exercise tolerance.
Thus our data suggest that a functional CLOCK protein is essential to ensure the 
maintenance of mitochondrial content within muscle although the absence of a
functional CLOCK protein does not impair the ability of animals to adapt to
chronic exercise.

PMID: 23429867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Obes. 2013;2013:296537. doi: 10.1155/2013/296537. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Altered hepatic lipid metabolism contributes to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
in leptin-deficient Ob/Ob mice.

Perfield JW 2nd(1), Ortinau LC, Pickering RT, Ruebel ML, Meers GM, Rector RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri,
Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is strongly linked to obesity, insulin
resistance, and abnormal hepatic lipid metabolism; however, the precise
regulation of these processes remains poorly understood. Here we examined genes
and proteins involved in hepatic oxidation and lipogenesis in 14-week-old
leptin-deficient Ob/Ob mice, a commonly studied model of obesity and hepatic
steatosis. Obese Ob/Ob mice had increased fasting glucose, insulin, and
calculated HOMA-IR as compared with lean wild-type (WT) mice. Ob/Ob mice also had
greater liver weights, hepatic triglyceride (TG) content, and markers of de novo 
lipogenesis, including increased hepatic gene expression and protein content of
acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), fatty acid synthase (FAS), and stearoyl-CoA
desaturase-1 (SCD-1), as well as elevated gene expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and SREBP-1c
compared with WT mice. While hepatic mRNA levels for PGC-1a, PPARa, and TFAM were
elevated in Ob/Ob mice, measures of mitochondrial function (ß-HAD activity and
complete (to CO(2)) and total mitochondrial palmitate oxidation) and
mitochondrial OXPHOS protein subunits I, III, and V content were significantly
reduced compared with WT animals. In summary, reduced hepatic mitochondrial
content and function and an upregulation in de novo lipogenesis contribute to
obesity-associated NAFLD in the leptin-deficient Ob/Ob mouse.

PMCID: PMC3562693
PMID: 23401753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Sci Signal. 2013 Feb 5;6(261):ra8. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003638.

Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species promote epidermal differentiation and hair 
follicle development.

Hamanaka RB(1), Glasauer A, Hoover P, Yang S, Blatt H, Mullen AR, Getsios S,
Gottardi CJ, DeBerardinis RJ, Lavker RM, Chandel NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;14(4):194-5.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;14(4):194-5.

Proper regulation of keratinocyte differentiation within the epidermis and
follicular epithelium is essential for maintenance of epidermal barrier function 
and hair growth. The signaling intermediates that regulate the morphological and 
genetic changes associated with epidermal and follicular differentiation remain
poorly understood. We tested the hypothesis that reactive oxygen species (ROS)
generated by mitochondria are an important regulator of epidermal differentiation
by generating mice with a keratinocyte-specific deficiency in mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), which is required for the transcription of
mitochondrial genes encoding electron transport chain subunits. Ablation of TFAM 
in keratinocytes impaired epidermal differentiation and hair follicle growth and 
resulted in death 2 weeks after birth. TFAM-deficient keratinocytes failed to
generate mitochondria-derived ROS, a deficiency that prevented the transmission
of Notch and ß-catenin signals essential for epidermal differentiation and hair
follicle development, respectively. In vitro keratinocyte differentiation was
inhibited in the presence of antioxidants, and the decreased differentiation
marker abundance in TFAM-deficient keratinocytes was partly rescued by
application of exogenous hydrogen peroxide. These findings indicate that
mitochondria-generated ROS are critical mediators of cellular differentiation and
tissue morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4017376
PMID: 23386745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2013 Mar;104:163-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2013.01.017. Epub
2013 Jan 28.

Ropinirole protects against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine
(MPTP)-induced neurotoxicity in mice via anti-apoptotic mechanism.

Park G(1), Park YJ, Yang HO, Oh MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Science, and Kyung Hee East-West
Pharmaceutical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, 1 Hoegi-dong,
Dongdaemun-gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.

Ropinirole is a pharmacologically active agent used in the treatment of
Parkinson's disease (PD) that directly acts on dopamine receptors. Recent studies
reported that ropinirole has neuroprotective potential. However, there have been 
no detailed studies on apoptosis. Here we demonstrated the protective effects of 
ropinirole against 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced
neurotoxicity in a mouse model of PD. Unlike previous studies, we focused on
apoptotic pathways. To confirm the protective effect of ropinirole, we conducted 
behavioral tests and tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-immunohistochemistry. In the pole 
test and the rotarod test, commonly used behavioral tests in the mouse model of
PD, ropinirole treatment (0.5, 1, or 2 mg/kg) maintained movement ability against
MPTP-induced changes in motor coordination and postural balance, and
bradykinesia. Our histological analyses illustrated that ropinirole significantly
reduced MPTP-induced dopaminergic neuron damage in both the substantia nigra pars
compacta (SNpc) and the striatum. In addition, we performed Western blot or kit
analysis to measure apoptosis-related protein levels in the SNpc. Ropinirole
increased the Bcl-2/Bax ratio, transcription factor A, and nuclear respiratory
factor 1 and inhibited cytosolic cytochrome c release and caspase-3 activity,
indicating that ropinirole inhibited the apoptotic cascade. These results suggest
that ropinirole has neuroprotective effects in a mouse model of PD by inhibiting 
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23369986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Aging (Albany NY). 2012 Dec;4(12):859-60.

Mitochondria, obesity and aging.

Vernochet C, Kahn CR.

PMCID: PMC3615153
PMID: 23363767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Jun;54:349-61. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.01.006. Epub 2013 Jan 
17.

Mitochondrial abnormalities in temporal lobe of autistic brain.

Tang G(1), Gutierrez Rios P, Kuo SH, Akman HO, Rosoklija G, Tanji K, Dwork A,
Schon EA, Dimauro S, Goldman J, Sulzer D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, NY 10032, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) consists of a group of complex developmental
disabilities characterized by impaired social interactions, deficits in
communication and repetitive behavior. Multiple lines of evidence implicate
mitochondrial dysfunction in ASD. In postmortem BA21 temporal cortex, a region
that exhibits synaptic pathology in ASD, we found that compared to controls, ASD 
patients exhibited altered protein levels of mitochondria respiratory chain
protein complexes, decreased Complex I and IV activities, decreased mitochondrial
antioxidant enzyme SOD2, and greater oxidative DNA damage. Mitochondrial membrane
mass was higher in ASD brain, as indicated by higher protein levels of
mitochondrial membrane proteins Tom20, Tim23 and porin. No differences were
observed in either mitochondrial DNA or levels of the mitochondrial gene
transcription factor TFAM or cofactor PGC1a, indicating that a mechanism other
than alterations in mitochondrial genome or mitochondrial biogenesis underlies
these mitochondrial abnormalities. We further identified higher levels of the
mitochondrial fission proteins (Fis1 and Drp1) and decreased levels of the fusion
proteins (Mfn1, Mfn2 and Opa1) in ASD patients, indicating altered mitochondrial 
dynamics in ASD brain. Many of these changes were evident in cortical pyramidal
neurons, and were observed in ASD children but were less pronounced or absent in 
adult patients. Together, these findings provide evidence that mitochondrial
function and intracellular redox status are compromised in pyramidal neurons in
ASD brain and that mitochondrial dysfunction occurs during early childhood when
ASD symptoms appear.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3959772
PMID: 23333625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2013 Feb;23(1):116-24. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2012.12.004.
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

U-turn DNA bending by human mitochondrial transcription factor A.

Rubio-Cosials A(1), Solà M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Molecular Biology Institute Barcelona
(IBMB-CSIC), Baldiri Reixac 10-12, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Transcription factor A (TFAM) is involved in the transcription regulation,
maintenance and compaction of the mitochondrial genome. Recent structural data on
TFAM showed its mode of operation and clarified previous biochemical and genetic 
results. In solution, TFAM is highly dynamic. According to crystal structures of 
its complex with the cognate light-strand promoter (LSP) binding sequence, it
intertwines and dramatically bends DNA, thereby allowing interactions with the
transcription initiation machinery. Recent studies have shown TFAM sliding on
non-specific DNA, which induces compaction by increasing DNA flexibility.
Finally, the structural localization of disease-related TFAM mutations suggests
functional impairment at the molecular level.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Physiol. 2013 Mar 15;591(6):1551-61. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.245944. Epub
2013 Jan 7.

AMP-activated protein kinase is required for exercise-induced peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor co-activator 1 translocation to subsarcolemmal
mitochondria in skeletal muscle.

Smith BK(1), Mukai K, Lally JS, Maher AC, Gurd BJ, Heigenhauser GJ, Spriet LL,
Holloway GP.

Author information: 
(1)Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph, 491 Gordon St.,
Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, Canada. smithb@uoguelph.ca

In skeletal muscle, mitochondria exist as two subcellular populations known as
subsarcolemmal (SS) and intermyofibrillar (IMF) mitochondria. SS mitochondria
preferentially respond to exercise training, suggesting divergent transcriptional
control of the mitochondrial genomes. The transcriptional co-activator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> co-activator 1a (PGC-1a) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam) have been implicated in the direct regulation of
the mitochondrial genome in mice, although SS and IMF differences may exist, and 
the potential signalling events regulating the mitochondrial content of these
proteins have not been elucidated. Therefore, we examined the potential for
PGC-1a and Tfam to translocate to SS and IMF mitochondria in human subjects, and 
performed experiments in rodents to identify signalling mechanisms regulating
these translocation events. Acute exercise in humans and rats increased PGC-1a
content in SS but not IMF mitochondria. Acute exposure to
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-ß-ribofuranoside in rats recapitulated the
exercise effect of increased PGC-1a protein within SS mitochondria only,
suggesting that AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) signalling is involved. In
addition, rendering AMPK inactive (AMPK kinase dead mice) prevented
exercise-induced PGC-1a translocation to SS mitochondria, further suggesting that
AMPK plays an integral role in these translocation events. In contrast to the
conserved PGC-1a translocation to SS mitochondria across species (humans, rats
and mice), acute exercise only increased mitochondrial Tfam in rats.
Nevertheless, in rat resting muscle PGC-1a and Tfam co-immunoprecipate with
a-tubulin, suggesting a common cytosolic localization. These data suggest that
exercise causes translocation of PGC-1a preferentially to SS mitochondria in an
AMPK-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3607172
PMID: 23297307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Mol Neurosci. 2013 Jul;50(3):379-93. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9932-0. Epub 2013 
Jan 5.

Gemfibrozil pretreatment resulted in a sexually dimorphic outcome in the rat
models of global cerebral ischemia-reperfusion via modulation of mitochondrial
pro-survival and apoptotic cell death factors as well as MAPKs.

Mohagheghi F(1), Ahmadiani A, Rahmani B, Moradi F, Romond N, Khalaj L.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

Inducers of mitochondrial biogenesis are widely under investigation for use in a 
novel therapeutic approach in neurodegenerative disorders. The ability of
Gemfibrozil, a fibrate, is investigated for the first time to modulate
mitochondrial pro-survival factors involved in the mitochondrial biogenesis
signaling pathway, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear respiratory factor (NRF-1), and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) in the brain. Gemfibozil is clinically administered
to control hyperlipidemia. It secondarily prevents cardiovascular events such as 
cardiac arrest in susceptible patients. In this study, pretreatment of animals
with gemfibrozil prior to ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) resulted in a sexually
dimorphic outcome. While the expression of NRF-1 and TFAM were induced in
gemfibrozil-pretreated met-estrous females, they were suppressed in males.
Gemfibrozil also proved to be neuroprotective in met-estrous females, as it
inhibited caspase-dependent apoptosis while in males it led to hippocampal
neurodegeneration via activation of both the caspase-dependent and
caspase-independent apoptosis. In the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPKs)
pathway, gemfibrozil pretreatment induced the expression of extracellular
signal-regulated kinases (ERK1/2) in met-estrous females and reduced it in males.
These findings correlatively point to the sexual-dimorphic effects of gemfibrozil
in global cerebral I/R context by affecting important factors involved in the
mitochondrial biogenesis, MAPKs, and apoptotic cell death pathways.

PMID: 23288702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013 Jul;66(3):489-97. doi: 10.1007/s12013-012-9496-1.

Overexpression of TFAM protects 3T3-L1 adipocytes from NYGGF4 (PID1)
overexpression-induced insulin resistance and mitochondrial dysfunction.

Shi CM(1), Xu GF, Yang L, Fu ZY, Chen L, Fu HL, Shen YH, Zhu L, Ji CB, Guo XR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

NYGGF4, also known as phosphotyrosine interaction domain containing 1(PID1), is a
recently discovered gene which is involved in obesity-related insulin resistance 
(IR) and mitochondrial dysfunction. We aimed to further elucidate the effects and
mechanisms underlying NYGGF4-induced IR by investigating the effect of
overexpressing mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which is essential
for mitochondrial DNA transcription and replication, on NYGGF4-induced IR and
mitochondrial abnormalities in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Overexpression of TFAM
increased the mitochondrial copy number and ATP content in both control 3T3-L1
adipocytes and NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes. Reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production was enhanced in NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes and reduced in
TFAM-overexpressing adipocytes; co-overexpression of TFAM significantly
attenuated ROS production in NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes. However,
overexpression of TFAM did not affect the mitochondrial transmembrane potential
(<U+0394><U+03A8>m) in control 3T3-L1 adipocytes or NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes. In
addition, co-overexpression of TFAM-enhanced insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by
increasing Glucose transporter type 4 (GLUT4) translocation to the PM in
NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes. Overexpression of NYGGF4 significantly
inhibited tyrosine phosphorylation of Insulin receptor substrate 1 (IRS-1) and
serine phosphorylation of Akt, whereas overexpression of TFAM strongly induced
phosphorylation of IRS-1 and Akt in NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes. This study 
demonstrates that NYGGF4 plays a role in IR by impairing mitochondrial function, 
and that overexpression of TFAM can restore mitochondrial function to normal
levels in NYGGF4-overexpressing adipocytes via activation of the IRS-1/PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway.

PMID: 23274913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nutrition. 2013 Mar;29(3):562-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nut.2012.09.011. Epub 2012 Dec
28.

Hepatic lipid metabolic pathways modified by resveratrol in rats fed an
obesogenic diet.

Alberdi G(1), Rodríguez VM, Macarulla MT, Miranda J, Churruca I, Portillo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Obesity Group, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Faculty
of Pharmacy, University of the Basque Country-UPV/EHU, Vitoria, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The scientific community is on the look-out for safe biomolecules
useful in the prevention of obesity and related aberrations such as fatty liver. 
This study analyzed the influence of resveratrol on hepatic triacylglycerol
metabolism.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into control and
resveratrol-treated groups (30 mg/kg of body weight per day) and fed a commercial
obesogenic diet for 6 wk. Liver triacylglycerol content and the activity of
carnitine palmitoyl transferase-Ia (CPT-Ia), acyl-coenzyme A oxydase (ACO), fatty
acid synthase (FAS), glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH), malic enzyme
(ME), acetyl-coenzyme A carboxylase (ACC), adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) activation were measured. Mitochondrial protein
cytochrome C oxidase subunit 2 (COXII), mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPAR-a), sirtuin-1 (SIRT1), hepatocyte nuclear
factor receptor-4a (HNF-4a), and PGC-1a mRNA levels were also analyzed. Serum
insulin was quantified.
RESULTS: Resveratrol decreased liver fat accumulation, increased CPT-Ia and ACO, 
and decreased ACC activities. Other lipogenic enzymes, FAS, ME, and G6PDH were
not modified. The polyphenol activated AMPK and PGC-1a. The expression of
SRBP-1c, PPAR-a, SIRT1, PGC-1a, HNF-4a, TFAM, and COXII was not modified. No
changes in serum insulin levels were observed.
CONCLUSION: Resveratrol partly prevents the increase in liver fat accumulation
induced by high-fat high-sucrose feeding by increasing fatty acid oxidation and
decreasing lipogenesis. These effects are mediated by the activation of the
AMPK/SIRT1 axis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23274094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2013 Mar;29(3):204-13. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.2384.

Impaired transport of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and the
metabolic memory phenomenon associated with the progression of diabetic
retinopathy.

Santos JM(1), Kowluru RA.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes damages retinal mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and compromises
the mtDNA transcription. In the transcription and replication of mtDNA,
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is considered a key
activator. We have shown that in diabetes, although retinal TFAM gene expression 
is increased, its mitochondrial levels are decreased. This study investigates the
role of mitochondrial outer and inner membrane transport systems in the transfer 
of TFAM into the mitochondria in diabetes and how reversal of hyperglycaemia
affects the ability of TFAM to reach the mitochondria.
METHODS: Components of the membrane transport system, Tom70, Tom40, Tim23, and
Tim44, were analysed in the retina from streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats
maintained in poor control or in good control for 8 months, or in poor control
for 4 months followed by in good control for 4 months. The binding of TFAM with
Tom70 and Tim44 was determined by co-immunoprecipitation and that with mtDNA by
chromatin immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Retinal expressions of Tom70, Tom40, and Tim44 were significantly
decreased in diabetes, and the binding of TFAM with Tom70, Tim44, and mtDNA was
impaired. Reversal of hyperglycaemia had no beneficial effect on the decreased
binding of TFAM to Tom proteins and mtDNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, subnormal membrane transport to systems in diabetes impair the
transfer of TFAM into the mitochondria, and decreased TFAM-mtDNA binding that
results in subnormal mitochondria transcription. These processes continue to be
dysfunctional even after the hyperglycaemic insult is terminated. Strategies
targeting mitochondrial membrane transport proteins could have the potential of
improving mitochondrial biogenesis and slowing or halting the progression of
diabetic retinopathy.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3596457
PMID: 23255365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. FEBS J. 2013 Feb;280(4):1039-50. doi: 10.1111/febs.12096. Epub 2013 Jan 27.

Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to impairment of insulin sensitivity and
adiponectin secretion in adipocytes.

Wang CH(1), Wang CC, Huang HC, Wei YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Adipocytes play an integrative role in the regulation of energy metabolism and
glucose homeostasis in the human body. Functional defects in adipocytes may cause
systemic disturbance of glucose homeostasis. Recent studies revealed
mitochondrial abnormalities in the adipose tissue of patients with type 2
diabetes. In addition, patients with mitochondrial diseases usually manifest
systemic metabolic disorder. However, it is unclear how mitochondrial dysfunction
in adipocytes affects the regulation of glucose homeostasis. In this study, we
induced mitochondrial dysfunction and overproduction of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) by addition of respiratory inhibitors oligomycin A and antimycin A and by
knockdown of mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA), respectively. We found
an attenuation of the insulin response as indicated by lower glucose uptake and
decreased phosphorylation of Akt upon insulin stimulation of adipocytes with
mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, the expression of glucose transporter 4
(Glut4) and secretion of adiponectin were decreased in adipocytes with increased 
ROS generated by defective mitochondria. Moreover, the severity of insulin
insensitivity was correlated with the extent of mitochondrial dysfunction. These 
results suggest that higher intracellular ROS levels elicited by mitochondrial
dysfunction resulted in impairment of the function of adipocytes in the
maintenance of glucose homeostasis through attenuation of insulin signaling,
downregulation of Glut4 expression, and decrease in adiponectin secretion. Our
findings substantiate the important role of mitochondria in the regulation of
glucose homeostasis in adipocytes and also provide a molecular basis for the
explanation of the manifestation of diabetes mellitus or insulin insensitivity in
a portion of patients with mitochondrial diseases such as MELAS or MERRF
syndrome.

© 2012 The Authors Journal compilation © 2012 FEBS.

PMID: 23253816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Clin Sci (Lond). 2013 Jun;124(11):663-74. doi: 10.1042/CS20120469.

(-)-Epicatechin is associated with increased angiogenic and mitochondrial
signalling in the hindlimb of rats selectively bred for innate low running
capacity.

Hüttemann M(1), Lee I, Perkins GA, Britton SL, Koch LG, Malek MH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University School of
Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Alternative approaches to reduce congenital muscle dysfunction are needed in
cases where the ability to exercise is limited. (-)-Epicatechin is found in cocoa
and may stimulate capillarity and mitochondrial proliferation in skeletal muscle.
A total of 21 male rats bred for LCR (low running capacity) from generation 28
were randomized into three groups: vehicle for 30 days (control); (-)-epicatechin
for 30 days; and (-)-epicatechin for 30 days followed by 15 days without
(-)-epicatechin. Groups 2 and 3 received 1.0 mg of (-)-epicatechin/kg of body
mass twice daily, whereas water was given to the control group. The plantaris
muscle was harvested for protein and morphometric analyses. In addition, in vitro
experiments were conducted to examine the role of (-)-epicatechin on
mitochondrial respiratory kinetics at different incubation periods. Treatment for
30 days with (-)-epicatechin increased capillarity (P<0.001) and was associated
with increases in protein expression of VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor)-A with a concomitant decrease in TSP-1 (thrombospondin-1) and its
receptor, which remained after 15 days of (-)-epicatechin cessation. Analyses of 
the p38 MAPK (mitogen-activated protein kinase) signalling pathway indicated an
associated increase in phosphorylation of MKK3/6 (MAPK kinase 3/6) and p38 and
increased protein expression of MEF2A (myocyte enhancer factor 2A). In addition, 
we observed significant increases in protein expression of PGC-1a
(peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> co-activator 1a), PGC-1ß, Tfam and 
cristae abundance. Interestingly, these increases associated with (-)-epicatechin
treatment remained after 15 days of cessation. Lastly, in vitro experiments
indicated that acute exposure of LCR muscle to (-)-epicatechin incubation was not
sufficient to increase mitochondrial respiration. The results suggest that
increases in skeletal muscle capillarity and mitochondrial biogenesis are
associated with 30 days of (-)-epicatechin treatment and sustained for 15 days
following cessation of treatment. Clinically, the use of this natural compound
may have potential application in populations that experience muscle fatigue and 
are unable to perform endurance exercise.

PMCID: PMC3715875
PMID: 23252598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2012;25(1):48-61. doi: 10.1071/RD12272.

Associations between lipid metabolism and fertility in the dairy cow.

Wathes DC(1), Clempson AM, Pollott GE.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead Lane, North Mymms, Hatfield, Herts AL9
7TA, UK. dcwathes@rvc.ac.uk

Dairy cows mobilise body tissues to support milk production and, because glucose 
supplies are limited, lipids are used preferentially for energy production.
Lipogenic activity is switched off and lipolytic mechanisms in adipose tissue
increase through changes in the expression of several key enzymes. This results
in a loss of body condition, together with high circulating concentrations of
non-esterified fatty acids. Changes in the synthesis, secretion and signalling
pathways of somatotrophic hormones (insulin, growth hormone, insulin-like growth 
factor 1) and adipokines (e.g. leptin) are central to the regulation of these
processes. A high reliance on fatty acids as an energy source in the peripartum
period causes oxidative damage to mitochondria in metabolically active tissues,
including the liver and reproductive tract. The expression of genes involved in
insulin resistance (PDK4, AHSG) is increased, together with expression of TIEG1, 
a transcription factor that can induce apoptosis via the mitochondrial pathway.
Polymorphisms in TFAM and UCP2, two autosomal mitochondrial genes, have been
associated with longevity in dairy cows. Polymorphisms in many other genes that
affect lipid metabolism also show some associations with fertility traits. These 
include DGAT1, SCD1, DECR1, CRH, CBFA2T1, GH, LEP and NPY. Excess lipid
accumulation in oocytes and the regenerating endometrium reduces fertility via
reductions in embryo survival and increased inflammatory changes, respectively.

PMID: 23244828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 11;430(2):653-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.096. Epub 2012 Dec 2.

p21(WAF¹/C¹P¹) deficiency induces mitochondrial dysfunction in HCT116 colon
cancer cells.

Kim AJ(1), Jee HJ, Song N, Kim M, Jeong SY, Yun J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Dong-A University, Busan,
South Korea.

p21(WAF1/CIP1) is a critical regulator of cell cycle progression. However, the
role of p21 in mitochondrial function remains poorly understood. In this study,
we examined the effect of p21 deficiency on mitochondrial function in HCT116
human colon cancer cells. We found that there was a significant increase in the
mitochondrial mass of p21(-/-) HCT116 cells, as measured by 10-N-nonyl-acridine
orange staining, as well as an increase in the mitochondrial DNA content. In
contrast, p53(-/-) cells had a mitochondrial mass comparable to that of wild-type
HCT116 cells. In addition, the expression levels of the mitochondrial biogenesis 
regulators PGC-1a and TFAM and AMPK activity were also elevated in p21(-/-)
cells, indicating that p21 deficiency induces the rate of mitochondrial
biogenesis through the AMPK-PGC-1a axis. However, the increase in mitochondrial
biogenesis in p21(-/-) cells did not accompany an increase in the cellular
steady-state level of ATP. Furthermore, p21(-/-) cells exhibited significant
proliferation impairment in galactose medium, suggesting that p21 deficiency
induces a defect in the mitochondrial respiratory chain in HCT116 cells. Taken
together, our results suggest that the loss of p21 results in an aberrant
increase in the mitochondrial mass and in mitochondrial dysfunction in HCT116
cells, indicating that p21 is required to maintain proper mitochondrial mass and 
respiratory function.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23211592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2012 Dec;90(12):1634-41. doi: 10.1139/y2012-144. Epub
2012 Nov 29.

Training-induced alterations of skeletal muscle mitochondrial biogenesis proteins
in non-insulin-dependent type 2 diabetic men.

Chung N(1), Kreutz T, Schiffer T, Opitz D, Hermann R, Gehlert S, Bloch W, Brixius
K, Brinkmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Sport Medicine, German Sport University
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

This study investigates whether regular physical activity (moderate endurance or 
resistance training twice a week for 3 months) influences the key regulatory
molecules of mitochondrial biogenesis (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma coactivator-1a (PGC1a), nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)) in patients suffering from
non-insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (n = 16, years = 62 ± 7,
body mass index (BMI) = 30 ± 4 kg/m(2)). Seven T2DM men took part in endurance
training, and 9 men participated in resistance training. BMI-matched non-diabetic
male control subjects (CON) (n = 7, years = 53 ± 6, BMI = 30 ± 4 kg/m(2)) were
studied for comparison. The protein contents of PGC1a, NRF1, and TFAM were
determined using immunohistochemical staining methods on biopsies taken from the 
musculus vastus lateralis. At baseline, no differences were observed in
NRF1-density between the T2DM men and the CON, while the contents of PGC1a and
TFAM were decreased in the T2DM men. PGC1a and TFAM contents were not changed in 
the T2DM patients after the training period, but NRF1 was decreased. The
down-regulation of mitochondrial signaling molecules might explain the
patho-physiological reduction in mitochondrial biogenesis found in T2DM. Physical
training, as performed in our study, did not reverse the down-regulation of
mitochondrial signaling molecules - at least not at 3 months after the training.

PMID: 23210442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2012;132(12):1389-98.

[MITO-Porter; a cutting-edge technology for mitochondrial gene therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Furukawa R(1), Yamada Y, Harashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Design of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
furukawa-ryo@mail.sci.hokudai.ac.jp

Gene therapy is an attractive strategy, for not only targeting nuclear genome,
but the mitochondrial genome as well. Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes 13 
subunits of the electron transport chain, 22 tRNAs, and 2 rRNAs and their
mutations cause a wide range of mitochondrial diseases. Each cell contains
hundreds to thousands of mtDNAs, and in the case of a diseased cell, the
mitochondrion possesses both mutant mtDNA and wild-type mtDNA. It is generally
accepted that the disease phenotype appears when the proportion of the pathogenic
mutant mtDNA exceeds a certain threshold. Therefore, the suppression of mutant
mtDNA or supplementing wild-type mtDNA will control the onset of mitochondrial
disease. To achieve the transfection of an exogenous therapeutic gene to the
mitochondrial matrix where mtDNA is transcribed and translated, it is necessary
to transfer cargos through mitochondrial outer and inner membranes. Several
methods have been examined for mitochondrial transfection, but a universal,
wide-ranging transfection technique has yet not been established. We recently
developed a mitochondrial targeting delivery system, namely the MITO-Porter. The 
MITO-Porter is liposomal nanocarrier with a mitochondrial fusogenic lipid
composition. We reported that the MITO-Porter could deliver chemical compounds
and proteins to the mitochondrial matrix via membrane fusion. In this review, we 
report (1) on the pharmacological enhancement of lecithinized superoxide
dismutase (PC-SOD) using MITO-Porter, (2) the transcription activation of
exogenous DNA by mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and (3)
perspectives on a mitochondrial targeting device.

PMID: 23208046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 11;430(2):717-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.084. Epub 2012 Dec 1.

Effects of overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A on lifespan and
oxidative stress response in Drosophila melanogaster.

Matsuda T(1), Kanki T, Tanimura T, Kang D, Matsuura ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Humanities and Sciences,
Ochanomizu University, Otsuka, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-8610, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) plays a role in the maintenance of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) by packaging mtDNA, forming the mitochondrial nucleoid.
There have been many reports about a function of TFAM at the cellular level, but 
only a few studies have been done in individual organisms. Here we examined the
effects of TFAM on the Drosophila lifespan and oxidative stress response, by
overexpressing TFAM using the GAL4/UAS system. Under standard conditions, the
lifespan of TFAM-overexpressing flies was shorter than that of the control flies.
However, the lifespan of TFAM-overexpressing flies was longer when they were
treated with 1% H(2)O(2). These results suggest that even though excess TFAM has 
a negative influence on lifespan, it has a defensive function under strong
oxidative stress. In the TFAM-overexpressing flies, no significant changes in
mtDNA copy number or mtDNA transcription were observed. However, the results of a
total antioxidant activity assay suggest the possibility that TFAM is involved in
the elimination of oxidative stress. The present results clearly show the effects
of TFAM overexpression on the lifespan of Drosophila under both standard
conditions and oxidative stress conditions, and our findings contribute to the
understanding of the physiological mechanisms involving TFAM in mitochondria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23206694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Mol Cell. 2013 Jan 10;49(1):121-32. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.023. Epub 2012 
Nov 29.

Phosphorylation of human TFAM in mitochondria impairs DNA binding and promotes
degradation by the AAA+ Lon protease.

Lu B(1), Lee J, Nie X, Li M, Morozov YI, Venkatesh S, Bogenhagen DF, Temiakov D, 
Suzuki CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a high-mobility group (HMG) 
protein at the nexus of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication, transcription, and
inheritance. Little is known about the mechanisms underlying its
posttranslational regulation. Here, we demonstrate that TFAM is phosphorylated
within its HMG box 1 (HMG1) by cAMP-dependent protein kinase in mitochondria.
HMG1 phosphorylation impairs the ability of TFAM to bind DNA and to activate
transcription. We show that only DNA-free TFAM is degraded by the Lon protease,
which is inhibited by the anticancer drug bortezomib. In cells with normal mtDNA 
levels, HMG1-phosphorylated TFAM is degraded by Lon. However, in cells with
severe mtDNA deficits, nonphosphorylated TFAM is also degraded, as it is DNA
free. Depleting Lon in these cells increases levels of TFAM and upregulates mtDNA
content, albeit transiently. Phosphorylation and proteolysis thus provide
mechanisms for rapid fine-tuning of TFAM function and abundance in mitochondria, 
which are crucial for maintaining and expressing mtDNA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586414
PMID: 23201127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Rejuvenation Res. 2013 Feb;16(1):67-73. doi: 10.1089/rej.2012.1382.

Mitochondriogenesis genes and extreme longevity.

Santiago C(1), Garatachea N, Yvert T, Rodríguez-Romo G, Santos-Lozano A,
Fiuza-Luces C, Lucia A.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Europea de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Genes of the proliferator-activated receptor delta (PPARD)-peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PPARGC1A, also termed
PGC1-a)-nuclear respiratory factor (NRF)-mitochondrial transcription Factor A
(TFAM) mitochondriogenesis pathway can influence health/disease phenotypes, yet
their association with extreme longevity is not known. We studied the association
of five common polymorphisms in genes of this pathway (rs2267668, rs8192678,
rs6949152, rs12594956, rs1937) and extreme longevity using a case (107
centenarians)-control (284 young adults) design. We found no between-group
differences in allele/genotype frequencies, except for CC genotype in rs1937
(p=0.003), with no representation in controls (0%), versus 2.8% in centenarians
(2 men, 1 woman). In summary, the studied genetic variants of the
PPARD-PPARGC1A-NRF-TFAM pathway were not associated with extreme longevity, yet a
marginal association could exist for rs1937.

PMID: 23186209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Feb 1;85(3):335-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.11.007. Epub 
2012 Nov 23.

Garlic-derived diallyl disulfide modulates peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor gamma co-activator 1 alpha in neuroblastoma cells.

Pagliei B(1), Aquilano K, Baldelli S, Ciriolo MR.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca Scientifica, 
00133 Rome, Italy.

The peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma co-activator 1 alpha (PGC1a)
is an inducible transcriptional co-activator with direct function in the
induction of mitochondrial biogenesis. In the present report we show that, in
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells, garlic-derived diallyl disulfide (DADS) is able to
increase PGC1a expression in a ROS-dependent manner and to induce mitochondrial
biogenesis at early stage of treatment that precede cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis outcome. In particular, we demonstrate that DADS elicits: i) the
increase of PGC1a within nuclear compartment; ii) the decrease of PGC1a
non-active acetylated form; iii) the induction of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
genes such as TFAM and TFBM1. We also show an accumulation of PGC1a within
mitochondria along with an increased association with the regulatory D-Loop
region of mtDNA and a concomitant augmented expression of mitochondrial RNA. Such
events are related to a prompt elevation of mitochondrial mass, as assessed by
evaluating the content of mtDNA. We show that the induction of mitochondrial
biogenesis is directed to dampen the cytotoxic effect of DADS. Indeed, PGC1a
overexpression or down-regulation prevents or exacerbates mtDNA loss and
apoptosis. Overall the data highlight an anti-apoptotic role of PGC1a-mediated
mitochondrial biogenesis in neuroblatoma cells and suggest PGC1a as a potential
target for enhancing the effectiveness of therapy in aggressive neuroblastoma
with high drug-resistance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Cell Cycle. 2012 Dec 1;11(23):4390-401. doi: 10.4161/cc.22777. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Mitochondria "fuel" breast cancer metabolism: fifteen markers of mitochondrial
biogenesis label epithelial cancer cells, but are excluded from adjacent stromal 
cells.

Sotgia F(1), Whitaker-Menezes D, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Salem AF, Tsirigos A,
Lamb R, Sneddon S, Hulit J, Howell A, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Jefferson Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine Center; Kimmel Cancer
Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA USA. fsotgia@gmail.com

Here, we present new genetic and morphological evidence that human tumors consist
of two distinct metabolic compartments. First, re-analysis of genome-wide
transcriptional profiling data revealed that > 95 gene transcripts associated
with mitochondrial biogenesis and/or mitochondrial translation were significantly
elevated in human breast cancer cells, as compared with adjacent stromal tissue. 
Remarkably, nearly 40 of these upregulated gene transcripts were mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins (MRPs), functionally associated with mitochondrial translation
of protein components of the OXPHOS complex. Second, during validation by
immunohistochemistry, we observed that antibodies directed against 15 markers of 
mitochondrial biogenesis and/or mitochondrial translation (AKAP1, GOLPH3,
GOLPH3L, MCT1, MRPL40, MRPS7, MRPS15, MRPS22, NRF1, NRF2, PGC1-a, POLRMT, TFAM,
TIMM9 and TOMM70A) selectively labeled epithelial breast cancer cells. These same
mitochondrial markers were largely absent or excluded from adjacent tumor stromal
cells. Finally, markers of mitochondrial lipid synthesis (GOLPH3) and
mitochondrial translation (POLRMT) were associated with poor clinical outcome in 
human breast cancer patients. Thus, we conclude that human breast cancers contain
two distinct metabolic compartments-a glycolytic tumor stroma, which surrounds
oxidative epithelial cancer cells-that are mitochondria-rich. The co-existence of
these two compartments is indicative of metabolic symbiosis between epithelial
cancer cells and their surrounding stroma. As such, epithelial breast cancer
cells should be viewed as predatory metabolic "parasites," which undergo anabolic
reprogramming to amplify their mitochondrial "power." This notion is consistent
with the observation that the anti-malarial agent chloroquine may be an effective
anticancer agent. New anticancer therapies should be developed to target
mitochondrial biogenesis and/or mitochondrial translation in human cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3552922
PMID: 23172368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cell Metab. 2012 Dec 5;16(6):765-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.10.016. Epub 2012
Nov 15.

Adipose-specific deletion of TFAM increases mitochondrial oxidation and protects 
mice against obesity and insulin resistance.

Vernochet C(1), Mourier A, Bezy O, Macotela Y, Boucher J, Rardin MJ, An D, Lee
KY, Ilkayeva OR, Zingaretti CM, Emanuelli B, Smyth G, Cinti S, Newgard CB, Gibson
BW, Larsson NG, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Integrative Physiology and Metabolism, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Obesity and type 2 diabetes are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in
adipose tissue, but the role for adipose tissue mitochondria in the development
of these disorders is currently unknown. To understand the impact of adipose
tissue mitochondria on whole-body metabolism, we have generated a mouse model
with disruption of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) specifically
in fat. F-TFKO adipose tissue exhibit decreased mtDNA copy number, altered levels
of proteins of the electron transport chain, and perturbed mitochondrial function
with decreased complex I activity and greater oxygen consumption and uncoupling. 
As a result, F-TFKO mice exhibit higher energy expenditure and are protected from
age- and diet-induced obesity, insulin resistance, and hepatosteatosis, despite a
greater food intake. Thus, TFAM deletion in the adipose tissue increases
mitochondrial oxidation that has positive metabolic effects, suggesting that
regulation of adipose tissue mitochondria may be a potential therapeutic target
for the treatment of obesity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3529641
PMID: 23168219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2014 Apr;24(2):311-8. doi: 10.1111/sms.12012. Epub 2012
Nov 19.

Mitochondrial DNA variation is associated with elite athletic status in the
Polish population.

Maruszak A(1), Adamczyk JG, Siewierski M, Sozanski H, Gajewski A, Zekanowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research
Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warszawa, Poland.

There is mounting evidence that genetic factors located in mitochondrial and
nuclear genomes influence sport performance. Certain mitochondrial haplogroups
and polymorphisms were associated with the status of elite athlete, especially in
endurance performance. The aim of our study was to assess whether selected
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA variants are associated with elite
athlete performance in a group of 395 elite Polish athletes (213 endurance
athletes and 182 power athletes) and 413 sedentary controls. Our major finding
was that the mtDNA haplogroup H and HV cluster influence endurance performance at
the Olympic/World Class level of performance (P = 0.018 and P = 0.0185,
respectively). We showed that two polymorphisms located in the mtDNA control
region were associated with achieving the elite performance level either in the
total athlete's group as compared with controls (m.16362C, 3.8% vs 9.2%,
respectively, P = 0.0025, odds ratio = 0.39, 95% confidence interval: 0.21-0.72),
or in the endurance athletes as compared with controls (m.16080G, 2.35% vs 0%,
respectively, P = 0.004). Our results indicate that mtDNA variability affects the
endurance capacity rather than the power one. We also propose that mtDNA
haplogroups and subhaplogroups, as well as individual mtDNA polymorphisms
favoring endurance performance, could be population-specific, reflecting complex 
cross-talk between nuclear and mitochondrial genomes.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23163620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Hear Res. 2013 Feb;296:13-24. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.11.007. Epub 2012 Nov
16.

The effect of overexpression of PGC-1a on the mtDNA4834 common deletion in a rat 
cochlear marginal cell senescence model.

Zhao XY(1), Sun JL, Hu YJ, Yang Y, Zhang WJ, Hu Y, Li J, Sun Y, Zhong Y, Peng W, 
Zhang HL, Kong WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, PR China.

Aging is a natural process usually defined as a progressive loss of function with
an accumulation of senescent cells. The clinical manifestations of this process
include age-related hearing loss (AHL)/presbycusis. Several investigations
indicated the association between a mitochondrial common deletion (CD) (mtDNA
4977-bp deletion in humans, corresponding to 4834-bp deletion in rats) and
presbycusis. Previous researches have shown that peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) is a key regulator 
of mitochondrial biogenesis and energy metabolism. However, the expression of
PGC-1a in the inner ear and the possible effect of PGC-1a on presbycusis are not 
clear. Our data demonstrated the distribution of PGC-1a and its downstream
transcription factors nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in marginal cells
(MCs) for the first time. To explore the role of PGC-1a in cellular senescence,
we established a model of marginal cell senescence harboring the mtDNA4834 common
deletion induced by d-galactose. We also found that PGC-1a and its downstream
transcription factors compensatorily increased in our cell senescence model.
Furthermore, the overexpression of PGC-1a induced by transfection largely
increased the expression levels of NRF-1 and TFAM and significantly decreased the
expression level of NF-<U+03BA>B in the cell senescence model. And the levels of CD,
senescent cells and apoptotic cells in the cell model decreased after PGC-1a
overexpression. These results suggested that PGC-1a might protect MCs in this
cell model from senescence through a nuclear-mitochondrial interaction and
against apoptosis. Our study may shed light on the pathogenesis of presbycusis
and provide a new therapeutic target for presbycusis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cell Death Dis. 2012 Nov 15;3:e422. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.156.

ZNF143 transcription factor mediates cell survival through upregulation of the
GPX1 activity in the mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction.

Lu W(1), Chen Z, Zhang H, Wang Y, Luo Y, Huang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. wqlu@mdanderson.org

Mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction has intimate relationship with redox
regulation. The key mechanism about how the mitochondrial respiration-defective
cells survive oxidative stress is still elusive. Here, we report that
transcription factor zinc-finger protein 143 (ZNF143) expression and glutathione 
peroxidase (GPX) activity are markedly increased in the mitochondrial
respiratory-defective cells induced by dominant-negative DNA polymerase <U+03B3>
(POLGdn). In this work, investigation of the cellular antioxidant glutathione
(GSH) and enzyme GPX activity in the mitochondrial dysfunction revealed the
presence of an increased synthesis of GSH through the activation of GCLC
(glutamate-cysteine ligase catalytic subunit) and GCLM (glutamate-cysteine ligase
regulatory subunit) gene expression, and also a positive upregulation of
glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) activity by the transcription factor ZNF143.
Significant increase in gene expression of SepSecS, the key enzyme responsible
for selenocysteine transfer RNA (tRNA) synthesis, further confirmed the
activation of the selenocysteine synthesis pathway. By using both GPX1 and ZNF143
knockdown, we provided insight into the involvement of ZNF143 in promoting GPX1
activity and protecting cells from oxidative damage and cisplatin treatment in
the mitochondrial dysfunction. Furthermore, we reported the possible regulation
of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in the mitochondrial dysfunction. 
Our findings delineate an important antioxidant survival pathway that allows the 
mitochondrial-defective cells to survive oxidative stress and cisplatin
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3542592
PMID: 23152058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Dec;71(12):1064-74. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e318275df4b.

Decreased mRNA expression of PGC-1a and PGC-1a-regulated factors in the SOD1G93A 
ALS mouse model and in human sporadic ALS.

Thau N(1), Knippenberg S, Körner S, Rath KJ, Dengler R, Petri S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
Thau.Nadine@mh-hannover.de

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease
characterized by selective motoneuron loss. Although the cause of ALS is unknown,
oxidative stress, inflammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction have been
identified as important components of its pathogenesis. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) plays a central role in
the regulation of mitochondrial metabolism and biogenesis via activation of
transcription factors, such as nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam). Alterations in PGC-1a expression and
function have previously been described in models of Huntington and Alzheimer
diseases. Moreover, the protective effects of PGC-1a have been shown in animal
models of ALS. Levels of PGC-1a correlate with the number of acetylcholine
receptor clusters in muscle. This is of particular interest because
neurodegeneration in ALS may be a dying-back process. We investigated mRNA and
protein expressions of PGC-1a and PGC-1a-regulated factors in the spinal cord and
muscle tissues of SOD1 ALS mice and in ALS patients. We detected significant
alterations in mRNA expression of PGC-1a and downstream factors with their
earliest occurrence in muscle tissue. Our data provide evidence for a role of
PGC-1a in mitochondrial dysfunction both in the ALS mouse model and in human
sporadic ALS that is probably most relevant in the skeletal muscle.

PMID: 23147503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Mar;1833(3):452-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2012.11.004. 
Epub 2012 Nov 9.

A role for sequestosome 1/p62 in mitochondrial dynamics, import and genome
integrity.

Seibenhener ML(1), Du Y, Diaz-Meco MT, Moscat J, Wooten MC, Wooten MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Cellular and Molecular Biosciences Program,
Auburn University, AL 36849, USA.

As a signaling scaffold, p62/sequestosome (p62/SQSTM1) plays important roles in
cell signaling and degradation of misfolded proteins. While localization of p62
to mitochondria has been reported, a description of its function once there,
remains unclear. Here, we report that p62 is localized to mitochondria in
non-stressed situations and demonstrate that deficiency in p62 exacerbates
defects in mitochondrial membrane potential and energetics leading to
mitochondrial dysfunction. We report on the relationship between mitochondrial
protein import and p62. In a p62 null background, mitochondrial import of the
mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM is disrupted. When p62 is returned,
mitochondrial function is restored to more normal levels. We identify for the
first time that p62 localization plays a role in regulating mitochondrial
morphology, genome integrity and mitochondrial import of a key transcription
factor. We present evidence that these responses to the presence of p62 extend
beyond the protein's immediate influence on membrane potential.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3556180
PMID: 23147249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Int J Mol Sci. 2012;13(9):11228-46. doi: 10.3390/ijms130911228. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

High mitochondrial DNA copy number and bioenergetic function are associated with 
tumor invasion of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cell lines.

Lin CS(1), Lee HT, Lee SY, Shen YA, Wang LS, Chen YJ, Wei YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112,
Taiwan; E-Mails: doc2765c@ms59.hinet.net (C.-S.L.); htlee1228@gmail.com
(H.-T.L.); yjchen@ym.edu.tw (Y.-J.C.) ; Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan ; Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of
Surgery, Taipei Hospital, Department of Health, Executive Yuan, New Taipei City
242, Taiwan.

We previously reported a gradual increase of relative mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
copy number during the progression of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). 
Because mitochondria are the intracellular organelles responsible for ATP
production, we investigated the associations among mtDNA copy number,
mitochondrial bioenergetic function, tumor invasion and the expression levels of 
epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) markers in a series of seven ESCC cell
lines, including 48T, 81T, 146T, TE1, TE2, TE6 and TE9. Among them, TE1 had the
highest relative mtDNA copy number of 240.7%. The mRNA of mtDNA-encoded ND1 gene 
(2.80), succinate-supported oxygen consumption rate (11.21 nmol/min/10(6) cells),
ATP content (10.7 fmol/cell), and the protein level of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) were the highest and the lactate concentration in
the culture medium (3.34 mM) was the lowest in TE1. These findings indicate that 
TE1 exhibited the highest bioenergetic function of mitochondria. Furthermore, TE1
showed the highest trans-well migration activity of 223.0 cells/field, the
highest vimentin but the lowest E-cadherin protein expression levels, which
suggest that TE1 had the highest invasion capability. We then conducted a
knockdown study using pLKO.1-based lentiviral particles to infect TE1 cells to
suppress the expression of TFAM. Molecular analyses of the parental TE1, control 
TE1-NT and TFAM knockdown TE1-sh-TFAM(97) cells were performed. Interestingly, as
compared to the control TE1-NT, TE1-sh-TFAM(97) exhibited lower levels of the
relative mtDNA copy number (p = 0.001), mRNA of mtDNA-encoded ND1 gene (p =
0.050), succinate-supported oxygen consumption rate (p = 0.065), and ATP content 
(p = 0.007), but had a higher lactate concentration in the culture medium (p =
0.010) and higher protein level of lactate dehydrogenase. A decline in
mitochondrial bioenergetic function was observed in TE1-sh-TFAM(97).
Significantly, compared to the control TE1-NT, TE1-sh-TFAM(97) had a lower
trans-well migration activity (p < 0.001), a higher E-cadherin level but a lower 
vimentin protein level, which indicates a decrease of invasiveness. Taken
together, we suggest that high relative mtDNA copy number and bioenergetic
function of mitochondria may confer an advantage for tumor invasion of ESCC.

PMCID: PMC3472741
PMID: 23109849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;373(1-2):125-35. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1481-x. Epub 
2012 Oct 29.

Sex-dependent differences in rat brown adipose tissue mitochondrial biogenesis
and insulin signaling parameters in response to an obesogenic diet.

Nadal-Casellas A(1), Bauzá-Thorbrügge M, Proenza AM, Gianotti M, Lladó I.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS), Universitat de les Illes Balears, Cra. Valldemossa km 7.5, 07122 
Palma, Spain.

Marked sex-dependent differences in mitochondrial function and redox status have 
been found in brown adipose tissue (BAT) of control rats. Insulin also plays a
role in the development and maintenance of this tissue. The aim was to
investigate sexual dimorphism in the effects of diet-induced obesity on BAT
mitochondrial function, as well as on insulin signaling pathway. 10-week-old
Wistar rats of both sexes were fed a control diet or a palatable high-fat diet
for 26 weeks. Serum markers of insulin sensitivity were analyzed. Mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) content, mitochondrial oxidative activities, PGC-1a mRNA levels, as
well as the protein levels of insulin receptor subunit ß (IRß), glucose
transporter GLUT4, ß(3)-adrenergic receptor (ß(3)-AR), phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase, mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), cytochrome c oxidase
subunit IV (COX IV), and uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) were measured in BAT. Obese 
females showed impaired systemic insulin sensitivity accompanied by diminished
IRß, GLUT4, and ß(3)-AR protein levels in BAT. In addition, TFAM and COX IV
protein and PGC-1a mRNA levels decreased in obese females, whereas mtDNA levels
increased. In obese males, oxidative and thermogenic capacities rose and no
significant changes were observed in the insulin signaling pathway elements. The 
reduction of the insulin signaling pathway in BAT of obese females may be
responsible, at least partially, for the impaired biogenesis process, which could
favor the increase of body weight found in this sex. In contrast, the enhanced
mitochondrial functionality in the BAT of males would avoid increased oxidative
damage and the impairment of insulin signaling.

PMID: 23108789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Cells. 2012 Oct;34(4):357-65. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-0081-7. Epub 2012 Oct
18.

An analogue of resveratrol HS-1793 exhibits anticancer activity against MCF-7
cells via inhibition of mitochondrial biogenesis gene expression.

Jeong SH(1), Song IS, Kim HK, Lee SR, Song S, Suh H, Yoon YG, Yoo YH, Kim N, Rhee
BD, Ko KS, Han J.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory for Mitochondrial Signaling, Department of
Physiology, College of Medicine, Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center,
Inje University, Busan, 614-735, Korea.

Resveratrol is a phytoalexin and polyphenol derived from grapes, berries, and
peanuts. It has been shown to mediate death of a wide variety of cancer cells.
Although resveratrol is considered an important potential chemotherapeutic agent,
it is required at high doses to achieve a biologically or physiologically
significant effect, which may be impractical for treating cancer. Thus, a more
stable and potent derivative of resveratrol, with more effective tumoricidal
activity, must be developed. A novel resveratrol analog, HS-1793, has recently
been synthesized and was determined to exhibit a greater decrease in cancer cell 
viability than resveratrol. However, the underlying mechanism of HS-1793-induced 
cancer cell death remains unknown. We thus investigated the mechanism by which
HS-1793 induces cell death and assessed whether this occurs through a
mitochondrial-mediated mechanism. Using the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line, we
determined that HS-1793 treatment significantly increased cell death at a
relatively low dose compared with resveratrol. HS-1793 treatment more
significantly decreased mitochondrial membrane potential, cellular ATP
concentration, and cellular oxygen consumption rate than resveratrol treatment.
At the molecular level, HS-1793 treatment down-regulated the expression of major 
mitochondrial biogenesis-regulating proteins, including mitochondrial
transcriptional factor A (TFAM), Tu translation elongation factor (TUFM), and
single-stranded DNA-binding protein. We conclude that HS- 1793 acts by regulating
the expression of TFAM and TUFM, leading to a block in normal mitochondrial
function, which sensitizes cancer cells to cell death. We therefore propose that 
HS-1793 can be a useful chemosensitization agent, which together with other such 
agents can efficiently target cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3887771
PMID: 23104437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Jan;373(1-2):161-70. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1485-6. Epub 
2012 Oct 26.

Skeletal muscle mitochondrial dysfunction precedes right ventricular impairment
in experimental pulmonary hypertension.

Enache I(1), Charles AL, Bouitbir J, Favret F, Zoll J, Metzger D,
Oswald-Mammosser M, Geny B, Charloux A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Physiologie et d'Explorations Fonctionnelles, Pôle de Pathologie
Thoracique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Strasbourg, Nouvel Hôpital Civil, 1,
Place de l'Hôpital, 67091 Strasbourg, France. Irina.Enache@chru-strasbourg.fr

We assessed the time courses of mitochondrial biogenesis factors and respiration 
in the right ventricle (RV), gastrocnemius (GAS), and left ventricle (LV) in a
model of pulmonary-hypertensive rats. Monocrotaline (MT) rats and controls were
studied 2 and 4 weeks after injection. Compensated and decompensated heart
failure stages were defined according to obvious congestion signs. mRNA
expression and protein level of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma 
co-activator 1a (PGC-1a), citrate synthase (CS) mRNA and activity, and
mitochondrial respiration were investigated. In addition, mRNA expression of
sirtuin1, nuclear respiratory factor 1, and mitochondrial transcription factor A 
were studied. As early as 2 weeks, the expression of the studied genes was
decreased in the MT GAS. At 4 weeks, the MT GAS and MT RV showed decreased mRNA
levels whatever the stage of disease, but PGC-1a protein and CS activity were
significantly reduced only at the decompensated stage. The functional result was 
a significant fall in mitochondrial respiration at the decompensated stage in the
RV and GAS. The mRNA expression and mitochondrial respiration were not
significantly modified in the MT LV. MT rats demonstrated an early decrease in
expression of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis in a skeletal muscle,
whereas reduced protein expression, and the resulting mitochondrial respiratory
dysfunction appeared only in rats with overt heart failure, in the GAS and RV.
Dissociations between mRNA and protein levels at the compensated stage deserve to
be further studied.

PMID: 23099843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Neurochem. 2012 Nov;123 Suppl 2:125-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07951.x.

Mitochondrial biogenesis contributes to ischemic neuroprotection afforded by LPS 
pre-conditioning.

Stetler RA(1), Leak RK, Yin W, Zhang L, Wang S, Gao Y, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology and Institute of Brain Sciences, 
Shanghai, China.

Although alterations in mitochondrial dynamics are associated with cellular
responses to injury, the functional role of these dynamic changes in ischemic
neurons is underexplored. One of these dynamic responses to injury includes
mitochondrial biogenesis. Various sublethal pre-conditioning stimuli that induce 
an ischemic-tolerant state [e.g., lipopolysaccharide (LPS)] may also induce
mitochondrial biogenesis. Using neuron-enriched cultures, we found that sublethal
LPS pre-conditioning induced both ischemic tolerance and markers of mitochondrial
biogenesis with overlapping dose-response temporal kinetics. Sublethal LPS
transiently increased the expression of critical components of the mitochondrial 
transcriptional machinery, including nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), as well as mtDNA copy number,
mitochondrial protein levels, and markers of functional mitochondria, such as
increased cellular ATP content, citrate synthase activity, and maximal
respiration capacity. Importantly, knockdown of TFAM abrogated both the induction
of mitochondrial biogenesis and the neuroprotective pre-conditioning effects of
LPS. Several signaling pathways coordinated these events. AMPK inhibition
suppressed NRF1 and TFAM expression by LPS, whereas PI3K/Akt signaling was
necessary for the nuclear translocation of NRF1 and subsequent induction of TFAM.
This is the first demonstration that LPS pre-conditioning initiates multiple
signaling pathways leading to mitochondrial biogenesis in neurons and that these 
dynamic changes contribute to ischemic tolerance.

© 2012 The Authors Journal of Neurochemistry © International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC3623612
PMID: 23050650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mitochondrion. 2013 Sep;13(5):481-92. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2012.10.011. Epub 2012 
Oct 22.

Is mitochondrial DNA content a potential biomarker of mitochondrial dysfunction?

Malik AN(1), Czajka A.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, Division of Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences, School
of Medicine, King's college London, London, UK. afshan.malik@kcl.ac.uk

Mitochondrial dysfunction is central to numerous diseases of oxidative stress.
Changes in mitochondrial DNA (MtDNA) content, often measured as mitochondrial
genome to nuclear genome ratio (Mt/N) using real time quantitative PCR, have been
reported in a broad range of human diseases, such as diabetes and its
complications, obesity, cancer, HIV complications, and ageing. We propose the
hypothesis that MtDNA content in body fluids and tissues could be a biomarker of 
mitochondrial dysfunction and review the evidence supporting this theory.
Increased reactive oxygen species resulting from an external trigger such as
hyperglycaemia or increased fat in conditions of oxidative stress could lead to
enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis, and increased Mt/N. Altered MtDNA levels may
contribute to enhanced oxidative stress and inflammation and could play a
pathogenic role in mitochondrial dysfunction and disease. Changes in Mt/N are
detectable in circulating cells such as peripheral blood mononuclear cells and
these could be used as surrogate to predict global changes in tissues and organs.
We review a large number of studies reporting changes in MtDNA levels in body
fluids such as circulating blood cells, cell free serum, saliva, sperm, and
cerebrospinal fluid as well as in tumour and normal tissue samples. However, the 
data are often conflicting as the current methodology used to measure Mt/N can
give false results because of one or more of the following reasons (1) use of
mitochondrial primers which co-amplify nuclear pseudogenes (2) use of nuclear
genes which are variable and/or duplicated in numerous locations (3) a dilution
bias caused by the differing genome sizes of the mitochondrial and nuclear genome
and (4) template preparation protocols which affect the yields of nuclear and
mitochondrial genomes. Development of robust and reproducible methodology is
needed to test the hypothesis that MtDNA content in body fluids is biomarker of
mitochondrial dysfunction.

Copyright © 2012 © Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Aging (Albany NY). 2012 Sep;4(9):620-35.

RhTFAM treatment stimulates mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and improves
memory in aged mice.

Thomas RR(1), Khan SM, Smigrodzki RM, Onyango IG, Dennis J, Khan OM, Portelli FR,
Bennett JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's Disease Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA
23298, USA.

Mitochondrial function declines with age in postmitotic tissues such as brain,
heart and skeletal muscle. Despite weekly exercise, aged mice showed substantial 
losses of mtDNA gene copy numbers and reductions in mtDNA gene transcription and 
mitobiogenesis signaling in brain and heart. We treated these mice with weekly
intravenous injections of recombinant human mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(rhTFAM). RhTFAM treatment for one month increased mitochondrial respiration in
brain, heart and muscle, POLMRT expression and mtDNA gene transcription in brain,
and PGC-1 alpha mitobiogenesis signaling in heart. RhTFAM treatment reduced
oxidative stress damage to brain proteins, improved memory in Morris water maze
performance and increased brain protein levels of BDNF and synapsin. Microarray
analysis showed co-expression of multiple Gene Ontology families in
rhTFAM-treated aged brains compared to young brains. RhTFAM treatment reverses
age-related memory impairments associated with loss of mitochondrial energy
production in brain, increases levels of memory-related brain proteins and
improves mitochondrial respiration in brain and peripheral tissues.

PMCID: PMC3492226
PMID: 23075607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Jan 1;114(1):3-10. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01107.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

New records in aerobic power among octogenarian lifelong endurance athletes.

Trappe S(1), Hayes E, Galpin A, Kaminsky L, Jemiolo B, Fink W, Trappe T, Jansson 
A, Gustafsson T, Tesch P.

Author information: 
(1)Human Performance Laboratory, Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana 47306,
USA. strappe@bsu.edu

Comment in
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Mar 15;114(6):830.
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Mar 15;114(6):829.
    J Appl Physiol (1985). 2013 Jan 1;114(1):1-2.

We examined whole body aerobic capacity and myocellular markers of oxidative
metabolism in lifelong endurance athletes [n = 9, 81 ± 1 yr, 68 ± 3 kg, body mass
index (BMI) = 23 ± 1 kg/m(2)] and age-matched, healthy, untrained men (n = 6; 82 
± 1 y, 77 ± 5 kg, BMI = 26 ± 1 kg/m(2)). The endurance athletes were
cross-country skiers, including a former Olympic champion and several
national/regional champions, with a history of aerobic exercise and participation
in endurance events throughout their lives. Each subject performed a maximal
cycle test to assess aerobic capacity (VO(2max)). Subjects had a resting vastus
lateralis muscle biopsy to assess oxidative enzymes (citrate synthase and ßHAD)
and molecular (mRNA) targets associated with mitochondrial biogenesis [peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam)]. The octogenarian athletes had a higher (P < 0.05)
absolute (2.6 ± 0.1 vs. 1.6 ± 0.1 l/min) and relative (38 ± 1 vs. 21 ± 1
ml·kg(-1)·min(-1)) VO(2max), ventilation (79 ± 3 vs. 64 ± 7 l/min), heart rate
(160 ± 5 vs. 146 ± 8 beats per minute), and final workload (182 ± 4 vs. 131 ± 14 
W). Skeletal muscle oxidative enzymes were 54% (citrate synthase) and 42% (ßHAD) 
higher (P < 0.05) in the octogenarian athletes. Likewise, basal PGC-1a and Tfam
mRNA were 135% and 80% greater (P < 0.05) in the octogenarian athletes. To our
knowledge, the VO(2max) of the lifelong endurance athletes is the highest
recorded in humans >80 yr of age and comparable to nonendurance trained men 40
years younger. The superior cardiovascular and skeletal muscle health profile of 
the octogenarian athletes provides a large functional reserve above the aerobic
frailty threshold and is associated with lower risk for disability and mortality.

PMCID: PMC3544519
PMID: 23065759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047098. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Brimonidine blocks glutamate excitotoxicity-induced oxidative stress and
preserves mitochondrial transcription factor a in ischemic retinal injury.

Lee D(1), Kim KY, Noh YH, Chai S, Lindsey JD, Ellisman MH, Weinreb RN, Ju WK.

Author information: 
(1)The Sophie and Arthur Laboratory for Optic Nerve Biology, Hamilton Glaucoma
Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, United States of America.

Glutamate excitotoxicity-induced oxidative stress have been linked to
mitochondrial dysfunction in retinal ischemia and optic neuropathies including
glaucoma. Brimonindine (BMD), an alpha 2-adrenergic receptor agonist, contributes
to the neuroprotection of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) against glutamate
excitotoxicity or oxidative stress. However, the molecular mechanisms of
BMD-associated mitochondrial preservation in RGC protection against glutamate
excitotoxicity-induced oxidative stress following retinal ischemic injury remain 
largely unknown. Here, we tested whether activation of alpha 2 adrenergic
receptor by systemic BMD treatment blocks glutamate excitotoxicity-induced
oxidative stress, and preserves the expression of mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complex in ischemic
retina. Sprague-Dawley rats received BMD (1 mg/kg/day) or vehicle (0.9% saline)
systemically and then transient ischemia was induced by acute intraocular
pressure elevation. Systemic BMD treatment significantly increased RGC survival
at 4 weeks after ischemia. At 24 hours, BMD significantly decreased Bax
expression but increased Bcl-xL and phosphorylated Bad protein expression in
ischemic retina. Importantly. BMD significantly blocked the upregulations of
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors 1 and 2A protein expression, as well as of SOD2
protein expression in ischemic retina at 24 hours. During the early
neurodegeneration following ischemic injury (12-72 hours), Tfam and OXPHOS
complex protein expression were significantly increased in vehicle-treated
retina. At 24 hours after ischemia, Tfam immunoreactivity was increased in the
outer plexiform layer, inner nuclear layer, inner plexiform layer and ganglion
cell layer. Further, Tfam protein was expressed predominantly in RGCs. Finally,
BMD preserved Tfam immunoreactivity in RGCs as well as Tfam/OXPHOS complex
protein expression in the retinal extracts against ischemic injury. Our findings 
suggest that systemic BMD treatment protects RGCs by blockade of glutamate
excitotoxicity-induced oxidative stress and subsequent preservation of
Tfam/OXPHOS complex expression in ischemic retina.

PMCID: PMC3467218
PMID: 23056591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Oct;1271:110-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06738.x.

Role of PGC-1a signaling in skeletal muscle health and disease.

Kang C(1), Li Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

This paper reviews the current understanding of the molecular basis of the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a)-mediated
pathway and discusses the role of PGC-1a in skeletal muscle atrophy caused by
immobilization. PGC-1a is the master transcription regulator that stimulates
mitochondrial biogenesis, by upregulating nuclear respiratory factors (NRF-1, 2) 
and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), which leads to increased
mitochondrial DNA replication and gene transcription. PGC-1a also regulates
cellular oxidant-antioxidant homeostasis by stimulating the gene expression of
superoxide dismutase-2 (SOD2), catalase, glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPx1), and
uncoupling protein (UCP). Recent reports from muscle-specific PGC-1a
overexpression underline the importance of PGC-1a in atrophied skeletal muscle,
demonstrate enhancement of the PGC-1a mitochondrial biogenic pathway, and reduced
oxidative damage. Thus, PGC-1a appears to play a protective role against
atrophy-linked skeletal muscle deterioration.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3499658
PMID: 23050972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Hear Res. 2012 Dec;294(1-2):40-8. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.09.006. Epub 2012
Sep 27.

Age-related decline of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit expression in the
auditory cortex of the mimetic aging rat model associated with the common
deletion.

Zhong Y(1), Hu Y, Peng W, Sun Y, Yang Y, Zhao X, Huang X, Zhang H, Kong W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1277 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan 430022,
China.

The age-related deterioration in the central auditory system is well known to
impair the abilities of sound localization and speech perception. However, the
mechanisms involved in the age-related central auditory deficiency remain
unclear. Previous studies have demonstrated that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
deletions accumulated with age in the auditory system. Also, a cytochrome c
oxidase (CcO) deficiency has been proposed to be a causal factor in the
age-related decline in mitochondrial respiratory activity. This study was
designed to explore the changes of CcO activity and to investigate the possible
relationship between the mtDNA common deletion (CD) and CcO activity as well as
the mRNA expression of CcO subunits in the auditory cortex of D-galactose
(D-gal)-induced mimetic aging rats at different ages. Moreover, we explored
whether peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a),
nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) were involved in the changes of nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded CcO
subunits in the auditory cortex during aging. Our data demonstrated that
d-gal-induced mimetic aging rats exhibited an accelerated accumulation of the CD 
and a gradual decline in the CcO activity in the auditory cortex during the aging
process. The reduction in the CcO activity was correlated with the level of CD
load in the auditory cortex. The mRNA expression of CcO subunit III was reduced
significantly with age in the d-gal-induced mimetic aging rats. In contrast, the 
decline in the mRNA expression of subunits I and IV was relatively minor.
Additionally, significant increases in the mRNA and protein levels of PGC-1a,
NRF-1 and TFAM were observed in the auditory cortex of D-gal-induced mimetic
aging rats with aging. These findings suggested that the accelerated accumulation
of the CD in the auditory cortex may induce a substantial decline in CcO subunit 
III and lead to a significant decline in the CcO activity progressively with age 
despite compensatory increases of PGC-1a, NRF-1 and TFAM. Therefore, CcO may be a
specific intramitochondrial site of age-related deterioration in the auditory
cortex, and CcO subunit III might be a target in the development of presbycusis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Biol Reprod. 2012 Nov 16;87(5):118. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.101881. Print
2012 Nov.

Incorporation of coenzyme Q10 into bovine oocytes improves mitochondrial features
and alleviates the effects of summer thermal stress on developmental competence.

Gendelman M(1), Roth Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University,
Rehovot, Israel.

Environmental stress-induced alterations in oocyte mitochondria are suggested to 
deleteriously affect developmental competence of the ovarian pool of oocytes. We 
examined the association between seasonal effects on oocyte developmental
competence and mitochondrial distribution, polarization, mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) content, and RNA expression, and whether the incorporation of coenzyme
Q10 (CoQ10) might improve these effects. Bovine oocytes were collected during the
summer (June-August), fall (September-November), and winter (December-May),
matured in vitro with or without 50 µM CoQ10, fertilized, and cultured for 8
days. The proportion of developed blastocysts was highest in the winter,
intermediate in the fall, and lowest in the summer. Matured oocytes were
classified into categories I-IV according to their mitochondrial distribution
pattern (MitoTracker green). The proportion of high- and low-polarized
mitochondria (JC-1 assay) differed between oocyte categories but was not affected
by season. On the other hand, oocyte distribution into categories differed
between seasons and was affected by CoQ10, with an increased proportion of
category I oocytes in the fall. Oocyte mtDNA did not differ between seasons, but 
expression of mitochondrion-associated genes involved in the respiratory chain
(ND2, SDHD, CYTB, COXII, ATP5B, and TFAM) did. Coenzyme Q10 increased the
expression of CYTB, COXII, and ATP5B and the proportions of blastocysts developed
in the fall. In summary, season-induced alterations in mitochondrial functions
might explain, in part, the reduced oocyte developmental competence. It seems
that in the fall, under modest harm, CoQ10 incorporation can alleviate these
deleterious effects somewhat.

PMID: 23018185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 9;109(41):16510-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1119738109. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Mammalian transcription factor A is a core component of the mitochondrial
transcription machinery.

Shi Y(1), Dierckx A, Wanrooij PH, Wanrooij S, Larsson NG, Wilhelmsson LM,
Falkenberg M, Gustafsson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Cell Biology, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

Transcription factor A (TFAM) functions as a DNA packaging factor in mammalian
mitochondria. TFAM also binds sequence-specifically to sites immediately upstream
of mitochondrial promoters, but there are conflicting data regarding its role as 
a core component of the mitochondrial transcription machinery. We here
demonstrate that TFAM is required for transcription in mitochondrial extracts as 
well as in a reconstituted in vitro transcription system. The absolute
requirement of TFAM can be relaxed by conditions that allow DNA breathing, i.e., 
low salt concentrations or negatively supercoiled DNA templates. The situation is
thus very similar to that described in nuclear RNA polymerase II-dependent
transcription, in which the free energy of supercoiling can circumvent the need
for a subset of basal transcription factors at specific promoters. In agreement
with these observations, we demonstrate that TFAM has the capacity to induce
negative supercoils in DNA, and, using the recently developed nucleobase analog
FRET-pair tC(O)-tC(nitro), we find that TFAM distorts significantly the DNA
structure. Our findings differ from recent observations reporting that TFAM is
not a core component of the mitochondrial transcription machinery. Instead, our
findings support a model in which TFAM is absolutely required to recruit the
transcription machinery during initiation of transcription.

PMCID: PMC3478657
PMID: 23012404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 2;287(45):37808-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.385369. Epub 2012
Sep 17.

Intracellular and extracellular ATP coordinately regulate the inverse correlation
between osteoclast survival and bone resorption.

Miyazaki T(1), Iwasawa M, Nakashima T, Mori S, Shigemoto K, Nakamura H, Katagiri 
H, Takayanagi H, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and
Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan. miyazak14@tmig.or.jp

Osteoclasts, highly differentiated bone-resorbing cells of hematopoietic origin, 
have two conflicting tendencies: a lower capacity to survive and a higher
capacity to execute energy-consuming activities such as bone resorption. Here, we
report that when compared with their precursors, mature mitochondria-rich
osteoclasts have lower levels of intracellular ATP, which is associated with
receptor activator of nuclear factor <U+03BA>-B ligand (RANKL)-induced Bcl-x(L)
down-regulation. Severe ATP depletion, caused by disrupting mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam) gene, leads to increased bone-resorbing activity
despite accelerated apoptosis. Although AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK)
activation by ATP depletion is not involved in the regulation of osteoclast
function, the release of ATP from intracellular stores negatively regulates
bone-resorbing activity through an autocrine/paracrine feedback loop by altering 
cytoskeletal structures. Furthermore, osteoclasts derived from aged mice exhibit 
reduced mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and intracellular ATP levels with increased
bone-resorbing activity, implicating the possible involvement of age-related
mitochondrial dysfunction in osteoporosis. Thus, our study provides evidence for 
a mechanism underlying the control of cellular functions by reciprocal changes in
intracellular and extracellular ATP, which regulate the negative correlation
between osteoclast survival and bone resorption.

PMCID: PMC3488055
PMID: 22988253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Nov 1;53(9):1729-37. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.08.588. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

A compensatory mechanism protects retinal mitochondria from initial insult in
diabetic retinopathy.

Santos JM(1), Tewari S, Kowluru RA.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

In the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy, an increase in retinal oxidative
stress precedes mitochondrial dysfunction and capillary cell apoptosis. This
study is designed to understand the mechanism responsible for the protection of
mitochondria damage in the early stages of diabetic retinopathy. After 15 days-12
months of streptozotocin-induced diabetes in rats, retina was analyzed for
mitochondria DNA (mtDNA) damage by extended length PCR. DNA repair enzyme and
replication machinery were quantified in the mitochondria, and the binding of
mitochondrial transcriptional factor A (TFAM) with mtDNA was analyzed by ChIP.
Key parameters were confirmed in the retinal endothelial cells incubated in 20mM 
glucose for 6-96h. Although reactive oxygen species (ROS) were increased within
15 days of diabetes, mtDNA damage was observed at 6 months of diabetes. After 15 
days of diabetes DNA repair/replication enzymes were significantly increased in
the mitochondria, but at 2 months, their mitochondrial accumulation started to
come down, and mtDNA copy number and binding of TFAM with mtDNA became
significantly elevated. However, at 6 months of diabetes, the repair/replication 
machinery became subnormal and mtDNA copy number significantly decreased. A
similar temporal relationship was observed in endothelial cells exposed to high
glucose. Thus, in the early stages of diabetes, increased mtDNA biogenesis and
repair compensates for the ROS-induced damage, but, with sustained insult, this
mechanism is overwhelmed, and mtDNA and electron transport chain (ETC) are
damaged. The compromised ETC propagates a vicious cycle of ROS and the
dysfunctional mitochondria fuels loss of capillary cells by initiating their
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3632051
PMID: 22982046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2012 Dec;44(6):665-71. doi: 10.1007/s10863-012-9472-x. Epub 
2012 Sep 12.

NYGGF4 (PID1) effects on insulin resistance are reversed by metformin in 3T3-L1
adipocytes.

Qiu J(1), Wang YM, Shi CM, Yue HN, Qin ZY, Zhu GZ, Cao XG, Ji CB, Cui Y, Guo XR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Newborn Infants, Nanjing Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.

NYGGF4 (also called PID1) is a recently discovered gene that is involved in
obesity-related insulin resistance (IR). We aimed in the present study to further
elucidate the effects of NYGGF4 on IR and the underlying mechanisms through using
metformin treatment in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Our data showed that the metformin
pretreatment strikingly enhanced insulin-stimulated glucose uptake through
increasing GLUT4 translocation to the PM in NYGGF4 overexpression adipocytes.
NYGGF4 overexpression resulted in significant inhibition of tyrosine
phosphorylation of IRS-1 and serine phosphorylation of Akt, whereas incubation
with metformin strongly activated IRS-1 and Akt phosphorylation in NYGGF4
overexpression adipocytes. The reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels in NYGGF4
overexpression adipocytes were strikingly enhanced, which could be decreased by
the metformin pretreatment. Our data also showed that metformin increased the
expressions of PGC1-a, NRF-1, and TFAM, which were reduced in the NYGGF4
overexpression adipocytes. These results suggest that NYGGF4 plays a role in IR
and its effects on IR could be reversed by metformin through activating
IRS-1/PI3K/Akt and AMPK-PGC1-a pathways.

PMID: 22968630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Age (Dordr). 2013 Oct;35(5):1607-20. doi: 10.1007/s11357-012-9465-z. Epub 2012
Sep 4.

Age- and calorie restriction-related changes in rat brain mitochondrial DNA and
TFAM binding.

Picca A(1), Fracasso F, Pesce V, Cantatore P, Joseph AM, Leeuwenburgh C, Gadaleta
MN, Lezza AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies and Pharmacological Sciences,
University of Bari, Via Orabona, 4, 70125, Bari, Italy.

Aging markedly affects mitochondrial biogenesis and functions particularly in
tissues highly dependent on the organelle's bioenergetics capability such as the 
brain's frontal cortex. Calorie restriction (CR) diet is, so far, the only
intervention able to delay or prevent the onset of several age-related
alterations in different organisms. We determined the contents of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and the 4.8-kb mtDNA
deletion in the frontal cortex from young (6-month-old) and aged (26-month-old), 
ad libitum-fed (AL) and calorie-restricted (CR), rats. We found a 70 % increase
in TFAM amount, a 25 % loss in mtDNA content, and a 35 % increase in the 4.8-kb
deletion content in the aged AL animals with respect to the young rats.
TFAM-specific binding to six mtDNA regions was analyzed by mtDNA
immunoprecipitation and semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR), showing
a marked age-related decrease. Quantitative real-time PCR at two subregions
involved in mtDNA replication demonstrated, in aged AL rats, a remarkable
decrease (60-70 %) of TFAM-bound mtDNA. The decreased TFAM binding is a novel
finding that may explain the mtDNA loss in spite of the compensatory TFAM
increased amount. In aged CR rats, TFAM amount increased and mtDNA content
decreased with respect to young rats' values, but the extent of the changes was
smaller than in aged AL rats. Attenuation of the age-related effects due to the
diet in the CR animals was further evidenced by the unchanged content of the
4.8-kb deletion with respect to that of young animals and by the partial
prevention of the age-related decrease in TFAM binding to mtDNA.

PMCID: PMC3776104
PMID: 22945739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40879. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040879. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Mitochondrial DNA maintenance is regulated in human hepatoma cells by glycogen
synthase kinase 3ß and p53 in response to tumor necrosis factor a.

Vadrot N(1), Ghanem S, Braut F, Gavrilescu L, Pilard N, Mansouri A, Moreau R,
Reyl-Desmars F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U773, CRB3, Equipe Moreau, Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Faculté de
Médecine X Bichat, Paris, France.

During chronic liver inflammation, up-regulated Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha
(TNF-a) targets hepatocytes and induces abnormal reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production responsible for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) alterations. The
serine/threonine Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta (GSK3ß) plays a pivotal role
during inflammation but its involvement in the maintenance of mtDNA remains
unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate its involvement in TNF-a
induced mtDNA depletion and its interrelationship with p53 a protein known to
maintain mtDNA copy numbers. Using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) 
we found that at 30 min in human hepatoma HepG2 cells TNF-a induced 0.55±0.10
mtDNA lesions per 10 Kb and a 52.4±2.8% decrease in mtDNA content dependent on
TNF-R1 receptor and ROS production. Both lesions and depletion returned to
baseline from 1 to 6 h after TNF-a exposure. Luminol-amplified chemiluminescence 
(LAC) was used to measure the rapid (10 min) and transient TNF-a induced increase
in ROS production (168±15%). A transient 8-oxo-dG level of 1.4±0.3 ng/mg DNA and 
repair of abasic sites were also measured by ELISA assays. Translocation of p53
to mitochondria was observed by Western Blot and co-immunoprecipitations showed
that TNF-a induced p53 binding to GSK3ß and mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(TFAM). In addition, mitochondrial D-loop immunoprecipitation (mtDIP) revealed
that TNF-a induced p53 binding to the regulatory D-loop region of mtDNA. The
knockdown of p53 by siRNAs, inhibition by the phosphoSer(15)p53 antibody or
transfection of human mutant active GSK3ßS9A pcDNA3 plasmid inhibited recovery of
mtDNA content while blockade of GSK3ß activity by SB216763 inhibitor or knockdown
by siRNAs suppressed mtDNA depletion. This study is the first to report the
involvement of GSK3ß in TNF-a induced mtDNA depletion. We suggest that p53
binding to GSK3ß, TFAM and D-loop could induce recovery of mtDNA content through 
mtDNA repair.

PMCID: PMC3401193
PMID: 22911714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nat Commun. 2012;3:1013. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2001.

Protein sliding and DNA denaturation are essential for DNA organization by human 
mitochondrial transcription factor A.

Farge G(1), Laurens N, Broekmans OD, van den Wildenberg SM, Dekker LC, Gaspari M,
Gustafsson CM, Peterman EJ, Falkenberg M, Wuite GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy and LaserLaB, VU University, De Boelelaan 
1081, Amsterdam 1081 HV, The Netherlands.

Mitochondria organize their genome in protein-DNA complexes called nucleoids. The
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a protein that regulates
mitochondrial transcription, is abundant in these nucleoids. TFAM is believed to 
be essential for mitochondrial DNA compaction, yet the exact mechanism has not
been resolved. Here we use a combination of single-molecule manipulation and
fluorescence microscopy to show the nonspecific DNA-binding dynamics and
compaction by TFAM. We observe that single TFAM proteins diffuse extensively over
DNA (sliding) and, by collisions, form patches on DNA in a cooperative manner.
Moreover, we demonstrate that TFAM induces compaction by changing the flexibility
of the DNA, which can be explained by local denaturation of the DNA (melting).
Both sliding of TFAM and DNA melting are also necessary characteristics for
effective, specific transcription regulation by TFAM. This apparent connection
between transcription and DNA organization clarifies how TFAM can accomplish two 
complementary roles in the mitochondrial nucleoid at the same time.

PMID: 22910359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;44(11):1962-9. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.07.024. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

An active mitochondrial biogenesis occurs during dendritic cell differentiation.

Zaccagnino P(1), Saltarella M, Maiorano S, Gaballo A, Santoro G, Nico B, Lorusso 
M, Del Prete A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Bari, Piazza G Cesare 11, 
70124 Bari, Italy.

Dendritic cells (DC) are sentinels of the immune system deriving from circulating
monocyte precursors recruited to sites of inflammation. In a previous report (Del
Prete et al., 2008) we showed that, after differentiation, DC exhibited increased
number of condensed mitochondria and dynamic changes in their energy metabolism. 
A study is presented here showing that the DC differentiation process is
characterized by increased expression level and activity of mitochondrial
respiratory complexes, as well as by an increased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy 
number. Moreover, DC are equipped with more efficient antioxidant protection
systems, over expressed most likely to detoxify increased ROS production, as a
consequence of the much higher mitochondrial activity. Kinetic analysis of the
three main mitochondrial biogenesis-associated genes revealed that the peak in
PPAR<U+03B3> coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1a) gene expression was suddenly reached few hours 
after the onset of the differentiation. While PGC-1a expression rapidly declines,
the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and nuclear respiratory factor-1 
(NRF-1) expression gradually increased. These findings demonstrate that an active
mitochondrial biogenesis occurs during DC differentiation and further suggest
that an early input by the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis PGC-1a is
needed to trigger the subsequent activation of the downstream transcription
factors, NRF-1 and TFAM in this process.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22871569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2012 Sep;99(3):780-8. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

eNOS correlates with mitochondrial biogenesis in hearts of congenital heart
disease with cyanosis.

[Article in English, Portuguese]

Xiao J(1), Chen L, Wang X, Liu M, Xiao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, PR, China.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial biogenesis program in heart appears to exhibit adaptive
remodeling following biomechanical and oxidative stress. The adaptive mechanisms 
that protect myocardium metabolism during hypoxia are coordinated in part by
nitric oxide (NO).
OBJECTIVE: To observe mitochondrial biogenesis and nitric oxide synthase (NOS)
expression in hearts of congenital heart disease with cyanosis, discuss
mitochondrial response to chronic hypoxia in myocardium.
METHODS: 20 patients with cyanotic (n=10) or acyanotic cardiac defects (n=10)
were investigated. Samples from the right ventricular outflow tract myocardium
taken during operation were studied. Morphometric analysis of mitochondria was
performed with transmission electron microscope. Relative mtDNA/nDNA ratio was
determined with real-time PCR. Cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COXI),
peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor Î³ coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), nuclear
respiratory factor 1 (NRF1), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam)
transcript levels were detected by real-time fluorescent RT-PCR. COXI and nNOS,
iNOS and eNOS protein levels were measured with western blot.
RESULTS: Mitochondrial volume density (Vv) and numerical density (Nv) were
significantly elevated in patients with cyanotic compared to acyanotic congenital
heart disease. Elevated mtDNA and up-regulated COXI, PGC-1a, NRF1 and Tfam mRNA
levels were observed in cyanotic patients. Protein levels of COXI and eNOS were
significantly higher in the myocardium of cyanotic than of acyanotic patients.
PGC-1a transcript levels correlated with the levels of eNOS.
CONCLUSION: Mitochondrial biogenesis is activated in right ventricular outflow
tract myocardium in congenital heart disease with cyanosis, which could be the
adaptive response to chronic hypoxia and possibly involves eNOS up-regulation.

PMID: 22858618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Nov 1;318(18):2335-43. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.07.012. Epub 
2012 Jul 24.

Maintenance of mitochondrial genome distribution by mitochondrial AAA+ protein
ClpX.

Kasashima K(1), Sumitani M, Endo H.

Author information: 
(1)Jichi Medical University, Department of Biochemistry, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.
kasa@jichi.ac.jp

The segregation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is important for the maintenance and
transmission of the genome between generations. Recently, we clarified that human
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is required for equal distribution
and symmetric segregation of mtDNA in cultured cells; however, the molecular
mechanism involved is largely unknown. ClpX is an ATPase associated with various 
cellular activities (AAA+) proteins that localize to the mitochondrial matrix and
is suggested to associate with mtDNA. In this study, we found that RNAi-mediated 
knockdown of ClpX in HeLa cells resulted in enlarged mtDNA nucleoids, which is
very similar to that observed in TFAM-knockdown cells in several properties. The 
expression of TFAM protein was not significantly reduced in ClpX-knockdown cells.
However, the enlarged mtDNA nucleoids caused by ClpX-knockdown were suppressed by
overexpression of recombinant TFAM and the phenotype was not observed in
knockdown with ClpP, a protease subunit of ClpXP. Endogenous ClpX and TFAM exist 
in close vicinity, and ClpX enhanced DNA-binding activity of TFAM in vitro. These
results suggest that human ClpX, a novel mtDNA regulator, maintains mtDNA
nucleoid distribution through TFAM function as a chaperone rather than as a
protease and its involvement in mtDNA segregation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22841477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Exp Cell Res. 2012 Oct 15;318(17):2200-14. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2012.07.004. Epub
2012 Jul 16.

The neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NeuroD6 enhances
mitochondrial biogenesis and bioenergetics to confer tolerance of neuronal
PC12-NeuroD6 cells to the mitochondrial stressor rotenone.

Baxter KK(1), Uittenbogaard M, Chiaramello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, George Washington University
Medical Center, Washington, DC 20037, United States.

The fundamental question of how and which neuronal specific transcription factors
tailor mitochondrial biogenesis and bioenergetics to the need of developing
neuronal cells has remained largely unexplored. In this study, we report that the
neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NeuroD6 possesses
mitochondrial biogenic properties by amplifying the mitochondrial DNA content and
TFAM expression levels, a key regulator for mitochondrial biogenesis.
NeuroD6-mediated increase in mitochondrial biogenesis in the neuronal
progenitor-like PC12-NEUROD6 cells is concomitant with enhanced mitochondrial
bioenergetic functions, including increased expression levels of specific
subunits of respiratory complexes of the electron transport chain, elevated
mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP levels produced by oxidative
phosphorylation. Thus, NeuroD6 augments the bioenergetic capacity of PC12-NEUROD6
cells to generate an energetic reserve, which confers tolerance to the
mitochondrial stressor, rotenone. We found that NeuroD6 induces an adaptive
bioenergetic response throughout rotenone treatment involving maintenance of the 
mitochondrial membrane potential and ATP levels in conjunction with preservation 
of the actin network. In conclusion, our results support the concept that NeuroD6
plays an integrative role in regulating and coordinating the onset of neuronal
differentiation with acquisition of adequate mitochondrial mass and energetic
capacity to ensure energy demanding events, such as cytoskeletal remodeling,
plasmalemmal expansion, and growth cone formation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3586193
PMID: 22814253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40572. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040572. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Increases in mitochondrial DNA content and 4977-bp deletion upon ATM/Chk2
checkpoint activation in HeLa cells.

Niu R(1), Yoshida M, Ling F.

Author information: 
(1)Chemical Genetics Laboratory, RIKEN Advanced Science Institute, and CREST,
JST, Wako-shi, Saitama, Japan.

Activation of the Mec1/Rad53 damage checkpoint pathway influences mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) content and point mutagenesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The
effects of this conserved checkpoint pathway on mitochondrial genomes in human
cells remain largely unknown. Here, we report that knockdown of the human DNA
helicase RRM3 enhances phosphorylation of the cell cycle arrest kinase Chk2,
indicating activation of the checkpoint via the ATM/Chk2 pathway, and increases
mtDNA content independently of TFAM, a regulator of mtDNA copy number. Cell-cycle
arrest did not have a consistent effect on mtDNA level: knockdown of cell cycle
regulators PLK1 (polo-like kinase), MCM2, or MCM3 gave rise, respectively, to
decreased, increased, or almost unchanged mtDNA levels. Therefore, we concluded
that the mtDNA content increase upon RRM3 knockdown is not a response to delay of
cell cycle progression. Also, we observed that RRM3 knockdown increased the
levels of reactive oxygen species (ROS); two ROS scavengers, N-acetyl cysteine
and vitamin C, suppressed the mtDNA content increase. On the other hand, in RRM3 
knockdown cells, we detected an increase in the frequency of the common 4977-bp
mtDNA deletion, a major mtDNA deletion that can be induced by abnormal ROS
generation, and is associated with a decline in mitochondrial genome integrity,
aging, and various mtDNA-related disorders in humans. These results suggest that 
increase of the mitochondrial genome by TFAM-independent mtDNA replication is
connected, via oxidative stress, with the ATM/Chk2 checkpoint activation in
response to DNA damage, and is accompanied by generation of the common 4977-bp
deletion.

PMCID: PMC3393681
PMID: 22808196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Sep;30(3):673-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1049. Epub 2012 Jun
29.

Positive effect of curcumin on inflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction in
obese mice with liver steatosis.

Kuo JJ(1), Chang HH, Tsai TH, Lee TY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine, National Yang Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan, R.O.C.

Obesity contributes to the increased risk of liver- related morbidity and
mortality. The accumulation of macrophages in adipose tissue in an inflammatory
state is a hallmark of obesity-induced hepatic steatosis. In this study, we
reveal the role of curcumin in the molecular mechanisms underlying inflammatory
events in a model consisting of obese mice with hepatic steatosis. Obese mice fed
with curcumin experienced significant weight loss and significantly reduced serum
triglyceride (TG) levels. The adipose tumor necrocis factor-a, interleukin-6
(IL-6) and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 levels were significantly higher in
obese mice compared to mice fed with curcumin. Compared to the obese mice,
curcumin decreased the number of F4/80-positive macrophages in epididymal adipose
and liver tissue. The induction of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 3 phosphorylation by curcumin resulted in the downregulation of the
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 in the liver of obese mice. Curcumin decreased
hepatic TG in obese mice by downregulating the gene expression of sterol
regulatory element-binding protein-1c in the liver. The hepatic expression of
several mitochondrial biogenesis genes decreased in the obese mice, including
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial 
transcription factor A (Tfam), which are responsible for the lower mitochondrial 
respiratory chain (MRC) complex I activity and adenosine triphosphate production.
By contrast, obese mice treated with curcumin showed normalized mtDNA, NRF1 and
Tfam gene expression, reduced hepatic nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B activities and levels of 
thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) and restored mitochondrial
oxidative metabolism and biogenesis. The results from the present sudy show that 
curcumin prevents fatty liver disease through multiple mechanisms, and suggest
that curcumin may be used to prevent the development and progression of
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).

PMID: 22751848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8392-405. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Human Cockayne syndrome B protein reciprocally communicates with mitochondrial
proteins and promotes transcriptional elongation.

Berquist BR(1), Canugovi C, Sykora P, Wilson DM 3rd, Bohr VA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare human disorder characterized by pathologies of
premature aging, neurological abnormalities, sensorineural hearing loss and
cachectic dwarfism. With recent data identifying CS proteins as physical
components of mitochondria, we sought to identify protein partners and roles for 
Cockayne syndrome group B (CSB) protein in this organelle. CSB was found to
physically interact with and modulate the DNA-binding activity of the major
mitochondrial nucleoid, DNA replication and transcription protein TFAM.
Components of the mitochondrial transcription apparatus (mitochondrial RNA
polymerase, transcription factor 2B and TFAM) all functionally interacted with
CSB and stimulated its double-stranded DNA-dependent adenosine triphosphatase
activity. Moreover, we found that patient-derived CSB-deficient cells exhibited a
defect in efficient mitochondrial transcript production and that CSB specifically
promoted elongation by the mitochondrial RNA polymerase in vitro. These
observations provide strong evidence for the importance of CSB in maintaining
mitochondrial function and argue that the pathologies associated with CS are in
part, a direct result of the roles that CSB plays in mitochondria.

PMCID: PMC3458532
PMID: 22743267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;748:283-304. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-3573-0_12.

Bigenomic regulation of cytochrome c oxidase in neurons and the tight coupling
between neuronal activity and energy metabolism.

Wong-Riley MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. mwr@mcw.edu

Cytochrome c oxidase is the terminal enzyme of the mitochondrial electron
transport chain, without which oxidative metabolism cannot be carried to
completion. It is one of only four unique, bigenomic proteins in mammalian cells.
The holoenzyme is made up of three mitochondrial-encoded and ten nuclear-encoded 
subunits in a 1:1 stoichiometry. The ten nuclear subunit genes are located in
nine different chromosomes. The coordinated regulation of such a multisubunit,
multichromosomal, bigenomic enzyme poses a challenge. It is especially so for
neurons, whose mitochondria are widely distributed in extensive dendritic and
axonal processes, resulting in the separation of the mitochondrial from the
nuclear genome by great distances. Neuronal activity dictates COX activity that
reflects protein amount, which, in turn, is regulated at the transcriptional
level. All 13 COX transcripts are up- and downregulated by neuronal activity. The
ten nuclear COX transcripts and those for Tfam and Tfbms important for
mitochondrial COX transcripts are transcribed in the same transcription factory. 
Bigenomic regulation of all 13 transcripts is mediated by nuclear respiratory
factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and NRF-2). NRF-1, in addition, also regulates critical
neurochemicals of glutamatergic synaptic transmission, thereby ensuring the tight
coupling of energy metabolism and neuronal activity at the molecular level in
neurons.

PMCID: PMC3710587
PMID: 22729863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Aug 15;303(4):R408-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00085.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

mRNA stability as a function of striated muscle oxidative capacity.

D'souza D(1), Lai RY, Shuen M, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

A change in mRNA stability alters the abundance of mRNA available for translation
and is emerging as a critical pathway influencing gene expression. Variations in 
the stability of functional and regulatory mitochondrial proteins may contribute 
to the divergent mitochondrial densities observed in striated muscle. Thus we
hypothesized that the stability of mRNAs encoding for regulatory nuclear and
mitochondrial transcription factors would be inversely proportional to muscle
oxidative capacity and would be facilitated by the activity of RNA binding
proteins (RBPs). The stability of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam),
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), and
nuclear respiratory factor 2a (NRF-2a) mRNA was assessed in striated muscles with
distinct oxidative capacities using in vitro decay assays. All three
mitochondrial regulators were rapidly degraded in cardiac and slow-twitch red
(STR) muscle, resulting in a ~60-65% lower (P < 0.05) mRNA half-life (t(1/2))
compared with fast-twitch white (FTW) fibers. This accelerated rate of Tfam mRNA 
decay was matched by a 2.5-fold increase in Tfam transcription in slow- compared 
with fast-twitch muscle (P = 0.05). Protein expression of four unique RBPs
[AU-rich binding factor 1 (AUF1), human antigen R (HuR), KH-homology splicing
regulatory protein (KSRP), and CUG binding protein 1 (CUGBP1)] believed to
modulate mRNA stability was elevated in cardiac and STR muscles (P < 0.05) and
was moderately associated with the decay of Tfam, PGC-1a, and NRF-2a mRNA.
Variable rates of transcript degradation were apparent when comparing all
transcripts within the same muscle type. Thus the distribution of RBPs appears to
follow a fiber-type specific pattern and subsequently functions to alter the
stability of specific mitochondrial regulators in a transcript- and
tissue-specific fashion.

PMID: 22718808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Mitochondrion. 2012 Jul;12(4):449-58. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2012.06.002. Epub 2012 
Jun 16.

Recombinant mitochondrial transcription factor A protein inhibits nuclear factor 
of activated T cells signaling and attenuates pathological hypertrophy of cardiac
myocytes.

Fujino T(1), Ide T, Yoshida M, Onitsuka K, Tanaka A, Hata Y, Nishida M, Takehara 
T, Kanemaru T, Kitajima N, Takazaki S, Kurose H, Kang D, Sunagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) attenuates the 
decrease in mtDNA copy number after myocardial infarction, ameliorates
pathological hypertrophy, and markedly improves survival. However, non-transgenic
strategy to increase mtDNA for the treatment of pathological hypertrophy remains 
unknown. We produced recombinant human TFAM protein (rhTFAM). rhTFAM rapidly
entered into mitochondria of cultured cardiac myocytes. rhTFAM increased mtDNA
and abolished the activation of nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT), which
is well known to activate pathological hypertrophy. rhTFAM attenuated subsequent 
morphological hypertrophy of myocytes as well. rhTFAM would be an attractive
molecule in attenuating cardiac pathological hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 22709542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Mol Neurosci. 2013 Feb;49(2):262-9. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9837-y. Epub 2012
Jun 17.

Inhibition of phosphorylation of JNK suppresses Aß-induced ER stress and
upregulates prosurvival mitochondrial proteins in rat hippocampus.

Yenki P(1), Khodagholi F, Shaerzadeh F.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

A growing body of evidence indicates that c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNKs) is
activated in Alzheimer's disease. Herein, we examine the effect of the JNK
specific inhibitor, SP600125, on the level of functional proteins or
transcription factors related to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and oxidative stress 
induced by amyloid beta (Aß). Our results clearly showed the ability of SP600125 
to decrease the levels of caspase 12 and calpain 2, two important enzymes
involved in ER stress. Aß has been suggested to be able to decrease the
phosphorylation level of cAMP response element-binding (CREB) through
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway. We observed that JNK inhibition in
Aß-injected rats can restore the activation of CREB through increasing its
phosphorylation level. This effect may explain the increase observed in c-fos
level, as a CREB downstream factor under JNK inhibition in Aß-injected rats.
Following Aß injection, the levels of pro-survival mitochondrial proteins
including nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma co-activator 1-alpha, and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) significantly decreased, which could be returned to control level with JNK
inhibition. We suggest that the elevation in the level of PGC1-alpha and other
mitochondrial proteins is the result of an increase in CREB activation as the
upstream factor of PGC1-alpha. Also, we observed that pretreatment with SP600125 
leads to a greater increase of nuclear related factor-2 (Nrf2) level compared
with the Aß-injected group. Nrf2 has been shown to bind to CREB-binding factor
leading to their contribution in Nrf2 target genes expression. Besides, NRF-1 and
TFAM are reported as Nrf2 targets. Based on our data, we can conclude that JNK
carry out partial destructive effects of Aß in rat brain.

PMID: 22706709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2012 Sep 1;303(5):C540-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00156.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Contractile activity-induced mitochondrial biogenesis and mTORC1.

Carter HN(1), Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Health Rsearch Centre, School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York
Univ., Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3, Canada.

In response to exercise training, or chronic contractile activity, mitochondrial 
content is known to be enriched within skeletal muscle. However, the molecular
mechanisms that mediate this adaptation are incompletely defined. Recently, the
protein complex, mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1), has been
identified to facilitate the expression of nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial
proteins (NUGEMPs) in resting muscle cells via the interaction of the mTORC1
components, mTOR and raptor, the transcription factor Yin Yang 1, and peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a. It is currently unknown if this
mechanism is operative during the increase in mitochondrial content that occurs
within skeletal muscle with chronic contractile activity (CCA). Thus we employed 
a cell culture model of murine skeletal muscle and subjected the myotubes to CCA 
for 3 h per day for 4 consecutive days in the presence or absence of the mTORC1
inhibitor rapamycin. CCA produced increases in the mitochondrial markers
cytochrome oxidase (COX) IV (2.5-fold), Tfam (1.5-fold), and COX activity
(1.6-fold). Rapamycin-mediated inhibition of mTORC1 did not suppress these
CCA-induced increases in mitochondrial proteins and organelle content. mTORC1
inhibition alone produced a selective upregulation of mitochondrial proteins (COX
IV, Tfam), but diminished organelle state 3 respiration. CCA restored this
impairment to normal. Our results suggest that mTORC1 activity is not integral
for the increase in mitochondrial content elicited by CCA, but is required to
maintain mitochondrial function and homeostasis in resting muscle.

PMID: 22700793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Sep;30(3):643-9. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1020. Epub 2012 Jun
11.

Curcumin ameliorates mitochondrial dysfunction associated with inhibition of
gluconeogenesis in free fatty acid-mediated hepatic lipoapoptosis.

Kuo JJ(1), Chang HH, Tsai TH, Lee TY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Medicine, National Yang Ming University, Taipei,
Taiwan, R.O.C.

Insulin resistance occurs in almost all patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD), and mitochondrial dysfunction likely plays a pivotal role in the
progression of fatty liver into non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Curcumin is
a compound derived from the spice turmeric, a spice that is a potent antioxidant,
anti-carcinogenic, and anti-hepatotoxic agent. The aim of this study was to
analyze the ability of curcumin to protect against the mitochondrial impairment
induced by high free fatty acids (HFFAs) and to determine the underlying
mechanism for this cytoprotection. Curcumin treatment inhibited the
lipoapoptosis, ROS production and ATP depletion elicited by HFFA in primary
hepatocytes. We demonstrate that curcumin effectively suppressed HFFA-induced
production of phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and
glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) in hepatocytes. Not only did curcumin treatment
increase mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number in hepatocytes, but it also
increased levels of transcriptional factors that regulate mitochondrial
biogenesis, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a
(PGC1a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam). In addition, curcumin contributed to cell survival, as indicated
by the restoration of the mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and the
inhibition of the mitochondrial biogenesis induced by HFFA. Furthermore, this
cytoprotection resulted from curcumin-mediated downregulation of the NF-<U+03BA>B p65
subunit, thereby inhibiting lipoapoptosis. Together, these data suggest that
curcumin protects hepatocytes from HFFA-induced lipoapoptosis and mitochondrial
dysfunction, which partially occurs through the regulation of mitochondrial
biogenesis.

PMID: 22692588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;44(9):1390-7. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.05.022. Epub 2012 Jun 9.

TNFa affects energy metabolism and stimulates biogenesis of mitochondria in
EA.hy926 endothelial cells.

Drabarek B(1), Dymkowska D, Szczepanowska J, Zablocki K.

Author information: 
(1)Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology PAS, Warsaw, Poland.

Mitochondrial response of EA.hy926 endothelial cells to tumour necrosis factor
alpha (TNFa) was investigated. It was confirmed that TNFa stimulates reactive
oxygen species (ROS) generation and increases intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1) level. These changes were paralleled by elevated oxygen consumption,
slightly raised total mitochondrial mass and increased manganese superoxide
dismutase (Mn-SOD) and uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) content. They also correlated 
with a rise of mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (TFAM), nuclear respiratory
factor-1 (NRF-1) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator
(PGC)-1a, which are involved in regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and an
elevated level of selected respiratory chain proteins. Thus, the apparent
stimulatory effect of TNFa on mitochondrial metabolism probably reflects an
increased amount of mitochondria rather than activation of biochemical processes 
per se, although the latter cannot be excluded definitely. These observations are
similar to those described for cardiac muscle cells challenged with bacterial
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), in which mitochondrial biogenesis was postulated.
Stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis could be a mechanism activated to prevent
TNFa-induced cell death.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22687752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. BMC Gastroenterol. 2012 Jun 11;12:68. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-12-68.

Mitochondrial uncouplers inhibit hepatic stellate cell activation.

Guimarães EL(1), Best J, Dollé L, Najimi M, Sokal E, van Grunsven LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Liver Cell Biology Lab, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Laarbeeklaan 103, Brussels 1090, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial dysfunction participates in the progression of several 
pathologies. Although there is increasing evidence for a mitochondrial role in
liver disease, little is known about its contribution to hepatic stellate cell
(HSC) activation. In this study we investigated the role of mitochondrial
activity through mild uncoupling during in vitro activation of HSCs.
METHODS: Cultured primary human and mouse HSCs were treated with the chemical
uncouplers FCCP and Valinomycin. ATP levels were measured by luciferase assay and
production of reactive oxygen species was determined using the fluorescent probe 
DCFH-DA. Possible cytotoxicity by uncoupler treatment was evaluated by caspase
3/7 activity and cytoplasmic protease leakage. Activation of HSCs and their
response to the pro-fibrogenic cytokine TGF-ß was evaluated by gene expression of
activation markers and signal mediators using RT-qPCR. Proliferation was measured
by incorporation of EdU and protein expression of a-smooth muscle actin was
analyzed by immunocytochemistry and western blot.
RESULTS: FCCP and Valinomycin treatment mildly decreased ATP and reactive oxygen 
species levels. Both uncouplers increased the expression of mitochondrial genes
such as Tfam and COXIV while inducing morphological features of quiescent mouse
HSCs and abrogating TGF-ß signal transduction. Mild uncoupling reduced HSC
proliferation and expression of pro-fibrogenic markers of mouse and human HSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Mild mitochondrial uncoupling inhibits culture-induced HSC
activation and their response to pro-fibrogenic cytokines like TGF-ß. These
results therefore suggest mitochondrial uncoupling of HSCs as a strategy to
reduce progression of liver fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3439697
PMID: 22686625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Toxicology. 2012 Oct 9;300(1-2):67-74. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.05.026. Epub 2012 
Jun 5.

Sulfur dioxide inhalation stimulated mitochondrial biogenesis in rat brains.

Qin G(1), Wang J, Huo Y, Yan H, Jiang C, Zhou J, Wang X, Sang N.

Author information: 
(1)The College of Environmental Science and Resources, Shanxi University,
Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China.

Sulfur dioxide (SO(2)) is a common environmental pollutant. Mitochondria play
essential roles in energy metabolism, generation of reactive oxygen species, and 
regulation of apoptosis in response to neuronal brain injury. It is of interest
to observe the effect of SO(2) on mitochondrial function in brain. In the present
study, male Wistar rats were housed in exposure chambers and treated with 3.5, 7 
and 14mg/m(3) SO(2) for 4h/day for 30days, while control rats were exposed to
filtered air in the same condition. Mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) was
assessed in cerebral mitochondria using the lipophilic cationic probe JC-1. The
amount of ATP was measured by the luciferinluciferase method. Analyses of
mitochondrial replication and transcription were performed by real time PCR. The 
protein levels were detected using Western blotting. Our results showed that
cerebral mtDNA content was markedly increased in rats after SO(2) exposure.
Paralleling the change in mtDNA content, MMP, ATP content, MDA level, CO1 & 4 and
ATP6 & 8 expression, and cytochrome c oxidase activity were increased in rat
cortex after SO(2) inhalation. Moreover, mitochondrial biogenesis was accompanied
by increased expression of NRF1 and TFAM, whereas PGC-1a was not changed. We
report for the first time increased mitochondrial biogenesis in brain of rats
exposed to SO(2), which might be an adaptive response to mitochondrial depletion 
by oxidant damage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22677886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;189(1):433-43. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101375. Epub 2012 Jun
6.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A serves as a danger signal by augmenting
plasmacytoid dendritic cell responses to DNA.

Julian MW(1), Shao G, Bao S, Knoell DL, Papenfuss TL, VanGundy ZC, Crouser ED.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Dorothy M. 
Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are potent APCs known to regulate immune
responses to self-Ags, particularly DNA. The mitochondrial fraction of necrotic
cells was found to most potently promote human pDC activation, as reflected by
type I IFN release, which was dependent upon the presence of mitochondrial DNA
and involved TLR9 and receptors for advanced glycation end products.
Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a highly abundant mitochondrial
protein that is functionally and structurally homologous to high mobility group
box protein 1, was observed to synergize with CpG-containing oligonucleotide,
type A, DNA to promote human pDC activation. pDC type I IFN responses to TFAM and
CpG-containing oligonucleotide, type A, DNA indicated their engagement with
receptors for advanced glycation end products and TLR9, respectively, and were
dependent upon endosomal processing and PI3K, ERK, and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Taken
together, these results indicate that pDC contribute to sterile immune responses 
by recognizing the mitochondrial component of necrotic cells and further
incriminate TFAM and mitochondrial DNA as likely mediators of pDC activation
under these circumstances.

PMCID: PMC3381894
PMID: 22675199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jan;24(1):6-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2011.12.008. Epub
2012 May 30.

Maternal high-fat intake during pregnancy programs metabolic-syndrome-related
phenotypes through liver mitochondrial DNA copy number and transcriptional
activity of liver PPARGC1A.

Burgueño AL(1), Cabrerizo R, Gonzales Mansilla N, Sookoian S, Pirola CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biology of Complex Diseases, Institute of
Medical Research A. Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National-Council of
Scientific and Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos
Aires-1427, Argentina.

In this study, we contrasted the hypothesis that maternal diet during pregnancy
has an impact on fetal metabolic programming through changes in liver
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content and transcriptional activity of Ppargc1a and
that these effects are sex specific.METHODS: Rats were fed either high-fat (HFD) 
or standard chow diet (SCD) during gestation and lactation. The resulting adult
male and female offspring were fed either HFD or SCD for an 18-week period,
generating eight experimental groups.
RESULTS: Maternal HFD feeding during pregnancy is associated with a decreased
liver mtDNA copy number (P<.008). This effect was independent of the offspring
sex or diet, and was significantly associated with fatty liver when dams were fed
HFD (P<.05, adjusted by homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance,
HOMA-IR). We also found that maternal HFD feeding results in a male-specific
significant reduction of the liver abundance of Ppargc1a mRNA (P<.004), which
significantly impacted peripheral insulin resistance. Liver expression of
Ppargc1a was inversely correlated with HOMA-IR (R=-0.53, P<.0003). Only male
offspring exposed to a chronic metabolic insult in adult life were insulin
resistant and hyperleptinemic, and showed abnormal liver and abdominal fat
accumulation. Liver abundance of Tfam, Nrf1, Hnf4a, Pepck and Ppparg mRNA was not
associated with maternal programming. In conclusion, maternal high-fat diet
feeding during pregnancy programs liver mtDNA content and the transcriptional
activity of Ppargc1a, which strongly modulates, in a sex-specific manner, glucose
homeostasis and organ fat accumulation in adult life after exposure to a
nutritional insult.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22658649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2012;2012:835970. doi: 10.1155/2012/835970. Epub 2012 May
9.

A combination of lipoic acid plus coenzyme Q10 induces PGC1a, a master switch of 
energy metabolism, improves stress response, and increases cellular glutathione
levels in cultured C2C12 skeletal muscle cells.

Wagner AE(1), Ernst IM, Birringer M, Sancak O, Barella L, Rimbach G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, Christian Albrechts University,
Hermann-Rodewald-Straße 6, 24118 Kiel, Germany.

Skeletal muscle function largely depend on intact energy metabolism, stress
response, and antioxidant defense mechanisms. In this study, we tested the effect
of a combined supplementation of a-lipoic acid (LA) plus coenzyme Q10 (Q10) on
PPAR<U+03B3>-coactivator a (PGC1a) activity, expression of glutathione-related phase II 
enzymes and glutathione (GSH) levels in cultured C2C12 myotubes. Supplementation 
of myotubes with 250<U+2009>µmol/L LA plus 100<U+2009>µmol/L Q10 significantly increased
nuclear levels of PGC1a, a master switch of energy metabolism and mitochondrial
biogenesis. The increase of nuclear PGC1a was accompanied by an increase in PPAR<U+03B3>
transactivation, a downstream target of PGC1a, and an increase in mitochondrial
transcription factor A mRNA centrally involved in mitochondrial replication and
transcription. Furthermore, supplementation of myotubes with LA plus Q10 resulted
in an increase of genes encoding proteins involved in stress response, GSH
synthesis, and its recycling. In LA-plus-Q10-treated myotubes a significant
4-fold increase in GSH was evident. This increase in GSH was accompanied by
increased nuclear Nrf2 protein levels, partly regulating <U+03B3>GCS and GST gene
expression. Present data suggest that the combined supplementation of skeletal
muscle cells with LA plus Q10 may improve energy homeostasis, stress response,
and antioxidant defense mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3357652
PMID: 22655115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Reproduction. 2012 Aug;144(2):177-85. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0113. Epub 2012 May 28.

Regulation of mitochondrial DNA accumulation during oocyte growth and meiotic
maturation in the mouse.

Mahrous E(1), Yang Q, Clarke HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for the Study of Reproduction, McGill
University, Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montréal, 
Quebec, Canada.

Oocytes accumulate an enormous quantity of mitochondrial (mt) DNA, and an
insufficient amount of mtDNA may underlie some cases of poor oocyte quality
leading to infertility. Little is known, however, about the mechanisms that
govern the timing and regulation of mtDNA accumulation during oogenesis. We
report, through analysis of the mtDNA content of individual oocytes of the mouse,
that mtDNA accumulates steadily during oocyte growth to reach a value of ~175<U+200A>000
copies per cell. MtDNA content ceases to increase once oocytes reach full size
and remains unchanged during meiotic maturation. To test whether mtDNA
accumulation depends on oocyte growth, we inhibited growth in vitro in two ways -
by exposing complexes comprising partially grown oocytes enclosed by granulosa
cells to a chemical inhibitor of the phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase signaling
pathway and by removing the surrounding granulosa cells from partially grown
oocytes. Under both conditions, the oocytes fail to grow, but mtDNA accumulation 
is unaffected, indicating that the two processes can be mechanistically
uncoupled. Quantitative analysis of the mRNAs encoding proteins required for
mtDNA replication revealed that Polg (Polga) (polymerase-<U+03B3>, a-subunit), Polg2
(Polgb), and Tfam (transcription factor A, mitochondrial) increase during oocyte 
growth but then decrease after fully grown oocytes become transcriptionally
silent as indicated by the non-surrounded nucleolus-to-surrounded nucleolus
transition. Thus, there is a correlation between the decline in the quantity of
mRNAs encoding mtDNA replication factors in fully grown oocytes and the arrest of
mtDNA accumulation in these cells, suggesting that the two events may be causally
linked.

PMID: 22641769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Physiol Biochem. 2012 Dec;68(4):593-601. doi: 10.1007/s13105-012-0178-7. Epub
2012 May 25.

Three weeks of erythropoietin treatment hampers skeletal muscle mitochondrial
biogenesis in rats.

Martinez-Bello VE(1), Sanchis-Gomar F, Romagnoli M, Derbre F, Gomez-Cabrera MC,
Viña J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, Fundacion Investigacion
Hospital Clinico Universitario/INCLIVA, Valencia, Spain.

The blood O(2)-carrying capacity is maintained by the O(2)-regulated production
of erythropoietin (Epo), which stimulates the proliferation and survival of red
blood cell progenitors. Epo has been thought to act exclusively on erythroid
progenitor cells. However, recent studies have identified the erythropoietin
receptor (EpoR) in other cells, such as neurons, astrocytes, microglia, heart,
cancer cell lines, and skeletal muscle provides evidence for a potential role of 
Epo in other tissues. In this study we aimed to determine the effect of
recombinant human erythropoietin (rHuEpo) on skeletal muscle adaptations such as 
mitochondrial biogenesis, myogenesis, and angiogenesis in different muscle fibre 
types. Fourteen male Wistar rats were randomly divided into two experimental
groups, and saline or rHuEpo (300 IU) was administered subcutaneously three times
a week for 3 weeks. We evaluated the protein expression of intermediates involved
in the mitochondrial biogenesis cascade, the myogenic cascade, and in
angiogenesis in the oxidative soleus muscle and in the glycolytic gastrocnemius
muscle. Contrary to our expectations, rHuEpo significantly hampered the
mitochondrial biogenesis pathway in gastrocnemius muscle (PGC-1a, mTFA and
cytochrome c). We did not find any effect of the treatment on cellular signals of
myogenesis (MyoD and Myf5) or angiogenesis (VEGF) in either soleus or
gastrocnemius muscles. Finally, we found no significant effect on the maximal
aerobic velocity at the end of the experiment in the rHuEpo-treated animals. Our 
findings suggest that 3 weeks of rHuEpo treatment, which generates an increase of
oxygen carrying capacity, can affect mitochondrial biogenesis in a muscle
fibre-specific dependent manner.

PMID: 22627788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cell Death Dis. 2012 May 24;3:e312. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2012.46.

Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis contributes to depletion of functional
mitochondria in chronic MPP+ toxicity: dual roles for ERK1/2.

Zhu JH(1), Gusdon AM, Cimen H, Van Houten B, Koc E, Chu CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, University of Pittsburgh 
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

The regulation of mitochondrial quality has emerged as a central issue in
neurodegeneration, diabetes, and cancer. We utilized repeated low-dose
applications of the complex I inhibitor 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium (MPP(+)) over
2 weeks to study cellular responses to chronic mitochondrial stress. Chronic
MPP(+) triggered depletion of functional mitochondria resulting in diminished
capacities for aerobic respiration. Inhibiting autophagy/mitophagy only partially
restored mitochondrial content. In contrast, inhibiting activation of
extracellular signal-regulated protein kinases conferred complete cytoprotection 
with full restoration of mitochondrial functional and morphological parameters,
enhancing spare respiratory capacity in MPP(+) co-treated cells above that of
control cells. Reversal of mitochondrial injury occurred when U0126 was added 1
week after MPP(+), implicating enhanced repair mechanisms. Chronic MPP(+) caused 
a >90% decrease in complex I subunits, along with decreases in complex III and IV
subunits. Decreases in respiratory complex subunits were reversed by co-treatment
with U0126, ERK1/2 RNAi or transfection of dominant-negative MEK1, but only
partially restored by degradation inhibitors. Chronic MPP(+) also suppressed the 
de novo synthesis of mitochondrial DNA-encoded proteins, accompanied by decreased
expression of the mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM. U0126 completely
reversed each of these deficits in mitochondrial translation and protein
expression. These data indicate a key, limiting role for mitochondrial biogenesis
in determining the outcome of injuries associated with elevated mitophagy.

PMCID: PMC3366080
PMID: 22622131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Exp Physiol. 2013 Jan;98(1):207-19. doi: 10.1113/expphysiol.2012.066688. Epub
2012 May 21.

Effect of exercise on mouse liver and brain bioenergetic infrastructures.

E L(1), Lu J, Burns JM, Swerdlow RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

To assess the effects of exercise on liver and brain bioenergetic
infrastructures, we exposed C57BL/6 mice to 6 weeks of moderate-intensity
treadmill exercise. During the training period, fasting blood glucose was lower
in exercised mice than in sedentary mice, but serum insulin levels were not
reduced. At week 6, trained mice showed a paradoxical decrease in plasma lactate 
during exercise, which was accompanied by an increase in the liver
monocarboxylate transporter 2 protein level (~30%, P < 0.05). Exercise increased 
liver peroxisomal proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a expression
(approximately twofold, P < 0.001), NAD-dependent deacetylase sirtuin-1 protein
(~30%, P < 0.05), p38 protein (~15%, P < 0.05), cytochrome c oxidase subunit 4
isoform 1 protein (~50%, P < 0.05) and AMP-activated protein kinase
phosphorylation (~40%, P < 0.05). Despite this, liver mitochondrial DNA copy
number (~30%, P = 0.05), mitochondrial transcription factor A expression (~15%,
P < 0.05), cytochrome c oxidase subunit 2 expression (~10%, P < 0.05),
cAMP-response element binding protein phosphorylation (~60%, P < 0.05) and
brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression (~40%, P < 0.05) were all reduced,
while cytochrome oxidase and citrate synthase activities were unchanged. The only
altered brain parameter observed was a reduction in tumour necrosis factor a
expression (~35%, P < 0.05); tumour necrosis factor a expression was unchanged in
liver. Our data suggest that lactate produced by exercising muscle modifies the
liver bioenergetic infrastructure, and enhanced liver uptake may in turn limit
the ability of exercise-generated lactate to modify brain bioenergetics. Also, it
appears that, at least in the liver, a dissociated mitochondrial biogenesis, in
which some components are strategically enhanced while others are minimized, can 
occur.

PMCID: PMC3540163
PMID: 22613742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jul 1;53(1):30-43. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.03.015. Epub 2012 Apr 25.

Mitochondrial dysfunction accounts for aldosterone-induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition of renal proximal tubular epithelial cells.

Yuan Y(1), Chen Y, Zhang P, Huang S, Zhu C, Ding G, Liu B, Yang T, Zhang A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing 210029, China.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis 
of renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis. We previously demonstrated that aldosterone
(Aldo)-induced EMT is dependent on mitochondrial-derived oxidative stress. This
study investigated whether mitochondrial dysfunction (MtD) is involved in the
pathogenesis of EMT and whether peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), a major regulator of oxidative metabolism and
mitochondrial function, prevents EMT by improving MtD. Aldo decreased PGC-1a
expression while increasing its acetylation and induced MtD, as evidenced by
oxidative stress, mitochondrial membrane potential collapse, mitochondrial DNA
damage, and mitochondrial complex activity reduction. Aldo time-dependently
induced p66Shc phosphorylation and expression. Mineralocorticoid receptor
antagonist eplerenone and p66Shc short interfering RNA prevented Aldo-induced MtD
and EMT, as evidenced by downregulation of a-smooth muscle actin and upregulation
of E-cadherin. Mitochondrial DNA depletion by ethidium bromide or mitochondrial
transcription factor A inhibitory RNA (RNAi) induced MtD, further promoting EMT. 
RNAi-mediated suppression of PGC-1a induced MtD and EMT, whereas overexpression
of PGC-1a prevented Aldo-induced MtD and inhibited EMT. Similarly, overexpression
of silent mating type information regulation 2 homolog 1 (SIRT1), a gene upstream
of PGC-1a, or the SIRT1 activator resveratrol restored Aldo-induced MtD and EMT
by upregulating PGC-1a. These findings, which implicate a role for MtD in EMT and
suggest that SIRT1 and PGC-1a coordinate to improve mitochondrial function and
EMT, may guide us in therapeutic strategies for renal tubulointerstitial
fibrosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22608985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Br J Pharmacol. 2012 Oct;167(3):641-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.02026.x.

Protective effects of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor agonists on
human podocytes: proposed mechanisms of action.

Miglio G(1), Rosa AC, Rattazzi L, Grange C, Camussi G, Fantozzi R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienza e Tecnologia del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di
Torino, Turin, Italy. gianluca.miglio@unito.it

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)
agonists exert anti-albuminuric effects. However, the nephroprotective effects of
these drugs remain to be fully understood. We have investigated whether
gemfibrozil, GW0742 and pioglitazone protect human podocytes against nutrient
deprivation (ND)-induced cell death and the role of mitochondrial biogenesis as a
cytoprotective process.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Immortalized human podocytes were pre-treated with the
PPAR agonists and exposed to ND (5 h) under normoxia, hypoxia or in the presence 
of pyruvate. Cell death was measured at the end of the ND and of the recovery
phase (24 h). Mitochondrial mass, cytochrome c oxidase (COX) subunits 1 and 4
were measured as markers of mitochondrial cell content, while membrane potential 
as an index of mitochondrial function. PGC-1a, NRF1 and Tfam expression was
studied, as crucial regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis.
KEY RESULTS: Cell pre-treatment with gemfibrozil, GW0742, or pioglitazone
significantly decreased the ND-induced cell loss, necrosis and apoptosis. These
effects were attenuated by hypoxia and potentiated by pyruvate. Pre-treatment
with these drugs significantly increased mitochondrial cell content, while it did
not affect mitochondrial function. In all these experiments pioglitazone exerted 
significantly larger effects than gemfibrozil or GW0742.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Gemfibrozil, GW0742 and pioglitazone may exert
direct protective effects on human podocytes. Mitochondrial biogenesis is a cell 
response to the PPAR agonists related to their cytoprotective activity. These
results provide a mechanistic support to the clinical evidence indicating PPAR
agonists as disease-modifying agents for glomerular diseases.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3449267
PMID: 22594945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3474-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds178. Epub 2012 May 
15.

Transducer of regulated CREB-binding proteins (TORCs) transcription and function 
is impaired in Huntington's disease.

Chaturvedi RK(1), Hennessey T, Johri A, Tiwari SK, Mishra D, Agarwal S, Kim YS,
Beal MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, NY 10065, USA.
rajnish@iitr.res.in

Huntington's disease (HD) is an incurable neurological disorder caused by an
abnormal glutamine repeat expansion in the huntingtin (Htt) protein. In the
present studies, we investigated the role of Transducers of Regulated cAMP
response element-binding (CREB) protein activity (TORCs) in HD, since TORCs play 
an important role in the expression of the transcriptional co-regulator
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), whose
expression is impaired in HD. We found significantly decreased TORC1 expression
levels in STHdhQ111 cells expressing mutant Htt, in the striatum of NLS-N171-82Q,
R6/2 and HdhQ111 HD transgenic mice and in postmortem striatal tissue from HD
patients. TORC1 overexpression in wild-type (WT) and Htt striatal cells increased
CREB mRNA and protein levels, PGC-1a promoter activity, mRNA expression of the
PGC-1a, NRF-1, Tfam and CytC genes, mitochondrial DNA content, mitochondrial
activity and mitochondrial membrane potential. TORC1 overexpression also
increased the resistance of striatal cells to 3-nitropropionic (3-NP)
acid-mediated toxicity. In cultured WT and mutant Htt striatal cells, small
hairpin RNA-mediated TORC1 knockdown resulted in decreased PGC-1a expression and 
increased susceptibility to 3-NP-induced toxicity. Overexpression of PGC-1a
partially prevented TORC1 knockdown-mediated increased susceptibility of Htt
striatal cells to 3-NP. Specific knockdown of TORC1 in the striatum of
NLS-N171-82Q HD transgenic mice induced neurodegeneration. Lastly, knockdown of
Htt prevents transcriptional repression of TORC1 and CREB in Htt striatal cells. 
These findings show that impaired expression and function of TORC1, which results
in a reduction in PGC-1a, plays an important role in mitochondrial dysfunction in
HD.

PMCID: PMC3491961
PMID: 22589249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Biogerontology. 2012 Aug;13(4):399-411. doi: 10.1007/s10522-012-9384-5. Epub 2012
May 13.

Effects of aging and methionine restriction applied at old age on ROS generation 
and oxidative damage in rat liver mitochondria.

Sanchez-Roman I(1), Gómez A, Pérez I, Sanchez C, Suarez H, Naudí A, Jové M,
Lopez-Torres M, Pamplona R, Barja G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology-II, Faculty of Biological Sciences,
Complutense University of Madrid (UCM), c/Jose Antonio Novais 2, Madrid, Spain.

It is known that a global decrease in food ingestion (dietary restriction, DR)
lowers mitochondrial ROS generation (mitROS) and oxidative stress in young
immature rats. This seems to be caused by the decreased methionine ingestion of
DR animals. This is interesting since isocaloric methionine restriction in the
diet (MetR) also increases, like DR, rodent maximum longevity. However, it is not
known if old rats maintain the capacity to lower mitROS generation and oxidative 
stress in response to MetR similarly to young immature animals, and whether MetR 
implemented at old age can reverse aging-related variations in oxidative stress. 
In this investigation the effects of aging and 7 weeks of MetR were investigated 
in liver mitochondria of Wistar rats. MetR implemented at old age decreased
mitROS generation, percent free radical leak at the respiratory chain and mtDNA
oxidative damage without changing oxygen consumption. Protein oxidation,
lipoxidation and glycoxidation increased with age, and MetR in old rats partially
or totally reversed these age-related increases. Aging increased the amount of
SIRT1, and MetR decreased SIRT1 and TFAM and increased complex IV. No changes
were observed in the protein amounts of PGC1, Nrf2, MnSOD, AIF, complexes I, II
and III, and in the extent of genomic DNA methylation. In conclusion, treating
old rats with isocaloric short-term MetR lowers mitROS production and free
radical leak and oxidative damage to mtDNA, and reverses aging-related increases 
in protein modification. Aged rats maintain the capacity to lower mitochondrial
ROS generation and oxidative stress in response to a short-term exposure to
restriction of a single dietary substance: methionine.

PMID: 22580750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Jul 15;53(2):237-48. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.04.002. Epub 2012 May 11.

Human AP endonuclease/redox factor APE1/ref-1 modulates mitochondrial function
after oxidative stress by regulating the transcriptional activity of NRF1.

Li M(1), Vascotto C, Xu S, Dai N, Qing Y, Zhong Z, Tell G, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Research Institute of Surgery,
Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400042, People's
Republic of China.

Maintenance of mitochondrial functionality largely depends on nuclear
transcription because most mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the nuclear
genome and transported to the mitochondria. Nuclear respiration factor 1 (NRF1)
plays a crucial role in regulating the expression of a broad range of
mitochondrial genes in the nucleus in response to cellular oxidative stress.
However, little is known about the redox regulatory mechanism of the
transcriptional activity of NRF1. In this study, we show that the human
apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease/redox factor (APE1/Ref-1) is involved in
mitochondrial function regulation by modulating the DNA-binding activity of NRF1.
Our results show that both APE1 expression level and its redox activity are
essential for maintenance of the mitochondrial function after
tert-butylhydroperoxide-induced oxidative stress. Upon knocking down or redox
mutation of APE1, NRF1 DNA-binding activity was impaired and, consequently, the
expression of its downstream genes, including Tfam, Cox6c, and Tomm22, was
significantly reduced. NRF1 knockdown blocked the restoration of mitochondrial
function by APE1 overexpression, which further suggests APE1 regulates
mitochondrial function through an NRF1-dependent pathway. Taken together, our
results reveal APE1 as a new coactivator of NRF1, which highlights an additional 
regulatory role of APE1 in maintenance of mitochondrial functionality.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22580151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Jul 15;303(2):R127-34. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00337.2011. Epub 2012 May 9.

Age-associated declines in mitochondrial biogenesis and protein quality control
factors are minimized by exercise training.

Koltai E(1), Hart N, Taylor AW, Goto S, Ngo JK, Davies KJ, Radak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Sport Science, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

A decline in mitochondrial biogenesis and mitochondrial protein quality control
in skeletal muscle is a common finding in aging, but exercise training has been
suggested as a possible cure. In this report, we tested the hypothesis that
moderate-intensity exercise training could prevent the age-associated
deterioration in mitochondrial biogenesis in the gastrocnemius muscle of Wistar
rats. Exercise training, consisting of treadmill running at 60% of the initial
Vo(2max), reversed or attenuated significant age-associated (detrimental)
declines in mitochondrial mass (succinate dehydrogenase, citrate synthase,
cytochrome-c oxidase-4, mtDNA), SIRT1 activity, AMPK, pAMPK, and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1-a, UCP3, and the Lon
protease. Exercise training also decreased the gap between young and old animals 
in other measured parameters, including nuclear respiratory factor 1,
mitochondrial transcription factor A, fission-1, mitofusin-1, and polynucleotide 
phosphorylase levels. We conclude that exercise training can help minimize
detrimental skeletal muscle aging deficits by improving mitochondrial protein
quality control and biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3404634
PMID: 22573103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2013 Jul;65(5):549-57. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2012.04.001. Epub
2012 Apr 28.

Responses of brown adipose tissue to diet-induced obesity, exercise, dietary
restriction and ephedrine treatment.

Slocum N(1), Durrant JR, Bailey D, Yoon L, Jordan H, Barton J, Brown RH, Clifton 
L, Milliken T, Harrington W, Kimbrough C, Faber CA, Cariello N, Elangbam CS.

Author information: 
(1)Safety Assessment, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398,
USA.

Drug-induced weight loss in humans has been associated with undesirable side
effects not present in weight loss from lifestyle interventions (caloric
restriction or exercise). To investigate the mechanistic differences of weight
loss by drug-induced and lifestyle interventions, we examined the gene expression
(mRNA) in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and conducted histopathologic assessments in
diet-induced obese (DIO) mice given ephedrine (18 mg/kg/day orally), treadmill
exercise (10 m/min, 1-h/day), and dietary restriction (DR: 26% dietary
restriction) for 7 days. Exercise and DR mice lost more body weight than controls
and both ephedrine and exercise reduced percent body fat. All treatments reduced 
BAT and liver lipid accumulation (i.e., cytoplasmic lipids in brown adipocytes
and hepatocytes) and increased oxygen consumption (VO2 ml/kg/h) compared with
controls. Mitochondrial biogenesis/function-related genes (TFAM, NRF1 and GABPA) 
were up-regulated in the BAT of all groups. UCP-1 was up-regulated in exercise
and ephedrine groups, whereas MFSD2A was up-regulated in ephedrine and DR groups.
PGC-1a up-regulation was observed in exercise and DR groups but not in ephedrine 
group. In all experimental groups, except for ephedrine, fatty acid transport and
metabolism genes were up-regulated, but the magnitude of change was higher in the
DR group. PRKAA1 was up-regulated in all groups but not significantly in the
ephedrine group. ADRß3 was slightly up-regulated in the DR group only, whereas
ESRRA remained unchanged in all groups. Although our data suggest a common
pathway of BAT activation elicited by ephedrine treatment, exercise or DR, mRNA
changes were indicative of additional nutrient-sensing pathways in exercise and
DR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22542811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Rejuvenation Res. 2012 Apr;15(2):136-9. doi: 10.1089/rej.2011.1255.

Acetyl-L-carnitine activates the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivators PGC-1a/PGC-1ß-dependent signaling cascade of mitochondrial
biogenesis and decreases the oxidized peroxiredoxins content in old rat liver.

Pesce V(1), Nicassio L, Fracasso F, Musicco C, Cantatore P, Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology E. Quagliariello, University 
of Bari, Bari, Italy. v.pesce@biologia.uniba.it

The behavior of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivators
PGC-1a/PGC-ß-dependent mitochondrial biogenesis signaling pathway, as well as the
level of some antioxidant enzymes and proteins involved in mitochondrial dynamics
in the liver of old rats before and after 2 months of acetyl-L-carnitine (ALCAR) 
supplementation, was tested. The results reveal that ALCAR treatment is able to
reverse the age-associated decline of PGC-1a, PGC-1ß, nuclear respiratory factor 
1 (NRF-1), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NADH) dehydrogenase subunit 1 (ND1), and cytochrome c oxidase
subunit IV (COX IV) protein levels, of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content, and of 
citrate synthase activity. Moreover, it partially reverses the mitochondrial
superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) decline and reduces the cellular content of
oxidized peroxiredoxins. These data demonstrate that ALCAR treatment is able to
promote in the old rat liver a new mitochondrial population that can contribute
to the cellular oxidative stress reduction. Furthermore, a remarkable decline of 
Drp1 and of Mfn2 proteins is reported here for the first time, suggesting a
reduced mitochondrial dynamics in aging liver with no effect of ALCAR treatment.

PMID: 22533417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Neurosci Methods. 2012 Jun 15;207(2):130-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2012.04.005. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

ß-adrenoceptor pathway enhances mitochondrial function in human neural stem cells
via rotary cell culture system.

Chiang MC(1), Lin H, Cheng YC, Yen CH, Huang RN, Lin KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei City 242,
Taiwan. cmcphd@gmail.com

The structure and function of the human nervous system are altered in space when 
compared with their state on earth. To investigate directly the influence of
simulated microgravity conditions which may be beneficial for cultivation and
proliferation of human neural stem cells (hNSCs), the rotary cell culture system 
(RCCS) developed at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) was 
used. RCCS allows the creation of a unique microgravity environment of low shear 
force, high-mass transfer and enables three-dimensional (3D) cell culture of
dissimilar cell types. The results show that simulated microgravity using an RCCS
would induce ß-adrenoceptor, upregulate cAMP formation and activate both PKA and 
CREB (cAMP response element binding protein) pathways. The expression of
intracellular mitochondrial genes, including PGC1a (PPAR coactivator 1a), nuclear
respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF1 and NRF2) and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam), regulated by CREB, were all significantly increased at 72 h
after the onset of microgravity. Accordingly and importantly, the ATP level and
amount of mitochondrial mass were also increased. These results suggest that
exposure to simulated microgravity using an RCCS would induce cellular
proliferation in hNSCs via an increased mitochondrial function. In addition, the 
RCCS bioreactor would support hNSCs growth, which may have the potential for cell
replacement therapy in neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22524992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Behav Brain Res. 2012 Jun 15;232(1):165-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2012.04.006. Epub 
2012 Apr 9.

ERK and p38 inhibitors attenuate memory deficits and increase CREB
phosphorylation and PGC-1a levels in Aß-injected rats.

Ashabi G(1), Ramin M, Azizi P, Taslimi Z, Alamdary SZ, Haghparast A, Ansari N,
Motamedi F, Khodagholi F.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.

In this study, we investigated the effect of intracerebroventricular
administration of ERK and p38 specific inhibitors, U0126 and PD169316,
respectively, on learning and memory deficits induced by amyloid beta (Aß) in
rats. To investigate the effects of these compounds on learning and memory, we
performed Morris water maze (MWM) test. U0126 and/or PD169316 improved spatial
learning in MWM in Aß-injected rats, 20 days after Aß-injection. To determine the
mechanisms of action of U0126 and PD169316, we studies their effect on some
intracellular signaling pathways such as Ca(+)/cAMP-response element binding
protein (CREB), c-fos, and transcription factors that regulate mitochondrial
biogenesis. Based on our data, CREB and c-fos levels decreased 7 days after
Aß-injection, while U0126 and/or PD169316 pretreatments significantly increased
these levels. Moreover, U0126 and PD169316 activated peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1a, nuclear respiratory factor 
1, and mitochondrial transcription factor A, 7 days after Aß-injection.
Surprisingly, these factors were returned to vehicle level, 20 days after
Aß-injection. Our findings reinforce the potential neuroprotective effect of
these inhibitors against the Aß toxicity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22510382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2011 Dec;33(6):638-43.

[Prokaryotic expression and purification of mitochondrial transcription complex
proteins].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu G(1), Yang RF, Shi BY, Liu DP.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To obtain human mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM),
mitochondrial transcription factor B1 (TFB1M), and mitochondrial transcription
factor B2 (TFB2M) that were expressed efficiently in E. coli BE21 and to purify
the target proteins.
METHODS: TFAM, TFB1M, and TFB2M segments were designed and synthesized. After
having been sequenced, the reconstructed expression vectors were constructed by
enzyme digestion and by cloning into an expression vector pET42a. Then the
reconstructed vectors were transformed into E. coli BL21. Recombinant glutathione
S transferase (GST) fusion proteins were expressed via the induction of IsoPropyl
beta-D-ThioGalactoside (IPTG) and purified by glutathione Sepharose 4B.
RESULTS: The expression plasmids of pET42a-TFAM, pET42a-TFB1M, and pET42a-TFB1M
were successfully constructed. The sequences of the cloned gene segments were
identical with GenBank reported. The protein bands with relative molecular masses
of 56 000, 67 000, and 69 000 appeared on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) after the expressed GST-TFAM, GST-TFB1M, and
GST-TFB2M fusion proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. The expressed fusion
proteins were purified to high purity.
CONCLUSION: The recombinant plasmids pET42a-TFAM, pET42a-TFB1M, and pET42a-TFB2M 
were successfully constructed, and the GST-fused target proteins were prepared.

PMID: 22509547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 24;109(17):6513-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1118710109. Epub 2012 Apr 9.

Transcription from the second heavy-strand promoter of human mtDNA is repressed
by transcription factor A in vitro.

Lodeiro MF(1), Uchida A, Bestwick M, Moustafa IM, Arnold JJ, Shadel GS, Cameron
CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Cell-based studies support the existence of two promoters on the heavy strand of 
mtDNA: heavy-strand promoter 1 (HSP1) and HSP2. However, transcription from HSP2 
has been reported only once in a cell-free system, and never when recombinant
proteins have been used. Here, we document transcription from HSP2 using an in
vitro system of defined composition. An oligonucleotide template representing
positions 596-685 of mtDNA was sufficient to observe transcription by the human
mtRNA polymerase (POLRMT) that was absolutely dependent on mitochondrial
transcription factor B2 (TFB2M). POLRMT/TFB2M-dependent transcription was
inhibited by concentrations of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)
stoichiometric with the transcription template, a condition that activates
transcription from the light-strand promoter (LSP) in vitro. Domains of TFAM
required for LSP activation were also required for HSP2 repression, whereas other
mtDNA binding proteins failed to alter transcriptional output. Binding sites for 
TFAM were located on both sides of the start site of transcription from HSP2,
suggesting that TFAM binding interferes with POLRMT and/or TFB2M binding.
Consistent with a competitive binding model for TFAM repression of HSP2, the
impact of TFAM concentration on HSP2 transcription was diminished by elevating
the POLRMT and TFB2M concentrations. In the context of our previous studies of
LSP and HSP1, it is now clear that three promoters exist in human mtDNA. Each
promoter has a unique requirement for and/or response to the level of TFAM
present, thus implying far greater complexity in the regulation of mammalian
mitochondrial transcription than recognized to date.

PMCID: PMC3340051
PMID: 22493245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Cell Metab. 2012 Apr 4;15(4):466-79. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2012.03.003.

Mitochondrial dynamics, biogenesis, and function are coordinated with the cell
cycle by APC/C CDH1.

Garedew A(1), Andreassi C, Moncada S.

Author information: 
(1)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, University College London, London, 
UK. a.garedew@ucl.ac.uk

Retraction in
    Cell Metab. 2012 Aug 8;16(2):284.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2012 Apr 4;15(4):413-4.

Cell proliferation is associated with a high rate of aerobic glycolysis, which
has been widely interpreted as a compensatory mechanism for suppressed
mitochondrial function, despite reports of high respiration rates. The molecular 
mechanisms that link cell proliferation with mitochondrial metabolism, dynamics, 
and biogenesis remain obscure. Here, we show that proliferation is associated
with an increase in both glycolysis and respiration, in conjunction with
mitochondrial fusion and biogenesis. Changes in mitochondrial morphology and mass
are due to accumulation of OPA1, MFN1, and TFAM, silencing any of which hinders
cell proliferation. Moreover, the levels of OPA1, MFN1, and TFAM are regulated by
the ubiquitin ligase APC/C(CDH1), which also controls proteasomal degradation of 
key glycolytic, glutaminolytic, and cell-cycle proteins. Thus, we have identified
an important component of the molecular mechanism that coordinates cell
proliferation with activation of the mitochondrial metabolic machinery that
provides the necessary energy and biosynthetic substrates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22482729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 17;109(16):6136-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121558109. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Correlative 3D superresolution fluorescence and electron microscopy reveal the
relationship of mitochondrial nucleoids to membranes.

Kopek BG(1), Shtengel G, Xu CS, Clayton DA, Hess HF.

Author information: 
(1)Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Ashburn, VA
20147, USA.

Microscopic images of specific proteins in their cellular context yield important
insights into biological processes and cellular architecture. The advent of
superresolution optical microscopy techniques provides the possibility to augment
EM with nanometer-resolution fluorescence microscopy to access the precise
location of proteins in the context of cellular ultrastructure. Unfortunately,
efforts to combine superresolution fluorescence and EM have been stymied by the
divergent and incompatible sample preparation protocols of the two methods. Here,
we describe a protocol that preserves both the delicate photoactivatable
fluorescent protein labels essential for superresolution microscopy and the fine 
ultrastructural context of EM. This preparation enables direct 3D imaging in 500-
to 750-nm sections with interferometric photoactivatable localization microscopy 
followed by scanning EM images generated by focused ion beam ablation. We use
this process to "colorize" detailed EM images of the mitochondrion with the
position of labeled proteins. The approach presented here has provided a new
level of definition of the in vivo nature of organization of mitochondrial
nucleoids, and we expect this straightforward method to be applicable to many
other biological questions that can be answered by direct imaging.

PMCID: PMC3341004
PMID: 22474357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jul;30(1):199-203. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.959. Epub 2012 Apr 
2.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A is a proinflammatory mediator in hemorrhagic
shock.

Chaung WW(1), Wu R, Ji Y, Dong W, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

Endogenous molecules released by dying cells [i.e., damage-associated molecular
patterns (DAMPs)] after trauma and severe blood loss can activate pattern
recognition receptors, leading to a cascade of inflammatory responses and organ
injury. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a transcription factor for
mitochondrial DNA. TFAM is structurally related to high mobility group box 1
(HMGB1), an important member of DAMPs. We, therefore, hypothesized that TFAM can 
be released into the circulation after hemorrhage to initiate inflammatory
responses. In order to examine this hypothesis, male Sprague-Dawley rats were
bled to and maintained at a mean arterial pressure of 40 mmHg for 90 min. They
were then resuscitated with an equal volume of shed blood in the form of Ringer's
lactate (i.e., low-volume resuscitation) over 60 min. TFAM levels in the serum
were measured at 4 h after hemorrhage and resuscitation. Our results showed that 
serum levels of TFAM were more than doubled after hemorrhage and resuscitation.
To further characterize TFAM's biological activity, we expressed recombinant rat 
TFAM with a GST-tag (GST-TFAM) in an E. coli expression system. The purity of
GST-TFAM was over 99% and it was immunoreactive for specific anti-TFAM
antibodies. Using RAW 264.7 cells and primary rat peritoneal macrophages, we
showed that GST-TFAM dose-dependently increased TNF-a release. To determine the
biological activity of GST-TFAM in vivo, GST-TFAM was intravenously injected in
healthy male adult rats. Our results demonstrated that intravenous injection of
GST-TFAM, not GST alone, upregulated circulating levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, increased neutrophil infiltration to the lungs and caused organ injury
in healthy animals. Thus, TFAM can act as a DAMP and may contribute to the
initiation of inflammatory responses in hemorrhagic shock.

PMCID: PMC3981640
PMID: 22469910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Sep-Oct;1819(9-10):921-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.03.002. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A regulates mitochondrial transcription
initiation, DNA packaging, and genome copy number.

Campbell CT(1), Kolesar JE, Kaufman BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA, mtTF1, TFAM) is an essential protein
that binds mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) with and without sequence specificity to
regulate both mitochondrial transcription initiation and mtDNA copy number. The
abundance of mtDNA generally reflects TFAM protein levels; however, the precise
mechanism(s) by which this occurs remains a matter of debate. Data suggest that
the usage of mitochondrial promoters is regulated by TFAM dosage, allowing TFAM
to affect both gene expression and RNA priming for first strand mtDNA
replication. Additionally, TFAM has a non-specific DNA binding activity that is
both cooperative and high affinity. TFAM can compact plasmid DNA in vitro,
suggesting a structural role for the non-specific DNA binding activity in genome 
packaging. This review summarizes TFAM-mtDNA interactions and describes an
emerging view of TFAM as a multipurpose coordinator of mtDNA transactions, with
direct consequences for the maintenance of gene expression and genome copy
number. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mitochondrial Gene
Expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22465614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Exp Gerontol. 2012 Jun;47(6):417-24. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2012.03.004. Epub 2012 
Mar 17.

The effects of aging, physical training, and a single bout of exercise on
mitochondrial protein expression in human skeletal muscle.

Bori Z(1), Zhao Z, Koltai E, Fatouros IG, Jamurtas AZ, Douroudos II, Terzis G,
Chatzinikolaou A, Sovatzidis A, Draganidis D, Boldogh I, Radak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Sport Science, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

Aging results in a significant decline in aerobic capacity and impaired
mitochondrial function. We have tested the effects of moderate physical activity 
on aerobic capacity and a single bout of exercise on the expression profile of
mitochondrial biogenesis, and fusion and fission related genes in skeletal muscle
of human subjects. Physical activity attenuated the aging-associated decline in
VO2 max (p<0.05). Aging increased and a single exercise bout decreased the
expression of nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1), while the transcription factor
A (TFAM) expression showed a strong relationship with VO(2max) and increased
significantly in the young physically active group. Mitochondrial fission
representing FIS1 was induced by regular physical activity, while a bout of
exercise decreased fusion-associated gene expression. The expression of
polynucleotide phosphorylase (PNPase) changed inversely in young and old groups
and decreased with aging. The A2 subunit of cyclic AMP-activated protein kinase
(AMPK) was induced by a single bout of exercise in skeletal muscle samples of
both young and old subjects (p<0.05). Our data suggest that moderate levels of
regular physical activity increases a larger number of mitochondrial
biogenesis-related gene expressions in young individuals than in aged subjects.
Mitochondrial fission is impaired by aging and could be one of the most sensitive
markers of the age-associated decline in the adaptive response to physical
activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22449457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Animal. 2011 Aug;5(9):1335-43. doi: 10.1017/S1751731111000346.

Polymorphisms in the autosomal genes for mitochondrial function TFAM and UCP2 are
associated with performance and longevity in dairy cows.

Clempson AM(1), Pollott GE, Brickell JS, Bourne NE, Munce N, Wathes DC.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Veterinary Basic Science, Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead
Lane, North Mymms, Hatfield, Hertfordshire, AL9 7TA, UK.

The autosomal genes mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and uncoupling
protein 2 (UCP2) are both involved in moderating mitochondrial energy production.
This study investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in TFAM and UCP2
and their associations with growth, fertility, milk production and survival in UK
dairy cows. Holstein-Friesian heifers (n = 509) were recruited at birth and
monitored until they either reached the end of their second lactation or were
culled. Weight, height, length and girth were measured at 1, 6 and 15 months of
age to assess growth. Fertility records were obtained for both heifers and cows
and production traits (milk per day, peak yield and 305-day yield) were recorded 
in the first and second lactation. Mixed model and survival analyses revealed
that TFAM3 GG homozygotes, representing 49% of the population, were larger than
the AG heterozygotes throughout the growing period, had worse fertility, produced
less milk in both lactations and were more likely to be culled. TFAM3 AA
homozygotes (7% of population) were generally smaller as heifers, had slightly
worse fertility and also produced less milk. This suggests a clear advantage for 
maximizing the heterozygotic population for this SNP. Furthermore, the results
for milk per day suggest an overdominant effect, as both homozygotes of TFAM3 had
significantly lower yields than the heterozygote. For UCP2, the minority CG
heterozygotes (6% of population) were larger as heifers, had a reduced age at
first conception and a delayed return to cyclicity after calving, when compared
against the majority (94%) GG homozygotes.

PMID: 22440278  [PubMed]


417. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2012;29(1-2):261-8. doi: 10.1159/000337607. Epub 2012 Mar
1.

The effects of 17ß-estradiol on mitochondrial biogenesis and function in breast
cancer cell lines are dependent on the ERa/ERß ratio.

Sastre-Serra J(1), Nadal-Serrano M, Pons DG, Valle A, Oliver J, Roca P.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo multidisciplinar de Oncología Traslacional, Institut Universitari
d'Investigació en Ciències de la Salut (IUNICS), Palma de Mallorca, Illes
Balears, Spain.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: 17ß-estradiol (E2) is a risk factor for the development of
breast cancer, and cause tumorigenesis in epithelial breast cells. Moreover, E2
has distinct effects on different tissues that are attributed to the presence of 
two estrogen receptor isoforms, ERa and ERß.
METHODS: The effect of E2 on mitochondrial biogenesis and function was
investigated in two breast cancer cell lines with different estrogen receptor
ratios, MCF-7 (high ERa/ERß ratio) and T47D (low ERa/ERß ratio) cell lines
treated with physiological concentrations of E2 (1 nM).
RESULTS: Mitochondria of the MCF-7 cell line showed an increase in proliferation 
but a decrease in functionality, while the T47D cell line, with low ERa/ERß
ratio, maintained functionality with fewer mitochondria.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that ERs endowment and its subtypes relation have
an effect on treatment response and could contribute new ideas about mitochondria
and ERs in breast cancer, as well as new indicators to the disease progression.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22415095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Steroids. 2012 May;77(6):659-65. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2012.02.012. Epub 2012
Feb 27.

Retroperitoneal white adipose tissue mitochondrial function and adiponectin
expression in response to ovariectomy and 17ß-estradiol replacement.

Amengual-Cladera E(1), Lladó I, Gianotti M, Proenza AM.

Author information: 
(1)Grup Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.
emi.amengual@uib.es

Sexual dimorphism has been previously found both in mitochondrial biogenesis and 
function and in adiponectin expression of retroperitoneal WAT. However, little is
known about the E2 effects on WAT mitochondrial function. Accordingly, the aim of
this study was to examine in greater depth the role of estrogens in sexual
dimorphism. This was accomplished by studying the effects of ovariectomy and E2
replacement on retroperitoneal WAT mitochondrial function. Fourteen-week-old
female and ovariectomized (OVX) female Wistar rats were used in this study. The
ovariectomy was performed at 5 weeks of age and at 10 weeks of age OVX rats were 
divided into two experimental groups: OVX, and OVX treated with 17ß-estradiol
(E2) (OVX+E2). Subcutaneous injections of E2 (10 µg/kg/48 h) were administered to
the OVX+E2 rats for 4 weeks previous to the sacrifice whereas OVX rats were
treated only with the vehicle. Levels of the main markers for mitochondrial
biogenesis and function and those representatives of the antioxidant defense
system and insulin sensitivity were determined. Additionally, the mRNA levels of 
the a and ß estrogen receptors and of some adipocyte differentiation markers were
studied. Our results indicate that retroperitoneal WAT was able to adapt itself
to ovariectomy without any changes in mitochondrial function markers or for the
adiponectin levels. However, E2 supplementation led to an unexpected decrease in:
TFAM protein levels, in LPL, PPAR<U+03B3> and adiponectin gene expression and in the
systemic HMW adiponectin levels. This decrease is probably due to the
down-regulation of the ERa mRNA expression to avoid an over-stimulation by E2.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22402114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2012;24(3):501-9. doi: 10.1071/RD11091.

High levels of mitochondrial heteroplasmy modify the development of ovine-bovine 
interspecies nuclear transferred embryos.

Hua S(1), Lu C, Song Y, Li R, Liu X, Quan F, Wang Y, Liu J, Su F, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi
Province 712100, People's Republic of China. hs863@nwsuaf.edu.cn

To investigate the effect of mitochondrial heteroplasmy on embryo development,
cloned embryos produced using bovine oocytes as the recipient cytoplasm and ovine
granulosa cells as the donor nuclei were complemented with 2pL mitochondrial
suspension isolated from ovine (BOOMT embryos) or bovine (BOBMT embryos)
granulosa cells; cloned embryos without mitochondrial injection served as the
control group (BO embryos). Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (RT-qPCR) and sodium bisulfite genomic sequencing were used to analyse
mRNA and methylation levels of pluripotency genes (OCT4, SOX2) and mitochondrial 
genes (TFAM, POLRMT) in the early developmental stages of cloned embryos. The
number of mitochondrial DNA copies in 2pL ovine-derived and bovine-derived
mitochondrial suspensions was 960±110 and 1000±120, respectively. The blastocyst 
formation rates were similar in BOBMT and BO embryos (P>0.05), but significantly 
higher than in BOOMT embryos (P<0.01). Expression of OCT4 and SOX2, as detected
by RT-qPCR, decreased significantly in BOOMT embryos (P<0.05), whereas the
expression of TFAM and POLRMT increased significantly, compared with expression
in BOOMT and BO embryos (P<0.05). In addition, methylation levels of OCT4 and
SOX2 were significantly greater (P<0.05), whereas those of TFAM and POLRMT were
significantly lower (P<0.01), in BOOMT embryos compared with BOBMT and BO
embryos. Together, the results of the present study suggest that the degree of
mitochondrial heteroplasmy may affect embryonic development.

PMID: 22401282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Clin Transl Sci. 2012 Feb;5(1):43-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1752-8062.2011.00357.x. Epub 
2011 Nov 7.

Alterations in skeletal muscle indicators of mitochondrial structure and
biogenesis in patients with type 2 diabetes and heart failure: effects of
epicatechin rich cocoa.

Taub PR(1), Ramirez-Sanchez I, Ciaraldi TP, Perkins G, Murphy AN, Naviaux R,
Hogan M, Maisel AS, Henry RR, Ceballos G, Villarreal F.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, California, USA.

(-)-Epicatechin (Epi), a flavanol in cacao stimulates mitochondrial volume and
cristae density and protein markers of skeletal muscle (SkM) mitochondrial
biogenesis in mice. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2) and heart failure (HF) are
diseases associated with defects in SkM mitochondrial structure/function. A study
was implemented to assess perturbations and to determine the effects of Epi-rich 
cocoa in SkM mitochondrial structure and mediators of biogenesis. Five patients
with DM2 and stage II/III HF consumed dark chocolate and a beverage containing
approximately 100 mg of Epi per day for 3 months. We assessed changes in protein 
and/or activity levels of oxidative phosphorylation proteins, porin, mitofilin,
nNOS, nitric oxide, cGMP, SIRT1, PGC1a, Tfam, and mitochondria volume and cristae
abundance by electron microscopy from SkM. Apparent major losses in normal
mitochondria structure were observed before treatment. Epi-rich cocoa increased
protein and/or activity of mediators of biogenesis and cristae abundance while
not changing mitochondrial volume density. Epi-rich cocoa treatment improves SkM 
mitochondrial structure and in an orchestrated manner, increases molecular
markers of mitochondrial biogenesis resulting in enhanced cristae density. Future
controlled studies are warranted using Epi-rich cocoa (or pure Epi) to translate 
improved mitochondrial structure into enhanced cardiac and/or SkM muscle
function.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22376256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jun;18(5):520-4. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.01.021. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

PARK2 variability in Polish Parkinson's disease patients--interaction with
mitochondrial haplogroups.

Gaweda-Walerych K(1), Safranow K, Jasinska-Myga B, Bialecka M, Klodowska-Duda G, 
Rudzinska M, Czyzewski K, Cobb SA, Slawek J, Styczynska M, Opala G, Drozdzik M,
Nishioka K, Farrer MJ, Ross OA, Wszolek ZK, Barcikowska M, Zekanowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Medical Research Center, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland. kasiawal@libero.it

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: A new pathomechanism of Parkinson's disease (PD) involving
regulation of mitochondrial functions was recently proposed. Parkin complexed
with mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) binds mtDNA and promotes
mitochondrial biogenesis, which is abolished by PARK2 gene mutations. We have
previously shown that mitochondrial haplogroups/clusters and TFAM common
variation influenced PD risk. We investigate the role of PARK2 polymorphisms on
PD risk and their interactions with mitochondrial haplogroups/clusters as well as
with TFAM variability.
METHODS: 104 early-onset PD patients (EOPD, age at onset = 50 years) were
screened for PARK2 coding sequence changes including gene dosage alterations.
Three selected PARK2 polymorphisms (S167N, V380L, D394N) were genotyped in 326 PD
patients and 315 controls using TaqMan allelic discrimination assay.
RESULTS: PARK2 screen revealed two heterozygous changes in two EOPD patients:
exon 2 deletion and one novel synonymous variation (c.999C > A, P333P). In
association study no differences in genotype/allele frequencies of S167N, V380L, 
D394N were found between analyzed groups. Stratification by mitochondrial
clusters revealed higher frequency of V380L G/G genotype and allele G in PD
patients, within HV cluster (p = 0.040; p = 0.022, respectively). Moreover,
interaction between genotypes G/G V380L of PARK2 and G/G rs2306604 of TFAM,
within HV cluster was significant (OR 2.05; CI 1.04-4.04; p = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that co-occurrence of G/G V380L PARK2 and G/G
rs2306604 TFAM on the prooxidative HV cluster background can contribute to PD
risk. We confirm low PARK2 mutation frequency in Polish EOPD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3358581
PMID: 22361577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Neurosci Res. 2012 Jun;90(6):1200-8. doi: 10.1002/jnr.23000. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Effect of mitochondrial transcription factor a overexpression on motor neurons in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis model mice.

Morimoto N(1), Miyazaki K, Kurata T, Ikeda Y, Matsuura T, Kang D, Ide T, Abe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Science, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.

Increasing evidence indicates that oxidative stress is an important mechanism
underlying motor neuron (MN) degeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly susceptible to oxidative damage and has
little potential for repair, although mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)
plays essential roles in maintaining mitochondrial DNA by reducing oxidative
stress, promoting mtDNA transcription, and regulating mtDNA copy number. To
analyze a possible therapeutic effect of TFAM on ALS pathology, double transgenic
mice overexpressing G93A mutant SOD1 (G93ASOD1) and human TFAM (hTFAM) were newly
generated in the present study. Rotarod scores were better in G93ASOD1/hTFAM
double-Tg mice than G93ASOD1 single-Tg mice at an early symptomatic stage, 15 and
16 weeks of age, with a 10% extension of the onset age in double-Tg mice. The
number of surviving MNs was 30% greater in double-Tg mice with end-stage disease,
at 19 weeks, with remarkable reductions in the amount of the oxidative stress
marker 8-OHdG and the apoptotic marker cleaved caspase 3 and with preserved COX1 
expression. Double-immunofluorescence study showed that hTFAM was expressed
specifically in MNs and microglia in the spinal cords of double-Tg mice. The
present study suggests that overexpression of TFAM has a potential to reduce
oxidative stress in MN and delay onset of the disease in ALS model mice. © 2012
Wiley Priodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22354563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cancer Sci. 2012 May;103(5):882-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2012.02239.x. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

Human apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 translocalizes to mitochondria after
photodynamic therapy and protects cells from apoptosis.

Li MX(1), Shan JL, Wang D, He Y, Zhou Q, Xia L, Zeng LL, Li ZP, Wang G, Yang ZZ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Research Institute of Surgery, Daping Hospital, Third Military 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Photodynamic therapy (PDT) is an effective therapeutic regime for lung cancer.
Mitochondrial functional failure is considered to be one of the most important
factors causing cell death after PDT. However, the detailed mechanisms that are
involved are still unclear. We previously reported that apurinic/apyrimidinic
endonuclease (APE1) plays a critical role in regulating sensitivity to PDT in the
lung cancer A549 cell line. An important mitochondrial regulatory role for APE1
has recently been reported, so therefore we explored the role of APE1 in cell
survival after PDT-induced oxidative stress through regulation of mitochondrial
function. We first observed that photoirradiation induced the mitochondrial
translocation of APE1. The ability of APE1 to regulate mitochondrial membrane
potential and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production after photoirradiation was
tested in APE1 knockdown A549 cells. APE1-deficient A549 cells were characterized
as having a lower mitochondrial membrane potential and higher ROS production,
which led to increased apoptosis through the mitochondrial pathway after PDT.
Additionally, unexpected activity of APE1 was observed in mitochondria: the
control of mitochondrial transcriptional activity by redox regulation of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Furthermore, two dominant-negative
mutants of APE1 were overexpressed to enhance their individual activities in
mitochondria. The results suggest that both these APE1 activities play a role in 
the regulation of mitochondrial function but through different mechanisms. The
present study not only provides possible mechanisms for APE1 in regulating
survival after photoirradiation but also uncovers a new activity of APE1 in
mitochondria.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 22329793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2012 Apr;120(4):210-6. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1298015.
Epub 2012 Feb 10.

Effects of short and prolonged mild intracellular nitric oxide manipulations on
various aspects of insulin secretion in INS-1E ß-cells.

Natali A(1), Santini E, Delbarba A, Baldi S, Venturi E, Tulipani A, Nisoli E,
Ferrannini E.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Unit, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pisa, Italy.
anatali@ifc.cnr.it

OBJECTIVE: We aimed at evaluating the impact of short and prolonged mild
manipulations of intracellular nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability on the main
features of insulin secretion and whether NO promotes mitochondrial biogenesis in
isolated ß-cells.
MATERIALS/METHODS: INS-1E ß-cells were exposed to either the intracellular NO
donor, hydroxylamine (HA), or the NO synthase inhibitor,
L-nitro-arginine-methyl-ester (L-NAME), at concentrations lower than 2.0 mM.
Glucose and arginine-induced insulin secretion (GIIS and AIIS) were measured
after short (1 h) or prolonged (48 h) exposure to L-NAME 1.0 and 2.0 mM or HA 0.4
and 0.8 mM, lower concentrations were also evaluated for the 1 h effects. Basal
insulin secretion (BIS), with either HA or L-NAME added to culture media, and
peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), and mitochondrial DNA transcription factor-A (Tfam)
gene expression during chronic HA supplementation were also measured.
RESULTS: Neither L-NAME nor HA affected insulin release at glucose 3.3 mM or in
cell culture (BIS). Both short and prolonged cell exposure to L-NAME potentiated 
GIIS though with a flat dose-response curve while HA inhibited GIIS only at the
highest concentration. AIIS was prevented by short exposure to L-NAME and
potentiated by HA, while it did not respond to prolonged incubations. Prolonged
cell exposure to HA had no effect on PGC-1a, NRF-1 or Tfam gene expression.
CONCLUSION: In INS1E cells an intact NO synthesis is necessary to limit insulin
release in response to acute glucose gradients and to fully respond to arginine
while intracellular NO enrichment above the physiologic levels further inhibits
GIIS and potentiate AIIS only when excessive. Prolonged NO manipulations do not
affect AIIS, BIS or mitochondrial biogenesis.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22328114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Immunol. 2012 Mar 15;188(6):2847-57. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102157. Epub 2012
Feb 6.

TLR4-mediated AKT activation is MyD88/TRIF dependent and critical for induction
of oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial transcription factor A in murine
macrophages.

Bauerfeld CP(1), Rastogi R, Pirockinaite G, Lee I, Hüttemann M, Monks B, Birnbaum
MJ, Franchi L, Nuñez G, Samavati L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, St. John Hospital and Medical Center, Detroit, MI
48236, USA.

Mitochondria play a critical role in cell survival and death. Mitochondrial
recovery during inflammatory processes such as sepsis is associated with cell
survival. Recovery of cellular respiration, mitochondrial biogenesis, and
function requires coordinated expression of transcription factors encoded by
nuclear and mitochondrial genes, including mitochondrial transcription factor A
(T-fam) and cytochrome c oxidase (COX, complex IV). LPS elicits strong host
defenses in mammals with pronounced inflammatory responses, but also triggers
activation of survival pathways such as AKT pathway. AKT/PKB is a
serine/threonine protein kinase that plays an important role in cell survival,
protein synthesis, and controlled inflammation in response to TLRs. Hence we
investigated the role of LPS-mediated AKT activation in mitochondrial
bioenergetics and function in cultured murine macrophages (B6-MCL) and bone
marrow-derived macrophages. We show that LPS challenge led to increased
expression of T-fam and COX subunits I and IV in a time-dependent manner through 
early phosphorylation of the PI3K/AKT pathway. PI3K/AKT pathway inhibitors
abrogated LPS-mediated T-fam and COX induction. Lack of induction was associated 
with decreased ATP production, increased proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-a), NO
production, and cell death. The TLR4-mediated AKT activation and mitochondrial
biogenesis required activation of adaptor protein MyD88 and Toll/IL-1R
domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-ß. Importantly, using a genetic approach, 
we show that the AKT1 isoform is pivotal in regulating mitochondrial biogenesis
in response to TLR4 agonist.

PMCID: PMC3294201
PMID: 22312125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 May 1;52(9):1543-51. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.01.007. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Damage to mtDNA in liver injury of patients with extrahepatic cholestasis: the
protective effects of mitochondrial transcription factor A.

Xu SC(1), Chen YB, Lin H, Pi HF, Zhang NX, Zhao CC, Shuai L, Zhong M, Yu ZP, Zhou
Z, Bie P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Health, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, People's Republic of China.

Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction are involved in the pathogenesis
of chronic liver cholestasis. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly susceptible to 
oxidative stress and mtDNA damage leads to mitochondrial dysfunction. This study 
aimed to investigate the mtDNA alterations that occurred during liver injury in
patients with extrahepatic cholestasis. Along with an increase in malondialdehyde
(MDA) levels and a decrease in ATP levels, extrahepatic cholestatic patients
presented a significant increase in mitochondrial 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine
(8-OHdG) levels and decreases in mtDNA copy number, mtDNA transcript levels, and 
mtDNA nucleoid structure. In L02 cells, glycochenodeoxycholic acid (GCDCA)
induced similar damage to the mtDNA and mitochondria. In line with the mtDNA
alterations, the mRNA and protein levels of mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(TFAM) were significantly decreased both in cholestatic patients and in
GCDCA-treated L02 cells. Moreover, overexpression of TFAM could efficiently
attenuate the mtDNA damage induced by GCDCA in L02 cells. However, without its
C-tail, <U+0394>C-TFAM appeared less effective against the hepatotoxicity of GCDCA than 
the wild-type TFAM. Overall, our study demonstrates that mtDNA damage is involved
in liver damage in extrahepatic cholestatic patients. The mtDNA damage is
attributable to the loss of TFAM. TFAM has mtDNA-protective effects against the
hepatotoxicity of bile acid during cholestasis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22306509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cell Cycle. 2012 Feb 1;11(3):554-68. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.3.19062. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Drosophila cyclin D/Cdk4 regulates mitochondrial biogenesis and aging and
sensitizes animals to hypoxic stress.

Icreverzi A(1), de la Cruz AF, Van Voorhies WA, Edgar BA.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Science Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
USA.

Drosophila cyclinD (CycD) is the single fly ortholog of the mammalian cyclin D1
and promotes both cell cycle progression and cellular growth. However, little is 
known about how CycD promotes cell growth. We show here that CycD/Cdk4
hyperactivity leads to increased mitochondrial biogenesis (mitobiogenesis),
mitochondrial mass, NRF-1 activity (Tfam transcript levels) and metabolic
activity in Drosophila, whereas loss of CycD/Cdk4 activity has the opposite
effects. Surprisingly, both CycD/Cdk4 addition and loss of function increase
mitochondrial superoxide production and decrease lifespan, indicating that an
imbalance in mitobiogenesis may lead to oxidative stress and aging. In addition, 
we provide multiple lines of evidence indicating that CycD/Cdk4 activity affects 
the hypoxic status of cells and sensitizes animals to hypoxia. Both mitochondrial
and hypoxia-related effects can be detected at the global transcriptional level. 
We propose that mitobiogenesis and the hypoxic stress response have an
antagonistic relationship, and that CycD/Cdk4 levels regulate mitobiogenesis
contemporaneous to the cell cycle, such that only when cells are sufficiently
oxygenated can they proliferate.

PMCID: PMC3315095
PMID: 22293404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Apr 1;302(7):E807-16. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00239.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

TRPM2 Ca2+ channel regulates energy balance and glucose metabolism.

Zhang Z(1), Zhang W, Jung DY, Ko HJ, Lee Y, Friedline RH, Lee E, Jun J, Ma Z, Kim
F, Tsitsilianos N, Chapman K, Morrison A, Cooper MP, Miller BA, Kim JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Pennsylvania State University
College of Medicine, Hershey, USA.

TRPM2 Ca(2+)-permeable cation channel is widely expressed and activated by
markers of cellular stress. Since inflammation and stress play a major role in
insulin resistance, we examined the role of TRPM2 Ca(2+) channel in glucose
metabolism. A 2-h hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamp was performed in
TRPM2-deficient (KO) and wild-type mice to assess insulin sensitivity. To examine
the effects of diet-induced obesity, mice were fed a high-fat diet for 4-10 mo,
and metabolic cage and clamp studies were conducted in conscious mice. TRPM2-KO
mice were more insulin sensitive partly because of increased glucose metabolism
in peripheral organs. After 4 mo of high-fat feeding, TRPM2-KO mice were
resistant to diet-induced obesity, and this was associated with increased energy 
expenditure and elevated expressions of PGC-1a, PGC-1ß, PPARa, ERRa, TFAM, and
MCAD in white adipose tissue. Hyperinsulinemic euglycemic clamps showed that
TRPM2-KO mice were more insulin sensitive, with increased Akt and GSK-3ß
phosphorylation in heart. Obesity-mediated inflammation in adipose tissue and
liver was attenuated in TRPM2-KO mice. Overall, TRPM2 deletion protected mice
from developing diet-induced obesity and insulin resistance. Our findings
identify a novel role of TRPM2 Ca(2+) channel in the regulation of energy
expenditure, inflammation, and insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3330711
PMID: 22275755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Apr;46(1):137-46. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.12.055. Epub 2012
Jan 13.

A neuroprotective role of the human uncoupling protein 2 (hUCP2) in a Drosophila 
Parkinson's disease model.

Islam R(1), Yang L, Sah M, Kannan K, Anamani D, Vijayan C, Kwok J, Cantino ME,
Beal MF, Fridell YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allied Health Sciences, University of Connecticut, 358 Mansfield
Road, Storrs, CT 06269, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD), caused by selective loss of dopaminergic (DA) neurons
in the substantia nigra pars compacta, is the most common movement disorder.
While its etiology remains unknown, mitochondrial dysfunction is recognized as
one of the major cellular defects contributing to PD pathogenesis. Mitochondrial 
uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) has been implicated in neuroprotection in several
neuronal injury models. Here we show that hucp2 expression in Drosophila DA
neurons under the control of the tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) promoter protects
those flies against the mitochondrial toxin rotenone-induced DA neuron death,
head dopamine depletion, impaired locomotor activity and energy deficiency. Under
normal conditions, hUCP2 flies maintain an enhanced locomotor activity and have
higher steady-state ATP levels suggesting improved energy homeostasis. We show
that while no increased mitochondrial DNA content or volume fraction is measured 
in hUCP2 flies, augmented mitochondrial complex I activity is detected. Those
results suggest that it is increased mitochondrial function but not mitochondrial
biogenesis that appears responsible for higher ATP levels in hUCP2 flies.
Consistent with this notion, an up-regulation of Spargel, the Drosophila
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 (PGC-1) homologue 
is detected in hUCP2 flies. Furthermore, a Spargel target gene Tfam, the
mitochondrial transcription factor A is up-regulated in hUCP2 flies. Taken
together, our results demonstrate a neuroprotective effect of hUCP2 in DA neurons
in a Drosophila sporadic PD model. Moreover, as the TH promoter activity is
present in both DA neurons and epidermis, our results reveal that hucp2
expression in those tissues may act as a stress signal to trigger Spargel
activation resulting in enhanced mitochondrial function and increased energy
metabolism.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Neuroscience. 2012 Mar 15;205:10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.12.053. Epub
2012 Jan 8.

Exercise induces mitochondrial biogenesis after brain ischemia in rats.

Zhang Q(1), Wu Y, Zhang P, Sha H, Jia J, Hu Y, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040, China.

Stroke is a major cause of death worldwide. Previous studies have suggested both 
exercise and mitochondrial biogenesis contribute to improved post-ischemic
recovery of brain function. However, the exact mechanism underlying this effect
is unclear. On the other hand, the benefit of exercise-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis in brain has been confirmed. In this study, we attempted to determine 
whether treadmill exercise induces functional improvement through regulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis after brain ischemia. We subjected adult male rats to
ischemia, followed by either treadmill exercise or non-exercise and analyzed the 
effect of exercise on the amount of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis factors, and mitochondrial protein. In the
ischemia-exercise group, only peroxisome proliferator activated receptor
coactivator-1 (PGC-1) expression was increased significantly after 3 days of
treadmill training. However, after 7 days of training, the levels of mtDNA,
nuclear respiratory factor 1, NRF-1, mitochondrial transcription factor A, TFAM, 
and the mitochondrial protein cytochrome C oxidase subunit IV (COXIV) and heat
shock protein-60 (HSP60) also increased above levels observed in non-exercised
ischemic animals. These changes followed with significant changes in behavioral
scores and cerebral infarct volume. The results indicate that exercise can
promote mitochondrial biogenesis after ischemic injury, which may serve as a
novel component of exercise-induced repair mechanisms of the brain. Understanding
the molecular basis for exercise-induced neuroprotection may be beneficial in the
development of therapeutic approaches for brain recovery from the ischemic
injury. Based upon our findings, stimulation or enhancement of mitochondrial
biogenesis may prove a novel neuroprotective strategy in the future.

Copyright Â© 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22266265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar;97(3):978-86. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1096. Epub
2012 Jan 18.

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone controls mitochondrial biology in human epidermis.

Knuever J(1), Poeggeler B, Gáspár E, Klinger M, Hellwig-Burgel T, Hardenbicker C,
Tóth BI, Bíró T, Paus R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160,
D-23538 Luebeck, Germany.

CONTEXT: Mitochondrial capacity and metabolic potential are under the control of 
hormones, such as thyroid hormones. The most proximal regulator of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis, TRH, is the key hypothalamic
integrator of energy metabolism via its impact on thyroid hormone secretion.
OBJECTIVE: Here, we asked whether TRH directly modulates mitochondrial functions 
in normal, TRH-receptor-positive human epidermis.
METHODS: Organ-cultured human skin was treated with TRH (5-100 ng/ml) for 12-48
h.
RESULTS: TRH significantly increased epidermal immunoreactivity for the
mitochondria-selective subunit I of respiratory chain complex IV (MTCO1). This
resulted from an increased MTCO1 transcription and protein synthesis and a
stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis as demonstrated by transmission electron 
microscopy and TRH-enhanced mitochondrial DNA synthesis. TRH also significantly
stimulated the transcription of several other mitochondrial key genes (TFAM,
HSP60, and BMAL1), including the master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis
(PGC-1a). TRH significantly enhanced mitochondrial complex I and IV enzyme
activity and enhanced the oxygen consumption of human skin samples, which shows
that the stimulated mitochondria are fully vital because the main source for
cellular oxygen consumption is mitochondrial endoxidation.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify TRH as a potent, novel neuroendocrine
stimulator of mitochondrial activity and biogenesis in human epidermal
keratinocytes in situ. Thus, human epidermis offers an excellent model for
dissecting neuroendocrine controls of human mitochondrial biology under
physiologically relevant conditions and for exploring corresponding clinical
applications.

PMID: 22259067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Mar 15;302(6):E731-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00159.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Tissue-specific control of mitochondrial respiration in obesity-related insulin
resistance and diabetes.

Holmström MH(1), Iglesias-Gutierrez E, Zierath JR, Garcia-Roves PM.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Section of Integrative Physiology, Stockholm, Sweden.

The tissue-specific role of mitochondrial respiratory capacity in the development
of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes is unclear. We determined mitochondrial
function in glycolytic and oxidative skeletal muscle and liver from lean (+/?)
and obese diabetic (db/db) mice. In lean mice, the mitochondrial respiration
pattern differed between tissues. Tissue-specific mitochondrial profiles were
then compared between lean and db/db mice. In liver, mitochondrial respiratory
capacity and protein expression, including peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), was decreased in db/db mice, consistent with 
increased mitochondrial fission. In glycolytic muscle, mitochondrial respiration,
as well as protein and mRNA expression of mitochondrial markers, was increased in
db/db mice, suggesting increased mitochondrial content and fatty acid oxidation
capacity. In oxidative muscle, mitochondrial complex I function and PGC-1a and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) protein levels were decreased in
db/db mice, along with increased level of proteins related to mitochondrial
dynamics. In conclusion, mitochondrial respiratory performance is under the
control of tissue-specific mechanisms and is not uniformly altered in response to
obesity. Furthermore, insulin resistance in glycolytic skeletal muscle can be
maintained by a mechanism independent of mitochondrial dysfunction. Conversely,
insulin resistance in liver and oxidative skeletal muscle from db/db mice is
coincident with mitochondrial dysfunction.

PMID: 22252943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Parkinsons Dis. 2012;2(1):67-76. doi: 10.3233/JPD-2012-11074.

Impaired complex-I mitochondrial biogenesis in Parkinson disease frontal cortex.

Thomas RR(1), Keeney PM, Bennett JP.

Author information: 
(1)Parkinson's Disease Research Center, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) can include a progressive frontal lobe a-synucleinopathy
with disability from cognitive decline and cortico-limbic dysregulation that may 
arise from bioenergetic impairments. We examined in PD frontal cortex regulation 
of mitochondrial biogenesis (mitobiogenesis) and its effects on Complex-I. We
quantified expression of 33 nuclear genome (nDNA)-encoded and 7 mitochondrial
genome (mtDNA)-encoded Complex-I genes, 6 Complex-I assembly factors and multiple
mitobiogenesis genes. We related these findings to levels of Complex-I proteins
and NADH-driven electron flow in mitochondria from these same specimens reported 
in earlier studies. We found widespread, decreased expression of nDNA Complex-I
genes that correlated in some cases with mitochondrial Complex-I protein levels, 
and of ACAD9, a Complex-I assembly factor. mtDNA-transcribed Complex-I genes
showed ~ constant expression within each PD sample but variable expression across
PD samples that correlated with NRF1. Relationships among PGC-1a and its
downstream targets NRF1 and TFAM were very similar in PD and CTL and were related
to mitochondrial NADH-driven electron flow. MicroRNA arrays revealed multiple
miRNA's regulated >2-fold predicted to interact with PGC-1a or its upstream
regulators. Exposure of cultured human neurons to NO, rotenone and TNF-alpha
partially reproduced mitobiogenesis down-regulation. In PD frontal cortex
mitobiogenesis signaling relationships are maintained but down-regulated,
correlate with impaired mitochondrial NADH-driven electron flow and may arise
from combinations of nitrosative/oxidative stresses, inflammatory cytokines,
altered levels of mitobiogenesis gene-interacting microRNA's, or other unknown
mechanisms. Stimulation of mitobiogenesis in PD may inhibit rostral disease
progression and appearance of secondary symptoms referable to frontal cortex.

PMID: 23939409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. FEBS Open Bio. 2012 Jun 12;2:145-50. doi: 10.1016/j.fob.2012.06.001. Print 2012.

The manner in which DNA is packaged with TFAM has an impact on transcription
activation and inhibition.

Furukawa R(1), Yamada Y, Matsushima Y, Goto Y, Harashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Design of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita-12, Nishi-6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812,
Japan.

For successful mitochondrial transgene expression, an optimal packaging exogenous
DNA is an important issue. We report herein on the effects of DNA packaged with
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which packages mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), on the transcription process. Our initial findings indicated that the
transcription of the TFAM/DNA complex was activated, when the complex was formed 
at an optimal ratio. We also found that TFAM has a significant advantage over
protamine, a nuclear DNA packaging protein, from the viewpoint of transcription
efficiency. This result indicates that TFAM can be useful packaging protein for
exogenous DNA to achieve mitochondrial transgene expression.

PMCID: PMC3642137
PMID: 23650593  [PubMed]


435. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Sep-Oct;1819(9-10):1080-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.11.008. Epub 2011 Dec 8.

Matrix proteases in mitochondrial DNA function.

Matsushima Y(1), Kaguni LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation & Birth Defect Research, National Institute
of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology & Psychiatry, Tokyo 187-8502,
Japan.

Lon, ClpXP and m-AAA are the three major ATP-dependent proteases in the
mitochondrial matrix. All three are involved in general quality control by
degrading damaged or abnormal proteins. In addition to this role, they are
proposed to serve roles in mitochondrial DNA functions including packaging and
stability, replication, transcription and translation. In particular, Lon has
been implicated in mtDNA metabolism in yeast, fly and humans. Here, we review the
role of Lon protease in mitochondrial DNA functions, and discuss a putative
physiological role for mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) degradation by
Lon protease. We also discuss the possible roles of m-AAA and ClpXP in
mitochondrial DNA functions, and the putative candidate substrates for the three 
matrix proteases. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Mitochondrial
Gene Expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3383373
PMID: 22172992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Reprod Domest Anim. 2012 Oct;47(5):806-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2011.01972.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Characteristics of bovine oocytes with different meiotic competence in terms of
their mitochondrial status and expression of nuclear-encoded factors.

Machatkova M(1), Jeseta M, Hulinska P, Knitlova D, Nemcova L, Kanka J.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic.

The present study was designed to characterize bovine oocytes with different
meiotic competence and atresia levels in terms of their mitochondrial status.
Oocyte subpopulations were recovered either from medium (MF) or small (SF)
follicles and categorized as healthy, light-atretic and mid-atretic according to 
oocyte morphology. Mitochondrial activity, morphology and distribution, adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) content and expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) and nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) were assessed before (GV) and
after (MII) maturation. The data were related to follicular size regardless of or
with regard to oocyte atresia. Regardless of atresia, the MF subpopulation showed
a significantly higher mitochondrial activity and frequency of oocytes with
granulated mitochondria at GV and clustered mitochondria at MII than the SF
subpopulation. With regard to atresia, mitochondrial activity decreased from
healthy to mid-atretic oocytes in both MF and SF subpopulations at GV, but in the
SF subpopulation at MII, the mitochondrial activity and frequency of oocytes with
clustered mitochondria were significantly higher in light-atretic than in healthy
oocytes. The light-atretic oocytes also produced more ATP than healthy ones in
both SF and MF subpopulations. However, a significantly higher relative abundance
of mRNA TFAM was found in SF than MF subpopulations at GV, and this difference
remained in mid-atretic oocytes at MII. It can be concluded that meiotic
competence and atresia level influence mitochondrial status of immature bovine
oocytes. After maturation, healthy oocytes from medium follicles and
light-atretic oocytes from small follicles were more developed in terms of
mitochondrial status than the other oocytes.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 22171698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):4065-73. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.23.18254. Epub 2011 Dec
1.

Mitochondrial oxidative stress in cancer-associated fibroblasts drives lactate
production, promoting breast cancer tumor growth: understanding the aging and
cancer connection.

Balliet RM(1), Capparelli C, Guido C, Pestell TG, Martinez-Outschoorn UE, Lin Z, 
Whitaker-Menezes D, Chiavarina B, Pestell RG, Howell A, Sotgia F, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)The Jefferson Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine Center, Department
of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Increasing chronological age is the most significant risk factor for cancer.
Recently, we proposed a new paradigm for understanding the role of the aging and 
the tumor microenvironment in cancer onset. In this model, cancer cells induce
oxidative stress in adjacent stromal fibroblasts. This, in turn, causes several
changes in the phenotype of the fibroblast including mitochondrial dysfunction,
hydrogen peroxide production, and aerobic glycolysis, resulting in high levels of
L-lactate production. L-lactate is then transferred from these glycolytic
fibroblasts to adjacent epithelial cancer cells and used as "fuel" for oxidative 
mitochondrial metabolism.  Here, we created a new pre-clinical model system to
directly test this hypothesis experimentally. To synthetically generate
glycolytic fibroblasts, we genetically-induced mitochondrial dysfunction by
knocking down TFAM using an sh-RNA approach.  TFAM is mitochondrial transcription
factor A, which is important in functionally maintaining the mitochondrial
respiratory chain. Interestingly, TFAM-deficient fibroblasts showed evidence of
mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress, with the loss of certain
mitochondrial respiratory chain components, and the over-production of hydrogen
peroxide and L-lactate. Thus, TFAM-deficient fibroblasts underwent metabolic
reprogramming towards aerobic glycolysis.  Most importantly, TFAM-deficient
fibroblasts significantly promoted tumor growth, as assayed using a human breast 
cancer (MDA-MB-231) xenograft model. These increases in glycolytic fibroblast
driven tumor growth were independent of tumor angiogenesis. Mechanistically,
TFAM-deficient fibroblasts increased the mitochondrial activity of adjacent
epithelial cancer cells in a co-culture system, as seen using MitoTracker.
Finally, TFAM-deficient fibroblasts also showed a loss of caveolin-1 (Cav-1), a
known breast cancer stromal biomarker. Loss of stromal fibroblast Cav-1 is
associated with early tumor recurrence, metastasis, and treatment failure,
resulting in poor clinical outcome in breast cancer patients. Thus, this new
experimental model system, employing glycolytic fibroblasts, may be highly
clinically relevant. These studies also have implications for understanding the
role of hydrogen peroxide production in oxidative damage and "host cell aging,"
in providing a permissive metabolic microenvironment for promoting and sustaining
tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3272288
PMID: 22129993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027727. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Differential regional and subtype-specific vulnerability of enteric neurons to
mitochondrial dysfunction.

Viader A(1), Wright-Jin EC, Vohra BP, Heuckeroth RO, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is a central mediator of disease progression in diverse
neurodegenerative diseases that often present with prominent gastrointestinal
abnormalities. Gastrointestinal dysfunction in these disorders is related, at
least in part, to defects in the enteric nervous system (ENS). The role of
mitochondrial deficits in ENS neurodegeneration and their relative contribution
to gastrointestinal dysfunction, however, are unclear. To better understand how
mitochondrial abnormalities in the ENS influence enteric neurodegeneration and
affect intestinal function, we generated mice (Tfam-ENSKOs) with impaired
mitochondrial metabolism in enteric neurons and glia through the targeted
deletion of the mitochondrial transcription factor A gene (Tfam). Tfam-ENSKO mice
were initially viable but, at an early age, they developed severe
gastrointestinal motility problems characterized by intestinal pseudo-obstruction
resulting in premature death. This gastrointestinal dysfunction was caused by
extensive, progressive neurodegeneration of the ENS involving both neurons and
glia. Interestingly, mitochondrial defects differentially affected specific
subpopulations of enteric neurons and regions of the gastrointestinal tract.
Mitochondrial deficiency-related neuronal and glial loss was most prominent in
the proximal small intestine, but the first affected neurons, nitrergic
inhibitory neurons, had the greatest losses in the distal small intestine. This
regional and subtype-specific variability in susceptibility to mitochondrial
defects resulted in an imbalance of inhibitory and excitatory neurons that likely
accounts for the observed phenotype in Tfam-ENSKO mice. Mitochondrial
dysfunction, therefore, is likely to be an important driving force of
neurodegeneration in the ENS and contribute to gastrointestinal symptoms in
people with neurodegenerative disorders.

PMCID: PMC3218017
PMID: 22110743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Arch Toxicol. 2012 Apr;86(4):633-42. doi: 10.1007/s00204-011-0778-y. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Diesel exhaust particulate extracts inhibit transcription of nuclear respiratory 
factor-1 and cell viability in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.

Mattingly KA(1), Klinge CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Toxicol. 2012 Apr;86(4):517-8.

Endothelial dysfunction precedes cardiovascular disease and is accompanied by
mitochondrial dysfunction. Here we tested the hypothesis that diesel exhaust
particulate extracts (DEPEs), prepared from a truck run at different speeds and
engine loads, would inhibit genomic estrogen receptor activation of nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) transcription in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs). Additionally, we examined how DEPEs affect NRF-1-regulated TFAM
expression and, in turn, Tfam-regulated mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidase
subunit I (COI, MTCO1) and NADH dehydrogenase subunit I (NDI) expression as well 
as cell proliferation and viability. We report that 17ß-estradiol (E(2)),
4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), and raloxifene increased NRF-1 transcription in
HUVECs in an ER-dependent manner. DEPEs inhibited NRF-1 transcription, and this
suppression was not ablated by concomitant treatment with E(2), 4-OHT, or
raloxifene, indicating that the effect was not due to inhibition of ER activity. 
While E(2) increased HUVEC proliferation and viability, DEPEs inhibited viability
but not proliferation. Resveratrol increased NRF-1 transcription in an
ER-dependent manner in HUVECs, and ablated DEPE inhibition of basal NRF-1
expression. Given that NRF-1 is a key nuclear transcription factor regulating
genes involved in mitochondrial activity and biogenesis, these data suggest that 
DEPEs may adversely affect mitochondrial function leading to endothelial
dysfunction and resveratrol may block these effects.

PMCID: PMC3309133
PMID: 22105178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2011 Nov 18;3:32. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-3-32.

Adipocyte mitochondrial genes and the forkhead factor FOXC2 are decreased in type
2 diabetes patients and normalized in response to rosiglitazone.

Håkansson J(1), Eliasson B, Smith U, Enerbäck S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine
University of Gothenburg, Göteborg, Sweden. Joakim@pharmasurgics.se.

BACKGROUND: FOXC2 has lately been implicated in diabetes and obesity as well as
mitochondrial function and biogenesis and also as a regulator of mtTFA/Tfam. In
this study, the expression of FOXC2 and selected genes involved in mitochondrial 
function and biogenesis in healthy subjects and in a matched cohort with type 2
diabetes patients before and after treatment with rosiglitazone was determined.
Quantitative real time PCR was used to analyze both RNA and DNA from biopsies
from subcutaneous adipose tissue.
METHODS: Blood samples and subcutaneous abdominal fat biopsies were collected
from 12 T2D patients, of which 11 concluded the study, pre-treatment and 90 days 
after initiation of rosiglitazone treatment, and from 19 healthy control subjects
on the first and only visit from healthy subjects. Clinical parameters were
measured on the blood samples. RNA and DNA were prepared from the fat biopsies
and gene expression was measured with real time PCR.
RESULTS: The expression level of genes in the mitochondrial respiratory complexes
I - IV were significantly downregulated in the diabetic patients and restored in 
response to rosiglitazone treatment. Rosiglitazone treatment also increased the
relative number of mitochondria in diabetic patients compared with controls.
Furthermore, the transcription factors FOXC2 and mtTFA/Tfam displayed a response 
pattern identical to the mitochondrial genes.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXC2, mtTFA/Tfam and subunits of the respiratory complexes I - IV
show equivalent regulation in gene expression levels in response to TZD
treatment. This, together with the knowledge that FOXC2 has a regulatory function
of mtTFA/Tfam and mitochondrial biogenesis, suggests that FOXC2 has a possible
functional role in the TZD activated mitochondrial response.

PMCID: PMC3230127
PMID: 22098677  [PubMed]


441. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Nov 4;18(11):1179-81. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2167.

TFAM forces mtDNA to make a U-turn.

Hallberg BM, Larsson NG.

Comment on
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;18(11):1281-9.
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;18(11):1290-6.

PMID: 22056802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am J Pathol. 2012 Jan;180(1):24-31. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.10.003. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

Mitochondrial genome instability and ROS enhance intestinal tumorigenesis in
APC(Min/+) mice.

Woo DK(1), Green PD, Santos JH, D'Souza AD, Walther Z, Martin WD, Christian BE,
Chandel NS, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8023, USA.

Alterations in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation have long been documented 
in tumors. Other types of mitochondrial dysfunction, including altered reactive
oxygen species (ROS) production and apoptosis, also can contribute to
tumorigenesis and cancer phenotypes. Furthermore, mutation and altered amounts of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) have been observed in cancer cells. However, how mtDNA 
instability per se contributes to cancer remains largely undetermined.
Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is required for expression and
maintenance of mtDNA. Tfam heterozygous knock-out (Tfam(+/-)) mice show mild
mtDNA depletion, but have no overt phenotypes. We show that Tfam(+/-) mouse cells
and tissues not only possess less mtDNA but also increased oxidative mtDNA
damage. Crossing Tfam(+/-) mice to the adenomatous polyposis coli multiple
intestinal neoplasia (APC(Min/+)) mouse cancer model revealed that mtDNA
instability increases tumor number and growth in the small intestine. This was
not a result of enhancement of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, but rather appears to
involve a propensity for increased mitochondrial ROS production. Direct
involvement of mitochondrial ROS in intestinal tumorigenesis was shown by
crossing APC(Min/+) mice to those that have catalase targeted to mitochondria,
which resulted in a significant reduction in tumorigenesis in the colon. Thus,
mitochondrial genome instability and ROS enhance intestinal tumorigenesis and
Tfam(+/-) mice are a relevant model to address the role of mtDNA instability in
disease states in which mitochondrial dysfunction is implicated, such as cancer, 
neurodegeneration, and aging.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3338350
PMID: 22056359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Reprod Domest Anim. 2012 Aug;47(4):644-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2011.01936.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Investigation into developmental potential and nuclear/mitochondrial function in 
early wood and plains bison hybrid embryos.

Seaby RP(1), Mackie P, King WA, Mastromonaco GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario N1G
2W1, Canada.

Studies to date have shown that bison embryo development in vitro is compromised 
with few embryos developing to the blastocyst stage. The aim of this study was to
use bison-cattle hybrid embryos, an interspecific cross that is known to result
in live offspring in vivo, as a model for assessing species-specific differences 
in embryo development in vitro. Cattle oocytes fertilized with cattle, plains
bison and wood bison sperm were assessed for various developmental parameters
associated with embryo quality, including cell number, apoptosis and ATP content.
Decreased development to the blastocyst stage was observed in hybrid wood bison
embryos compared with the other treatment groups. Although both wood bison and
plains bison hybrid blastocysts had significantly lower cell numbers than cattle 
blastocysts, only wood bison hybrid blastocysts had a greater incidence of
apoptosis than cattle blastocysts. Among the treatment groups, ATP levels and
expression profiles of NRF1, TFAM, MT-CYB, BAX and BCL2 were not significantly
different in both 8- to 16-cell stage and blastocyst stage embryos. These data
provide evidence of decreased developmental competence in the wood bison hybrid
embryos, owing to inadequate culture conditions that have increased apoptotic
events.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 22050383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Nov 21;505(3):268-72. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.036. Epub
2011 Oct 21.

Impact of exercise on mitochondrial transcription factor expression and damage in
the striatum of a chronic mouse model of Parkinson's disease.

Patki G(1), Lau YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA.

The etiology of neurodegenerative disorders like Parkinson's disease remains
unknown, although many genetic and environmental factors are suggested as likely 
causes. Neuronal oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction have been
implicated as possible triggers for the onset and progression of Parkinson's
neurodegeneration. We have recently shown that long-term treadmill exercise
prevented neurological, mitochondrial and locomotor deficits in a chronic
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine and probenecid-induced mouse model
of Parkinson's disease that was originally established in our laboratory. In the 
present study, we further demonstrated that long-term exercise attenuated both
cytochrome c release and elevated levels of p53, which are known to be associated
with mitochondrial dysfunction in the striatum of this chronic model. On the
other hand, the expressions of mitochondrial transcription factor A and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1a were unexpectedly
upregulated in the striatum of this chronic model, but long-term exercise
training brought their levels down closer to normal. Our findings suggest that
maintaining normal mitochondrial function is essential for preventing the process
of Parkinson's disease-like neurodegeneration, whereas stimulating the
mitochondrial transcription factors for biogenesis is not obligatory.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3227723
PMID: 22040668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Oct 30;18(11):1281-9. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2160.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A induces a U-turn structure in the
light strand promoter.

Rubio-Cosials A(1), Sidow JF, Jiménez-Menéndez N, Fernández-Millán P, Montoya J, 
Jacobs HT, Coll M, Bernadó P, Solà M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Molecular Biology Institute of Barcelona
(CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012 Mar;19(3):364.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;18(11):1179-81.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A, TFAM, is essential for mitochondrial 
DNA packaging and maintenance and also has a crucial role in transcription.
Crystallographic analysis of TFAM in complex with an oligonucleotide containing
the mitochondrial light strand promoter (LSP) revealed two high-mobility group
(HMG) protein domains that, through different DNA recognition properties,
intercalate residues at two inverted DNA motifs. This induced an overall DNA bend
of ~180°, stabilized by the interdomain linker. This U-turn allows the TFAM
C-terminal tail, which recruits the transcription machinery, to approach the
initiation site, despite contacting a distant DNA sequence. We also ascertained
that structured protein regions contacting DNA in the crystal were highly
flexible in solution in the absence of DNA. Our data suggest that TFAM bends LSP 
to create an optimal DNA arrangement for transcriptional initiation while
facilitating DNA compaction elsewhere in the genome.

PMID: 22037172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Oct 30;18(11):1290-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2159.

The mitochondrial transcription and packaging factor Tfam imposes a U-turn on
mitochondrial DNA.

Ngo HB(1), Kaiser JT, Chan DC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Nov;18(11):1179-81.

Tfam (transcription factor A, mitochondrial), a DNA-binding protein with tandem
high-mobility group (HMG)-box domains, has a central role in the expression,
maintenance and organization of the mitochondrial genome. It activates
transcription from mitochondrial promoters and organizes the mitochondrial genome
into nucleoids. Using X-ray crystallography, we show that human Tfam forces
promoter DNA to undergo a U-turn, reversing the direction of the DNA helix. Each 
HMG-box domain wedges into the DNA minor groove to generate two kinks on one face
of the DNA. On the opposite face, a positively charged a-helix serves as a
platform to facilitate DNA bending. The structural principles underlying DNA
bending converge with those of the unrelated HU family proteins, which have
analogous architectural roles in organizing bacterial nucleoids. The functional
importance of this extreme DNA bending is promoter specific and seems to be
related to the orientation of Tfam on the promoters.

PMCID: PMC3210390
PMID: 22037171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Neuron Glia Biol. 2011 Feb;7(1):17-23. doi: 10.1017/S1740925X1100010X. Epub 2011 
Oct 28.

The role of microglial mtDNA damage in age-dependent prolonged LPS-induced
sickness behavior.

Nakanishi H(1), Hayashi Y, Wu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging Science and Pharmacology, Faculty of Dental Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. nakan@dent.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Microglia are the main cellular source of oxidation products and inflammatory
molecules in the brain during aging. The accumulation of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) oxidative damage in microglia during aging results in the increased
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). The increased intracellular ROS, in 
turn, activates a redox-sensitive nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) to provoke excessive 
neuroinflammation, resulting in memory deficits and the prolonged behavioral
consequence of infection. Besides its role in regulating the gene copy number,
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is closely associated with the
stabilization of mtDNA structures. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces the
generation of ROS from the actively respirating mitochondria as well as NADPH
oxidase, and leads to the subsequent activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
inflammatory pathway in aging microglia. The overexpression of human TFAM
improves the age-dependent prolonged LPS-induced sickness behaviors by
ameliorating the mtDNA damage and reducing the resultant redox-regulated
inflammatory responses. Therefore, 'microglia-aging' plays important roles in the
age-dependent enhanced behavioral consequences of infection.

PMID: 22032249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Nov 11;52(12):8791-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.11-8203.

Role of mitochondria biogenesis in the metabolic memory associated with the
continued progression of diabetic retinopathy and its regulation by lipoic acid.

Santos JM(1), Kowluru RA.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: Termination of hyperglycemia does not arrest the progression of diabetic
retinopathy, and retinal mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) remains damaged, resulting in 
a continuous cycle of mitochondrial dysfunction. This study is to investigate the
role of mitochondria biogenesis (regulated by nuclear mitochondrial signaling) in
the metabolic memory phenomenon.
METHODS: Mitochondria DNA copy number, functional integrity, and biogenesis
(peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1a [PGC1], nuclear
respiratory factor 1 [NRF1], mitochondrial transcriptional factor [TFAM]) were
analyzed in the retina from streptozotocin-diabetic rats maintained in poor or
good control for 12 months (PC and GC respectively), or in PC for 6 months
followed by 6 months of GC (Rev). The effect of direct inhibition of superoxide
on prior insult was investigated by supplementing lipoic acid (LA) during their 6
months of GC (R+LA). Binding of TFAM with chaperones (heat shock proteins 70 and 
60, Hsp70 and Hsp60 respectively) was quantified by coimmunoprecipitation. The
key parameters and the number of mitochondria (by transmission electron
microscopy and fluorescence microscopy) were confirmed in isolated retinal
endothelial cells.
RESULTS: Six months of GC in the rats in Rev group did not provide any benefit to
diabetes-induced decreased mtDNA copy number, increased gene transcripts of PGC1,
NRF1, and TFAM, and decreased mitochondrial TFAM. The binding of TFAM with the
chaperones remained subnormal. Supplementation of LA (R+LA), however, had a
significant beneficial effect on the impaired mitochondria biogenesis, and also
on the continued progression of diabetic retinopathy. Similar results of reversal
of high glucose insult were observed in isolated retinal endothelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysregulated mitochondria biogenesis contributes to the metabolic
memory, and supplementation of GC with therapies targeted in modulating
mitochondria homeostasis has potential in helping diabetic patients retard
progression of retinopathy.

PMCID: PMC3230862
PMID: 22003111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jan;40(2):614-24. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr787. Epub 2011 Sep 
23.

Transcriptional activation by mitochondrial transcription factor A involves
preferential distortion of promoter DNA.

Malarkey CS(1), Bestwick M, Kuhlwilm JE, Shadel GS, Churchill ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Denver, School of Medicine,
12801 E. 17th Ave, Aurora, CO 80045-0511, USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA/TFAM) is a nucleus-encoded,
high-mobility-group-box (HMG-box) protein that regulates transcription of the
mitochondrial genome by specifically recognizing light-strand and heavy-strand
promoters (LSP, HSP1). TFAM also binds mitochondrial DNA in a non-sequence
specific (NSS) fashion and facilitates its packaging into nucleoid structures.
However, the requirement and contribution of DNA-bending for these two different 
binding modes has not been addressed in detail, which prompted this comparison of
binding and bending properties of TFAM on promoter and non-promoter DNA. Promoter
DNA increased the stability of TFAM to a greater degree than non-promoter DNA.
However, the thermodynamic properties of DNA binding for TFAM with promoter and
non-specific (NS) DNA were similar to each other and to other NSS HMG-box
proteins. Fluorescence resonance energy transfer assays showed that TFAM bends
promoter DNA to a greater degree than NS DNA. In contrast, TFAM lacking the
C-terminal tail distorted both promoter and non-promoter DNA to a significantly
reduced degree, corresponding with markedly decreased transcriptional activation 
capacity at LSP and HSP1 in vitro. Thus, the enhanced bending of promoter DNA
imparted by the C-terminal tail is a critical component of the ability of TFAM to
activate promoter-specific initiation by the core mitochondrial transcription
machinery.

PMCID: PMC3258160
PMID: 21948790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Nature. 2011 Sep 25;478(7368):269-73. doi: 10.1038/nature10435.

Structure of human mitochondrial RNA polymerase.

Ringel R(1), Sologub M, Morozov YI, Litonin D, Cramer P, Temiakov D.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Center and Department of Biochemistry, Center for Integrated Protein
Science Munich, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Feodor-Lynen-Strasse 25, 
81377 Munich, Germany.

Transcription of the mitochondrial genome is performed by a single-subunit RNA
polymerase (mtRNAP) that is distantly related to the RNAP of bacteriophage T7,
the pol<U+2009>I family of DNA polymerases, and single-subunit RNAPs from chloroplasts. 
Whereas T7 RNAP can initiate transcription by itself, mtRNAP requires the factors
TFAM and TFB2M for binding and melting promoter DNA. TFAM is an abundant protein 
that binds and bends promoter DNA 15-40<U+2009>base pairs upstream of the transcription 
start site, and stimulates the recruitment of mtRNAP and TFB2M to the promoter.
TFB2M assists mtRNAP in promoter melting and reaches the active site of mtRNAP to
interact with the first base pair of the RNA-DNA hybrid. Here we report the X-ray
structure of human mtRNAP at 2.5<U+2009>Å resolution, which reveals a T7-like catalytic 
carboxy-terminal domain, an amino-terminal domain that remotely resembles the T7 
promoter-binding domain, a novel pentatricopeptide repeat domain, and a flexible 
N-terminal extension. The pentatricopeptide repeat domain sequesters an AT-rich
recognition loop, which binds promoter DNA in T7 RNAP, probably explaining the
need for TFAM during promoter binding. Consistent with this, substitution of a
conserved arginine residue in the AT-rich recognition loop, or release of this
loop by deletion of the N-terminal part of mtRNAP, had no effect on
transcription. The fingers domain and the intercalating hairpin, which melts DNA 
in phage RNAPs, are repositioned, explaining the need for TFB2M during promoter
melting. Our results provide a new venue for the mechanistic analysis of
mitochondrial transcription. They also indicate how an early phage-like mtRNAP
lost functions in promoter binding and melting, which were provided by initiation
factors in trans during evolution, to enable mitochondrial gene regulation and
the adaptation of mitochondrial function to changes in the environment.

PMID: 21947009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 May;1820(5):565-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2011.08.014.
Epub 2011 Aug 31.

The role of TFAM-associated proteins in mitochondrial RNA metabolism.

Uchiumi T(1), Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan. uchiumi@cclm.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) takes on a higher structure
called the nucleoid or mitochromosome, which corresponds to that of nuclear DNA. 
Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which was cloned as a transcription 
factor for mitochondrial DNA, is critical for forming this higher structure and
for maintenance of mtDNA.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: To investigate the functional aspects of the nucleoid, we have
identified many RNA-binding proteins to be candidate TFAM interactors, including 
ERAL1 and p32.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: In this review, we would like to describe that ERAL1 binds to 
the mitochondrial rRNA component of the ribosomal small subunit and is an
important constituent of this subunit. p32, which is involved in mitochondrial
translation, may be a novel marker of clinical progression in prostate cancer.
Here we describe these proteins, all of which are involved in translation within 
the mitochondrial matrix.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: This review highlights the results from the mitochondrial
nucleoid research in organic biochemistry. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled Biochemistry of Mitochondria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21920408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Gene Ther. 2012 May;19(5):469-75. doi: 10.1038/gt.2011.134. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Mitochondrial gene replacement in human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural
progenitors.

Iyer S(1), Xiao E, Alsayegh K, Eroshenko N, Riggs MJ, Bennett JP Jr, Rao RR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Biological Complexity, Life Sciences Program, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284-3020, USA. siyer@vcu.edu

Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural progenitor (hNP) cells are an
excellent resource for understanding early neural development and
neurodegenerative disorders. Given that many neurodegenerative disorders can be
correlated with defects in the mitochondrial genome, optimal utilization of hNP
cells requires an ability to manipulate and monitor changes in the mitochondria. 
Here, we describe a novel approach that uses recombinant human mitochondrial
transcription factor A (rhTFAM) protein to transfect and express a pathogenic
mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) carrying the G11778A mutation associated with
Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON) disease, into dideoxycytidine
(ddC)-treated hNPs. Treatment with ddC reduced endogenous mtDNA and gene
expression, without loss of hNP phenotypic markers. Entry of G11778A mtDNA
complexed with the rhTFAM was observed in mitochondria of ddC-hNPs. Expression of
the pathogenic RNA was confirmed by restriction enzyme analysis of the
SfaN1-digested cDNA. On the basis of the expression of neuron-specific class III 
beta-tubulin, neuronal differentiation occurred. Our results show for the first
time that pathogenic mtDNA can be introduced and expressed into hNPs without loss
of phenotype or neuronal differentiation potential. This mitochondrial gene
replacement technology allows for creation of in vitro stem cell-based models
useful for understanding neuronal development and treatment of neurodegenerative 
disorders.

PMID: 21918550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Nov 15;51(10):1849-60. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2011.08.017. Epub 2011 Aug 25.

Mitochondrial biogenesis and the development of diabetic retinopathy.

Santos JM(1), Tewari S, Goldberg AF, Kowluru RA.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Eye Institute, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Retinal mitochondria become dysfunctional and their DNA (mtDNA) is damaged in
diabetes. The biogenesis of mitochondrial DNA is tightly controlled by
nuclear-mitochondrial transcriptional factors, and translocation of transcription
factor A (TFAM) to the mitochondria is essential for transcription and
replication. Our aim is to investigate the effects of diabetes on
nuclear-mitochondrial communication in the retina and its role in the development
of retinopathy. Damage of mtDNA, copy number, and biogenesis (PGC1, NRF1, TFAM)
were analyzed in the retinas from streptozotocin-diabetic wild-type (WT) and
MnSOD transgenic (Tg) mice. Binding between TFAM and chaperone Hsp70 was
quantified by coimmunoprecipitation. The key parameters were confirmed in
isolated retinal endothelial cells and in the retinas from human donors with
diabetic retinopathy. Diabetes in WT mice increased retinal mtDNA damage and
decreased copy number. The gene transcripts of PGC1, NRF1, and TFAM were
increased, but mitochondrial accumulation of TFAM was significantly decreased,
and the binding of Hsp70 and TFAM was subnormal compared to WT nondiabetic mice. 
However, Tg diabetic mice were protected from retinal mtDNA damage and
alterations in mitochondrial biogenesis. In retinal endothelial cells, high
glucose decreased the number of mitochondria, as demonstrated by MitoTracker
green staining and by electron microscopy, and impaired the transcriptional
factors. Similar alterations in biogenesis were observed in the donors with
diabetic retinopathy. Thus, retinal mitochondrial biogenesis is under the control
of superoxide radicals and is impaired in diabetes, possibly by decreased
transport of TFAM to the mitochondria. Modulation of biogenesis by pharmaceutical
or molecular means may provide a potential strategy to retard the
development/progression of diabetic retinopathy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3202722
PMID: 21911054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Endocrinology. 2011 Nov;152(11):4158-70. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1078. Epub 2011 Aug
23.

Maternal obesity promotes a proinflammatory signature in rat uterus and
blastocyst.

Shankar K(1), Zhong Y, Kang P, Lau F, Blackburn ML, Chen JR, Borengasser SJ,
Ronis MJ, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, 15 Children's Way, Slot 512-20B, Little 
Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA. shankarkartik@uams.edu

Maternal obesity at conception increases the risk of offspring obesity, thus
propagating an intergenerational vicious cycle. Male offspring born to obese dams
are hyperresponsive to high fat-diets, gaining greater body weight, fat mass, and
additional metabolic sequelae compared to lean controls. In this report, we
identify the impact of maternal obesity before conception, on the embryo, and
intrauterine milieu during the periimplantation period. We conducted global
transcriptomic profiling in the uterus and periimplantation blastocyst,
gene/protein expression analyses of inflammatory pathways in conjunction with
endocrine and metabolic characterization in the dams at implantation. Uterine
gene expression profiles of lean and obese dams revealed distinct signatures for 
genes regulating inflammation and lipid metabolism. Both pathway and gene-set
enrichment analysis revealed uterine nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and c-Jun N-terminal
kinase signaling to be up-regulated in the uterus of obese dams, which was
confirmed via immunoblotting. Obese uteri also evidenced an inflammatory
secretome with higher chemokine mRNA abundance (CCL2, CCL5, CCL7, and CxCL10) and
related regulators (TLR2, CD14, and Ccr1). Increased inflammation in the uterus
was associated with ectopic lipid accumulation and expression of lipid metabolic 
genes. Gene expression in sex-identified male periimplantation blastocyst at day 
postcoitum 4.5 was clearly influenced by maternal obesity (359 transcripts,
±1.4-fold), including changes in developmental and epigenetic regulators. Akin to
the uterus, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B-regulated proinflammatory genes (CCL4 and CCL5)
increased and expression of antioxidant (GPx3) and mitochondrial (TFAM and NRF1) 
genes decreased in the obese embryos. Our results suggest that ectopic lipid and 
inflammation may link maternal obesity to increased predisposition of offspring
to obesity later in life.

PMCID: PMC3199010
PMID: 21862610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 May;1820(5):577-85. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2011.08.007.
Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Overexpression of TFAM, NRF-1 and myr-AKT protects the MPP(+)-induced
mitochondrial dysfunctions in neuronal cells.

Piao Y(1), Kim HG, Oh MS, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration Control Research Center, South
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial dysfunction is a prominent feature of neurodegenerative
diseases including Parkinson's disease (PD), in which insulin signaling pathway
may also be implicated because 50-80% of PD patients exhibited metabolic syndrome
and insulin resistance. 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and
its toxic metabolite, 1-methyl-4-phenyl-2,3-dihydropyridinium ion (MPP(+)),
inhibit complex I in mitochondrial respiratory chain and are used widely to
construct the PD models. But the precise molecular link between mitochondrial
damage and insulin signaling remains unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using cell-based mitochondrial activity profiling system, we
systemically demonstrated that MPP(+) suppressed mitochondrial activity and
mitochondrial gene expressions mediated by nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1)
and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) in SH-SY5Y cells. MPP(+)
fragmented mitochondrial networks and repressed phosphorylation of AKT.
Similarly, the expressions of mitochondrial genes and tyrosine hydroxylase and
AKT phosphorylation were reduced in substantia nigra and striatum of
MPTP-injected mice. Transient transfection of TFAM, NRF-1, or myr-AKT reversed
all aspects of the MPP(+)-mediated changes.
CONCLUSIONS: Mitochondrial activation by TFAM, NRF-1, and myr-AKT abrogated
MPP(+)-mediated damages on mitochondria and insulin signaling, leading to
recovery of nigrostriatal neurodegeneration.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: We suggest that TFAM, NRF-1, and AKT may be the critical
points of therapeutic intervention for PD. This article is part of a Special
Issue entitled Biochemistry of Mitochondria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21856379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 27;194:234-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.068.
Epub 2011 Aug 6.

Impaired mitochondrial biogenesis in hippocampi of rats with chronic seizures.

Han Y(1), Lin Y, Xie N, Xue Y, Tao H, Rui C, Xu J, Cao L, Liu X, Jiang H, Chi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan 250012,
China.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been suggested to be a contributing factor of
epilepsy, but the underlying mechanisms are not completely explored.
Mitochondrial biogenesis is involved in regulation of mitochondrial content,
morphology, and function. In the current study, we show mitochondrial biogenesis 
severely impaired in hippocampi of rats with chronic seizures induced by
pilocarpine, as evidenced by decreased mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content and
decreased mtDNA-encoded protein level. Furthermore, we show mtDNA transcription
and replication reduced in rats with chronic seizures. These defects were
independent of downregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis-related factors, such
as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1a, nuclear
respiratory factor-1, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), but
depended on reduced Tfam-DNA binding activity. The present study suggests novel
mechanisms for mitochondrial dysfunction during chronic seizures.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21854834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Theriogenology. 2011 Oct 15;76(7):1215-26. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.05.025. Epub 2011 Aug 5.

G6PDH-activity in equine oocytes correlates with morphology, expression of
candidate genes for viability, and preimplantative in vitro development.

Mohammadi-Sangcheshmeh A(1), Held E, Ghanem N, Rings F, Salilew-Wondim D, Tesfaye
D, Sieme H, Schellander K, Hoelker M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Efficiencies for in vitro production of equine embryos are still low due to
highly variable developmental competences of equine immature oocytes. In contrast
to the equine, in vitro developmental competence of immature oocytes has been
predicted successfully by the activity of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PDH) indicated by brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) dye in a range of different
species. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to test the association
between G6PDH activity in equine oocytes with: (1) cumulus morphology and oocyte 
properties in terms of diameter and volume; (2) maturational competence; (3) gene
expression of certain molecular markers; and (4) in vitro embryo development
after intracytoplasmic sperm injection. Equine oocytes were exposed to BCB stain 
and were classified as BCB+ or BCB- according to their ability to convert the dye
from blue to colorless. Additionally, BCB+ and BCB- oocytes were subclassified as
having a compact (Cp) or expanded (Ex) cumulus complex. As a result, BCB+ oocytes
had a greater proportion of expanded cumulus oocyte complexes compared with BCB- 
oocytes (71.2% vs. 49.5%). Moreover, we observed a significant difference in
oocyte diameter and volume between BCB+ and BCB- oocytes irrespective of cumulus 
morphology. BCB+ oocytes reached a higher maturation rate compared with BCB-
oocytes (59.0% vs. 28.7%). Regarding the analyzed candidate genes, relative
transcript abundance was significantly different for nine genes. The expression
of eight genes was significantly higher (P < 0.05) for BCB+ oocytes, including
ATPV6E, IF-3, TFAM, DNMT1, STAT3, Aurora-A, ODC1, and CKS2 whereas BCB- oocytes
showed higher in expression of COX1. These results are in line with the observed 
developmental competence. Cleavage rate (45.9% vs. 29.0%) and percentage of
embryos that reached the blastocyst stage (9.2% vs. 1.4%) were significantly
higher for embryos derived from BCB+ oocytes compared with BCB- oocytes. In
conclusion, the present study provides evidence that G6PDH-activity in immature
equine oocytes is a useful predictor for subsequent in vitro developmental
competence.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21820165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Surg Res. 2012 Jul;176(1):178-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.05.055. Epub 2011 Jun
25.

Early myocardial dysfunction is not caused by mitochondrial abnormalities in a
rat model of peritonitis.

Smeding L(1), van der Laarse WJ, van Veelen TA, Lamberts RR, Niessen HW, Kneyber 
MC, Groeneveld AB, Plötz FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. l.smeding@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Patients with complicated intra-abdominal infections are prone to
develop multiple organ failure, including myocardial dysfunction. We hypothesized
that early dysfunction during sepsis is associated with inflammation,
mitochondrial injury, impaired mitochondrial function, and activation of
mitochondrial biogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats received lipopolysaccharide (LPS, n = 11)
intraperitoneally. Healthy rats (n = 6) served as controls. Myocardial function
was measured ex vivo in an isolated Langendorff-perfused heart set-up. Myocardial
vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) expression was determined by
immunofluorescence microscopy. Cytochrome c release and cytochrome c oxidase (COX
IV) activity were measured by immunohistochemistry and enzyme histochemistry,
respectively. Protein expression of tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), B-cell
lymphoma (Bcl)-2, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3> cofactor 1a
(PGC-1a), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) were analyzed by
Western blot technique. Mitochondria were studied by electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Two hours after LPS injection, developed pressure had decreased and
after 4 h myocardial contractility (+dP/dt) and relaxation (-dP/dt) also had
decreased. TNF-a protein expression was increased after 2 h and returned to
normal at 4 h, whereas after 4 h VCAM-1 expression was higher in LPS-treated
animals. At 2 h a substrate-dependent increase in COXIV-activity was seen, but no
mitochondrial damage occurred as cytochrome c release, COX IV activity and Bcl-2,
PGC-1a or TFAM expression were not changed. Electron microscopy did not reveal
differences in myocardial mitochondrial characteristics between LPS-treated and
control rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Early myocardial dysfunction in sepsis is associated with myocardial
inflammation but not with mitochondrial injury, impaired mitochondrial function, 
or activated mitochondrial biogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21816428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 16;108(33):13534-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109263108. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Super-resolution microscopy reveals that mammalian mitochondrial nucleoids have a
uniform size and frequently contain a single copy of mtDNA.

Kukat C(1), Wurm CA, Spåhr H, Falkenberg M, Larsson NG, Jakobs S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of
Ageing, D-50931 Cologne, Germany.

Mammalian mtDNA is packaged in DNA-protein complexes denoted mitochondrial
nucleoids. The organization of the nucleoid is a very fundamental question in
mitochondrial biology and will determine tissue segregation and transmission of
mtDNA. We have used a combination of stimulated emission depletion microscopy,
enabling a resolution well below the diffraction barrier, and molecular biology
to study nucleoids in a panel of mammalian tissue culture cells. We report that
the nucleoids labeled with antibodies against DNA, mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM), or incorporated BrdU, have a defined, uniform mean size of ~100 
nm in mammals. Interestingly, the nucleoid frequently contains only a single copy
of mtDNA (average ~1.4 mtDNA molecules per nucleoid). Furthermore, we show by
molecular modeling and volume calculations that TFAM is a main constituent of the
nucleoid, besides mtDNA. These fundamental insights into the organization of
mtDNA have broad implications for understanding mitochondrial dysfunction in
disease and aging.

PMCID: PMC3158146
PMID: 21808029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;27(1):197-210. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110710.

The impact of mitochondrial and nuclear DNA variants on late-onset Alzheimer's
disease risk.

Maruszak A(1), Safranow K, Branicki W, Gaweda-Walerych K, Pospiech E,
Gabryelewicz T, Canter JA, Barcikowska M, Zekanowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research
Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warszawa, Poland.
aleksandra.maruszak@gmail.com

We investigated the potential contribution of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants,
haplogroups, and polymorphisms in nuclear genes essential for mitochondrial
biogenesis and function (PGC-1a TFAM) to late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD)
risk. Epistatic interaction analysis was conducted between the studied variables.
Our results demonstrate that mtDNA haplogroups and subhaplogroups with putative
role in partial uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation are significantly
associated with a decreased LOAD risk (OR <1). Conversely, mtDNA haplogroup H (p 
= 0.049) and HV cluster (p = 0.018) are significant LOAD risk factors, which was 
additionally confirmed by meta-analysis (OR = 1.22, OR = 1.25, respectively).
Haplogroup K was demonstrated to exert a neutralizing effect on the high risk
associated with APOE4+ status (p = 0.014). Further, two synergistic interactions 
between subhaplogroup H5 and APOE4 status (p = 0.009) and between TFAM rs1937 and
APOE4 status (p < 0.001) were detected, influencing LOAD risk. No interaction
pointing to a dual mitochondrial-nuclear genome variation effect on LOAD
occurrence was identified.

PMID: 21799244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Pineal Res. 2011 Nov;51(4):426-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2011.00906.x. Epub 
2011 Jul 29.

Nickel exposure induces oxidative damage to mitochondrial DNA in Neuro2a cells:
the neuroprotective roles of melatonin.

Xu SC(1), He MD, Lu YH, Li L, Zhong M, Zhang YW, Wang Y, Yu ZP, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Health, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

Recent studies suggest that oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction play
important roles in the neurotoxicity of nickel. Because mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
is highly vulnerable to oxidative stress and melatonin can efficiently protect
mtDNA against oxidative damage in various pathological conditions, the aims of
this study were to determine whether mtDNA oxidative damage was involved in the
neurotoxicity of nickel and to assay the neuroprotective effects of melatonin in 
mtDNA. In this study, we exposed mouse neuroblastoma cell lines (Neuro2a) to
different concentrations of nickel chloride (NiCl(2), 0.125, 0.25, and 0.5 mm)
for 24 hr. We found that nickel significantly increased reactive oxygen species
(ROS) production and mitochondrial superoxide levels. In addition, nickel
exposure increased mitochondrial 8-hydroxyguanine (8-OHdG) content and reduced
mtDNA content and mtDNA transcript levels. Consistent with this finding, nickel
was found to destroy mtDNA nucleoid structure and decrease protein levels of
Tfam, a key protein component for nucleoid organization. However, all the
oxidative damage to mtDNA induced by nickel was efficiently attenuated by
melatonin pretreatment. Our results suggest that oxidative damage to mtDNA may
account for the neurotoxicity of nickel. Melatonin has great pharmacological
potential in protecting mtDNA against the adverse effects of nickel in the
nervous system.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21797922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2011 Oct;66(10):1062-76. doi:
10.1093/gerona/glr080. Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Expression of key regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis in growth hormone
receptor knockout (GHRKO) mice is enhanced but is not further improved by other
potential life-extending interventions.

Gesing A(1), Masternak MM, Wang F, Joseph AM, Leeuwenburgh C, Westbrook R,
Lewinski A, Karbownik-Lewinska M, Bartke A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Endocrinology, Medical University of Lodz,
Zeligowski St., No 7/9, 90-752 Lodz, Poland. adges7@yahoo.com

Mitochondrial biogenesis is essential for cell viability. Growth hormone receptor
knockout (GHRKO), calorie restriction, and surgical visceral fat removal
constitute experimental interventions to delay aging and increase life span. We
examined the expression of known regulators of mitochondriogenesis: peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> co-activator 1a (PGC-1a), adenosine
monophosphate (AMP)-activated protein kinase (AMPK), sirtuin-1 (SIRT-1) and
sirtuin-3 (SIRT-3), endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), nuclear respiratory
factor-1, mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and mitofusin-2 (MFN-2) in
the skeletal muscles and hearts of control and calorie-restricted female GHRKO
mice and in the kidneys of male GHRKOs after visceral fat removal or sham
surgery. Expression of PGC-1a in skeletal muscles, AMPK, SIRT-1, SIRT-3, eNOS,
and MFN-2 in the heart and PGC-1a, AMPK, SIRT-3, eNOS, and MFN-2 in kidneys was
increased in GHRKO mice but was not affected by calorie restriction or visceral
fat removal. GHRKO mice have increased expression of key regulators of
mitochondriogenesis, which is not improved further by calorie restriction or
visceral fat removal.

PMCID: PMC3172561
PMID: 21788651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Physiol. 2011 Sep 15;589(Pt 18):4615-31. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2011.209924.
Epub 2011 Jul 25.

(-)-Epicatechin enhances fatigue resistance and oxidative capacity in mouse
muscle.

Nogueira L(1), Ramirez-Sanchez I, Perkins GA, Murphy A, Taub PR, Ceballos G,
Villarreal FJ, Hogan MC, Malek MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, CA, USA.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2011 Dec 15;589(Pt 24):5921-2.
    J Physiol. 2011 Oct 1;589(Pt 19):4643.

The flavanol (-)-epicatechin, a component of cacao (cocoa), has been shown to
have multiple health benefits in humans. Using 1-year-old male mice, we examined 
the effects of 15 days of (-)-epicatechin treatment and regular exercise on: (1) 
exercise performance, (2) muscle fatigue, (3) capillarity, and (4) mitochondrial 
biogenesis in mouse hindlimb and heart muscles. Twenty-five male mice (C57BL/6N) 
were randomized into four groups: (1) water, (2) water-exercise (W-Ex), (3)
(-)-epicatechin ((-)-Epi), and (4) (-)-epicatechin-exercise ((-)-Epi-Ex). Animals
received 1 mg kg(-1) of (-)-epicatechin or water (vehicle) via oral gavage (twice
daily). Exercise groups underwent 15 days of treadmill exercise. Significant
increases in treadmill performance (~50%) and enhanced in situ muscle fatigue
resistance (~30%) were observed with (-)-epicatechin. Components of oxidative
phosphorylation complexes, mitofilin, porin, nNOS, p-nNOS, and Tfam as well as
mitochondrial volume and cristae abundance were significantly higher with
(-)-epicatechin treatment for hindlimb and cardiac muscles than exercise alone.
In addition, there were significant increases in skeletal muscle capillarity. The
combination of (-)-epicatechin and exercise resulted in further increases in
oxidative phosphorylation-complex proteins, mitofilin, porin and capillarity than
(-)-epicatechin alone. These findings indicate that (-)-epicatechin alone or in
combination with exercise induces an integrated response that includes structural
and metabolic changes in skeletal and cardiac muscles resulting in greater
endurance capacity. These results, therefore, warrant the further evaluation of
the underlying mechanism of action of (-)-epicatechin and its potential clinical 
application as an exercise mimetic.

PMCID: PMC3208228
PMID: 21788351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Aug;22(8):1475-85. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010111154. Epub 2011 
Jul 22.

IHG-1 promotes mitochondrial biogenesis by stabilizing PGC-1a.

Hickey FB(1), Corcoran JB, Docherty NG, Griffin B, Bhreathnach U, Furlong F,
Martin F, Godson C, Murphy M.

Author information: 
(1)UCD Diabetes Research Centre, UCD Conway Institute, Ireland.

Increased expression of Induced-by-High-Glucose 1 (IHG-1) associates with
tubulointerstitial fibrosis in diabetic nephropathy. IHG-1 amplifies TGF-ß1
signaling, but the functions of this highly-conserved protein are not well
understood. IHG-1 contains a putative mitochondrial-localization domain, and here
we report that IHG-1 is specifically localized to mitochondria. IHG-1
overexpression increased mitochondrial mass and stabilized peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a). Conversely, inhibition
of IHG-1 expression decreased mitochondrial mass, downregulated mitochondrial
proteins, and PGC-1a-regulated transcription factors, including nuclear
respiratory factor 1 and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and reduced
activity of the TFAM promoter. In the unilateral ureteral obstruction model, we
observed higher PGC-1a protein expression and IHG-1 levels with fibrosis. In a
gene-expression database, we noted that renal biopsies of human diabetic
nephropathy demonstrated higher expression of genes encoding key mitochondrial
proteins, including cytochrome c and manganese superoxide dismutase, compared
with control biopsies. In summary, these data suggest that IHG-1 increases
mitochondrial biogenesis by promoting PGC-1a-dependent processes, potentially
contributing to the pathogenesis of renal fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3148702
PMID: 21784897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Stem Cells. 2011 Sep;29(9):1459-68. doi: 10.1002/stem.695.

The mitochondrial electron transport chain is dispensable for proliferation and
differentiation of epidermal progenitor cells.

Baris OR(1), Klose A, Kloepper JE, Weiland D, Neuhaus JF, Schauen M, Wille A,
Müller A, Merkwirth C, Langer T, Larsson NG, Krieg T, Tobin DJ, Paus R, Wiesner
RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Physiology and Pathophysiology, Institute for Vegetative
Physiology,University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Tissue stem cells and germ line or embryonic stem cells were shown to have
reduced oxidative metabolism, which was proposed to be an adaptive mechanism to
reduce damage accumulation caused by reactive oxygen species. However, an
alternate explanation is that stem cells are less dependent on specialized
cytoplasmic functions compared with differentiated cells, therefore, having a
high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic volume ratio and consequently a low mitochondrial
content. To determine whether stem cells rely or not on mitochondrial
respiration, we selectively ablated the electron transport chain in the basal
layer of the epidermis, which includes the epidermal progenitor/stem cells
(EPSCs). This was achieved using a loxP-flanked mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) allele in conjunction with a keratin 14 Cre transgene. The
epidermis of these animals (Tfam(EKO)) showed a profound depletion of
mitochondrial DNA and complete absence of respiratory chain complexes. However,
despite a short lifespan due to malnutrition, epidermal development and skin
barrier function were not impaired. Differentiation of epidermal layers was
normal and no proliferation defect or major increase of apoptosis could be
observed. In contrast, mice with an epidermal ablation of prohibitin-2, a
scaffold protein in the inner mitochondrial membrane, displayed a dramatic
phenotype observable already in utero, with severely impaired skin architecture
and barrier function, ultimately causing death from dehydration shortly after
birth. In conclusion, we here provide unequivocal evidence that EPSCs, and
probably tissue stem cells in general, are independent of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain, but still require a functional dynamic mitochondrial
compartment.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21780252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Physiol Res. 2011;60 Suppl 1:S61-70. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

Modelling mitochondrial dysfunction in mice.

Dogan SA(1), Trifunovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Understanding mitochondrial role in normal physiology and pathological conditions
has proven to be of high importance as mitochondrial dysfunction is connected
with a number of disorders as well as some of the most common diseases (e.g.
diabetes or Parkinson's disease). Modeling mitochondrial dysfunction has been
difficult mainly due to unique features of mitochondrial genetics. Here we
discuss some of the most important mouse models generated so far and lessons
learned from them.

PMID: 21777023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Dec 1;15(11):2837-54. doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3713.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Lipopolysaccharide-induced mitochondrial DNA depletion.

Choumar A(1), Tarhuni A, Lettéron P, Reyl-Desmars F, Dauhoo N, Damasse J, Vadrot 
N, Nahon P, Moreau R, Pessayre D, Mansouri A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U773, Centre de Recherche Biomédicale Bichat Beaujon CRB3, Paris,
France.

Hepatic energy depletion has been described in severe sepsis, and
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has been shown to cause mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
damage. To clarify the mechanisms of LPS-induced mtDNA damage and mitochondrial
alterations, we treated wild-type (WT) or transgenic manganese superoxide
dismutase-overerexpressing (MnSOD(+++)) mice with a single dose of LPS (5 mg/kg).
In WT mice, LPS increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species formation,
hepatic inducible nitric oxide synthase (NOS) mRNA and protein, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, interleukin-1 beta, and high-mobility group protein B1
concentrations. Six to 48 h after LPS administration (5 mg/kg), liver mtDNA
levels, respiratory complex I activity, and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) contents
were decreased. In addition, LPS increased interferon-ß concentration and
decreased mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) mRNA, Tfam protein, and
mtDNA-encoded mRNAs. Morphological studies showed mild hepatic inflammation. The 
LPS (5 mg/kg)-induced mtDNA depletion, complex I inactivation, ATP depletion, and
alanine aminotransferase increase were prevented in MnSOD(+++) mice or in WT mice
cotreated with 1400W (a NOS inhibitor),
(2-(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl-4-ylamino)-2-oxoethyl)triphenylphosphoniu
m chloride, monohydrate (a superoxide scavenger) or uric acid (a peroxynitrite
scavenger). The MnSOD overexpression delayed death in mice challenged by a
higher, lethal dose of LPS (25 mg/kg). In conclusion, LPS administration damages 
mtDNA and alters mitochondrial function. The protective effects of MnSOD, NOS
inhibitors, and superoxide or peroxynitrite scavengers point out a role of the
superoxide anion reacting with NO to form mtDNA- and protein-damaging
peroxynitrite. In addition to the acute damage caused by reactive species,
decreased levels of mitochondrial transcripts contribute to mitochondrial
dysfunction.

PMID: 21767162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Nov;51(5):769-76. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.06.020. Epub
2011 Jul 2.

G protein coupled receptor kinase 2 interacting protein 1 (GIT1) is a novel
regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis in heart.

Pang J(1), Xu X, Getman MR, Shi X, Belmonte SL, Michaloski H, Mohan A, Blaxall
BC, Berk BC.

Author information: 
(1)Aab Cardiovascular Research Institute, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
Jinjiang_pang@URMC.rochester.edu

G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR)-kinase interacting protein-1 (GIT1) is a
multi-function scaffold protein. However, little is known about its physiological
role in the heart. Here we sought to identify the cardiac function of GIT1.
Global GIT1 knockout (KO) mice were generated and exhibited significant cardiac
hypertrophy that progressed to heart failure. Electron microscopy revealed that
the hearts of GIT1 KO mice demonstrated significant morphological abnormities in 
mitochondria, including decreased mitochondrial volume density, cristae density
and increased vacuoles. Moreover, mitochondrial biogenesis-related gene
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) co-activator-1a (PGC-1a),
PGC-1ß, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) expression, and total
mitochondrial DNA were remarkably decreased in hearts of GIT1 KO mice. These
animals also had impaired mitochondrial function, as evidenced by reduced ATP
production and dissipated mitochondrial membrane potential (<U+03A8>(m)) in adult
cardiomyocytes. Concordant with these mitochondrial observations, GIT1 KO mice
showed enhanced cardiomyocyte apoptosis and cardiac dysfunction. In conclusion,
our findings identify GIT1 as a new regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis and
function, which is necessary for postnatal cardiac maturation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3367479
PMID: 21756914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 13;31(28):10128-40. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0884-11.2011.

Schwann cell mitochondrial metabolism supports long-term axonal survival and
peripheral nerve function.

Viader A(1), Golden JP, Baloh RH, Schmidt RE, Hunter DA, Milbrandt J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is a common cause of peripheral neuropathies. While the
role of neuron and axonal mitochondria in peripheral nerve disease is well
appreciated, whether Schwann cell (SC) mitochondrial deficits contribute to
peripheral neuropathies is unclear. Here, we examine how SC mitochondrial
dysfunction affects axonal survival and contributes to the decline of peripheral 
nerve function by generating mice with SC-specific mitochondrial deficits. These 
mice (Tfam-SCKOs) were produced through the tissue-specific deletion of the
mitochondrial transcription factor A gene (Tfam), which is essential for
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription and maintenance. Tfam-SCKOs were viable, 
but as they aged, they developed a progressive peripheral neuropathy
characterized by nerve conduction abnormalities as well as extensive muscle
denervation. Morphological examination of Tfam-SCKO nerves revealed early
preferential loss of small unmyelinated fibers followed by prominent
demyelination and degeneration of larger-caliber axons. Tfam-SCKOs displayed
sensory and motor deficits consistent with this pathology. Remarkably, the severe
mtDNA depletion and respiratory chain abnormalities in Tfam-SCKO mice did not
affect SC proliferation or survival. Mitochondrial function in SCs is therefore
essential for maintenance of axonal survival and normal peripheral nerve
function, suggesting that SC mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to human
peripheral neuropathies.

PMCID: PMC3147283
PMID: 21752989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Br J Nutr. 2011 Oct;106(8):1198-206. doi: 10.1017/S0007114511001632. Epub 2011
May 31.

Taurine supplementation restored the changes in pancreatic islet mitochondria in 
the fetal protein-malnourished rat.

Lee YY(1), Lee HJ, Lee SS, Koh JS, Jin CJ, Park SH, Yi KH, Park KS, Lee HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Korea Cancer Center Hospital, Seoul, South
Korea.

Intra-uterine growth retardation has been linked to the development of type 2
diabetes in later life. Mitochondrial changes have been suggested as a link
between fetal malnutrition and adult insulin resistance. Taurine has been
implicated in this process. We investigated whether protein malnutrition in early
life alters mitochondria of the pancreatic islets in adulthood, and whether
taurine supplementation restores these changes. Male offspring of rats fed a
control diet, a low-protein diet or a low-protein diet supplemented with taurine 
during pregnancy and lactation were weaned onto the control diet. In each group, 
at 20 weeks of age, intravenous glucose tolerance tests,
euglycaemic-hyperinsulinaemic clamp studies, morphometric analysis of the
pancreatic islets and ultra-structural analysis of the mitochondria of the
ß-cells were performed. The expressions of cytochrome c oxidase (COX) I and
mitochondrial respiratory chain complex II were also measured. Fetal
protein-malnourished rats showed decreased pancreatic islet mass and reduced
insulin-secretory responses to a glucose load. These rats also showed reduced
mitochondrial DNA-encoded COX I gene expression in the islets. Electron
microscopic examination showed abnormal mitochondrial shapes in the ß-cells of
fetal protein-malnourished rats. Taurine supplementation to the low-protein diet 
restored all these changes. Our findings indicate that a maternal
protein-restriction diet causes long-lasting mitochondrial changes that may
contribute to the development of type 2 diabetes later in life. The lack of
taurine may be a key causative factor for these dysfunctional mitochondrial
changes.

PMID: 21736818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Can J Vet Res. 2011 Apr;75(2):134-40.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) gene sequencing and mitochondrial
evaluation in inherited retinal dysplasia in miniature schnauzer dogs.

Bauer BS(1), Forsyth GW, Sandmeyer LS, Grahn BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, Western College of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan S7N 5B4.
bianca.bauer@usask.ca

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of retinal dysplasia in miniature schnauzer dogs and it has been
proposed that affected dogs have altered mitochondrial numbers, size, and
morphology. To test these hypotheses the Tfam gene of affected and normal
miniature schnauzer dogs with retinal dysplasia was sequenced and lymphocyte
mitochondria were quantified, measured, and the morphology was compared in normal
and affected dogs using transmission electron microscopy. For Tfam sequencing,
retina, retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), and whole blood samples were collected.
Total RNA was isolated from the retina and RPE and reverse transcribed to make
cDNA. Genomic DNA was extracted from white blood cell pellets obtained from the
whole blood samples. The Tfam coding sequence, 5' promoter region, intron1 and
the 3' non-coding sequence of normal and affected dogs were amplified using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR), cloned and sequenced. For electron microscopy,
lymphocytes from affected and normal dogs were photographed and the mitochondria 
within each cross-section were identified, quantified, and the mitochondrial area
(µm²) per lymphocyte cross-section was calculated. Lastly, using a masked
technique, mitochondrial morphology was compared between the 2 groups. Sequencing
of the miniature schnauzer Tfam gene revealed no functional sequence variation
between affected and normal dogs. Lymphocyte and mitochondrial area,
mitochondrial quantification, and morphology assessment also revealed no
significant difference between the 2 groups. Further investigation into other
candidate genes or factors causing retinal dysplasia in the miniature schnauzer
is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3062924
PMID: 21731185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012 Feb;44(2):217-24. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e31822b0bd4.

Different timing of changes in mitochondrial functions following endurance
training.

Daussin FN(1), Rasseneur L, Bouitbir J, Charles AL, Dufour SP, Geny B, Burelle Y,
Richard R.

Author information: 
(1)Univ Lille Nord de France and UDSL, EA 4488: physical activity-muscle-health, 
Lille, France. frederic.daussin@univ-lille2.fr

PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to investigate the time course of the
endurance training-induced adaptations in two major mitochondrial functions.
METHODS: Forty rats were divided into four groups: a control group and three
training groups--a 1-d training group, a 5-d training group, and a 10-d training 
group. The training protocol consisted of 30 min of running on a motorized
treadmill (26 m·min(-1), 15% grade). Nuclear respiratory factor-1; transcription 
factor A, mitochondrial; superoxide dismutase-2; glutathione peroxidase-4; and
citrate synthase (CS) messenger RNA levels were measured by qPCR. Mitochondrial
respiration and H2O2 release were assessed using permeabilized fibers of white
gastrocnemius in situ. Calculation of free radical leak was performed in two
conditions where substrates were identical in both measurements. CS activity was 
assessed spectrophotometrically.
RESULTS: An early time-dependent modulation in messenger RNA levels was observed 
with training: nuclear respiratory factor-1 and superoxide dismutase-2 levels
increased after acute exercise, transcription factor A, mitochondrial and CS
levels improved after 5 d, and glutathione peroxidase-4 levels increased after 10
d. CS activity improved by 29% ± 8% (P < 0.01) after 5 d together with a 50% ± 7%
reduction in the free radical leak (P < 0.05). Finally, 10 d of endurance
training did not significantly alter mitochondrial H2O2 release but increased
mitochondrial respiration rates in situ (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that mitochondrial adaptations follow a
sequential program in which mitochondrial respiration and free radical leak
adaptations occur according to a different timing. Collectively, these results
suggest early mitochondrial qualitative adaptations in response to endurance
training.

PMID: 21716149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Neurol Res. 2011 Jul;33(6):638-55. doi: 10.1179/1743132810Y.0000000016.

Whole blood genome-wide expression profiling and network analysis suggest MELAS
master regulators.

Mende S(1), Royer L, Herr A, Schmiedel J, Deschauer M, Klopstock T, Kostic VS,
Schroeder M, Reichmann H, Storch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Dresden University of Technology, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The heteroplasmic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation A3243G causes
the mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes
(MELAS) syndrome as one of the most frequent mitochondrial diseases. The process 
of reconfiguration of nuclear gene expression profile to accommodate cellular
processes to the functional status of mitochondria might be a key to MELAS
disease manifestation and could contribute to its diverse phenotypic
presentation.
OBJECTIVE: To determine master regulatory protein networks and disease-modifying 
genes in MELAS syndrome.
METHODS: Analyses of whole blood transcriptomes from 10 MELAS patients using a
novel strategy by combining classic Affymetrix oligonucleotide microarray
profiling with regulatory and protein interaction network analyses.
RESULTS: Hierarchical cluster analysis elucidated that the relative abundance of 
mutant mtDNA molecules is decisive for the nuclear gene expression response.
Further analyses confirmed not only transcription factors already known to be
involved in mitochondrial diseases (such as TFAM), but also detected the
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 complex, nuclear factor Y and cAMP responsive
element-binding protein-related transcription factors as novel master regulators 
for reconfiguration of nuclear gene expression in response to the MELAS mutation.
Correlation analyses of gene alterations and clinico-genetic data detected
significant correlations between A3243G-induced nuclear gene expression changes
and mutant mtDNA load as well as disease characteristics. These potential
disease-modifying genes influencing the expression of the MELAS phenotype are
mainly related to clusters primarily unrelated to cellular energy metabolism, but
important for nucleic acid and protein metabolism, and signal transduction.
DISCUSSION: Our data thus provide a framework to search for new pathogenetic
concepts and potential therapeutic approaches to treat the MELAS syndrome.

PMID: 21708074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Gene. 2011 Sep 15;484(1-2):52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.05.032. Epub 2011 Jun 
12.

Mitochondrial genome-maintaining activity of mouse mitochondrial transcription
factor A and its transcript isoform in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

Yoon YG(1), Koob MD, Yoo YH.

Author information: 
(1)Mitochondria Hub Regulation Center and Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan 602-714, Republic of Korea.
youngyoon97@gmail.com

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) binds to and organizes mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA) genome into a mitochondrial nucleoid (mt-nucleoid) structure, which
is necessary for mtDNA transcription and maintenance. Here, we demonstrate the
mtDNA-organizing activity of mouse Tfam and its transcript isoform (Tfam(iso)),
which has a smaller high-mobility group (HMG)-box1 domain, using a yeast model
system that contains a deletion of the yeast homolog of mouse Tfam protein,
Abf2p. When the mouse Tfam genes were introduced into the ABF2 locus of yeast
genome, the corresponding mouse proteins, Tfam and Tfam(iso), can functionally
replace the yeast Abf2p and support mtDNA maintenance and mitochondrial
biogenesis in yeast. Growth properties, mtDNA content and mitochondrial protein
levels of genes encoded in the mtDNA were comparable in the strains expressing
mouse proteins and the wild-type yeast strain, indicating that the proteins have 
robust mtDNA-maintaining and -expressing function in yeast mitochondria. These
results imply that the mtDNA-organizing activities of the mouse mt-nucleoid
proteins are structurally and evolutionary conserved, thus they can maintain the 
mtDNA of distantly related and distinctively different species, such as yeast.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3150443
PMID: 21683127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Diabetes. 2011 Aug;60(8):2051-60. doi: 10.2337/db11-0121. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Reduction in reactive oxygen species production by mitochondria from elderly
subjects with normal and impaired glucose tolerance.

Ghosh S(1), Lertwattanarak R, Lefort N, Molina-Carrion M, Joya-Galeana J, Bowen
BP, Garduno-Garcia Jde J, Abdul-Ghani M, Richardson A, DeFronzo RA, Mandarino L, 
Van Remmen H, Musi N.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Division, Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science 
Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Aging increases the risk of developing impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT) and type 2 diabetes. It has been proposed that increased reactive oxygen
species (ROS) generation by dysfunctional mitochondria could play a role in the
pathogenesis of these metabolic abnormalities. We examined whether aging per se
(in subjects with normal glucose tolerance [NGT]) impairs mitochondrial function 
and how this relates to ROS generation, whether older subjects with IGT have a
further worsening of mitochondrial function (lower ATP production and elevated
ROS generation), and whether exercise reverses age-related changes in
mitochondrial function.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Mitochondrial ATP and ROS production were measured
in muscle from younger individuals with NGT, older individuals with NGT, and
older individuals with IGT. Measurements were performed before and after 16 weeks
of aerobic exercise.
RESULTS: ATP synthesis was lower in older subjects with NGT and older subjects
with IGT versus younger subjects. Notably, mitochondria from older subjects (with
NGT and IGT) displayed reduced ROS production versus the younger group. ATP and
ROS production were similar between older groups. Exercise increased ATP
synthesis in the three groups. Mitochondrial ROS production also increased after 
training. Proteomic analysis revealed downregulation of several electron
transport chain proteins with aging, and this was reversed by exercise.
CONCLUSIONS: Old mitochondria from subjects with NGT and IGT display
mitochondrial dysfunction as manifested by reduced ATP production but not with
respect to increased ROS production. When adjusted to age, the development of IGT
in elderly individuals does not involve changes in mitochondrial ATP and ROS
production. Lastly, exercise reverses the mitochondrial phenotype (proteome and
function) of old mitochondria.

PMCID: PMC3142073
PMID: 21677280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mitochondrion. 2011 Sep;11(5):774-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2011.05.009. Epub 2011
May 30.

Physiological variables and mitochondrial-related genotypes of an athlete who
excels in both short and long-distance running.

Eynon N(1), Birk R, Meckel Y, Lucia A, Nemet D, Eliakim A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of Health Sciences, Ariel
University Center, Israel. eynon@wincol.ac.il

We report the athletic, physiological and mitochondrial-related genomic data of
an Israeli endurance runner. He is holding the Israeli record in 10,000, 5000,
1500 and 800 m run, along with being one of the best Israeli 400 m runners. We
tested the ACTN3 R577X, and six polymorphisms in the PPARGC1A-NRF-TFAM pathway
genes. The case athlete was heterozygous for the ACTN3 R577X variation and had
five out of six 'endurance-oriented' genotypes, scoring significantly high in
endurance 'optimal' genotype profile. In conclusion, we suggest that the case
athlete is favoured by polygenic profile that is more suitable for mitochondrial 
biogenesis, regardless of his good phenotypic accomplishments in short-term
running events.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21651994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Rejuvenation Res. 2011 Jun;14(3):315-24. doi: 10.1089/rej.2010.1132. Epub 2011
Jun 1.

An exploratory analysis of the effects of a weight loss plus exercise program on 
cellular quality control mechanisms in older overweight women.

Wohlgemuth SE(1), Lees HA, Marzetti E, Manini TM, Aranda JM, Daniels MJ, Pahor M,
Perri MG, Leeuwenburgh C, Anton SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging and Geriatrics, Institute on Aging, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-0910, USA. steffiw@ufl.edu

Obese older adults are particularly susceptible to sarcopenia and have a higher
prevalence of disability than their peers of normal weight. Interventions to
improve body composition in late life are crucial to maintaining independence.
The main mechanisms underlying sarcopenia have not been determined conclusively, 
but chronic inflammation, apoptosis, and impaired mitochondrial function are
believed to play important roles. It has yet to be determined whether impaired
cellular quality control mechanisms contribute to this process. The objective of 
this study was to assess the effects of a 6-month weight loss program combined
with moderate-intensity exercise on the cellular quality control mechanisms
autophagy and ubiquitin-proteasome, as well as on inflammation, apoptosis, and
mitochondrial function, in the skeletal muscle of older obese women. The
intervention resulted in significant weight loss (8.0<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.9 % vs. 0.4<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.1% of
baseline weight, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002) and improvements in walking speed (reduced time to
walk 400 meters,<U+2009>-<U+2009>20.4<U+2009>±<U+2009>16% vs.<U+2009>-<U+2009>2.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>12%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). In the intervention
group, we observed a three-fold increase in messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of the
autophagy regulators LC3B, Atg7, and lysosome-associated membrane protein-2
(LAMP-2) compared to controls. Changes in mRNA levels of FoxO3A and its targets
MuRF1, MAFBx, and BNIP3 were on average seven-fold higher in the intervention
group compared to controls, but these differences were not statistically
significant. Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) mRNA levels were elevated after the 
intervention, but we did not detect significant changes in the downstream
apoptosis markers caspase 8 and 3. Mitochondrial biogenesis markers (PGC1a and
TFAm) were increased by the intervention, but this was not accompanied by
significant changes in mitochondrial complex content and activity. In conclusion,
although exploratory in nature, this study is among the first to report the
stimulation of cellular quality control mechanisms elicited by a weight loss and 
exercise program in older obese women.

PMCID: PMC3136739
PMID: 21631380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Aging Res. 2011;2011:845379. doi: 10.4061/2011/845379. Epub 2011 May 10.

Morphofunctional and Biochemical Approaches for Studying Mitochondrial Changes
during Myoblasts Differentiation.

Barbieri E(1), Battistelli M, Casadei L, Vallorani L, Piccoli G, Guescini M,
Gioacchini AM, Polidori E, Zeppa S, Ceccaroli P, Stocchi L, Stocchi V, Falcieri
E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino Carlo Bo, Via I
Maggetti, 26, 61029 Urbino (PU), Italy.

This study describes mitochondrial behaviour during the C2C12 myoblast
differentiation program and proposes a proteomic approach to mitochondria
integrated with classical morphofunctional and biochemical analyses.
Mitochondrial ultrastructure variations were determined by transmission electron 
microscopy; mitochondrial mass and membrane potential were analysed by
Mitotracker Green and JC-1 stains and by epifluorescence microscope. Expression
of PGC1a, NRF1a, and Tfam genes controlling mitochondrial biogenesis was studied 
by real-time PCR. The mitochondrial functionality was tested by cytochrome c
oxidase activity and COXII expression. Mitochondrial proteomic profile was also
performed. These assays showed that mitochondrial biogenesis and activity
significantly increase in differentiating myotubes. The proteomic profile
identifies 32 differentially expressed proteins, mostly involved in oxidative
metabolism, typical of myotubes formation. Other notable proteins, such as
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), a cell protection molecule, and voltage-dependent
anion-selective channel protein (VDAC1) involved in the mitochondria-mediated
apoptosis, were found to be regulated by the myogenic process. The integration of
these approaches represents a helpful tool for studying mitochondrial dynamics,
biogenesis, and functionality in comparative surveys on mitochondrial pathogenic 
or senescent satellite cells.

PMCID: PMC3100678
PMID: 21629710  [PubMed]


479. Aging Cell. 2011 Oct;10(5):824-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2011.00723.x. Epub
2011 Jun 27.

Mitochondrial DNA copy number and function decrease with age in the short-lived
fish Nothobranchius furzeri.

Hartmann N(1), Reichwald K, Wittig I, Dröse S, Schmeisser S, Lück C, Hahn C, Graf
M, Gausmann U, Terzibasi E, Cellerino A, Ristow M, Brandt U, Platzer M, Englert
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Leibniz Institute for Age Research-Fritz
Lipmann Institute (FLI), Beutenbergstrasse 11, Jena, Germany.
hartmann@fli-leibniz.de

Among vertebrates that can be kept in captivity, the annual fish Nothobranchius
furzeri possesses the shortest known lifespan. It also shows typical signs of
aging and is therefore an ideal model to assess the role of different
physiological and environmental parameters on aging and lifespan determination.
Here, we used Nothobranchius furzeri to study whether aging is associated with
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) alterations and changes in mitochondrial function. We
sequenced the complete mitochondrial genome of N. furzeri and found an extended
control region. Large-scale mtDNA deletions have been frequently described to
accumulate in other organisms with age, but there was no evidence for the
presence of detectable age-related mtDNA deletions in N. furzeri. However, mtDNA 
copy number significantly decreased with age in skeletal muscle, brain, liver,
skin and dorsal fin. Consistent with this finding, expression of Pgc-1a that
encodes a transcriptional coactivator of mitochondrial biogenesis and expression 
of Tfam and mtSsbp both encoding mtDNA binding factors was downregulated with
age. The investigation of possible changes in mitochondrial function revealed
that the content of respiratory chain complexes III and IV was reduced in
skeletal muscle with age. In addition, ADP-stimulated and succinate-dependent
respiration was decreased in mitochondria of old fish. These findings suggest
that despite the short lifespan, aging in N. furzeri is associated with a decline
in mtDNA copy number, the downregulation of mtDNA-associated genes and an
impairment of mitochondrial function.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 21624037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Neurodegener. 2011 May 19;6(1):32. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-32.

PGC-1alpha downstream transcription factors NRF-1 and TFAM are genetic modifiers 
of Huntington disease.

Taherzadeh-Fard E(1), Saft C, Akkad DA, Wieczorek S, Haghikia A, Chan A, Epplen
JT, Arning L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany.
larissa.arning@rub.de.

BACKGROUND: Huntington disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative disease
caused by an abnormal expansion of a CAG repeat in the huntingtin HTT (HD) gene. 
The primary genetic determinant of the age at onset (AO) is the length of the HTT
CAG repeat; however, the remaining genetic contribution to the AO of HD has
largely not been elucidated. Recent studies showed that impaired functioning of
the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1a (PGC-1alpha) 
contributes to mitochondrial dysfunction and appears to play an important role in
HD pathogenesis. Further genetic evidence for involvement of PGC-1alpha in HD
pathogenesis was generated by the findings that sequence variations in the
PPARGC1A gene encoding PGC-1alpha exert modifying effects on the AO in HD. In
this study, we hypothesised that polymorphisms in PGC-1alpha downstream targets
might also contribute to the variation in the AO.
RESULTS: In over 400 German HD patients, polymorphisms in the nuclear respiratory
factor 1 gene, NRF-1, and the mitochondrial transcription factor A, encoded by
TFAM showed nominally significant association with AO of HD. When combining these
results with the previously described modifiers rs7665116 in PPARGC1A and C7028T 
in the cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (CO1, mt haplogroup H) in a multivariable
model, a substantial proportion of the variation in AO can be explained by the
joint effect of significant modifiers and their interactions, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: These results underscore that impairment of mitochondrial function
plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of HD and that upstream transcriptional
activators of PGC-1alpha may be useful targets in the treatment of HD.

PMCID: PMC3117738
PMID: 21595933  [PubMed]


481. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2011 Mar;33(3):169-73.

[MnCl2-induced functional damage of mitochondria in human lung cells in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Bao Y(1), Li J, Zhang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of MnCl(2) on the mitochondrial function of
human lung cells, and to study the changes of protein expression level of nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) in mitochondrial dysfunction induced by MnCl(2).
METHODS: The effects of MnCl(2) on cell survival rate were assessed by the
reductions of tetrazolium dye (MTT) in cultured cell lines 16HBE and A549 cells. 
All tested16HBE and A549 cells were incubated with different concentrations of
MnCl(2). The permeability transition pore (PTP) of mitochondria, mitochondrial
membrane potential and the inhibition rate of mitochondrial enzymes as indicators
of mitochondrial damage were measured by fluorescent spectrometry and MTT assay, 
respectively. Apoptosis was determined by flow cytometry. Protein levels of NRF-1
and mtTFA were measured by Western blot assay.
RESULTS: MnCl(2) decreased the survival rate of the two cell lines. The IC(50) of
16HBE and A549 cells were 1.91 mmol/L and 1.98 mmol/L, respectively. MnCl(2)
caused a concentration-dependent decrease of mitochondrial enzymes and the
inhibition rate of mitochondrial enzymes of the two cell lines induced by 1.00
mmol/L MnCl(2) were (52.8 ± 5.4)% and (50.6 ± 2.2)%, respectively. The PTP
opening increased in MnCl(2)-treated cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner. 
Compared with the control group, mitochondrial membrane potential in the two cell
lines was decreased by MnCl(2), by (7.9 ± 3.0)%, (26.2 ± 2.2)% and (27.8 ± 4.1)% 
in the 16HBE cells, and (4.7 ± 1.0)%, (14.9 ± 2.4)% and (27.5 ± 1.2)% in the A549
cells. Increased apoptosis rates of the two cell lines were induced by 1.00
mmol/L MnCl(2), (12.3 ± 1.9)% and (6.0 ± 0.4)%, respectively. The results of
Western blot assay revealed that the protein levels of NRF-1 and mtTFA were
decreased in manganese-treated cells in a dose-dependent manner, with a
significant difference compared with that of the control cells (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: MnCl(2) induces mitochondrial dysfunction in 16HBE and A549 cells,
and decreases the expression level of nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1),
indicating that NRF-1 may play an important role in mitochondrial dysfunction.

PMID: 21575513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. FEBS J. 2011 Jul;278(14):2500-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08176.x. Epub
2011 Jun 5.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A overexpression and base excision repair
deficiency in the inner ear of rats with D-galactose-induced aging.

Zhong Y(1), Hu YJ, Chen B, Peng W, Sun Y, Yang Y, Zhao XY, Fan GR, Huang X, Kong 
WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Oxidative damage to mtDNA is associated with excessive reactive oxygen species
production. The mitochondrial common deletion (mtDNA 4977-bp and 4834-bp deletion
in humans and rats, respectively) is the most typical and frequent form of mtDNA 
damage associated with aging and degenerative diseases. The accumulation of the
mitochondrial common deletion has been proposed to play a crucial role in
age-related hearing loss (presbycusis). However, the mechanisms underlying the
formation and accumulation of mtDNA deletions are still obscure. In the present
study, a rat mimetic aging model induced by D-Gal was used to explore the origin 
of deletion mutations and how mtDNA repair systems modulate this process in the
inner ear during aging. We found that the mitochondrial common deletion was
greatly increased and mitochondrial base excision repair capacity was
significantly reduced in the inner ear in D-Gal-treated rats as compared with
controls. The overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A induced by
D-Gal significantly stimulated mtDNA replication, resulting in an increase in
mtDNA copy number. In addition, an age-related loss of auditory sensory cells in 
the inner ear was observed in D-Gal-treated rats. Taken together, our data
suggest that mitochondrial base excision repair capacity deficiency and an
increase in mtDNA replication resulting from mitochondrial transcription factor A
overexpression may contribute to the accumulation of mtDNA deletions in the inner
ear during aging. This study also provides new insights into the development of
presbycusis.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

PMID: 21575134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2011 Feb;76(2):260-7.

Role of transcription factors in mtDNA biogenesis mediated by thyroid hormones.

Patrushev MV(1), Patrusheva VE.

Author information: 
(1)I. Kant Russian State University, Kaliningrad, Russia. maxpatrushev@gmail.com

Exogenous thyroid hormones are regulators of cellular metabolism that involves,
along with other cell structures, mitochondria. Mechanisms of the influence of
thyroid hormones on the biogenesis of mtDNA are not fully understood due to their
pleiotropic nature. Different ways of regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis by
thyroid hormones are discussed in literature, but thyroid receptors, localized in
both the nucleus and mitochondria, are the main elements of most pathways. Data
on events occurring after receptor activation are rather contradictory. We
investigated the degree of involvement of mitochondrial transcription factors in 
the biogenesis of mtDNA induced by triiodothyronine. The contribution of TFAM,
TFB2M, and helicase Twinkle in thyroid-induced mtDNA biogenesis was assessed. The
activation of TFAM and TFB2M expression is shown to be required for the induction
of mtDNA biogenesis. The role of helicase Twinkle, the expression induction of
which is also observed after triiodothyronine addition, remains unclear. The
analysis of factors that activate TFAM and TFB2M expression showed that NRF-1 is 
the determinative regulator: deficiency of this factor leads to complete collapse
of mtDNA biogenesis. However, lack of transcriptional coactivator PGC-1a did not 
lead to significant reduction in thyroid-induced biogenesis, whereas literature
data point to its key role in the biogenesis of mitochondria. Thus, in this study
the role of key transcription factors in mtDNA biogenesis induced by
triiodothyronine was demonstrated for the first time in a model system.

PMID: 21568860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Reproduction. 2011 Aug;142(2):295-307. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0044. Epub 2011 May 9.

Nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility and inefficient development of pig-mouse
cytoplasmic hybrid embryos.

Amarnath D(1), Choi I, Moawad AR, Wakayama T, Campbell KH.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Development and Biotechnology Group, School of Biosciences, The
University of Nottingham, Sutton Bonington, Loughborough, Leicestershire, LE12
5RD, UK.

Inter-species somatic cell nuclear transfer (iSCNT) embryos usually fail to
develop to the blastocyst stage and beyond due to incomplete reprogramming of
donor cell. We evaluated whether using a karyoplast that would require less
extensive reprogramming such as an embryonic blastomere or the meiotic spindle
from metaphase II oocytes would provide additional insight into the development
of iSCNT embryos. Our results showed that karyoplasts of embryonic or oocyte
origin are no different from somatic cells; all iSCNT embryos, irrespective of
karyoplast origin, were arrested during early development. We hypothesized that
nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility could be another reason for failure of
embryonic development from iSCNT. We used pig-mouse cytoplasmic hybrids as a
model to address nuclear-cytoplasmic incompatibility in iSCNT embryos. Fertilized
murine zygotes were reconstructed by fusing with porcine cytoplasts of varying
cytoplasmic volumes (1/10 (small) and 1/5 (large) total volume of mouse zygote). 
The presence of pig cytoplasm significantly reduced the development of mouse
zygotes to the blastocyst stage compared with control embryos at 120<U+200A>h post-human
chorionic gondotropin (41 vs 6 vs 94%, P<0.05; 1/10, 1/5, control respectively). 
While mitochondrial DNA copy numbers remained relatively unchanged, expression of
several important genes namely Tfam, Polg, Polg2, Mfn2, Slc2a3 (Glut3), Slc2a1
(Glut1), Bcl2, Hspb1, Pou5f1 (Oct4), Nanog, Cdx2, Gata3, Tcfap2c, mt-Cox1 and
mt-Cox2 was significantly reduced in cytoplasmic hybrids compared with control
embryos. These results demonstrate that the presence of even a small amount of
porcine cytoplasm is detrimental to murine embryo development and suggest that a 
range of factors are likely to contribute to the failure of inter-species nuclear
transfer embryos.

PMID: 21555359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2011 Aug;43(8):1178-86. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2011.04.011. Epub 2011 Apr 28.

NARP mutation and mtDNA depletion trigger mitochondrial biogenesis which can be
modulated by selenite supplementation.

Wojewoda M(1), Duszynski J, Szczepanowska J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioenergetics and Biomembranes, Department of Biochemistry,
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur St, 02-993 Warsaw, Poland.
m.wojewoda@nencki.gov.pl

The importance of mitochondrial biogenesis in the pathogenesis of mitochondrial
diseases has been widely recognised but little is known about it with regard to
NARP (Neuropathy, Ataxia and Retinitis Pigmentosa) syndrome. Since such knowledge
would contribute to the understanding of the pathogenesis of this disease, we
designed a study to provide comprehensive overview of mitochondrial biogenesis in
cybrid cells harboring NARP mutation (8993T>G). We also used Rho0 cells with the 
same nuclear background to show that distinct mtDNA defects lead to distinct
cellular responses irrespective of nuclear genome. Mitochondrial biogenesis is
regulated by mitochondria-to-nucleus (retrograde) communication which depends on 
intracellular signaling pathways sensitive to ROS. Since we previously found that
selenite lowered ROS in NARP cybrids, we hypothesised that selenite could also
modulate mitochondrial biogenesis in these cells. Although the mitochondrial mass
was not changed in NARP cybrids, we showed the compensatory upregulation of
respiratory chain subunits which prompted us to investigate the transcription
factors that regulate their expression such as PGC-1a, NRFs, and TFAM. Selenite
supplementation increased the level of NRF1 and nuclear accumulation of NRF2, but
we did not detect any major changes in the levels of investigated respiratory
chain proteins. These subtle changes in mitochondrial biogenesis in response to
selenite treatment support the hypothesis that selenite could be considered as a 
potential therapeutic agent of NARP syndrome due to its antioxidant properties.
Moreover, it could also be tested with regard to other mitochondrial disorders
associated with ROS overproduction.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21550418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Exp Gerontol. 2011 Aug;46(8):670-8. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2011.03.004. Epub 2011
Apr 13.

Mitochondrial biogenesis and angiogenesis in skeletal muscle of the elderly.

Iversen N(1), Krustrup P, Rasmussen HN, Rasmussen UF, Saltin B, Pilegaard H.

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Muscle Research Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The aim of this study was to test the hypotheses that 1) skeletal muscles of
elderly subjects can adapt to a single endurance exercise bout and 2) endurance
trained elderly subjects have higher expression/activity of oxidative and
angiogenic proteins in skeletal muscle than untrained elderly people. To
investigate this, lifelong endurance trained elderly (ET; n = 8) aged 71.3 ± 3.4 
years and untrained elderly subjects (UT; n = 7) aged 71.3 ± 4 years, performed a
cycling exercise bout at 75% VO(2max) with vastus lateralis muscle biopsies
obtained before (Pre), immediately after exercise (0 h) and at 2 h of recovery.
Capillarization was detected histochemically and oxidative enzyme activities were
determined on isolated mitochondria. GLUT4, HKII, Cyt c and VEGF protein
expression was measured on muscle lysates from Pre-biopsies, phosphorylation of
AMPK and P38 on lysates from Pre and 0 h biopsies, while PGC-1a, VEGF, HKII and
TFAM mRNA content was determined at all time points. ET had ~40% higher PDH, CS, 
SDH, a-KG-DH and ATP synthase activities and 27% higher capillarization than UT, 
reflecting increased skeletal muscle oxidative capacity with lifelong endurance
exercise training. In addition, acute exercise increased in UT PGC-1a mRNA
11-fold and VEGF mRNA 4-fold at 2 h of recovery, and AMPK phosphorylation ~5-fold
immediately after exercise, relative to Pre, indicating an ability to adapt
metabolically and angiogenically to endurance exercise. However, in ET PGC-1a
mRNA only increased 5 fold and AMPK phosphorylation ~2-fold, while VEGF mRNA
remained unchanged after the acute exercise bout. P38 increased similarly in ET
and UT after exercise. In conclusion, the present findings suggest that lifelong 
endurance exercise training ensures an improved oxidative capacity of skeletal
muscle, and that skeletal muscle of elderly subjects maintains the ability to
respond to acute endurance exercise.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21504786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Comput Biol Chem. 2011 Apr;35(2):81-95. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2011.03.001. 
Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Error compensation of tRNA misacylation by codon-anticodon mismatch prevents
translational amino acid misinsertion.

Seligmann H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolution, Ecology & Behavior, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Israel. herves@bio.uio.no

Codon-anticodon mismatches and tRNA misloadings cause translational amino acid
misinsertions, producing dysfunctional proteins. Here I explore the original
hypothesis whether mismatches tend to compensate misacylation, so as to insert
the amino acid coded by the codon. This error compensation is promoted by the
fact that codon-anticodon mismatch stabilities increase with tRNA misacylation
potentials (predicted by 'tfam') by non-cognate amino acids coded by the
mismatched codons for most tRNAs examined. Error compensation is independent of
preferential misacylation by non-cognate amino acids physico-chemically similar
to cognate amino acids, a phenomenon that decreases misinsertion impacts. Error
compensation correlates negatively with (a) codon/anticodon abundance (in human
mitochondria and Escherichia coli); (b) developmental instability (estimated by
fluctuating asymmetry in bilateral counts of subdigital lamellae, in each of two 
lizard genera, Anolis and Sceloporus); and (c) pathogenicity of human
mitochondrial tRNA polymorphisms. Patterns described here suggest that tRNA
misacylation is sometimes compensated by codon-anticodon mismatches. Hence
translation inserts the amino acid coded by the mismatched codon, despite
mismatch and misloading. Results suggest that this phenomenon is sufficiently
important to affect whole organism phenotypes, as shown by correlations with
pathologies and morphological estimates of developmental stability.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21470914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Transcription. 2011 Mar;2(2):55-59.

The core human mitochondrial transcription initiation complex: It only takes two 
to tango.

Shutt TE(1), Bestwick M, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology Yale University School of Medicine; New Haven, CT USA.

We recently demonstrated that the core transcription initiation complex in human 
mitochondria is a two-component system (POLRMT and h-mtTFB2). Human mtTFA/TFAM,
previously proposed to be a requisite initiation complex member, is dispensable
for promoter-specific initiation in vitro. We propose that it instead regulates
relative promoter activity and/or overall nucleoid transcription and replication 
potential.

PMCID: PMC3062394
PMID: 21468229  [PubMed]


489. Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 15;71(8):2978-87. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-3482. Epub
2011 Apr 5.

Frequent truncating mutation of TFAM induces mitochondrial DNA depletion and
apoptotic resistance in microsatellite-unstable colorectal cancer.

Guo J(1), Zheng L, Liu W, Wang X, Wang Z, Wang Z, French AJ, Kang D, Chen L,
Thibodeau SN, Liu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New
Orleans, Louisiana, USA.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is required for mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) replication and transcription. Disruption of TFAM results in heart
failure and premature aging in mice. But very little is known about the role of
TFAM in cancer development. Here, we report the identification of frequent
frameshift mutations in the coding mononucleotide repeat of TFAM in sporadic
colorectal cancer (CRC) cell lines and in primary tumors with microsatellite
instability (MSI), but not in microsatellite stable (MSS) CRC cell lines and
tumors. The presence of the TFAM truncating mutation, in CRC cells with MSI,
reduced the TFAM protein level in vivo and in vitro and correlated with mtDNA
depletion. Furthermore, forced overexpression of wild-type TFAM in RKO cells
carrying a TFAM truncating mutation suppressed cell proliferation and inhibited
RKO cell-induced xenograft tumor growth. Moreover, these cells showed more
susceptibility to cisplatin-induced apoptosis due to an increase of cytochrome b 
(Cyt b) expression and its release from mitochondria. An interaction assay
between TFAM and the heavy-strand promoter (HSP) of mitochondria revealed that
mutant TFAM exhibited reduced binding to HSP, leading to reduction in Cyt b
transcription. Collectively, these data provide evidence that a high incidence of
TFAM truncating mutations leads to mitochondrial copy number reduction and
mitochondrial instability, distinguishing most CRC with MSI from MSS CRC. These
mutations may play an important role in tumorigenesis and cisplatin-induced
apoptotic resistance of most microsatellite-unstable CRCs.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3710668
PMID: 21467167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Lab Invest. 2011 Jul;91(7):1018-28. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2011.55. Epub 2011 Apr
4.

Fatty liver is associated with impaired activity of PPAR<U+03B3>-coactivator 1a (PGC1a) 
and mitochondrial biogenesis in mice.

Aharoni-Simon M(1), Hann-Obercyger M, Pen S, Madar Z, Tirosh O.

Author information: 
(1)The School of Nutritional Sciences, Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science
and Nutrition, The Robert H Smith Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment,
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Rehovot, Israel.

Accumulating evidence indicates that mitochondria have a key role in
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). C57BL/6J mice were fed a
choline-deficient, ethionine-supplemented (CDE) diet. Histological studies
demonstrated accumulation of fat vacuoles in up to 90% of hepatocytes in mice fed
the CDE diet for 14 days. In addition, a decrease in mitochondrial levels,
together with an increase in superoxide radicals' levels were observed,
indicating elevation of oxidative stress in hepatocytes. ATP levels were
decreased in livers from CDE-fed mice after overnight fasting. This was
accompanied by a compensative and significant increase in
peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC1a) mRNA levels
in comparison to control livers. However, there was a reduction in PGC1a protein 
levels in CDE-treated mice. Moreover, the expression of mitochondrial biogenesis 
genes nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1), mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(TFAM), mitochondrial transcription factor B1 (TFB1M) and mitochondrial
transcription factor B2 (TFB2M), which are all regulated by PGC1a activity,
remained unchanged in fasted CDE-treated mice. These results indicate impaired
activity of PGC1a. The impaired activity was further confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, which demonstrated decreased interaction of PGC1a
with promoters containing NRF-1 and NRF-2 response elements in mice fed the CDE
diet. A decrease in PGC1a ability to activate the expression of the gluconeogenic
gene phosphoenol-pyruvate carboxykinase was also observed. This study
demonstrates, for the first time, that attenuated mitochondrial biogenesis in
steatotic livers is associated with impaired biological activity of PGC1a.

PMID: 21464822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2011;701:201-6. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7756-4_27.

Elevated mitochondrial DNA copy number and POL-<U+03B3> expression but decreased
expression of TFAM in murine intestine following therapeutic dose irradiation.

Zhang H(1), Maguire DJ, Zhang M, Zhang L, Okunieff P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Florida, 2033 Mowry Road,
103633, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Mitochondria play pivotal roles in cellular handling of oxygen and in apoptosis, 
the ordered suicide response of cells to irradiation. The involvement of
expression products from the 16.5 kb human mitochondrial genome in these
activities has been studied widely. However, little is known about effects of
irradiation on mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The relative lack of mtDNA
repair mechanisms compared with nuclear DNA (nDNA) predicts particular
vulnerability to irradiation. Using a technique developed to ascertain mtDNA:nDNA
ratios, we previously showed that this ratio increases dramatically in murine
small bowel within 48 hours following whole body irradiation. We now report that 
those levels continue to rise for four days and remain elevated at close to that 
level beyond 30 days after 5 Gy of irradiation.We further demonstrate that levels
of the mtDNA-specific DNA polymerase-<U+03B3> (Pol-<U+03B3> ) also show a sharp and sustained
increase during this time course after a 2-Gy dose. Paradoxically, transcription 
factor A (TFAM), exhibited the directly opposite response.

PMID: 21445788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Cell Res. 2011 May;21(5):817-34. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.55. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Mitochondrial H2O2 generated from electron transport chain complex I stimulates
muscle differentiation.

Lee S(1), Tak E, Lee J, Rashid MA, Murphy MP, Ha J, Kim SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Science and
Engineering Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and
Biomedical Science Institute (BK-21), School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University,
#1 Hoegi-dong, Dongdaemoon-gu, Seoul 130-701, Korea.

Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mROS) have been considered detrimental to 
cells. However, their physiological roles as signaling mediators have not been
thoroughly explored. Here, we investigated whether mROS generated from
mitochondrial electron transport chain (mETC) complex I stimulated muscle
differentiation. Our results showed that the quantity of mROS was increased and
that manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) was induced via NF-<U+03BA>B activation
during muscle differentiation. Mitochondria-targeted antioxidants (MitoQ and
MitoTEMPOL) and mitochondria-targeted catalase decreased mROS quantity and
suppressed muscle differentiation without affecting the amount of ATP.
Mitochondrial alterations, including the induction of mitochondrial transcription
factor A and an increase in the number and size of mitochondria, and functional
activations were observed during muscle differentiation. In particular, increased
expression levels of mETC complex I subunits and a higher activity of complex I
than other complexes were observed. Rotenone, an inhibitor of mETC complex I,
decreased the mitochondrial NADH/NAD(+) ratio and mROS levels during muscle
differentiation. The inhibition of complex I using small interfering RNAs and
rotenone reduced mROS levels, suppressed muscle differentiation, and depleted ATP
levels with a concomitant increase in glycolysis. From these results, we conclude
that complex I-derived O(2)·(-), produced through reverse electron transport due 
to enhanced metabolism and a high activity of complex I, was dismutated into
H(2)O(2) by MnSOD induced via NF-<U+03BA>B activation and that the dismutated mH(2)O(2) 
stimulated muscle differentiation as a signaling messenger.

PMCID: PMC3203677
PMID: 21445095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Steroids. 2011 Jun;76(7):660-6. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2011.03.002. Epub 2011
Mar 16.

Dexamethasone decreases cholestatic liver injury via inhibition of intrinsic
pathway with simultaneous enhancement of mitochondrial biogenesis.

Tiao MM(1), Lin TK, Chen JB, Liou CW, Wang PW, Huang CC, Chou YM, Huang YH,
Chuang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondria are known to be involved in cholestatic liver injury. We
tested the hypothesis that glucocorticoids can modulate mitochondrial function to
alleviate cholestatic liver injury.
METHODS: A rat model of cholestasis was established by bile duct ligation (BDL), 
with a sham group receiving laparotomy without BDL, and a group receiving
dexamethasone (DEX) treatment after BDL.
RESULTS: The liver function including total bilirubin levels, alanine
transaminase and aspartate transaminase activities was significantly improved in 
the DEX treatment group in comparison to the BDL group. There was a significant
upregulation of liver peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a
and mitochondrial transcriptional factor A protein between 6 and 72 h was found
in the DEX group. DEX treatment significantly down-regulated Bax, caspase 9 and
caspase 3 expression induced by BDL at 24-72 h, but had little effect on the
expression of caspase 8, Bcl(2,) Fas and Fas-FasL complex. Consequently, the
number of apoptotic liver cells in the DEX group was significantly less than in
the BDL group at 72 h.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that glucocorticoids decreases cholestatic liver
injury within hours after BDL. Early glucocorticoids treatment can enhance the
mitochondrial biogenesis and modulate the intrinsic but not extrinsic pathway of 
apoptosis following BDL.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21419148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):G119-27. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00253.2010. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Mitochondrial biogenesis fails in secondary biliary cirrhosis in rats leading to 
mitochondrial DNA depletion and deletions.

Arduini A(1), Serviddio G, Escobar J, Tormos AM, Bellanti F, Viña J, Monsalve M, 
Sastre J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, Spain.

Chronic cholestasis is characterized by mitochondrial dysfunction, associated
with loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, decreased activities of
respiratory chain complexes, and ATP production. Our aim was to determine the
molecular mechanisms that link long-term cholestasis to mitochondrial
dysfunction. We studied a model of chronic cholestasis induced by bile duct
ligation in rats. Key sensors and regulators of the energetic state and
mitochondrial biogenesis, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-to-nuclear DNA (nDNA) ratio
(mtDNA/nDNA) relative copy number, mtDNA deletions, and indexes of apoptosis
(BAX, BCL-2, and cleaved caspase 3) and cell proliferation (PCNA) were evaluated.
Our results show that long-term cholestasis is associated with absence of
activation of key sensors of the energetic state, evidenced by decreased SIRT1
and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase levels and lack of AMPK activation. Key
mitochondrial biogenesis regulators (PGC-1a and GABP-a) decreased and NRF-1 was
not transcriptionally active. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) protein
levels increased transiently in liver mitochondria at 2 wk after bile duct
ligation, but they dramatically decreased at 4 wk. Reduced TFAM levels at this
stage were mirrored by a marked decrease (65%) in mtDNA/nDNA relative copy
number. The blockade of mitochondrial biogenesis should not be ascribed to
activation of apoptosis or inhibition of cell proliferation. Impaired
mitochondrial turnover and loss of the DNA stabilizing effect of TFAM are likely 
the causative event involved in the genetic instability evidenced by accumulation
of mtDNA deletions. In conclusion, the lack of stimulation of mitochondrial
biogenesis leads to mtDNA severe depletion and deletions in long-term
cholestasis. Hence, long-term cholestasis should be considered a secondary
mitochondrial hepatopathy.

PMID: 21415417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2011 Aug;109(2):115-22. doi:
10.1111/j.1742-7843.2011.00697.x. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Nuclear respiratory factor-1 is involved in mitochondrial dysfunction induced by 
benzo(a)pyrene in human bronchial epithelial cells.

Zhang L(1), Bao Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prevention, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.

In this study, we investigated the role of nuclear respiratory factor-1(NRF-1) in
benzo(a)pyrene (BaP)-induced mitochondrial events in human bronchial epithelial
cells (16HBE). Cytotoxicity was determined with MTT assay, and apoptosis was
measured by flow cytometry. The results showed that BaP inhibited cell
proliferation in a dose-dependent manner and induced apoptosis in 16HBE cells.
Time-dependent reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation induced by BaP was
observed in 16HBE cells. The loss of mitochondrial membrane permeability
transition (MPT) was obtained by a laser scanning confocal microscope, and the
decreasing ATP level was detected by a Cell-Titer-Glo(®) Luminescent Cell
Viability Assay. Results of western blotting assay revealed that both NRF-1 and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) decreased in 12-µM BaP-treated cells
at both 12 and 24 hr. The results of RT-PCR indicate that NRF-1 and mtTFA mRNA in
16HBE cells were not changed after BaP treatment 12 or 24 hr. Down-regulation of 
NRF-1 by shRNA further reduced the loss of MPT and increased ROS generation in
response to BaP treatment. Therefore, our results demonstrate that NRF-1 is
responsible for BaP-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in 16HBE cells and
associated with the level of mtTFA protein, loss of MPT and ROS overproduction.

© 2011 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology © 2011 Nordic
Pharmacological Society.

PMID: 21401886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2012 Jan-Mar;26(1):1-7. doi:
10.1097/WAD.0b013e318214b7d0.

Psychotropic drug effects on gene transcriptomics relevant to Alzheimer disease.

Lauterbach EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Mercer University School of 
Medicine, Macon, GA 31201, USA. eclbgnp@earthlink.net

Psychotropics are widely prescribed in Alzheimer disease (AD) without regard to
their pathobiological effects. Results summarize a comprehensive survey of
psychotropic effects on messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression for 52 genes
linked to AD. Pending future investigations, current data indicate that atypical 
antipsychotics, lithium, and fluoxetine reduce AD risk, whereas other drug
classes promote risk. Risk may be attenuated by antipsychotics and lithium
(down-regulate TNF), atypical antipsychotics (down-regulate TF), risperidone
(down-regulates IL1B), olanzapine (up-regulates TFAM, down-regulates PRNP),
fluoxetine (up-regulates CLU, SORCS1, NEDD9, GRN, and ECE1), and lithium
coadministered with antipsychotics (down-regulates IL1B). Risk may be enhanced by
neuroleptics (up-regulate TF), haloperidol (up-regulates IL1B and PION),
olanzapine (down-regulates THRA and PRNP, up-regulates IL1A), and chlorpromazine,
imipramine, maprotiline, fluvoxamine, and diazepam (up-regulate IL1B). There were
no results for dextromethorphan-plus-quinidine. Fluoxetine effects on CLU, NEDD9,
and GRN were statistically robust. Drug effects on specific variants,
polymorphisms, genotypes, and other genes (CCR2, TF, and PRNP) are detailed.
Translational AD risk applications and their limitations related to specific
genes, mutations, variants, polymorphisms, genotypes, brain site, sex, clinical
population, AD stage, and other factors are discussed. This report provides an
initial summary and framework to understand the potential impact of psychotropic 
drugs on AD-relevant genes.

PMID: 21399480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Life Sci. 2011 Apr 25;88(17-18):803-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2011.02.025. Epub 2011 
Mar 15.

Tetramethylpyrazine protects palmitate-induced oxidative damage and mitochondrial
dysfunction in C2C12 myotubes.

Gao X(1), Zhao XL, Zhu YH, Li XM, Xu Q, Lin HD, Wang MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. gao.xin@zs-hospital.sh.cn

AIMS: Tetramethylpyrazine (TMP), one of the active ingredients isolated from a
Chinese herbal prescription, possesses protective effects against oxidative
stress caused by high glucose in endothelial cells. In this study, the role of
TMP in preventing muscle cells from palmitate-induced oxidative damage was
investigated and the possible mechanisms of action elucidated.
MAIN METHODS: Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) were measured in C2C12 
myotubes, a palmitate-induced oxidative stress cell model, with or without TMP.
Both mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and oxygen consumption were assessed 
in conjunction with quantification of mitochondrial DNA and mitochondrial
biogenesis-related factors, such as peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> 
coactivator 1 a (PGC1a), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Expression
of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III as an index of mitochondrial
function was evaluated by immunoblotting, and glucose transport into the C2C12
myotube examined by analyzing 2-deoxy-[(3)H]glucose uptake.
KEY FINDINGS: TMP significantly alleviated palmitate-induced mitochondrial ROS
production, mitigated mitochondrial dysfunction and increased D-loop mRNA
expression as compared with the control. This was accompanied by a marked
reversal of palmitate-induced down-regulation in the expression of mitochondrial 
biogenesis-related factors (PGC1a, NRF1 and Tfam) and decreased glucose uptake in
C2C12 myotubes. As a result, cell respiration, as reflected by the elevated
expression of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III and oxygen consumption,
was enhanced.
SIGNIFICANCE: TMP is capable of protecting C2C12 myotubes against
palmitate-induced oxidative damage and mitochondrial dysfunction, and improving
glucose uptake in muscle cells partially through the up-regulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21396380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Physiol Biochem. 2011 Sep;67(3):359-70. doi: 10.1007/s13105-011-0083-5. Epub
2011 Mar 11.

Expression of nuclear-encoded genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and
dynamics in experimentally denervated muscle.

Wagatsuma A(1), Kotake N, Mabuchi K, Yamada S.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
wagatsuma1969@yahoo.co.jp

The abundance, morphology, and functional properties of mitochondria become
altered in response to denervation. To gain insight into the regulation of this
process, mitochondrial enzyme activities and gene expression involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis and dynamics in mouse gastrocnemius muscle was
investigated. Sciatic nerve transactions were performed on mice, and then
gastrocnemius muscles were isolated at days 5 and 30 after surgery. Muscle weight
was decreased significantly by 15% and 62% at days 5 and 30 after surgery,
respectively. The activity of citrate synthase, a marker of oxidative enzyme, was
reduced significantly by 31% and 53% at days 5 and 30, respectively. Enzyme
histochemical analysis revealed that subsarcolemmal mitochondria were largely
lost than intermyofibrillar mitochondria at day 5, and this trend was further
progressed at day 30 after surgery. Expression levels of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor, <U+03B3> coactivator 1 (PGC-1)a, estrogen-related
receptor a (ERRa), and mitofusin 2 were down-regulated throughout the
experimental period, whereas those of PGC-1ß, PRC, nuclear respiratory factor
(NRF)-1, NRF-2, TFAM, and Lon protease were down-regulated at day 30 after
surgery. These results suggest that PGC-1a, ERRa, and mitofusin 2 may be
important factors in the process of denervation-induced mitochondrial adaptation.
In addition, other PGC-1 family of transcriptional coactivators and DNA binding
transcription factors may also contribute to mitochondrial adaptation after early
response to denervation.

PMID: 21394548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):7-8. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvr049. Epub 2011 Feb 22.

Energy at heart: matching demand with production.

Ellingsen Ø.

Comment on
    Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):57-67.

PMID: 21345804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Apr;92(1):106-10. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2011.01.010. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Tissue-specific differences in mitochondrial DNA content in type 2 diabetes.

Hsieh CJ(1), Weng SW, Liou CW, Lin TK, Chen JB, Tiao MM, Hung YT, Chen IY, Huang 
WT, Wang PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung
Medical Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: To investigate whether the effect of hyperglycemia on mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA) content is tissue-specific.
METHOD: We compared the mtDNA contents in leg muscle, blood vessel, and
peripheral leucocytes in seventeen patients with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) with
those of seven controls. We measured 8-hydroxydeoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) expression 
in the muscles and thiobarbituric acid reactive substance (TBARS) in sera to
evaluate oxidative stress. Immunohistochemical detection of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1 alpha (PGC1-a), mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), and apoptosis were performed in the muscle tissue.
RESULTS: The mtDNA copy number was highest in muscle tissue, followed by blood
vessel tissue, and lowest in leucocytes in both the diabetic and control
subjects. The diabetic patients had less mtDNA content in the muscle than the
controls (2.86±0.33 vs. 3.20±0.14, P=0.025), but more mtDNA content in the
leucocytes (2.25±0.26 vs. 1.98±0.06, P=0.04). In both groups, there was a
positive correlation between muscle tissue mtDNA content and the expression of
8-OHdG. Patients with T2DM had significantly increased 8-OHdG and TUNEL labeling 
index and non-significant increases in the expression of PGC1-a and Tfam.
CONCLUSION: Oxidative stress stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis but induces a
greater degree of apoptosis in diabetic patients, resulting in a decrease in
muscle tissue mtDNA content.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21281975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Exp Neurol. 2011 Apr;228(2):253-8. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.01.014. Epub
2011 Jan 28.

Folate deficiency increases mtDNA and D-1 mtDNA deletion in aged brain of mice
lacking uracil-DNA glycosylase.

Kronenberg G(1), Gertz K, Overall RW, Harms C, Klein J, Page MM, Stuart JA,
Endres M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Hochschulambulanz für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Eschenallee 3,
14050 Berlin, Germany.

Strong epidemiological and experimental evidence links folate deficiency and
resultant hyperhomocysteinemia with cognitive decline and neurodegeneration.
Here, we tested the hypothesis that uracil misincorporation contributes to
mitochondrial pathology in aged brain following folate deprivation. In a 2 × 2
design, 14-month-old mice lacking uracil DNA glycosylase (Ung-/-) versus
wild-type controls were subjected to a folate-deficient versus a regular diet for
six weeks. Folate-deficient feeding significantly enhanced mtDNA content and
overall abundance of the D-1 mtDNA deletion in brain of Ung-/-, but not of
wild-type mice. Independent of folate status, the frequency of the D-1 mtDNA
deletion in mtDNA was significantly increased in Ung-/- mice. The rate of
mitochondrial biogenesis as assessed at six weeks of the experimental diet by
mRNA expression levels of transcriptional coactivator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator (PGC)-1a and of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam) was not affected by either Ung-/- genotype or
short-term folate deficiency. Similarly, citrate synthase (CS) activity in the
brain did not differ across experimental groups. By contrast, independent of
genotype, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity was significantly reduced in
folate-deficient animals. Our results suggest that impaired uracil excision
repair causes an increase in mitochondrial mutagenesis in aged brain along with a
compensatory increase in mtDNA content in response to low folate status. Folate
deficiency may contribute to neurodegeneration via mtDNA damage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21281628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Diabetes. 2011 Feb;60(2):427-35. doi: 10.2337/db10-0409.

The adipocyte-expressed forkhead transcription factor Foxc2 regulates metabolism 
through altered mitochondrial function.

Lidell ME(1), Seifert EL, Westergren R, Heglind M, Gowing A, Sukonina V, Arani Z,
Itkonen P, Wallin S, Westberg F, Fernandez-Rodriguez J, Laakso M, Nilsson T, Peng
XR, Harper ME, Enerbäck S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, The
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Previous findings demonstrate that enhanced expression of the forkhead
transcription factor Foxc2 in adipose tissue leads to a lean and
insulin-sensitive phenotype. These findings prompted us to further investigate
the role of Foxc2 in the regulation of genes of fundamental importance for
metabolism and mitochondrial function.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The effects of Foxc2 on expression of genes involved
in mitochondriogenesis and mitochondrial function were assessed by quantitative
real-time PCR. The potential of a direct transcriptional regulation of regulated 
genes was tested in promoter assays, and mitochondrial morphology was
investigated by electron microscopy. Mitochondrial function was tested by
measuring oxygen consumption and extracellular acidification rates as well as
palmitate oxidation.
RESULTS: Enhanced expression of FOXC2 in adipocytes or in cells with no
endogenous Foxc2 expression induces mitochondriogenesis and an elongated
mitochondrial morphology. Together with increased aerobic metabolic capacity,
increased palmitate oxidation, and upregulation of genes encoding respiratory
complexes and of brown fat-related genes, Foxc2 also specifically induces
mitochondrial fusion genes in adipocytes. Among tested forkhead genes, Foxc2 is
unique in its ability to trans-activate the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA/Tfam) gene--a master regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis. In human adipose tissue the expression levels of mtTFA/Tfam and of
fusion genes also correlate with that of Foxc2.
CONCLUSIONS: We previously showed that a high-calorie diet and insulin induce
Foxc2 in adipocytes; the current findings identify a previously unknown role for 
Foxc2 as an important metabo-regulator of mitochondrial morphology and
metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3028341
PMID: 21270254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Biochem. 2011 May;149(5):581-9. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvr008. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

Biochemical properties of Caenorhabditis elegans HMG-5, a regulator of
mitochondrial DNA.

Sumitani M(1), Kasashima K, Matsugi J, Endo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical University, 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Shimotsuke, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

Caenorhabditis elegans HMG-5, which is encoded by F45E4.9, contains two high
mobility group (HMG) box domains and shows sequence similarity with mammalian
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). In this study, using soaking RNA
interference, we found that knockdown of HMG-5 reduced the amount of mtDNA in P0 
hermaphrodites, suggesting it as functional orthologue of mammalian TFAM. We also
examined the biochemical property of HMG-5 in mammalian cells and in vitro. We
found that HMG-5 localized to the mitochondria in human cultured cells and was
included in the NP-40-insoluble fraction in which mtDNA and TFAM were enriched.
By immunoprecipitation analysis, HMG-5 was found to associate with human
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in the cells. In vitro binding experiment also showed
that HMG-5 binds to C. elegans mtDNA and plasmid DNA, indicating its feature as a
non-specific DNA-binding protein. Furthermore, it was found that HMG-5 can
interact with itself. These results demonstrate that HMG5 shares similar
biochemical properties with mammalian TFAM as a nucleoid factor. HMG-5 could be a
good candidate for investigating mtDNA metabolism in multicellular organisms.

PMCID: PMC3115682
PMID: 21258070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. FASEB J. 2011 Apr;25(4):1333-44. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-173625. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Impaired nigrostriatal function precedes behavioral deficits in a genetic
mitochondrial model of Parkinson's disease.

Good CH(1), Hoffman AF, Hoffer BJ, Chefer VI, Shippenberg TS, Bäckman CM, Larsson
NG, Olson L, Gellhaar S, Galter D, Lupica CR.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Neurobiology Branch, National Institute on Drug Abuse Intramural
Research Program, National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) involves progressive loss of nigrostriatal dopamine (DA)
neurons over an extended period of time. Mitochondrial damage may lead to PD, and
neurotoxins affecting mitochondria are widely used to produce degeneration of the
nigrostriatal circuitry. Deletion of the mitochondrial transcription factor A
gene (Tfam) in C57BL6 mouse DA neurons leads to a slowly progressing parkinsonian
phenotype in which motor impairment is first observed at ~12 wk of age. L-DOPA
treatment improves motor dysfunction in these "MitoPark" mice, but this declines 
when DA neuron loss is more complete. To investigate early neurobiological events
potentially contributing to PD, we compared the neurochemical and
electrophysiological properties of the nigrostriatal circuit in behaviorally
asymptomatic 6- to 8-wk-old MitoPark mice and age-matched control littermates.
Release, but not uptake of DA, was impaired in MitoPark mouse striatal brain
slices, and nigral DA neurons lacked characteristic pacemaker activity compared
with control mice. Also, hyperpolarization-activated cyclic nucleotide-gated
(HCN) ion channel function was reduced in MitoPark DA neurons, although HCN
messenger RNA was unchanged. This study demonstrates altered nigrostriatal
function that precedes behavioral parkinsonian symptoms in this genetic PD model.
A full understanding of these presymptomatic cellular properties may lead to more
effective early treatments of PD.

PMCID: PMC3058704
PMID: 21233488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. FASEB J. 2011 Apr;25(4):1402-16. doi: 10.1096/fj.10-169029. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

Tamoxifen increases nuclear respiratory factor 1 transcription by activating
estrogen receptor beta and AP-1 recruitment to adjacent promoter binding sites.

Ivanova MM(1), Luken KH, Zimmer AS, Lenzo FL, Smith RJ, Arteel MW, Kollenberg TJ,
Mattingly KA, Klinge CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY
40292, USA.

Little is known about endogenous estrogen receptor ß (ERß) gene targets in human 
breast cancer. We reported that estradiol (E(2)) induces nuclear respiratory
factor-1 (NRF-1) transcription through ERa in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Here we 
report that 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT), with an EC(50) of ~1.7 nM, increases
NRF-1 expression by recruiting ERß, cJun, cFos, CBP, and RNA polymerase II to and
dismissing NCoR from the NRF1 promoter. Promoter deletion and transient
transfection studies showed that the estrogen response element (ERE) is essential
and that an adjacent AP-1 site contributes to maximal 4-OHT-induced NRF-1
transcription. siRNA knockdown of ERß revealed that ERß inhibits basal NRF-1
expression and is required for 4-OHT-induced NRF-1 transcription. An AP-1
inhibitor blocked 4-OHT-induced NRF-1 expression. The 4-OHT-induced increase in
NRF-1 resulted in increased transcription of NRF-1 target CAPNS1 but not CYC1,
CYC2, or TFAM despite increased NRF-1 coactivator PGC-1a protein. The absence of 
TFAM induction corresponds to a lack of Akt-dependent phosphorylation of NRF-1
with 4-OHT treatment. Overexpression of NRF-1 inhibited 4-OHT-induced apoptosis
and siRNA knockdown of NRF-1 increased apoptosis, indicating an antiapoptotic
role for NRF-1. Overall, NRF-1 expression and activity is regulated by 4-OHT via 
endogenous ERß in MCF-7 cells.

PMCID: PMC3058701
PMID: 21233487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurochem. 2011 Mar;116(6):1148-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07171.x. Epub
2011 Jan 28.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 inhibition reduces ischemic cerebral damage, restores 
impaired mitochondrial biogenesis and prevents ROS production.

Valerio A(1), Bertolotti P, Delbarba A, Perego C, Dossena M, Ragni M, Spano P,
Carruba MO, De Simoni MG, Nisoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Biomedical Sciences & Biotechnology,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

This study was designed to test the hypothesis that improved mitochondrial
biogenesis could help reducing ischemic cerebral injury. We found that levels of 
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a and nuclear respiratory
factor-1, mitochondrial DNA content and other markers of mitochondrial biogenesis
and function were reduced in primary mouse cortical neurons under oxygen-glucose 
deprivation (OGD). The glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3) inhibitor SB216763
activated an efficient mitochondrial biogenesis program in control cortical
neurons and counteracted the OGD-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis impairment.
This was accompanied by the activation of an antioxidant response that reduced
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species generation and ischemic neuronal damage.
The in vitro effects of SB216763 were mimicked by two other structurally
unrelated GSK-3 inhibitors. The protective effects of SB216763 on OGD-mediated
neuronal damage were abolished in the presence of diverse mitochondrial
inhibitors. Finally, when systemically administered in vivo, SB216763 reduced the
infarct size and recovered the loss of mitochondrial DNA in mice subjected to
permanent middle cerebral artery occlusion. We conclude that GSK-3 inhibition by 
SB216763 might pave the way of novel promising therapies aimed at stimulating the
renewal of functional mitochondria and reducing reactive oxygen species-mediated 
damage in ischemic stroke.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21210815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Sci. 2011 Mar;102(3):578-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01835.x. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

Clinical usefulness of mitochondrial transcription factor A expression as a
predictive marker in colorectal cancer patients treated with FOLFOX.

Yoshida Y(1), Hasegawa J, Nezu R, Kim YK, Hirota M, Kawano K, Izumi H, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Osaka Rosai Hospital, Osaka, Japan. yy4160@yahoo.co.jp

We previously reported that mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA)
preferentially recognizes cisplatin-damaged DNA via physical interaction with p53
and is upregulated by treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil (5-FU). The aim
of the present study was to evaluate whether expression of mtTFA predicts the
clinical outcome in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer treated with
modified 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin 6 (mFOLFOX6). Fifty-nine
patients with metastatic lesions from colorectal cancer treated with mFOLFOX6
were included in this study. The subjects consisted of 25 women and 34 men with a
median age of 62 years. The patients were treated with oxaliplatin (85 mg/m(2) ) 
plus leucovorin (200 mg/m(2) ) as a 2-h infusion on day 1, followed by 5-FU (400 
mg/m(2) ) bolus and 46-h continuous infusion of 2400 mg/m(2) . The expressions of
mtTFA and p53 of resected primary tumors were examined by immunohistochemical
analysis. Of the 59 patients, 33 (complete response 1, partial response 32)
achieved a confirmed response to therapy. The positive cytoplasmic staining rate 
for mtTFA was 44.1% and that for p53 was 59.3%, respectively. Strong expression
of mtTFA was detected in eight of 33 complete response/partial response (24.2%)
and in 18 of 26 SD/PD (69.2%), indicating that mtTFA expression was significantly
correlated with response to chemotherapy (P<0.01). Median overall survival was
significantly longer in patients without mtTFA expression (P=0.0493).
Multivariate analysis revealed that mtTFA expression significantly affected
overall survival (hazard ratio 2.10, P=0.036). Immunohistochemical study of mtTFA
may be useful for predicting the clinical outcome of metastatic colorectal cancer
patients treated with FOLFOX.

© 2011 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21205083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 25;286(8):6049-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.176842. Epub 2010 
Dec 16.

Resveratrol potentiates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in INS-1E beta-cells
and human islets through a SIRT1-dependent mechanism.

Vetterli L(1), Brun T, Giovannoni L, Bosco D, Maechler P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva Medical
Center and Geneva University Hospitals, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

Resveratrol, a polyphenol compound, is known for its effects on energy
homeostasis. With properties of energy sensors mediating effects of calorie
restriction, sirtuins are targets of resveratrol. The mammalian sirtuin homolog
SIRT1 is a protein deacetylase playing a role in glucose metabolism and islet
function. Here, we investigated the effects of resveratrol and possible link with
SIRT1 in ß-cells. Insulinoma INS-1E cells and human islets were cultured with
resveratrol before analyzing their physiological responses. Treatment of INS-1E
cells for 24 h with 25 µM resveratrol resulted in marked potentiation of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. This effect was associated with elevated
glycolytic flux, resulting in increased glucose oxidation, ATP generation, and
mitochondrial oxygen consumption. Such changes correlated with up-regulation of
key genes for ß-cell function, i.e. Glut2, glucokinase, Pdx-1, Hnf-1a, and Tfam. 
In human islets, chronic resveratrol treatment similarly increased both the
glucose secretory response and expression of the same set of genes, eventually
restoring the glucose response in islets obtained from one type 2 diabetic donor.
Overexpression of Sirt1 in INS-1E cells potentiated resveratrol effects on
insulin secretion. Conversely, inhibition of SIRT1 achieved either by expression 
of an inactive mutant or by using the EX-527 inhibitor, both abolished
resveratrol effects on glucose responses. Treatment of INS-1E cells with EX-527
also prevented resveratrol-induced up-regulation of Glut2, glucokinase, Pdx-1,
and Tfam. Resveratrol markedly enhanced the glucose response of INS-1E cells and 
human islets, even after removal of the compound from the medium. These effects
were mediated by and fully dependent on active SIRT1, defining a new role for
SIRT1 in the regulation of insulin secretion.

PMCID: PMC3057791
PMID: 21163946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. BMC Med Genomics. 2010 Dec 16;3:59. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-3-59.

Birt-Hogg-Dubé renal tumors are genetically distinct from other renal neoplasias 
and are associated with up-regulation of mitochondrial gene expression.

Klomp JA(1), Petillo D, Niemi NM, Dykema KJ, Chen J, Yang XJ, Sääf A, Zickert P, 
Aly M, Bergerheim U, Nordenskjöld M, Gad S, Giraud S, Denoux Y, Yonneau L, Méjean
A, Vasiliu V, Richard S, MacKeigan JP, Teh BT, Furge KA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Computational Biology, Van Andel Research Institute, Grand
Rapids, MI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Germline mutations in the folliculin (FLCN) gene are associated with 
the development of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome (BHDS), a disease characterized by
papular skin lesions, a high occurrence of spontaneous pneumothorax, and the
development of renal neoplasias. The majority of renal tumors that arise in
BHDS-affected individuals are histologically similar to sporadic chromophobe
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and sporadic renal oncocytoma. However, most sporadic 
tumors lack FLCN mutations and the extent to which the BHDS-derived renal tumors 
share genetic defects associated with the sporadic tumors has not been well
studied.
METHODS: BHDS individuals were identified symptomatically and FLCN mutations were
confirmed by DNA sequencing. Comparative gene expression profiling analyses were 
carried out on renal tumors isolated from individuals afflicted with BHDS and a
panel of sporadic renal tumors of different subtypes using discriminate and
clustering approaches. qRT-PCR was used to confirm selected results of the gene
expression analyses. We further analyzed differentially expressed genes using
gene set enrichment analysis and pathway analysis approaches. Pathway analysis
results were confirmed by generation of independent pathway signatures and
application to additional datasets.
RESULTS: Renal tumors isolated from individuals with BHDS showed distinct gene
expression and cytogenetic characteristics from sporadic renal oncocytoma and
chromophobe RCC. The most prominent molecular feature of BHDS-derived kidney
tumors was high expression of mitochondria-and oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS)-associated genes. This mitochondria expression phenotype was associated 
with deregulation of the PGC-1a-TFAM signaling axis. Loss of FLCN expression
across various tumor types is also associated with increased nuclear
mitochondrial gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a genetic distinction between BHDS-associated
tumors and other renal neoplasias. In addition, deregulation of the PGC-1a-TFAM
signaling axis is most pronounced in renal tumors that harbor FLCN mutations and 
in tumors from other organs that have relatively low expression of FLCN. These
results are consistent with the recently discovered interaction between FLCN and 
AMPK and support a model in which FLCN is a regulator of mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC3012009
PMID: 21162720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):57-67. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvq374. Epub 2010 Nov
26.

Mitochondrial transcription factors TFAM and TFB2M regulate Serca2 gene
transcription.

Watanabe A(1), Arai M, Koitabashi N, Niwano K, Ohyama Y, Yamada Y, Kato N,
Kurabayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Biological Science, Gunma University Graduate
School of Medicine, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.

Comment in
    Cardiovasc Res. 2011 Apr 1;90(1):7-8.

AIMS: Sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca²(+)-ATPase 2a (SERCA2a) transports Ca²(+)
by consuming ATP produced by mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes. Messenger
RNA (mRNA) for these enzymes is transcribed by mitochondrial transcription
factors A (TFAM) and B2 (TFB2M). This study examined whether TFAM and TFB2M
coordinately regulate the transcription of the Serca2 gene and mitochondrial
genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Nuclear localization of TFAM and TFB2M was demonstrated by
immunostaining in rat neonatal cardiac myocytes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy revealed that TFAM and TFB2M bind
to the -122 to -114 nt and -122 to -117 nt regions of the rat Serca2 gene
promoter, respectively. Mutation of these sites resulted in decreased Serca2 gene
transcription. In a rat myocardial infarction model, Serca2a mRNA levels
significantly correlated with those of Tfam (r = 0.54, P < 0.001) and Tfb2m (r = 
0.73, P < 0.001). Overexpression of TFAM and TFB2M blocked hydrogen peroxide- and
norepinephrine-induced decreases in Serca2a mRNA levels. In addition,
overexpression of TFAM and TFB2M increased the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy
number and mRNA levels of mitochondrial enzymes.
CONCLUSION: Although TFAM and TFB2M are recognized as mtDNA-specific
transcription factors, they also regulate transcription of nuclear DNA, i.e. the 
Serca2 gene. Our findings suggest a novel paradigm in which the transcription of 
genes for mitochondrial enzymes that produce ATP and the gene for SERCA2a that
consumes ATP is coordinately regulated by the same transcription factors. This
mechanism may contribute to maintaining proper cardiac function.

PMID: 21113058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Mar;349(1-2):139-47. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0668-2. Epub 
2010 Nov 26.

Muscle regeneration occurs to coincide with mitochondrial biogenesis.

Wagatsuma A(1), Kotake N, Yamada S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. wagatsuma1969@yahoo.co.jp

We investigated the expression of the nuclear-encoded genes controlling the
mitochondrial properties in the mouse gastrocnemius muscle to gain insight into
the mitochondrial biogenesis that occurs during the muscle
degeneration/regeneration induced by freezing. In addition, we tested whether the
muscle regeneration is affected by pharmacologically blocking the mitochondrial
protein synthesis to elucidate the possible involvement of mitochondrial
biogenesis in muscle regeneration. The activity of citrate synthase dramatically 
increased soon after the initial injury when the myoblasts began to differentiate
into myotubes, indicating that mitochondrial biogenesis occurs early during the
muscle regeneration. At the same time, the expression of mitochondrial
biogenesis-related genes including PGC-1ß, PRC, NRF-1, NRF-2, TFAM, mtSSB,
fission 1, and Lon protease synchronized with that of the myogenic regulatory
genes including MyoD and myogenin. The skeletal muscles forced to regenerate in
the presence of chloramphenicol to block the mitochondrial protein synthesis were
of poor repair with small myofibers and an increased amount of connective tissue.
These results suggest that mitochondrial biogenesis activated early during the
muscle regeneration and that mitochondrial biogenesis plays a role in muscle
regeneration.

PMID: 21110070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;300(2):E361-71. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00292.2010. Epub 2010 Nov 16.

The importance of PGC-1a in contractile activity-induced mitochondrial
adaptations.

Uguccioni G(1), Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)York University, Toronto, ON, Canada.

The transcriptional coactivator PPAR<U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) is a critical
regulator of mitochondrial content and function in skeletal muscle. PGC-1a may
also mediate mitochondrial adaptations in response to chronic contractile
activity (CCA). To characterize the essential role of PGC-1a in organelle
biogenesis, C2C12 murine myotubes were transfected with PGC-1a-specific siRNA and
subjected to electrical stimulation-evoked CCA. CCA enhanced cytochrome c oxidase
(COX) activity along with increases in several nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
proteins. Transfection of PGC-1a siRNA decreased protein and mRNA of the
coactivator by 60%, resulting in decrements of Tfam and COX-IV proteins. The mRNA
expression of the PGC-1 family members PGC-1ß and PRC, as well as transcription
factors NRF-1/2 and ERRa, did not exhibit compensatory changes in response to
PGC-1a depletion. However, phosphorylation of AMPK was enhanced in myotubes with 
reduced levels of PGC-1a. This suggests the presence of metabolic compensatory
stress signals in cells deficient in PGC-1a. Our findings reveal that the
CCA-induced increases in COX-IV protein and overall mitochondrial content, using 
both COX activity and organelle fluorescence, are dependent on PGC-1a. However,
this was not the case for all proteins, since decreased levels of the coactivator
did not attenuate the increases in Tfam and cytochrome c in response to CCA.
These data indicate that PGC-1a is necessary for most of the mitochondrial
adaptations that occur with CCA but that there are additional pathways that
function in parallel with PGC-1a to mediate the elevated expression of specific
nuclear-encoded proteins that are vital for mitochondrial function and cell
viability.

PMID: 21081705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mitochondrion. 2011 Mar;11(2):287-95. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.10.009. Epub 2010 
Nov 19.

New isoforms of human mitochondrial transcription factor A detected in normal and
tumoral cells.

De Virgilio C(1), Pousis C, Bruno S, Gadaleta G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Ernesto Quagliariello,
University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Novel alternatively spliced variants of the human mitochondrial transcription
factor A predicted by the computational tool ASPic were experimentally validated 
in different normal and tumoral human tissues by RT-PCR and DNA sequencing. The
comparison between the 5'UTR length and the distribution of the different
transcripts showed that the transcripts with the shortest 5'UTR are present in
all the investigated tissues, while the longest 5'UTR seems to be related to
tissue-specificity. Studies about the localization and function of the most
widely diffuse alternative isoform Tr6 were carried out.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21081181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Brain Res. 2011 Jan 12;1368:355-60. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.10.074. Epub
2010 Oct 25.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) polymorphisms and risk of late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease in Han Chinese.

Zhang Q(1), Yu JT, Wang P, Chen W, Wu ZC, Jiang H, Tan L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, School of Medicine,
Qingdao University, No. 5 Donghai Middle Road, Qingdao, Shandong Province 266071,
China.

Chronic mitochondria DNA (mtDNA) damage and mitochondrial dysfunction induced by 
increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) have been proved to contribute to the
development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) plays an important role in the maintenance of mtDNA integrity. Recently,
some studies suggested two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (rs1937 and
rs2306604) in the TFAM gene are associated with sporadic late-onset AD (LOAD) in 
Caucasians. To explore the correlation between TFAM gene and LOAD, we performed a
case-control study in a large Chinese cohort consisting of 394 patients and 390
healthy controls. The results showed that there were significant differences in
genotype (P=0.03) and allele (P=0.04) frequencies of the SNP rs1937 between LOAD 
patients and controls. The minor C allele of rs1937 acted as a moderate
protective factor of LOAD (P=0.04, odds ratios/OR=0.76). The logistic regression 
analysis also suggested an association of LOAD with SNP rs1937 (dominant model:
P=0.03, OR=0.71; recessive model: P=0.02, OR=0.25; additive model: P=0.01,
OR=0.68). No significant association was observed between rs2306604 and LOAD.
Haplotype analysis identified the haplotype CC as a protective factor of LOAD
(P=0.038, OR=0.76). This study provides the evidence that variations in TFAM are 
involved in the pathogenesis of sporadic LOAD in the Han Chinese population.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20977898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 20;5(10):e13513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013513.

Regionalized pathology correlates with augmentation of mtDNA copy numbers in a
patient with myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF-syndrome).

Brinckmann A(1), Weiss C, Wilbert F, von Moers A, Zwirner A, Stoltenburg-Didinger
G, Wilichowski E, Schuelke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité University Medical School, Berlin,
Germany.

Human patients with myoclonic epilepsy with ragged-red fibers (MERRF) suffer from
regionalized pathology caused by a mutation in the mitochondrial DNA (m.8344A<U+2192>G).
In MERRF-syndrome brain and skeletal muscles are predominantly affected, despite 
mtDNA being present in any tissue. In the past such tissue-specificity could not 
be explained by varying mtDNA mutation loads. In search for a region-specific
pathology in human individuals we determined the mtDNA/nDNA ratios along with the
mutation loads in 43 different post mortem tissue samples of a 16-year-old female
MERRF patient and in four previously healthy victims of motor vehicle accidents. 
In brain and muscle we further determined the quantity of mitochondrial proteins 
(COX subunits II and IV), transcription factors (NRF1 and TFAM), and VDAC1
(Porin) as a marker for the mitochondrial mass. In the patient the mutation loads
varied merely between 89-100%. However, mtDNA copy numbers were increased 3-7
fold in predominantly affected brain areas (e.g. hippocampus, cortex and putamen)
and in skeletal muscle. Similar increases were absent in unaffected tissues (e.g.
heart, lung, kidney, liver, and gastrointestinal organs). Such mtDNA copy number 
increase was not paralleled by an augmentation of mitochondrial mass in some
investigated tissues, predominantly in the most affected tissue regions of the
brain. We thus conclude that "futile" stimulation of mtDNA replication per se or 
a secondary failure to increase the mitochondrial mass may contribute to the
regionalized pathology seen in MERRF-syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2958123
PMID: 20976001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genet Mol Res. 2010 Oct 19;9(4):2050-9. doi: 10.4238/vol9-4gmr850.

Evaluation of TFAM and FABP4 gene polymorphisms in three lines of Nellore cattle 
selected for growth.

Ayres DR(1), Souza FR, Mercadante ME, Fonseca LF, Tonhati H, Cyrillo JN, Bonilha 
SF, Albuquerque LG.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Zootecnia, Faculdade de Ciências Agrárias e Veterinárias,
Universidade Estadual Paulista, Jaboticabal, SP, Brasil.

We analyzed the polymorphisms TFAM HaeIII, TFAM MboI and FABP4 MspA1I in three
Nellore lines selected for growth in order to evaluate how selection affects the 
frequencies of these polymorphisms and evaluate their association with growth and
carcass traits in Zebu cattle. Birth, weaning and yearling weights, rump height, 
longissimus muscle area, backfat thickness, and rump fat thickness were analyzed.
The sample was constituted of animals from two lines selected for yearling weight
(NeS and NeT), and a control line (NeC), established in 1980, at the São Paulo
Instituto de Zootecnia. Two hundred and seventy-two heifers were genotyped for
TFAM gene SNPs, and 325 heifers were genotyped for the FABP4 SNP. High
frequencies were observed for the alleles A (TFAM HaeIII), C (TFAM MboI) and C
(FABP4 MspA1I). Significant differences in allele frequencies between NeS and NeT
were observed for the TFAM HaeIII, and between the line NeT and lines NeC and NeS
for the FABP4 MspA1I SNP. Five haplotypes were observed for the two polymorphisms
in the TFAM gene, haplotype AACC being the most frequent. None of the markers
separately or according to haplotype was significantly associated with the growth
and carcass traits. The low frequencies of alleles that are associated with high 
marbling scores and thick subcutaneous fat in taurine breeds might explain the
low means for these traits in Nellore cattle.

PMID: 20967695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Jan 15;317(2):210-20. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.10.008. Epub
2010 Oct 15.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A is required for the segregation of
mitochondrial DNA in cultured cells.

Kasashima K(1), Sumitani M, Endo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi
329-0498, Japan. kasa@jichi.ac.jp

The segregation and transmission of the mitochondrial genome in humans are
complicated processes but are particularly important for understanding the
inheritance and clinical abnormalities of mitochondrial disorders. However, the
molecular mechanism of the segregation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is largely
unclear. In this study, we demonstrated that human mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) is required for the segregation of mtDNA in cultured cells.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of TFAM in HeLa cells resulted in the enlarged mtDNA, as 
indicated by the assembly of fluorescent signals stained with PicoGreen.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization confirmed the enlarged mtDNA and further showed
the existence of increased numbers of mitochondria lacking mtDNA signals in TFAM 
knockdown cells. By complementation analysis, the C-terminal tail of TFAM, which 
enhances its affinity with DNA, was found to be required for the appropriate
distribution of mtDNA. Furthermore, we found that TFAM knockdown induced
asymmetric segregation of mtDNA between dividing daughter cells. These results
suggest an essential role for human TFAM in symmetric segregation of mtDNA.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20955698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Oct 26;107(43):18410-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1008924107. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Mitochondrial Lon protease regulates mitochondrial DNA copy number and
transcription by selective degradation of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM).

Matsushima Y(1), Goto Y, Kaguni LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Center for Mitochondrial
Science and Medicine, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824-1319,
USA.

Lon is the major protease in the mitochondrial matrix in eukaryotes, and is well 
conserved among species. Although a role for Lon in mitochondrial biogenesis has 
been proposed, the mechanistic basis is unclear. Here, we demonstrate a role for 
Lon in mtDNA metabolism. An RNA interference (RNAi) construct was designed that
reduces Lon to less than 10% of its normal level in Drosophila Schneider cells.
RNAi knockdown of Lon results in increased abundance of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) and mtDNA copy number. In a corollary manner,
overexpression of Lon reduces TFAM levels and mtDNA copy number. Notably,
induction of mtDNA depletion in Lon knockdown cells does not result in
degradation of TFAM, thereby causing a dramatic increase in the TFAMmtDNA ratio. 
The increased TFAMmtDNA ratio in turn causes inhibition of mitochondrial
transcription. We conclude that Lon regulates mitochondrial transcription by
stabilizing the mitochondrial TFAMmtDNA ratio via selective degradation of TFAM.

PMCID: PMC2972957
PMID: 20930118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Hepatology. 2010 Dec;52(6):1992-2000. doi: 10.1002/hep.23927. Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Epigenetic regulation of insulin resistance in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: 
impact of liver methylation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator 1a promoter.

Sookoian S(1), Rosselli MS, Gemma C, Burgueño AL, Fernández Gianotti T, Castaño
GO, Pirola CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Hepatology, Institute of Medical Research
A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires National Council of Scientific and
Technological Research, Buenos Aires, Argentina. ssookoian@lanari.fmed.uba.ar

Insulin resistance (IR) and mitochondrial dysfunction play a central role in the 
pathophysiology of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). We hypothesized that
genetic factors and epigenetic modifications occurring in the liver contribute to
the IR phenotype. We specifically examined whether fatty liver and IR are
modified by hepatic DNA methylation of the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PPARGC1A) and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) promoters, and also evaluated whether liver mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
content is associated with NAFLD and IR. We studied liver biopsies obtained from 
NAFLD patients in a case-control design. After bisulfite treatment of DNA, we
used methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to assess the putative 
methylation of three CpG in the PPARGC1A and TFAM promoters. Liver mtDNA
quantification using nuclear DNA (nDNA) as a reference was evaluated by way of
real-time PCR. Liver PPARGC1A methylated DNA/unmethylated DNA ratio correlated
with plasma fasting insulin levels and homeostasis model assessment of insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR); TFAM methylated DNA/unmethylated DNA ratio was inversely
correlated with insulin levels. PPARGC1A promoter methylation was inversely
correlated with the abundance of liver PPARGC1A messenger RNA. The liver
mtDNA/nDNA ratio was significantly higher in control livers compared with NAFLD
livers. mtDNA/nDNA ratio was inversely correlated with HOMA-IR, fasting glucose, 
and insulin and was inversely correlated with PPARGC1A promoter
methylation.CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that the IR phenotype and the liver
transcriptional activity of PPARGC1A show a tight interaction, probably through
epigenetic modifications. Decreased liver mtDNA content concomitantly contributes
to peripheral IR.

Copyright © 2010 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 20890895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Dec;299(6):E1096-105. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00238.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Different effects of oleate vs. palmitate on mitochondrial function, apoptosis,
and insulin signaling in L6 skeletal muscle cells: role of oxidative stress.

Yuzefovych L(1), Wilson G, Rachek L.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Univ. of South Alabama, Mobile, AL
36688, USA.

The type of free fatty acids (FFAs), saturated or unsaturated, is critical in the
development of insulin resistance (IR), since the degree of saturation correlates
with IR. We compared the effects of the saturated FFA palmitate, the unsaturated 
FFA oleate, and a mixture of each on the production of mitochondrial reactive
oxygen species (mtROS), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage, mitochondrial function,
apoptosis, and insulin-signaling pathway in skeletal muscle cells. Only palmitate
caused a significant increase of mtROS production, which correlated with
concomitant mtDNA damage, mitochondrial dysfunction, induction of JNK, apoptosis,
and inhibition of insulin signaling. Blocking de novo synthesis of ceramide
abolished the effects of palmitate on mtROS production, viability, and insulin
signaling. Oleate alone did not cause mtROS generation and mtDNA damage, and its 
addition to palmitate prevented palmitate-induced mtDNA damage, increased total
ATP levels and cell viability, and prevented palmitate-induced apoptosis and
inhibition of insulin-stimulated Akt (Ser(473)) phosphorylation. The peroxisome
proliferator activator receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC-1a) protein level and
promoter activity were decreased at concentrations of palmitate =0.5 mM, whereas 
addition of oleate increased both PGC-1a level and promoter activity. Expression 
of the mitochondrial transcription factor (TFAM) was significantly diminished
after palmitate but not oleate treatment. Addition of the ROS scavenger,
N-acetylcystein (NAC), to palmitate restored both the expression and promoter
activity of PGC-1a as well as TFAM expression. We propose that 1) mtROS
generation is the initial event in the induction of mitochondrial dysfunction and
consequent apoptosis and the inhibition of insulin signaling and that 2) oleate
ameliorates palmitate-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and thus may contribute
to the prevention of palmitate-induced IR.

PMCID: PMC3006254
PMID: 20876761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mitochondrion. 2011 Jan;11(1):176-81. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.09.004. Epub 2010 
Sep 21.

Mitochondrial DNA and TFAM gene variation in early-onset myocardial infarction:
evidence for an association to haplogroup H.

Palacín M(1), Alvarez V, Martín M, Díaz M, Corao AI, Alonso B, Díaz-Molina B,
Lozano I, Avanzas P, Morís C, Reguero JR, Rodríguez I, López-Larrea C,
Cannata-Andía J, Batalla A, Ruiz-Ortega M, Martínez-Camblor P, Coto E.

Author information: 
(1)Genética Molecular, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.

The main objective of this research was to define the association between common 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) polymorphisms and mitochondrial transcription A gene
(TFAM) variants and myocardial infarction (MI) in patients with atherosclerotic
diseased vessels. Ten mitochondrial polymorphisms that defined the nine common
European haplogroups were genotyped in 500 male patients with early onset MI (<55
years) and at least one atherosclerotic coronary vessel (angiographically
confirmed), and 500 healthy controls. In addition, we searched for DNA variants
in the coding region of the TFAM gene and compared patients and controls for the 
allele and genotype frequencies. Early onset MI was strongly associated with male
gender and tobacco smoking in our population. MtDNA haplogroup H (defined by
allele 7028 °C) was significantly more frequent in a first group of patients (n =
250) compared to controls (n = 300), and the association was confirmed in a
second group of only smokers (250 patients and 200 controls). For total patients 
and controls, we obtained a p = 0.002 (OR = 1.50; 95% CI = 1.17-1.92) for H vs.
the other haplogroups. We found four common TFAM polymorphisms, with
allele/genotype frequencies that did not differ between patients and controls. In
conclusion, mitochondrial haplogroup H was associated with early onset MI in male
smokers. Our work supported a role for the mtDNA variation in the risk for
atherosclerosis and ischemic associated events, likely due to differences in
mitochondrial function and reactive oxygen production between the different
haplogroups.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20863902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2010 Nov;140(5):1160-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jtcvs.2010.08.003. Epub 2010 Sep 17.

Myocardial infarction in rats causes partial impairment in insulin response
associated with reduced fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial gene expression.

Amorim PA(1), Nguyen TD, Shingu Y, Schwarzer M, Mohr FW, Schrepper A, Doenst T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Leipzig Heart Center, Leipzig,
Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Myocardial infarction leads to contractile dysfunction. In patients
with diabetes, impaired contractility has been associated with the loss of
insulin effects and mitochondrial dysfunction. We assessed cardiac insulin
sensitivity and mitochondrial and contractile function in rats after ligation of 
the left coronary artery.
METHODS: At 2 weeks after left coronary artery ligation, we performed
echocardiography in vivo and assessed the substrate use and insulin response in
the isolated working heart and the regulation of insulin (Akt, glucose
transporter type 4) and mitochondrial signaling (p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a,
mitochondrial transcription factor A) using polymerase chain reaction and Western
blotting.
RESULTS: The infarcted hearts were dilated and had a reduced ejection fraction
(ejection fraction < 50%). The basal glucose oxidation was preserved, but the
fatty acid oxidation was significantly reduced. Insulin's effect on substrate
oxidation was significantly impaired for both the decrease in fatty acid
oxidation and the increase in glucose oxidation. However, insulin-stimulated
glucose uptake was normal in the infarcted hearts, consistent with normal
insulin-induced phosphorylation of Akt and unchanged mRNA expression of glucose
transporter type 4. The impaired oxidative response to insulin was associated
with reduced mRNA expression of the genes regulating fatty acid oxidation
(long-chain-acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1,
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a) and mitochondrial biogenesis
(mitochondrial transcription factor A). Although mRNA expression of the
mitochondrial master regulator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivator 1a was normal in the infarcted hearts, the protein expression of its 
post-transcriptional activator, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase, was
significantly reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Myocardial infarction in rats caused partial insulin resistance at
the level of substrate oxidation, which was associated with mitochondrial and
cardiac contractile dysfunction. Mitochondrial dysfunction was characterized by a
reduced capacity to oxidize fatty acids and might have resulted from impaired
mitochondrial biogenesis through the lack of p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 20850803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2010;682:279-96. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-6366-6_16.

Mechanisms of skeletal muscle weakness.

Westerblad H(1), Place N, Yamada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Hakan.Westerblad@ki.se

Skeletal muscle weakness is an important feature of numerous -pathological
conditions and it may also be a component in normal ageing. Decreased muscular
strength can be due to decreased muscle mass and/or intrinsic defects in the
muscle cells. In this chapter we will discuss decreased force production due to
mechanisms intrinsic to skeletal muscle cells. We will mainly use data from mouse
disease models to exemplify defects at various sites in the cellular
activation-contraction pathway. We will show that depending on the underlying
problem, muscle weakness can be due decreased Ca²(+) release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum, reduced myofibrillar Ca²(+) sensitivity and/or decreased 
ability of the cross-bridges to generate force.

PMID: 20824532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Oct 8;401(1):26-31. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.08.143. Epub 2010 Sep 15.

Over-expression of Tfam improves the mitochondrial disease phenotypes in a mouse 
model system.

Nishiyama S(1), Shitara H, Nakada K, Ono T, Sato A, Suzuki H, Ogawa T, Masaki H, 
Hayashi J, Yonekawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan.

The phenotypes of mitochondrial diseases caused by mutations in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) have been proposed to be strictly regulated by the proportion of
wild-type and pathogenically mutated mtDNAs. More specifically, it is thought
that the onset of the disease phenotype occurs when cells cannot maintain the
proper mitochondrial function because of an over-abundance of pathological mtDNA.
Therapies that cause a decrease in the pathogenic mtDNA population have been
proposed as a treatment for mitochondrial diseases, but these therapies are
difficult to apply in practice. In this report, we present a novel concept: to
improve mitochondrial disease phenotypes via an increase in the absolute copy
number of the wild-type mtDNA population in pathogenic cells even when the
relative proportion of mtDNA genotypes remains unchanged. We have succeeded in
ameliorating the typical symptoms of mitochondrial disease in a model mouse line 
by the over-expression of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam)
followed by an increase of the mtDNA copy number. This new concept should lead to
the development of a novel therapeutic treatment for mitochondrial diseases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20816751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. FASEB J. 2010 Dec;24(12):5052-62. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-150714. Epub 2010 Aug 31.

TNF-alpha impairs regulation of muscle oxidative phenotype: implications for
cachexia?

Remels AH(1), Gosker HR, Schrauwen P, Hommelberg PP, Sliwinski P, Polkey M,
Galdiz J, Wouters EF, Langen RC, Schols AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is characterized by weight loss,
muscle wasting (in advanced disease ultimately resulting in cachexia), and loss
of muscle oxidative phenotype (oxphen). This study investigates the effect of
inflammation (as a determinant of muscle wasting) on muscle oxphen by using cell 
studies combined with analyses of muscle biopsies of patients with COPD and
control participants. We analyzed markers (citrate synthase, ß-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase, and cytochrome c oxidase IV) and regulators (PGC-1a, PPAR-a, and
Tfam) of oxphen in vastus lateralis muscle biopsies of patients with advanced
COPD and healthy smoking control participants. Here 17 of 73 patients exhibited
elevated muscle TNF-a mRNA levels. In these patients, significantly lower mRNA
levels of all oxidative markers/regulators were found. Interestingly, these
patients also had a significantly lower body mass index and tended to have less
muscle mass. In cultured muscle cells, mitochondrial protein content and myosin
heavy chain isoform I (but not II) protein and mRNA levels were reduced on
chronic TNF-a stimulation. TNF-a also reduced mitochondrial respiration in a
nuclear factor kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B) -dependent manner. Importantly, TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B
activation decreased promoter transactivation and transcriptional activity of
regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis and muscle oxphen. In conclusion, these
results demonstrate that TNF-a impairs muscle oxphen in a NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent manner.

PMID: 20807714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. DNA Repair (Amst). 2010 Oct 5;9(10):1080-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2010.07.009.
Epub 2010 Aug 23.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A functions in mitochondrial base excision
repair.

Canugovi C(1), Maynard S, Bayne AC, Sykora P, Tian J, de Souza-Pinto NC, Croteau 
DL, Bohr VA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gerontology, NIA, National Institutes of Health,
Baltimore, MD 21224, United States.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is an essential component of
mitochondrial nucleoids. TFAM plays an important role in mitochondrial
transcription and replication. TFAM has been previously reported to inhibit
nucleotide excision repair (NER) in vitro but NER has not yet been detected in
mitochondria, whereas base excision repair (BER) has been comprehensively
characterized in these organelles. The BER proteins are associated with the inner
membrane in mitochondria and thus with the mitochondrial nucleoid, where TFAM is 
also situated. However, a function for TFAM in BER has not yet been investigated.
This study examines the role of TFAM in BER. In vitro studies with purified
recombinant TFAM indicate that it preferentially binds to DNA containing
8-oxoguanines, but not to abasic sites, uracils, or a gap in the sequence. TFAM
inhibited the in vitro incision activity of 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), 
uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG), apurinic endonuclease 1 (APE1), and nucleotide
incorporation by DNA polymerase <U+03B3> (pol <U+03B3>). On the other hand, a DNA
binding-defective TFAM mutant, L58A, showed less inhibition of BER in vitro.
Characterization of TFAM knockdown (KD) cells revealed that these lysates had
higher 8oxoG incision activity without changes in aOGG1 protein levels, TFAM KD
cells had mild resistance to menadione and increased damage accumulation in the
mtDNA when compared to the control cells. In addition, we found that the tumor
suppressor p53, which has been shown to interact with and alter the DNA binding
activity of TFAM, alleviates TFAM-induced inhibition of BER proteins. Together,
the results suggest that TFAM modulates BER in mitochondria by virtue of its DNA 
binding activity and protein interactions.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC2955416
PMID: 20739229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mitochondrion. 2011 Jan;11(1):76-82. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.07.007. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

Upregulation of human selenoprotein H in murine hippocampal neuronal cells
promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and functional performance.

Mendelev N(1), Mehta SL, Witherspoon S, He Q, Sexton JZ, Li PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Biomanufacturing Research Institute and
Technological Enterprise (BRITE) Building 2025, North Carolina Central
University, 302 East Lawson Street, Durham, NC 27707, USA.

Overexpression of selenoprotein H (SelH) gene provides neuroprotection in neurons
against UVB-induced cell death by blocking the mitochondrial-initiated apoptotic 
cell death pathway. This study examined the effects of SelH on mitochondrial
biogenesis and mitochondrial function. The results demonstrated that
overexpression of SelH gene in neuronal HT22 cells significantly increased the
levels of mitochondrial biogenesis regulators, nuclear respiratory factor-1
(NRF-1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator-1 alpha
(PGC-1a) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam). Mitochondrial
cytochrome c content was elevated, mass was increased and respiration was
enhanced. SelH transfection ameliorated ultra violet B (UVB)-induced suppression 
of mitochondrial biogenesis markers and depolarization of mitochondrial membrane 
potential. Overexpression of SelH promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and improves 
mitochondrial functional performance.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC2998579
PMID: 20656065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mitochondrion. 2011 Jan;11(1):54-63. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.07.005. Epub 2010
Jul 21.

Endurance training reverts heart mitochondrial dysfunction, permeability
transition and apoptotic signaling in long-term severe hyperglycemia.

Lumini-Oliveira J(1), Magalhães J, Pereira CV, Moreira AC, Oliveira PJ, Ascensão 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre in Physical Activity, Health and Leisure, Faculty of Sport,
University of Porto, Portugal.

The present study analyzed the effects of endurance training against cardiac
mitochondrial dysfunction, particularly on the susceptibility to mitochondrial
permeability transition pore (MPTP) induction in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced
hyperglycemia. Twenty-four young male Wistar rats were randomly assigned into
sedentary citrate (SED+CIT), sedentary type I diabetes (SED+STZ; 50mg/kg), T+CIT 
(14-week treadmill running, 60min/day) and T+STZ (injected 4weeks before
training). After 18weeks, isolated heart mitochondria were used for in vitro
oxygen consumption and transmembrane potential (<U+2206><U+03A8>) assessment. Cyclosporin-A
(CyclA)-sensitive osmotic swelling and Ca(2+) fluxes were measured to study MPTP 
susceptibility. Voltage-dependent anion channel (VDAC), adenine nucleotide
translocator (ANT), cyclophilin D (CypD), transcription factor A (Tfam), Bax,
Bcl-2 contents, caspase-3 and -9 activities were determined. In the sedentary
group, long-term severe hyperglycemia decreased state 3, CCCP-induced uncoupling 
and increased oligomycin-inhibited respiration, state 4 and lag phase with
glutamate-malate. A decreased state 3 and state 4 with succinate were observed.
Moreover, hyperglycemia decreased Ca(2+) uptake and increased CyclA-sensitive
Ca(2+) release and Ca(2+)-induced mitochondrial swelling. The oxygen consumption 
and <U+2206><U+03A8> parameters impaired by long-term severe hyperglycemia were reverted by
endurance training (SED+STZ vs. T+STZ). Training increased mitochondrial Ca(2+)
uptake and decreased Ca(2+) release in hyperglycemic groups. Additionally,
endurance training reverted the hyperglycemia-induced CypD elevation, attenuating
decrease of ANT, VDAC and Tfam. Moreover, training prevented the STZ-induced
elevation in Bax, Bax-to-Bcl-2 ratio, caspase-3 and -9 and the increased Bcl-2.
Endurance training reestablished heart mitochondrial respiratory dysfunction
caused by long-term severe hyperglycemia and reduced the increased susceptibility
to MPTP induction probably by modulation of MPTP regulatory proteins.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20654738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mitochondrion. 2011 Jan;11(1):64-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.07.004. Epub 2010
Jul 18.

Mitochondrial biogenesis related endurance genotype score and sports performance 
in athletes.

Eynon N(1), Ruiz JR, Meckel Y, Morán M, Lucia A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Life Sciences Division, The Zinman 
College of Physical Education and Sport Sciences at Wingate Institute, Israel.
eynon@wincol.ac.il

We determined the probability of individuals having the 'optimal' mitochondrial
biogenesis related endurance polygenic profile, and compared the endurance
polygenic profile of Israeli (Caucasian) endurance athletes (n = 74), power
athletes (n = 81), and non-athletes (n = 240). We computed a mitochondrial
biogenesis related 'endurance genotype score' (EGS, scoring from 0 to 100) from
the accumulated combination of six polymorphisms in the PPARGC1A-NRF-TFAM
pathway. Some of the variant alleles of the polymorphisms studied were so
infrequent, that the probability of possessing an 'optimal' EGS (= 100) was 0% in
the entire study population. However, the EGS was significantly higher (P<0.001) 
in endurance athletes (38.9 ± 17.1) compared with controls (30.6 ± 12.4) or power
athletes (29.0 ± 11.2). In summary, although the probability of an individual
possessing a theoretically 'optimal' genetic background for endurance sports is
very low, in general endurance athletes have a polygenic profile that is more
suitable for mitochondrial biogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20647061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mitochondrion. 2011 Jan;11(1):48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.07.001. Epub 2010
Jul 17.

Mitochondrial DNA depletion and its correlation with TFAM, TFB1M, TFB2M and POLG 
in human diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas.

Correia RL(1), Oba-Shinjo SM, Uno M, Huang N, Marie SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Neurology, School 
of Medicine, University of São Paulo, Av Dr Arnaldo 455, 4th Floor, Room 4110,
São Paulo, SP, 01246-903, Brazil.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) alterations and their clinical and pathological
implications have been analyzed in several human malignancies. A marked decrease 
in mtDNA copy number along with the increase in malignancy was observed in
diffusely infiltrating astrocytomas (24 WHO grade II, 18 grade III, and 78 grade 
IV or GBM) compared to non-neoplastic brain tissues, being mostly depleted in
GBM. Although high relative gene expression levels of mtDNA replication
regulators (mitochondrial polymerase catalytic subunit (POLG), transcription
factors A (TFAM), B1 (TFB1M) and B2 (TFB2M)) were detected, it cannot
successfully revert the mtDNA depletion observed in our samples. On the other
hand, a strong correlation among the expression levels of mitochondrial
transcription factors corroborates with the TFAM role in the direct control of
TFB1M and TFB2M during initiation of mtDNA replication. POLG expression was
related to decreased mtDNA copy number, and its overexpression associated with
TFAM expression levels also have an impact on long-term survival among GBM
patients, interpreted as a potential predictive factor for better prognosis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and Mitochondria Research Society. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 20643228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Jun;15(6):1329-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01128.x.
Epub 2010 Jul 12.

High fat diet-induced liver steatosis promotes an increase in liver mitochondrial
biogenesis in response to hypoxia.

Carabelli J(1), Burgueño AL, Rosselli MS, Gianotti TF, Lago NR, Pirola CJ,
Sookoian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Hepatology, Institute of Medical Research
A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National Council of Scientific and
Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number plays a key role in the pathophysiology of 
metabolic syndrome-related phenotypes, but its role in non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) is not well understood. We evaluated the molecular mechanisms
that may be involved in the regulation of liver mtDNA content in a
high-fat-induced rat model of NAFLD. In particular, we tested the hypothesis that
liver mtDNA copy number is associated with liver expression of HIF-1a. Rats were 
given either standard chow diet (SCD, n = 10) or high-fat diet (HFD, n = 15) for 
20 weeks. Subsequently, mtDNA quantification using nuclear DNA (nDNA) as a
reference was carried out using real time quantitative PCR. HFD induced a
significant increase in liver mtDNA/nDNA ratio, which significantly correlated
with the liver triglyceride content (R: 0.29, P < 0.05). The liver mtDNA/nDNA
ratio significantly correlated with the hepatic expression of HIF-1a mRNA (R:
0.37, P < 0.001); liver HIF-1a mRNA was significantly higher in the HFD group. In
addition, liver cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV isoform 1 (COX4I1) mRNA
expression was also positively correlated with liver mtDNA content. The hepatic
expression of mRNA of transcriptional factors that regulate mitochondrial
biogenesis, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and PGC-1ß, nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1),
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor d and Tfam, was not associated with
the liver mtDNA content. Neither hepatocyte apoptosis nor oxidative stress was
involved in the HIF-1a-mediated increase in mtDNA copy number. In conclusion, we 
found that HFD promotes an increase in liver mitochondrial biogenesis in response
to hypoxia via HIF-1a, probably to enhance the mitochondrial function as well as 
to accommodate the metabolic load.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4373333
PMID: 20629985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Cell Sci. 2010 Aug 1;123(Pt 15):2565-75. doi: 10.1242/jcs.064089. Epub 2010 Jun
29.

Co-regulation of nuclear respiratory factor-1 by NFkappaB and CREB links
LPS-induced inflammation to mitochondrial biogenesis.

Suliman HB(1), Sweeney TE, Withers CM, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

The nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF1) gene is activated by lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), which might reflect TLR4-mediated mitigation of cellular inflammatory
damage via initiation of mitochondrial biogenesis. To test this hypothesis, we
examined NRF1 promoter regulation by NF<U+03BA>B, and identified interspecies-conserved 
<U+03BA>B-responsive promoter and intronic elements in the NRF1 locus. In mice,
activation of Nrf1 and its downstream target, Tfam, by Escherichia coli was
contingent on NF<U+03BA>B, and in LPS-treated hepatocytes, NF<U+03BA>B served as an NRF1
enhancer element in conjunction with NF<U+03BA>B promoter binding. Unexpectedly, optimal
NRF1 promoter activity after LPS also required binding by the
energy-state-dependent transcription factor CREB. EMSA and ChIP assays confirmed 
p65 and CREB binding to the NRF1 promoter and p65 binding to intron 1.
Functionality for both transcription factors was validated by gene-knockdown
studies. LPS regulation of NRF1 led to mtDNA-encoded gene expression and
expansion of mtDNA copy number. In cells expressing plasmid constructs containing
the NRF-1 promoter and GFP, LPS-dependent reporter activity was abolished by
cis-acting <U+03BA>B-element mutations, and nuclear accumulation of NF<U+03BA>B and CREB
demonstrated dependence on mitochondrial H(2)O(2). These findings indicate that
TLR4-dependent NF<U+03BA>B and CREB activation co-regulate the NRF1 promoter with NF<U+03BA>B
intronic enhancement and redox-regulated nuclear translocation, leading to
downstream target-gene expression, and identify NRF-1 as an early-phase component
of the host antibacterial defenses.

PMCID: PMC2912462
PMID: 20587593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2010 Oct;110(3):597-606. doi: 10.1007/s00421-010-1544-1. Epub
2010 Jun 23.

Mitochondrial gene expression in elite cyclists: effects of high-intensity
interval exercise.

Psilander N(1), Wang L, Westergren J, Tonkonogi M, Sahlin K.

Author information: 
(1)Astrand Laboratory, GIH, The Swedish School of Sport and Health Sciences, Box 
5626, SE 114 86 Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Eur J Appl Physiol. 2010 Oct;110(3):607. Niklas, Psilander [corrected to
Psilander, Niklas]; Li, Wang [corrected to Wang, Li]; Jens, Westergren [corrected
to Westergren, Jens]; Michail, Tonkonogi [corrected to Tonkonogi, Michail]; Kent,
Sahlin [corrected to Sahlin, Kent].

Little is known about the effect of training on genetic markers for mitochondrial
biogenesis in elite athletes. We tested the hypothesis that low-volume sprint
interval exercise (SIE) would be as effective as high-volume interval exercise
(IE). Ten male cyclists competing on national elite level (W (max) 403 ± 13 W,
VO(2peak) 68 ± 1 mL kg(-1) min(-1)) performed two interval exercise protocols: 7 
× 30-s "all-out" bouts (SIE) and 3 × 20-min bouts at ~87% of VO(2peak) (IE).
During IE, the work was eightfold larger (1,095 ± 43 vs. 135 ± 5 kJ) and the
exercise duration 17 times longer (60 vs. 3.5 min) than during SIE. Muscle
samples were taken before and 3 h after exercise. The mRNA of upstream markers of
mitochondrial biogenesis [peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>
coactivator-1 (PGC-1a), PGC-1a-related coactivator (PRC) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor d (PPARd)] increased to the same extent after SIE
and IE (6-, 1.5- and 1.5-fold increase, respectively). Of the downstream targets 
of PGC-1a, mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) increased only after SIE
and was significantly different from that after IE (P < 0.05), whereas others
increased to the same extent (pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, PDK4) or was
unchanged (nuclear respiratory factor 2, NRF2). We conclude that upstream genetic
markers of mitochondrial biogenesis increase in a similar way in elite athletes
after one exercise session of SIE and IE. However, since the volume and duration 
of work was considerably lower during SIE and since Tfam, the downstream target
of PGC-1a, increased only after SIE, we conclude that SIE might be a
time-efficient training strategy for highly trained individuals.

PMID: 20571821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Oct;38(19):6577-88. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq527. Epub 2010
Jun 20.

Maintenance of respiratory chain function in mouse hearts with severely impaired 
mtDNA transcription.

Freyer C(1), Park CB, Ekstrand MI, Shi Y, Khvorostova J, Wibom R, Falkenberg M,
Gustafsson CM, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg 8, 171
65 Solna, Sweden.

The basal mitochondrial transcription machinery is essential for biogenesis of
the respiratory chain and consists of mitochondrial RNA polymerase, mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) and mitochondrial transcription factor B2. This
triad of proteins is sufficient and necessary for mtDNA transcription initiation.
Abolished mtDNA transcription caused by tissue-specific knockout of TFAM in the
mouse heart leads to early onset of a severe mitochondrial cardiomyopathy with
lethality within the first post-natal weeks. Here, we describe a mouse model
expressing human TFAM instead of the endogenous mouse TFAM in heart. These rescue
mice have severe reduction in mtDNA transcription initiation, but, surprisingly, 
are healthy at the age of 52 weeks with near-normal steady-state levels of
transcripts. In addition, we demonstrate that heavy-strand mtDNA transcription
normally terminates at the termination-associated sequence in the control region.
This termination is abolished in rescue animals resulting in heavy (H)-strand
transcription of the entire control region. In conclusion, we demonstrate here
the existence of an unexpected mtDNA transcript stabilization mechanism that
almost completely compensates for the severely reduced transcription initiation
in rescue hearts. Future elucidation of the underlying molecular mechanism may
provide a novel pathway to treat mitochondrial dysfunction in human pathology.

PMCID: PMC2965244
PMID: 20566479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 6;107(27):12133-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910581107. Epub 2010 Jun 18.

Core human mitochondrial transcription apparatus is a regulated two-component
system in vitro.

Shutt TE(1), Lodeiro MF, Cotney J, Cameron CE, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, 310 Cedar Street,
PO Box 208023, New Haven, CT 06520-8023, USA.

The core human mitochondrial transcription apparatus is currently regarded as an 
obligate three-component system comprising the bacteriophage T7-related
mitochondrial RNA polymerase, the rRNA methyltransferase-related transcription
factor, h-mtTFB2, and the high mobility group box transcription/DNA-packaging
factor, h-mtTFA/TFAM. Using a faithful recombinant human mitochondrial
transcription system from Escherichia coli, we demonstrate that specific
initiation from the mtDNA promoters, LSP and HSP1, only requires mitochondrial
RNA polymerase and h-mtTFB2 in vitro. When h-mtTFA is added to these basal
components, LSP exhibits a much lower threshold for activation and a larger
amplitude response than HSP1. In addition, when LSP and HSP1 are together on the 
same transcription template, h-mtTFA-independent transcription from HSP1 and
h-mtTFA-dependent transcription from both promoters is enhanced and a higher
concentration of h-mtTFA is required to stimulate HSP1. Promoter competition
experiments revealed that, in addition to LSP competing transcription components 
away from HSP1, additional cis-acting signals are involved in these aspects of
promoter regulation. Based on these results, we speculate that the human
mitochondrial transcription system may have evolved to differentially regulate
transcription initiation and transcription-primed mtDNA replication in response
to the amount of h-mtTFA associated with nucleoids, which could begin to explain 
the heterogeneity of nucleoid structure and activity in vivo. Furthermore, this
study sheds new light on the evolution of mitochondrial transcription components 
by showing that the human system is a regulated two-component system in vitro,
and thus more akin to that of budding yeast than thought previously.

PMCID: PMC2901451
PMID: 20562347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Exp Neurol. 2010 Sep;225(1):74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.05.006. Epub
2010 Jun 1.

Resveratrol protects against peripheral deficits in a mouse model of Huntington's
disease.

Ho DJ(1), Calingasan NY, Wille E, Dumont M, Beal MF.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Cornell Medical College, Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, 525
E. 68th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Exp Neurol. 2011 Nov;232(1):1-6.

Sirtuins are NAD-dependent deacetylases that regulate important biologic
processes including transcription, cell survival and metabolism. Activation of
SIRT1, a mammalian sirtuin, extends longevity and increases neuronal survival. An
important substrate of SIRT1 is peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
co-activator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), a principal regulator of energy metabolism,
whose function is significantly impaired in Huntington's disease (HD). We studied
the effects of a pharmacological preparation of the SIRT1 activator resveratrol
(SRT501-M), in the N171-82Q transgenic mouse model of HD. We analyzed motor
performance, survival, central and peripheral pathology and levels of PGC-1alpha 
expression. Administration of SRT501-M increased expression of PGC-1alpha, as
well as its downstream targets, nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) and
uncoupling protein-1 (UCP-1) in brown adipose tissue (BAT), but there was no
effect on PGC-1alpha, NRF-1 or the mitochondrial transcription factor (Tfam) in
the striatum. SRT501-M administration also reduced BAT vacuolation and decreased 
elevated blood glucose levels. However, there was no significant improvement in
weight loss, motor performance, survival and striatal atrophy. Activation of the 
PGC-1alpha signaling pathway via resveratrol-induced activation of SIRT1,
therefore, is an effective therapy in BAT, but not in the central nervous system 
of HD transgenic mice.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20561979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2010 Jun;35(3):350-7. doi: 10.1139/H10-030.

High-intensity interval training increases SIRT1 activity in human skeletal
muscle.

Gurd BJ(1), Perry CG, Heigenhauser GJ, Spriet LL, Bonen A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Studies, Queen's University, Kingston, ON K7L
3N6, Canada.

The effects of training on silent mating-type information regulator 2 homolog 1
(SIRT1) activity and protein in relationship to peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) and mitochondrial content were
determined in human skeletal muscle. Six weeks of high-intensity interval
training ( approximately 1 h of 10 x 4 min intervals at 90% peak oxygen
consumption separated by 2 min rest, 3 days per week) increased maximal
activities of mitochondrial enzymes in skeletal muscle by 28% to 36% (citrate
synthase, beta-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase, and cytochrome c oxidase
subunit IV) and PGC-1alpha protein (16%) when measured 4 days after training.
Interestingly, total muscle SIRT1 activity (31%) and activity per SIRT1 protein
(58%) increased despite decreased SIRT1 protein (20%). The present data
demonstrate that exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis is accompanied by
elevated SIRT1 activity in human skeletal muscle.

PMID: 20555380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Aug 15;19(16):3190-205. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq229. Epub 2010
Jun 7.

Impairment of PGC-1alpha expression, neuropathology and hepatic steatosis in a
transgenic mouse model of Huntington's disease following chronic energy
deprivation.

Chaturvedi RK(1), Calingasan NY, Yang L, Hennessey T, Johri A, Beal MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, NY 10065, USA. rajnish@iitr.res.in /fbeal@med.cornell.edu

We investigated the ability of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) to activate
PPARgamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) in the brain, liver and brown adipose
tissue (BAT) of the NLS-N171-82Q transgenic mouse model of Huntington's disease
(HD). In the striatum of the HD mice, the baseline levels of PGC-1alpha, NRF1,
NRF2, Tfam, COX-II, PPARdelta, CREB and ERRalpha mRNA and mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), were significantly reduced. Administration of the creatine analog beta
guanidinopropionic acid (GPA) reduced ATP and PCr levels and increased AMPK mRNA 
in both the cerebral cortex and striatum. Treatment with GPA significantly
increased expression of PGC-1alpha, NRF1, Tfam and downstream genes in the
striatum and cerebral cortex of wild-type (WT) mice, but there was no effect on
these genes in the HD mice. The striatum of the untreated HD mice showed
microvacuolation in the neuropil, as well as gliosis and huntingtin aggregates,
which were exacerbated by treatment with GPA. GPA treatment produced a
significant increase in mtDNA in the cerebral cortex and striatum of WT mice, but
not in HD mice. The HD mice treated with GPA had impaired activation of liver
PGC-1alpha and developed hepatic steatosis with accumulation of lipids,
degeneration of hepatocytes and impaired activation of gluconeogenesis. The BAT
in the HD mice showed vacuolation due to accumulation of neutral lipids, and
age-dependent impairment of UCP-1 activation and temperature regulation. Impaired
activation of PGC-1alpha, therefore, plays an important role in the behavioral
phenotype, metabolic disturbances and pathology of HD, which suggests the
possibility that agents that enhance PGC-1alpha function will exert therapeutic
benefits in HD patients.

PMCID: PMC2915615
PMID: 20529956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. ASN Neuro. 2010 May 24;2(2):e00034. doi: 10.1042/AN20100005.

The neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NeuroD6 confers
tolerance to oxidative stress by triggering an antioxidant response and
sustaining the mitochondrial biomass.

Uittenbogaard M(1), Baxter KK, Chiaramello A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, George Washington University
Medical Center, 2300 I Street N.W., Washington, DC 20037, U.S.A. anaaec@gwumc.edu

Preserving mitochondrial mass, bioenergetic functions and ROS (reactive oxygen
species) homoeostasis is key to neuronal differentiation and survival, as
mitochondria produce most of the energy in the form of ATP to execute and
maintain these cellular processes. In view of our previous studies showing that
NeuroD6 promotes neuronal differentiation and survival on trophic factor
withdrawal, combined with its ability to stimulate the mitochondrial biomass and 
to trigger comprehensive antiapoptotic and molecular chaperone responses, we
investigated whether NeuroD6 could concomitantly modulate the mitochondrial
biomass and ROS homoeostasis on oxidative stress mediated by serum deprivation.
In the present study, we report a novel role of NeuroD6 as a regulator of ROS
homoeostasis, resulting in enhanced tolerance to oxidative stress. Using a
combination of flow cytometry, confocal fluorescence microscopy and mitochondrial
fractionation, we found that NeuroD6 sustains mitochondrial mass, intracellular
ATP levels and expression of specific subunits of respiratory complexes upon
oxidative stress triggered by withdrawal of trophic factors. NeuroD6 also
maintains the expression of nuclear-encoded transcription factors, known to
regulate mitochondrial biogenesis, such as PGC-1alpha
(peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator-1alpha), Tfam
(transcription factor A, mitochondrial) and NRF-1 (nuclear respiratory factor-1).
Finally, NeuroD6 triggers a comprehensive antioxidant response to endow PC12-ND6 
cells with intracellular ROS scavenging capacity. The NeuroD6 effect is not
limited to the classic induction of the ROS-scavenging enzymes, such as SOD2
(superoxide dismutase 2), GPx1 (glutathione peroxidase 1) and PRDX5
(peroxiredoxin 5), but also to the recently identified powerful ROS suppressors
PGC-1alpha, PINK1 (phosphatase and tensin homologue-induced kinase 1) and SIRT1. 
Thus our collective results support the concept that the NeuroD6-PGC-1alpha-SIRT1
neuroprotective axis may be critical in co-ordinating the mitochondrial biomass
with the antioxidant reserve to confer tolerance to oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC2874871
PMID: 20517466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 2;397(3):548-52. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.154. Epub 2010 May 31.

Evidence of a bigenomic regulation of mitochondrial gene expression by thyroid
hormone during rat brain development.

Sinha RA(1), Pathak A, Mohan V, Babu S, Pal A, Khare D, Godbole MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow 226014, India.

Hypothyroidism during early mammalian brain development is associated with
decreased expression of various mitochondrial encoded genes along with evidence
for mitochondrial dysfunction. However, in-spite of the similarities between
neurological disorders caused by perinatal hypothyroidism and those caused by
various genetic mitochondrial defects we still do not know as to how thyroid
hormone (TH) regulates mitochondrial transcription during development and whether
this regulation by TH is nuclear mediated or through mitochondrial TH receptors? 
We here in rat cerebellum show that hypothyroidism causes reduction in expression
of nuclear encoded genes controlling mitochondrial biogenesis like PGC-1alpha,
NRF-1alpha and Tfam. Also, we for the first time demonstrate a mitochondrial
localization of thyroid hormone receptor (mTR) isoform in developing brain
capable of binding a TH response element (DR2) present in D-loop region of
mitochondrial DNA. These results thus indicate an integrated
nuclear-mitochondrial cross talk in regulation of mitochondrial transcription by 
TH during brain development.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20515651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurosci. 2010 May 26;30(21):7227-35. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0698-10.2010.

Parvalbumin deficiency and GABAergic dysfunction in mice lacking PGC-1alpha.

Lucas EK(1), Markwardt SJ, Gupta S, Meador-Woodruff JH, Lin JD,
Overstreet-Wadiche L, Cowell RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) is a master regulator of metabolism in peripheral
tissues, and it has been proposed that PGC-1alpha plays a similar role in the
brain. Recent evidence suggests that PGC-1alpha is concentrated in GABAergic
interneurons, so we investigated whether male and female PGC-1alpha -/- mice
exhibit abnormalities in interneuron gene expression and/or function. We found a 
striking reduction in the expression of the Ca(2+)-binding protein parvalbumin
(PV), but not other GABAergic markers, throughout the cerebrum in PGC-1alpha +/- 
and -/- mice. Furthermore, PGC-1alpha overexpression in cell culture was
sufficient to robustly induce PV expression. Consistent with a reduction in PV
rather than a loss of PV-expressing interneurons, spontaneous synaptic inhibition
was not altered in PGC-1alpha -/- mice. However, evoked synaptic responses
displayed less paired-pulse depression and dramatic facilitation in response to
repetitive stimulation at the gamma frequency. PV transcript expression was also 
significantly reduced in retina and heart of PGC-1alpha -/- animals, suggesting
that PGC-1alpha is required for proper expression of PV in multiple tissues.
Together these findings indicate that PGC-1alpha is a novel regulator of
interneuron gene expression and function and a potential therapeutic target for
neurological disorders associated with interneuron dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2888101
PMID: 20505089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Neurodegener. 2010 May 26;5:21. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-5-21.

ALS spinal neurons show varied and reduced mtDNA gene copy numbers and increased 
mtDNA gene deletions.

Keeney PM(1), Bennett JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia,
USA. jpbennett@vcu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Spinal cord neurons of ALS patients demonstrate reduced cytochrome
oxidase histochemical activity, and ALS spinal cord tissues have increased
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) point mutations and depleted mtDNA levels. It is
presently unknown whether mtDNA abnormalities are present in single human ALS
neurons.
RESULTS: Using laser capture microdissection (LCM) we isolated several hundred
individual anterior spinal neurons from unfixed, frozen sections of 10 ALS and 7 
age-matched CTL cervical spinal cords. DNA from each individual neuron was
analyzed with multiplex qPCR for ND2, CO3, and ND4, three mitochondrial DNA genes
encoding respiratory proteins. Scatterplots of individual spinal neuron results
showed extensive heterogeneity of mtDNA gene levels across 4-5 orders of
magnitude that were much more clustered in single Purkinje neurons isolated from 
CTL cerebella. Plots of ratios of ND4/ND2 and CO3/ND2 showed that many but not
all ALS neurons from individuals contained low ratios of these mtDNA genes,
implying greater abundances of mtDNA deletions in the major arc. Single CTL
cerebellar Purkinje neurons did not contain high levels of apparent mtDNA
deletions observed in anterior spinal neurons.
CONCLUSIONS: At the time of ALS subjects' deaths, many but not all surviving
anterior neurons in their cervical spinal cords have reduced mtDNA gene levels
and increased mtDNA deletion abundances that arise for unclear reasons. If these 
anterior spinal neuron mtDNA gene deficiencies contribute to bioenergetic
impairments, reduced synaptic function and increased risk of degeneration, then
introduction into mitochondria and expression of intact mtDNA, now available
through use of recently developed recombinant human TFAM, may reverse the course 
of ALS.

PMCID: PMC2889994
PMID: 20504367  [PubMed]


43. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jul;24(7):1338-48. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0402. Epub 2010 May 
25.

Androgen receptor counteracts Doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in male mice.

Ikeda Y(1), Aihara K, Akaike M, Sato T, Ishikawa K, Ise T, Yagi S, Iwase T, Ueda 
Y, Yoshida S, Azuma H, Walsh K, Tamaki T, Kato S, Matsumoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, The University of Tokushima
Graduate School of Health Biosciences, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Doxorubicin (Dox) has been used as a potent anticancer agent, but serious
cardiotoxicity precludes its use in a wide range of patients. We have reported
that the androgen-androgen receptor (AR) system plays important roles in cardiac 
growth and protection from angiotensin II-induced cardiac remodeling. The present
study was undertaken to clarify whether the androgen-AR system exerts a
cardioprotective effect against Dox-induced cardiotoxicity. Male AR knockout
(ARKO) and age-matched littermate male wild-type (WT) mice at 25 wk of age were
given ip injections of Dox (20 mg/kg) or a vehicle. The survival rate and left
ventricular function in Dox-treated male ARKO mice were reduced compared with
those in Dox-treated male WT mice. Electron microscopic study showed prominent
vacuole formation of myocardial mitochondria in Dox-treated male ARKO mice.
Cardiac oxidative stress and apoptosis of cardiomyocytes were increased more
prominently by Dox treatment in male ARKO mice than in male WT mice. In addition,
Dox-induced reduction in the expression of cardiac mitochondria transcription
factor A (Tfam) and phosphorylation of serine-threonine kinase (Akt) was more
pronounced in male ARKO mice than in male WT mice. In cardiac myoblast cells,
testosterone up-regulated Akt phosphorylation and Tfam expression and exerted an 
antiapoptotic effect against Dox-induced cardiotoxicity. Collectively, the
results demonstrate that Dox-induced cardiotoxicity is aggravated in male ARKO
mice via exacerbation of mitochondrial damage and superoxide generation, leading 
to enhanced apoptosis of cardiomyocytes. Thus, the androgen-AR system is thought 
to counteract Dox-induced cardiotoxicity partly through activation of the Akt
pathway and up-regulation of Tfam to protect cardiomyocytes from mitochondrial
damage and apoptosis.

PMID: 20501642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jul 9;285(28):21590-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.070169. Epub 2010 
May 6.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha)
and sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) reside in mitochondria: possible direct function in
mitochondrial biogenesis.

Aquilano K(1), Vigilanza P, Baldelli S, Pagliei B, Rotilio G, Ciriolo MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133 Rome, Italy.

The transcriptional co-activator PGC-1alpha and the NAD(+)-dependent deacetylase 
SIRT1 are considered important inducers of mitochondrial biogenesis because in
the nucleus they regulate transcription of nucleus-encoded mitochondrial genes.
We demonstrate that PGC-1alpha and SIRT1 are also present inside mitochondria and
are in close proximity to mtDNA. They interact with mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) as assessed by confocal microscopy analysis and by blue
native-PAGE. Nucleoid purification allowed us to identify SIRT1 and PGC-1alpha as
proteins associated with native and cross-linked nucleoids, respectively. After
mtDNA immunoprecipitation analysis, carried out on mitochondrial extracts, we
found that PGC-1alpha is present on the same D-loop region recognized by TFAM.
Finally, by oligonucleotide pulldown assay, we found PGC-1alpha and SIRT1
associated with the TFAM consensus sequence (human mitochondrial transcription
factor-binding site H). The results obtained suggest that in mitochondria
PGC-1alpha and SIRT1 may function as their nuclear counterparts and represent the
genuine factors mediating the cross-talk between nuclear and mitochondrial
genome. Finally, this work adds new knowledge on the function of SIRT1 and
PGC-1alpha and highlights the direct involvement of such proteins in regulation
of mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2898414
PMID: 20448046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2010 Aug;30(6):947-54. doi: 10.1007/s10571-010-9524-x. Epub
2010 May 6.

Mitochondrial DNA damage and the involvement of antioxidant defense and repair
system in hippocampi of rats with chronic seizures.

Lin Y(1), Han Y, Xu J, Cao L, Gao J, Xie N, Zhao X, Jiang H, Chi Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, 44#, Wenhua Xi
Road, Jinan, 250012, People's Republic of China.

In this study, we demonstrated a decreased level of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
with a large number of oxidized bases in hippocampi of rats with epilepsy induced
by pilocarpine. In order to verify the underlying mechanism of mtDNA impairment, 
we detected the response of antioxidant defense system and mitochondrial base
excision repair (mtBER) pathway. Superoxide dismutase2 (SOD-2) and glutathione
(GSH) were significantly decreased in the experimental group, manifesting a
decreased capacity of scavenging free radicals. Mitochondrial base excision
repair (mtBER) pathway, which is the main repair pathway for the removal of
oxidative base modifications, displayed unbalanced expression in epileptic group.
DNA polymerasegamma (polgamma) increased, while apurinic/apyrimidinic
endonuclease (APE1), one of mtBER initiators, decreased in mitochondria in the
chronic phase of epileptogenesis. In conclusion, mtDNA was impaired during
chronic recurrent seizures, whereas the endogenous antioxidants and the mtBER
pathway failed to respond to the elevated mtDNA damage.

PMID: 20446108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Fiziol Cheloveka. 2010 Mar-Apr;36(2):121-5.

[Association of the mitochondrial transcription factor (TFAM) gene polymorphism
with physical performance of athletes].

[Article in Russian]

Akhmetov II, Popov DV, Missina SS, Vinogradova OL, Rogozkin VA.

The aim of the study was to investigate allelic distribution of the mitochondrial
transcription factor gene (TFAM) Ser12Thr polymorphism in athletes (n = 1537) and
controls (n = 1113), and to find interrelation between genotypes and aerobic
capacity in rowers (n = 90). Genotyping was performed by restriction fragment
length polymorphism analysis. Aerobic capacity (maximal oxygen consumption
(VO2max) and maximal power production capacity (Wmax)) was determined using an
incremental test to exhaustion by rower ergometer. The frequency of TFAM 12Thr
allele was significantly higher in endurance-oriented athletes (n = 588) than in 
controls (14.0% vs. 9.1%; p <0.0001), and increased with the growth of skills.
Furthermore, TFAM 12Thr allele was associated with high values of aerobic
performance (when Wmax and VO2max were measured). Thus, TFAM gene Ser12Thr
polymorphism is associated with physical performance of athletes.

PMID: 20432700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Blood Press. 2010 Jun;19(3):196-205. doi: 10.3109/08037051.2010.481808.

Resveratrol induces mitochondrial biogenesis and ameliorates Ang II-induced
cardiac remodeling in transgenic rats harboring human renin and angiotensinogen
genes.

Biala A(1), Tauriainen E, Siltanen A, Shi J, Merasto S, Louhelainen M, Martonen
E, Finckenberg P, Muller DN, Mervaala E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Pharmacology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

There is compelling evidence to indicate an important role for increased local
renin-angiotensin system activity in the pathogenesis of cardiac hypertrophy and 
heart failure. Resveratrol is a natural polyphenol that activates SIRT1, a novel 
cardioprotective and longevity factor having NAD(+)-dependent histone deacetylase
activity. We tested the hypothesis whether resveratrol could prevent from
angiotensin II (Ang II)-induced cardiovascular damage. Four-week-old double
transgenic rats harboring human renin and human angiotensinogen genes (dTGR) were
treated for 4 weeks either with SIRT1 activator resveratrol or SIRT1 inhibitor
nicotinamide. Untreated dTGR and their normotensive Sprague-Dawley control rats
(SD) received vehicle. Untreated dTGR developed severe hypertension as well as
cardiac hypertrophy, and showed pronounced cardiovascular mortality compared with
normotensive SD rats. Resveratrol slightly but significantly decreased blood
pressure, ameliorated cardiac hypertrophy and prevented completely Ang II-induced
mortality, whereas nicotinamide increased blood pressure without significantly
influencing cardiac hypertrophy or survival. Resveratrol decreased cardiac ANP
mRNA expression and induced cardiac mRNA expressions of mitochondrial biogenesis 
markers peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator
(PGC-1alpha), mitochondrial transcription factor (Tfam), nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1) and cytochrome c oxidase subunit 4 (cox4). Resveratrol
dose-dependently increased SIRT1 activity in vitro. Our findings suggest that the
beneficial effects of SIRT1 activator resveratrol on Ang II-induced cardiac
remodeling are mediated by blood pressure-dependent pathways and are linked to
increased mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 20429690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 11;107(19):8788-93. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1003428107. Epub 2010 Apr 26.

Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS generation are essential for Kras-mediated
tumorigenicity.

Weinberg F(1), Hamanaka R, Wheaton WW, Weinberg S, Joseph J, Lopez M,
Kalyanaraman B, Mutlu GM, Budinger GR, Chandel NS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Medicine, Robert H.
Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Medical School
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Otto Warburg's theory on the origins of cancer postulates that tumor cells have
defects in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and therefore rely on high
levels of aerobic glycolysis as the major source of ATP to fuel cellular
proliferation (the Warburg effect). This is in contrast to normal cells, which
primarily utilize oxidative phosphorylation for growth and survival. Here we
report that the major function of glucose metabolism for Kras-induced
anchorage-independent growth, a hallmark of transformed cells, is to support the 
pentose phosphate pathway. The major function of glycolytic ATP is to support
growth under hypoxic conditions. Glutamine conversion into the tricarboxylic acid
cycle intermediate alpha-ketoglutarate through glutaminase and alanine
aminotransferase is essential for Kras-induced anchorage-independent growth.
Mitochondrial metabolism allows for the generation of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) which are required for Kras-induced anchorage-independent growth through
regulation of the ERK MAPK signaling pathway. We show that the major source of
ROS generation required for anchorage-independent growth is the Q(o) site of
mitochondrial complex III. Furthermore, disruption of mitochondrial function by
loss of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) gene reduced
tumorigenesis in an oncogenic Kras-driven mouse model of lung cancer. These
results demonstrate that mitochondrial metabolism and mitochondrial ROS
generation are essential for Kras-induced cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2889315
PMID: 20421486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;20(4):1181-8. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-100126.

Systematic analysis of candidate genes for Alzheimer's disease in a French,
genome-wide association study.

Laumet G(1), Chouraki V, Grenier-Boley B, Legry V, Heath S, Zelenika D, Fievet N,
Hannequin D, Delepine M, Pasquier F, Hanon O, Brice A, Epelbaum J, Berr C,
Dartigues JF, Tzourio C, Campion D, Lathrop M, Bertram L, Amouyel P, Lambert JC.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U744, Lille, France.

We selected twenty genes from the "Top Results" list on the AlzGene database
website and assessed their association with risk of developing Alzheimer's
disease (AD) in a large, genome-wide association study (using 526 SNPs from 2,032
AD cases and 5,328 controls) performed in France. The APOE, CLU, PICALM, and CR1 
loci were excluded, since they had already been extensively analyzed. Ten
genes/loci (TFAM, SORL1, CHRNB2, SORCS1, DAPK1, MTHFR, GWA 14q32.13, BDNF, NEDD9,
and CH25H) showed weak nominal association with AD risk, in line with previous
studies. In the remaining ten genes/loci (TNK1, ACE, CST3, IL1B, hCG2039140,
PRNP, GAB2, LOC651924, IL1A, and TF), no single nucleotide polymorphisms were
associated in our dataset. Of the genes showing nominal association in our
cohorts, TFAM and CHRNB2 appear particularly interesting and warrant further
genetic and functional follow-up analyses.

PMID: 20413850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 1;19(13):2695-705. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq163. Epub 2010 Apr
22.

High mitochondrial DNA copy number has detrimental effects in mice.

Ylikallio E(1), Tyynismaa H, Tsutsui H, Ide T, Suomalainen A.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedicum Helsinki, Research Program of Molecular Neurology, University of
Helsinki, and Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is an essential multicopy genome, compacted into
protein-DNA clusters called nucleoids. Maintaining an adequate mtDNA copy number 
is crucial for cellular viability. Loss of mtDNA results in severe human
syndromes, whereas increased mtDNA copy number has been suggested to improve
survival from myocardial infarction in mice and to be a promising therapeutic
strategy for mitochondrial disease. The mechanisms that regulate mtDNA amount and
organization are, however, not fully understood. Of the proteins required for
mtDNA existence, only the mitochondrial helicase Twinkle and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) have been shown to increase mtDNA copy number in
vivo, when expressed in physiological levels. Here we studied how Twinkle and
TFAM affect mtDNA synthesis and nucleoid structure in mice. Using in vivo BrdU
labeling, we show that Twinkle specifically regulates de novo mtDNA synthesis.
Remarkably, high mtDNA copy number in mice is accompanied by nucleoid
enlargement, which in turn correlates with defective transcription, age-related
accumulation of mtDNA deletions and respiratory chain (RC) deficiency.
Simultaneous overexpression of Twinkle and TFAM in bitransgenic mice has an
additive effect on mtDNA copy number, increasing it up to 6-fold in skeletal
muscle. Bitransgenic mice also exhibit further enlargement of nucleoids and
aggravation of the RC defect. In conclusion, we show that Twinkle acts as a
regulator of mtDNA replication initiation, and provide evidence that high mtDNA
copy number and alteration of nucleoid architecture may be detrimental to
mitochondrial function.

PMID: 20413656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 11;285(24):18129-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C110.128918. Epub
2010 Apr 21.

Human mitochondrial transcription revisited: only TFAM and TFB2M are required for
transcription of the mitochondrial genes in vitro.

Litonin D(1), Sologub M, Shi Y, Savkina M, Anikin M, Falkenberg M, Gustafsson CM,
Temiakov D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Osteopathic Medicine, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Stratford, New Jersey 08084, USA.

Human mitochondrial transcription is driven by a single subunit RNA polymerase
and a set of basal transcription factors. The development of a recombinant in
vitro transcription system has allowed for a detailed molecular characterization 
of the individual components and their contribution to transcription initiation. 
We found that TFAM and TFB2M act synergistically and increase transcription
efficiency 100-200-fold as compared with RNA polymerase alone. Both the
light-strand promoter (LSP) and the HSP1 promoters displayed maximal levels of in
vitro transcription when TFAM was present in an amount equimolar to the DNA
template. Importantly, we did not detect any significant transcription activity
in the presence of the TFB2M paralog, TFB1M, or when templates containing the
putative HSP2 promoter were used. These data confirm previous observations that
TFB1M does not function as a bona fide transcription factor and raise questions
as to whether HSP2 serves as a functional promoter in vivo. In addition, we did
not detect transcription stimulation by the ribosomal protein MRPL12. Thus, only 
two essential initiation factors, TFAM and TFB2M, and two promoters, LSP and
HSP1, are required to drive transcription of the mitochondrial genome.

PMCID: PMC2881736
PMID: 20410300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Bone. 2010 Jul;47(1):140-50. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2010.04.593. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis contributes to Wnt induced osteoblastic
differentiation of C3H10T1/2 cells.

An JH(1), Yang JY, Ahn BY, Cho SW, Jung JY, Cho HY, Cho YM, Kim SW, Park KS, Kim 
SY, Lee HK, Shin CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Mitochondria play a key role in cell physiology including cell differentiation
and proliferation. We investigated the changes of mitochondrial biogenesis during
Wnt-induced osteoblastic differentiation of murine mesenchymal C3H10T1/2 cells.
Scanning electron microscopy demonstrated that activation of Wnt signaling by
Wnt-3A conditioned medicum (CM) resulted in significant increase in the number of
mitochondria in C3H10T1/2 cells. In addition, the induction of alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) activities by Wnt-3A CM was accompanied by significant increase
in mitochondrial mass (p<0.05), mitochondrial membrane potential (p<0.05),
intracellular reactive oxygen species production (p<0.05), resting oxygen
consumption rate (p<0.05), cellular ATP content (p< or =0.05) and mtDNA copy
number (p<0.05) compared to the cells with control CM (L292-CM) treatment.
Moreover, co-treatment with Dkk-1 or WIF-1, both of which are Wnt inhibitors,
abrogated the Wnt-3A-induced ALP activities as well as mitochondrial biogenesis
markers. Upregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis by overexpression of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) significantly enhanced Wnt-induced
osteogenesis as measured by ALP activities. In contrast, inhibition of
mitochondrial biogenesis by treatment with Zidovudine (AZT) resulted in
significant inhibition of ALP activities. Finally, ALP activities in human
osteosarcoma cell line devoid of mitochondrial DNA (rho(0) cells) was
significantly suppressed both in basal and Wnt-3A stimulated state compared to
those from mitochondria-intact cells (rho+ cells). As a mechanism for
Wnt-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis, we found that Wnt increased the expression
of PGC-1alpha, a critical molecules in mitochondrial biogenesis, through Erk and 
p38 MAPK pathway independent of beta-catenin signaling. We also found that
increased mitochondrial biogenesis is in turn positively regulating TOPflash
reporter activity as well as beta-catenin levels. To summarize, mitochodrial
biogenesis is upregulated by Wnt signaling and this upregulation contributes to
the osteoblastic differentiation of mouse mesenchymal C3H10T1/2 cells.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Jul;299(1):C155-63. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00523.2009. Epub 2010 Apr 7.

Effect of chronic contractile activity on mRNA stability in skeletal muscle.

Lai RY(1), Ljubicic V, D'souza D, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

Repeated bouts of exercise promote the biogenesis of mitochondria by multiple
steps in the gene expression patterning. The role of mRNA stability in
controlling the expression of mitochondrial proteins is relatively unexplored. To
induce mitochondrial biogenesis, we chronically stimulated (10 Hz; 3 or 6 h/day) 
rat muscle for 7 days. Chronic contractile activity (CCA) increased the protein
expression of PGC-1alpha, c-myc, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) 
by 1.6-, 1.7- and 2.0-fold, respectively. To determine mRNA stability, we
incubated total RNA with cytosolic extracts using an in vitro cell-free system.
We found that the intrinsic mRNA half-lives (t(1/2)) were variable within control
muscle. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha) and Tfam mRNAs decayed more rapidly (t(1/2) = 22.7 and 31.4 min)
than c-myc mRNA (t(1/2) = 99.7 min). Furthermore, CCA resulted in a differential 
response in degradation kinetics. After CCA, PGC-1alpha and Tfam mRNA half-lives 
decreased by 48% and 44%, respectively, whereas c-myc mRNA half-life was
unchanged. CCA induced an elevation of both the cytosolic RNA-stabilizing human
antigen R (HuR) and destabilizing AUF1 (total) by 2.4- and 1.8-fold,
respectively. Increases in the p37(AUF1), p40(AUF1), and p45(AUF1) isoforms were 
most evident. Thus these data indicate that CCA results in accelerated turnover
rates of mRNAs encoding important mitochondrial biogenesis regulators in skeletal
muscle. This adaptation is likely beneficial in permitting more rapid phenotypic 
plasticity in response to subsequent contractile activity.

PMCID: PMC2904257
PMID: 20375275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Rejuvenation Res. 2010 Apr-Jun;13(2-3):148-51. doi: 10.1089/rej.2009.0955.

Acetyl-L-carnitine supplementation to old rats partially reverts the age-related 
mitochondrial decay of soleus muscle by activating peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha-dependent mitochondrial 
biogenesis.

Pesce V(1), Fracasso F, Cassano P, Lezza AM, Cantatore P, Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology E Quagliariello, University
of Bari, Bari, Italy.

The age-related decay of mitochondrial function is a major contributor to the
aging process. We tested the effects of 2-month-daily acetyl-L-carnitine (ALCAR) 
supplementation on mitochondrial biogenesis in the soleus muscle of aged rats.
This muscle is heavily dependent on oxidative metabolism. Mitochondrial (mt) DNA 
content, citrate synthase activity, transcript levels of some nuclear- and
mitochondrial-coded genes (cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV [COX-IV], 16S rRNA,
COX-I) and of some factors involved in the mitochondrial biogenesis signaling
pathway (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma [PPARgamma]
coactivator-1alpha [PGC-1alpha], mitochondrial transcription factor A
mitochondrial [TFAM], mitochondrial transcription factor 2B [TFB2]), as well as
the protein content of PGC-1alpha were determined. The results suggest that the
ALCAR treatment in old rats activates PGC-1alpha-dependent mitochondrial
biogenesis, thus partially reverting the age-related mitochondrial decay.

PMID: 20370498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 21;285(21):16387-402. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.092676. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

Identification of multiple rate-limiting steps during the human mitochondrial
transcription cycle in vitro.

Lodeiro MF(1), Uchida AU, Arnold JJ, Reynolds SL, Moustafa IM, Cameron CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16802, USA.

We have reconstituted human mitochondrial transcription in vitro on DNA
oligonucleotide templates representing the light strand and heavy strand-1
promoters using protein components (RNA polymerase and transcription factors A
and B2) isolated from Escherichia coli. We show that 1 eq of each transcription
factor and polymerase relative to the promoter is required to assemble a
functional initiation complex. The light strand promoter is at least 2-fold more 
efficient than the heavy strand-1 promoter, but this difference cannot be
explained solely by the differences in the interaction of the transcription
machinery with the different promoters. In both cases, the rate-limiting step for
production of the first phosphodiester bond is open complex formation. Open
complex formation requires both transcription factors; however, steps immediately
thereafter only require transcription factor B2. The concentration of nucleotide 
required for production of the first dinucleotide product is substantially higher
than that required for subsequent cycles of nucleotide addition. In vitro,
promoter-specific differences in post-initiation control of transcription exist, 
as well as a second rate-limiting step that controls conversion of the
transcription initiation complex into a transcription elongation complex.
Rate-limiting steps of the biochemical pathways are often those that are targeted
for regulation. Like the more complex multisubunit transcription systems,
multiple steps may exist for control of transcription in human mitochondria. The 
tools and mechanistic framework presented here will facilitate not only the
discovery of mechanisms regulating human mitochondrial transcription but also
interrogation of the structure, function, and mechanism of the complexes that are
regulated during human mitochondrial transcription.

PMCID: PMC2871506
PMID: 20351113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Genet Metab. 2010 May;100(1):83-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.02.004. Epub
2010 Feb 12.

Methylation of TFAM gene promoter in peripheral white blood cells is associated
with insulin resistance in adolescents.

Gemma C(1), Sookoian S, Dieuzeide G, García SI, Gianotti TF, González CD, Pirola 
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biology of Complex Diseases, Institute of
Medical Research, A. Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires, National Council of
Scientific and Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires 
C1427ARO, Argentina.

PURPOSE: To explore whether DNA methylation of the mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) promoter is associated with insulin resistance in a sample of
adolescents with features of metabolic syndrome.
METHODS: The data and blood samples were collected from 122 adolescents out of a 
cross-sectional study of 934 high-school students. The population was divided
into two groups: noninsulin resistance (NIR) and insulin resistance (IR). After
bisulfite treatment of genomic DNA from peripheral leukocytes, we used
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to assess DNA methylation of
three putative methylation target sites (CpG) in the TFAM promoter.
RESULTS: The ratio of the promoter methylated DNA/unmethylated DNA was
0.012+/-0.0009 (1.2% of alleles), and inversely correlated with the biochemical
features of insulin resistance (plasma fasting insulin R: -0.26, p<0.004 and
homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) index R: -0.27, p<0.002), and obesity (R:
-0.27, p<0.002). Multiple regression analysis showed that the log-transformed
HOMA index correlated with the status of promoter methylation of TFAM,
independently of body mass index (BMI) Z score (beta: -0.33+/-0.094, p=0.00094). 
Finally, the TFAM promoter methylated DNA/unmethylated DNA ratio was found to be 
significantly associated with insulin resistance as dichotomous variable (NIR
n=45, 0.014+/-0.002 and IR n=77, 0.011+/-0.001, respectively, p<0.016).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest a potential role of promoter TFAM methylation in
the pathogenesis of insulin resistance in adolescents.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20202876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 May 2;411(9-10):749-53. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.02.005. Epub
2010 Feb 10.

Measure of expression of mitochondrial related genes in human mononuclear blood
cells, adipose white tissue and smooth muscle cells.

Fabricius MH(1), Wilms LK, Larsen J, Pedersen PL, Anthonsen S, Kvetny J.

Author information: 
(1)The Mitochondrial Research Unit, Naestved Hospital, DK-4700 Naestved, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The role of mitochondrial dysfunction is currently studied
intensively, but the cumbersome procedure of obtaining tissue from humans has
restricted the number of subjects studied. Therefore, the aim of the present
study was to examine the expression of mitochondrial related genes in blood cells
from humans and to compare the results with measurements of mitochondrial
membrane potential known to be regulated by thyroid hormones.
METHODS: In a group of 17 healthy women subscribed for hysterectomy on a benign
basis, muscle tissue, fat tissue samples and blood specimens were obtained.
Mitochondrial mass and membrane potential was examined in peripheral blood
monocytes by flow cytometry. Gene expression of PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, NFR-1,
NRF-2 and TFAM was determined by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: All genes were expressed in the 3 tissues examined, though with
different magnitude. Most genes were expressed in mononuclear blood cells at a
magnitude comparable to that in white adipose tissue. Furthermore, a significant 
correlation was observed between PGC-1beta and Mitochondrial Membrane Potential
(MMP) and Mitochondrial Mass (MM).
CONCLUSION: Measurement of expression of mitochondrial related genes in human
mononuclear blood cells may be useful for examining mitochondrial function and
regulation by thyroid hormones in humans.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20149788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jul;83(1):52-62. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.080887. Epub 2010 
Feb 3.

The role of mitochondrial DNA copy number in mammalian fertility.

Wai T(1), Ao A, Zhang X, Cyr D, Dufort D, Shoubridge EA.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute and Department of Human Genetics, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Jul;83(1):1-2.

Mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a small, maternally inherited genome that 
codes for 13 essential proteins in the respiratory chain. Mature oocytes contain 
more than 150 000 copies of mtDNA, at least an order of magnitude greater than
the number in most somatic cells, but sperm contain only approximately 100
copies. Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation has been suggested to be an
important determinant of oocyte quality and sperm motility; however, the
functional significance of the high mtDNA copy number in oocytes, and of the low 
copy number in sperm, remains unclear. To investigate the effects of mtDNA copy
number on fertility, we genetically manipulated mtDNA copy number in the mouse by
deleting one copy of Tfam, an essential component of the mitochondrial nucleoid, 
at different stages of germline development. We show that males can tolerate at
least a threefold reduction in mtDNA copy number in their sperm without impaired 
fertility, and in fact, they preferentially transmit a deleted Tfam allele.
Surprisingly, oocytes with as few as 4000 copies of mtDNA can be fertilized and
progress normally through preimplantation development to the blastocyst stage.
The mature oocyte, however, has a critical postimplantation developmental
threshold of 40 000-50 000 copies of mtDNA in the mature oocyte. These
observations suggest that the high mtDNA copy number in the mature oocyte is a
genetic device designed to distribute mitochondria and mtDNAs to the cells of the
early postimplantation embryo before mitochondrial biogenesis and mtDNA
replication resumes, whereas down-regulation of mtDNA copy number is important
for normal sperm function.

PMCID: PMC2888963
PMID: 20130269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 24;4(12):e8458. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008458.

Dynamic regulation of genes involved in mitochondrial DNA replication and
transcription during mouse brown fat cell differentiation and recruitment.

Murholm M(1), Dixen K, Qvortrup K, Hansen LH, Amri EZ, Madsen L, Barbatelli G,
Quistorff B, Hansen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, The Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Brown adipocytes are specialised in dissipating energy through
adaptive thermogenesis, whereas white adipocytes are specialised in energy
storage. These essentially opposite functions are possible for two reasons
relating to mitochondria, namely expression of uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1) and a 
remarkably higher mitochondrial abundance in brown adipocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report a comprehensive characterisation
of gene expression linked to mitochondrial DNA replication, transcription and
function during white and brown fat cell differentiation in vitro as well as in
white and brown fat, brown adipose tissue fractions and in selected adipose
tissues during cold exposure. We find a massive induction of the majority of such
genes during brown adipocyte differentiation and recruitment, e.g. of the
mitochondrial transcription factors A (Tfam) and B2 (Tfb2m), whereas only a
subset of the same genes were induced during white adipose conversion. In
addition, PR domain containing 16 (PRDM16) was found to be expressed at
substantially higher levels in brown compared to white pre-adipocytes and
adipocytes. We demonstrate that forced expression of Tfam but not Tfb2m in brown 
adipocyte precursor cells promotes mitochondrial DNA replication, and that
silencing of PRDM16 expression during brown fat cell differentiation blunts
mitochondrial biogenesis and expression of brown fat cell markers.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Using both in vitro and in vivo model systems of white 
and brown fat cell differentiation, we report a detailed characterisation of gene
expression linked to mitochondrial biogenesis and function. We find significant
differences in differentiating white and brown adipocytes, which might explain
the notable increase in mitochondrial content observed during brown adipose
conversion. In addition, our data support a key role of PRDM16 in triggering
brown adipocyte differentiation, including mitochondrial biogenesis and
expression of UCP1.

PMCID: PMC2809086
PMID: 20107496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Neuropathology. 2010 Aug;30(4):401-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2009.01086.x. Epub
2010 Jan 19.

Overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) ameliorates delayed
neuronal death due to transient forebrain ischemia in mice.

Hokari M(1), Kuroda S, Kinugawa S, Ide T, Tsutsui H, Iwasaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. karimasa@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is an important regulator to maintain
mitochondrial DNA copy number. However, no studies have denoted its roles in
cerebral ischemia. Therefore, this study was aimed to assess whether the forced
overexpression of TFAM ameliorates delayed neuronal death following transient
forebrain ischemia. We have established human TFAM-transgenic (Tg) mice. Wild
type (WT) and TFAM-Tg mice were subjected to 20-min bilateral common carotid
artery occlusion (BCCAO). Immunostaining against cytochrome c was performed to
estimate its release from mitochondria at 24 h after 20-min BCCAO. Histological
analysis was performed to evaluate the effect of TFAM overexpression on delayed
neuronal death at 72 h after 20-min BCCAO. The number of cytochrome c-positive
neurons in the hippocampal CA1 sector was significantly smaller in TFAM-Tg mice
than in WT mice (P = 0.005). The percentage of viable neurons in the hippocampal 
CA1 sector was significantly higher in TFAM-Tg mice than in WT mice (P < 0.001), 
and the number of TUNEL-positive neurons was significantly smaller in TFAM-Tg
mice than in WT mice (P < 0.001). Our data strongly suggest that TFAM
overexpression can reduce mitochondrial permeability transition and ameliorate
delayed neuronal death in the hippocampus after transient forebrain ischemia.

PMID: 20102525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Physiol. 2010 Mar 15;588(Pt 6):1011-22. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.181743. Epub
2010 Jan 25.

A practical model of low-volume high-intensity interval training induces
mitochondrial biogenesis in human skeletal muscle: potential mechanisms.

Little JP(1), Safdar A, Wilkin GP, Tarnopolsky MA, Gibala MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Exercise Metabolism Research Group, Department of Kinesiology, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4K1.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2010 Sep 15;588(Pt 18):3341-2.
    J Physiol. 2010 Jun 1;588(Pt 11):1817-8.

High-intensity interval training (HIT) induces skeletal muscle metabolic and
performance adaptations that resemble traditional endurance training despite a
low total exercise volume. Most HIT studies have employed 'all out',
variable-load exercise interventions (e.g. repeated Wingate tests) that may not
be safe, practical and/or well tolerated by certain individuals. Our purpose was 
to determine the performance, metabolic and molecular adaptations to a more
practical model of low-volume HIT. Seven men (21 + or - 0.4 years, V(O2peak) = 46
+ or - 2 ml kg(-1) min(-1)) performed six training sessions over 2 weeks. Each
session consisted of 8-12 x 60 s intervals at approximately 100% of peak power
output elicited during a ramp V(O2) peak test (355 + or - 10 W) separated by 75 s
of recovery. Training increased exercise capacity, as assessed by significant
improvements on both 50 kJ and 750 kJ cycling time trials (P < 0.05 for both).
Skeletal muscle (vastus lateralis) biopsy samples obtained before and after
training revealed increased maximal activity of citrate synthase (CS) and
cytochrome c oxidase (COX) as well as total protein content of CS, COX subunits
II and IV, and the mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) (P < 0.05 for
all). Nuclear abundance of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
co-activator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) was approximately 25% higher after training (P <
0.05), but total PGC-1alpha protein content remained unchanged. Total SIRT1
content, a proposed activator of PGC-1alpha and mitochondrial biogenesis, was
increased by approximately 56% following training (P < 0.05). Training also
increased resting muscle glycogen and total GLUT4 protein content (both P <
0.05). This study demonstrates that a practical model of low volume HIT is a
potent stimulus for increasing skeletal muscle mitochondrial capacity and
improving exercise performance. The results also suggest that increases in SIRT1,
nuclear PGC-1alpha, and Tfam may be involved in coordinating mitochondrial
adaptations in response to HIT in human skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2849965
PMID: 20100740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Mitochondrion. 2010 Jun;10(4):321-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2010.01.006. Epub 2010
Jan 20.

Mitochondrial DNA content and expression of genes involved in mtDNA
transcription, regulation and maintenance during human fetal development.

Pejznochova M(1), Tesarova M, Hansikova H, Magner M, Honzik T, Vinsova K, Hajkova
Z, Havlickova V, Zeman J.

Author information: 
(1)Charles University in Prague, First Faculty of Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 120 00 Prague 2, Czech Republic.
martina.pejznochova@centrum.cz

The mitochondrial biogenesis and adequate energy production are important for
fetal growth and early postnatal adaptation. The aim of the study was to
characterize mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content and expression patterns of POLG,
TFAM, NRF1,NRF2 and PGC1 family of regulated coactivators (PGC1A, PGC1B and PRC) 
involved in the mtDNA transcription, regulation and maintenance in human fetal
tissues during second trimester of gestation. Further the mRNA expression
profiles of selected cytochrome c oxidase (COX) subunits were analysed. Moreover 
enzyme activities of COX and CS and protein levels of COX subunits were analysed.
DNA, RNA and proteins were isolated from 26 pairs of fetal liver and muscle
samples obtained at autopsy after termination of pregnancy for genetic
indications unrelated to OXPHOS deficiency between 13th and 28th week of
gestation. This work offers a broad view on the mtDNA content changes in two
different tissues during the second trimester of gestation and in the
corresponding tissues after birth. The important differences in expression of
POLG, TFAM, NRF2 genes and family PGC1 coactivators were found between the fetal 
tissues. The significant tissue-specific changes in expression of selected COX
subunits on mRNA level (COX4 and MTCO2) were observed. Further the considerable
differences in enzyme activities of COX and CS are demonstrated between fetal and
postnatal phase. In conclusion our study indicates that the fetal developing
tissues might differ in the control of mitochondrial biogenesis depending on
their energy demand and the age of gestation. Moreover the gene expression is
changed mainly on transcriptional level through fetal period.

Copyright 2010 Mitochondria Research Society. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20096380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Free Radic Biol Med. 2010 Mar 1;48(5):736-46. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.12.019. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Nitric oxide synthase-2 regulates mitochondrial Hsp60 chaperone function during
bacterial peritonitis in mice.

Suliman HB(1), Babiker A, Withers CM, Sweeney TE, Carraway MS, Tatro LG, Bartz
RR, Welty-Wolf KE, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Nitric oxide synthase-2 (NOS2) plays a critical role in reactive nitrogen species
generation and cysteine modifications that influence mitochondrial function and
signaling during inflammation. Here, we investigated the role of NOS2 in hepatic 
mitochondrial biogenesis during Escherichia coli peritonitis in mice. NOS2(-/-)
mice displayed smaller mitochondrial biogenesis responses than Wt mice during E. 
coli infection according to differences in mRNA levels for the PGC-1 alpha
coactivator, nuclear respiratory factor-1, mitochondrial transcription factor-A
(Tfam), and mtDNA polymerase (Pol gamma). NOS2(-/-) mice did not significantly
increase mitochondrial Tfam and Pol gamma protein levels during infection in
conjunction with impaired mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription, loss of mtDNA 
copy number, and lower State 3 respiration rates. NOS2 blockade in
mitochondrial-GFP reporter mice disrupted Hsp60 localization to mitochondria
after E. coli exposure. Mechanistically, biotin-switch and immunoprecipitation
studies demonstrated NOS2 binding to and S-nitros(yl)ation of Hsp60 and Hsp70.
Specifically, NOS2 promoted Tfam accumulation in mitochondria by regulation of
Hsp60-Tfam binding via S-nitros(yl)ation. In hepatocytes, site-directed
mutagenesis identified (237)Cys as a critical residue for Hsp60
S-nitros(yl)ation. Thus, the role of NOS2 in inflammation-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis involves both optimal gene expression for nuclear-encoded
mtDNA-binding proteins and functional regulation of the Hsp60 chaperone that
enables their importation for mtDNA transcription and replication.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2842938
PMID: 20043987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Mar;332(3):886-97. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.160879. Epub 
2009 Dec 16.

Hepatic mitochondrial DNA depletion after an alcohol binge in mice: probable role
of peroxynitrite and modulation by manganese superoxide dismutase.

Larosche I(1), Lettéron P, Berson A, Fromenty B, Huang TT, Moreau R, Pessayre D, 
Mansouri A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U773, Faculté de
Médecine Xavier Bichat, 16 rue Henri Huchard, BP 416, 75018 Paris, France.

Alcohol consumption increases reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation, which can 
damage mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and alter mitochondrial function. To test
whether manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) modulates acute alcohol-induced
mitochondrial alterations, transgenic MnSOD-overexpressing (MnSOD(+++)) mice,
heterozygous knockout (MnSOD(+/-)) mice, and wild-type (WT) littermates were
sacrificed 2 or 24 h after intragastric ethanol administration (5 g/kg). Alcohol 
administration further increased MnSOD activity in MnSOD(+++) mice, but further
decreased it in MnSOD(+/-) mice. In WT mice, alcohol administration transiently
increased mitochondrial ROS formation, decreased mitochondrial glutathione,
depleted and damaged mtDNA, and decreased complex I and V activities; alcohol
durably increased inducible nitric-oxide synthase (NOS) expression, plasma
nitrites/nitrates, and the nitration of tyrosine residues in complex V proteins. 
These effects were prevented in MnSOD(+++) mice and prolonged in MnSOD(+/-) mice.
In alcoholized WT or MnSOD(+/-) mice, mtDNA depletion and the nitration of
tyrosine residues in complex I and V proteins were prevented or attenuated by
cotreatment with tempol (4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl), a
superoxide scavenger; N(omega)-nitro-l-arginine methyl ester and
N-[3-(aminomethyl)benzyl]acetamidine (1,400W), two NOS inhibitors; or uric acid, 
a peroxynitrite scavenger. In conclusion, MnSOD overexpression prevents, and
MnSOD deficiency prolongs, mtDNA depletion after an acute alcohol binge in mice. 
The protective effects of MnSOD, tempol, NOS inhibitors, and uric acid point out 
a role of the superoxide anion reacting with NO to form mtDNA-damaging
peroxynitrite.

PMID: 20016022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Genes Brain Behav. 2010 Mar 1;9(2):173-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2009.00542.x.
Epub 2009 Oct 7.

MitoPark mice mirror the slow progression of key symptoms and L-DOPA response in 
Parkinson's disease.

Galter D(1), Pernold K, Yoshitake T, Lindqvist E, Hoffer B, Kehr J, Larsson NG,
Olson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Retzius väg 8, B2:4, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77
Stockholm, Sweden. dagmar.galter@ki.se

The MitoPark mouse, in which the mitochondrial transcription factor Tfam is
selectively removed in midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons, is a genetic model for
Parkinson's disease (PD) that replicates the slow and progressive development of 
key symptoms. To further validate this model, we have extended both behavioral
and biochemical analyses in these animals. We found that vertical movements
decline earlier and faster than horizontal movements, possibly modeling the early
occurrence of axial, postural instability in PD. L-DOPA induces different
locomotor responses depending on the age: in young MitoPark mice the
L-DOPA-induced motor activation is small; middle-aged MitoPark mice respond in a 
dose-dependent manner to L-DOPA, whereas aged MitoPark mice display a
double-peaked locomotor response to a high dose of L-DOPA that includes an
intermittent period of very low motor activity, similar to the 'on-off'
phenomenon in PD. To correlate behavior with biochemical data, we analyzed
monoamine levels in three different brain areas that are highly innervated by the
DA system: striatum, anterior cortex and olfactory bulb. DA levels declined
earlier and faster in striatum than in cortex; only at the latest time-point
analyzed, DA levels were found to be significantly lower than control levels in
the olfactory bulb. Interestingly, the ratio between homovanillic acid (HVA) and 
DA differed between regions over time. In striatum and olfactory bulb, the ratio 
increased steeply indicating increased DA turnover. In contrast, the ratio
decreased over time in cortex, revealing important differences between DA cells
in substantia nigra and the ventral tegmental area.

PMCID: PMC4154513
PMID: 20002202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Jan 18;469(1):24-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.11.037. Epub
2009 Nov 17.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A variants and the risk of Parkinson's
disease.

Gaweda-Walerych K(1), Safranow K, Maruszak A, Bialecka M, Klodowska-Duda G,
Czyzewski K, Slawek J, Rudzinska M, Styczynska M, Opala G, Drozdzik M, Kurzawski 
M, Szczudlik A, Canter JA, Barcikowska M, Zekanowski C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Medical Research Center, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Pawinskiego 5, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
kabgaweda@poczta.onet.pl

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) has been recently shown to
decrease reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation. It is also known that
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroups might confer different coupling properties,
resulting in different ROS levels. We hypothesized that potentially functional
TFAM variants could influence PD risk depending on haplogroup background. To test
this we assessed the role of six TFAM variants on PD risk in 326 PD patients and 
316 controls, and correlated it with mtDNA haplogroup clusters (HV, JTKU and a
putative functionally different group U4U5a1KJ1cJ2, connected previously with
partial uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation). Both genotype and haplotype
analysis showed that intronic variant rs2306604 modifies PD risk. Multivariate
logistic regression analysis confirmed that rs2306604 G/G genotype is an
independent risk factor for PD (OR 1.789, 95% CI 1.162-2.755, p=0.008). There was
a borderline interaction between G/G genotype and HV haplogroup (p=0.075).
Haplotype analysis showed that all three haplotypes containing rs2306604 allele A
occurred at higher frequencies in controls, but only one of them reached
statistical significance (chi(2) 4.523, p=0.0334). Conversely, four of five
haplotypes containing allele G had higher frequencies in PD group, with no
statistical significance.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19925850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Agric Food Chem. 2009 Dec 23;57(24):11455-62. doi: 10.1021/jf902021h.

Functional modulation of mitochondria by eicosapentaenoic acid provides
protection against ceramide toxicity to C6 glioma cells.

Jeng JY(1), Lee WH, Tsai YH, Chen CY, Chao SY, Hsieh RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei 106, Taiwan.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and associated apoptosis have been reported in the
pathogenesis of neuron degeneration. The effects of eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)
and arachidonic acid (AA) on the mitochondrial membrane potential, mitochondrial 
biogenesis, and mitochondrial function of rat C6 glioma cells were determined in 
this study. Increased cytochrome c release and activated caspase-3 expression
were determined in cells treated with >20 microM C(2) ceramide. There were
significant repressive effects on ceramide-induced cell death with 25-100 microM 
EPA and 25 microM AA pretreatment. However, significantly increased membrane
potentials were detected in cells pretreated with 25 and 50 microM EPA compared
to ceramide-treated cells, but not in AA pretreatment groups. In cells pretreated
with EPA, ATP production loss was prevented from ceramide-induced mitochondrial
dysfunction. In mitochondrial biogenesis related assay, both EPA and AA enhanced 
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma-coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) 
and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) transcriptional activities.
However, elevated PGC-1alpha transcriptional activities in groups pretreated with
25, 50, and 100 microM EPA and only in the 100 microM AA group were analyzed. The
Tfam transcriptional activities were enhanced in groups pretreated with 25 and 50
microM EPA and AA. Increased NADH dehydrogenase subunit 6 (ND6) mRNA expression
was determined in cells pretreated with 25 and 50 microM EPA and 25 microM AA.
Elevated protein levels of Tfam, flavoprotein, and cytochrome oxidase subunit III
(COX III) were determined in cells pretreated with 25 and 50 microM EPA. The
EPA-provided a more protective effect than AA against ceramide-induced cell
death, which might mainly be due to maintaining the membrane potential and
sustaining the mitochondrial ATP production function. EPA has more potential to
elevate mitochondrial biogenesis through enhanced PGC-1alpha, and Tfam
transcriptional activities may provide partial protection against ceramide
cytotoxicity.

PMID: 19921818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2010 Jan;298(1):R25-33. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00524.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Acute {beta}-adrenergic stimulation does not alter mitochondrial protein
synthesis or markers of mitochondrial biogenesis in adult men.

Robinson MM(1), Richards JC, Hickey MS, Moore DR, Phillips SM, Bell C, Miller BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Exercise Science, Colorado State University, Fort
Collins, Colorado, USA.

Exercise-induced expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) is dramatically inhibited in mice pretreated with
a beta-adrenergic receptor (beta-AR) antagonist, suggesting that beta-ARs play an
important role in the regulation of skeletal muscle PGC-1alpha expression, and
potentially, mitochondrial biogenesis. Accordingly, we hypothesized that acute
beta-AR stimulation would induce transcriptional pathways involved in skeletal
muscle mitochondrial biogenesis in humans. Whole body protein turnover (WBPT),
myofibrillar protein synthesis (MyPS), skeletal muscle mitochondrial protein
synthesis (MiPS), and mitochondrial biogenic signaling were determined in samples
of vastus lateralis obtained on two separate occasions in 10 young adult males
following 1 h of continuous intravenous administration of saline (CON) or a
nonspecific beta-AR agonist [isoproterenol (ISO): 12 ng.kg fat free
mass(-1).min(-1)], combined with coinfusion of [1,2](13)C-leucine. beta-AR
stimulation induced appreciable increases in heart rate and systolic blood
pressure (both P < 0.001) but did not affect mitochondrial biogenic signaling (no
change in PGC-1alpha, TFAM, NRF-1, NRF-2, COX, or NADHox expression via RT-PCR; P
> 0.05). Additionally, MiPS [CON: 0.099 +/- 0.028, ISO: 0.074 +/- 0.046 (mean +/-
SD); P > 0.05] and MyPS (CON: 0.059 +/- 0.008, ISO: 0.055 +/- 0.009; P > 0.05),
as well as measures of WBPT were unaffected. On the basis of this investigation, 
we conclude that acute intravenous beta-AR stimulation does not increase
mitochondrial protein synthesis or biogenesis signals in skeletal muscle.

PMID: 19907002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Appl Genet. 2009;50(4):361-9. doi: 10.1007/BF03195694.

Correlation between porcine PPARGC1A mRNA expression and its downstream target
genes in backfat and longissimus dorsi muscle.

Erkens T(1), Vandesompele J, Van Zeveren A, Peelman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Genetics and Ethology, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium. tim.erkens@urgent.be

Knowledge of in vivo relationship between the coactivator PPARGC1A and its target
genes is very limited, especially in the pig. In this study, a real-time PCR
experiment was performed on longissimus dorsi muscle (MLD) and backfat with 10
presumed PPARGC1A downstream target genes, involved in energy and fat metabolism,
to identify possible relationships with PPARGC1A mRNA expression in vivo in the
pig (n = 20). Except for UCP3 and LPL, a very significant difference in
expression was found between MLD and backfat for all genes (P < 0.01).
Hierarchical cluster analysis and the significant pairing of mRNA expression data
between sampling locations suggested a genetic regulation of the expression of
several target genes. A positive correlation with PPARGC1A was found for CPT1B,
GLUT4, PDK4, and TFAM (P < 0.0001). A negative correlation was found for UCP2,
FABP4, LEP (P < 0.0001), and TNF (P = 0.0071). No significant correlation was
detected for UCP3 and LPL. This study provides evidence for a clear difference in
mRNA expression of crucial genes in fat and energy metabolism between 2 important
tissues. Our data suggest a clear impact of PPARGC1A on energy and lipid
metabolism in vivo in the pig, through several of these downstream target genes.

PMID: 19875886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 1;285(1):142-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.030130. Epub 2009
Oct 27.

Pyrroloquinoline quinone stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis through cAMP
response element-binding protein phosphorylation and increased PGC-1alpha
expression.

Chowanadisai W(1), Bauerly KA, Tchaparian E, Wong A, Cortopassi GA, Rucker RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Bioactive compounds reported to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis are linked to 
many health benefits such increased longevity, improved energy utilization, and
protection from reactive oxygen species. Previously studies have shown that mice 
and rats fed diets lacking in pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ) have reduced
mitochondrial content. Therefore, we hypothesized that PQQ can induce
mitochondrial biogenesis in mouse hepatocytes. Exposure of mouse Hepa1-6 cells to
10-30 microm PQQ for 24-48 h resulted in increased citrate synthase and
cytochrome c oxidase activity, Mitotracker staining, mitochondrial DNA content,
and cellular oxygen respiration. The induction of this process occurred through
the activation of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), a pathway 
known to regulate mitochondrial biogenesis. PQQ exposure stimulated
phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133, activated the promoter of PGC-1alpha, and 
increased PGC-1alpha mRNA and protein expression. PQQ did not stimulate
mitochondrial biogenesis after small interfering RNA-mediated reduction in either
PGC-1alpha or CREB expression. Consistent with activation of the PGC-1alpha
pathway, PQQ increased nuclear respiratory factor activation (NRF-1 and NRF-2)
and Tfam, TFB1M, and TFB2M mRNA expression. Moreover, PQQ protected cells from
mitochondrial inhibition by rotenone, 3-nitropropionic acid, antimycin A, and
sodium azide. The ability of PQQ to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis accounts
in part for action of this compound and suggests that PQQ may be beneficial in
diseases associated with mitochondrial dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2804159
PMID: 19861415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 25;390(4):1182-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.114. Epub 2009 Oct 25.

The PGC-1alpha-dependent pathway of mitochondrial biogenesis is upregulated in
type I endometrial cancer.

Cormio A(1), Guerra F, Cormio G, Pesce V, Fracasso F, Loizzi V, Cantatore P,
Selvaggi L, Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology E. Quagliariello, University 
of Bari, Via Orabona, 4-70126 Bari, Italy. a.cormio@biologia.uniba.it

PGC-1alpha-dependent pathway of mitochondrial biogenesis was investigated for the
first time in type I endometrial cancer and in normal endometrium. In cancer
endometrial tissue the citrate synthase activity, the mitochondrial DNA content
and the TFAM level were found doubled compared to control endometrial tissue.
Moreover, a 1.6- and 1.8-fold increase, respectively, of NRF-1 and PGG-1alpha
expression was found. This study demonstrates, for the first time, that the
increased mitochondrial biogenesis in type I endometrial cancer is associated to 
the upregulation of PGC-1alpha signalling pathway.

PMID: 19861117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;11(4):497-507. doi: 10.1089/clo.2009.0021.

Fates of donor and recipient mitochondrial DNA during generation of interspecies 
SCNT-derived human ES-like cells.

Sha HY(1), Chen JQ, Chen J, Zhang PY, Wang P, Chen LP, Cheng GX, Zhu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Fudan University Huashan Hospital, National Key
Laboratory for Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China, 200040.

To investigate nuclear donor and cytoplast recipient mitochondria fate and their 
effects on generation of interspecies somatic cell nuclear transfer
(iSCNT)-derived human embryonic stem (ES)-like cells, iSCNT embryos were
reconstructed between enucleated goat oocytes and human neural stem cells
(hNSCs). A total of 10.74% cleaved embryos (13/121) developed to blastocyst
stage. One typical primary ES-like (tpES-like) colony and two nontypical primary 
ES-like (non-tpES-like) colonies designated as non-tpES-like cell-1 and
non-tpES-like cell-2, respectively, were obtained from the inner cell masses of
iSCNT blastocysts. The tpES-like cells expressed ESC markers. Both human and goat
mtDNA could be detected in the embryos at 2-8-, 16-32-cell, and blastocyst
stages, and in tpES-like colony and two non-tpES-like colonies. Human mtDNA
copies per cell from embryos at two- to eight-cell stage to the three colonies
maintain almost its original level, whereas 2.88 x 10(5) goat mtDNA copies per
oocyte decreased to 10.8 copies per tpES-like cell, 493 copies per non-tpES-like 
cell-1, and 77.6 copies per non-tpES-like cell-2, resulting in 43.75% (8.4/19.2),
1.24% (6.2/499), and 14.63% (13.3/90.9) mtDNA content in tpES-like cell,
non-tpES-like cell-1, and non-tpES-like cell-2 was that of nuclear donor,
respectively. Human-specific Tfam and Polg mRNA could be detected in cells of the
three colonies. However, tpES-like colony failed to be passaged. The mRNA level
of CoxIV encoded by nuclear donor in tpES-like cell was higher than that in
non-tpES-like cell, but significantly lower than that of human ESC, suggesting
proper nuclear-cytoplasmic communication would not be established in tpES-like
cells. Thus, the data suggest that (1) goat oocytes could reprogram human neural 
stem cells (hNSCs) into embryonic state and further support the inner cell mass
(ICM) of iSCNT blastocyst to form tpES-like colony; (2) nuclear donor mtDNA could
be replicated and maintain its original level during the reduction of recipient
mitochondrial DNA copies, (3) nuclear-cytoplasmic communication and recipient
mtDNA copies might affect the derivation of iSCNT-derived ES-like cells.

PMID: 19780695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2009 Oct;16(5):576-85. Epub 2009 Sep 18.

Skeletal muscle characteristics of rats with obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and
hyperlipidemia.

Nagatomo F(1), Gu N, Fujino H, Takeda I, Tsuda K, Ishihara A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, Graduate School of Human and Environmental
Studies, Kyoto University, Japan.

AIM: Data on the skeletal muscle characteristics of patients and animals with
lifestyle-related diseases are limited. We investigated mRNA expression levels
and fiber profiles in the skeletal muscles of rats with obesity, diabetes,
hypertension, and/or hyperlipidemia.
METHODS: The mRNA expression levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptors (PPARalpha and PPARdelta/beta), PPARgamma coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha), stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (SCD-1), carnitine palmi-toyl-transferase
I (CPT I), medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD), and mitochondrial
transcriptional factor A (TFAM) in the soleus muscles were compared among
15-week-old control (WR), type 2 diabetic (GK), hypertensive (SHR), and
hyperlipidemic (CP) rats. The fiber profiles in the soleus muscles of these rats 
were also determined.
RESULTS: GK rats showed lower PPARdelta/beta, PGC-1alpha, and MCAD expression
levels than WR rats. SHR rats showed higher PPARalpha and MCAD and lower
PPARdelta/beta expression levels than WR rats. CP rats showed lower
PPARdelta/beta and higher SCD-1 expression levels than WR rats. The muscles of
WR, SHR, and CP rats had low-oxidative type I and high-oxidative type IIA and
type IIC fibers, whereas the muscle of GK rats had only low-oxidative type I
fibers.
CONCLUSIONS: The skeletal muscles of rats with lifestyle-related diseases have
unique mRNA expres-sion patterns and fiber profiles depending on the type of
disease. For example, the lower PGC-1alpha and MCAD mRNA expression levels in the
soleus muscles of type 2 diabetic rats are associated with the presence of only
low-oxidative type I fibers in the muscle.

PMID: 19763017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Nov;37(20):6765-83. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp750. Epub 2009
Sep 15.

Biophysical characterizations of human mitochondrial transcription factor A and
its binding to tumor suppressor p53.

Wong TS(1), Rajagopalan S, Freund SM, Rutherford TJ, Andreeva A, Townsley FM,
Petrovich M, Fersht AR.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Protein Engineering, Medical Research Council, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 0QH, UK.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a multi-functional protein, 
involved in different aspects of maintaining mitochondrial genome integrity. In
this report, we characterized TFAM and its interaction with tumor suppressor p53 
using various biophysical methods. DNA-free TFAM is a thermally unstable protein 
that is in equilibrium between monomers and dimers. Self-association of TFAM is
modulated by its basic C-terminal tail. The DNA-binding ability of TFAM is mainly
contributed by its first HMG-box, while the second HMG-box has low-DNA-binding
capability. We also obtained backbone resonance assignments from the NMR spectra 
of both HMG-boxes of TFAM. TFAM binds primarily to the N-terminal transactivation
domain of p53, with a K(d) of 1.95 +/- 0.19 microM. The C-terminal regulatory
domain of p53 provides a secondary binding site for TFAM. The TFAM-p53-binding
interface involves both TAD1 and TAD2 sub-domains of p53. Helices alpha1 and
alpha2 of the HMG-box constitute the main p53-binding region. Since both TFAM and
p53 binds preferentially to distorted DNA, the TFAM-p53 interaction is implicated
in DNA damage and repair. In addition, the DNA-binding mechanism of TFAM and
biological relevance of the TFAM-p53 interaction are discussed.

PMCID: PMC2777442
PMID: 19755502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Nov;37(20):6701-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp727. Epub 2009
Sep 9.

In vivo methylation of mtDNA reveals the dynamics of protein-mtDNA interactions.

Rebelo AP(1), Williams SL, Moraes CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Miami School of
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

To characterize the organization of mtDNA-protein complexes (known as nucleoids) 
in vivo, we have probed the mtDNA surface exposure using site-specific DNA
methyltransferases targeted to the mitochondria. We have observed that DNA
methyltransferases have different accessibility to different sites on the mtDNA
based on the levels of protein occupancy. We focused our studies on selected
regions of mtDNA that are believed to be major regulatory regions involved in
transcription and replication. The transcription termination region (TERM) within
the tRNA(Leu(UUR)) gene was consistently and strongly protected from methylation,
suggesting frequent and high affinity binding of mitochondrial transcription
termination factor 1 (mTERF1) to the site. Protection from methylation was also
observed in other regions of the mtDNA, including the light and heavy strand
promoters (LSP, HSP) and the origin of replication of the light strand (OL).
Manipulations aiming at increasing or decreasing the levels of the mitochondrial 
transcription factor A (TFAM) led to decreased in vivo methylation, whereas
manipulations that stimulated mtDNA replication led to increased methylation. We 
also analyzed the effect of ATAD3 and oxidative stress in mtDNA exposure. Our
data provide a map of human mtDNA accessibility and demonstrate that nucleoids
are dynamically associated with proteins.

PMCID: PMC2777446
PMID: 19740762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Adv Drug Deliv Rev. 2009 Nov 30;61(14):1369-74. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2009.06.006. 
Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Mitochondrial biogenesis in exercise and in ageing.

Viña J(1), Gomez-Cabrera MC, Borras C, Froio T, Sanchis-Gomar F, Martinez-Bello
VE, Pallardo FV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, Spain. jose.vina@uv.es

Mitochondrial biogenesis is critical for the normal function of cells. It is well
known that mitochondria are produced and eventually after normal functioning they
are degraded. Thus, the actual level of mitochondria in cells is dependent both
on the synthesis and the degradation. Ever since the proposal of the
mitochondrial theory of ageing by Jaime Miquel in the 70's, it was appreciated
that mitochondria, which are both a target and a source of radicals in cells, are
most important organelles to understand ageing. Thus, a common feature between
cell physiology of ageing and exercise is that in both situations mitochondria
are critical for normal cell functioning. Mitochondrial synthesis is stimulated
by the PGC-1alpha-NRF1-TFAM pathway. PGC-1alpha is the first stimulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis. NRF1 is an intermediate transcription factor which
stimulates the synthesis of TFAM which is a final effector activating the
duplication of mitochondrial DNA molecules. This pathway is impaired in ageing.
On the contrary, exercise, particularly aerobic exercise, activates
mitochondriogenesis in the young animal but its effects on mitochondrial
biogenesis in the old animal are doubtful. In this chapter we consider the
interrelationship between mitochondrial biogenesis stimulated by exercise and the
possible impairment of this pathway in ageing leading to mitochondrial deficiency
and eventually muscle sarcopenia.

PMID: 19716394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Circ Res. 2009 Sep 25;105(7):705-12, 11 p following 712. doi:
10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.205310. Epub 2009 Aug 20.

p53 improves aerobic exercise capacity and augments skeletal muscle mitochondrial
DNA content.

Park JY(1), Wang PY, Matsumoto T, Sung HJ, Ma W, Choi JW, Anderson SA, Leary SC, 
Balaban RS, Kang JG, Hwang PM.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Medicine Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md 20892, USA.

RATIONALE: Exercise capacity is a physiological characteristic associated with
protection from both cardiovascular and all-cause mortality. p53 regulates
mitochondrial function and its deletion markedly diminishes exercise capacity,
but the underlying genetic mechanism orchestrating this is unclear. Understanding
the biology of how p53 improves exercise capacity may provide useful insights for
improving both cardiovascular as well as general health.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to understand the genetic mechanism by
which p53 regulates aerobic exercise capacity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using a variety of physiological, metabolic, and molecular
techniques, we further characterized maximum exercise capacity and the effects of
training, measured various nonmitochondrial and mitochondrial determinants of
exercise capacity, and examined putative regulators of mitochondrial biogenesis. 
As p53 did not affect baseline cardiac function or inotropic reserve, we focused 
on the involvement of skeletal muscle and now report a wider role for p53 in
modulating skeletal muscle mitochondrial function. p53 interacts with
Mitochondrial Transcription Factor A (TFAM), a nuclear-encoded gene important for
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription and maintenance, and regulates mtDNA
content. The increased mtDNA in p53(+/+) compared to p53(-/-) mice was more
marked in aerobic versus glycolytic skeletal muscle groups with no significant
changes in cardiac tissue. These in vivo observations were further supported by
in vitro studies showing overexpression of p53 in mouse myoblasts increases both 
TFAM and mtDNA levels whereas depletion of TFAM by shRNA decreases mtDNA content.
CONCLUSIONS: Our current findings indicate that p53 promotes aerobic metabolism
and exercise capacity by using different mitochondrial genes and mechanisms in a 
tissue-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC2761626
PMID: 19696408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):76-85. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077776. Epub 2009 
Aug 19.

Embryo mitochondrial DNA depletion is reversed during early embryogenesis in
cattle.

Chiaratti MR(1), Bressan FF, Ferreira CR, Caetano AR, Smith LC, Vercesi AE,
Meirelles FV.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ciências Básicas, Faculdade de Zootecnia e Engenharia de
Alimentos, Universidade de São Paulo, Pirassununga, Brazil.
chiaramr@fcm.unicamp.br

The extensive replication of mitochondria during oogenesis and the wide
variability in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy numbers present in fully grown
oocytes indicate that mtDNA amount may play an important role during early
embryogenesis. Using bovine oocytes derived from follicles of different sizes to 
study the influence of mtDNA content on development, we showed that oocytes
obtained from small follicles, known to be less competent in developing into
blastocysts, contain less mtDNA than those originating from larger follicles.
However, because of the high variability in copy number, a more accurate approach
was examined in which parthenogenetic one-cell embryos were biopsied to measure
their mtDNA content and then cultured to assess development capacity. Contrasting
with previous findings, mtDNA copy number in biopsies was not different between
competent and incompetent embryos, indicating that mtDNA content is not related
to early developmental competence. To further examine the importance of mtDNA on 
development, one-cell embryos were partially depleted of their mtDNA (64% +/-
4.1% less) by centrifugation followed by the removal of the
mitochondrial-enriched cytoplasmic fraction. Surprisingly, depleted embryos
developed normally into blastocysts, which contained mtDNA copy numbers similar
to nonmanipulated controls. Development in depleted embryos was accompanied by an
increase in the expression of genes (TFAM and NRF1) controlling mtDNA replication
and transcription, indicating an intrinsic ability to restore the content of
mtDNA at the blastocyst stage. Therefore, we concluded that competent bovine
embryos are able to regulate their mtDNA content at the blastocyst stage
regardless of the copy numbers accumulated during oogenesis.

PMID: 19696017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Free Radic Biol Med. 2009 Nov 15;47(10):1394-400. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.08.007. Epub 2009 Aug 14.

Exercise activation of muscle peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha signaling is redox sensitive.

Kang C(1), O'Moore KM, Dickman JR, Ji LL.

Author information: 
(1)The Biodynamics Laboratory, Department of Kinesiology, University of Wisconsin
at Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha)-activated signal transduction pathway has previously been shown to
stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle in response to endurance
exercise. In vitro data indicate that PGC-1alpha signaling may be sensitive to
reactive oxygen species (ROS) but its role in vivo is not clear. The objectives
of this study were (1) to investigate whether the PGC-1alpha pathway could be
activated by a single bout of anaerobic exercise in rats, wherein a major portion
of ROS was generated via the cytosolic xanthine oxidase (XO), and (2) to examine 
whether allopurinol (ALP), a specific XO inhibitor, would attenuate PGC-1alpha
expression and signaling owing to decreased ROS generation. Female Sprague-Dawley
rats were randomly divided into three groups: (1) subjected to sprinting on a
treadmill at 35 m/min, 15% grade, for 3 min followed by 3 min slow running at 15 
m/min, 0% grade, repeated until exhaustion (88 +/- 4 min; Exer; N= 9); (2)
subjected to the same exercise protocol (88 +/- 4 min) but injected with two
doses of ALP (0.4 mmol/kg, ip) 24 and 1 h before the experiment (Exer+ ALP; N=
9); and (3) rested control (C; N= 9). Exercise increased XO activity and ROS
generation in the Exer rat vastus lateralis muscle (P< 0.05), whereas the Exer+
ALP group displayed only 7% XO activity and similar ROS level compared with the C
group. PGC-1alpha protein content showed a 5.6-fold increase (P< 0.01) in Exer vs
C, along with a 200% (P< 0.01) increase in both nuclear respiratory factor
(NRF)-1 and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) content. ALP treatment
decreased PGC-1alpha, NRF-1, and Tfam levels by 45, 19, and 20% (P< 0.05),
respectively. Exercise doubled the content of the phosphorylated cAMP-responsive 
element-binding protein in the Exer group (P< 0.01) and tripled phosphorylated
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (P< 0.01), whereas these effects were
reduced by 60 and 30% (P< 0.01, P< 0.05), respectively, in Exer+ ALP rats.
Nuclear factor-kappaB binding and phospho-IkappaB content were also increased in 
Exer rats (P< 0.01) and these increases were abolished by ALP treatment. The data
indicate that contraction-activated PGC-1alpha signaling pathways in skeletal
muscle are redox sensitive and that nonmitochondrial ROS play an important role
in stimulating mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 19686839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Acta Physiol (Oxf). 2010 Jan;198(1):71-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2009.02030.x. 
Epub 2009 Aug 13.

Training response of mitochondrial transcription factors in human skeletal
muscle.

Norrbom J(1), Wallman SE, Gustafsson T, Rundqvist H, Jansson E, Sundberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Physiology, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology,
Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden. jessica.norrbom@ki.se

AIM: Mitochondrial function is essential for physical performance and health.
Aerobic fitness is positively associated with mitochondrial (mt) biogenesis in
muscle cells through partly unknown regulatory mechanisms. The present study
aimed to investigate the influence of exercise and training status on key mt
transcription factors in relation to oxidative capacity in human skeletal muscle.
METHODS: The basal mRNA and protein levels of mitochondrial transcription factor 
A (TFAM), mitochondrial transcription factors B1 (TFB1M) or B2 (TFB2M), and mRNA 
levels of mitochondrial transcription termination factor (mTERF), were measured
in a cross-sectional study with elite athletes (EA) and moderately active (MA)
and the basal mRNA levels of these factors were measured during a 10-day
endurance training programme with (R-leg) and without (NR-leg) restricted blood
flow to the working leg.
RESULTS: TFAM protein expression was significantly higher in the EA than in the
MA, while protein levels of TFB1M and TFB2M were not different between the
groups. There was no difference between EA and MA, or any effect with training on
TFAM mRNA levels. However, the mRNA levels of TFB1M, TFB2M and mTERF were higher 
in EA compared with MA. For TFB1M and TFB2M, the mRNA expression was increased in
the R-leg after 10 days of training, but not in the NR-leg. mTERF mRNA levels
were higher in EA compared with MA.
CONCLUSION: This study further establishes that TFAM protein levels are higher in
conditions with enhanced oxidative capacity. The mRNA levels of TFB1M and TFB2M
are influenced by endurance training, possibly suggesting a role for these
factors in the regulation of exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 19681768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Anim Reprod Sci. 2010 Apr;118(2-4):188-93. doi:
10.1016/j.anireprosci.2009.07.007. Epub 2009 Jul 26.

Transcript expression of mitochondria related genes is correlated with bovine
oocyte selection by BCB test.

Opiela J(1), Lipinski D, Slomski R, Katska-Ksiazkiewicz L.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Animal Production, Department of Biotechnology 
of Animal Reproduction, Krakowska 1 st., 32-083 Balice, Poland.
jopiela@izoo.krakow.pl

This study was conducted in order to determine whether the level of G6PDH
activity in immature bovine oocytes is correlated with the transcript expression 
of the mtDNA replication related genes, POLG, TFAM, NRF1 and mtDNA, encoded COX1 
in immature and mature oocytes. G6PDH activity was assessed by the BCB test.
Transcript level was assessed by real-time PCR. In immature oocytes, significant 
differences were noted in mRNA expression of three out of four of the genes
analysed: TFAM mRNA expression differed (P<0.01) between BCB-, BCB+, and the
control group; COX1 expression differed (P<0.05) between all analysed groups, and
NRF1 transcript levels differed (P<0.01) between BCB- and BCB+, and between BCB- 
and the control group (P<0.05). No significant difference in transcript level of 
POLG gene between the analysed groups was noted. In mature oocytes, a significant
difference (P<0.05) was noted only for mRNA level of TFAM gene between BCB- and
BCB+, and between BCB- and the control group. The results suggest that immature
BCB- oocytes do have significantly lower transcript level of genes involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis, suggesting that this may be one of the reasons for
their low developmental competence compared to BCB+ and control oocytes.
Interestingly, we did not find significant differences in blastocyst rate between
BCB+ and control oocytes. However, excluding BCB- oocytes from procedures relying
on single oocyte can help in increasing the efficacy of the experiment. Our
results showed a correlation between transcript level of mtDNA replication
factors and G6PDH activity assessed by BCB staining in bovine oocytes.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19671488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Chang Gung Med J. 2009 Jul-Aug;32(4):354-69.

Clinical and molecular aspects of diseases of mitochondrial DNA instability.

Mao CC(1), Holt IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Taoyuan, Taiwan. ccm.mao@googlemail.com

Mitochondria within human cells contain vast numbers of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which are small, circular, and double-stranded. The proper functions of 
mtDNA depend totally on specific proteins that are encoded by the nucleus and
then imported into mitochondria. Thus instability of mtDNA can stem from the
mtDNA itself, or secondarily from abnormalities in nuclear DNA. In this review,
we will first introduce mtDNA, including its characteristics, replication,
transcription, translation, and the proteins involved in its metabolism, in
particular DNA polymerase gamma (POLG), DNA helicase Twinkle (Twinkle), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). Secondly, we will stress the
importance of mitochondrial nucleoid structures in the protection and
facilitation of mtDNA metabolism, and report on the few known protein components 
of nucleoid, especially Twinkle, TFAM, and the recently discovered ATAD3. Based
on this information, mtDNA instabilities will be categorized in accordance with
their molecular etiologies, those that are caused by primary defects of mtDNA,
and those by secondary effects from abnormalities in nuclear DNA. The former
includes large defects or point mutations of mtDNA. The latter involves the
nuclear genes of POLG1, Twinkle, ANT1, TK2, dGK, and TP. With the comprehensive
categorization in this review, links are provided between the molecular and
clinical aspects of mitochondrial DNA diseases. This report should help medical
staff understand the complexity of these diseases and encourage them in further
investigations. (

PMID: 19664342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Metab. 2009 Aug;10(2):110-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2009.07.002.

PDX1 deficiency causes mitochondrial dysfunction and defective insulin secretion 
through TFAM suppression.

Gauthier BR(1), Wiederkehr A, Baquié M, Dai C, Powers AC, Kerr-Conte J, Pattou F,
MacDonald RJ, Ferrer J, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland. benoit.gauthier@cabimer.es

Mutations in the transcription factor Pdx1 cause maturity-onset diabetes of the
young 4 (MODY4). Islet transduction with dominant-negative Pdx1 (RIPDN79PDX1)
impairs mitochondrial metabolism and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS).
Transcript profiling revealed suppression of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial factor
A (TFAM). Herein, we show that Pdx1 suppression in adult mice reduces islet TFAM 
expression coinciding with hyperglycemia. We define TFAM as a direct target of
Pdx1 both in rat INS1 cells and human islets. Adenoviral overexpression of TFAM
along with RIPDN79PDX1 in isolated rat islets rescued mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
copy number and restored respiratory chain activity as well as glucose-induced
ATP synthesis and insulin secretion. CGP37157, which blocks the mitochondrial
Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger, restored ATP generation and GSIS in RIPDN79PDX1 islets,
thereby bypassing the transcriptional defect. Thus, the genetic control by the
beta cell-specific factor Pdx1 of the ubiquitous gene TFAM maintains beta cell
mtDNA vital for ATP production and normal GSIS.

PMCID: PMC4012862
PMID: 19656489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;126(6):751-61. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0728-4.

The combined impact of metabolic gene polymorphisms on elite endurance athlete
status and related phenotypes.

Ahmetov II(1), Williams AG, Popov DV, Lyubaeva EV, Hakimullina AM, Fedotovskaya
ON, Mozhayskaya IA, Vinogradova OL, Astratenkova IV, Montgomery HE, Rogozkin VA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Performance, SSC RF Institute for Biomedical Problems of 
the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia. genoterra@mail.ru

Endurance performance is a complex phenotype subject to the influence of both
environmental and genetic factors. Although the last decade has seen a variety of
specific genetic factors proposed, many in metabolic pathways, each is likely to 
make a limited contribution to an 'elite' phenotype: it seems more likely that
such status depends on the simultaneous presence of multiple such variants. The
aim of the study was to investigate individually and in combination the
association of common metabolic gene polymorphisms with endurance athlete status,
the proportion of slow-twitch muscle fibers and maximal oxygen consumption. A
total of 1,423 Russian athletes and 1,132 controls were genotyped for 15 gene
polymorphisms, of which most were previously reported to be associated with
athlete status or related intermediate phenotypes. Muscle fiber composition of m.
vastus lateralis in 45 healthy men was determined by immunohistochemistry.
Maximal oxygen consumption of 50 male rowers of national competitive standard was
determined during an incremental test to exhaustion on a rowing ergometer. Ten
'endurance alleles' (NFATC4 Gly160, PPARA rs4253778 G, PPARD rs2016520 C,
PPARGC1A Gly482, PPARGC1B 203Pro, PPP3R1 promoter 5I, TFAM 12Thr, UCP2 55Val,
UCP3 rs1800849 T and VEGFA rs2010963 C) were first identified showing discrete
associations with elite endurance athlete status. Next, to assess the combined
impact of all 10 gene polymorphisms, all athletes were classified according to
the number of 'endurance' alleles they possessed. The proportion of subjects with
a high (=9) number of 'endurance' alleles was greater in the best endurance
athletes compared with controls (85.7 vs. 37.8%, P = 7.6 × 10(-6)). The number of
'endurance' alleles was shown to be positively correlated (r = 0.50; P = 4.0 ×
10(-4)) with the proportion of fatigue-resistant slow-twitch fibers, and with
maximal oxygen consumption (r = 0.46; P = 7.0 × 10(-4)). These data suggest that 
the likelihood of becoming an elite endurance athlete depends on the carriage of 
a high number of endurance-related alleles.

PMID: 19653005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genes Cells. 2009 Aug;14(8):1029-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01328.x. Epub 
2009 Jul 14.

DNA conformation-dependent activities of human mitochondrial RNA polymerase.

Fukuoh A(1), Ohgaki K, Hatae H, Kuraoka I, Aoki Y, Uchiumi T, Jacobs HT, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT) is a core protein for mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) transcription. In addition, POLRMT is assumed to be involved in
replication, although its exact role is not yet clearly elucidated. We have found
novel properties of human POLRMT using a reconstituted transcription system.
Various lengths of RNA molecules were synthesized from templates even without a
defined promoter sequence, when we used supercoiled circular double-stranded DNA 
as a template. This promoter-independent activity was as strong as the
promoter-dependent one. Promoter-independent DNA conformation-dependent
transcription required TFB2M. On supercoiled templates, the promoter-independent 
activity was strongly suppressed by a putatively physiological amount of TFAM,
while promoter-dependent transcription was inhibited to a lesser extent. These
different inhibition patterns by TFAM may be important for prevention of random
RNA synthesis in vivo. Promoter-independent activity was also observed on relaxed
circular single-stranded DNA, where its activity no longer required TFB2M. RNA
synthesis on single-stranded DNA was weakly suppressed by a putatively
physiological amount of TFAM but restored by the addition of mitochondrial
single-stranded DNA binding protein. We suggest that these properties of POLRMT
could explain the characteristic features of mammalian mtDNA transcription and
replication.

PMID: 19624753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Toxicology. 2009 Oct 1;264(1-2):10-5. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2009.07.003. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Perfluorooctanoic acid stimulated mitochondrial biogenesis and gene transcription
in rats.

Walters MW(1), Bjork JA, Wallace KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Duluth, MN 55812, USA. walt0121@d.umn.edu

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), used in the production of non-stick surface
compounds, exhibits a worldwide distribution in the serum of humans and wildlife.
In rodents PFOA transactivates PPARalpha and PPARgamma nuclear receptors and
increases mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number, which may be critical to the
altered metabolic state of affected animals. A key regulator of mitochondrial
biogenesis and transcription of mitochondrial genes is the PPARgamma
coactivator-1alpha (Pgc-1alpha) protein. The purpose of this study was to
determine if Pgc-1alpha is implicated in the stimulation of mitochondrial
biogenesis that occurs following the treatment of rats with PFOA. Livers from
adult male Sprague-Dawley rats that received a 30 mg/kg daily oral dose of PFOA
for 28 days were used for all experiments. Analysis of mitochondrial replication 
and transcription was performed by real time PCR, and proteins were detected
using western blotting. PFOA treatment caused a transcriptional activation of the
mitochondrial biogenesis pathway leading to a doubling of mtDNA copy number.
Further, transcription of OXPHOS genes encoded by mtDNA was 3-4 times greater
than that of nuclear encoded genes, suggestive of a preferential induction of
mtDNA transcription. Western blot analysis revealed an increase in Pgc-1alpha,
unchanged Tfam and decreased Cox II and Cox IV subunit protein expression. We
conclude that PFOA treatment in rats induces mitochondrial biogenesis at the
transcriptional level with a preferential stimulation of mtDNA transcription and 
that this occurs by way of activation of the Pgc-1alpha pathway. Implication of
the Pgc-1alpha pathway is consistent with PPARgamma transactivation by PFOA and
reveals new understanding and possibly new critical targets for assessing or
averting the associated metabolic disease.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 19616056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Physiol. 2009 Jul 15;587(Pt 14):3427-8. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.175307.

Mitochondrial biogenesis in adipose tissue: can exercise make fat cells 'fit'?

Vieira VJ(1), Valentine RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 
Urbana, IL 61801, USA. vvieira2@illinois.edu

Comment on
    J Physiol. 2009 Apr 1;587(Pt 7):1607-17.

PMCID: PMC2742270
PMID: 19602637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 28;284(35):23602-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.024323. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Transient oxidative stress damages mitochondrial machinery inducing persistent
beta-cell dysfunction.

Li N(1), Brun T, Cnop M, Cunha DA, Eizirik DL, Maechler P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, rue 
Michel-Servet 1, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Transient exposure of beta-cells to oxidative stress interrupts the transduction 
of signals normally coupling glucose metabolism to insulin secretion. We
investigated putative persistence of effects induced by one transient oxidative
stress (200 microm H(2)O(2), 10 min) on insulin secreting cells following
recovery periods of days and weeks. Three days after oxidative stress INS-1E
cells and rat islets exhibited persistent dysfunction. In particular, the
secretory response to 15 mm glucose was reduced by 40% in INS-1E cells stressed 3
days before compared with naïve cells. Compared with non-stressed INS-1E cells,
we observed reduced oxygen consumption (-43%) and impaired glucose-induced ATP
generation (-46%). These parameters correlated with increased mitochondrial
reactive oxygen species formation (+60%) accompanied with down-regulation of
subunits of the respiratory chain and decreased expression of genes responsible
for mitochondrial biogenesis (TFAM, -24%; PGC-1alpha, -67%). Three weeks after
single oxidative stress, both mitochondrial respiration and secretory responses
were recovered. Moreover, such recovered INS-1E cells exhibited partial
resistance to a second transient oxidative stress and up-regulation of UCP2
(+78%) compared with naïve cells. In conclusion, one acute oxidative stress
induces beta-cell dysfunction lasting over days, explained by persistent damages 
in mitochondrial components.

PMCID: PMC2749135
PMID: 19546218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;554:87-101. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-521-3_6.

Methods for assessing binding of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) to
DNA.

Fukuoh A(1), Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.

It is now recognized that mammalian mitochondrial DNA forms a higher structure
called the nucleoid, corresponding to the nucleosome of nuclear DNA.
Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which was cloned as a transcription 
factor for mitochondrial DNA, is essential for the maintenance of mitochondrial
DNA. In fact, TFAM markedly enhances the promoter-specific transcription of
mitochondrial DNA. In addition, TFAM has an ability to bind to DNA in a
sequence-independent manner and is abundant enough to cover an entire region of
mitochondrial DNA. Over-expression of human TFAM in cells increases the amount of
mitochondrial DNA almost in parallel with the TFAM. TFAM may stabilize
mitochondrial DNA by packaging and regulate (or titrate) the amount of
mitochondrial DNA. Thus, TFAM may play a crucial role in maintaining
mitochondrial DNA as a main component of the nucleoid (or more appropriately
mitochromosome).

PMID: 19513669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Methods Mol Biol. 2009;554:3-14. doi: 10.1007/978-1-59745-521-3_1.

Biochemical isolation of mtDNA nucleoids from animal cells.

Bogenhagen DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, University at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, NY, USA.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in animal cells is organized into clusters of 5-7
genomes referred to as nucleoids. Contrary to the notion that mtDNA is largely
free of bound proteins, these structures are nearly as rich in protein as nuclear
chromatin. While the purification of intact, membrane-bound mitochondria is an
established method, relatively few studies have attempted biochemical
purification of mtDNA nucleoids. In this chapter, two alternative methods are
presented for the purification of nucleoids. The first method yields the
so-called native nucleoids, using conditions designed to preserve non-covalent
protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. The second method uses formaldehyde
to crosslink proteins to mtDNA and exposes nucleoids to treatment with harsh
detergents and high salt concentrations.

PMID: 19513664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 Jun;73(6):1262-7. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Linoleic acid promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and maintains mitochondrial
structure for prevention of streptozotocin damage in RIN-m5F cells.

Jeng JY(1), Yeh TS, Chiu YH, Lee YC, Cheng HH, Hsieh RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C.

Linoleic acid (LA) improves insulin resistance and prevents diabetes. To
investigate whether linoleic acid could protect against streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced cell death, rat RIN-m5F cells were exposed to STZ. SL and SO groups
consisted of cells treated with STZ and then LA or oleic acid (OA) respectively. 
STZ treatment decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential in the STZ, SO, and 
SL groups. Cells of the SL group had more intact mitochondria. Increased mRNA
expression of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and nuclear DNA (nDNA), as well as of the
mitochondrial biogenesis regulators peroxisome proliferator activated receptor
gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), and mitochondrial transcription factor A
(Tfam), were found in the LA group. The insulin content was significantly
decreased in all three groups. These results suggest that the effects of LA on
cell viability after STZ damage occur through maintenance of mitochondrial
structure and increased mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 19502730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. FEBS J. 2009 Jul;276(14):3800-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07094.x. Epub 2009
Jun 3.

Overexpression of Tfam protects mitochondria against beta-amyloid-induced
oxidative damage in SH-SY5Y cells.

Xu S(1), Zhong M, Zhang L, Wang Y, Zhou Z, Hao Y, Zhang W, Yang X, Wei A, Pei L, 
Yu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Occupational Health, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing, China.

There is strong evidence that beta-amyloid (Abeta) causes oxidative stress and
induces mitochondrial dysfunction in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease.
Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) has multiple roles in the maintenance
of mtDNA. To study the protective roles of Tfam against amyloid neurotoxicity, we
established SH-SY5Y cell lines stably overexpressing Tfam and exposed them to 10 
microm Abeta1-42 for 24 h. We found that Tfam overexpression attenuated
Abeta1-42-induced cell viability damage and apoptosis. In addition, Tfam
overexpression significantly suppressed the increase in excess reactive oxygen
species and reversed the reduction in cytochrome c oxidase activity and ATP
production induced by Abeta1-42. Furthermore, overexpression of DeltaC-Tfam,
which has no functional domain for stimulating mtDNA transcription but can still 
maintain the mtDNA nucleoid formation and mtDNA copy number, also exhibited
protective effects against Abeta1-42 cytotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells. Together, our
data suggest that Tfam overexpression protects mitochondria against Abeta-induced
oxidative damage in SH-SY5Y cells. These beneficial effects may be attributable
to the roles of Tfam in maintaining mtDNA nucleoid formation and mtDNA copy
number.

PMID: 19496804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):H392-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00164.2009. Epub 2009 May 22.

Carbon monoxide, skeletal muscle oxidative stress, and mitochondrial biogenesis
in humans.

Rhodes MA(1), Carraway MS, Piantadosi CA, Reynolds CM, Cherry AD, Wester TE,
Natoli MJ, Massey EW, Moon RE, Suliman HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Given that the physiology of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) encompasses mitochondrial
biogenesis, we tested the hypothesis that the HO-1 product, carbon monoxide (CO),
activates mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle and enhances maximal oxygen
uptake (Vo(2max)) in humans. In 10 healthy subjects, we biopsied the vastus
lateralis and performed Vo(2max) tests followed by blinded randomization to air
or CO breathing (1 h/day at 100 parts/million for 5 days), a contralateral muscle
biopsy on day 5, and repeat Vo(2max) testing on day 8. Six independent subjects
underwent CO breathing and two muscle biopsies without exercise testing.
Molecular studies were performed by real-time RT-PCR, Western blot analysis, and 
immunochemistry. After Vo(2max) testing plus CO breathing, significant increases 
were found in mRNA levels for nuclear respiratory factor-1, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha, mitochondrial
transcription factor-A (Tfam), and DNA polymerase gamma (Polgamma) with no change
in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number or Vo(2max). Levels of myosin heavy
chain I and nuclear-encoded HO-1, superoxide dismutase-2, citrate synthase,
mitofusin-1 and -2, and mitochondrial-encoded cytochrome oxidase subunit-I
(COX-I) and ATPase-6 proteins increased significantly. None of these responses
were reproduced by Vo(2max) testing alone, whereas CO alone increased Tfam and
Polgamma mRNA, and COX-I, ATPase-6, mitofusin-2, HO-1, and superoxide dismutase
protein. These findings provide evidence linking the HO/CO response involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis in rodents to skeletal muscle in humans through a set of
responses involving regulation of the mtDNA transcriptosome and mitochondrial
fusion proteins autonomously of changes in exercise capacity.

PMCID: PMC2711725
PMID: 19465554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Apoptosis. 2009 Jul;14(7):890-9. doi: 10.1007/s10495-009-0357-3.

Early transcriptional deregulation of hepatic mitochondrial biogenesis and its
consequent effects on murine cholestatic liver injury.

Tiao MM(1), Lin TK, Liou CW, Wang PW, Chen JB, Kuo FY, Huang CC, Chou YM, Chuang 
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Mitochondria are known to be involved in cholestatic liver injury, but the damage
and biogenesis of mitochondria in response to the early stage of cholestasis is
unknown. A rat model of cholestasis was established by bile duct ligation (BDL), 
with simultaneous creation of the sham group receiving laparotomy without BDL. A 
significant decrease of liver peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1alpha, mitochondrial transcriptional factor A (Tfam) and glutathione
peroxidase (GPx) mRNA and Tfam protein from 6 to 72 h after BDL was found, which 
was associated with significant decrease of the glutathione, GPx and catalase
activity at 72 h. At 72 h after BDL, mitochondrial DNA copy number reached the
lowest level, while caspase 9 and 3 activity, but not caspase 8, Bax, Bcl(2), Fas
L and Fas-Fas L complex, were upregulated significantly in the liver homogenates 
of BDL rats. The apoptotic liver cells appeared in large amounts in the rat liver
by 72 h after BDL. Our results indicate that transcriptional regulation of the
mitochondrial biogenesis is impaired within a few hours after complete bile duct 
obstruction, resulting in later mitochondrial dysfunction and consequent
cholestatic liver injury via the intrinsic apoptosis pathway.

PMID: 19462240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mitochondrion. 2009 Jun;9(3):196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2009.01.012. Epub 2009 
Feb 4.

Recombinant mitochondrial transcription factor A with N-terminal mitochondrial
transduction domain increases respiration and mitochondrial gene expression.

Iyer S(1), Thomas RR, Portell FR, Dunham LD, Quigley CK, Bennett JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Neurodegenerative Diseases and The Morris K. Udall
Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence, University of Virginia, PO Box
800394, Charlottesville, VA 22908, United States.

We developed a scalable procedure to produce human mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) modified with an N-terminal protein transduction domain (PTD) and
mitochondrial localization signal (MLS) that allow it to cross membranes and
enter mitochondria through its "mitochondrial transduction domain" (MTD=PTD+MLS).
Alexa488-labeled MTD-TFAM rapidly entered the mitochondrial compartment of cybrid
cells carrying the G11778A LHON mutation. MTD-TFAM reversibly increased
respiration and levels of respiratory proteins. In vivo treatment of mice with
MTD-TFAM increased motor endurance and complex I-driven respiration in
mitochondria from brain and skeletal muscle. MTD-TFAM increases mitochondrial
bioenergetics and holds promise for treatment of mitochondrial diseases involving
deficiencies of energy production.

PMCID: PMC2783715
PMID: 19460293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neurochem Int. 2009 Dec;55(7):496-504. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.05.001. Epub
2009 May 13.

PPARgamma stimulation promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and prevents glucose
deprivation-induced neuronal cell loss.

Miglio G(1), Rosa AC, Rattazzi L, Collino M, Lombardi G, Fantozzi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Pharmacology and Forensic Medicine, University of
Turin, Italy. gianluca.miglio@unito.it

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma stimulation provides
protection in several models of neurological disorders, but the mechanisms
underlying these effects remain to be fully elucidated. Here we have studied
whether two PPARgamma agonists, pioglitazone and rosiglitazone, prevent loss of
differentiated SH-SY5Y cells transiently exposed to glucose deprivation (GD).
Nanomolar drug concentrations prevented GD-induced cell loss in a concentration- 
and time-dependent manner. These effects were abolished by malonate, a reversible
mitochondrial Complex II inhibitor, while significantly potentiated by pyruvate, 
thus suggesting that they are related to mitochondrial function. During cell
pretreatment, PPARgamma agonists promoted biogenesis of functional mitochondria, 
as indicated by the up-regulation of PPARgamma coactivator (PGC)-1alpha, NRF1,
TFAM, cytochrome c oxidase subunit (CO) I and CO IV, and the increased level of
mtDNA, while did not significantly change mitochondrial membrane potential. In
addition, the analysis of the concentration-response and time-course curves for
the protective effects and the up-regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis markers 
suggests that mitochondrial biogenesis and cell loss prevention are related
effects. In conclusion our data indicate that a prolonged PPARgamma stimulation, 
by repeated administration of nanomolar pioglitazone or rosiglitazone
concentrations, decreases GD-induced loss of differentiated SH-SY5Y cells. In
addition, they suggest that mitochondrial biogenesis may contribute to these
effects.

PMID: 19442697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):C217-25. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00070.2009. Epub 2009 May 13.

The role of PGC-1alpha on mitochondrial function and apoptotic susceptibility in 
muscle.

Adhihetty PJ(1), Uguccioni G, Leick L, Hidalgo J, Pilegaard H, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York Univ., Toronto, Ontario, M3J
1P3, Canada.

Mitochondria are critical for cellular bioenergetics, and they mediate apoptosis 
within cells. We used whole body peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) knockout (KO) animals to investigate its role on 
organelle function, apoptotic signaling, and cytochrome-c oxidase activity, an
indicator of mitochondrial content, in muscle and other tissues (brain, liver,
and pancreas). Lack of PGC-1alpha reduced mitochondrial content in all muscles
(17-44%; P < 0.05) but had no effect in brain, liver, and pancreas. However, the 
tissue expression of proteins involved in mitochondrial DNA maintenance
[transcription factor A (Tfam)], import (Tim23), and remodeling [mitofusin 2
(Mfn2) and dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp1)] did not parallel the decrease in
mitochondrial content in PGC-1alpha KO animals. These proteins remained unchanged
or were upregulated (P < 0.05) in the highly oxidative heart, indicating a change
in mitochondrial composition. A change in muscle organelle composition was also
evident from the alterations in subsarcolemmal and intermyofibrillar
mitochondrial respiration, which was impaired in the absence of PGC-1alpha.
However, endurance-trained KO animals did not exhibit reduced mitochondrial
respiration. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production was not
affected by the lack of PGC-1alpha, but subsarcolemmal mitochondria from
PGC-1alpha KO animals released a greater amount of cytochrome c than in WT
animals following exogenous ROS treatment. Our results indicate that the lack of 
PGC-1alpha results in 1) a muscle type-specific suppression of mitochondrial
content that depends on basal oxidative capacity, 2) an alteration in
mitochondrial composition, 3) impaired mitochondrial respiratory function that
can be improved by training, and 4) a greater basal protein release from
subsarcolemmal mitochondria, indicating an enhanced mitochondrial apoptotic
susceptibility.

PMID: 19439529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):18644-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.019976. Epub
2009 May 13.

Chromosome conformation capture of all 13 genomic Loci in the transcriptional
regulation of the multisubunit bigenomic cytochrome C oxidase in neurons.

Dhar SS(1), Ongwijitwat S, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) is the terminal enzyme of the electron transport chain
composed of 13 subunits; three are mitochondria-encoded, and 10 are
nucleus-inscribed on nine different chromosomes within the mammalian genome. The 
transcriptional regulation of such a multisubunit, multichromosomal, and
bigenomic enzyme is mechanistically challenging. Transcription factories have
been proposed as one mechanism by which genes from different genomic loci
congregate to transcribe functionally related genes, and chromosome conformation 
capture (3C) is a means by which such interactions can be revealed. Thus far,
however, only loci from the same chromosome or at most two chromosomes have been 
co-localized by 3C. The present study used 3C to test our hypothesis that not
only the 10 genomic loci from nine chromosomes encoding the 10 nuclear subunits
of COX, but also genes from three chromosomes encoding mitochondrial
transcription factors A and B (Tfam, Tfb1m, and Tfb2m) critical for the
transcription of the three mitochondria-encoded COX subunit genes all occupy
common intranuclear sites in the murine neuronal nuclei. The pairing of various
COX subunit genes and Tf genes indicates that interactions are present among all 
of them. On the other hand, genes for a non-mitochondrial protein (calreticulin) 
as well as a mitochondrial enzyme (citrate synthase) did not interact with COX
genes. Furthermore, interactions between COX subunit and Tf genes were
up-regulated by depolarizing stimulation and down-regulated by impulse blockade
in primary neurons. Thus, a viable mechanism is in place for a synchronized,
coordinated transcriptional regulation of this multisubunit, bigenomic COX enzyme
in neurons.

PMCID: PMC2707239
PMID: 19439416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. PLoS Genet. 2009 May;5(5):e1000474. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000474. Epub 2009 
May 8.

Ancient mtDNA genetic variants modulate mtDNA transcription and replication.

Suissa S(1), Wang Z, Poole J, Wittkopp S, Feder J, Shutt TE, Wallace DC, Shadel
GS, Mishmar D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences and National Institute of Biotechnology (NIBN),
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.

Although the functional consequences of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genetic
backgrounds (haplotypes, haplogroups) have been demonstrated by both disease
association studies and cell culture experiments, it is not clear which of the
mutations within the haplogroup carry functional implications and which are
"evolutionary silent hitchhikers". We set forth to study the functionality of
haplogroup-defining mutations within the mtDNA transcription/replication
regulatory region by in vitro transcription, hypothesizing that
haplogroup-defining mutations occurring within regulatory motifs of mtDNA could
affect these processes. We thus screened >2500 complete human mtDNAs representing
all major populations worldwide for natural variation in experimentally
established protein binding sites and regulatory regions comprising a total of
241 bp in each mtDNA. Our screen revealed 77/241 sites showing point mutations
that could be divided into non-fixed (57/77, 74%) and
haplogroup/sub-haplogroup-defining changes (i.e., population fixed changes,
20/77, 26%). The variant defining Caucasian haplogroup J (C295T) increased the
binding of TFAM (Electro Mobility Shift Assay) and the capacity of in vitro
L-strand transcription, especially of a shorter transcript that maps immediately 
upstream of conserved sequence block 1 (CSB1), a region associated with RNA
priming of mtDNA replication. Consistent with this finding, cybrids (i.e., cells 
sharing the same nuclear genetic background but differing in their mtDNA
backgrounds) harboring haplogroup J mtDNA had a >2 fold increase in mtDNA copy
number, as compared to cybrids containing haplogroup H, with no apparent
differences in steady state levels of mtDNA-encoded transcripts. Hence, a
haplogroup J regulatory region mutation affects mtDNA replication or stability,
which may partially account for the phenotypic impact of this haplogroup. Our
analysis thus demonstrates, for the first time, the functional impact of
particular mtDNA haplogroup-defining control region mutations, paving the path
towards assessing the functionality of both fixed and un-fixed genetic variants
in the mitochondrial genome.

PMCID: PMC2673036
PMID: 19424428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Crit Care Med. 2009 Jun;37(6):2000-9. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181a001ae.

Monocyte activation by necrotic cells is promoted by mitochondrial proteins and
formyl peptide receptors.

Crouser ED(1), Shao G, Julian MW, Macre JE, Shadel GS, Tridandapani S, Huang Q,
Wewers MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Dorothy M
Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University Medical
Center, Columbus, OH, USA. elliott.crouser@osumc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Necrotic cells evoke potent innate immune responses through unclear
mechanisms. The mitochondrial fraction of the cell retains constituents of its
bacterial ancestors, including N-formyl peptides, which are potentially
immunogenic. Thus, we hypothesized that the mitochondrial fraction of the cell,
particularly N-formyl peptides, contributes significantly to the activation of
monocytes by necrotic cells.
DESIGN: Human peripheral blood monocytes were incubated with necrotic cell
fractions and mitochondrial proteins to investigate their potential for immune
cell activation.
SETTING: University Medical Center Research Laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Healthy human adults served as blood donors.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Human blood monocyte activation was measured after
treatment with cytosolic, nuclear and mitochondrial fractions of necrotic HepG2
cells or necrotic HepG2 cells depleted of N-formyl peptides [Rho(0) cells]. The
specific role of the high affinity formyl peptide receptor (FPR) was then tested 
using specific pharmacologic inhibitors and RNA silencing. The capacity of
mitochondrial N-formyl peptides to activate monocytes was confirmed using a
synthetic peptide conforming to the N-terminus of mitochondrial nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide subunit 6. The results demonstrated that mitochondrial cell 
fractions most potently activated monocytes, and interleukin (IL)-8 was
selectively released at low-protein concentrations. Mitochondria from Rho(0)
cells induced minimal monocyte IL-8 release, and specific pharmacologic
inhibitors and RNA-silencing confirmed that FPR contributes significantly to
monocyte IL-8 responses to both necrotic cells and mitochondrial proteins.
N-formyl peptides alone did not induce monocyte IL-8 release; whereas, the
combination of mitochondrial N-formyl peptides and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) dramatically increased IL-8 release from monocytes. Likewise,
high mobility group box 1, the nuclear homolog of TFAM, did not induce monocyte
IL-8 release unless combined with mitochondrial N-formyl peptides.
CONCLUSIONS: Interactions between mitochondrial N-formyl peptides and FPR in the 
presence of other mitochondrial antigens (e.g., TFAM) contributes significantly
to the activation of monocytes by necrotic cells.

PMCID: PMC2743203
PMID: 19384205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hum Gene Ther. 2009 Aug;20(8):897-907. doi: 10.1089/hum.2009.023.

Mitochondrial gene therapy augments mitochondrial physiology in a Parkinson's
disease cell model.

Keeney PM(1), Quigley CK, Dunham LD, Papageorge CM, Iyer S, Thomas RR, Schwarz
KM, Trimmer PA, Khan SM, Portell FR, Bergquist KE, Bennett JP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Morris K. Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence, University 
of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

Neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease (PD) affects mainly dopaminergic neurons
in the substantia nigra, where age-related, increasing percentages of cells lose 
detectable respiratory activity associated with depletion of intact mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA). Replenishment of mtDNA might improve neuronal bioenergetic function 
and prevent further cell death. We developed a technology ("ProtoFection") that
uses recombinant human mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) engineered
with an N-terminal protein transduction domain (PTD) followed by the SOD2
mitochondrial localization signal (MLS) to deliver mtDNA cargo to the
mitochondria of living cells. MTD-TFAM (MTD = PTD + MLS = "mitochondrial
transduction domain") binds mtDNA and rapidly transports it across plasma
membranes to mitochondria. For therapeutic proof-of-principle we tested
ProtoFection technology in Parkinson's disease cybrid cells, using mtDNA
generated from commercially available human genomic DNA (gDNA; Roche). Nine to 11
weeks after single exposures to MTD-TFAM + mtDNA complex, PD cybrid cells with
impaired respiration and reduced mtDNA genes increased their mtDNA gene copy
numbers up to 24-fold, mtDNA-derived RNAs up to 35-fold, TFAM and ETC proteins,
cell respiration, and mitochondrial movement velocities. Cybrid cells with no or 
minimal basal mitochondrial impairments showed reduced or no responses to
treatment, suggesting the possibility of therapeutic selectivity. Exposure of PD 
but not control cybrid cells to MTD-TFAM protein alone or MTD-TFAM + mtDNA
complex increased expression of PGC-1alpha, suggesting activation of
mitochondrial biogenesis. ProtoFection technology for mitochondrial gene therapy 
holds promise for improving bioenergetic function in impaired PD neurons and
needs additional development to define its pharmacodynamics and delineate its
molecular mechanisms. It also is unclear whether single-donor gDNA for generating
mtDNA would be a preferred therapeutic compared with the pooled gDNA used in this
study.

PMCID: PMC2829286
PMID: 19374590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 May;1787(5):296-302. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2009.01.018. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

MTERF2 is a nucleoid component in mammalian mitochondria.

Pellegrini M(1), Asin-Cayuela J, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Larsson NG,
Gustafsson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska Institutet, SE-141 86 Stockholm,
Sweden.

The mammalian MTERF family of proteins has four members, named MTERF1 to MTERF4, 
which were identified in homology searches using the mitochondrial transcription 
termination factor, mTERF (here denoted MTERF1) as query. MTERF1 and MTERF3 are
known to participate in the control of mitochondrial DNA transcription, but the
function of the other two proteins is not known. We here investigate the
structure and function of MTERF2. Protein import experiments using isolated
organelles confirm that MTERF2 is a mitochondrial protein. Edman degradation of
MTERF2 isolated from stably transfected HeLa cells demonstrates that mature
MTERF2 lacks a targeting peptide (amino acids 1-35) present in the precursor form
of the protein. MTERF2 is a monomer in isolation and displays a non
sequence-specific DNA-binding activity. In vivo quantification experiments
demonstrate that MTERF2 is relatively abundant, with one monomer present per
approximately 265 bp of mtDNA. In comparison, the mtDNA packaging factor TFAM is 
present at a ratio of one molecule per approximately 10-12 bp of mtDNA. Using
formaldehyde cross-linking we demonstrate that MTERF2 is present in nucleoids,
and therefore must be located in close proximity to mtDNA. Taken together, our
work provides a basic biochemical characterization of MTERF2, paving the way for 
future functional studies.

PMID: 19366608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jun;37(10):3153-64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp157. Epub 2009
Mar 20.

Structural analysis and DNA binding of the HMG domains of the human mitochondrial
transcription factor A.

Gangelhoff TA(1), Mungalachetty PS, Nix JC, Churchill ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Denver, School of Medicine,
12801 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045-0511, USA.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) is central to assembly and
initiation of the mitochondrial transcription complex. Human mtTFA (h-mtTFA) is a
dual high mobility group box (HMGB) protein that binds site-specifically to the
mitochondrial genome and demarcates the promoters for recruitment of h-mtTFB1,
h-mtTFB2 and the mitochondrial RNA polymerase. The stoichiometry of h-mtTFA was
found to be a monomer in the absence of DNA, whereas it formed a dimer in the
complex with the light strand promoter (LSP) DNA. Each of the HMG boxes and the
C-terminal tail were evaluated for their ability to bind to the LSP DNA. Removal 
of the C-terminal tail only slightly decreased nonsequence specific DNA binding, 
and box A, but not box B, was capable of binding to the LSP DNA. The X-ray
crystal structure of h-mtTFA box B, at 1.35 A resolution, revealed the features
of a noncanonical HMG box. Interactions of box B with other regions of h-mtTFA
were observed. Together, these results provide an explanation for the unusual
DNA-binding properties of box B and suggest possible roles for this domain in
transcription complex assembly.

PMCID: PMC2691818
PMID: 19304746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2008 Dec;59 Suppl 7:5-18.

Regulation by exercise of skeletal muscle content of mitochondria and GLUT4.

Holloszy JO(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Nutritional Sciences, Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.
jhollosz@dom.wustl.edu

Endurance exercise-training results in an increase in the size and number of
mitochondria in the skeletal muscles that are involved in the exercise. In early 
studies of this phenomenon, long-term training programs of progressively
increasing intensity and duration were used. These studies gave the impression
that the adaptive increase in mitochondria is a slow process. Recent advances in 
the understanding of how mitochondrial biogenesis is regulated, have made it
possible to study the mechanisms by which exercise regulates mitochondrial
biogenesis. These studies have shown that a single bout of exercise induces a
rapid increase in mitochondrial biogenesis that is mediated both by activation
and by increased expression of a transcription coactivator, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha). PGC-1alpha
docks on and coactivates transcription factors that regulate expression of
nuclear genes that encode mitochondrial proteins and also of the nuclear gene
that encodes mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). TFAM regulates
mitochondrial DNA transcription. Thus, PGC-1alpha regulates the coordinated
expression of mitochondrial proteins encoded in both nuclear and mitochondrial
genes. In addition to an increase in mitochondrial biogenesis, exercise induces
an increase in the GLUT4 isoform of the glucose transporter. This increase in
GLUT4 occurs in parallel with, and is mediated by, the same signals and some of
the same transcription factors as the increase in mitochondrial biogenesis. Two
signals generated during exercise, the increase in cytosolic Ca(2+) and the
decrease in high energy phosphates, mediate the activation and increased
expression of PGC-1alpha. The purpose of this article is to present an overview
of what is known regarding these phenomena.

PMID: 19258654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Exp Cell Res. 2009 May 1;315(8):1429-38. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.02.018. Epub
2009 Mar 3.

Altered gene transcription profiles in fibroblasts harboring either TK2 or DGUOK 
mutations indicate compensatory mechanisms.

Villarroya J(1), de Bolós C, Meseguer A, Hirano M, Vilà MR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Investigacions en Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular (CIBBIM), Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Institut de Recerca, Plta 1 Lab 117, Pg. Vall
d'Hebron, 119-129, 08035 Barcelona, Spain. joanvillarroya@gmail.com

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) depletion syndrome (MDS) is an autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by a reduced amount of mtDNA, which impairs synthesis of
respiratory chain complexes. MDS has been classified into two main groups, the
hepatocerebral form affecting liver and the central nervous system, and the
myopathic form targeting the skeletal muscle. We have compared the molecular
genetic characteristics of fibroblasts derived from two patients harboring TK2
mutations with two harboring mutations in DGUOK gene. Real-time PCR revealed
mtDNA depletion in dGK-deficient fibroblasts (dGK-) but not in TK2-deficient
cells (TK2-). Real-time RT-PCR and western blotting demonstrated significant
differences in the expression of the human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1
(hENT1) at the mRNA and protein levels. hENT1 transcript and protein were
increased in quiescent control and TK2- fibroblasts relative to cycling cells. In
contrast, hENT1 was stable in quiescent and cycling dGK- cells. Moreover, siRNA
down-regulation of hENT1, but not of TK1, induced mtDNA depletion in TK2-
fibroblasts indicating that hENT1 contributes to the maintenance of normal mtDNA 
levels in cells lacking TK2. Transcripts for thymidine phosphorylase, the
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), and the polymerase gamma (Pol
gamma), were reduced in dGK-, but not in TK2- cells while the mRNA expression of 
thymidylate synthase (TS) increased. Our results suggested differential gene
expression in TK2 and dGK-deficient fibroblasts, and highlighted the importance
of hENT1 as a compensatory factor in MDS disorder.

PMID: 19265691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Physiol. 2009 Apr 1;587(Pt 7):1607-17. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2008.165464. Epub 
2009 Feb 16.

Exercise and adrenaline increase PGC-1{alpha} mRNA expression in rat adipose
tissue.

Sutherland LN(1), Bomhof MR, Capozzi LC, Basaraba SA, Wright DC.

Author information: 
(1)Alberta Diabetes Institute, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2009 Jul 15;587(Pt 14):3427-8.

The purpose of the present investigation was to explore the effects of exercise
and adrenaline on the mRNA expression of PGC-1alpha, a master regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis, in rat abdominal adipose tissue. We hypothesized that
(1) exercise training would increase PGC-1alpha mRNA expression in association
with increases in mitochondrial marker enzymes, (2) adrenaline would increase
PGC-1alpha mRNA expression and (3) the effect of exercise on PGC-1alpha mRNA
expression in white adipose tissue would be attenuated by a beta-blocker. Two
hours of daily swim training for 4 weeks led to increases in mitochondrial marker
proteins and PGC-1alpha mRNA expression in epididymal and retroperitoneal fat
depots. Additionally, a single 2 h bout of exercise led to increases in
PGC-1alpha mRNA expression immediately following exercise cessation. Adrenaline
treatment of adipose tissue organ cultures led to dose-dependent increases in
PGC-1alpha mRNA expression. A supra-physiological concentration of adrenaline
increased PGC-1alpha mRNA expression in epididymal but not retroperitoneal
adipose tissue. beta-Blockade attenuated the effects of an acute bout of exercise
on PGC-1alpha mRNA expression in epididymal but not retroperitoneal fat pads. In 
summary, this is the first investigation to demonstrate that exercise training,
an acute bout of exercise and adrenaline all increase PGC-1alpha mRNA expression 
in rat white adipose tissue. Furthermore it would appear that increases in
circulating catecholamine levels may be one potential mechanism mediating
exercise induced increases in PGC-1alpha mRNA expression in rat abdominal adipose
tissue.

PMCID: PMC2678229
PMID: 19221126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Reproduction. 2009 Apr;137(4):679-87. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0405. Epub 2009 Jan 19.

Effects of oviductal fluid on the development, quality, and gene expression of
porcine blastocysts produced in vitro.

Lloyd RE(1), Romar R, Matás C, Gutiérrez-Adán A, Holt WV, Coy P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, Regent's Park, London, UK.

In mammals, fertilization and early pre-implantation development occur in the
oviduct. Previous results obtained in our laboratory have identified specific
molecules in the oviduct that affect porcine sperm-egg interactions. The aim of
the present study was to determine whether the contact between oocytes and
oviductal fluid also affect embryo development, quality, and gene expression. In 
vitro matured porcine oocytes were exposed to bovine oviductal fluid (bOF) for 30
min prior to fertilization. Cleavage and blastocyst development rates were
significantly higher from bOF-treated oocytes than from untreated oocytes.
Blastocysts obtained from bOF-treated oocytes had significantly greater total
cell numbers than those obtained from untreated oocytes. Using real-time PCR,
grade 1 (very good morphological quality) and grade 2 (good morphological
quality) blastocysts were analyzed for gene transcripts related to apoptosis
(BAX, BCL2L1), mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription/replication (POLG, POLG2, 
and TFAM), blastomere connection and morula compaction (GJA1), and blastocyst
formation and pluripotency (POU5F1). We found that the entire set of genes
analyzed was differentially expressed between grade 1 and 2 blastocysts.
Furthermore, bOF treatment reduced the ratio of BAX to BCL2L1 transcripts and
enhanced the abundance of TFAM transcripts in grade 2 blastocysts. Not only do
these findings demonstrate that factors within the bOF act on porcine oocytes
both quickly and positively, but they also suggest that such factors could
promote embryo development and quality by protecting them against adverse impacts
on mtDNA transcription/replication and apoptosis induced by the culture
environment.

PMID: 19153191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 May;17(5):1032-9. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.605. Epub
2009 Jan 15.

Maternal pregestational BMI is associated with methylation of the PPARGC1A
promoter in newborns.

Gemma C(1), Sookoian S, Alvariñas J, García SI, Quintana L, Kanevsky D, González 
CD, Pirola CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Biology of Complex Diseases Department, Institute of
Medical Research, A. Lanari, University of Buenos Aires-CONICET, Ciudad Autónoma 
de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

We explored peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator 1alpha 
gene (PPARGC1A), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma gene (PPARG),
and transcription factor A mitochondrial gene (Tfam) promoter DNA methylation in 
newborns between both extremes of abnormal fetal growth: Small (SGA) and large
for gestational age (LGA) in relation to the mother's characteristics. We further
sought for the association of rs9930506 variant at FTO gene and the promoter
patterns of DNA methylation in the aforementioned genes, in relation to the
offspring's birth weight. In a cross-sectional study, 88 healthy pregnant women
and their babies were included. According to the offspring birth weight, there
were 57 newborns with appropriate weight for gestational age (AGA), 17 SGA, and
14 LGA. After bisulphite treatment of umbilical cord genomic DNA, a real-time
methylation-specific PCR was used to determine the promoter methylation status in
selected CpGs. Promoter methylated DNA/unmethylated DNA ratio, expressed as mean 
+/- s.e., was 0.82 +/- 0.15 (45% of alleles) for PPARGC1A, and 0.0044 +/- 0.0006 
(0.4% of alleles) for Tfam. PPARG promoter was almost 100% methylated in all
samples. In univariate analysis, there was no association among characteristics
of the newborn and gene promoter methylation. None of the maternal features were 
related with the status of promoter methylation, except for a positive
correlation between maternal BMI and PPARGC1A promoter methylation in umbilical
cord (Pearson correlation coefficient r = 0.41, P = 0.0007). Finally, FTO
rs9930506 AA homozygous in the LGA group showed decreased levels of methylated
PPARGC1A in comparison with AG + GG genotypes and AGA and SGA infants. In
conclusion, our findings suggest a potential role of promoter PPARGC1A
methylation in metabolic programming.

PMID: 19148128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Dis Markers. 2008;25(3):131-9.

Mitochondrial transcription factors TFA, TFB1 and TFB2: a search for DNA
variants/haplotypes and the risk of cardiac hypertrophy.

Alonso-Montes C(1), Castro MG, Reguero JR, Perrot A, Ozcelik C, Geier C, Posch
MG, Morís C, Alvarez V, Ruiz-Ortega M, Coto E.

Author information: 
(1)Genética Molecular, Hospital Central Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.

Mitochondrial transcription factors mtTFA, mtTFB1 and mtTFB2 are required for the
replication of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), regulating the number of mtDNA copies. 
Mice with a mtTFA deletion showed a reduced number of mtDNA copies, a reduction
in respiratory chain activity, and a characteristic dilated cardiomyopathy. DNA
variants in these genes could be involved in the risk for cardiac hypertrophy
(HCM). We determined the variation in the TFAM, TFB1M, and TFB2M genes (using
SSCA, DHPLC, and direct sequencing) in a total of 200 HCM-patients from Spain and
Germany, and in 250 healthy controls. We found several common polymorphisms that 
defined haplotype blocks in these genes, with frequencies that did not differ
between patients and controls. We also found four novel variants in patients
which were absent in the controls: -91 C > A (5'-UTR) and Ala105 > Thr in TFAM,
and Thr211 > Ala and Arg256 > Lys in TFB1M. The three missense changes were in
highly conserved amino acids, and could be involved in HCM-risk. In conclusion,
common variants in the mitochondrial transcription factors were not associated
with the risk for HCM. However, rare DNA variants (putative mutations) could be
involved in the pathogenesis of HCM in a reduced number of cases.

PMCID: PMC3827797
PMID: 19096125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 30;379(1):43-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.141. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

TZDs reduce mitochondrial ROS production and enhance mitochondrial biogenesis.

Fujisawa K(1), Nishikawa T, Kukidome D, Imoto K, Yamashiro T, Motoshima H,
Matsumura T, Araki E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Although it has been reported that thiazolidinediones (TZDs) may reduce
cardiovascular events in type 2 diabetic patients, its precise mechanism is
unclear. We previously demonstrated that hyperglycemia-induced production of
reactive oxygen species from mitochondria (mtROS) contributed to the development 
of diabetic complications, and metformin normalized mt ROS production by
induction of MnSOD and promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis by activating the
PGC-1alpha pathway. In this study, we examined whether TZDs could inhibit
hyperglycemia-induced mtROS production by activating the PGC-1alpha pathway. We
revealed that pioglitazone and ciglitazone attenuated hyperglycemia-induced ROS
production in human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). Both TZDs
increased the expression of NRF-1, TFAM and MnSOD mRNA. Moreover, pioglitazone
increased mtDNA and mitochondrial density. These results suggest that TZDs
normalize hyperglycemia-induced mtROS production by induction of MnSOD and
promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis by activating PGC-1alpha. This phenomenon
could contribute to the prevention of diabetic vascular complications.

PMID: 19084501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009 Feb 1;234(3):326-38. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.11.004. Epub 2008 Nov 20.

Prolonged ethanol administration depletes mitochondrial DNA in
MnSOD-overexpressing transgenic mice, but not in their wild type littermates.

Larosche I(1), Choumar A, Fromenty B, Lettéron P, Abbey-Toby A, Van Remmen H,
Epstein CJ, Richardson A, Feldmann G, Pessayre D, Mansouri A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U773, Centre de Recherche Biomédicale Bichat Beaujon (CRB3), Equipe
Mitochondries et Foie, F75018, Paris, France.

Alcohol consumption increases reactive oxygen species formation and lipid
peroxidation, whose products can damage mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and alter
mitochondrial function. A possible role of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD)
on these effects has not been investigated. To test whether MnSOD overexpression 
modulates alcohol-induced mitochondrial alterations, we added ethanol to the
drinking water of transgenic MnSOD-overexpressing (TgMnSOD) mice and their wild
type (WT) littermates for 7 weeks. In TgMnSOD mice, alcohol administration
further increased the activity of MnSOD, but decreased cytosolic glutathione as
well as cytosolic glutathione peroxidase activity and peroxisomal catalase
activity. Whereas ethanol increased cytochrome P-450 2E1 and mitochondrial ROS
generation in both WT and TgMnSOD mice, hepatic iron, lipid peroxidation products
and respiratory complex I protein carbonyls were only increased in
ethanol-treated TgMnSOD mice but not in WT mice. In ethanol-fed TgMnSOD mice, but
not ethanol-fed WT mice, mtDNA was depleted, and mtDNA lesions blocked the
progress of polymerases. The iron chelator, DFO prevented hepatic iron
accumulation, lipid peroxidation, protein carbonyl formation and mtDNA depletion 
in alcohol-treated TgMnSOD mice. Alcohol markedly decreased the activities of
complexes I, IV and V of the respiratory chain in TgMnSOD, with absent or lesser 
effects in WT mice. There was no inflammation, apoptosis or necrosis, and
steatosis was similar in ethanol-treated WT and TgMnSOD mice. In conclusion,
prolonged alcohol administration selectively triggers iron accumulation, lipid
peroxidation, respiratory complex I protein carbonylation, mtDNA lesions blocking
the progress of polymerases, mtDNA depletion and respiratory complex dysfunction 
in TgMnSOD mice but not in WT mice.

PMID: 19063909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Dec;295(6):C1561-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00076.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

Alterations in mitochondrial function and cytosolic calcium induced by
hyperglycemia are restored by mitochondrial transcription factor A in
cardiomyocytes.

Suarez J(1), Hu Y, Makino A, Fricovsky E, Wang H, Dillmann WH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0618,
USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is essential for mitochondrial DNA
transcription and replication. TFAM transcriptional activity is decreased in
diabetic cardiomyopathy; however, the functional implications are unknown. We
hypothesized that a reduced TFAM activity may be responsible for some of the
alterations caused by hyperglycemia. Therefore, we investigated the effect of
TFAM overexpression on hyperglycemia-induced cytosolic calcium handling and
mitochondrial abnormalities. Neonatal rat cardiomyocytes were exposed to high
glucose (30 mM) for 48 h, and we examined whether TFAM overexpression, by
protecting mitochondrial DNA, could reestablish calcium fluxes and mitochondrial 
alterations toward normal. Our results shown that TFAM overexpression increased
to more than twofold mitochondria copy number in cells treated either with normal
(5.5 mM) or high glucose. ATP content was reduced by 30% and mitochondrial
calcium decreased by 40% after high glucose. TFAM overexpression returned these
parameters to even higher than control values. Calcium transients were prolonged 
by 70% after high glucose, which was associated with diminished
sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 2a and cytochrome-c oxidase subunit 1 
expression. These parameters were returned to control values after TFAM
overexpression. High glucose-induced protein oxidation was reduced by TFAM
overexpression, indicating a reduction of the high glucose-induced oxidative
stress. In addition, we found that TFAM activity can be modulated by O-linked
beta-N-acetylglucosamine glycosylation. In conclusion, TFAM overexpression
protected cell function against the damage induced by high glucose in
cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC2603561
PMID: 19060297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Clin Nutr. 2009 Jan;89(1):455S-62S. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.2008.26717B. Epub 2008
Dec 3.

Regulation of skeletal muscle mitochondrial fatty acid metabolism in lean and
obese individuals.

Holloway GP(1), Bonen A, Spriet LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph,
Guelph, ON, Canada.

A reduction in fatty acid (FA) oxidation has been associated with lipid
accumulation and insulin resistance in skeletal muscle of obese individuals.
Numerous reports suggest that the reduction in FA oxidation may result from
intrinsic mitochondrial defects, although little direct evidence has been offered
to support this conclusion. This brief review summarizes recent work from our
laboratory that reexamined whether this decrease in skeletal muscle FA oxidation 
with obesity was attributable to a dysfunction in FA oxidation within
mitochondria or simply to a reduction in muscle mitochondrial content.
Whole-muscle mitochondrial content and FA oxidation was reduced in the obese, but
there was no decrease in the ability of isolated mitochondria to oxidize FA. The 
mitochondrial content of the transport protein, FA translocase (FAT/CD36), did
not differ between lean and obese women but was correlated with mitochondrial FA 
oxidation. It was concluded that the reduced FA oxidation in obesity is
attributable to decreased muscle mitochondrial content and not intrinsic defects 
in mitochondrial FA oxidation, and that mitochondrial FAT/CD36 is involved in
regulating FA oxidation in human skeletal muscle. The reduced skeletal muscle
mitochondrial content with obesity may result from impaired mitochondrial
biogenesis. However, this did not result from decreased protein contents of
various transcription factors, because peroxisome proliferater-activated receptor
gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC1alpha), PGC1beta, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha (PPARalpha), and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) were 
not reduced with obesity. In contrast, it appears that obesity is associated with
altered regulation of cofactors (PGC1alpha and PGC1beta) and their downstream
transcription factors (PPARalpha, PPARdelta/beta, and TFAM), because relations
among these variables were present in muscle from lean individuals but not from
obese individuals. These findings imply that obese individuals would benefit from
interventions that increase the skeletal muscle mitochondrial content and the
potential for oxidizing FAs.

PMID: 19056573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2009 Feb;296(2):C355-62. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00415.2007. Epub 2008 Nov 26.

Effect of thyroid hormone on mitochondrial properties and oxidative stress in
cells from patients with mtDNA defects.

Menzies KJ(1), Robinson BH, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, Farqhuarson Life Science Bldg., Rm. 
302, York Univ., Toronto, ON M3JIP3, Canada.

Mitochondrial (mt)DNA mutations contribute to various disease states
characterized by low ATP production. In contrast, thyroid hormone
[3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T(3))] induces mitochondrial biogenesis and enhances
ATP generation within cells. To evaluate the role of T(3)-mediated mitochondrial 
biogenesis in patients with mtDNA mutations, three fibroblast cell lines with
mtDNA mutations were evaluated, including two patients with Leigh's syndrome and 
one with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Compared with control cells, patient
fibroblasts displayed similar levels of mitochondrial mass, peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha),
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), and uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2)
protein expression. However, patient cells exhibited a 1.6-fold elevation in ROS 
production, a 1.7-fold elevation in cytoplasmic Ca2+ levels, a 1.2-fold elevation
in mitochondrial membrane potential, and 30% less complex V activity compared
with control cells. Patient cells also displayed 20-25% reductions in both
cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity and MnSOD protein levels compared with
control cells. After T(3) treatment of patient cells, ROS production was
decreased by 40%, cytoplasmic Ca2+ was reduced by 20%, COX activity was increased
by 1.3-fold, and ATP levels were elevated by 1.6-fold, despite the absence of a
change in mitochondrial mass. There were no significant alterations in the
protein expression of PGC-1alpha, Tfam, or UCP2 in either T(3)-treated patient or
control cells. However, T(3) restored the mitochondrial membrane potential,
complex V activity, and levels of MnSOD to normal values in patient cells and
elevated MnSOD levels by 21% in control cells. These results suggest that T(3)
acts to reduce cellular oxidative stress, which may help attenuate ROS-mediated
damage, along with improving mitochondrial function and energy status in cells
with mtDNA defects.

PMID: 19036942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003686. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Dysregulation of mitochondrial dynamics and the muscle transcriptome in ICU
patients suffering from sepsis induced multiple organ failure.

Fredriksson K(1), Tjäder I, Keller P, Petrovic N, Ahlman B, Schéele C, Wernerman 
J, Timmons JA, Rooyackers O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care, Karolinska Institute,
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS ONE. 2008;3(12)doi:
10.1371/annotation/68d951f9-a236-472f-98af-24e4cc4c1a20..

BACKGROUND: Septic patients treated in the intensive care unit (ICU) often
develop multiple organ failure including persistent skeletal muscle dysfunction
which results in the patient's protracted recovery process. We have demonstrated 
that muscle mitochondrial enzyme activities are impaired in septic ICU patients
impairing cellular energy balance, which will interfere with muscle function and 
metabolism. Here we use detailed phenotyping and genomics to elucidate mechanisms
leading to these impairments and the molecular consequences.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Utilising biopsy material from seventeen patients
and ten age-matched controls we demonstrate that neither mitochondrial in vivo
protein synthesis nor expression of mitochondrial genes are compromised. Indeed, 
there was partial activation of the mitochondrial biogenesis pathway involving
NRF2alpha/GABP and its target genes TFAM, TFB1M and TFB2M yet clearly this failed
to maintain mitochondrial function. We therefore utilised transcript profiling
and pathway analysis of ICU patient skeletal muscle to generate insight into the 
molecular defects driving loss of muscle function and metabolic homeostasis. Gene
ontology analysis of Affymetrix analysis demonstrated substantial loss of muscle 
specific genes, a global oxidative stress response related to most probably
cytokine signalling, altered insulin related signalling and a substantial overlap
between patients and muscle wasting/inflammatory animal models. MicroRNA 21
processing appeared defective suggesting that post-transcriptional protein
synthesis regulation is altered by disruption of tissue microRNA expression.
Finally, we were able to demonstrate that the phenotype of skeletal muscle in ICU
patients is not merely one of inactivity, it appears to be an actively
remodelling tissue, influenced by several mediators, all of which may be open to 
manipulation with the aim to improve clinical outcome.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This first combined protein and transcriptome based
analysis of human skeletal muscle obtained from septic patients demonstrated that
losses of mitochondria and muscle mass are accompanied by sustained protein
synthesis (anabolic process) while dysregulation of transcription programmes
appears to fail to compensate for increased damage and proteolysis. Our analysis 
identified both validated and novel clinically tractable targets to manipulate
these failing processes and pursuit of these could lead to new potential
treatments.

PMCID: PMC2579334
PMID: 18997871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2009 Jul;15(6):468-70. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.09.004. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Mutational screening of the mitochondrial transcription factors B1 and B2 (TFB1M 
and TFB2M) in Parkinson's disease.

Sánchez-Ferrero E(1), Coto E, Blázquez M, Ribacoba R, Guisasola LM, Salvador C,
Alvarez V.

Author information: 
(1)Genética Molecular, Hospital Central de Asturias, 33006 Oviedo, Spain.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD). The
nuclear encoded transcription factors A, B1 and B2 are essential for
mitochondrial DNA replication. Sequence variants at the genes encoding TFAM,
TFB1M and TFB2M could contribute to the risk of developing PD. Here, we searched 
for TFB1M and TFB2M nucleotide variants in a cohort of PD-patients (n=300) and
healthy controls (n=200) from Spain. Single strand conformation analysis and
direct sequencing were used to determine the variation at all the coding exons of
the two genes. In addition to previously reported polymorphisms, we found several
rare variants in patients and controls. Allele frequencies for all the nucleotide
changes did not differ between patients and controls. Our work suggests that DNA 
variants in TFB1M and TFB2M did not contribute to the risk for PD in our
population.

PMID: 18980857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jan 15;18(2):278-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn355. Epub 2008 Oct
22.

Increased mitochondrial Ca2+ and decreased sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ in
mitochondrial myopathy.

Aydin J(1), Andersson DC, Hänninen SL, Wredenberg A, Tavi P, Park CB, Larsson NG,
Bruton JD, Westerblad H.

Author information: 
(1)Present address: Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Gleueler Str.
50a, Cologne, Germany.

Genetic mutations that affect mitochondrial function often cause skeletal muscle 
dysfunction. Here, we used mice with skeletal-muscle-specific disruption of the
nuclear gene for mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) to study whether
changes in cellular Ca(2+) handling is part of the mechanism of muscle
dysfunction in mitochondrial myopathy. Force measurements were combined with
measurements of cytosolic Ca(2+), mitochondrial Ca(2+) and membrane potential and
reactive oxygen species in intact, adult muscle fibres. The results show reduced 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) storage capacity in Tfam KO muscles due to a
decreased expression of calsequestrin-1. This resulted in decreased SR Ca(2+)
release during contraction and hence lower force production in Tfam KO than in
control muscles. Additionally, there were no signs of oxidative stress in Tfam KO
cells, whereas they displayed increased mitochondrial [Ca(2+)] during repeated
contractions. Mitochondrial [Ca(2+)] remained elevated long after the end of
stimulation in muscle cells from terminally ill Tfam KO mice, and the increase
was smaller in the presence of the cyclophilin D-binding inhibitor cyclosporin A.
The mitochondrial membrane potential in Tfam KO cells did not decrease during
repeated contractions. In conclusion, we suggest that the observed changes in
Ca(2+) handling are adaptive responses with long-term detrimental effects.
Reduced SR Ca(2+) release likely decreases ATP expenditure, but it also induces
muscle weakness. Increased [Ca(2+)](mit) will stimulate mitochondrial metabolism 
acutely but may also trigger cell damage.

PMID: 18945718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cardiovasc Res. 2009 Feb 15;81(3):449-56. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvn280. Epub 2008 Oct 
14.

Mitochondrial oxidative stress and dysfunction in myocardial remodelling.

Tsutsui H(1), Kinugawa S, Matsushima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.
htsutsui@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Recent experimental and clinical studies have suggested that oxidative stress is 
enhanced in myocardial remodelling and failure. The production of oxygen radicals
is increased in the failing heart, whereas normal antioxidant enzyme activities
are preserved. Mitochondrial electron transport is an enzymatic source of oxygen 
radical generation and can be a therapeutic target against oxidant-induced damage
in the failing myocardium. Chronic increases in oxygen radical production in the 
mitochondria can lead to a catastrophic cycle of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage
as well as functional decline, further oxygen radical generation, and cellular
injury. Reactive oxygen species induce myocyte hypertrophy, apoptosis, and
interstitial fibrosis by activating matrix metalloproteinases. These cellular
events play an important role in the development and progression of maladaptive
myocardial remodelling and failure. Therefore, oxidative stress and mtDNA damage 
are good therapeutic targets. Overexpression of the genes for peroxiredoxin-3
(Prx-3), a mitochondrial antioxidant, or mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), could ameliorate the decline in mtDNA copy number in failing hearts.
Consistent with alterations in mtDNA, the decrease in mitochondrial function was 
also prevented. Therefore, the activation of Prx-3 or TFAM gene expression could 
ameliorate the pathophysiological processes seen in mitochondrial dysfunction and
myocardial remodelling. Inhibition of oxidative stress and mtDNA damage could be 
novel and effective treatment strategies for heart failure.

PMID: 18854381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Methods. 2008 Dec;46(4):241-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2008.09.008. Epub 2008 Oct
10.

Mouse models of oxidative phosphorylation dysfunction and disease.

Vempati UD(1), Torraco A, Moraes CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami, USA.

Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) deficiency results in a number of human
diseases, affecting at least one in 5000 of the general population. Altering the 
function of genes by mutations are central to our understanding their function.
Prior to the development of gene targeting, this approach was limited to rare
spontaneous mutations that resulted in a phenotype. Since its discovery, targeted
mutagenesis of the mouse germline has proved to be a powerful approach to
understand the in vivo function of genes. Gene targeting has yielded remarkable
understanding of the role of several gene products in the OXPHOS system. We
provide a "tool box" of mouse models with OXPHOS defects that could be used to
answer diverse scientific questions.

PMCID: PMC2652743
PMID: 18848991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Dec 15;105(6):1342-51. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21936.

Estrogenic control of mitochondrial function and biogenesis.

Klinge CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Center for Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville,
Kentucky 40292, USA. carolyn.klinge@louisville.edu

Estrogens have cell-specific effects on a variety of physiological endpoints
including regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and activity. Estrogens regulate
gene transcription by the classical genomic mechanism of binding to estrogen
receptors alpha and beta (ERalpha and ERbeta) as well as the more recently
described nongenomic pathways involving plasma membrane-associated ERs that
activate intracellular protein kinase-mediated phosphorylation signaling
cascades. Here I will review the rapid and longer-term effects of estrogen on
mitochondrial function. The identification of ERalpha and ERbeta within
mitochondria of various cells and tissues is discussed with a model of estrogen
regulation of the transcription of nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1, NRF1).
NRF-1 subsequently promotes transcription of mitochondrial transcription factor
Tfam (mtDNA maintenance factor, also called mtTFA) and then Tfam targets
mtDNA-encoded genes. The nuclear effects of estrogens on gene expression directly
controlling mitochondrial biogenesis, oxygen consumption, mtDNA transcription,
and apoptosis are reviewed. Overall, we are just beginning to evaluate the many
direct and indirect effects of estrogens on mitochondrial activities.

PMCID: PMC2593138
PMID: 18846505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 19;283(51):35724-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805078200. Epub 2008
Oct 6.

Gain-of-function R225Q mutation in AMP-activated protein kinase gamma3 subunit
increases mitochondrial biogenesis in glycolytic skeletal muscle.

Garcia-Roves PM(1), Osler ME, Holmström MH, Zierath JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Section Integrative Physiology, 
Karolinska Institutet, von Eulers Väg 4, 4th Floor, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a heterotrimeric complex, composed of a
catalytic subunit (alpha) and two regulatory subunits (beta and gamma), that
works as a cellular energy sensor. The existence of multiple heterotrimeric
complexes provides a molecular basis for the multiple roles of this highly
conserved signaling system. The AMPK gamma3 subunit is predominantly expressed in
skeletal muscle, mostly in type II glycolytic fiber types. We determined whether 
the AMPK gamma3 subunit has a role in signaling pathways that mediate
mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle. We provide evidence that
overexpression or ablation of the AMPK gamma3 subunit does not appear to play a
critical role in defining mitochondrial content in resting skeletal muscle.
However, overexpression of a mutant form (R225Q) of the AMPK gamma3 subunit
(Tg-AMPKgamma3(225Q)) increases mitochondrial biogenesis in glycolytic skeletal
muscle. These adaptations are associated with an increase in expression of the
co-activator PGC-1alpha and several transcription factors that regulate
mitochondrial biogenesis, including NRF-1, NRF-2, and TFAM. Succinate
dehydrogenase staining, a marker of the oxidative profile of individual fibers,
was also increased in transversal skeletal muscle sections of white gastrocnemius
muscle from Tg-AMPKgamma3(225Q) mice, independent of changes in fiber type
composition. In conclusion, a single nucleotide mutation (R225Q) in the AMPK
gamma3 subunit is associated with mitochondrial biogenesis in glycolytic skeletal
muscle, concomitant with increased expression of the co-activator PGC-1alpha and 
several transcription factors that regulate mitochondrial proteins, without
altering fiber type composition.

PMID: 18838377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Neurogenetics. 2009 Feb;10(1):19-25. doi: 10.1007/s10048-008-0151-3. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

Assessment of Alzheimer's disease case-control associations using family-based
methods.

Schjeide BM(1), McQueen MB, Mullin K, DiVito J, Hogan MF, Parkinson M, Hooli B,
Lange C, Blacker D, Tanzi RE, Bertram L.

Author information: 
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease (MIND), Department of
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The genetics of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is heterogeneous and remains only
ill-defined. We have recently created a freely available and continuously updated
online database (AlzGene; http://www.alzgene.org ) for which we collect all
published genetic association studies in AD and perform systematic meta-analyses 
on all polymorphisms with sufficient genotype data. In this study, we tested 27
genes (ACE, BDNF, CH25H, CHRNB2, CST3, CTSD, DAPK1, GALP, hCG2039140, IL1B, LMNA,
LOC439999, LOC651924, MAPT, MTHFR, MYH13, PCK1, PGBD1, PRNP, PSEN1, SORCS1,
SORL1, TF, TFAM, TNK1, GWA_14q32.13, and GWA_7p15.2), all showing significant
association with AD risk in the AlzGene meta-analyses, in a large collection of
family-based samples comprised of 4,180 subjects from over 1,300 pedigrees.
Overall, we observe significant association with risk for AD and polymorphisms in
ACE, CHRNB2, TF, and an as yet uncharacterized locus on chromosome 7p15.2
[rs1859849]. For all four loci, the association was observed with the same
alleles as in the AlzGene meta-analyses. The convergence of case-control and
family-based findings suggests that these loci currently represent the most
promising AD gene candidates. Further fine-mapping and functional analyses are
warranted to elucidate the potential biochemical mechanisms and epidemiological
relevance of these genes.

PMCID: PMC2841132
PMID: 18830724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jan 1;18(1):65-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn313. Epub 2008 Sep 30.

The conserved translocase Tim17 prevents mitochondrial DNA loss.

Iacovino M(1), Granycome C, Sembongi H, Bokori-Brown M, Butow RA, Holt IJ,
Bateman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Maintenance of an intact mitochondrial genome is essential for oxidative
phosphorylation in all eukaryotes. Depletion of mitochondrial genome copy number 
can have severe pathological consequences due to loss of respiratory capacity. In
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, several bifunctional metabolic enzymes have been shown 
to be required for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) maintenance. For example, Ilv5 is
required for branched chain amino acid biosynthesis and mtDNA stability. We have 
identified OXA1 and TIM17 as novel multicopy suppressors of mtDNA instability in 
ilv5 cells. In addition, overexpression of TIM17, but not OXA1, prevents the
complete loss of mtDNA in cells lacking the TFAM homologue Abf2. Introduction of 
the disease-associated A3243G mutant mtDNA into human NT2 teratocarcinoma cells
frequently causes mtDNA loss. Yet when human TIM17A is overexpressed in NT2
cybrids carrying A3243G mtDNA, the proportion of cybrid clones maintaining mtDNA 
increases significantly. TIM17A overexpression results in long-term mtDNA
stabilization, since NT2 cybrids overexpressing TIM17A maintain mtDNA at levels
similar to controls for several months. Tim17 is a conserved suppressor of mtDNA 
instability and is the first factor to be identified that can prevent mtDNA loss 
in a human cellular model of mitochondrial disease.

PMCID: PMC3298863
PMID: 18826960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cancer Sci. 2008 Nov;99(11):2230-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.00918.x. Epub
2008 Sep 22.

Enhancement of apoptotic damage of squamous cell carcinoma cells by inhibition of
the mitochondrial DNA repairing system.

Ueta E(1), Sasabe E, Yang Z, Osaki T, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
University, Kochi, Japan. uetaeisaku@yahoo.co.jp

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) repair systems are thought to be associated with the
susceptibility of cancer cells to anticancer agents. The present study
investigated the relationship between the susceptibility to gamma-rays and the
mtDNA repair ability of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSC) cell lines. The levels
of 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) and mtDNA common deletion in both nuclear
and mitochondrial DNA of OSC-2, OSC-3 and OSC-6 cells (radio-sensitive cell
lines) after gamma-ray-irradiation were higher than those of OSC-1, OSC-4 and
OSC-5 cells (radio-resistant cell lines). Compared with OSC-2, OSC-3 and OSC-6
cells, OSC-1, OSC-4 and OSC-5 cells had higher levels of activity of
phosphoinositide-3 kinase (PI-3K)/Akt and more strongly expressed
8-hydroxyguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), DNA polymerase gamma (POLG) and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam). Down-regulation of these
mtDNA-repair-associated molecules by the RNA interference technique enhanced the 
susceptibility of OSC-2 and OSC-5 cells to gamma-rays, and the expression of Tfam
and POLG was down-regulated by inhibitors of PI-3K/Akt signaling. These results
indicate that the inhibition of mtDNA repair capacity by PI-3K/Akt signal
inhibitors and OGG1 down-regulator in cancer cells may be a useful strategy for
cancer treatment when combined with ionizing irradiation and chemotherapeutic
drugs.

PMID: 18823381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30658-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800510200. Epub 2008 
Sep 8.

Paradoxical effect of mitochondrial respiratory chain impairment on insulin
signaling and glucose transport in adipose cells.

Shi X(1), Burkart A, Nicoloro SM, Czech MP, Straubhaar J, Corvera S.

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605,
USA.

Adipocyte function is crucial for the control of whole body energy homeostasis.
Pathway analysis of differentiating 3T3-L1 adipocytes reveals that major
metabolic pathways induced during differentiation involve mitochondrial function.
However, it is not clear why differentiated white adipocytes require enhanced
respiratory chain activity relative to pre-adipocytes. To address this question, 
we used small interference RNA to interfere with the induction of the
transcription factor Tfam, which is highly induced between days 2 and 4 of
differentiation and is crucial for replication of mitochondrial DNA. Interference
with Tfam resulted in cells with decreased respiratory chain capacity, reflected 
by decreased basal oxygen consumption, and decreased mitochondrial ATP synthesis,
but no difference in many other adipocyte functions or expression levels of
adipose-specific genes. However, insulin-stimulated GLUT4 translocation to the
cell surface and subsequent glucose transport are impaired in Tfam knockdown
cells. Paradoxically, insulin-stimulated Akt phosphorylation is significantly
enhanced in these cells. These studies reveal independent links between
mitochondrial function, insulin signaling, and glucose transport, in which
impaired respiratory chain activity enhances insulin signaling to Akt
phosphorylation, but impairs GLUT4 translocation. These results indicate that
mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction in adipocytes can cause impaired
insulin responsiveness of GLUT4 translocation by a mechanism downstream of the
Akt protein kinase.

PMCID: PMC2576555
PMID: 18779333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Circ J. 2008;72 Suppl A:A31-7. Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Oxidative stress and mitochondrial DNA damage in heart failure.

Tsutsui H(1), Kinugawa S, Matsushima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. htsutsui@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Recent experimental and clinical studies have suggested that oxidative stress is 
enhanced in heart failure. The production of oxygen radicals is increased in the 
failing heart while antioxidant enzyme activities are preserved. Mitochondrial
electron transport is an enzymatic source of oxygen radical generation and also a
target against oxidant-induced damage in the failing myocardium. Chronic
increases in oxygen radical production in the mitochondria can lead to a
catastrophic cycle of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage, as well as functional
decline, further oxygen radical generation, and cellular injury. Reactive oxygen 
species induce myocyte hypertrophy, apoptosis, and interstitial fibrosis by
activating matrix metalloproteinases. These cellular events play an important
role in the development and progression of maladaptive cardiac remodeling and
failure. Therefore, oxidative stress and mtDNA damage are good therapeutic
targets. Overexpression of peroxiredoxin-3 (Prx-3), mitochondrial antioxidant, or
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) could ameliorate the decline in mtDNA
copy number in failing hearts. Consistent with alterations in mtDNA, the decrease
in oxidative capacities is also prevented. Therefore, the activation of Prx-3 or 
TFAM expression could ameliorate the pathophysiological processes seen in
myocardial failure. Inhibition of oxidative stress and mtDNA damage could be
novel and potentially effective treatment strategies for heart failure.

PMID: 18772530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2008 Dec;23(12):1223-32. doi: 10.1007/s00384-008-0539-4.
Epub 2008 Sep 4.

Expression of beta-F1-ATPase and mitochondrial transcription factor A and the
change in mitochondrial DNA content in colorectal cancer: clinical data analysis 
and evidence from an in vitro study.

Lin PC(1), Lin JK, Yang SH, Wang HS, Li AF, Chang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Yang-Ming Campus, Taipei City Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Mitochondria play an important role in regulating apoptosis and thus may
be involved in tumor progression. This study was conducted to elucidate the role 
of mitochondrial dysfunction in colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content was analyzed with real-time polymerase
chain reaction in 153 CRC patients who had received surgery at the Taipei
Veterans General Hospital from January 1999 to December 2000. The expression of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and beta-F1-ATPase were analyzed
using immunohistochemistry. HCT116 cells were cultured in 1% O(2) for at least 20
passages. Mitochondrial biogenesis, ATP production, and the apoptotic response to
5-fluorouracil were analyzed in the derived cells.
RESULTS: Disease stage was associated with changes in mtDNA content (p < 0.001), 
expression of TFAM (p = 0.004), and/or beta-F1-ATPase (p < 0.001). CRCs with low 
expression of TFAM or beta-F1-ATPase had a lower mtDNA content. In the
multivariate analysis, disease stage was the most significant prognostic factor
[95% confidence interval (CI), 2.82-6.23], followed by beta-F1-ATPase [95% CI,
1.10-4.10]. In patients receiving 5-FU based chemotherapy, the 5-year
disease-free survival rate was only 27% in CRC patients with a low beta-F1-ATPase
tumor and was significantly lower than that in those with a high beta-F1-ATPase
tumor (60%; p = 0.042). In the hypoxia-treated cells, mitochondrial mass
increased, mtDNA content decreased, sensitivity to 5-fluorouracil decreased, and 
beta-F1-ATPase expression decreased.
CONCLUSION: Mitochondrial dysfunction may be associated with poor outcomes in CRC
patients.

PMID: 18769884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2008;22(1-4):337-46. doi: 10.1159/000149812. Epub 2008 Jul 
25.

The serum levels of 17beta-estradiol, progesterone and triiodothyronine correlate
with brown adipose tissue thermogenic parameters during aging.

Valle A(1), Santandreu FM, García-Palmer FJ, Roca P, Oliver J.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS), Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Sex and thyroid hormones are among the factors modulating energy metabolism
through regulation of mitochondrial oxidative capacity. Brown adipose tissue
(BAT) in old female rats has been shown to maintain, better than males, the
ability to produce heat when exposed to cold. Considering the decline that takes 
place in gonadal and thyroid function during aging, the aim of this work was to
test whether the age-related hormonal status may be a potential mediator of the
gender differences in BAT decline. COX activity, UCP1, mitochondrial respiration 
rate, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), levels of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), as well as the serum levels of sex steroids (17beta-estradiol,
progesterone and testosterone) and thyroid hormones (T3 and T4) were measured in 
6-, 18-, and 24-month (mo) old male and female rats kept at 22 degrees C. Six
mo-old female rats showed higher thermogenic features than males. Male rats at
18-mo showed a decrease in uncoupling activity compared to females. Both genders 
showed marked signs of atrophy in BAT of 24-mo-old rats, characterized by a
decrease in total DNA, mitochondrial protein, COX and UCP1, whereas mtDNA was
found to increase. Sex steroid hormones were well correlated with BAT parameters 
when both genders were considered, however, T3 was the hormone with the strongest
positive correlations in female rats. In conclusion, our findings provide
evidence suggesting that T3 may be a potential mediator of the sexual dimorphism 
in the effect of aging on the functional decline of BAT.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18769061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Stroke. 2008 Nov;39(11):3057-63. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.520114. Epub 2008 Aug
21.

Rapidly increased neuronal mitochondrial biogenesis after hypoxic-ischemic brain 
injury.

Yin W(1), Signore AP, Iwai M, Cao G, Gao Y, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Mitochondrial biogenesis is regulated through the
coordinated actions of both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes to ensure that the 
organelles are replenished on a regular basis. This highly regulated process has 
been well defined in skeletal and heart muscle, but its role in neuronal cells,
particularly when under stress or injury, is not well understood. In this study, 
we report for the first time rapidly increased mitochondrial biogenesis in a rat 
model of neonatal hypoxic/ischemic brain injury (H-I).
METHODS: Postnatal day 7 rats were subjected to H-I induced by unilateral carotid
artery ligation followed by 2.5 hours of hypoxia. The relative amount of brain
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) was measured semiquantitatively using long fragment PCR
at various time points after H-I. HSP60 and COXIV proteins were detected by
Western blot. Expression of three genes critical for the transcriptional
regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor coactivator-1 (PGC-1), nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), were examined by Western blot and
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Brain mtDNA content was markedly increased 6 hours after H-I, and
continued to increase up to 24 hours after H-I. Paralleling the temporal change
in mtDNA content, mitochondrial number and proteins HSP60 and COXIV, and citrate 
synthase activity were increased in neurons in the cortical infarct border zone
after H-I. Moreover, cortical expression of NRF-1 and TFAM were increased 6 to 24
hours after H-I, whereas PGC-1 was not changed.
CONCLUSIONS: Neonatal H-I brain injury rapidly induces mitochondrial biogenesis, 
which may constitute a novel component of the endogenous repair mechanisms of the
brain.

PMCID: PMC2726706
PMID: 18723421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Neurosci. 2008 Aug 20;28(34):8624-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1957-08.2008.

Reverse of age-dependent memory impairment and mitochondrial DNA damage in
microglia by an overexpression of human mitochondrial transcription factor a in
mice.

Hayashi Y(1), Yoshida M, Yamato M, Ide T, Wu Z, Ochi-Shindou M, Kanki T, Kang D, 
Sunagawa K, Tsutsui H, Nakanishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oral Aging Science, Faculty of Dental Sciences, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly susceptible to injury induced by reactive
oxygen species (ROS). During aging, mutations of mtDNA accumulate to induce
dysfunction of the respiratory chain, resulting in the enhanced ROS production.
Therefore, age-dependent memory impairment may result from oxidative stress
derived from the respiratory chain. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)
is now known to have roles not only in the replication of mtDNA but also its
maintenance. We herein report that an overexpression of TFAM in HeLa cells
significantly inhibited rotenone-induced mitochondrial ROS generation and the
subsequent NF-kappaB (nuclear factor-kappaB) nuclear translocation. Furthermore, 
TFAM transgenic (TG) mice exhibited a prominent amelioration of an age-dependent 
accumulation of lipid peroxidation products and a decline in the activities of
complexes I and IV in the brain. In the aged TG mice, deficits of the motor
learning memory, the working memory, and the hippocampal long-term potentiation
(LTP) were also significantly improved. The expression level of interleukin-1beta
(IL-1beta) and mtDNA damages, which were predominantly found in microglia,
significantly decreased in the aged TG mice. The IL-1beta amount markedly
increased in the brain of the TG mice after treatment with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), whereas its mean amount was significantly lower than that of the
LPS-treated aged wild-type mice. At the same time, an increased mtDNA damage in
microglia and an impaired hippocampal LTP were also observed in the LPS-treated
aged TG mice. Together, an overexpression of TFAM is therefore considered to
ameliorate age-dependent impairment of the brain functions through the prevention
of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunctions in microglia.

PMID: 18716221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2008;101:89-92.

Transgenic rodent models of Parkinson's disease.

Harvey BK(1), Wang Y, Hoffer BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore 21224, MD, USA.

In the case of Parkinson's disease (PD), classical animal models have utilized
dopaminergic neurotoxins such as 6-hydroxydopamine (6OHDA) and 1-methyl 4-phenyl 
1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). More recently, human genetic linkage studies
have identified several genes in familial forms of PD. Transgenic models have
been made that explore the function of PD-linked genes (e.g. alpha-synuclein,
DJ-1, LRRK2, Parkin, UCH-L1, PINK1). Recent evidence suggests mitochondrial
dysfunction may play a major role in PD. Manipulation of mitochondrial
respiratory genes (e.g. mitochondrial transcription factor A or TFAM) also
elicits a PD phenotype in mice. Transgenic mice (MitoPark) were developed that
have TFAM selectively knocked out in dopaminergic neurons. The nigral dopamine
neurons of MitoPark mice show respiratory chain dysfunction, accompanied by the
development of intraneuronal inclusions and eventual cell death. In early
adulthood, the MitoPark mice show a slowly progressing loss of motor function
that accompanies these cellular changes. The MitoPark mouse enables further study
of the role of mitochondrial dysfunction in DA neurons as an important mechanism 
in the development of PD. Transgenic technology has allowed new insights into
mechanisms of neurodegeneration for a number of neurological disorders. This
paper will summarize recent studies on several transgenic models of PD.

PMCID: PMC2613245
PMID: 18642640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Cell Physiol. 2008 Nov;217(2):529-43. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21528.

Expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) during porcine
gametogenesis and preimplantation embryo development.

Antelman J(1), Manandhar G, Yi YJ, Li R, Whitworth KM, Sutovsky M, Agca C,
Prather RS, Sutovsky P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Sciences, University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia,
Missouri, USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is responsible for stability,
maintenance, and transcriptional control of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). We have
studied the expression and distribution of TFAM in the gametes and
preimplantation embryos of the domestic pig (Sus scrofa). We hypothesized that
TFAM is not present in the boar sperm mitochondria to reduce the possibility of
paternal mtDNA propagation in the progeny. In contrast, we anticipated that Tfam 
gene is expressed in a developmental stage-dependent manner in porcine oocytes
and embryos. The appropriate TFAM band of 25 kDa was detected by Western blotting
in ejaculated boar spermatozoa, as well as in porcine oocytes and zygotes. Boar
sperm extracts also displayed several bands >25 kDa suggestive of
post-translational modification by ubiquitination, confirmed by affinity
purification of ubiquitinated proteins. TFAM immunoreactivity was relegated to
the sperm tail principal piece and sperm head in fully differentiated
spermatozoa. The content of Tfam mRNA increased considerably from the germinal
vesicle to blastocyst stage and also between in vitro fertilized and cultured
blastocysts compared to in vivo-derived blastocysts. TFAM protein accumulated in 
the oocytes during maturation and was reduced by proteolysis after fertilization.
This pattern was not mirrored in parthenogenetically activated oocytes and
zygotes reconstructed by SCNT, suggesting deviant processing of TFAM protein and 
transcript after oocyte/embryo manipulation. Thus, TFAM may exert a critical role
in porcine gametogenesis and preimplantation embryo development. Altogether, our 
data on the role of TFAM in mitochondrial function and inheritance have broad
implications for cell physiology and evolutionary biology.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 18636550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2008 Jun;59(2):239-52.

Abrogation of mitochondrial transcription in smooth muscle cells impairs smooth
muscle contractility and vascular tone.

Jawien J(1), Bian Z, Sheikine Y, Olofsson PS, Pang Y, Edholm T, Dou Y, Metzger D,
Hellström PM, Feil R, Hansson GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine; Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Smooth muscle cells (SMC) constitute the major contractile cell
population of blood vessels and inner organs. SMC contraction depends on energy
provided by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) catabolism, which can be generated
through oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria or by anaerobic glycolysis.
Mitochondrial activity may also modulate smooth muscle tone by biotransformation 
of vasoactive mediators. Here, we study the role of mitochondrial DNA gene
expression for vascular function in vivo.
METHODS: Since loss of functional mitochondria in SMC may not be compatible with 
normal development, we generated mice with inducible SMC-specific abrogation of
the mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam). Deletion of this gene leads to
dysfunctional mitochondria and prevents aerobic ATP production in affected cells.
RESULTS: Invasive blood pressure monitoring in live animals demonstrated that SMC
specific Tfam deletion results in lower blood pressure and a defective
blood-pressure response to stress, changes that were not compensated by increased
heart rate. The contractility to agonists was reduced in arterial and gastric
fundus strips from Tfam-deficient mice. Endothelium-dependent relaxation of
arterial strips in response to ACh was also blunted.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that mitochondrial function is needed for normal
gastric contraction, vascular tone, and maintenance of normal blood pressure.

PMID: 18622043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Rejuvenation Res. 2008 Jun;11(3):597-604. doi: 10.1089/rej.2007.0626.

Caloric restriction retards the age-related decline in mitochondrial function of 
brown adipose tissue.

Valle A(1), Guevara R, García-Palmer FJ, Roca P, Oliver J.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Ciber 
Fisiopatología Obesidad y Nutrición (CB06/03) Instituto Salud Carlos III, Spain.

Caloric restriction (CR) has been shown to prevent the age-associated loss of
mitochondrial function and biogenesis in several tissues such as liver, heart,
and skeletal muscle. However, little is known about the effects of CR on a tissue
in which the mitochondria have no adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-producing purpose 
but show a high degree of uncoupling, namely brown adipose tissue (BAT). Hence,
the aim of the present study was to analyze the effect of long-term CR on BAT
mitochondrial function and biogenesis. BAT mitochondria obtained from
24-month-old male and female rats previously subjected to 40% CR for 12 months
were compared with mitochondria from old (24 months) and young (6 months) ad
libitum fed rats. Old restricted rats compared to old ad libitum fed ones showed 
a reduction in BAT size with respect to fat content and adipocyte number.
Mitochondrial DNA content in BAT increased with age and even more so in
restricted rats, indicating a summative effect of age and CR on mitochondrial
proliferation. CR induced resistance to lose total and mitochondrial protein, COX
activity, and uncoupling capacity with advancing age, in relation with a lower
decrease of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). In summary, our results 
demonstrate CR prevents the age-associated decline in mitochondrial function in
BAT, probably in relation with a lower impairment of mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 18593277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008 Jul;16(7):1591-5. doi: 10.1038/oby.2008.253. Epub
2008 Apr 24.

A decreased mitochondrial DNA content is related to insulin resistance in
adolescents.

Gianotti TF(1), Sookoian S, Dieuzeide G, García SI, Gemma C, González CD, Pirola 
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Biology of Complex Diseases Department, Institute of
Medical Research A. Lanari, University of Buenos Aires-CONICET, Ciudad Autónoma
de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
content is associated with insulin resistance (IR) in a sample of adolescents
with features of metabolic syndrome. We further studied the link between
polymorphisms in three genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and the
presence of deleted mtDNA and mtDNA content. Data and blood samples were
collected from 175 adolescents out of a cross-sectional, population-based study
of 934 high school students. On the basis of the median value of homeostasis
model assessment of IR (HOMA-IR) of the whole sample (2.2), the population was
divided into two groups: noninsulin resistance (NIR) and IR. mtDNA quantification
using nuclear DNA (nDNA) as a reference was carried out using a real-time
quantitative PCR method. Genotyping for peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) (pro12Ala), PPAR- gamma coactivator-1alpha
(PGC-1alpha) (Gly482Ser), and Tfam (rs1937 and rs12247015) polymorphisms was
performed by PCR-based restriction fragment length polymorphism. Long-extension
PCR was performed to amplify the whole mitochondrial genome. The mtDNA/nDNA ratio
was significantly lower in the IR group (median: 9.08, range: 68.94) in
comparison with the NIR group (12.24, 71.92) (P<0.03). Besides, the mtDNA/nDNA
ratio was inversely correlated with HOMA (R: -0.18, P<0.02), glucose (R: -0.21,
P<0.008), and uric acid (R: -0.18, P<0.03). Genotypes for the PPAR- gamma,
PGC-1alpha, and Tfam variants were not associated with the mtDNA/nDNA ratio.
Long-extension PCR did not show significant levels of mtDNA deletions. In
conclusion, our findings indicate that reduced mtDNA content in peripheral
leukocytes is associated with IR. This result seems not to be related with the
previously mentioned variants in genes involved in the regulation of
mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 18451773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Jul-Aug;1777(7-8):666-75. doi:
10.1016/j.bbabio.2008.03.015. Epub 2008 Mar 28.

MITOCHIP assessment of differential gene expression in the skeletal muscle of
Ant1 knockout mice: coordinate regulation of OXPHOS, antioxidant, and apoptotic
genes.

Subramaniam V(1), Golik P, Murdock DG, Levy S, Kerstann KW, Coskun PE, Melkonian 
GA, Wallace DC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular and Mitochondrial Medicine and Genetics (MAMMAG) and
Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Irvine, 2010 Hewitt 
Hall, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

Genetic inactivation of the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial heart-muscle adenine
nucleotide translocator-1 (ANT1), which exports mitochondrial ATP to the cytosol 
in both humans (ANT1-/-) and mice (Ant1-/-), results in lactic acidosis and
mitochondrial cardiomyopathy and myopathy, the latter involving
hyper-proliferation of mitochondria, induction of oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) enzymes, increased reactive oxygen species (ROS), and excessive mtDNA
damage. To understand these manifestations, we analyzed Ant1-/- mouse skeletal
muscle for changes in gene expression using our custom 644 and 1087 gene MITOCHIP
microarrays and for changes in the protein levels of key mitochondrial
transcription factors. Thirty-four mRNAs were found to be up-regulated and 29
mRNAs were down-regulated. Up-regulated mRNAs included the mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) polypeptide and rRNA genes, selected nuclear-encoded OXPHOS genes, and
stress-response genes including Mcl-1. Down-regulated mRNAs included glycolytic
genes, pro-apoptotic genes, and c-Myc. The mitochondrial regulatory proteins
Pgc-1alpha, Nrf-1, Tfam, and myogenin were up-regulated and could account for the
induction of the OXPHOS and antioxidant enzymes. By contrast, c-Myc levels were
reduced and might account for a reduction in apoptotic potential. Therefore, the 
Ant1-/- mouse skeletal muscle demonstrates that energy metabolism, antioxidant
defenses, and apoptosis form an integrated metabolic network.

PMCID: PMC4391341
PMID: 18439414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2008 Apr 23;3(4):e2009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002009.

Etoposide induces ATM-dependent mitochondrial biogenesis through AMPK activation.

Fu X(1), Wan S, Lyu YL, Liu LF, Qi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, UMDNJ-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School,
Piscataway, New Jersey, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: DNA damage such as double-stranded DNA breaks (DSBs) has been
reported to stimulate mitochondrial biogenesis. However, the underlying mechanism
is poorly understood. The major player in response to DSBs is ATM (ataxia
telangiectasia mutated). Upon sensing DSBs, ATM is activated through
autophosphorylation and phosphorylates a number of substrates for DNA repair,
cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. ATM has been reported to phosphorylate the
alpha subunit of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which senses AMP/ATP ratio 
in cells, and can be activated by upstream kinases. Here we provide evidence for 
a novel role of ATM in mitochondrial biogenesis through AMPK activation in
response to etoposide-induced DNA damage.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Three pairs of human ATM+ and ATM- cells were
employed. Cells treated with etoposide exhibited an ATM-dependent increase in
mitochondrial mass as measured by 10-N-Nonyl-Acridine Orange and MitoTracker
Green FM staining, as well as an increase in mitochondrial DNA content. In
addition, the expression of several known mitochondrial biogenesis regulators
such as the major mitochondrial transcription factor NRF-1, PGC-1alpha and TFAM
was also elevated in response to etoposide treatment as monitored by RT-PCR.
Three pieces of evidence suggest that etoposide-induced mitochondrial biogenesis 
is due to ATM-dependent activation of AMPK. First, etoposide induced
ATM-dependent phosphorylation of AMPK alpha subunit at Thr172, indicative of AMPK
activation. Second, inhibition of AMPK blocked etoposide-induced mitochondrial
biogenesis. Third, activation of AMPK by AICAR (an AMP analogue) stimulated
mitochondrial biogenesis in an ATM-dependent manner, suggesting that ATM may be
an upstream kinase of AMPK in the mitochondrial biogenesis pathway.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that activation of ATM by
etoposide can lead to mitochondrial biogenesis through AMPK activation. We
propose that ATM-dependent mitochondrial biogenesis may play a role in DNA damage
response and ROS regulation, and that defect in ATM-dependent mitochondrial
biogenesis could contribute to the manifestations of A-T disease.

PMCID: PMC2329593
PMID: 18431490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 Apr;13(3):275-80.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) gene variation and risk of late-onset
Alzheimer's disease.

Alvarez V(1), Corao AI, Alonso-Montes C, Sánchez-Ferrero E, De Mena L, Morales B,
García-Castro M, Coto E.

Author information: 
(1)Genética Molecular, Hospital Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain.

Impaired mitochondrial function and an increased number of mutations in
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been found in brains of patients with late-onset
Alzheimer's disease (LOAD). The TFAM-gene encodes the mitochondrial transcription
factor A, a protein that controls the transcription, replication, damage sensing,
and repair of mtDNA. TFAM is on human chromosome region 10q21.1, where a locus
for LOAD has been mapped. Our objective was to determine the role of TFAM-gene
variation in the risk of LOAD. The seven TFAM coding exons were analysed through 
single strand conformation analysis and direct sequencing in a cohort of Spanish 
LOAD-patients and healthy controls. We found four common polymorphisms, two in
the flanquing intronic and two in the coding sequences. Polymorphism rs1937 (+35 
G/C) was the only missense change (S12T). Genotyping of this polymorphism in 300 
LOAD-patients and 183 healthy controls showed a significantly higher frequency of
GG-homozygotes in the patients (92% vs. 86%; p=0.04; OR=1.91, 95%CI=1.02-3.50).
This suggests that S12 is a risk factor for LOAD in our population. In
conclusion, rare variants (mutations) in the TFAM gene were not found in
LOAD-patients, but the S12T polymorphism was a moderate risk factor for LOAD in
our population.

PMID: 18430995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Physiol Rev. 2008 Apr;88(2):611-38. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00025.2007.

Transcriptional paradigms in mammalian mitochondrial biogenesis and function.

Scarpulla RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Mitochondria contain their own genetic system and undergo a unique mode of
cytoplasmic inheritance. Each organelle has multiple copies of a covalently
closed circular DNA genome (mtDNA). The entire protein coding capacity of mtDNA
is devoted to the synthesis of 13 essential subunits of the inner membrane
complexes of the respiratory apparatus. Thus the majority of respiratory proteins
and all of the other gene products necessary for the myriad mitochondrial
functions are derived from nuclear genes. Transcription of mtDNA requires a small
number of nucleus-encoded proteins including a single RNA polymerase (POLRMT),
auxiliary factors necessary for promoter recognition (TFB1M, TFB2M) and
activation (Tfam), and a termination factor (mTERF). This relatively simple
system can account for the bidirectional transcription of mtDNA from divergent
promoters and key termination events controlling the rRNA/mRNA ratio.
Nucleomitochondrial interactions depend on the interplay between transcription
factors (NRF-1, NRF-2, PPARalpha, ERRalpha, Sp1, and others) and members of the
PGC-1 family of regulated coactivators (PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, and PRC). The
transcription factors target genes that specify the respiratory chain, the
mitochondrial transcription, translation and replication machinery, and protein
import and assembly apparatus among others. These factors are in turn activated
directly or indirectly by PGC-1 family coactivators whose differential expression
is controlled by an array of environmental signals including temperature, energy 
deprivation, and availability of nutrients and growth factors. These
transcriptional paradigms provide a basic framework for understanding the
integration of mitochondrial biogenesis and function with signaling events that
dictate cell- and tissue-specific energetic properties.

PMID: 18391175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Jun;294(6):E1060-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00726.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

PGC-1alpha's relationship with skeletal muscle palmitate oxidation is not present
with obesity despite maintained PGC-1alpha and PGC-1beta protein.

Holloway GP(1), Perry CG, Thrush AB, Heigenhauser GJ, Dyck DJ, Bonen A, Spriet
LL.

Author information: 
(1)Human Health & Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada.
ghollowa@uoguelph.ca

Reduced skeletal muscle mitochondrial content and fatty acid oxidation are
associated with obesity and insulin resistance. Although the exact mechanisms
remain elusive, this may result from impaired mitochondrial biogenesis or
reductions in the mitochondrial reticulum network. Therefore, the purpose of this
study was to determine whether the protein contents of various transcription
factors, including PGC-1alpha and PGC-1beta and proteins associated with
mitochondrial fusion events, were reduced in skeletal muscle of nine obese (BMI =
37.6 +/- 2.2 kg/m(-2)) compared with nine age-matched lean (BMI = 23.3 +/- 0.7
kg/m(-2)) women. The protein contents of PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, PPARalpha, and
tFAM were not reduced with obesity. In contrast, PPARgamma was increased (+22%, P
< 0.05) with obesity, and there was a trend toward an increase (+31%, P = 0.13)
in PPARdelta/beta. In lean individuals, PGC-1alpha protein correlated with
citrate synthase (CS; r = 0.67) and rates of palmitate oxidation (r = 0.87),
whereas PGC-1beta correlated with PPARgamma (r = 0.90), PPARdelta/beta (r =
0.63), and cytochrome c oxidase IV (COX-IV; r = 0.63). In obese individuals, the 
relationship between PGC-1alpha and CS was maintained (r = 0.65); however, the
associations between PGC-1alpha and palmitate oxidation (r = -0.38) and PGC-1beta
with PPARgamma (r = 0.14), PPARdelta/beta (r = 0.21), and COX-IV (r = 0.01) were 
lost. In addition, mitofusin-1 (MFN-1), MFN-2, and dynamin-related protein-1
(DRP-1) total protein contents were not altered with obesity (P > 0.05). These
data suggest that altered regulation, and not reductions in the protein contents 
of transcription factors, is associated with insulin resistance. Also, it does
not appear that alterations in the proteins associated with mitochondrial network
formation and degradation can account for the observed decrease in mitochondrial 
content.

PMID: 18349111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 May;52(5):1670-6. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01449-07.
Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Mitochondrial DNA content, an inaccurate biomarker of mitochondrial alteration in
human immunodeficiency virus-related lipodystrophy.

Kim MJ(1), Jardel C, Barthélémy C, Jan V, Bastard JP, Fillaut-Chapin S, Houry S, 
Capeau J, Lombès A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U582, Paris, F-75013 France.

Lipoatrophy is a prevalent side effect of antiretroviral treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Its mechanisms are still disputed but
include mitochondrial toxicity and, in particular, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
depletion induced by nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. To obtain an
integrated evaluation of the mitochondrial alteration in lipoatrophy, we
investigated the DNA, RNA, and protein levels in 15 samples of abdominal
subcutaneous adipose tissue from HIV-infected patients with peripheral
lipoatrophy and compared the results with those for 15 samples from age- and body
mass index-matched controls. The DNA and RNA analyses used PCR-based techniques, 
while proteins were quantified with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
measurement of activities with spectrophotometric assays. Depletion of mtDNA and 
mtDNA-encoded MT-CO2 mRNA was present, but normal levels of mtDNA-dependent
activity (cytochrome c oxidase) and protein (MT-CO2p) showed that it was
compensated for. An increase in nuclear-DNA-dependent mitochondrial activities
(citrate synthase and malate dehydrogenase) and protein (COX4I1p), as well as
transcriptional up-regulation of nuclear-DNA-encoded mitochondrial genes (COX4I1 
and UCP2), demonstrated increased mitochondrial biogenesis. However, the
expression of the known transcription factors of mitochondrial biogenesis (TFAM, 
NRF1, GABPA, PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, and PPRC1) was normal or decreased. Increased
amounts of activated caspase 3 and of DDIT3 mRNA showed the induction of
apoptosis and oxidative stress, respectively. The mtDNA content did not correlate
with any other mitochondrial parameter. In conclusion, mtDNA content does not
appear to be an accurate biomarker of mitochondrial alteration in lipoatrophic
adipose tissue. The preservation of mtDNA-dependent mitochondrial functions
occurred despite severe mtDNA depletion. The presence of significant oxidative
stress and apoptosis did not correlate with the mtDNA content.

PMCID: PMC2346614
PMID: 18332166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 2;283(18):12333-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801342200. Epub 2008 
Feb 28.

Mitochondrial transcription factor B2 is essential for metabolic function in
Drosophila melanogaster development.

Adán C(1), Matsushima Y, Hernández-Sierra R, Marco-Ferreres R, Fernández-Moreno
MA, González-Vioque E, Calleja M, Aragón JJ, Kaguni LS, Garesse R.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto
Sols CSIC-UAM, CIBERER ISCIII, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, C/Arzobispo Morcillo 4, E-28029 Madrid, Spain.

Characterization of the basal transcription machinery of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) is critical to understand mitochondrial pathophysiology. In mammalian in 
vitro systems, mtDNA transcription requires mtRNA polymerase, transcription
factor A (TFAM), and either transcription factor B1 (TFB1M) or B2 (TFB2M). We
have silenced the expression of TFB2M by RNA interference in Drosophila
melanogaster. RNA interference knockdown of TF2BM causes lethality by arrest of
larval development. Molecular analysis demonstrates that TF2BM is essential for
mtDNA transcription during Drosophila development and is not redundant with
TFB1M. The impairment of mtDNA transcription causes a dramatic decrease in
oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial ATP synthesis in the long-lived
larvae, and a metabolic shift to glycolysis, which partially restores ATP levels 
and elicits a compensatory response at the nuclear level that increases
mitochondrial mass. At the cellular level, the mitochondrial dysfunction induced 
by TFB2M knockdown causes a severe reduction in cell proliferation without
affecting cell growth, and increases the level of apoptosis. In contrast, cell
differentiation and morphogenesis are largely unaffected. Our data demonstrate
the essential role of TFB2M in mtDNA transcription in a multicellular organism,
and reveal the complex cellular, biochemical, and molecular responses induced by 
impairment of oxidative phosphorylation during Drosophila development.

PMCID: PMC2431005
PMID: 18308726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Mar 10;314(5):988-96. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.005. Epub
2008 Jan 16.

Human prohibitin 1 maintains the organization and stability of the mitochondrial 
nucleoids.

Kasashima K(1), Sumitani M, Satoh M, Endo H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical University, Shimotsuke, Tochigi,
Japan.

Mitochondrial prohibitin (PHB) proteins have diverse functions, such as the
regulation of apoptosis and the maintenance of mitochondrial morphology. In this 
study, we clarified a novel mitochondrial function of PHB1 that regulates the
organization and maintenance of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). In PHB1-knockdown
cells, we found that mtDNA is not stained by fluorescent dyes, such as ethidium
bromide and PicoGreen, although the mitochondrial membrane potential still
maintains. We also demonstrated that mtDNA, which is predominantly found in the
NP-40-insoluble fraction when isolated from normal mitochondria, is partially
released into the soluble fraction when isolated from PHB1-knockdown cells,
indicating that the organization of the mitochondrial nucleoids has been altered.
Furthermore, we found that PHB1 regulates copy number of mtDNA by stabilizing
TFAM protein, a known protein component of the mitochondrial nucleoids. However, 
TFAM does not affect the organization of mtDNA as observed in PHB1-knockdown
cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that PHB1 maintains the
organization and copy number of the mtDNA through both TFAM-independent and
-dependent pathways.

PMID: 18258228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Feb 13;432(1):79-82. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.12.010. Epub 
2007 Dec 15.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) gene variation in Parkinson's
disease.

Alvarez V(1), Corao AI, Sánchez-Ferrero E, De Mena L, Alonso-Montes C, Huerta C, 
Blázquez M, Ribacoba R, Guisasola LM, Salvador C, García-Castro M, Coto E.

Author information: 
(1)Genética Molecular, Hospital Central de Asturias-Maternidad, 33006 Oviedo,
Spain.

Mitochondrial function is necessary to supply the energy required for cell
metabolism. Mutations/polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) have been
implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD). The mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(TFAM) controls the transcription of mtDNA and regulates the mtDNA-copy number,
thus being important for maintaining ATP production. TFAM dysfunction may also be
involved in PD, and TFAM gene mutations/polymorphisms could contribute to the
risk of developing PD. We searched for gene variants in the seven TFAM-exons in a
total of 250 PD-patients. We found five common polymorphisms, and only one was a 
missense change (S12T in exon 1). Genotype and allele frequencies did not differ 
between patients and healthy controls (n=225) for the five polymorphisms. Our
work suggests that TFAM-variants did not contribute to the risk of developing PD.

PMID: 18248889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 May 15;17(10):1418-26. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn030. Epub 2008 Feb
1.

Age-associated mosaic respiratory chain deficiency causes trans-neuronal
degeneration.

Dufour E(1), Terzioglu M, Sterky FH, Sörensen L, Galter D, Olson L, Wilbertz J,
Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, S-17177 Stockholm,
Sweden.

Heteroplasmic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations (mutations present only in a
subset of cellular mtDNA copies) arise de novo during the normal ageing process
or may be maternally inherited in pedigrees with mitochondrial disease syndromes.
A pathogenic mtDNA mutation causes respiratory chain deficiency only if the
fraction of mutated mtDNA exceeds a certain threshold level. These mutations
often undergo apparently random mitotic segregation and the levels of normal and 
mutated mtDNA can vary considerably between cells of the same tissue. In human
ageing, segregation of somatic mtDNA mutations leads to mosaic respiratory chain 
deficiency in a variety of tissues, such as brain, heart and skeletal muscle. A
similar pattern of mutation segregation with mosaic respiratory chain deficiency 
is seen in patients with mitochondrial disease syndromes caused by inherited
pathogenic mtDNA mutations. We have experimentally addressed the role of mosaic
respiratory chain deficiency in ageing and mitochondrial disease by creating
mouse chimeras with a mixture of normal and respiratory chain-deficient neurons
in cerebral cortex. We report here that a low proportion (>20%) of respiratory
chain-deficient neurons in the forebrain are sufficient to cause symptoms,
whereas premature death of the animal occurs only if the proportion is high
(>60-80%). The presence of neurons with normal respiratory chain function does
not only prevent mortality but also delays the age at which onset of disease
symptoms occur. Unexpectedly, respiratory chain-deficient neurons have adverse
effect on normal adjacent neurons and induce trans-neuronal degeneration. In
summary, our study defines the minimal threshold level of respiratory
chain-deficient neurons needed to cause symptoms and also demonstrate that
neurons with normal respiratory chain function ameliorate disease progression.
Finally, we show that respiratory chain-deficient neurons induce death of normal 
neurons by a trans-neuronal degeneration mechanism. These findings provide novel 
insights into the pathogenesis of mosaic respiratory chain deficiency in ageing
and mitochondrial disease.

PMCID: PMC2367695
PMID: 18245781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Apr;28(7):2446-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00980-07. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

CREB-1alpha is recruited to and mediates upregulation of the cytochrome c
promoter during enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis accompanying skeletal muscle
differentiation.

Franko A(1), Mayer S, Thiel G, Mercy L, Arnould T, Hornig-Do HT, Wiesner RJ,
Goffart S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vegetative Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Köln,
Robert-Koch-Strasse 39, 50931 Köln, Germany.

To further understand pathways coordinating the expression of nuclear genes
encoding mitochondrial proteins, we studied mitochondrial biogenesis during
differentiation of myoblasts to myotubes. This energy-demanding process was
accompanied by a fivefold increase of ATP turnover, covered by an eightfold
increase of mitochondrial activity. While no change in mitochondrial DNA copy
number was observed, mRNAs as well as proteins for nucleus-encoded cytochrome c, 
cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) 
increased, together with total cellular RNA and protein levels. Detailed analysis
of the cytochrome c promoter by luciferase reporter, binding affinity, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays as well as mutagenesis studies revealed a
critical role for cyclic AMP responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB-1) for
promoter activation. Expression of two CREB-1 isoforms was observed by using
specific antibodies and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, and a shift from 
phosphorylated CREB-1Delta in myoblasts to phosphorylated CREB-1alpha protein in 
myotubes was shown, while mRNA ratios remained unchanged. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed preferential binding of CREB-1alpha in situ 
to the cytochrome c promoter in myotubes. Overexpression of constitutively active
and dominant-negative forms supported the key role of CREB-1 in regulating the
expression of genes encoding mitochondrial proteins during myogenesis and
probably also in other situations of enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2268439
PMID: 18227154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 15;75(6):1313-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2007.12.002.
Epub 2007 Dec 15.

Increased mitochondrial DNA copy-number in CEM cells resistant to delayed
toxicity of 2',3'-dideoxycytidine.

Bjerke M(1), Franco M, Johansson M, Balzarini J, Karlsson A.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institute, Division for Clinical Microbiology, Department of
Laboratory Medicine, S-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.

The nucleoside analog 2',3'-dideoxycytidine (ddC) has been used for treatment of 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections. ddC causes delayed toxicity when
cells are exposed to the drug at low concentration for prolonged periods of time.
The delayed toxicity is due to inhibition of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
replication, which results in mtDNA depletion and mitochondrial dysfunction. In
the present study we have cultured CEM T-lymphoblast cells in the presence of low
concentrations of ddC to generate two cell lines resistant to the delayed
toxicity of the drug. Both cell lines were resistant to mtDNA depletion by ddC.
The mechanism of ddC resistance was investigated and we showed that the resistant
cells had decreased mRNA expression of the nucleoside kinases deoxycytidine
kinase and thymidine kinase 2. We also studied the mitochondrial DNA in the cells
and showed that the ddC-resistant cells had structurally intact mtDNA but
1.5-2-fold increased mtDNA copy-number as well as increased levels of the
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam). Our study suggests that cells may
increase their level of mtDNA to counteract mtDNA depletion induced by ddC, while
keeping pronounced antiviral activity of the drug.

PMID: 18206854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Feb 1;103(2):347-57.

Maintenance of mitochondrial DNA copy number and expression are essential for
preservation of mitochondrial function and cell growth.

Jeng JY(1), Yeh TS, Lee JW, Lin SH, Fong TH, Hsieh RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

To examine whether a reduction in the mtDNA level will compromise mitochondrial
biogenesis and mitochondrial function, we created a cell model with depleted
mtDNA. Stable transfection of small interfering (si)RNA of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam) was used to interfere with Tfam gene expression.
Selected stable clones showed 60-95% reduction in Tfam gene expression and 50-90%
reduction in cytochrome b (Cyt b) gene expression. Tfam gene knockdown clones
also showed decreased mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COX I)
protein expression. However, no significant differences in protein expression
were observed in nuclear DNA (nDNA)-encoded mitochondrial respiratory enzyme
subunits. The cell morphology changed from a rhombus-like to a spindle-like form 
as determined in clones with decreased expressions of Tfam, mtRNA, and
mitochondrial proteins. The mitochondrial respiratory enzyme activities and ATP
production in such clones were significantly lower. The proportions of mtDNA
mutations including 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), a 4,977-bp deletion,
and a 3,243-point mutation were also examined in these clones. No obvious
increase in mtDNA mutations was observed in mitochondrial dysfunctional cell
clones. The mitochondrial respiratory activity and ATP production ability
recovered in cells with increased mtDNA levels after removal of the specific
siRNA treatment. These experimental results provide direct evidence to
substantiate that downregulation of mtDNA copy number and expression may
compromise mitochondrial function and subsequent cell growth and morphology.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18072287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Feb;44(2):411-8. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and autophagy by lipopolysaccharide in
the neonatal rat cardiomyocyte protects against programmed cell death.

Hickson-Bick DL(1), Jones C, Buja LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Diane.L.Bick@uth.tmc.edu

Adult rat cardiomyocytes in culture respond to sub-lethal doses of
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) by activation of pathways including the production of
TNF-alpha and increased apoptosis. We and others have demonstrated a protective
phenotype for neonatal rat cardiomyocytes to LPS. Concentrations of LPS far
exceeding those necessary to induce TNF-alpha release do not induce apoptosis in 
the neonatal cells, although these cells are fully capable or inducing apoptosis 
in response to multiple other stimuli. In neonatal cells, we demonstrate that LPS
treatment leads to a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (Deltapsi) which is
temporally associated with an increase in the level of uncoupling protein 3
(UCP3). Cells remain viable with no measurable increase in apoptotic or necrotic 
cell death. Many markers of mitochondrial biogenesis are also activated. LPS
treatment stimulates an increase in the (i) transcription of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam), (ii) nuclear accumulation of redox-sensitive
nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1), and (iii) expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1 (PGC-1). We also observed
that LPS increased intracellular autophagy. Autophagy was assessed by monitoring 
the levels of a mammalian protein specifically associated with autophagosomes,
microtubule-associated light chain 3 (LC3). Furthermore, inhibition of autophagy 
in the presence of LPS stimulates markers of apoptosis. Our data suggest that the
protective response of neonatal cells to LPS is multi-faceted at the level of the
mitochondrion. Viable cells replace dysfunctional mitochondria by mitochondrial
biogenesis and the extent of the damage limited by the rapid removal of damaged
organelles by the stimulation of autophagy.

PMID: 18062988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Mar;22(3):609-22. Epub 2007 Nov 29.

Estradiol stimulates transcription of nuclear respiratory factor-1 and increases 
mitochondrial biogenesis.

Mattingly KA(1), Ivanova MM, Riggs KA, Wickramasinghe NS, Barch MJ, Klinge CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, 580 South Preston Street, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

Estrogen has direct and indirect effects on mitochondrial activity, but the
mechanisms mediating these effects remain unclear. Others reported that long-term
estradiol (E(2)) treatment increased nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) protein
in cerebral blood vessels of ovariectomized rats. NRF-1 is a transcription factor
that regulates the expression of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes, e.g.
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), that control transcription of the
mitochondrial genome. Here we tested the hypothesis that E(2) increases NRF-1
transcription resulting in a coordinate increase in the expression of nuclear-
and mitochondrial- encoded genes and mitochondrial respiratory activity. We show 
that E(2) increased NRF-1 mRNA and protein in MCF-7 breast and H1793 lung
adenocarcinoma cells in a time-dependent manner. E(2)-induced NRF-1 expression
was inhibited by the estrogen receptor (ER) antagonist ICI 182,780 and
actinomycin D but not by phosphoinositide-3 kinase and MAPK inhibitors,
indicating a genomic mechanism of E(2) regulation of NRF-1 transcription. An
estrogen response element (ERE) in the NRF-1 promoter bound ER alpha and ER beta 
in vitro, and E(2) induced ER alpha and ER beta recruitment to this ERE in
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays in MCF-7 cells. The NRF-1 ERE activated
reporter gene expression in transfected cells. Small interfering RNA to ER alpha 
and ER beta revealed that ER alpha mediates E(2)-induced NRF-1 transcription. The
E(2)-induced increase in NRF-1 was followed by increased TFAM and the
transcription of Tfam-regulated mitochondrial DNA-encoded COI and NDI genes and
increased mitochondrial biogenesis. Knockdown of NRF-1 blocked E(2) stimulation
of mitochondrial biogenesis and activity, indicating a mechanism by which
estrogens regulate mitochondrial function by increasing NRF-1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2262171
PMID: 18048642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Ital J Biochem. 2007 Dec;56(4):315-8.

The smaller isoform of the mitochondrial transcription factor A has a role in the
mitochondrial transcription.

Bruno S(1), De Virgilio C, Gadaleta G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Ernesto Quagliariello,
University of Bari, Italy.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is a mitochondrial protein
encoded in the nucleus. The gene for Tfam spans about 10 kb and consists of seven
exons and six introns. In human and rat, exon 5 can splite alternatively
resulting in two Tfam isoforms. In order to investigate the role of the delta
5Tfam isoform in human cells, we studied its stability in vitro, then we carried 
out overexpression experiments in H1299 human cell line in order to clarify the
in vivo effect of this shorter isoform of Tfam. The data obtained by Real
time-PCR demonstrate that the overexpression of delta 5Tfam causes an increase of
mitochondrial transcription, so also this isoform as a role in the mitochondrial 
process.

PMID: 19192634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Free Radic Biol Med. 2007 Dec 15;43(12):1616-26. Epub 2007 Sep 9.

Sequence-specific oxidative base modifications in hypoxia-inducible genes.

Pastukh V(1), Ruchko M, Gorodnya O, Wilson GL, Gillespie MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center for Lung Biology, University of South
Alabama College of Medicine, Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

Reactive oxygen species associated with hypoxic signaling in pulmonary arterial
endothelial cells (PAECs) oxidatively modify specific nucleotides in the hypoxic 
response element (HRE) of the VEGF gene (FASEB J.19:387-394; 2005). In this
study, we determined in PAECs if hypoxia caused genome-wide oxidative
modifications or if they were restricted to the promoters of genes differentially
regulated by hypoxia. Comet assays indicated that there were no differences
between normoxic and hypoxic PAECs in terms of global DNA damage. However, a
simple PCR-based method involving DNA amplification before and after treatment
with formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase (Fpg), a bacterial DNA repair enzyme
that cleaves at sites of purine base oxidation, revealed that hypoxia caused
modifications in the HREs of the hypoxia-inducible VEGF, HO-1, and ET-1 genes
which coincided with accumulation of their respective mRNA transcripts. Promoter 
sequences not involved with hypoxic induction and coding regions of these genes
failed to display Fpg-sensitive sites. Oxidative modifications also were not
detected in sequences of the hypoxia down-regulated ornithine decarboxylase and
TFAM genes or the constitutively expressed beta-actin gene. These findings show
that hypoxia-mediated oxidative DNA modifications cluster in functionally
relevant promoter sequences in hypoxia-inducible genes and suggest that such
oxidative modifications may be biologically significant.

PMID: 18037127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. FEBS J. 2007 Dec;274(24):6488-99. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A possesses multiple subcellular
targeting signals.

Pastukh V(1), Shokolenko I, Wang B, Wilson G, Alexeyev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of South Alabama,
Mobile, AL 36688, USA.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a member of a high-mobility
group (HMG) family represented mostly by nuclear proteins. Although nuclear
localization of TFAM has been demonstrated in some tumors and after treatment of 
tumor cells with anticancer drugs, the significance of these observations has not
been fully elucidated. Here we report that both TFAM overexpression and
impairment of its mitochondrial targeting can result in nuclear accumulation of
the protein. Both M1 and M7 methionines of human TFAM (hTFAM) can be used for
translation initiation with almost equal efficiency resulting in two
polypeptides. The shorter polypeptide, however, is not located in the nucleus,
despite truncation in the mitochondrial targeting sequence, and both isoforms are
targeted to mitochondria with similar efficiency. We further demonstrate that
nuclear TFAM confers significant cytoprotection against the chemotherapeutic
drugs etoposide, camptothecin, and cisplatin. Three regions of hTFAM [HMG-like
domain 1 (HMG1) and HMG-like domain 2 (HMG2), as well as the tail region] can
effect nuclear accumulation of enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) fusions.
The HMG1 domain contains a bipartite nuclear localization sequence whose identity
is supported by site-directed mutagenesis. However, this bipartite nuclear
localization sequence is weak, and both N-terminal and C-terminal flanking
sequences enhance the nuclear targeting of EGFP. Finally, several mutations in
the HMG1 domain increased the mitochondrial targeting of the EGFP fusions,
suggesting that the mitochondrial targeting sequence of hTFAM may extend beyond
the cleavable presequence.

PMID: 18028422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Aging Cell. 2008 Jan;7(1):2-12. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Mitochondrial function and apoptotic susceptibility in aging skeletal muscle.

Chabi B(1), Ljubicic V, Menzies KJ, Huang JH, Saleem A, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

During aging, skeletal muscle undergoes sarcopenia, a condition characterized by 
a loss of muscle cell mass and alterations in contractile function. The origin of
these decrements is unknown, but evidence suggests that they can be partly
attributed to mitochondrial dysfunction. To characterize the nature of this
dysfunction, we investigated skeletal muscle contractile properties,
subsarcolemmal (SS) and intermyofibrillar (IMF) mitochondrial biogenesis and
function, as well as apoptotic susceptibility in young (6 months old) and
senescent (36 months old) Fischer 344 Brown Norway rats. Muscle mass and maximal 
force production were significantly lower in the 36-month group, which is
indicative of a sarcopenic phenotype. Furthermore, contractile activity in situ
revealed greater fatigability in the 36-month compared to the 6-month animals.
This decrement could be partially accounted for by a 30% lower mitochondrial
content in fast-twitch muscle from 36-month animals, as well as lower protein
levels of the transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha. Enzyme activities and glutamate-induced oxygen
consumption rates in isolated SS and IMF mitochondria were similar between age
groups. However, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production during
state 3 respiration was approximately 1.7-fold greater in mitochondria isolated
from 36-month compared to 6-month animals, and was accompanied by a 1.8-fold
increase in the DNA repair enzyme 8-oxoguanine glycosylase 1 in fast-twitch
muscle. Basal rates of release of cytochrome c and endonuclease G in SS
mitochondria were 3.5- to 7-fold higher from senescent animals. These data
suggest that the age-related sarcopenia and muscle fatigability are associated
with enhanced ROS production, increased mitochondrial apoptotic susceptibility
and reduced transcriptional drive for mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 18028258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Diabetologia. 2008 Jan;51(1):165-74. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

R-alpha-lipoic acid and acetyl-L-carnitine complementarily promote mitochondrial 
biogenesis in murine 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Shen W(1), Liu K, Tian C, Yang L, Li X, Ren J, Packer L, Cotman CW, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Science, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of the study was to address the importance of
mitochondrial function in insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes, and also to
identify effective agents for ameliorating insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes.
We examined the effect of two mitochondrial nutrients, R-alpha-lipoic acid (LA)
and acetyl-L-carnitine (ALC), as well as their combined effect, on mitochondrial 
biogenesis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
METHODS: Mitochondrial mass and oxygen consumption were determined in 3T3-L1
adipocytes cultured in the presence of LA and/or ALC for 24 h. Mitochondrial DNA 
and mRNA from peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma and alpha (Pparg
and Ppara) and carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1a (Cpt1a), as well as several
transcription factors involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, were evaluated by
real-time PCR or electrophoretic mobility shift (EMSA) assay. Mitochondrial
complexes proteins were measured by western blot and fatty acid oxidation was
measured by quantifying CO2 production from [1-14C]palmitate.
RESULTS: Treatments with the combination of LA and ALC at concentrations of 0.1, 
1 and 10 micromol/l for 24 h significantly increased mitochondrial mass,
expression of mitochondrial DNA, mitochondrial complexes, oxygen consumption and 
fatty acid oxidation in 3T3L1 adipocytes. These changes were accompanied by an
increase in expression of Pparg, Ppara and Cpt1a mRNA, as well as increased
expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma coactivator
1 alpha (Ppargc1a), mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) and nuclear
respiratory factors 1 and 2 (Nrf1 and Nrf2). However, the treatments with LA or
ALC alone at the same concentrations showed little effect on mitochondrial
function and biogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We conclude that the combination of LA and ALC may
act as PPARG/A dual ligands to complementarily promote mitochondrial synthesis
and adipocyte metabolism.

PMID: 18026715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Mol Genet Metab. 2008 Jan;93(1):54-65. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Mitochondrial structure and function in the untreated Jackson toxic milk (tx-j)
mouse, a model for Wilson disease.

Roberts EA(1), Robinson BH, Yang S.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomic Biology Program, Hospital for Sick Children Research
Institute, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. eve.roberts@sickkids.ca

Structural changes in hepatocellular mitochondria are characteristic of Wilson
disease (WD). Features include variability in size and shape, increased density
of matrix, discreet inclusions, and cystic dilatation of the cristae. We examined
the functional basis for these mitochondrial changes in the toxic milk (tx-j)
mouse model for WD. Its normal syngeic strain, C3H, served as control. Hepatic
histology was near-normal in tx-j mice at 3-4-months-old and showed mild
inflammation and steatosis at 6-months-old. Transmission electron microscopy
showed typical mitochondrial abnormalities, specifically cystic dilatation of
tips of cristae, in 3, 4, and 6-month-old tx-j mice and none in normal
3-month-old C3H mice. Citrate synthase (CS) activity was initially lower in tx-j 
mice than age-matched controls but increased over the first 6 months such that it
was significantly greater at 5 and 6-months-old (p<0.003). No evidence for
hepatic mtDNA depletion was found by long-PCR analysis. NB-PAGE showed
preservation of all complexes in the oxidative-phosphorylation chain except
complex IV which declined markedly from 5-months-old onwards. Hepatic complex IV 
activity was significantly decreased in 5-month-old tx-j mice (p<0.04).
Expression of mitochondrial transfer factor A (TFAM) mRNA declined progressively 
in 6-8-month-old tx-j mice; immunodetectable protein levels declined in parallel.
Expression of mtSSB mRNA was uniformly low in tx-j mice from 1-8-months-old.
Levels of two mitochondrial antioxidant proteins capable of binding copper,
thioredoxin-2 and peroxiredoxin-3, rose over the first 6 months of life.
Mitochondrial changes occur early in WD and reflect complex, probably oxidative, 
injury.

PMID: 17981064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Cell Sci. 2007 Nov 15;120(Pt 22):4025-34. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

Mitochondrial DNA replication during differentiation of murine embryonic stem
cells.

Facucho-Oliveira JM(1), Alderson J, Spikings EC, Egginton S, St John JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, The Medical School, The
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.

Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), the intracellular process that generates the 
majority of the ATP of a cell through the electron-transfer chain, is highly
dependent on proteins encoded by the mitochondrial genome (mtDNA). MtDNA
replication is regulated by the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) and the mitochondrial-specific DNA polymerase gamma, which
consists of a catalytic (POLG) and an accessory (POLG2) subunit. Differentiation 
of pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs) into specific cell types requires
expansion of discrete populations of mitochondria and mtDNA replication to meet
the specific metabolic requirements of the cell. We determined by real-time PCR
that expression of pluripotent markers is reduced before the upregulation of
Polg, Polg2 and Tfam in spontaneously differentiating R1 murine (m)ESCs, along
with transient increases in mtDNA copy number. In D3 mESCs, the initial transient
increase did not take place. However, precursors of neuronal and cardiomyocyte
differentiation were positive for both POLG and TFAM. Similar-stage ESCs also
showed active mtDNA replication, identified by 5-bromo-2'-deoxy-uridine
labelling, as mtDNA copy number increased. Retinoic-acid-induced differentiation 
resulted in more consistent patterns of replication and upregulation of Polg,
Polg2 and Tfam, whereas siRNA knockdown demonstrated that steady-state expression
of POLG is essential for maintaining pluripotency.

PMID: 17971411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochimie. 2007 Oct;89(10):1276-88. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

New computational methods reveal tRNA identity element divergence between
Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria.

Freyhult E(1), Cui Y, Nilsson O, Ardell DH.

Author information: 
(1)The Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala University, Box 598, 751 24
Uppsala, Sweden.

There are at least 21 subfunctional classes of tRNAs in most cells that, despite 
a very highly conserved and compact common structure, must interact specifically 
with different cliques of proteins or cause grave organismal consequences.
Protein recognition of specific tRNA substrates is achieved in part through
class-restricted tRNA features called tRNA identity determinants. In earlier work
we used TFAM, a statistical classifier of tRNA function, to show evidence of
unexpectedly large diversity among bacteria in tRNA identity determinants. We
also created a data reduction technique called function logos to visualize
identity determinants for a given taxon. Here we show evidence that determinants 
for lysylated isoleucine tRNAs are not the same in Proteobacteria as in other
bacterial groups including the Cyanobacteria. Consistent with this, the
lysylating biosynthetic enzyme TilS lacks a C-terminal domain in Cyanobacteria
that is present in Proteobacteria. We present here, using function logos, a map
estimating all potential identity determinants generally operational in
Cyanobacteria and Proteobacteria. To further isolate the differences in potential
tRNA identity determinants between Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria, we created
two new data reduction visualizations to contrast sequence and function logos
between two taxa. One, called Information Difference logos (ID logos), shows the 
evolutionary gain or retention of functional information associated to features
in one lineage. The other, Kullback-Leibler divergence Difference logos (KLD
logos), shows recruitments or shifts in the functional associations of features, 
especially those informative in both lineages. We used these new logos to
specifically isolate and visualize the differences in potential tRNA identity
determinants between Proteobacteria and Cyanobacteria. Our graphical results
point to numerous differences in potential tRNA identity determinants between
these groups. Although more differences in general are explained by shifts in
functional association rather than gains or losses, the apparent identity
differences in lysylated isoleucine tRNAs appear to have evolved through both
mechanisms.

PMID: 17889982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2007 Dec 1;225(2):214-20. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Hyperglycemia decreases mitochondrial function: the regulatory role of
mitochondrial biogenesis.

Palmeira CM(1), Rolo AP, Berthiaume J, Bjork JA, Wallace KB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurosciences and Cell Biology of Coimbra, Department of Zoology,
University of Coimbra, 3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal. palmeira@ci.uc.pt

Increased generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is implicated in "glucose
toxicity" in diabetes. However, little is known about the action of glucose on
the expression of transcription factors in hepatocytes, especially those involved
in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication and transcription. Since mitochondrial
functional capacity is dynamically regulated, we hypothesized that stressful
conditions of hyperglycemia induce adaptations in the transcriptional control of 
cellular energy metabolism, including inhibition of mitochondrial biogenesis and 
oxidative metabolism. Cell viability, mitochondrial respiration, ROS generation
and oxidized proteins were determined in HepG2 cells cultured in the presence of 
either 5.5 mM (control) or 30 mM glucose (high glucose) for 48 h, 96 h and 7
days. Additionally, mtDNA abundance, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1),
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and nuclear respiratory factor-1
(NRF-1) transcripts were evaluated by real time PCR. High glucose induced a
progressive increase in ROS generation and accumulation of oxidized proteins,
with no changes in cell viability. Increased expression of PAI-1 was observed as 
early as 96 h of exposure to high glucose. After 7 days in hyperglycemia, HepG2
cells exhibited inhibited uncoupled respiration and decreased MitoTracker Red
fluorescence associated with a 25% decrease in mtDNA and 16% decrease in TFAM
transcripts. These results indicate that glucose may regulate mtDNA copy number
by modulating the transcriptional activity of TFAM in response to
hyperglycemia-induced ROS production. The decrease of mtDNA content and
inhibition of mitochondrial function may be pathogenic hallmarks in the altered
metabolic status associated with diabetes.

PMID: 17761203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Gene. 2007 Oct 15;401(1-2):145-53. Epub 2007 Jul 21.

Transcription factor hStaf/ZNF143 is required for expression of the human TFAM
gene.

Gérard MA(1), Krol A, Carbon P.

Author information: 
(1)Architecture et Réactivité de l'ARN, Université Louis Pasteur de Strasbourg,
CNRS, IBMC, 15 rue René Descartes, 67084 Strasbourg, France.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is essential for transcription
initiation and replication of mitochondrial DNA. It was previously reported that 
transcription factors Sp1, NRF-1, NRF-2 were critical for maintaining the normal 
transcription levels of the mammalian TFAM gene. In this work, investigation of
the transcriptional regulation of the human TFAM gene revealed the presence of
two cross-species conserved binding sites for the transcription factor
hStaf/ZNF143. By using promoter binding assays, transient expression of mutant
TFAM reporter gene constructs and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, we
provided insight into the involvement of hStaf/ZNF143 in promoter activity.
Furthermore, we reported the identification of two other functionally important
elements. Altogether, our data led to the conclusion that the promoter of the
human TFAM gene harbors a complex organization with at least six transcriptional 
regulatory elements.

PMID: 17707600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Eur Respir J. 2007 Aug;30(2):191-3.

Decreased muscle PPAR concentrations: a mechanism underlying skeletal muscle
abnormalities in COPD?

Sathyapala SA, Kemp P, Polkey MI.

PMID: 17666554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Med Hypotheses. 2008;70(3):693-7. Epub 2007 Jul 30.

Obese humans as economically designed feed converters: symmorphosis and low
oxidative capacity skeletal muscle.

Hudson NJ(1), Lehnert SA, Harper GS.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, Queensland Bioscience Precinct, 306 Carmody Road, 
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. nicholasjameshudson@yahoo.com

Human obesity is considered a consequence of a thrifty or economic metabolism. In
this hypothesis, we apply an established economic design theory, called
symmorphosis, to help explain the known association between obesity and low
oxidative capacity skeletal muscle. Symmorphosis reflects an engineering
principle, and predicts that physiological systems are most economically designed
when unnecessary spare capacity is eliminated. This is because the
structural/functional adaptations accounting for spare capacity themselves bear
energetic costs of construction, maintenance and load. As oxidation of feed
energy occurs in mitochondria, and because skeletal muscle accounts for 30% of
resting metabolism, we focus on skeletal muscle mitochondria. In the same way
that the most economically designed elevator is supported by a cable that is
strong enough, but not too strong, symmorphosis predicts that the most
economically designed feed converters should have enough, but not too much
mitochondrial oxidative (fuel burning) capacity. While ATP demand is clearly more
efficiently met by oxidative (38 molecules of ATP) rather than glycolytic (2
molecules of ATP) metabolism, symmorphosis predicts that having excess oxidative 
capacity actually reduces feed efficiency. This inefficiency is manifest by
having to maintain, ultimately using feed energy, the expensive inner
mitochondrial proton gradient in the superfluous mitochondria. On this basis, we 
predict that established molecular controllers of mitochondrial biogenesis and
oxidative capacity such as eNOS, SIN3 co-repressor, TFAM and PPARgamma may yield 
useful DNA markers and therapeutic targets for issues relating to frugal
energetics, namely predisposition to obesity and starvation resilience.

PMID: 17664046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Oct;293(4):C1302-8. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Sexual dimorphism in liver mitochondrial oxidative capacity is conserved under
caloric restriction conditions.

Valle A(1), Guevara R, García-Palmer FJ, Roca P, Oliver J.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, E-07122, Palma de
Mallorca, Spain.

Caloric restriction (CR) without malnutrition has been shown to increase maximal 
life span and delay the rate of aging in a wide range of species. It has been
proposed that reduction in energy expenditure and oxidative damage may explain
the life-extending effect of CR. Sex-related differences also have been shown to 
influence longevity and energy expenditure in many mammalian species. The aim of 
the present study was to determine the sex-related differences in rat liver
mitochondrial machinery, bioenergetics, and oxidative balance in response to
short-term CR. Mitochondria were isolated from 6-mo-old male and female Wistar
rats fed ad libitum or subjected to 40% CR for 3 mo. Mitochondrial O(2)
consumption, activities of the oxidative phosphorylation system (complexes I,
III, IV, and V), antioxidative activities [MnSOD, glutathione peroxidase (GPx)], 
mitochondrial DNA and protein content, mitochondrial H(2)O(2) production, and
markers of oxidative damage, as well as cytochrome C oxidase and mitochondrial
transcription factor A levels, were measured. Female rats showed a higher
oxidative capacity and GPx activity than males. This sexual dimorphism was not
modified by CR. Restricted rats showed slightly increased oxygen consumption,
complex III activity, and GPx antioxidant activity together with lower levels of 
oxidative damage. In conclusion, the sexual dimorphism in liver mitochondrial
oxidative capacity was unaffected by CR, with females showing higher
mitochondrial functionality and ROS protection than males.

PMID: 17652427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Sep;293(3):E636-44. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Responses of mitochondrial biogenesis and function to maternal diabetes in rat
embryo during the placentation period.

Alcolea MP(1), Lladó I, García-Palmer FJ, Gianotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Universitat de les Illes Balears i
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red (Network Biomedical Research Center)
Fisiopatología Obesidad y Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Palma de
Mallorca, Spain.

Mitochondria are cellular organelles that have been reported to be altered in
diabetes, being closely related to its associated complications. Moreover,
mitochondrial biogenesis and function are essential for proper embryo development
throughout the placentation period, occurring during organogenesis, when a great 
rate of congenital malformations have been associated with diabetic pregnancy.
Thus, the aim of the current work was to investigate the effect of the diabetic
environment on mitochondrial function and biogenesis during the placentation
period. For this purpose, we studied the oxidative phosphorylation system
(OXPHOS) enzymatic activities as well as the expression of genes involved in the 
coordinated regulation of both mitochondrial and nuclear genome (PGC-1alpha,
NRF-1, NRF-2alpha, mtSSB, and TFAM) and mitochondrial function (COX-IV, COX-I,
and beta-ATPase) in rat embryos from control and streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
mothers. Our results reflected that diabetic pregnancy retarded and altered
embryo growth. The embryos from diabetic mothers showing normal morphology
presented a reduced content of proteins regulated through the PGC-1alpha
mitochondriogenic pathway on gestational day 12. This fact was accompanied by
several responses that entailed the activation of OXPHOS activities on the same
day and the recovery of the content of the studied proteins to control levels on 
day 13. As a result, the mitochondria of these embryos would reach a situation
close to control on day 13 that could allow them to follow the normal
mitochondriogenic schedule throughout a gestational period in which the
mitochondrial differentiation process is critical. Nevertheless, malformed
embryos from diabetic mothers seemed to show a lower adaptation capability, which
could exacerbate their maldevelopment.

PMID: 17609253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007 Jul;35(Web Server issue):W350-3. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

TFAM 1.0: an online tRNA function classifier.

Tåquist H(1), Cui Y, Ardell DH.

Author information: 
(1)Linnaeus Centre for Bioinformatics, Uppsala University, Box 598, SE-751 24
Uppsala, Sweden.

We have earlier published an automated statistical classifier of tRNA function
called TFAM. Unlike tRNA gene-finders, TFAM uses information from the total
sequences of tRNAs and not just their anticodons to predict their function.
Therefore TFAM has an advantage in predicting initiator tRNAs, the amino acid
charging identity of nonstandard tRNAs such as suppressors, and the former
identity of pseudo-tRNAs. In addition, TFAM predictions are robust to sequencing 
errors and useful for the statistical analysis of tRNA sequence, function and
evolution. Earlier versions of TFAM required a complicated installation and
running procedure, and only bacterial tRNA identity models were provided. Here we
describe a new version of TFAM with both a Web Server interface and simplified
standalone installation. New TFAM models are available including a
proteobacterial model for the bacterial lysylated isoleucine tRNAs, making it now
possible for TFAM to correctly classify all tRNA genes for some bacterial taxa.
First-draft eukaryotic and archaeal models are also provided making initiator
tRNA prediction easily accessible genes to any researcher or genome sequencing
effort. The TFAM Web Server is available at http://tfam.lcb.uu.se.

PMCID: PMC1933168
PMID: 17591612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Sep;18(9):3225-36. Epub 2007 Jun 20.

The mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM coordinates the assembly of multiple 
DNA molecules into nucleoid-like structures.

Kaufman BA(1), Durisic N, Mativetsky JM, Costantino S, Hancock MA, Grutter P,
Shoubridge EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, H3A 2B4, Canada.

Packaging DNA into condensed structures is integral to the transmission of
genomes. The mammalian mitochondrial genome (mtDNA) is a high copy, maternally
inherited genome in which mutations cause a variety of multisystem disorders. In 
all eukaryotic cells, multiple mtDNAs are packaged with protein into spheroid
bodies called nucleoids, which are the fundamental units of mtDNA segregation.
The mechanism of nucleoid formation, however, remains unknown. Here, we show that
the mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM, an abundant and highly conserved
High Mobility Group box protein, binds DNA cooperatively with nanomolar affinity 
as a homodimer and that it is capable of coordinating and fully compacting
several DNA molecules together to form spheroid structures. We use noncontact
atomic force microscopy, which achieves near cryo-electron microscope resolution,
to reveal the structural details of protein-DNA compaction intermediates. The
formation of these complexes involves the bending of the DNA backbone, and DNA
loop formation, followed by the filling in of proximal available DNA sites until 
the DNA is compacted. These results indicate that TFAM alone is sufficient to
organize mitochondrial chromatin and provide a mechanism for nucleoid formation.

PMCID: PMC1951767
PMID: 17581862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(12):4042-54. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Relative abundance of the human mitochondrial transcription system and distinct
roles for h-mtTFB1 and h-mtTFB2 in mitochondrial biogenesis and gene expression.

Cotney J(1), Wang Z, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, Emory University School of
Medicine, 440 Clifton Road N.E., Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Human mitochondrial transcription requires the bacteriophage-related RNA
polymerase, POLRMT, the mtDNA-binding protein, h-mtTFA/TFAM, and two
transcription factors/rRNA methyltransferases, h-mtTFB1 and h-mtTFB2. Here, we
determined the steady-state levels of these core transcription components and
examined the consequences of purposeful elevation of h-mtTFB1 or h-mtTFB2 in HeLa
cells. On a per molecule basis, we find an approximately 6-fold excess of POLRMT 
to mtDNA and approximately 3-fold more h-mtTFB2 than h-mtTFB1. We also estimate
h-mtTFA at approximately 50 molecules/mtDNA, a ratio predicted to support robust 
transcription, but not to coat mtDNA. Consistent with a role for h-mtTFB2 in
transcription and transcription-primed replication, increased mitochondrial DNA
and transcripts result from its over-expression. This is accompanied by increased
translation rates of most, but not all mtDNA-encoded proteins. Over-expression of
h-mtTFB1 did not significantly influence these parameters, but did result in
increased mitochondrial biogenesis. Furthermore, h-mtTFB1 mRNA and protein are
elevated in response to h-mtTFB2 over-expression, suggesting the existence of a
retrograde signal to the nucleus to coordinately regulate expression of these
related factors. Altogether, our results provide a framework for understanding
the regulation of human mitochondrial transcription in vivo and define distinct
roles for h-mtTFB1 and h-mtTFB2 in mitochondrial biogenesis and gene expression
that together likely fine-tune mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC1919481
PMID: 17557812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Sep;293(3):E672-80. Epub 2007 Jun 5.

The effect of training on the expression of mitochondrial biogenesis- and
apoptosis-related proteins in skeletal muscle of patients with mtDNA defects.

Adhihetty PJ(1), Taivassalo T, Haller RG, Walkinshaw DR, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M3J 1P3.

Mitochondrial myopathy patients (MMPs) have impaired oxidative phosphorylation
and exercise intolerance. Endurance training of MMPs improves exercise tolerance,
but also increases mutational load. To assess the regulation of mitochondrial
content in MMPs, we measured proteins involved in 1) biogenesis, 2) oxidative
stress, and 3) apoptosis in MMPs and healthy controls (HCs) both before and after
endurance training. Before training, MMPs had a greater mitochondrial content,
along with a 1.4-fold (P < 0.05) higher expression of the biogenesis regulator
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha).
The DNA repair enzyme 8-oxoguanine DNA glycolase-1 (OGG-1), the antioxidant
manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), and the apoptotic proteins AIF and Bcl-2 
were higher in MMPs compared with HCs. Aconitase, an enzyme sensitive to
oxidative stress, was 52% lower (P < 0.05) in MMPs when calculated based on an
estimate of mitochondrial volume and oxidative stress-induced protein
modifications tended to be higher in MMPs compared with HCs. Endurance training
(ET) induced increases in mitochondrial content in both HC subjects and MMPs, but
there was no effect of training on the regulatory proteins Tfam or PGC-1alpha. In
MMPs, training induced a selective reduction of OGG-1, an increase in MnSOD, and 
a reduction in aconitase activity. Thus, before training, MMPs exhibited an
adaptive response of nuclear proteins indicative of a compensatory increase in
mitochondrial content. Following training, several parallel adaptations occurred 
in MMPs and HCs, which may contribute to previously observed functional
improvements of exercise in MMPs. However, our results indicate that muscle from 
MMPs may be exposed to greater levels of oxidative stress during the course of
training. Further investigation is required to evaluate the long-term benefits of
endurance training as a therapeutic intervention for mitochondrial myopathy
patients.

PMID: 17551003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Jun 15;420(3):257-62. Epub 2007 May 10.

Association study of two genetic variants in mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Belin AC(1), Björk BF, Westerlund M, Galter D, Sydow O, Lind C, Pernold K,
Rosvall L, Håkansson A, Winblad B, Nissbrandt H, Graff C, Olson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, and Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Andrea.Carmine.Belin@ki.se

Mitochondrial (mt) dysfunction has been implicated in Alzheimer's (AD) and
Parkinson's disease (PD). Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is needed
for mtDNA maintenance, regulating mtDNA copy number and is absolutely required
for transcriptional initiation at mtDNA promoters. Two genetic variants in TFAM
have been reported to be associated with AD in a Caucasian case-control material 
collected from Germany, Switzerland and Italy. One of these variants was reported
to show a tendency for association with AD in a pooled Scottish and Swedish
case-control material and the other variant was reported to be associated with AD
in a recent meta-analysis. We investigated these two genetic variants, rs1937 and
rs2306604, in an AD and a PD case-control material, both from Sweden and found
significant genotypic as well as allelic association to marker rs2306604 in the
AD case-control material (P=0.05 and P=0.03, respectively), where the A-allele
appears to increase risk for developing AD. No association was observed for
marker rs1937. We did not find any association in the PD case-control material
for either of the two markers. The distribution of the two-locus haplotype
frequencies (based on rs1937 and rs2306604) did not differ significantly between 
affected individuals and controls in the two sample sets. However, the global
P-value for haplotypic association testing indicated borderline association in
the AD sample set. Our data suggests that the rs2306604 A-allele could be a
moderate risk factor for AD, which is supported by the recent meta-analysis.

PMID: 17537576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biochimie. 2007 Aug;89(8):988-1001. Epub 2007 Apr 4.

Aging impact on biochemical activities and gene expression of Drosophila
melanogaster mitochondria.

Dubessay P(1), Garreau-Balandier I, Jarrousse AS, Fleuriet A, Sion B, Debise R,
Alziari S.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Génome Mitochondrial, UMR CNRS 6547, Université Blaise Pascal-Clermont 
II, 63177 Aubière, France.

The consequences of aging are characterized by a decline in the main cellular
functions, including those of the mitochondria. Although these consequences have 
been much studied, efforts have often focused solely on a few parameters used to 
assess the "state" of mitochondrial function during aging. We performed
comparative measurements of several parameters in young (a few days) and old (8
and 12 weeks) adult male Drosophila melanogaster: respiratory complex activities,
mitochondrial respiration, ATP synthesis, lipid composition of the inner
membrane, concentrations of respiratory complex subunits, expression of genes
(nuclear and mitochondrial) coding for mitochondrial proteins. Our results show
that, in the mitochondria of "old" flies, the activities of three respiratory
complexes (I, III, IV) are greatly diminished, ATP synthesis is decreased, and
the lipid composition of the inner membrane (fatty acids, cardiolipin) is
modified. However, the respiration rate and subunit concentrations measured by
Western blot are unaffected. Although cellular mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content 
remains constant, there is a decrease in concentrations of nuclear and
mitochondrial transcripts apparently coordinated. The expression of nuclear genes
encoding the transcription factors TFAM, TFB1, TFB2, and DmTTF, which are
essential for the maintenance and expression of mtDNA are also decreased. The
decrease in nuclear and mitochondrial transcript concentrations may be one of the
principal effects of aging on mitochondria, and could explain observed decreases 
in mitochondrial efficiency.

PMID: 17524546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Neurochem Res. 2007 Sep;32(9):1483-8. Epub 2007 May 19.

Amyloid-beta-peptide reduces the expression level of mitochondrial cytochrome
oxidase subunits.

Hong WK(1), Han EH, Kim DG, Ahn JY, Park JS, Han BG.

Author information: 
(1)Biobank for Health Sciences, Center for Genome Sciences, National Institute of
Health, Korea Center for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC), 194, Tongil-Ro,
Eunpyung-Ku, Seoul 122-701, Korea.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is an important cause of neurological disorder
including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Mitochondria play a key role in the
generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), resulting in oxidative damage to
neuronal cell and cellular compartments in the AD brain. Cytotoxicity induced by 
amyloid-beta (Abeta), a protein fragment of 25-35 amino acids in amyloid plaques 
has been shown to have neuro-toxic properties. They seem to involve mitochondrial
dysfunction, but the underlying mechanisms are not clearly understood. The
purpose of this study was to assess whether Abeta induced mitochondrial
dysfunction involves changes in cytochrome c oxidase (COX) expression. We
measured the activities of COX after expose of SK-N-SH cells (a human
neuroblastoma cell line) to Abeta. We found that levels of mRNAs expressing
mitochondrial COX subunits decreased significantly in Abeta-treated SK-N-SH cells
in a dose-dependent manner. Human mitochondrial transcription factor-1 (TFAM)
mRNA level also decreased after Abeta-treatment. These results suggest that Abeta
modulates the mitochondrial gene expression through a decrease in TFAM.

PMID: 17514422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Genetics. 2007 Jul;176(3):1511-26. Epub 2007 May 16.

Contrasting effects of in vitro fertilization and nuclear transfer on the
expression of mtDNA replication factors.

Bowles EJ(1), Lee JH, Alberio R, Lloyd RE, Stekel D, Campbell KH, St John JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, The Medical School,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is normally only inherited through the oocyte. However,
nuclear transfer (NT), the fusion of a donor cell with an enucleated oocyte, can 
transmit both donor cell and recipient oocyte mtDNA. mtDNA replication is under
the control of nuclear-encoded replication factors, such as polymerase gamma
(POLG) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). These are first expressed
during late preimplantation embryo development. To account for the persistence of
donor cell mtDNA, even when introduced at residual levels (mtDNA(R)), we
hypothesized that POLG and TFAM would be upregulated in intra- and interspecific 
(ovine-ovine) and intergeneric (caprine-ovine) NT embryos when compared to in
vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos. For the intra- and interspecific crosses, PolGA
(catalytic subunit), PolGB (accessory subunit), and TFAM mRNA were expressed at
the 2-cell stage in both nondepleted (mtDNA(+)) and mtDNA(R) embryos with protein
being expressed up to the 16-cell stage for POLGA and TFAM. However, at the
16-cell stage, there was significantly more PolGA expression in the mtDNA(R)
embryos compared to their mtDNA(+) counterparts. Expression for all three genes
first matched IVF embryos at the blastocyst stage. In the intergeneric model,
POLG was upregulated during preimplantation development. Although these embryos
did not persist further than the 16+-cell stage, significantly more mtDNA(R)
embryos reached this stage. However, the vast majority of these embryos were
homoplasmic for recipient oocyte mtDNA. The upreglation in mtDNA replication
factors was most likely due to the donor cells still expressing these factors
prior to NT.

PMCID: PMC1931560
PMID: 17507682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Sports Med. 2007 Dec;28(12):1059-64. Epub 2007 May 11.

Relationship between TFAM gene polymorphisms and endurance capacity in response
to training.

He Z(1), Hu Y, Feng L, Bao D, Xi Y, Wen L, Lucia A.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Center, China Institue of Sport Science, Beijing, China.

The aim of this study was to explore whether polymorphisms in mitochondrial
transcription factor A ( TFAM) gene are associated with endurance capacity in a
pretraining state (baseline) and/or in response to a supervised 18-wk endurance
training (changes) in 102 young Chinese males (nonathletes). Phenotypes measured 
were running economy (RE) and V(.)O (2max). Genomic DNA was extracted from white 
blood cells and the genotypes were analyzed by PCR-RFLP in single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) rs1937, rs2306604 and rs1049432. Genotype distributions were 
in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at three loci (p > 0.05). When the three
polymorphisms were considered together, three haplotypes were estimated, i.e., G 
(rs1937)-A (rs2306604)-G (rs1049432) (49 %), G (rs1937)-G (rs2306604)-G
(rs1049432) (33 %) and C (rs1937)-G (rs2306604)-T (rs1049432) (18 %). SNPrs1937
and rs1049432 achieved near complete linkage disequilibrium (LD) (D' = 1 and r
(2) = 0.903). We found no significant differences in baseline levels of V(.)O
(2max) and RE between TFAM genotypes or haplotypes. Similarly, we found no
differences for the training-induced changes of both variables. It was concluded 
that the three polymorphisms in TFAM gene rs1937, rs2306604 and rs1049432 do not 
predict endurance capacity/trainability, at least in Chinese males.

PMID: 17497594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Eur Respir J. 2007 Aug;30(2):245-52. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor expression is reduced in skeletal
muscle in COPD.

Remels AH(1), Schrauwen P, Broekhuizen R, Willems J, Kersten S, Gosker HR, Schols
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, University of Maastricht, P.O. Box 5800,
6202 AZ Maastricht, The Netherlands. a.remels@pul.unimaas.nl

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a multiorgan systemic disease.
The systemic features are skeletal muscle weakness and cachexia, the latter being
associated with systemic inflammation. The exact mechanisms underlying skeletal
muscle dysfunction in COPD remain obscure. Recent evidence suggests involvement
of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs) and PPAR-gamma
coactivator (PGC)-1alpha in regulation of skeletal muscle morphology and
metabolism, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) has been implicated
in the process of mitochondrial biogenesis. The aim of the present exploratory
study was, therefore, to compare these factors in the skeletal muscle of nine
healthy control subjects and 14 COPD patients stratified by cachexia. PPAR-gamma,
PPAR-delta and TFAM were measured at the mRNA and protein level by real-time
quantitative PCR and Western blotting, respectively. PPAR-alpha and PGC-1alpha
were meansured at the mRNA level. PPAR-delta and TFAM protein content, as well as
PGC-1alpha mRNA levels, were decreased in the skeletal muscle of COPD patients
compared with healthy controls. The cachectic COPD subgroup was further
characterised by decreased PPAR-alpha mRNA expression and decreased TFAM protein 
and mRNA levels compared with noncachectic COPD patients. In addition, PPAR-alpha
mRNA levels in skeletal muscle correlated negatively with inflammatory markers in
plasma. Therefore, a disturbed expression of these regulatory factors may well
underlie the disturbed skeletal muscle functioning in chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

PMID: 17459894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Eur J Pharmacol. 2007 Jun 1;563(1-3):77-82. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Recombinant human ciliary neurotrophic factor reduces weight partly by regulating
nuclear respiratory factor 1 and mitochondrial transcription factor A.

Liu QS(1), Wang QJ, Du GH, Zhu SY, Gao M, Zhang L, Zhu JM, Cao JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, China Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing 210009 PR
China.

Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) can lead to weight loss by up-regulating
energy metabolism and the expression of UCP-1 in mitochondria. To investigate the
up-stream regulators of the expression of UCP-1, recombinant human CNTF (rhCNTF) 
(0.1, 0.3, 0.9 mg/kg/day s.c.) administered to KK-Ay mice for 30 days resulting
in reductions in body weight and perirenal fat mass. In brown adipose tissues,
the gene expressions of nuclear respiratory factor (NRF)-1, mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFam) and uncoupling protein (UCP)-1 were found
up-regulated by rhCNTF. To the best of our knowledge, these effects represent new
insights on the mechanisms of action of weight loss by rhCNTF. In addition, we
also found that rhCNTF increased the activity of mitochondrial complex IV. The
stimulation of NRF-1, TFam, UCP-1 and the enhanced activity of mitochondrial
complex IV may be associated with remedying obesity. The result indicates that
rhCNTF can enhance the expressions of NRF-1 and TFam, both of which can
up-regulate the expression of UCP-1.

PMID: 17397829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cardiovasc Res. 2007 Jun 1;74(3):456-65. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Caloric restriction and gender modulate cardiac muscle mitochondrial H2O2
production and oxidative damage.

Colom B(1), Oliver J, Roca P, Garcia-Palmer FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Fonamental i Ciències de la Salut, Grup de Metabolisme
Energètic i Nutrició, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS), Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Gender and diet have an important effect in cardiovascular disease and
other aging-associated disorders, whose initiation and/or worsening seem to be
delayed in females from different species and in animals subjected to caloric
restriction (CR). The aim of the present study was to investigate whether cardiac
muscle bioenergetic mitochondrial features could be responsible for these
beneficial effects.
METHODS: Fifteen-month-old male and female Wistar rats were fed ad libitum or
subjected to 40% CR for 3 months. Cardiac mitochondrial function (citrate
synthase activity, oxygen consumption), activity of complexes I, III, IV and
ATPase of the OXPHOS system, antioxidant activities (MnSOD, GPx), mitochondrial
DNA and protein content, mitochondrial H2O2 production, heart oxidative damage,
complex IV and ATPase content and efficiency, as well as protein levels of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and peroxisome-proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma co-activator 1 alpha (PGC1alpha) were measured.
RESULTS: Female and CR rats exhibited lower cardiac mitochondria content, which
were more efficient and generated less H2O2 than in males and ad libitum fed
animals, with their consequent lower heart oxidative damage.
CONCLUSION: Higher mitochondrial differentiation becomes a metabolic adaptation
to increase energy efficiency, as what happens in female and CR rats. This
adaptation is associated with their lower mitochondrial free radical production
and oxidative damage, which could help to understand the mechanism by which these
animals exhibit a lower incidence of aging-related disorders, including
cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 17376413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. PLoS Med. 2007 Mar;4(3):e76.

Calorie restriction increases muscle mitochondrial biogenesis in healthy humans.

Civitarese AE(1), Carling S, Heilbronn LK, Hulver MH, Ukropcova B, Deutsch WA,
Smith SR, Ravussin E; CALERIE Pennington Team.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, United States
of America. CivitaAE@pbrc.edu

BACKGROUND: Caloric restriction without malnutrition extends life span in a range
of organisms including insects and mammals and lowers free radical production by 
the mitochondria. However, the mechanism responsible for this adaptation are
poorly understood.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The current study was undertaken to examine muscle
mitochondrial bioenergetics in response to caloric restriction alone or in
combination with exercise in 36 young (36.8 +/- 1.0 y), overweight (body mass
index, 27.8 +/- 0.7 kg/m(2)) individuals randomized into one of three groups for 
a 6-mo intervention: Control, 100% of energy requirements; CR, 25% caloric
restriction; and CREX, caloric restriction with exercise (CREX), 12.5% CR + 12.5%
increased energy expenditure (EE). In the controls, 24-h EE was unchanged, but in
CR and CREX it was significantly reduced from baseline even after adjustment for 
the loss of metabolic mass (CR, -135 +/- 42 kcal/d, p = 0.002 and CREX, -117 +/- 
52 kcal/d, p = 0.008). Participants in the CR and CREX groups had increased
expression of genes encoding proteins involved in mitochondrial function such as 
PPARGC1A, TFAM, eNOS, SIRT1, and PARL (all, p < 0.05). In parallel, mitochondrial
DNA content increased by 35% +/- 5% in the CR group (p = 0.005) and 21% +/- 4% in
the CREX group (p < 0.004), with no change in the control group (2% +/- 2%).
However, the activity of key mitochondrial enzymes of the TCA (tricarboxylic
acid) cycle (citrate synthase), beta-oxidation (beta-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase), and electron transport chain (cytochrome C oxidase II) was
unchanged. DNA damage was reduced from baseline in the CR (-0.56 +/- 0.11
arbitrary units, p = 0.003) and CREX (-0.45 +/- 0.12 arbitrary units, p = 0.011),
but not in the controls. In primary cultures of human myotubes, a nitric oxide
donor (mimicking eNOS signaling) induced mitochondrial biogenesis but failed to
induce SIRT1 protein expression, suggesting that additional factors may regulate 
SIRT1 content during CR.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed increase in muscle mitochondrial DNA in association
with a decrease in whole body oxygen consumption and DNA damage suggests that
caloric restriction improves mitochondrial function in young non-obese adults.

PMCID: PMC1808482
PMID: 17341128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Reprod. 2007 Jun;22(6):1585-96. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

The expression of polymerase gamma and mitochondrial transcription factor A and
the regulation of mitochondrial DNA content in mature human sperm.

Amaral A(1), Ramalho-Santos J, St John JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, The Medical School,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes 13 polypeptides of the
electron transfer chain. Its replication is dependent on the nuclear-encoded
polymerase gamma (POLG) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM). For
POLG, only the polyglutamine tract, characterized by a series of CAG repeats, has
been investigated in human sperm. However, TFAM is associated with the reduction 
in mtDNA content of testicular sperm. We have determined whether POLG and TFAM
have functional roles in post-ejaculatory sperm mtDNA.
METHODS: Sperm samples were categorized as: normals, samples with one or two
abnormal sperm parameters and oligoasthenoteratozoospermics (OATs). These were
analysed by fluorescent PCR to determine the number of CAG repeats, real-time PCR
for mtDNA copy number and immunocytochemistry and western blotting for patterns
of expression for POLG, TFAM and the mtDNA-encoded COXI.
RESULTS: Only the OAT group presented with a significantly higher incidence of
heterozygosity for CAG repeats, higher mtDNA content and a lower percentage of
sperm expressing POLG and TFAM. Paradoxically, good-quality sperm had fewer mtDNA
copies but significantly more sperm expressed POLG, TFAM and COXI.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the original findings that an association between
sperm quality and POLG CAG repeats does exist. However, the biological
significance of these variants in male infertility remains unclear, as these do
not seem to affect mtDNA maintenance. The reduction in mtDNA content in normal
samples likely reflects normal spermiogenesis, whereas increases in POLG and TFAM
expression possibly compensate for the low mtDNA content, maintaining
mitochondrial homeostasis.

PMID: 17339235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 27;282(17):12610-8. Epub 2007 Mar 2.

Human mitochondrial ribosomal protein MRPL12 interacts directly with
mitochondrial RNA polymerase to modulate mitochondrial gene expression.

Wang Z(1), Cotney J, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8023, USA.

The core human mitochondrial transcription machinery comprises a single subunit
bacteriophage-related RNA polymerase, POLRMT, the high mobility group box
DNA-binding protein h-mtTFA/TFAM, and two transcriptional co-activator proteins, 
h-mtTFB1 and h-mtTFB2 that also have rRNA methyltransferase activity.
Recapitulation of specific initiation of transcription in vitro can be achieved
by a complex of POL-RMT, h-mtTFA, and either h-mtTFB1 or h-mtTFB2. However, the
nature of mitochondrial transcription complexes in vivo and the potential
involvement of additional proteins in the transcription process in human
mitochondria have not been extensively investigated. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
transcription and translation are physically coupled via the formation of a
multiprotein complex nucleated by the binding of Nam1p to the amino-terminal
domain of mtRNA polymerase (Rpo41p). This model system paradigm led us to search 
for proteins that interact with POLRMT to regulate mitochondrial gene expression 
in humans. Using an affinity capture strategy to identify POL-RMT-binding
proteins, we identified mitochondrial ribosomal protein L7/L12 (MRPL12) as a
protein in HeLa mitochondrial extracts that interacts specifically with POLRMT in
vitro. Purified recombinant MRPL12 binds to POLRMT and stimulates mitochondrial
transcription activity in vitro, demonstrating that this interaction is both
direct and functional. Finally, from HeLa cells that overexpress FLAG
epitope-tagged MRPL12, increased steady-state levels of mtDNA-encoded transcripts
are observed and MRPL12-POLRMT complexes can be co-immunoprecipitated, providing 
strong evidence that this interaction enhances mitochondrial transcription or RNA
stability in vivo. We speculate that the MRPL12 interaction with POLRMT is likely
part of a novel regulatory mechanism that coordinates mitochondrial transcription
with translation and/or ribosome biogenesis during human mitochondrial gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2606046
PMID: 17337445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Reprod Dev. 2007 Jun;53(3):631-7. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Mitochondrial dysfunction of in vitro grown rabbit oocytes results in
preimplantation embryo arrest after activation.

Kanaya H(1), Hashimoto S, Teramura T, Morimoto Y, Matsumoto K, Saeki K, Iritani
A, Hosoi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Division of Genetic
Engineering, Kinki University, Japan.

To clarify the mechanism that impairs development of in vitro grown (IVG)
oocytes, we assessed whether the developmental disability of IVG oocytes is
caused by cytoplasmic dysfunction. First, we assessed the cleavage of
nuclear-substituted oocytes cultured in vitro. The nuclei, but not the cytoplasm,
of the IVG oocytes were able to support subsequent cleavage after artificial
activation. The mitochondrial activity of the oocytes increased as the follicles 
grew. However, the mitochondrial activity of the IVG oocytes was significantly
lower than that of ovulated oocytes and oocytes recovered from follicles with
diameters of more than 300 microm. Furthermore, the expression levels of
mitochondrial transcriptional factor A (TFAM) in the oocytes increased in a
similar manner. However, the expression levels of TFAM in the IVG oocytes was
significantly lower than that of ovulated oocytes and oocytes recovered from
follicles with diameters of more than 300 microm. Taken together, these results
indicate that the low developmental competence of IVG oocytes is caused by a
cytoplasm deficiency due to low mitochondrial activity.

PMID: 17317929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2007;19(1-4):205-12.

Skeletal muscle of female rats exhibit higher mitochondrial mass and
oxidative-phosphorylative capacities compared to males.

Colom B(1), Alcolea MP, Valle A, Oliver J, Roca P, García-Palmer FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició. Departament de Biología Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut. Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS). Universitat de les Illes Balears, E-07122 Palma de Mallorca,
Spain.

The effect of gender and caloric restriction on mitochondrial content and
oxidative-phosphorylative capacities has been investigated in rat gastrocnemius
muscle. Muscle protein, mitochondrial protein and DNA contents, enzymatic
activities of mitochondrial oxidative and phosphorylative system, mitochondrial
antioxidant enzymes, protein levels of complex IV (subunit I and IV) and ATPase, 
and the gene and protein expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM), involved in mitochondrial replication and transcription, were measured in
rats of both genders fed ad libitum and subjected to three months of 40% caloric 
restriction. Compared to males, gastrocnemius muscle of female rats showed higher
mitochondrial DNA and protein contents, TFAM protein level, oxidative and
phosphorylative machinery and activities, and glutathione peroxidase activity. In
conclusion, the present data show a clear gender dimorphism in rat muscle
mitochondrial features, which could explain the higher facility of females to
adapt to altered metabolic energy situations.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17310114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2007;19(1-4):195-204.

Sex differences in brown adipose tissue thermogenic features during caloric
restriction.

Valle A(1), García-Palmer FJ, Oliver J, Roca P.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició. Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut. Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut (IUNICS). Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

Caloric restriction (CR) studies have shown that females rats conserve energy
more efficiently, showing a higher resistance to weight loss and higher
protection of vital organs mass than male rats. Gender-dependent inactivation of 
thermogenesis in brown adipose tissue (BAT) has been proposed as one of these
possible energy conserving mechanisms. To study the changes underlying this
inactivation in rats, a three month study with 40% CR was undertaken to unravel
the effects on BAT recruitment. Under ad libitum conditions female rats had
greater BAT recruitment and greater oxygen consumption than their male
counterparts. Total and mitochondrial protein, as well as triglyceride and DNA
content were more reduced in restricted female rats than in restricted males.
Similarly, the levels of key BAT functional proteins (UCP1, LPL, HSL, TFAM) were 
more reduced in restricted females, whereas no changes were found in
mitochondrial DNA levels (mtDNA) and OXPHOS activities in males and females.
Furthermore, alpha (2A)/beta (3) adrenergic receptor ratio remained constant in
male rats whereas in female rats CR increased 60%. In conclusion, our results
suggest that female rats, whose BAT thermogenic activity is higher in ad libitum 
conditions, is depressed during CR. This inactivation involves the mitochondrial 
differentiation process and lipolytic system and could be due, at least in part, 
to the unfavourable adrenergic receptor balance for thermogenic activation.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 17310113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Trends Biochem Sci. 2007 Mar;32(3):111-7. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Mitochondrial transcription and its regulation in mammalian cells.

Asin-Cayuela J(1), Gustafsson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, SE-141 86,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Human mitochondria contain multiple copies of a small double-stranded DNA genome 
that encode 13 components of the electron-transport chain and RNA components that
are needed for mitochondrial translation. The mitochondrial genome is transcribed
by a specialized machinery that includes a monomeric RNA polymerase, the
mitochondrial transcription factor A and one of the two mitochondrial
transcription factor B paralogues, TFB1M or TFB2M. Today, the components of the
basal transcription machinery in mammalian mitochondria are known and their
mechanisms of action are gradually being established. In addition, regulatory
factors govern transcription levels both at the stage of initiation and
termination, but the detailed biochemical understanding of these processes is
largely missing.

PMID: 17291767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mitochondrion. 2007 Feb-Apr;7(1-2):39-44. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM): roles in maintenance of mtDNA and
cellular functions.

Kang D(1), Kim SH, Hamasaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
kang@mailserver.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

A growing body of evidence suggests that mammalian mitochondrial DNA takes on
higher structure called nucleoid or mitochromosome corresponding to that of
nuclear DNA. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which was cloned as a
transcription factor for mitochondrial DNA, has known to be essential for the
maintenance of mitochondrial DNA. Human TFAM has an ability to bind to DNA in a
sequence-independent manner and is abundant enough to cover whole region of
mitochondrial DNA, owing to which TFAM stabilizes mitochondrial DNA through
formation of nucleoid and regulates (or titrates) the amount of mitochondrial
DNA. Overexpression of human TFAM in mice increases the amount of mitochondrial
DNA and dramatically ameliorates the cardiac dysfunctions caused by myocardial
infarction. The maintenance of integrity of mitochondrial DNA is important for
keeping proper cellular functions both under physiological and pathological
conditions. TFAM may play a crucial role in maintaining mitochondrial DNA as a
main component of the nucleoid.

PMID: 17280879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mitochondrion. 2007 May;7(3):223-9. Epub 2006 Dec 9.

Interspecies mitochondrial fusion between mouse and human mitochondria is rapid
and efficient.

Yoon YG(1), Haug CL, Koob MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Minnesota School of Medicine, Moos Tower 5-214, MMC 206, 420
Delaware Street S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

A detailed molecular understanding of mitochondrial fusion and fission in
mammalian cells is rapidly emerging. In this report, we demonstrate for the first
time cross-species mitochondrial fusion between distantly related species using
green and red fluorescent proteins targeted to the mitochondrial matrix. We found
that mouse mitochondria were able to efficiently fuse to unmodified mitochondria 
of human cells and that the contents of the mitochondrial matrix were completely 
mixed in less than 4h. We also observed that mitochondria from the mtDNA-less
(rho(0)) mouse cells can homogeneously fuse to the mitochondria of human cells.
We were, however, unable to maintain human mitochondrial DNA in the mouse cells. 
These results indicate that mitochondrial fusion proteins in mouse and human
cells have enough functional homology to mediate efficient cross-species
mitochondrial fusion, but mouse nuclear and human mitochondrial genomes have not 
retained functional compatibility with one another.

PMCID: PMC2693707
PMID: 17251069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 23;104(4):1325-30. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Progressive parkinsonism in mice with respiratory-chain-deficient dopamine
neurons.

Ekstrand MI(1), Terzioglu M, Galter D, Zhu S, Hofstetter C, Lindqvist E, Thams S,
Bergstrand A, Hansson FS, Trifunovic A, Hoffer B, Cullheim S, Mohammed AH, Olson 
L, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska
University Hospital, S-14186 Stockholm, Sweden.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is implicated in the pathophysiology of Parkinson's
disease (PD), a common age-associated neurodegenerative disease characterized by 
intraneuronal inclusions (Lewy bodies) and progressive degeneration of the
nigrostriatal dopamine (DA) system. It has recently been demonstrated that
midbrain DA neurons of PD patients and elderly humans contain high levels of
somatic mtDNA mutations, which may impair respiratory chain function. However,
clinical studies have not established whether the respiratory chain deficiency is
a primary abnormality leading to inclusion formation and DA neuron death, or
whether generalized metabolic abnormalities within the degenerating DA neurons
cause secondary damage to mitochondria. We have used a reverse genetic approach
to investigate this question and created conditional knockout mice (termed
MitoPark mice), with disruption of the gene for mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) in DA neurons. The knockout mice have reduced mtDNA expression
and respiratory chain deficiency in midbrain DA neurons, which, in turn, leads to
a parkinsonism phenotype with adult onset of slowly progressive impairment of
motor function accompanied by formation of intraneuronal inclusions and dopamine 
nerve cell death. Confocal and electron microscopy show that the inclusions
contain both mitochondrial protein and membrane components. These experiments
demonstrate that respiratory chain dysfunction in DA neurons may be of
pathophysiological importance in PD.

PMCID: PMC1783140
PMID: 17227870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2007;77:251-90.

Nuclear transfer: preservation of a nuclear genome at the expense of its
associated mtDNA genome(s).

Bowles EJ(1), Campbell KH, St John JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, The Division of Medical
Sciences, The Medical School, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT,
United Kingdom.

Nuclear transfer technology has uses across theoretical and applied applications,
but advances are restricted by continued poor success rates and health problems
associated with live offspring. Development of reconstructed embryos is dependent
upon numerous interlinking factors relating both to the donor cell and the
recipient oocyte. For example, abnormalities in gene expression following somatic
cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) have been linked with an inability of the oocyte
cytoplasm to sufficiently epigenetically reprogram the nucleus. Furthermore,
influences on the propagation of mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) could
be of great importance in determining the early developmental potential of NT
embryos and contributing to their genetic identity. mtDNA encodes some of the
subunits of the electron transfer chain, responsible for cellular ATP production.
The remaining subunits and those factors required for mtDNA replication,
transcription and translation are encoded by the nucleus, necessitating precise
intergenomic communication. Additionally, regulation of mtDNA copy number, via
the processes of mtDNA transcription and replication, is essential for normal
preimplantation embryo development and differentiation. Unimaternal transmission 
following natural fertilization usually results in the presence of a single
identical population of mtDNA, homoplasmy. Heteroplasmy can result if mixed
populations of mtDNA genomes co-exist. Many abnormalities observed in NT embryos,
fetuses, and offspring may be caused by deficiencies in OXPHOS, perhaps resulting
in part from heteroplasmic mtDNA populations. Additionally, incompatibilities
between the somatic nucleus and the cytoplast may be exacerbated by increased
genetic divergence between the two genomes. It is important to ensure that the
nucleus is capable of sufficiently regulating mtDNA, requiring a level of
compatibility between the two genomes, which may be a function of evolutionary
distance. We suggest that abnormal expression of factors such as TFAM and POLG in
NT embryos will prematurely drive mtDNA replication, hence impacting on early
development.

PMID: 17222707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Cell Physiol. 2007 May;211(2):364-70.

Downregulation of TLR4-dependent ATP production is critical for estrogen-mediated
immunoprotection in Kupffer cells following trauma-hemorrhage.

Hsieh YC(1), Frink M, Kawasaki T, Thobe BM, Choudhry MA, Schwacha MG, Bland KI,
Chaudry IH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Surgical Research and Department of Surgery, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.

Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) mediates mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage and
biogenic responses. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is an essential
regulator for mtDNA transcription and ATP production. Increased ATP levels were
associated with normalization of immune function following trauma-hemorrhage.
Moreover, administration of 17beta-estradiol following trauma-hemorrhage
upregulates cardiac Tfam and ATP levels. We therefore hypothesized that the
salutary effect of 17beta-estradiol on Kupffer cell function following
trauma-hemorrhage is mediated via negative regulation of TLR4, which
downregulates iNOS, upregulates Tfam and mtDNA-encoded gene cytochrome c oxidase 
I (mtCOI), and consequently increases cellular ATP levels. Male C3H/HeN,
C3H/HeOuJ (intact TLR4), and C3H/HeJ (TLR4 mutant) mice were subjected to
trauma-hemorrhage (mean BP 35 +/- 5 mmHg approximately 90 min, then
resuscitation) or sham operation. At the beginning of resuscitation, mice
received 17beta-estradiol (25 microg/25 g) or vehicle intravenously and were
sacrificed 2 h thereafter. Kupffer cell TLR4, iNOS, IL-6 and TNF-alpha production
capacities were increased, and ATP, Tfam, and mtCOI levels were decreased
following trauma-hemorrhage. Administration of 17beta-estradiol following
trauma-hemorrhage prevented the increase in Kupffer cell TLR4, iNOS, and cytokine
production. This was accompanied by normalized ATP, Tfam, and mtCOI levels.
Furthermore, the decreased Kupffer cell ATP and mtCOI levels were not observed in
TLR4 mutant mice following trauma-hemorrhage. Taken together, these findings
suggest that downregulation of TLR4-dependent ATP production is critical to
17beta-estradiol-mediated immunoprotection in Kupffer cells following
trauma-hemorrhage.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17219405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nat Genet. 2007 Jan;39(1):17-23.

Systematic meta-analyses of Alzheimer disease genetic association studies: the
AlzGene database.

Bertram L(1), McQueen MB, Mullin K, Blacker D, Tanzi RE.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative 
Disease (MIND), Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA. bertram@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

The past decade has witnessed hundreds of reports declaring or refuting genetic
association with putative Alzheimer disease susceptibility genes. This wealth of 
information has become increasingly difficult to follow, much less interpret. We 
have created a publicly available, continuously updated database that
comprehensively catalogs all genetic association studies in the field of
Alzheimer disease (http://www.alzgene.org). We performed systematic meta-analyses
for each polymorphism with available genotype data in at least three case-control
samples. In addition to identifying the epsilon4 allele of APOE and related
effects, we pinpointed over a dozen potential Alzheimer disease susceptibility
genes (ACE, CHRNB2, CST3, ESR1, GAPDHS, IDE, MTHFR, NCSTN, PRNP, PSEN1, TF, TFAM 
and TNF) with statistically significant allelic summary odds ratios (ranging from
1.11-1.38 for risk alleles and 0.92-0.67 for protective alleles). Our database
provides a powerful tool for deciphering the genetics of Alzheimer disease, and
it serves as a potential model for tracking the most viable gene candidates in
other genetically complex diseases.

PMID: 17192785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Cell Sci. 2007 Jan 15;120(Pt 2):299-308. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

A new activating role for CO in cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis.

Suliman HB(1), Carraway MS, Tatro LG, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

To investigate a possible new physiological role of carbon monoxide (CO), an
endogenous gas involved in cell signaling and cytotoxicity, we tested the
hypothesis that the mitochondrial generation of reactive oxygen species by CO
activates mitochondrial biogenesis in the heart. In mice, transient elevations of
cellular CO by five- to 20-fold increased the copy number of cardiac
mitochondrial DNA, the content of respiratory complex I-V and interfibrillar
mitochondrial density within 24 hours. Mitochondrial biogenesis is activated by
gene and protein expression of the nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1) and NRF2, 
of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator-1alpha, and of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), which augmented the copy number of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). This is independent of nitric oxide synthase (NOS), as
demonstrated by the identical responses in wild-type and endothelial NOS
(eNOS)-deficient mice, and by the inhibition of inducible NOS (iNOS). In the
heart and in isolated cardiomyocytes, CO activation involved both guanylate
cyclase and the pro-survival kinase Akt/PKB. Akt activation was facilitated by
mitochondrial binding of CO and by production of hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)).
Interference with Akt activity by blocking PI 3-kinase and by mitochondrial
targeting of catalase to scavenge H(2)O(2) prevented binding of NRF1 to the Tfam 
promoter, thereby connecting mitochondrial H(2)O(2) to the pathway leading to
mtDNA replication. The findings disclose mitochondrial CO and H(2)O(2) as new
activating factors in cardiac mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 17179207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biochem. 2007 Feb;141(2):201-11. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

The C-terminal tail of mitochondrial transcription factor a markedly strengthens 
its general binding to DNA.

Ohgaki K(1), Kanki T, Fukuoh A, Kurisaki H, Aoki Y, Ikeuchi M, Kim SH, Hamasaki
N, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) contains a basic C-terminal tail
which is essential for the promoter-specific transcription. TFAM is also a major 
component of a protein-mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) complex, called nucleoid, as a
non-specific DNA-binding protein. However, little is known about a role of the
C-tail in the nucleoid. Overexpression of full-length TFAM decreased the amount
of a D-loop form of mtDNA in cells, while overexpression of TFAM lacking its
C-tail (TFAM-DeltaC) did not, suggesting that the C-tail is involved in
destabilization or formation of the D-loop. An mRNA for mtDNA-derived ND1 was
hardly decreased in the former but rather decreased in the latter. Given that the
D-loop formation is coupled with the transcription, the decrease in the D-loop is
likely due to its destabilization. The recombinant full-length TFAM much strongly
unwound DNA than TFAM-DeltaC, which is consistent with the above idea because
D-loop is resolved by unwinding of the supercoiling state. Notably, truncation of
the C-tail decreased DNA-binding activity of TFAM by three orders of magnitude.
Thus, the C-terminal tail of TFAM is important for the strong general binding to 
mtDNA. This strong DNA-binding conferred by the C-tail may play an important role
in the nucleoid structure.

PMID: 17167045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Essays Biochem. 2006;42:13-29.

Control of gene expression and mitochondrial biogenesis in the muscular
adaptation to endurance exercise.

Joseph AM(1), Pilegaard H, Litvintsev A, Leick L, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M3J 1P3.

Every time a bout of exercise is performed, a change in gene expression occurs
within the contracting muscle. Over the course of many repeated bouts of exercise
(i.e. training), the cumulative effects of these alterations lead to a change in 
muscle phenotype. One of the most prominent of these adaptations is an increase
in mitochondrial content, which confers a greater resistance to muscle fatigue.
This essay reviews current knowledge on the regulation of exercise-induced
mitochondrial biogenesis at the molecular level. The major steps involved
include, (i) transcriptional regulation of nuclear-encoded genes encoding
mitochondrial proteins by the coactivator peroxisome-proliferator-activated
receptor g coactivator-1, (ii) control of mitochondrial DNA gene expression by
the transcription factor Tfam, (iii) mitochondrial fission and fusion mechanisms,
and (iv) import of nuclear-derived gene products into the mitochondrion via the
protein import machinery. It is now known that exercise can modify the rates of
several of these steps, leading to mitochondrial biogenesis. An understanding of 
how exercise can produce this effect could help us decide whether exercise is
beneficial for patients suffering from mitochondrial disorders, as well as a
variety of metabolic diseases.

PMID: 17144877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Acta Biochim Pol. 2006;53(4):777-82. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A is the major protein in rodent hepatocytes
that recognizes DNA lesions induced by N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene.

Pietrowska M(1), Kolodziejczyk I, Widlak P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Radiobiology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice, Poland.
m_pietrowska@io.gliwice.pl

Extracts from rodent liver cells contain an abundant protein that recognizes DNA 
adducts induced by the chemical carcinogen N-acetoxy-acetylaminofluorene (AAAF). 
This protein also has a strong affinity for DNA damaged by cisplatin (DDP), but
not by benzo(a)pyrene diolepoxide or UV-radiation, and has been termed
AAAF/DDP-DDB. Here we purified this protein from rat tissue and analyzed it by
mass spectrometry and identified it as mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM). Experiments with bacterially expressed recombinant TFAM confirmed its
high affinity for DNA damaged by AAAF. Assuming its abundance and specificity for
AAAF induced lesions, TFAM may significantly impede recognition and repair of DNA
adducts induced by AAAF and other derivatives of 2-aminofluorene.

PMID: 17143337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2007 Mar;102(3):1143-51. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Effect of denervation on mitochondrially mediated apoptosis in skeletal muscle.

Adhihetty PJ(1), O'Leary MF, Chabi B, Wicks KL, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada
M3J 1P3.

Chronic muscle disuse induced by denervation reduces mitochondrial content and
produces muscle atrophy. To investigate the molecular mechanisms responsible for 
these adaptations, we assessed 1) mitochondrial biogenesis- and apoptosis-related
proteins and 2) apoptotic susceptibility and cell death following denervation.
Rats were subjected to 5, 7, 14, 21, or 42 days of unilateral denervation of the 
sciatic or peroneal nerve. Muscle mass and mitochondrial content were reduced by 
40-65% after 21 and 42 days of denervation. Denervation-induced decrements in
mitochondrial content occurred along with 60% and 70% reductions in transcription
factor A (Tfam) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 
(PGC)-1alpha, respectively. After 42 days of denervation, Bax was elevated by
115% and Bcl-2 was decreased by 89%, producing a 16-fold increase in the
Bax-to-Bcl-2 ratio. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production was markedly
elevated by 5- to 7.5-fold in subsarcolemmal mitochondria after 7, 14, and 21
days of denervation, whereas reactive oxygen species production in
intermyofibrillar (IMF) mitochondria was reduced by 40-50%. Subsarcolemmal and
IMF mitochondrial levels of MnSOD were also reduced by 40-50% after 14-21 days of
denervation. The maximal rate of IMF mitochondrial pore opening (V(max)) was
elevated by 25-35%, and time to V(max) was reduced by 20-25% after 14 and 21
days, indicating increased apoptotic susceptibility. Myonuclear decay, assessed
by DNA fragmentation, was elevated at 7-21 days of denervation. Our data indicate
that PGC-1alpha and Tfam are important factors that likely contribute to the
reduced mitochondrial content after chronic disuse. In addition, our results
illustrate that, despite the reduced mitochondrial content, denervated muscle has
greater mitochondrial apoptotic susceptibility, which coincided with elevated
apoptosis, and these processes may contribute to denervation-induced muscle
atrophy.

PMID: 17122379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Free Radic Res. 2006 Dec;40(12):1284-94.

Mitochondrial DNA damage and the aging process: facts and imaginations.

Wiesner RJ(1), Zsurka G, Kunz WS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Vegetative Physiology, University of Köln,
Köln, Germany. rudolf.wiesner@uni-koeln.de

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is a circular double-stranded molecule organized in
nucleoids and covered by the histone-like protein mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM). Even though mtDNA repair capacity appears to be adequate the
accumulation of mtDNA mutations has been shown to be at least one important
molecular mechanism of human aging. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), which are
generated at the FMN moiety of mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) complex I,
should be considered to be important at least for the generation of age-dependent
mtDNA deletions. However, the accumulation of acquired mutations to functionally 
relevant levels in aged tissues seems to be a consequence of clonal expansions of
single founder molecules and not of ongoing mutational events.

PMID: 17090418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006;34(20):5815-28. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Alterations to the expression level of mitochondrial transcription factor A,
TFAM, modify the mode of mitochondrial DNA replication in cultured human cells.

Pohjoismäki JL(1), Wanrooij S, Hyvärinen AK, Goffart S, Holt IJ, Spelbrink JN,
Jacobs HT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology and Tampere University Hospital, FI-33014,
University of Tampere, Finland.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is an abundant mitochondrial protein 
of the HMG superfamily, with various putative roles in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
metabolism. In this study we have investigated the effects on mtDNA replication
of manipulating TFAM expression in cultured human cells. Mammalian mtDNA
replication intermediates (RIs) fall into two classes, whose mechanistic
relationship is not properly understood. One class is characterized by extensive 
RNA incorporation on the lagging strand, whereas the other has the structure of
products of conventional, strand-coupled replication. TFAM overexpression
increased the overall abundance of RIs and shifted them substantially towards
those of the conventional, strand-coupled type. The shift was most pronounced in 
the rDNA region and at various replication pause sites and was accompanied by a
drop in the relative amount of replication-termination intermediates, a
substantial reduction in mitochondrial transcripts, mtDNA decatenation and
progressive copy number depletion. TFAM overexpression could be partially
phenocopied by treatment of cells with dideoxycytidine, suggesting that its
effects are partially attributable to a decreased rate of fork progression. TFAM 
knockdown also resulted in mtDNA depletion, but RIs remained mainly of the
ribosubstituted type, although termination intermediates were enhanced. We
propose that TFAM influences the mode of mtDNA replication via its combined
effects on different aspects of mtDNA metabolism.

PMCID: PMC1635303
PMID: 17062618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biol Reprod. 2007 Feb;76(2):327-35. Epub 2006 Oct 11.

Regulated mitochondrial DNA replication during oocyte maturation is essential for
successful porcine embryonic development.

Spikings EC(1), Alderson J, St John JC.

Author information: 
(1)The Mitochondrial and Reproductive Genetics Group, Medical School, University 
of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Cellular ATP is mainly generated through mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation,
which is dependent on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). We have previously demonstrated 
the importance of oocyte mtDNA for porcine and human fertilization. However, the 
role of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial replication factors during oocyte and
embryo development is not yet understood. We have analyzed two key factors,
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and polymerase gamma (POLG), to
determine their role in oocyte and early embryo development. Competent and
incompetent oocytes, as determined by brilliant cresyl blue (BCB) dye, were
assessed intermittently during the maturation process for TFAM and POLG mRNA
using real-time RT-PCR, for TFAM and POLG protein using immunocytochemistry, and 
for mtDNA copy number using real-time PCR. Analysis was also carried out
following treatment of maturing oocytes with the mtDNA replication inhibitor,
2',3'-dideoxycytidine (ddC). Following in vitro fertilization, preimplantation
embryos were also analyzed. Despite increased levels of TFAM and POLG mRNA and
protein at the four-cell stage, no increase in mtDNA copy number was observed in 
early preimplantation development. To compensate for this, mtDNA appeared to be
replicated during oocyte maturation. However, significant differences in
nuclear-encoded regulatory protein expression were observed between BCB(+) and
BCB(-) oocytes and between untreated oocytes and those treated with ddC. These
changes resulted in delayed mtDNA replication, which correlated to reduced
fertilization and embryonic development. We therefore conclude that adherence to 
the regulation of the timing of mtDNA replication during oocyte maturation is
essential for successful embryonic development.

PMID: 17035641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 2006 Dec 8;281(49):37972-9. Epub 2006 Sep 26.

Proteolytic processing of OPA1 links mitochondrial dysfunction to alterations in 
mitochondrial morphology.

Duvezin-Caubet S(1), Jagasia R, Wagener J, Hofmann S, Trifunovic A, Hansson A,
Chomyn A, Bauer MF, Attardi G, Larsson NG, Neupert W, Reichert AS.

Author information: 
(1)Adolf-Butenandt-Institut für Physiologische Chemie,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Butenandtstrasse 5, 81377 München,
Germany.

Many muscular and neurological disorders are associated with mitochondrial
dysfunction and are often accompanied by changes in mitochondrial morphology.
Mutations in the gene encoding OPA1, a protein required for fusion of
mitochondria, are associated with hereditary autosomal dominant optic atrophy
type I. Here we show that mitochondrial fragmentation correlates with processing 
of large isoforms of OPA1 in cybrid cells from a patient with myoclonus epilepsy 
and ragged-red fibers syndrome and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts harboring an
error-prone mitochondrial mtDNA polymerase gamma. Furthermore, processed OPA1 was
observed in heart tissue derived from heart-specific TFAM knock-out mice
suffering from mitochondrial cardiomyopathy and in skeletal muscles from patients
suffering from mitochondrial myopathies such as myopathy encephalopathy lactic
acidosis and stroke-like episodes. Dissipation of the mitochondrial membrane
potential leads to fast induction of proteolytic processing of OPA1 and
concomitant fragmentation of mitochondria. Recovery of mitochondrial fusion
depended on protein synthesis and was accompanied by resynthesis of large
isoforms of OPA1. Fragmentation of mitochondria was prevented by overexpressing
OPA1. Taken together, our data indicate that proteolytic processing of OPA1 has a
key role in inducing fragmentation of energetically compromised mitochondria. We 
present the hypothesis that this pathway regulates mitochondrial morphology and
serves as an early response to prevent fusion of dysfunctional mitochondria with 
the functional mitochondrial network.

PMID: 17003040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 Sep-Oct;8(9-10):1737-44.

Mitochondrial oxidative stress, DNA damage, and heart failure.

Tsutsui H(1), Ide T, Kinugawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. htsutsui@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Recent experimental and clinical studies have suggested that oxidative stress is 
enhanced in heart failure. The production of oxygen radicals is increased in the 
failing heart, whereas antioxidant enzyme activities are preserved as normal.
Mitochondrial electron transport is an enzymatic source of oxygen radical
generation and also a target of oxidant-induced damage. Chronic increases in
oxygen radical production in the mitochondria can lead to a catastrophic cycle of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage as well as functional decline, further oxygen
radical generation, and cellular injury. Reactive oxygen species induce myocyte
hypertrophy, apoptosis, and interstitial fibrosis by activating matrix
metalloproteinases. These cellular events play an important role in the
development and progression of maladaptive cardiac remodeling and failure.
Therefore, mitochondrial oxidative stress and mtDNA damage are good therapeutic
targets. Overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) could
ameliorate the decline in mtDNA copy number and preserve it at a normal level in 
failing hearts. Consistent with alterations in mtDNA, the decrease in oxidative
capacities was also prevented. Therefore, the activation of TFAM expression could
ameliorate the pathophysiologic processes seen in myocardial failure. Inhibition 
of mitochondrial oxidative stress and mtDNA damage could be novel and potentially
very effective treatment strategies for heart failure.

PMID: 16987026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 Sep-Oct;8(9-10):1635-50.

Thioredoxin1 upregulates mitochondrial proteins related to oxidative
phosphorylation and TCA cycle in the heart.

Ago T(1), Yeh I, Yamamoto M, Schinke-Braun M, Brown JA, Tian B, Sadoshima J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, UMDNJ, New Jersey Medical School, Newark, 07103, USA.

Thioredoxin1 (Trx1) inhibits hypertrophy and exhibits protective functions in the
heart. To elucidate further the cardiac functions of Trx1, we used a DNA
microarray analysis, with hearts from transgenic mice with cardiac- specific
overexpression of Trx1 (Tg-Trx1, n = 4) and nontransgenic controls (n = 4).
Expression of a large number of genes is regulated in Tg-Trx1, with a greater
number of genes downregulated, versus upregulated, at high-fold changes. The
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1gamma) 
gene was among the top 50 significantly upregulated genes. By pathway analyses,
we found that genes involved in both mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and 
the TCA cycle were upregulated in Tg-Trx1. We confirmed upregulation of
cytochrome c oxidase (COX) components and mitochondrial transcription factor A in
Tg-Trx1. The activity of citrate synthase and COX and the cardiac ATP content
were significantly higher in Tg-Trx1. A transcription factor binding-site
analysis showed that upregulated genes frequently contained binding sites for
nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF1). Expression of NRF1 and PGC-1gamma was
upregulated in Tg-Trx1, and Trx1 stimulated the transcriptional activity of NRF1 
and NRF2 in cardiac myocytes. These results suggest that, in cardiac myocytes,
Trx1 upregulates mitochondrial proteins and enhances mitochondrial functions,
possibly through PGC-1alpha and NRFs.

PMID: 16987018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2791-8. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

TNF-alpha downregulates eNOS expression and mitochondrial biogenesis in fat and
muscle of obese rodents.

Valerio A(1), Cardile A, Cozzi V, Bracale R, Tedesco L, Pisconti A, Palomba L,
Cantoni O, Clementi E, Moncada S, Carruba MO, Nisoli E.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Laboratories Network, Center for Study and Research on Obesity,
Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.

Obesity is associated with chronic low-grade inflammation. Thus, at metabolically
relevant sites, including adipose tissue and muscle, there is abnormal production
of proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-alpha. Here we demonstrate that eNOS
expression was reduced, with a concomitant reduction of mitochondrial biogenesis 
and function, in white and brown adipose tissue and in the soleus muscle of 3
different animal models of obesity. The genetic deletion of TNF receptor 1 in
obese mice restored eNOS expression and mitochondrial biogenesis in fat and
muscle; this was associated with less body weight gain than in obese wild-type
controls. Furthermore, TNF-alpha downregulated eNOS expression and mitochondrial 
biogenesis in cultured white and brown adipocytes and muscle satellite cells of
mice. The NO donors DETA-NO and SNAP prevented the reduction of mitochondrial
biogenesis observed with TNF-alpha. Our findings demonstrate that TNF-alpha
impairs mitochondrial biogenesis and function in different tissues of obese
rodents by downregulating eNOS expression and suggest a novel pathophysiological 
process that sustains obesity.

PMCID: PMC1564431
PMID: 16981010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Dec;209(3):923-34.

Acute loss of transcription factor E2F1 induces mitochondrial biogenesis in HeLa 
cells.

Goto Y(1), Hayashi R, Kang D, Yoshida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Meiji University Graduate School of Agriculture, 
Tama-ku, Kawasaki, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

Here, we sought to clarify the comprehensive cellular response to transcription
factor E2F1 expression using short interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene
silencing to examine the roles of E2F1. For this purpose, we analyzed global gene
expression changes in E2F1 knockdown HeLa cells, where no changes in cell growth 
or apoptosis were observed. Among the identified genes, the mRNA levels of
mitochondria-encoded genes were highly elevated in E2F1 siRNA-treated cells, but 
not in E2F6 siRNA-treated cells, relative to control siRNA-treated cells. These
changes were accompanied by a significant increase in the transcription and
replication of mitochondria DNA as well as the induction of nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial topoisomerase I (TOP1MT) mRNA in E2F1 knockdown cells, but not in
E2F6 knockdown cells, whereas the levels of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) mRNA and protein were unchanged, relative to the
levels in control siRNA-treated cells. Time-course experiments demonstrated that 
the induction of TOP1MT coincided with the timing of E2F1 loss. In addition, E2F1
knockdown cells, but not E2F6 knockdown cells, displayed increased ATP levels
along with an accumulation of cytochrome b protein. Finally, RNA interference
(RNAi)-mediated reduction in E2F1 knockdown HeLa cells, but not in E2F6 knockdown
HeLa cells, resulted in increased anticancer drug sensitivity. Taken together,
these data demonstrate a novel physiological aspect of E2F1 in human cancer
cells, where activated mitochondrial biogenesis occurs as a consequence of the
acute loss of E2F1.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16972274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jan;292(1):E340-6. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Expression of mitochondrial biogenesis-signaling factors in brown adipocytes is
influenced specifically by 17beta-estradiol, testosterone, and progesterone.

Rodríguez-Cuenca S(1), Monjo M, Gianotti M, Proenza AM, Roca P.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Fonamental i Ciències de la Salut, Ed. Guillem Colom. 
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Cra. Valldemossa, Km 7.5, 07122-Palma de
Mallorca, Spain.

Control of mitochondrial biogenesis in brown adipose tissue (BAT), as part of the
thermogenesis program, is a complex process that requires the integration of
multiple transcription factors to orchestrate mitochondrial and nuclear gene
expression. Despite the knowledge of the role of sex hormones on BAT physiology, 
little is known about the effect of these hormones on the mitochondrial biogenic 
program. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of testosterone,
17beta-estradiol, and progesterone on the expression of nuclear factors involved 
in the control of mitochondrial biogenesis and thermogenic function such as
ppargamma, pgc1alpha, nrf1, gabpa, and tfam, and also an inhibitor of PI3K-Akt
pathway, recently found to be involved in the control of mitochondrial
recruitment (pten). For this purpose, an in vitro assay using cell-cultured brown
adipocytes was used to address the role of steroid hormones, progesterone,
testosterone, and 17beta-estradiol on the mRNA expression of these factors by
real-time PCR. Thus 17beta-estradiol seemed to exert a dual effect, activating
the PI3K-Akt pathway by inhibiting pten mRNA expression and also inhibiting nrf1 
and tfam mRNA expression. Progesterone seemed to positively stimulate
mitochondriogenesis and BAT differentiation by increasing the mRNA expression of 
the gabpa-tfam axis and ppargamma, respectively, but also exerted a negative
output by increasing pten mRNA levels. Finally, testosterone inhibited the
transcription of pgc1alpha, the master factor involved in UCP1 expression and
mitochondrial biogenesis. In conclusion, our results support the idea that sex
hormones have direct effects on different mediators of the mitochondriogenesis
program.

PMID: 16954335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Intern Med. 2006;45(13):809-13. Epub 2006 Aug 1.

Mitochondrial oxidative stress and heart failure.

Tsutsui H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo.

Recent experimental and clinical studies have suggested that oxidative stress is 
enhanced in heart failure. Chronic increases in oxygen radical production in the 
mitochondria can lead to a catastrophic cycle of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage
as well as functional decline, further oxygen radical generation, and cellular
injury. Reactive oxygen species induce myocyte hypertrophy, apoptosis, and
interstitial fibrosis by activating matrix metalloproteinases. These cellular
events play an important role in the development and progression of maladaptive
cardiac remodeling and failure. Overexpression of mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) could ameliorate the decline in mtDNA copy number and preserve it
at a normal level in failing hearts. Consistent with alterations in mtDNA, the
decrease in oxidative capacities was also prevented. Therefore, the activation of
TFAM expression could ameliorate the pathophysiological processes seen in
myocardial failure. Inhibition of mitochondrial oxidative stress and DNA damage
could be the most effective and novel treatment strategies for heart failure.

PMID: 16880705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25791-802. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Human mitochondrial DNA nucleoids are linked to protein folding machinery and
metabolic enzymes at the mitochondrial inner membrane.

Wang Y(1), Bogenhagen DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, State University of New York at Stony 
Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8651, USA.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is packaged into bacterial nucleoid-like structures,
each containing several mtDNA molecules. The distribution of nucleoids during
mitochondrial fission and fusion events and during cytokinesis is important to
the segregation of mitochondrial genomes in heteroplasmic cells bearing a mixture
of wild-type and mutant mtDNA molecules. We report fractionation of HeLa cell
mtDNA nucleoids into two subsets of complexes that differ in their sedimentation 
velocity and their association with cytoskeletal proteins. Pulse labeling studies
indicated that newly replicated mtDNA molecules are evenly represented in the
rapidly and slowly sedimenting fractions. Slowly sedimenting nucleoids were
immunoaffinity purified using antibodies to either of two abundant mtDNA-binding 
proteins, TFAM or mtSSB. These two different immunoaffinity procedures yielded
very similar sets of proteins, with 21 proteins in common, including most of the 
proteins previously shown to play roles in mtDNA replication and transcription.
In addition to previously identified mitochondrial proteins, multiple peptides
were observed for one novel DNA metabolic protein, the DEAH-box helicase DHX30.
Antibodies raised against a recombinant fragment of this protein confirmed the
mitochondrial localization of a specific isoform of DHX30.

PMID: 16825194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Sep-Oct;1757(9-10):1421-8. Epub 2006 May 19.

Acetyl-L-carnitine feeding to unloaded rats triggers in soleus muscle the
coordinated expression of genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis.

Cassano P(1), Sciancalepore AG, Pesce V, Flück M, Hoppeler H, Calvani M, Mosconi 
L, Cantatore P, Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Ernesto Quagliariello,
University of Bari- Via Orabona 4- 70125, Bari, Italy.

The expressional profile of mitochondrial transcripts and of genes involved in
the mitochondrial biogenesis pathway induced by ALCAR daily supplementation in
soleus muscle of control and unloaded 3-month-old rats has been analyzed. It has 
been found that ALCAR treatment is able to upregulate the expression level of
mitochondrial transcripts (COX I, ATP6, ND6, 16 S rRNA) in both control and
unloaded animals. Interestingly, ALCAR feeding to unloaded rats resulted in the
increase of transcript level for master factors involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis (PGC-1alpha, NRF-1, TFAM). It also prevented the unloading-induced
downregulation of mRNA levels for kinases able to transduce metabolic (AMPK) and 
neuronal stimuli (CaMKIIbeta) into mitochondrial biogenesis. No significant
effect on the expressional level of such genes was found in control ALCAR-treated
rats. In addition, ALCAR feeding was able to prevent the loss of mitochondrial
protein content due to unloading condition. Correlation analysis revealed a
strong coordination in the expression of genes involved in mitochondrial
biogenesis only in ALCAR-treated suspended animals, supporting a differentiated
effect of ALCAR treatment in relation to the loading state of the soleus muscle. 
In conclusions, we demonstrated the ability of ALCAR supplementation to promote
only in soleus muscle of hindlimb suspended rats an orchestrated expression of
genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, which might counteract the
unloading-induced metabolic changes, preventing the loss of mitochondrial
proteins.

PMID: 16814248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. FASEB J. 2006 Jun;20(8):1109-17.

Inhibition of cardiac PGC-1alpha expression abolishes ERbeta agonist-mediated
cardioprotection following trauma-hemorrhage.

Hsieh YC(1), Choudhry MA, Yu HP, Shimizu T, Yang S, Suzuki T, Chen J, Bland KI,
Chaudry IH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Surgical Research and Department of Surgery, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, 1670 University Blvd, Volker Hall, Rm. G094, Birmingham, Alabama
35294-0019, USA.

PGC-1alpha (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor [PPARgamma]
coactivator-1alpha) activates PPARalpha and mitochondrial transcription factor A 
(Tfam), which regulate proteins, fatty acid and ATP metabolism (i.e., FAT/CD36,
MCAD, and COX I). Recently we found that the salutary effects of estradiol (E2)
on cardiac function following trauma-hemorrhage (T-H) are mediated via estrogen
receptor (ER)beta. In this study we tested the hypothesis that ERbeta-mediated
cardioprotection is induced via up-regulation of PGC-1alpha through PPARalpha or 
Tfam-dependent pathway. Male rats underwent T-H and received ERalpha agonist
propylpyrazole-triol (PPT), ERbeta agonist diarylpropionitrile (DPN), E2, or
vehicle. Another group was treated with antisense PGC-1alpha oligonucleotides
prior to administration of DPN. E2 and DPN treatments attenuated the decrease in 
cardiac mitochondrial ATP, abrogated the T-H-induced lipid accumulation, and
normalized PGC-1alpha, PPARalpha, FAT/CD36, MCAD, Tfam, and COX I after T-H. In
contrast, PPT administration did not abrogate lipid accumulation. Moreover, in
PPT-treated animals mitochondrial ATP remained significantly lower than those
observed in DPN- or E2-treated animals. Prior administration of antisense
PGC-1alpha prevented DPN-mediated cardioprotection and increase in ATP levels and
Tfam but not in PPARalpha following T-H. These findings suggest that the salutary
effects of E2 on cardiac function following T-H are mediated via ERbeta
up-regulation of PGC-1alpha through Tfam-dependent pathway.

PMID: 16770010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 May;64(5):848-53.

[Oxidative stress and heart failure].

[Article in Japanese]

Kinugawa S(1), Tsutsui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine.

The excessive reactive oxygen species (ROS), produced by the electron leak in
mitochondria of failing myocardium, play an important role in development and
progression of heart failure (HF) and cardiac remodeling, which is associated
with induction of myocyte hypertrophy and apoptosis and activation of matrix
metalloproteinases. Furthermore, ROS can damage mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA), and
thus lead to mitochondrial dysfunction and additional ROS generation. Recently,
we found that the overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), 
which is essential for mtDNA transcription and replication, ameliorates cardiac
remodeling and failure. Therefore, the regulation of mitochondrial oxidative
stress or manipulation of TFAM protein may provide a novel therapeutic strategy
of HF.

PMID: 16689364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 May;47(5):1810-6.

Differential mitochondrial DNA and gene expression in inherited retinal dysplasia
in miniature Schnauzer dogs.

Appleyard GD(1), Forsyth GW, Kiehlbauch LM, Sigfrid KN, Hanik HL, Quon A, Loewen 
ME, Grahn BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology, Western College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

PURPOSE: To investigate the molecular basis of inherited retinal dysplasia in
miniature Schnauzers.
METHODS: Retina and retinal pigment epithelial tissues were collected from canine
subjects at the age of 3 weeks. Total RNA isolated from these tissues was reverse
transcribed to make representative cDNA pools that were compared for differences 
in gene expression by using a subtractive hybridization technique referred to as 
representational difference analysis (RDA). Expression differences identified by 
RDA were confirmed and quantified by real-time reverse-transcription PCR.
Mitochondrial morphology from leukocytes and skeletal muscle of normal and
affected miniature Schnauzers was examined by transmission electron microscopy.
RESULTS: RDA screening of retinal pigment epithelial cDNA identified differences 
in mRNA transcript coding for two mitochondrial (mt) proteins--cytochrome oxidase
subunit 1 and NADH dehydrogenase subunit 6--in affected dogs. Contrary to
expectations, these identified sequences did not contain mutations. Based on the 
implication of mt-DNA-encoded proteins by the RDA experiments we used real-time
PCR to compare the relative amounts of mt-DNA template in white blood cells from 
normal and affected dogs. White blood cells of affected dogs contained less than 
30% of the normal amount of two specific mtDNA sequences, compared with the
content of the nuclear-encoded glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GA-3-PDH) reference gene. Retina and RPE tissue from affected dogs had reduced
mRNA transcript levels for the two mitochondrial genes detected in the RDA
experiment. Transcript levels for another mtDNA-encoded gene as well as the
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial Tfam transcription factor were reduced in these
tissues in affected dogs. Mitochondria from affected dogs were reduced in number 
and size and were unusually electron dense.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced levels of nuclear and mitochondrial transcripts in the
retina and RPE of miniature Schnauzers affected with retinal dysplasia suggest
that the pathogenesis of the disorder may arise from a lowered energy supply to
the retina and RPE.

PMID: 16638985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 9;344(3):708-12. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Impaired coactivator activity of the Gly482 variant of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) on
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) promoter.

Choi YS(1), Hong JM, Lim S, Ko KS, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Mitochondrial dysfunction may cause diabetes or insulin resistance. Peroxisome
proliferation-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-gamma) coactivator-1 alpha
(PGC-1alpha) increases mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) resulting in
mitochondrial DNA content increase. An association between a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP), G1444A(Gly482Ser), of PGC-1alpha coding region and insulin
resistance has been reported in some ethnic groups. In this study, we
investigated whether a change of glycine to serine at codon 482 of PGC-1alpha
affected the Tfam promoter activity. The cDNA of PGC-1alpha variant bearing
either glycine or serine at 482 codon was transfected into Chang human hepatocyte
cells. The PGC-1alpha protein bearing glycine had impaired coactivator activity
on Tfam promoter-mediated luciferase. We analyzed the PGC-1alpha genotype G1444A 
and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number from 229 Korean leukocyte genomic DNAs.
Subjects with Gly/Gly had a 20% lower amount of peripheral blood mtDNA than did
subjects with Gly/Ser and Ser/Ser (p<0.05). No correlation was observed between
diabetic parameters and PGC-1alpha genotypes in Koreans. These results suggest
that PGC-1alpha variants with Gly/Gly at 482nd amino acid may impair the Tfam
transcription, a regulatory function of mitochondrial biogenesis, resulting in
dysfunctional mtDNA replication.

PMID: 16631115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2006 Aug;101(2):385-91. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

ACE inhibition prevents myocardial infarction-induced skeletal muscle
mitochondrial dysfunction.

Zoll J(1), Monassier L, Garnier A, N'Guessan B, Mettauer B, Veksler V, Piquard F,
Ventura-Clapier R, Geny B.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Physiologie, Faculté de Médecine, 11, rue Humann, 67000
Strasbourg, France. Zolljoffrey@yahoo.com

Heart failure is associated with alterations in cardiac and skeletal muscle
energy metabolism resulting in a generalized myopathy. We investigated the
molecular and cellular effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition (ACEi)
on skeletal muscle metabolism in infarcted animals. Myocardial infarction (MI)
was obtained by left descending coronary artery ligation. Sham, MI, and
MI-treated rats (perindopril, 2 mg.kg(-1).day(-1) given 7 days after MI) were
studied 1 and 4 mo after surgery. Oxygen consumption of white gastrocnemius (Gas)
muscle was studied in saponin-permeabilized fibers, using the main substrates of 
mitochondrial respiration. mRNA expression of nuclear factors (PGC-1alpha,
NRF-2alpha, and mtTFA), involved in the transcription of mitochondrial proteins, 
and of MCIP1, a marker of calcineurin activation, were also determined.
Echocardiographic left ventricular fractional shortening was reduced in both MI
and perindopril group after 1 and 4 mo, whereas systemic blood pressure was
reduced by 16% only in the MI group after 4 mo. The capacity of Gas to oxidize
glutamate-malate, glycerol-triphosphate, or pyruvate (-30%, P < 0.01; -32%, P <
0.05; -33%, P < 0.01, respectively), was greatly decreased. Furthermore,
PGC-1alpha (-54%), NRF-2alpha (-45%), and MCIP1 (-84%) gene expression were
significantly downregulated. ACEi improved survival, left ventricular function,
and blood pressure. Perindopril protected also totally the Gas mitochondrial
function and preserved the mRNAs concentration of the mitochondrial
transcriptional factors. Moreover, PGC-1alpha correlated with Gas oxidative
capacity (r = 0.48), mitochondrial cytochrome-c oxidase (r = 0.65), citrate
synthase (r = 0.45) activities, and MCIP1 expression (r = 0.44). Thus ACEi
totally prevented MI-induced alterations of skeletal muscle mitochondrial
function and protein expression, halting the development of this metabolic
myopathy.

PMID: 16614354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2006;17(1-2):79-88. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is increased in rat embryo during
placentation and associated with mitochondrial differentiation.

Alcolea MP(1), Colom B, Lladó I, Gianotti M, García-Palmer FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició. Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain.

In the current study, the mitochondrial proliferationdifferentiation process was 
investigated in rat embryo during the placentation process, straight after
organogenesis, when there is an important oxidative metabolism activation. For
this purpose, on gestational days 11, 12 and 13 we studied the mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) content and the relative gene expression of proteins involved in mtDNA
replication (mitochondrial single strand DNA binding protein (mtSSB)), mtDNA
transcription (mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM)), as well as in
mitochondrial function (cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COXI)). The results
indicated that during placentation important changes in mitochondrial
proliferation-differentiation process take place in rat embryo. There is a great 
decrease in cellular mtDNA content and a rise in the ratio between TFAM and mtDNA
accompanied by an increase in COXI gene expression. Thus, we can conclude that on
gestational day 13 mitochondrial differentiation predominates over mitochondrial 
proliferation in embryo cells. Besides, our work reveals that in a physiological 
condition such as embryonic development the TFAM levels change in order to
regulate the transcriptional activity of mtDNA.

PMID: 16543724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 Feb 9;34(3):893-904. Print 2006.

TFAM detects co-evolution of tRNA identity rules with lateral transfer of
histidyl-tRNA synthetase.

Ardell DH(1), Andersson SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Evolution, Evolutionary Biology Center Norbyvägen 18C 
Uppsala University SE-752 36 Uppsala Sweden. dave.ardell@lcb.uu.se

We present TFAM, an automated, statistical method to classify the identity of
tRNAs. TFAM, currently optimized for bacteria, classifies initiator tRNAs and
predicts the charging identity of both typical and atypical tRNAs such as
suppressors with high confidence. We show statistical evidence for extensive
variation in tRNA identity determinants among bacterial genomes due to variation 
in overall tDNA base content. With TFAM we have detected the first case of
eukaryotic-like tRNA identity rules in bacteria. An alpha-proteobacterial clade
encompassing Rhizobiales, Caulobacter crescentus and Silicibacter pomeroyi,
unlike a sister clade containing the Rickettsiales, Zymomonas mobilis and
Gluconobacter oxydans, uses the eukaryotic identity element A73 instead of the
highly conserved prokaryotic element C73. We confirm divergence of bacterial
histidylation rules by demonstrating perfect covariation of alpha-proteobacterial
tRNA(His) acceptor stems and residues in the motif IIb tRNA-binding pocket of
their histidyl-tRNA synthetases (HisRS). Phylogenomic analysis supports lateral
transfer of a eukaryotic-like HisRS into the alpha-proteobacteria followed by in 
situ adaptation of the bacterial tDNA(His) and identity rule divergence. Our
results demonstrate that TFAM is an effective tool for the bioinformatics,
comparative genomics and evolutionary study of tRNA identity.

PMCID: PMC1363771
PMID: 16473847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Mar 15;15(6):883-95. Epub 2006 Jan 31.

Parkin enhances mitochondrial biogenesis in proliferating cells.

Kuroda Y(1), Mitsui T, Kunishige M, Shono M, Akaike M, Azuma H, Matsumoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, University of Tokushima
Graduate School of Medicine, 3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

We describe a novel function of parkin, a RING protein, which is elaborately
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis. Parkin was located within the mitochondrial
organelle of proliferating cells. Anti-proliferative treatments released parkin
from mitochondria to cytosol. Results of pharmacological treatments indicate that
parkin was released from mitochondria when permeability transition pore was
opened. The extra-mitochondrial localization was also observed in differentiated 
cells. In proliferating cells, transcription and replication of mitochondrial DNA
was enhanced by parkin overexpression and attenuated by parkin suppression with
siRNA. Parkin was associated with mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and
enhanced TFAM-mediated mitochondrial transcription. These results indicate that
parkin is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial transcription/replication
other than the ubiquitin-mediated protein degradation system in proliferating
cells.

PMID: 16449237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Feb;1760(2):141-50. Epub 2006 Jan 5.

TFAM-dependent and independent dynamics of mtDNA levels in C2C12 myoblasts caused
by redox stress.

Noack H(1), Bednarek T, Heidler J, Ladig R, Holtz J, Szibor M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg,
ZAMED, Heinrich-Damerow-Str. 1, 06097 Halle, Germany.
heiko.noack@medizin.uni-halle.de

TFAM is an essential protein factor for the initiation of transcription of the
mtDNA. It also functions as a packaging factor, which stabilizes the mtDNA pool. 
To investigate the regulatory role of TFAM for regeneration and proliferation of 
the mtDNA pool, we exposed the muscle cell line C2C12 to a severe redox stress
(H2O2) or to a moderate redox stress (GSH depletion), determined the dynamics of 
the mtDNA levels and correlated this with the TFAM protein levels. H2O2 caused a 
concentration-dependent loss of mtDNA molecules. The mtDNA levels recovered
slowly within 3 days after H2O2 stress. The TFAM protein was less degraded than
the mtDNA indicating an accumulation of TFAM protein per mtDNA after H2O2 stress.
Overexpression of TFAM did not protect against the mtDNA loss after H2O2 stress
but shortened the recovery time. GSH depletion led to a proliferation of the
mtDNA pool. Although the mtDNA levels increased the TFAM protein levels were
unaffected by the GSH depletion. We conclude that the accumulation of the TFAM
protein after H2O2 stress contributes to the regeneration of the mtDNA pool but
that other mechanisms, independent from the TFAM protein amount have to be
postulated to explain the proliferation of the mtDNA pool after GSH depletion.

PMID: 16439064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biochem. 2005 Dec;138(6):673-8.

PDIP38 associates with proteins constituting the mitochondrial DNA nucleoid.

Cheng X(1), Kanki T, Fukuoh A, Ohgaki K, Takeya R, Aoki Y, Hamasaki N, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582.

Human mitochondrial DNA takes on a large protein-DNA complex called a nucleoid or
mitochromosome. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is a major component 
of the complex. During an attempt to search for proteins associated with the
TFAM-containing complex by a proteomic method, we found one protein that has not 
been considered to be mitochondrial: PDIP38. PDIP38 was initially identified as a
binding protein to nuclear DNA polymerase delta. PDIP38 is almost exclusively
recovered from the mitochondrial fraction of human HeLa cells. PDIP38 is
completely cleaved when TritonX-100-solubilized mitochondria are treated with
proteinase K, but not when mitoplasts devoid of outer membranes are treated,
indicating that PDIP38 is located in the mitochondrial matrix. TFAM and
mitochondrial single-stranded DNA binding protein (mtSSB) are
co-immunoprecipitated with PDIP38 by anti-PDIP38 antibodies. On the other hand,
only the latter is crosslinked to PDIP38 when mitochondria are treated with a
crosslinker, formaldehyde. In addition to mtSSB, 60 kDa heat shock protein and a 
Lon protease homolog, both of which have single-stranded DNA binding activity,
are also crosslinked. PDIP38 associates with the nucleoid components and could be
involved in the metabolism of mitochondrial DNA.

PMID: 16428295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2005 Dec;37(12):2102-10.

How is mitochondrial biogenesis affected in mitochondrial disease?

Chabi B(1), Adhihetty PJ, Ljubicic V, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, CANADA.

Comment in
    Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2005 Dec;37(12):2084-5.

Mitochondrial biogenesis occurs when the tissue energy demand is chronically
increased to stress the ATP producing capacity of the preexisting mitochondria.
In muscle, endurance training is a metabolic stress that is capable of inducing
mitochondrial biogenesis, the consequence of which is improved performance during
exercise. Expansion of the mitochondrial volume requires the coordinated response
of the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. During acute exercise, the initial
signaling events are the perturbations in ATP turnover and calcium (Ca)
concentrations caused by the contractile process. These alterations activate
signal transduction pathways which target transcription factors involved in gene 
expression. Nuclear gene products are then posttranslationally imported into
mitochondria. One of these, Tfam, is important for the regulation of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) gene expression. In muscle, a broad range of
mitochondrial-specific diseases due to mutations in nuclear DNA or mtDNA exist,
termed mitochondrial myopathies. These mutations result in dysfunctional
mitochondrial assembly which ultimately leads to reduced ATP production.
Mitochondrial myopathy patients exhibit a variety of compensatory responses which
attempt to reconcile this energy deficiency, but the extent and the type of
compensatory adaptations are disease-specific. Understanding the role of exercise
in mediating these compensatory responses leading to mitochondrial biogenesis
could help us in prescribing exercise designed to improve mitochondrial function 
in patients with mitochondrial myopathies. In addition, numerous other diseases
(e.g., neurological disorders, cancer, diabetes, and cardiomyopathies), as well
as the aging process, have etiologies or consequences attributed, in part, to
mitochondrial dysfunction. Thus, insight gained by investigating the steps
involved in exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis may help us to understand
the underlying basis of these other disease states.

PMID: 16331136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Mar 1;97(4):673-83.

Nuclear control of respiratory gene expression in mammalian cells.

Scarpulla RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. rsc248@northwestern.edu

The mitochondrial respiratory apparatus is the product of both nuclear and
mitochondrial genes. The protein coding capacity of mtDNA is restricted to the
expression of 13 respiratory subunits and thus nuclear genes play a predominant
role in the biosynthesis of the respiratory chain and in the expression of the
mitochondrial genome. Transcriptional regulators that act on both nuclear and
mitochondrial genes have been implicated in the bi-genomic expression of the
respiratory chain. Mitochondrial transcription is directed by a small number of
nucleus-encoded factors (Tfam, TFB1M, TFB2M, mTERF). The expression of these
factors is coordinated with that of nuclear respiratory proteins through the
action of transcriptional activators and coactivators. In particular,
environmental signals induce the expression of PGC-1 family coactivators
(PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, and PRC), which in turn target specific transcription
factors (NRF-1, NRF-2, and ERR alpha) in the expression of respiratory genes.
This system provides a mechanism for linking respiratory chain expression to
environmental conditions and for integrating it with other functions related to
cellular energetics.

2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16329141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2006 Mar;96(4):413-22. Epub 2005 Nov 26.

Gene expression in skeletal muscle of coronary artery disease patients after
concentric and eccentric endurance training.

Zoll J(1), Steiner R, Meyer K, Vogt M, Hoppeler H, Flück M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Bern, Baltzerstrasse 2, 3000 Bern 9,
Switzerland.

Low-intensity concentric (CET) and eccentric (EET) endurance-type training induce
specific structural adaptations in skeletal muscle. We evaluated to which extent 
steady-state adaptations in transcript levels are involved in the compensatory
alterations of muscle mitochondria and myofibrils with CET versus EET at a
matched metabolic exercise intensity of medicated, stable coronary patients
(CAD). Biopsies were obtained from vastus lateralis muscle before and after 8
weeks of CET (n=6) or EET (n=6). Transcript levels for factors involved in
mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1alpha, Tfam), mitochondrial function (COX-1,
COX-4), control of contractile phenotype (MyHC I, IIa, IIx) as well as mechanical
stress marker (IGF-I) were quantified using an reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction approach. After 8 weeks of EET, a reduction of the COX-4 mRNA
level by 41% and a tendency for a drop in Tfam transcript concentration (-33%,
P=0.06) was noted. This down-regulation corresponded to a drop in total
mitochondrial volume density. MyHC-IIa transcript levels were specifically
decreased after EET, and MyHC-I mRNA showed a trend towards a reduction (P=0.08).
Total fiber cross-sectional area was not altered. After CET and EET, the IGF-I
mRNA level was significantly increased. The PGC-1alpha significantly correlated
with Tfam, and both PGC-1alpha and Tfam significantly correlated with COX-1 and
COX-4 mRNAs. Post-hoc analysis identified significant interactions between the
concurrent medication and muscular transcript levels as well as fiber size. Our
findings support the concept that specific transcriptional adaptations mediate
the divergent mitochondrial response of muscle cells to endurance training under 
different load condition and indicate a mismatch of processes related to muscle
hypertrophy in medicated CAD patients.

PMID: 16311763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Neuroscience. 2006;137(2):493-504. Epub 2005 Nov 17.

Oxygen-induced mitochondrial biogenesis in the rat hippocampus.

Gutsaeva DR(1), Suliman HB, Carraway MS, Demchenko IT, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Anesthesiology and Center for Hyperbaric Medicine
and Environmental Physiology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3315, Durham,
NC 27710, USA.

The hypothesis that damage to mitochondrial DNA by reactive oxygen species
increases the activity of nuclear and mitochondrial transcription factors for
mitochondrial DNA replication was tested in the in vivo rat brain. Mitochondrial 
reactive oxygen species generation was stimulated using pre-convulsive doses of
hyperbaric oxygen and hippocampal mitochondrial DNA content and neuronal and
mitochondrial morphology and cell proliferation were evaluated at 1, 5 and 10
days. Gene expression was subsequently evaluated to assess nuclear and
mitochondrial-encoded respiratory genes, mitochondrial transcription factor A,
and nuclear respiratory transcription factors-1 and -2. After 1 day, a
mitochondrial DNA deletion emerged involving Complex I and IV subunit-encoding
regions that was independent of overt neurological or cytological O(2) toxicity, 
and resolved before the onset of cell proliferation. This damage was attenuated
by blockade of neuronal nitric oxide synthase. Compensatory responses were found 
in nuclear gene expression for manganese superoxide dismutase, mitochondrial
transcription factor A, and nuclear respiratory transcription factor-2. Enhanced 
nuclear respiratory transcription factor-2 binding activity in hippocampus was
accompanied by a nearly three-fold boost in mitochondrial DNA content over 5
days. The finding that O(2) activates regional mitochondrial DNA transcription,
replication, and mitochondrial biogenesis in the hippocampus may have important
implications for maintaining neuronal viability after brain injury.

PMID: 16298077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. PLoS Biol. 2005 Dec;3(12):e415. Epub 2005 Nov 29.

Effects of hypothalamic neurodegeneration on energy balance.

Xu AW(1), Kaelin CB, Morton GJ, Ogimoto K, Stanhope K, Graham J, Baskin DG, Havel
P, Schwartz MW, Barsh GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA.

Normal aging in humans and rodents is accompanied by a progressive increase in
adiposity. To investigate the role of hypothalamic neuronal circuits in this
process, we used a Cre-lox strategy to create mice with specific and progressive 
degeneration of hypothalamic neurons that express agouti-related protein (Agrp)
or proopiomelanocortin (Pomc), neuropeptides that promote positive or negative
energy balance, respectively, through their opposing effects on melanocortin
receptor signaling. In previous studies, Pomc mutant mice became obese, but Agrp 
mutant mice were surprisingly normal, suggesting potential compensation by
neuronal circuits or genetic redundancy. Here we find that Pomc-ablation mice
develop obesity similar to that described for Pomc knockout mice, but also
exhibit defects in compensatory hyperphagia similar to what occurs during normal 
aging. Agrp-ablation female mice exhibit reduced adiposity with normal
compensatory hyperphagia, while animals ablated for both Pomc and Agrp neurons
exhibit an additive interaction phenotype. These findings provide new insight
into the roles of hypothalamic neurons in energy balance regulation, and provide 
a model for understanding defects in human energy balance associated with
neurodegeneration and aging.

PMCID: PMC1287504
PMID: 16296893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2006 May;290(5):F1260-9. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

Tubular mitochondrial alterations in neonatal rats subjected to RAS inhibition.

Lasaitiene D(1), Chen Y, Mildaziene V, Nauciene Z, Sundelin B, Johansson BR, Yano
M, Friberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Clinical Physiology, Univ. of Gothenburg, S-413 45 Gothenburg,
Sweden. daina.lasaitiene@kidney.med.gu.se

Pharmacological interruption of the angiotensin II (ANG II) type 1 receptor
signaling during nephrogenesis in rats perturbs renal tubular development. This
study aimed to further investigate tubular developmental defects in neonatal rats
subjected to ANG II inhibition with enalapril. We evaluated tubular
ultrastructural changes using electron microscopy and estimated
spectrophotometrically activity or concentrations of succinate dehydrogenase
(SDH), cytochromes a and c, which are components of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, on postnatal days 2 and 9 (PD2 and PD9). Renal expression of
sodium-potassium adenosinetriphosphatase (Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase) and two reflectors
of mitochondrial biogenesis [mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and
translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane 20 (TOM20)] also were studied using
Western immunoblotting and immunohistochemistry. Enalapril disrupted inner
mitochondrial membranes of developing cortical and medullary tubular cells on PD2
and PD9. These findings were paralleled by impaired mitochondrial respiratory
function, as revealed from the changes in components of the mitochondrial
respiratory chain, such as decreased cytochrome c level in the cortex and medulla
on PD2 and PD9, decreased cytochrome a level in the cortex and medulla on PD2,
and diminished cortical SDH activity on PD2 and PD9. Moreover, tubular expression
of the most active energy-consuming pump Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase was decreased by
enalapril treatment. Renal expression of TFAM and TOM20 was not altered by
neonatal enalapril treatment. Because nephrogenesis is a highly energy-demanding 
biological process, with the energy being utilized for renal growth and transport
activities, the structural-functional alterations of the mitochondria induced by 
neonatal enalapril treatment may provide the propensity for the tubular
developmental defect.

PMID: 16249276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 6;281(1):324-33. Epub 2005 Oct 17.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A induction by redox activation of nuclear
respiratory factor 1.

Piantadosi CA(1), Suliman HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA. piant001@mc.duke.edu

The nuclear expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), which is
required for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription and replication, must be
linked to cellular energy needs. Because respiration generates reactive oxygen
species as a side-product, we tested the idea that reactive oxygen species
regulate Tfam expression through phosphorylation of nuclear respiratory factor
(NRF-1) and binding to the Tfam promoter. In mitochondria-rich rat hepatoma cells
that overexpress NRF-1, basal and oxidant-induced increases were found in Tfam
expression and mtDNA content. Specific binding of NRF-1 to Tfam promoter was
demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. NRF-1-Tfam binding was augmented under pro-oxidant
conditions. NRF-1 gene silencing produced 1:1 knockdown of Tfam expression and
decreased mtDNA content. To evaluate oxidation-reduction (redox) regulation of
NRF-1 in Tfam expression, blockade of upstream phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase was 
used to demonstrate loss of oxidant stimulation of NRF-1 phosphorylation and Tfam
expression. The oxidant response was also abrogated by specific inhibition of
Akt/protein kinase B. Examination of the NRF-1 amino acid sequence revealed an
Akt phosphorylation consensus at which site-directed mutagenesis abolished NRF-1 
phosphorylation by Akt. Finally, Akt phosphorylation and NRF-1 translocation
predictably lacked oxidant regulation in a cancer line having no PTEN tumor
suppressor (HCC1937 cells). This study discloses novel redox regulation of NRF-1 
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation by phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-triphosphate kinase/Akt signaling in controlling Tfam induction by an
anti-oxidant pro-survival network.

PMID: 16230352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Gene. 2005 Dec 5;362:125-32. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

History of the Tfam gene in primates.

D'Errico I(1), Dinardo MM, Capozzi O, De Virgilio C, Gadaleta G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Università degli studi di
Bari, via Orabona 4/A, 70125, Bari, Italy.

Tfam is a single copy nuclear gene mapping on chromosome 10 in human and mouse,
20 in rat and 12 in Presbytis cristata. It encodes for an HMG
(high-mobility-group) protein showing a high affinity with the two
transcriptional promoters and other mitochondrial DNA regions. It is an activator
of mitochondrial transcription acting in the presence of mitochondrial RNA
polymerase and of transcription factor B. Other interesting features of Tfam gene
in human and rat are reported such as the existence of a smaller isoform,
originated by an alternative splicing mechanism of the exon 5 (delta5 isoform)
and the presence of different processed pseudogenes in addition to the active
copy of the gene. In order to widen knowledge about Tfam gene and the appearance 
of some of its properties in the evolutionary history of primates, we have
studied some aspects of this gene in different species. In particular we have
determined its chromosomal localization, suggesting that its locus is highly
conserved; we have searched for the presence of the delta5 isoform, demonstrating
that it is present only in hominids; we have provided evidence of Tfam processed 
pseudogenes in the majority of the analysed genomes. Sequence data from this
article have been deposited in the EMBL nucleotide database.

PMID: 16202542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2005 Dec;289(6):H2665-72. Epub 2005 Jul 29.

PGC-1 upregulation via estrogen receptors: a common mechanism of salutary effects
of estrogen and flutamide on heart function after trauma-hemorrhage.

Hsieh YC(1), Yang S, Choudhry MA, Yu HP, Rue LW 3rd, Bland KI, Chaudry IH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Surgical Research, Univ. of Alabama at Birmingham, 1670 Univ.
Blvd., Volker Hall, Rm. G094, Birmingham, AL 35294-0019, USA.

Flutamide, an androgen receptor antagonist, is thought to improve cardiovascular 
function by blocking the androgen receptor after trauma-hemorrhage (T-H).
Although 17beta-estradiol (E2) and flutamide improve cardiac function after T-H, 
whether E2 and flutamide produce their salutary effect via the same or a
different mechanism is unknown. We hypothesized that E2 and flutamide mediate
their effects via estrogen receptor (ER)-mediated upregulation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor coactivator 1 (PGC-1). PGC-1, a key regulator of 
cardiac mitochondrial function, induces mitochondrial genes by activating
transcription factors such as nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF-2), which
regulates mitochondrial proteins [i.e., mitochondrial transcription factor A
(Tfam), cytochrome-c oxidase subunit IV, and beta-ATP synthase]. Adult male rats 
underwent T-H [5-cm midline incision and hemorrhage (blood pressure = 40 mmHg for
approximately 90 min)] and resuscitation. At the onset of resuscitation, rats
received vehicle, flutamide (25 mg/kg), or E2 (50 microg/kg). Another group
received the ER antagonist ICI-182780 (3 mg/kg) with or without flutamide.
Flutamide or E2 administration after T-H restored depressed cardiac function.
Moreover, E2 and flutamide normalized expression of cardiac PGC-1, NRF-2, Tfam,
cytochrome-c oxidase subunit IV, and the mitochondrial DNA-encoded gene
cytochrome-c oxidase subunit I and beta-ATP synthase, mitochondrial ATP, and
cytochrome-c oxidase activity. However, if the ER antagonist ICI-182780 was
administered with flutamide, flutamide-mediated PGC-1 upregulation was totally
abolished. These results indicate that E2 and flutamide upregulate PGC-1 via the 
ER. Thus PGC-1 upregulation appears to be the common mechanism by which E2 and
flutamide mediate their salutary effects on cardiac function after T-H.

PMID: 16055512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Circulation. 2005 Aug 2;112(5):683-90. Epub 2005 Jul 25.

Overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor a ameliorates mitochondrial 
deficiencies and cardiac failure after myocardial infarction.

Ikeuchi M(1), Matsusaka H, Kang D, Matsushima S, Ide T, Kubota T, Fujiwara T,
Hamasaki N, Takeshita A, Sunagawa K, Tsutsui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number is decreased not only in
mtDNA-mutation diseases but also in a wide variety of acquired degenerative and
ischemic diseases. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is essential for
mtDNA transcription and replication. Myocardial mtDNA copy number and TFAM
expression both decreased in cardiac failure. However, the functional
significance of TFAM has not been established in this disease state.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have now addressed this question by creating transgenic
(Tg) mice that overexpress human TFAM gene and examined whether TFAM could
protect the heart from mtDNA deficiencies and attenuate left ventricular (LV)
remodeling and failure after myocardial infarction (MI) created by ligating the
left coronary artery. TFAM overexpression could ameliorate the decrease in mtDNA 
copy number and mitochondrial complex enzyme activities in post-MI hearts.
Survival rate during 4 weeks of MI was significantly higher in Tg-MI than in
wild-type (WT) littermates (WT-MI), although infarct size was comparable. LV
cavity dilatation and dysfunction were significantly attenuated in Tg-MI. LV
end-diastolic pressure was increased in WT-MI, and it was also reduced in Tg-MI. 
Improvement of LV function in Tg-MI was accompanied by a decrease in myocyte
hypertrophy, apoptosis, and interstitial fibrosis as well as oxidative stress in 
the noninfarcted LV.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of TFAM inhibited LV remodeling after MI. TFAM may
provide a novel therapeutic strategy of cardiac failure.

PMID: 16043643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 26;334(2):516-23.

Significant associations of the mitochondrial transcription factor A promoter
polymorphisms with marbling and subcutaneous fat depth in Wagyu x Limousin F2
crosses.

Jiang Z(1), Kunej T, Michal JJ, Gaskins CT, Reeves JJ, Busboom JR, Dovc P, Wright
RW Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman, WA
99164-6351, USA. jiangz@wsu.edu

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a nucleus-encoded protein, regulates
the initiation of transcription and replication of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).
Decreased expression of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes has been associated
with onset of obesity in mice. Therefore, we hypothesized genetic variants in
TFAM gene influence mitochondrial biogenesis consequently affecting body fat
deposition and energy metabolism. In the present study, both cDNA (2259 bp) and
genomic DNA (16,666 bp) sequences were generated for the bovine TFAM gene using a
combination of in silico cloning with targeted region PCR amplification.
Alignment of both cDNA and genomic sequences led to the determination of genomic 
organization and characterization of the promoter region of the bovine TFAM gene.
Two closely linked A/C and C/T single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were found 
in the bovine TFAM promoter and then genotyped on 237 Wagyu x Limousin F(2)
animals with recorded phenotypes for marbling and subcutaneous fat depth (SFD).
Statistical analysis demonstrated that both SNPs and their haplotypes were
associated with marbling (P=0.0153 for A/C, P=0.0026 for C/T, and P=0.0004 for
haplotype) and SFD (P=0.0200 for A/C, P=0.0039 for C/T, and P=0.0029 for
haplotype), respectively. A search for transcriptional regulatory elements using 
MatInspector indicated that both SNPs lead to a gain/loss of six putative-binding
sites for transcription factors relevant to fat deposition and energy metabolism.
Our results suggest for the first time that TFAM gene plays an important role in 
lipid metabolism and may be a strong candidate gene for obesity in mammals.

PMID: 16005429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. FASEB J. 2005 Sep;19(11):1531-3. Epub 2005 Jul 1.

Toll-like receptor 4 mediates mitochondrial DNA damage and biogenic responses
after heat-inactivated E. coli.

Suliman HB(1), Welty-Wolf KE, Carraway MS, Schwartz DA, Hollingsworth JW,
Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

An important site of cellular damage in bacterial sepsis is mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which we proposed is caused by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species
generated by activation of signaling through specific toll-like receptors (TLR). 
In wild-type (Wt) mice injected with heat-inactivated E. coli, hepatic TLR4 and
TLR2 proteins were up-regulated with TLR-dependent increases in transcript levels
for tumor necrosis factor (TNF-alpha), interleukin 6, nitric oxide synthase-II
(iNOS), and NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2). The accompanying stress significantly
depleted hepatic mtDNA despite eight- and fourfold increases in manganese
superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) and mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam)
expression, respectively. The identical E. coli dose generated significantly less
TNF-alpha, NO, and Nox2 in TLR4-/- and TLR2/4-/- but not in TLR2-/- mice. TLR4-/-
and TLR2/4-/- compared with Wt mice were protected from mtDNA oxidation but
showed no Tfam up-regulation and little copy number restoration. A critical role 
in the mtDNA damage was determined for TLR4-mediated iNOS transcription through
the MyD88 pathway. In Wt mice, mtDNA depletion was avoided by selective iNOS
blockade, and residual mtDNA loss was linked to NF-kappaB-dependent TNF-alpha
expression. These data disclose the dual role of TLR4 in mtDNA damage and
compensatory mitochondrial biogenic responses after innate immune activation.

PMID: 15994412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Jul;25(14):6225-34.

Myc stimulates nuclearly encoded mitochondrial genes and mitochondrial
biogenesis.

Li F(1), Wang Y, Zeller KI, Potter JJ, Wonsey DR, O'Donnell KA, Kim JW, Yustein
JT, Lee LA, Dang CV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Although several genes involved in mitochondrial function are direct Myc targets,
the role of Myc in mitochondrial biogenesis has not been directly established. We
determined the effects of ectopic Myc expression or the loss of Myc on
mitochondrial biogenesis. Induction of Myc in P493-6 cells resulted in increased 
oxygen consumption and mitochondrial mass and function. Conversely, compared to
wild-type Myc fibroblasts, Myc null rat fibroblasts have diminished mitochondrial
mass and decreased number of normal mitochondria. Reconstitution of Myc
expression in Myc null fibroblasts partially restored mitochondrial mass and
function and normal-appearing mitochondria. Concordantly, we also observed in
primary hepatocytes that acute deletion of floxed murine Myc by Cre recombinase
resulted in diminished mitochondrial mass in primary hepatocytes. Our microarray 
analysis of genes responsive to Myc in human P493-6 B lymphocytes supports a role
for Myc in mitochondrial biogenesis, since genes involved in mitochondrial
structure and function are overrepresented among the Myc-induced genes. In
addition to the known direct binding of Myc to many genes involved in
mitochondrial structure and function, we found that Myc binds the TFAM gene,
which encodes a key transcriptional regulator and mitochondrial DNA replication
factor, both in P493-6 lymphocytes with high ectopic MYC expression and in
serum-stimulated primary human 2091 fibroblasts with induced endogenous MYC.
These observations support a pivotal role for Myc in regulating mitochondrial
biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1168798
PMID: 15988031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2005 Jun;60(6):715-23.

Age-related changes of mitochondrial DNA content and mitochondrial genotypic and 
phenotypic alterations in rat hind-limb skeletal muscles.

Pesce V(1), Cormio A, Fracasso F, Lezza AM, Cantatore P, Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bari, Via
Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content relative to nuclear DNA content as well as
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) content was measured in four
hind-limb skeletal muscles, namely soleus (S), tibialis anterior (TA),
gastrocnemius (G), and extensor digitorum longus (EDL) of adult rats. Content of 
mtDNA in 6-month-old rats is in the rank order of S > TA > G > EDL, and TFAM
content is higher in S than in the other studied muscles. After the rat is 6
months of age, the mtDNA content decreases only in S and TA, whereas the TFAM
content increases only in S. Deletions in mtDNA appear quite early in life in S
and later on in the other muscles. Fibers defective for mitochondrial respiratory
enzymes appear in rats at 15 months of age. In the oldest animals, the highest
frequencies of occurrence of mtDNA deletions as well as of mitochondrial
phenotypic alterations are found in S according to its highest mtDNA content and 
oxidative potential.

PMID: 15983173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Gene. 2005 Jul 18;354:117-24.

Study of the mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) gene in the primate
Presbytis cristata.

D'Errico I(1), Reyes A, Dinardo MM, Gadaleta G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Università di Bari, Via
Orabona, 4, 70126 Bari-Italy.

The mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is a member of the HMG-box
protein family, necessary for both transcription and maintenance of mitochondrial
DNA. The gene is structured in seven exons and six introns and it is estimated to
span about 10 kb in mouse, human and rat. In addition to the full length mRNA of 
Tfam, a shorter mRNA isoform lacking exon 5 has been found to be widely
distributed in human and rat tissues. Here we present the isolation and
characterization of Tfam gene in the primate Presbytis cristata which belongs to 
the Cercopithecidae family. We have determined the complete CDS sequence, the
size of all the six introns, the complete sequences of the three shorter ones (I,
III, VI) and the partial sequences of the long introns (II, IV, V). The
comparison with other available Tfam sequences from mammals has revealed a high
degree of conservation (above 90%) both in CDS and introns. By in situ
hybridization (FISH) experiments we have mapped Tfam gene on chromosome 12 which,
according to other cytogenetics studies, is the homologous region of chromosome
10, where human Tfam has been mapped. Moreover we have searched for the presence 
of alternatively spliced isoforms through several approaches, such as RT-PCR and 
differential hybridization. In Presbytis cristata we have not detected the
presence of any spliced isoforms lacking exons; however we have identified one
isoform in which part of the intron I is retained in the mRNA. The inclusion of
this portion of intron I would originate an early stop codon if translated.

PMID: 15978747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 May;1042:101-8.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A in the maintenance of mitochondrial DNA:
overview of its multiple roles.

Kang D(1), Hamasaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan. kang@mailserver.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Mitochondria have their own genome, which is essential for proper oxidative
phosphorylation needed for a large part of ATP production in a cell. Although
mitochondrial DNA-less (rho0) cells can survive under special conditions, the
integrity of the mitochondrial genome is critical for survival of multicellular
organisms. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), originally cloned as
transcription factor, is essential for the maintenance of mtDNA. Recently, it has
become known that TFAM plays critical roles in multiple aspects to maintain the
integrity of mitochondrial DNA: transcription, replication, nucleoid formation,
damage sensing, and DNA repair. The effects of TFAM in these aspects are
intimately related to each other and to function as a whole for the purpose of
maintenance of mtDNA.

PMID: 15965051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 May;1042:88-100.

Analysis of proteome bound to D-loop region of mitochondrial DNA by DNA-linked
affinity chromatography and reverse-phase liquid chromatography/tandem mass
spectrometry.

Choi YS(1), Ryu BK, Min HK, Lee SW, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Ulsan,
Songpa-Ku Pungnap-Dong 388-1, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.

Mitochondrial dysfunction has been suggested as a causal factor for insulin
resistance and diabetes. Previously we have shown a decrease of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) content in tissues of diabetic patients. The mitochondrial proteins,
which regulate the mitochondrial biogensis, including transcription and
replication of mtDNA, are encoded by nuclear DNA. Despite the potential function 
of the proteins bound to the D-loop region of mtDNA in regulating mtDNA
transcription/replication, only a few proteins are known to bind the D-loop
region of mtDNA. The functional association of these known proteins with insulin 
resistance is weak. In this study, we applied proteomic analysis to identify a
group of proteins (proteome) that physically bind to D-loop DNA of mtDNA. We
amplified D-loop DNA (1.1 kb) by PCR and conjugated the PCR fragments to
CNBr-activated sepharose. Mitochondria fractions were isolated by both
differential centrifugation and Optiprep-gradient ultracentrifugation. The D-loop
DNA binding proteome fractions were enriched via this affinity chromatography and
analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The proteins on the gel were transferred onto PVDF membrane
and the peptide sequences of each band were subsequently analyzed by capillary
reverse-phase liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (RPLC/MS/MS). We
identified many D-loop DNA binding proteins, including mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA, Tfam) and mitochondrial single-stranded DNA
binding protein (mtSSBP) which were known to bind to mtDNA. We also report the
possibility of novel D-loop binding proteins such as histone family proteins and 
high-mobility group proteins.

PMID: 15965050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Infect Dis. 2005 May 15;191(10):1686-96. Epub 2005 Apr 12.

In vivo, nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors alter expression of both
mitochondrial and lipid metabolism genes in the absence of depletion of
mitochondrial DNA.

Mallon PW(1), Unemori P, Sedwell R, Morey A, Rafferty M, Williams K, Chisholm D, 
Samaras K, Emery S, Kelleher A, Cooper DA, Carr A; SAMA Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre in HIV Epidemiology and Clinical Research, University of New
South Wales, NSW 2010, Australia. p.mallon@cfi.unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs), which are used
to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, can cause mitochondrial
dysfunction and have been associated with lipoatrophy. The effects of this
mitochondrial dysfunction on lipid metabolism, at a molecular level in vivo, have
not been described.
METHODS: We examined early changes (by 2 weeks after initiation of therapy) in
expression of mitochondrial and nuclear genes in adipose tissue from 20
HIV-negative subjects randomized to receive dual-NRTI therapy
(zidovudine/lamivudine or stavudine/lamivudine) for 6 weeks.
RESULTS: We observed decreased transcription of mitochondrial (mt) RNA without
significant depletion of mtDNA. Decreases in mtRNA coincided with simultaneous
up-regulation of nuclear genes involved in transcriptional regulation of mtRNA
(NRF1 and TFAM) and oxidation of fatty acids (PPARA and LPL), whereas PPARG,
which is important for differentiation of adipose tissue, was down-regulated.
Many nuclear changes correlated with changes in peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PGC1), suggesting a central role for PGC1 in
nuclear responses to mitochondrial dysfunction. Expression of peripheral blood
monocyte mtRNA also decreased, suggesting that monocytes may be surrogates for
NRTI-induced mitochondrial dysfunction in other tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Independent of HIV, NRTIs decrease transcription of mtRNA in vivo.
The absence of depletion of mtDNA suggests that NRTIs cause mitochondrial
dysfunction by means other than through inhibition of DNA polymerase- gamma ,
whereas disruption of expression of lipid metabolism genes offers an explanation 
for NRTI-induced lipoatrophy.

PMID: 15838796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2005 Apr;50(4):316-21.

[Oxidative damage, maintenance, and higher structure of mitochondrial DNA].

[Article in Japanese]

Kang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)kang@mailserver.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

PMID: 15828277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 May 25;1723(1-3):302-8. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Quantitative change in mitochondrial DNA content in various mouse tissues during 
aging.

Masuyama M(1), Iida R, Takatsuka H, Yasuda T, Matsuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Fukui, Matsuoka-cho, Fukui 910-1193, Japan.

In order to systematically characterize age-related changes in the mtDNA content 
of various tissues during aging, we analyzed the mtDNA content of eight tissues
from mice at five different ages from young to senescent by quantitative
real-time PCR analysis. Obvious variations of mtDNA content among the tissues
were detected: There was a 20-fold range in 2-week-old mice and a 50-fold range
in 15-month-old mice. The mtDNA contents of the heart, lung, kidney, spleen and
skeletal muscle increased gradually with age, whereas those of bone marrow and
brain showed no age-related pattern. The expression patterns of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA) and mitochondrial single-strand DNA binding
protein (mtSSB), possible regulatory factors of the mtDNA copy number, were not
necessarily linked with the age-related pattern of the mtDNA content, suggesting 
the existence of other factors that affect the mtDNA content. The Western blot
analysis of mtDNA-encoded cytochrome c oxidase subunit III (MTCO3) demonstrated
that the expression levels of this protein in the heart and skeletal muscle
increase with age in parallel with the mtDNA content. These findings confirm that
the mtDNA content of tissues changes during aging.

PMID: 15820144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Int J Androl. 2005 Apr;28(2):65-73.

The impact of mitochondrial genetics on male infertility.

St John JC(1), Jokhi RP, Barratt CL.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Birmingham, The Division of Medical Sciences, Birmingham B15
2TJ, UK. j.stjohn@bham.ac.uk

Summary Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes 13 of the polypeptides associated
with the process of oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), the cells most important 
ATP generating pathway. Until recently, the effects of mtDNA rearrangements on
male fertility have been largely ignored. However, it is becoming increasingly
evident that both point mutations and large-scale deletions may have an impact on
sperm motility and morphology. We discuss the implications of these
rearrangements in the context of the clinical setting. We further discuss the
possible consequences resulting from the transmission of sperm mtDNA deletions to
the offspring. The role of nucleo-cytoplasmic interaction is investigated in the 
context of nuclear transcription and replication factors that regulate mtDNA
transcription and replication.

PMID: 15811066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005 Aug;289(2):C372-8. Epub 2005 Mar 30.

Gender dimorphism in rat liver mitochondrial oxidative metabolism and biogenesis.

Justo R(1), Boada J, Frontera M, Oliver J, Bermúdez J, Gianotti M.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Metabolisme Energètic i Nutrició, Departament de Biologia Fonamental i
Ciències de la Salut, Institut Universitari d'Investigació en Ciències de la
Salut, Universitat de les Illes Balears, Palma de Mallorca, Spain

In the present study, we have investigated gender differences in rat liver
mitochondrial oxidative metabolism. Total mitochondrial population (M) as well as
the heavy (M1), medium (M3), and light (M8) mitochondrial fractions obtained by
means of differential centrifugation steps at 1,000, 3,000, and 8,000 g,
respectively, were isolated. Electron microscopic analysis was performed and
mitochondrial protein content and cardiolipin levels, mitochondrial O(2) flux,
ATP synthase activity, mitochondrial membrane potential, and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) protein levels were measured in each sample. Our
results indicate that mitochondria from females have higher protein content and
higher cardiolipin levels, greater respiratory and phosphorylative capacities,
and more-energized mitochondria in respiratory state 3. Moreover, protein levels 
of TFAM were four times greater in females than in males. Gender differences in
the aforementioned parameters were more patent in the isolated heavy M1 and M3
mitochondrial fractions. The present study demonstrates that gender-related
differences in liver mitochondrial function are due mainly to a higher capacity
and efficiency of substrate oxidation, likely related to greater mitochondrial
machinery in females than in males, which is in accord with greater mitochondrial
differentiation in females.

PMID: 15800054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Apr 15;14(8):1069-76. Epub 2005 Mar 9.

Abnormal Ca(2+) release and catecholamine-induced arrhythmias in mitochondrial
cardiomyopathy.

Tavi P(1), Hansson A, Zhang SJ, Larsson NG, Westerblad H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, SE-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is implicated in numerous cardiac disorders. It has
been assumed that the functional defects are directly related to a decreased rate
of mitochondrial ATP production, but recent studies have challenged this idea.
Here, we used mice with tissue-specific knockout of mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) that leads to progressive cardiomyopathy. The role of changes in 
the excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling in cardiomyocytes of these mice was
studied by measuring the free cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration and by analyzing the
expression of genes encoding E-C coupling proteins. Action potential-mediated
Ca(2+) transients, measured with the fluorescent indicator fluo-3 in isolated
cardiomyocytes, were smaller and faster in Tfam knockout cardiomyocytes when
compared with controls. The total sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) content was 
decreased in Tfam knockout cells. The gene for the SR Ca(2+) binding protein
calsequestrin-2 (CASQ2), as well as other genes encoding proteins involved in SR 
Ca(2+) handling, showed decreased expression in Tfam knockout hearts. Decreased
CASQ2 levels have been linked to severe arrhythmias triggered by beta-adrenergic 
stimulation. In line with this, application of the beta-adrenergic agonist
isoproterenol resulted in frequent doublet Ca(2+) transients in Tfam knockout
cardiomyocytes. In conclusion, our results show that mitochondrial dysfunction in
the heart induces specific down-regulation of the expression of genes encoding
proteins involved in E-C coupling. These changes predispose to cardiac
arrhythmias and terminal heart failure and are thus important in the pathogenesis
of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 15757973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16815-20. Epub 2005 Mar 3.

Drosophila mitochondrial transcription factor B1 modulates mitochondrial
translation but not transcription or DNA copy number in Schneider cells.

Matsushima Y(1), Adán C, Garesse R, Kaguni LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1319, USA.

We report the cloning and molecular analysis of Drosophila mitochondrial
transcription factor (d-mtTF) B1. An RNA interference (RNAi) construct was
designed that reduces expression of d-mtTFB1 to 5% of its normal level in
Schneider cells. In striking contrast with our previous study on d-mtTFB2, we
found that RNAi knock-down of d-mtTFB1 does not change the abundance of specific 
mitochondrial RNA transcripts, nor does it affect the copy number of
mitochondrial DNA. In a corollary manner, overexpression of d-mtTFB1 did not
increase either the abundance of mitochondrial RNA transcripts or mitochondrial
DNA copy number. Our data suggest that, unlike d-mtTFB2, d-mtTFB1 does not have a
critical role in either transcription or regulation of the copy number of
mitochondrial DNA. Instead, because we found that RNAi knockdown of d-mtTFB1
reduces mitochondrial protein synthesis, we propose that it serves its primary
role in modulating translation. Our work represents the first study to document
the role of mtTFB1 in vivo and establishes clearly functional differences between
mtTFB1 and mtTFB2.

PMID: 15749697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1354-66.

Control of mitochondrial transcription specificity factors (TFB1M and TFB2M) by
nuclear respiratory factors (NRF-1 and NRF-2) and PGC-1 family coactivators.

Gleyzer N(1), Vercauteren K, Scarpulla RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical
School, 303 East Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

In vertebrates, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription is initiated
bidirectionally from closely spaced promoters, HSP and LSP, within the D-loop
regulatory region. Early studies demonstrated that mtDNA transcription requires
mitochondrial RNA polymerase and Tfam, a DNA binding stimulatory factor that is
required for mtDNA maintenance. Recently, mitochondrial transcription specificity
factors (TFB1M and TFB2M), which markedly enhance mtDNA transcription in the
presence of Tfam and mitochondrial RNA polymerase, have been identified in
mammalian cells. Here, we establish that the expression of human TFB1M and TFB2M 
promoters is governed by nuclear respiratory factors (NRF-1 and NRF-2), key
transcription factors implicated in mitochondrial biogenesis. In addition, we
show that NRF recognition sites within both TFB promoters are required for
maximal trans activation by the PGC-1 family coactivators, PGC-1alpha and PRC.
The physiological induction of these coactivators has been associated with the
integration of NRFs and other transcription factors in a program of mitochondrial
biogenesis. Finally, we demonstrate that the TFB genes are up-regulated along
with Tfam and either PGC-1alpha or PRC in cellular systems where mitochondrial
biogenesis is induced. Moreover, ectopic expression of PGC-1alpha is sufficient
to induce the coordinate expression of all three nucleus-encoded mitochondrial
transcription factors along with nuclear and mitochondrial respiratory subunits. 
These results support the conclusion that the coordinate regulation of
nucleus-encoded mitochondrial transcription factors by NRFs and PGC-1 family
coactivators is essential to the control of mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC548005
PMID: 15684387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Atherosclerosis. 2005 Jan;178(1):39-47.

Vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation is dependent upon upregulation of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) expression in injured rat carotid
artery.

Yoshida T(1), Azuma H, Aihara K, Fujimura M, Akaike M, Mitsui T, Matsumoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Sciences, University of Tokushima
Graduate School of Medicine, 3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Consistent with the physiological response to increased energy demand in
proliferating cells, the number of mitochondria is upregulated in synthetic
states of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) in atherosclerotic lesion. We
hypothesized that mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA), a prerequisite
factor for the transcription and replication of mtDNA, may be upregulated in VSMC
of injured rat carotid artery, and that inhibition of its expression can
attenuate the intimal thickening. Changes of intimal thickening and mtTFA
expression by a treatment with antisense oligodeoxynucleotides (ODN) for mtTFA
were investigated in balloon-injured rat carotid artery model. The expression of 
mtTFA was upregulated as early as 3 h up to 7 days after balloon injury. Delivery
of ansisense ODN for mtTFA from adventitia side to injured arterial wall caused a
significant decrease in intima-to-media (I/M) ratio. Furthermore, the increase in
immunoreactivity and mRNA expression of mtTFA in injured artery as well as the
number of mitochondria in intimal VSMC was abrogated by antisense ODN treatment. 
These data demonstrate that expression of mtTFA is upregulated in intimal VSMC of
injured rat carotid artery, and that suppression of mtTFA expression by antisense
ODN can attenuate intimal thickening after balloon injury.

PMID: 15585199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Dec 6;1659(2-3):148-52.

The transcription machinery in mammalian mitochondria.

Gaspari M(1), Larsson NG, Gustafsson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, SE-141 86
Stockholm, Sweden.

Initiation of transcription at mitochondrial promoters in mammalian cells
requires the simultaneous presence of a monomeric mitochondrial RNA polymerase,
mitochondrial transcription factor A, and either transcription factor B1 or B2.
We here review recent progress in our understanding of how these basal factors
cooperate in the initiation and regulation of mitochondrial transcription. We
describe the evolutionary origin of individual transcription factors and discuss 
how these phylogenetic relationships may facilitate a molecular understanding of 
the mitochondrial transcription machinery.

PMID: 15576046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Nov 16;32(20):6015-27. Print 2004.

Transient overexpression of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is
sufficient to stimulate mitochondrial DNA transcription, but not sufficient to
increase mtDNA copy number in cultured cells.

Maniura-Weber K(1), Goffart S, Garstka HL, Montoya J, Wiesner RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Vegetative Physiology, Medical Faculty, University of Köln,
Robert-Koch-Strasse 39, D-50931 Köln, FRG.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) stimulates transcription from
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) promoters in vitro and in organello. To investigate
whether changes of TFAM levels also modulate transcription and replication in
situ, the protein was transiently overexpressed in cultured cells. Mitochondrial 
mRNAs were significantly elevated at early time points, when no expansion of the 
TFAM pool was yet observed, but were decreased when TFAM levels had doubled,
resemb-ling in vitro results. HEK cells contain about 35 molecules of TFAM per
mtDNA. High levels of TFAM were not associated with increases of full-length
mtDNA, but nucleic acid species sensitive to RNAse H increased. Stimulation of
transcription was more evident when TFAM was transiently overexpressed in cells
pre-treated with ethidium bromide (EBr) having lowered mtDNA, TFAM and
mitochondrial transcript levels. EBr rapidly inhibited mtDNA transcription, while
decay of mtDNA was delayed and preferentially slowly migrating, relaxed mtDNA
species were depleted. In conclusion, we show that transcription of mtDNA is
submaximal in cultured cells and that a subtle increase of TFAM within the matrix
is sufficient to stimulate mitochondrial transcription. Thus, this protein meets 
all criteria for being a key factor regulating mitochondrial transcription in
vivo, but other factors are necessary for increasing mtDNA copy number, at least 
in cultured cells.

PMCID: PMC534614
PMID: 15547250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. EMBO J. 2004 Nov 24;23(23):4606-14. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

The mitochondrial RNA polymerase contributes critically to promoter specificity
in mammalian cells.

Gaspari M(1), Falkenberg M, Larsson NG, Gustafsson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Novum, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Initiation of transcription in mammalian mitochondria depends on three proteins: 
mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT), mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) and mitochondrial transcription factor B2 (TFB2M). We show here that the
recombinant mouse and human transcription machineries are unable to initiate
transcription in vitro from the heterologous light-strand promoter (LSP) of
mitochondrial DNA. This species specificity is dependent on the interaction of
TFAM and POLRMT with specific distal and proximal promoter elements. A sequence
element localized from position -1 to -2 relative to the transcription start site
in LSP functionally interacts with POLRMT. The POLRMT/TFB2M heterodimer is unable
to interact with promoter elements and initiate even abortive transcription in
the absence of TFAM. TFAM is thus an integral part of the mammalian transcription
machinery, and we propose that TFAM induces a structural change of the promoter
that is required for POLRMT-dependent promoter recognition.

PMCID: PMC533051
PMID: 15526033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;24(22):9823-34.

Architectural role of mitochondrial transcription factor A in maintenance of
human mitochondrial DNA.

Kanki T(1), Ohgaki K, Gaspari M, Gustafsson CM, Fukuoh A, Sasaki N, Hamasaki N,
Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a transcription factor for
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) that also possesses the property of nonspecific DNA
binding, is essential for maintenance of mtDNA. To clarify the role of TFAM, we
repressed the expression of endogenous TFAM in HeLa cells by RNA interference.
The amount of TFAM decreased maximally to about 15% of the normal level at day 3 
after RNA interference and then recovered gradually. The amount of mtDNA changed 
closely in parallel with the daily change in TFAM while in organello
transcription of mtDNA at day 3 was maintained at about 50% of the normal level. 
TFAM lacking its C-terminal 25 amino acids (TFAM-DeltaC) marginally activated
transcription in vitro. When TFAM-DeltaC was expressed at levels comparable to
those of endogenous TFAM in HeLa cells, mtDNA increased twofold, suggesting that 
TFAM-DeltaC is as competent in maintaining mtDNA as endogenous TFAM under these
conditions. The in organello transcription of TFAM-DeltaC-expressing cells was no
more than that in the control. Thus, the mtDNA amount is finely correlated with
the amount of TFAM but not with the transcription level. We discuss an
architectural role for TFAM in the maintenance of mtDNA in addition to its role
in transcription activation.

PMCID: PMC525493
PMID: 15509786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cardiovasc Res. 2004 Nov 1;64(2):279-88.

Lipopolysaccharide induces oxidative cardiac mitochondrial damage and biogenesis.

Suliman HB(1), Welty-Wolf KE, Carraway M, Tatro L, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, 0590 CR II Building,
Duke South Hospital Trent Drive, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The responses to bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) damage
mitochondria by generating oxidative stress within the organelles. We postulated 
that LPS damages heart mitochondrial DNA and protein by oxidation, and that this 
is recovered by oxidative mechanisms of mitochondrial biogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Systemic crude E. coli LPS administration decreased mtDNA
copy number and mtDNA gene transcription in rat heart caused by oxidant deletion 
of mtDNA. The fall in copy number was reflected in proteomic expression of
several mitochondria-encoded subunits of Complexes I, IV, and V. Recovery of
mtDNA copy number involved biogenesis as indicated by mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) and DNA polymerase-gamma expression. The transcriptional response
also included nuclear accumulation of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma co-activator 1 (PGC-1) and mRNA expression for redox-regulated
nuclear respiratory factors (NRF-1 and -2).
CONCLUSIONS: These novel findings disclose a duality of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) effect in the heart's response to LPS in which oxidative mitochondrial
damage is opposed by oxidant stimulation of biogenesis.

PMID: 15485687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Leukemia. 2004 Dec;18(12):1934-40.

Increased mitochondrial biogenesis in primary leukemia cells: the role of
endogenous nitric oxide and impact on sensitivity to fludarabine.

Carew JS(1), Nawrocki ST, Xu RH, Dunner K, McConkey DJ, Wierda WG, Keating MJ,
Huang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

B cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most prevalent adult leukemia in
the Western hemisphere, yet many biological and molecular features of the disease
remain undefined. CLL cells generate increased levels of radical species such as 
superoxide and nitric oxide (NO), which is associated with mitochondrial DNA
mutations. Considering that NO levels can affect mitochondrial biogenesis, we
hypothesized that the inherent nitrosative stress in CLL cells may lead to
hyperactive mitochondrial biogenesis. Here we report that primary CLL cells
contained significantly more mitochondria than normal lymphocytes and that their 
mitochondrial mass was significantly related to endogenous NO levels. Expression 
of the mitochondrial biogenesis factors nuclear respiratory factor-1 and
mitochondrial transcription factor A was elevated in most CLL specimens examined 
and appeared to be related to cellular NO levels. Treatment of B cells with
exogenous NO caused a substantial increase in mitochondrial mass. In vitro
sensitivity of CLL cells to fludarabine was highly related to mitochondrial mass 
in that cells with greater mitochondrial mass were less sensitive to the drug.
Taken together, our results suggest that NO is a key mediator of mitochondrial
biogenesis in CLL and that modulation of mitochondrial biogenesis by NO may alter
cellular sensitivity to fludarabine.

PMID: 15483672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Oct 21;369(3):219-23.

Possible association of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) genotype with
sporadic Alzheimer disease.

Günther C(1), von Hadeln K, Müller-Thomsen T, Alberici A, Binetti G, Hock C,
Nitsch RM, Stoppe G, Reiss J, Gal A, Finckh U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Butenfeld
42, 22529 Hamburg, Germany.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is essential for transcription and
replication of mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Disturbance of maintenance of
mtDNA integrity or mitochondrial function may underlay neurodegenerative
disorders such as Alzheimer disease (AD). TFAM, the gene encoding TFAM maps to
chromosome 10q21.1, a region that showed linkage to late-onset AD in several
study samples. We screened TFAM for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
genotyped the G>C SNP rs1937, coding for S12T in mitochondrial signal sequence of
TFAM, and the A>G SNP rs2306604 (IVS4+113A>G) in 372 AD patients and 295
nondemented control subjects. There was an association of genotype rs1937G/G with
AD in females and an association of a TFAM haplotype with AD both in the whole
sample and in females. The findings suggest that a TFAM haplotype containing
rs1937 G (for S12) may be a moderate risk factor for AD.

PMID: 15464268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic. 2004 Aug;3(2):157-67.

Pseudogenes in metazoa: origin and features.

D'Errico I(1), Gadaleta G, Saccone C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bari, Via E.
Orabona 4, Italy I-70126.

The complete genome sequences with their annotations are a considerable resource 
in biology, particularly in understanding the global structure of the genetic
material at the molecular level. The reason why some eukaryotic genomes contain
large quantities of apparently unnecessary DNA, namely pseudogenes, while others 
seem to invest in more efficient thinning processes or are equipped with
protection systems against parasitic elements still remains a mystery. Several
genome-wide surveys have been undertaken to identify pseudogenes in the
completely sequenced genome, bringing to light some differences both in their
amount and distribution. Since pseudogenes are important resources in
evolutionary and comparative genomics - as 'molecular fossils' - in this paper, a
survey on the origins, features, abundance and localisation of the different
pseudogenes is reported. As an example of genes producing processed pseudogenes, 
some experimental data obtained in the authors' laboratories from the study of a 
nuclear gene coding for the mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA), a key
regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis, are also reported.

PMID: 15355597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Jun;1019:430-3.

Acetyl-L-carnitine dietary supplementation to old rats increases mitochondrial
transcription factor A content in rat hindlimb skeletal muscles.

Pesce V(1), Fracasso F, Musicco C, Lezza AM, Cantatore P, Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Bari, Italy.

Acetyl-L-carnitine (ALCAR) fed to old rats has been reported to partially restore
mitochondrial function and ambulatory activity. The results of the effect of
ALCAR dietary supplementation to 28-month-old rats on mitochondrial transcription
factor A (TFAM) content of rat hindlimb skeletal muscles are reported.

PMID: 15247059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jul 1;32(Web Server issue):W230-4.

Dragon TF Association Miner: a system for exploring transcription factor
associations through text-mining.

Pan H(1), Zuo L, Choudhary V, Zhang Z, Leow SH, Chong FT, Huang Y, Ong VW,
Mohanty B, Tan SL, Krishnan SP, Bajic VB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infocomm Research, 21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Singapore 119613.

We present Dragon TF Association Miner (DTFAM), a system for text-mining of
PubMed documents for potential functional association of transcription factors
(TFs) with terms from Gene Ontology (GO) and with diseases. DTFAM has been
trained and tested in the selection of relevant documents on a manually curated
dataset containing >3000 PubMed abstracts relevant to transcription control. On
our test data the system achieves sensitivity of 80% with specificity of 82%.
DTFAM provides comprehensive tabular and graphical reports linking terms to
relevant sets of documents. These documents are color-coded for easier
inspection. DTFAM complements the existing biological resources by collecting,
assessing, extracting and presenting associations that can reveal some of the not
so easily observable connections among the entities found which could explain the
functions of TFs and help decipher parts of gene transcriptional regulatory
networks. DTFAM summarizes information from a large volume of documents saving
time and making analysis simpler for individual users. DTFAM is freely available 
for academic and non-profit users at
http://research.i2r.a-star.edu.sg/DRAGON/TFAM/.

PMCID: PMC441622
PMID: 15215386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31121-30. Epub 2004 May 19.

Oligonucleotide microarray analysis reveals PDX1 as an essential regulator of
mitochondrial metabolism in rat islets.

Gauthier BR(1), Brun T, Sarret EJ, Ishihara H, Schaad O, Descombes P, Wollheim
CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism and Genomics Platform, National
Center of Competence in Research Frontiers in Genetics, University of Geneva,
1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. benoit.gauthier@medecine.unige.ch

Mutations in the transcription factor IPF1/PDX1 have been associated with type 2 
diabetes. To elucidate beta-cell dysfunction, PDX1 was suppressed by transduction
of rat islets with an adenoviral construct encoding a dominant negative form of
PDX1. After 2 days, there was a marked inhibition of insulin secretion in
response to glucose, leucine, and arginine. Increasing cAMP levels with forskolin
and isobutylmethylxanthine restored glucose-stimulated insulin secretion,
indicating normal capacity for exocytosis. To identify molecular targets
implicated in the altered metabolism secretion coupling, DNA microarray analysis 
was performed on PDX1-deficient and control islets. Of the 2640 detected
transcripts, 70 were up-regulated and 56 were down-regulated. Transcripts were
subdivided into 12 clusters; the most prevalent were associated with metabolism. 
Quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR confirmed increases in succinate
dehydrogenase and ATP synthase mRNAs as well as pyruvate carboxylase and the
transcript for the malate shuttle. In parallel there was a 50% reduction in mRNA 
levels for the mitochondrially encoded nd1 gene, a subunit of the NADH
dehydrogenase comprising complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. As a
consequence, total cellular ATP concentration was drastically decreased by 75%,
and glucose failed to augment cytosolic ATP, explaining the blunted
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Rotenone, an inhibitor of complex I,
mimicked this effect. Surprisingly, TFAM, a nuclear-encoded transcription factor 
important for sustaining expression of mitochondrial genes, was down-regulated in
islets expressing DN79PDX1. In conclusion, loss of PDX1 function alters
expression of mitochondrially encoded genes through regulation of TFAM leading to
impaired insulin secretion.

PMID: 15151993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2004 Apr;22(2):104-7.

[Effect of microwave irradiation on neurocyte mitochondrial ultrastructure and
mtTFA mRNA expression in rats cerebral cortex and hippocampus].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie Y(1), Jiang HH, Gong QF, Zhang GB, Yu JH, Yu ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Military Labor Hygiene, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore molecular controlling mechanism of mitochondrial injury
induced by different density of microwave irradiation.
METHODS: Rats were exposed to microwave irradiation for 1 hour at average power
density of 3 mW/cm(2) or 30 mW/cm(2). After microwave irradiation, the changes of
pathological ultrastructure of rat cerebral cortex and hippocampus were observed 
by electron microscope, and mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) mRNA
expression level were determined by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After 3 mW/cm(2) microwave irradiation for 0, 3, 24 h, mitochondrial
ultrastructure and mtTFA mRNA expression level didn't significantly change in rat
cerebral cortex and hippocampus. After 30 mW/cm(2) microwave irradiation for 0,
3, 24 h, mitochondrial ultrastructure obviously changed, mtTFA mRNA expression in
rat hippocampus significantly increased by 67.00%, 80.00%, 30.00% respectively,
and in rat cerebral cortex by 133.00%, 86.00%, 233.00% respectively. There were
significant differences between the corresponding groups of hippocampus and
cerebral cortex (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: No obvious change in mitochondria was found after 3 mW/cm(2)
microwave irradiation, but it was found after 30 mW/cm(2) microwave irradiation. 
Mitochondria injury in cerebral cortex was more severe than that in hippocampus. 
mtTFA mRNA may have certain regulation in mitochondrial energy metabolism.

PMID: 15130438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Apr;1011:78-85.

Regulation and role of the mitochondrial transcription factor in the diabetic rat
heart.

Nishio Y(1), Kanazawa A, Nagai Y, Inagaki H, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan. nishio@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

To clarify the mechanism of abnormalities in mitochondrial expression and
function in diabetic rat heart, we have studied the transcriptional activities of
mitochondrial DNA using isolated intact mitochondria from the heart of either
diabetic or control rats. The transcriptional activity of cardiac mitochondria
isolated from diabetic rats decreased to 40% of the control level (P < 0.01).
Consistently, in the heart of diabetic rats, the content of cytochrome b mRNA
encoded by mitochondrial DNA was reduced to 50% of control (P < 0.01). This
abnormal transcriptional activity of mitochondrial DNA could not be explained by 
mRNA or protein contents of mitochondrial transcription factor (mtTFA), but mtTFA
binding to the promoter sequence of mitochondrial DNA, assessed by gel-shift
assay, was attenuated in diabetic rats. In contrast, the mRNA expression of
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes, such as ATP synthase-beta, was not affected 
by diabetes. Although O(2) consumption of the mitochondria from diabetic rats was
decreased, H(2)O(2) production in these rats was increased compared with the
control. Insulin treatment reversed all the abnormalities found in diabetic rats.
These results clearly indicate that an impairment of binding activity of mtTFA to
the promoter sequence has a key role in the abnormal mitochondrial gene
expression, which might explain the mitochondrial dysfunction found in diabetic
heart.

PMID: 15126286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Apr;1011:69-77.

Regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor A expression by high glucose.

Choi YS(1), Lee KU, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam, previously mtTFA) is a key regulator 
of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) transcription and replication. We have reported that
overexpression of nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) and high concentration (50
mM) of glucose increased the promoter activity of the rat Tfam in L6 rat skeletal
muscle cells. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of high
glucose-induced Tfam transactivation. The addition of 50 mM glucose for 24 h
increased Tfam promoter activity up to twofold. The glucose-induced Tfam
expression was dose-dependent and cell-type specific. Glucose increased the Tfam 
promoter-driven transactivity in L6 (skeletal muscle), HIT (pancreatic
beta-cell), and CHO (ovary) cells, but not in HepG2 (hepatoma), HeLa, and CV1
(kidney) cells. Among various monosaccharides, only glucose and fructose
increased the Tfam promoter activity. Oxidative stress might not be involved in
glucose-induced Tfam expression since treatment with antioxidants such as vitamin
C, vitamin E, probucol, or alpha-lipoic acid did not suppress the induction. None
of the inhibitors of protein kinase C, MAP kinase, and PI3 kinase altered the
glucose-induced Tfam promoter activity, suggesting that general phosphorylation
is involved in its signaling. However, a dominant negative mutant of NRF-1, in
which 200 amino acids of C-terminus were truncated, completely suppressed the
glucose-induced Tfam induction. It was concluded that high glucose-induced Tfam
transcription in L6 cells might be mediated by NRF-1.

PMID: 15126285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Apr;1011:61-8.

Mitochondrial nucleoid and transcription factor A.

Kanki T(1), Nakayama H, Sasaki N, Takio K, Alam TI, Hamasaki N, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Nuclear DNA is tightly packed into nucleosomal structure. In contrast, human
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) had long been believed to be rather naked because
mitochondria lack histone. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a member 
of a high mobility group (HMG) protein family and a first-identified
mitochondrial transcription factor, is essential for maintenance of mitochondrial
DNA. Abf2, a yeast counterpart of human TFAM, is abundant enough to cover the
whole region of mtDNA and to play a histone-like role in mitochondria. Human TFAM
is indeed as abundant as Abf2, suggesting that TFAM also has a histone-like
architectural role for maintenance of mtDNA. When human mitochondria are
solubilized with non-ionic detergent Nonidet-P40 and then separated into soluble 
and particulate fractions, most TFAM is recovered from the particulate fraction
together with mtDNA, suggesting that human mtDNA forms a nucleoid structure. TFAM
is tightly associated with mtDNA as a main component of the nucleoid.

PMID: 15126284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Apr;1011:1-6.

Mitochondrial pathogenesis from genes and apoptosis to aging and disease.
Overview.

Lee HK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, 28 Yongon-dong Chongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.
hkleemd@plaza.snu.ac.kr

PMID: 15126278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004 May;286(5):C1053-61. Epub 2004 Jan 7.

Calcium-regulated changes in mitochondrial phenotype in skeletal muscle cells.

Freyssenet D(1), Irrcher I, Connor MK, Di Carlo M, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, M3J 1P3 Canada.

Cytochrome c expression and mitochondrial biogenesis can be invoked by elevated
intracellular Ca(2+) in muscle cells. To characterize the potential role of
Ca(2+) as a messenger involved in mitochondrial biogenesis in muscle, we
determined the effects of the Ca(2+) ionophore A-23187 on the expression of
nuclear- and mitochondrially encoded genes. Treatment of myotubes with 1 microM
A-23187 for 48-96 h increased nuclear-encoded beta-subunit F(1)ATPase and malate 
dehydrogenase (MDH) mRNA levels by 50-100% (P < 0.05) but decreased mRNA levels
of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) by 19% (P < 0.05). mRNA levels of the cytochrome
c oxidase (COX) nuclear-encoded subunits IV, Vb, and VIc were unchanged, whereas 
the mitochondrially encoded subunits COX II and COX III were decreased by 30 and 
70%, respectively (P < 0.05). This was paralleled by a 20% decrease (P < 0.05) in
COX activity. These data suggest that cytoplasmic Ca(2+) differentially regulates
the mRNA level of nuclear and mitochondrial genes. The decline in COX II and III 
mRNA may be mediated by Tfam, because A-23187 modestly reduced Tfam levels by 48 
h. A-23187 induced time-dependent increases in Egr-1 mRNA, along with the
activation of ERK1/2 and AMP-activated protein kinase. MEK inhibition with
PD-98059 attenuated the increase in Egr-1 mRNA. A-23187 also increased Egr-1,
serum response factor, and Sp1 protein expression, transcription factors
implicated in mitochondrial biogenesis. Egr-1 overexpression increased
nuclear-encoded cytochrome c transcriptional activation by 1.5-fold (P < 0.05)
and reduced GDH mRNA by 37% (P < 0.05) but had no effect on MDH or beta-subunit
F(1)ATPase mRNA. These results indicate that changes in intracellular Ca(2+) can 
modify mitochondrial phenotype, in part via the involvement of Egr-1.

PMID: 15075204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jun 25;279(26):26900-5. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Drosophila mitochondrial transcription factor B2 regulates mitochondrial DNA copy
number and transcription in schneider cells.

Matsushima Y(1), Garesse R, Kaguni LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, Michigan 48824-1319, USA.

We report the cloning and molecular analysis of Drosophila mitochondrial
transcription factor B2 (d-mt-TFB2), a protein that plays a role in mitochondrial
transcription and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication in Drosophila. An RNA
interference (RNAi) construct was designed that reduces expression of d-mtTFB2 to
5% of its normal level in Schneider cells. RNAi knock-down of d-mtTFB2 reduces
the abundance of specific mitochondrial RNA transcripts 2- to 8-fold and
decreases the copy number of mtDNA approximately 3-fold. In a corollary manner,
we find that overexpression of d-mtTFB2 increases both the abundance of
mitochondrial RNA transcripts and the copy number of mtDNA. In a comparative
experiment, we find that overexpression of Drosophila mitochondrial transcription
factor A (d-TFAM) increases mtDNA copy number with no significant effect on
mitochondrial transcripts. This argues for a direct role for mtTFB2 in
mitochondrial transcription and suggests that, if TFAM serves a role in
transcription, its endogenous level limits mtDNA copy number but not
transcription. Furthermore, we suggest that mtTFB2 increases mtDNA copy number by
increasing the frequency of initiation of DNA replication, whereas TFAM serves to
stabilize and package mtDNA in mitochondrial nucleoids. Our work represents the
first study to document the function of mtTFB2 in vivo, establishing a dual role 
in regulation of both transcription and replication, and provides a benchmark for
comparative biochemical studies in various animal systems.

PMID: 15060065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 May 1;13(9):935-44. Epub 2004 Mar 11.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A regulates mtDNA copy number in mammals.

Ekstrand MI(1), Falkenberg M, Rantanen A, Park CB, Gaspari M, Hultenby K, Rustin 
P, Gustafsson CM, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Instititutet, Novum, S-141 86
Stockholm, Sweden.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number regulation is altered in several human
mtDNA-mutation diseases and it is also important in a variety of normal
physiological processes. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is essential
for human mtDNA transcription and we demonstrate here that it is also a key
regulator of mtDNA copy number. We initially performed in vitro transcription
studies and determined that the human TFAM protein is a poor activator of mouse
mtDNA transcription, despite its high capacity for unspecific DNA binding. Next, 
we generated P1 artificial chromosome (PAC) transgenic mice ubiquitously
expressing human TFAM. The introduced human TFAM gene was regulated in a similar 
fashion as the endogenous mouse Tfam gene and expression of the human TFAM
protein in the mouse did not result in down-regulation of the endogenous
expression. The PAC-TFAM mice thus had a net overexpression of TFAM protein and
this resulted in a general increase of mtDNA copy number. We used a combination
of mice with TFAM overexpression and TFAM knockout and demonstrated that mtDNA
copy number is directly proportional to the total TFAM protein levels also in
mouse embryos. Interestingly, the expression of human TFAM in the mouse results
in up-regulation of mtDNA copy number without increasing respiratory chain
capacity or mitochondrial mass. It is thus possible to experimentally dissociate 
mtDNA copy number regulation from mtDNA expression and mitochondrial biogenesis
in mammals in vivo. In conclusion, our results provide genetic evidence for a
novel role for TFAM in direct regulation of mtDNA copy number in mammals.

PMID: 15016765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 2;101(9):3136-41. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

A switch in metabolism precedes increased mitochondrial biogenesis in respiratory
chain-deficient mouse hearts.

Hansson A(1), Hance N, Dufour E, Rantanen A, Hultenby K, Clayton DA, Wibom R,
Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition and Biosciences, Karolinska Institutet, Novum,
Karolinska University Hospital, S-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.

We performed global gene expression analyses in mouse hearts with progressive
respiratory chain deficiency and found a metabolic switch at an early disease
stage. The tissue-specific mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) knockout
mice of this study displayed a progressive heart phenotype with depletion of
mtDNA and an accompanying severe decline of respiratory chain enzyme activities
along with a decreased mitochondrial ATP production rate. These characteristics
were observed after 2 weeks of age and became gradually more severe until the
terminal stage occurred at 10-12 weeks of age. Global gene expression analyses
with microarrays showed that a metabolic switch occurred early in the progression
of cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction. A large number of genes encoding critical
enzymes in fatty acid oxidation showed decreased expression whereas several genes
encoding glycolytic enzymes showed increased expression. These alterations are
consistent with activation of a fetal gene expression program, a well-documented 
phenomenon in cardiac disease. An increase in mitochondrial mass was not observed
until the disease had reached an advanced stage. In contrast to what we have
earlier observed in respiratory chain-deficient skeletal muscle, the increased
mitochondrial biogenesis in respiratory chain-deficient heart muscle did not
increase the overall mitochondrial ATP production rate. The observed switch in
metabolism is unlikely to benefit energy homeostasis in the respiratory
chain-deficient hearts and therefore likely aggravates the disease. It can thus
be concluded that at least some of the secondary gene expression alterations in
mitochondrial cardiomyopathy do not compensate but rather directly contribute to 
heart failure progression.

PMCID: PMC365756
PMID: 14978272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jun;286(6):E968-74. Epub 2004 Feb 17.

Tissue-specific regulation of cytochrome c oxidase subunit expression by thyroid 
hormone.

Sheehan TE(1), Kumar PA, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The influence of thyroid hormone (T(3)) on respiration is partly mediated via its
effect on the cytochrome c oxidase (COX) enzyme, a multi-subunit complex within
the mitochondrial respiratory chain. We compared the expression of COX subunits
I, III, Vb, and VIc and thyroid receptors (TR)alpha1 and TRbeta1 with functional 
changes in COX activity in tissues that possess high oxidative capacities. In
response to 5 days of T(3) treatment, TRbeta1 increased 1.6-fold in liver,
whereas TRalpha1 remained unchanged. T(3) also induced concomitant increases in
the protein and mRNA expression of nuclear-encoded subunit COX Vb in liver,
matched by a 1.3-fold increase in binding to a putative thyroid response element 
(TRE) within the COX Vb promoter in liver, suggesting transcriptional regulation.
In contrast, T(3) had no effect on COX Vb expression in heart. T(3) produced a
significant increase in COX III mRNA in liver but decreased COX III mRNA in
heart. These changes were matched by parallel alterations in mitochondrial
transcription factor A expression in both tissues. In contrast, COX I protein
increased in both liver and heart 1.7- and 1.5-fold (P < 0.05), respectively.
These changes in COX I closely paralleled the T(3)-induced increases in COX
activity observed in both of these tissues. In liver, T(3) induced a coordinated 
increase in the expression of the nuclear (COX Vb) and mitochondrial (COX I)
genomes at the protein level. However, in heart, the main effect of T(3) was
restricted to the expression of mitochondrial DNA subunits. Thus our data suggest
that T(3) regulates the expression of COX subunits by both transcriptional and
posttranscriptional mechanisms. The nature of this regulation differs between
tissues possessing a high mitochondrial content, like liver and heart.

PMID: 14970006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Life Sci. 2004 Mar 12;74(17):2097-109.

Up-regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor 1 mRNA levels by GH in VSMC.

Yoshioka S(1), Okimura Y, Takahashi Y, Iida K, Kaji H, Matsuo M, Chihara K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Metabolism, Neurology, and Hematology/Oncology,
Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, 7-5-2, Kusunoki-cho, Chu-o, Kobe 650-0017 Japan.

It is well known that growth hormone (GH) is involved in the development of
arteriosclerosis in which vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) play an important
role. In this study, we attempted to specify the genes up- or down-regulated by
recombinant human GH (rhGH) in VSMC using a differential display method. We found
that rhGH increased cytochrome oxidase subunit II/III mRNA in VSMC. Furthermore, 
the mRNA for mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (mtTF1), which stimulates the
expression of cytochrome oxidase subunit II/III, was found to be up-regulated by 
rhGH in a dose dependent manner using a quantitative PCR method. On the other
hand, IGF-I alone did not change mtTF1 mRNA levels. In rat L6 myoblasts and rat
H4-II-E hepatocytes, rhGH did not change mtTF1 mRNA levels. Pretreatment with a
JAK2 inhibitor AG490 (10 nM) and a MEK inhibitor PD98059 (10 microM) suppressed
rhGH-induced rise in mtTF1 mRNA levels of VSMC to the control levels.
Pretreatment with a PI-3kinase inhibitor wortomannin (1 nM) did not suppress
rhGH-induced rise in mtTF1 mRNA levels. These findings suggest that GH
up-regulates mtTF1 mRNA levels through JAK2 and MEK signaling in VSMC.

PMID: 14969715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 30;314(1):118-22.

In vitro methylation of nuclear respiratory factor-1 binding site suppresses the 
promoter activity of mitochondrial transcription factor A.

Choi YS(1), Kim S, Kyu Lee H, Lee KU, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Asan Institute for Life Sciences, Department of Internal Medicine, College of 
Medicine, University of Ulsan, Seoul, South Korea.

DNA methylation on CpG dinucleotides inactivates the expression of the many
genes. The decreased amount of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) has been suggested to be
an important indicator of mitochondrial biogenesis and the pathogenesis of many
human diseases. Since mitochondria transcription factor A (Tfam) is a key
molecule to regulate mtDNA replication and its promoter contains many CpG
dinucleotides, potential methylation sites, we investigated whether the
site-specific methylation would modulate the Tfam promoter-driven transcriptional
activity in vitro. The luciferase reporters ligated to Tfam promoter
(pGL2-Tfam2378) were in vitro methylated by SssI (CG), HpaII (CCGG), or HhaI
(GCGC) methylase and luciferase activities were monitored after transient
transfection of HepG2 cells. The SssI or HpaII methylation of pGL2-Tfam2378 or
the SV40 promoter-luciferase plasmid (pGL2-Control) decreased the luciferase
activities to less than 10% of the unmethylated plasmids, indicating that this
inactivation by SssI and HpaII methylation might not be specific for the Tfam
promoter. In contrast, HhaI methylation of pGL2-Tfam2378 suppressed the promoter 
activity to 24.4%, without affecting the control vector. There are two HhaI sites
in the nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) binding site of the Tfam promoter,
whereas HpaII sites are present out of the NRF-1 region. It was concluded that
the methylation on the NRF-1 sites might be a route for silencing Tfam promoter
resulting in decrease of mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 14715254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2004 Apr;286(4):C867-75. Epub 2003 Dec 3.

Compensatory responses of protein import and transcription factor expression in
mitochondrial DNA defects.

Joseph AM(1), Rungi AA, Robinson BH, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Canada M3J IP3.

Defects in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) evoke distinctive responses in the nuclear
genome, leading to altered mitochondrial biogenesis. We used C(2)C(12) cells
depleted of mtDNA (rho(-) cells) and fibroblasts from a mitochondrial
encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes (MELAS) patient to
examine adaptations of the protein import machinery and transcription factors
involved in mitochondrial biogenesis. In rho(-) cells, Tom20 and Tim23 protein
levels were reduced by 25% and 59%, whereas mtHSP70 was induced by twofold
relative to control cells. These changes were accompanied by a 21% increase in
enhanced yellow fluorescent protein (EYFP) import into mitochondria in rho(-)
cells (P < 0.05). In contrast, in MELAS cells mtHSP70 was elevated by 70%,
whereas Tom20 and Tom34 protein levels were increased by 45% and 112% relative to
control values. EYFP import was not altered in MELAS cells. In rho(-) cells,
protein levels of the transcription factors nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) 
and transcription factor A (Tfam) declined by 33% and 54%, whereas no change was 
observed for the coactivator peroxisome proliferator receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha). In contrast, Tfam was increased by 40% in MELAS 
cells. Rho(-) cells displayed reduced oxygen consumption (Vo(2)) and ATP levels, 
along with a twofold increase in lactate levels (P < 0.05). In electrically
stimulated C(2)C(12) cells, 109%, 78%, 60%, and 67% increases were observed in
mtDNA, Vo(2), cytochrome-c oxidase (COX) activity, and Tom34 levels, respectively
(P < 0.05). Our findings suggest that compensatory adaptations occurred to
maintain normal rates of protein import in response to mtDNA defects and support 
a role for contractile activity in reducing pathophysiology associated with mtDNA
depletion. Because the expression of nuclear-encoded transcription factors and
protein import machinery components was dependent on the type of mtDNA defect,
these findings suggest involvement of distinct signaling cascades, each dependent
on the type of mitochondrial defect, resulting in divergent changes in nuclear
gene expression patterns.

PMID: 14656719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2003 Fall;33(4):371-95.

Review: Mitochondrial medicine--cardiomyopathy caused by defective oxidative
phosphorylation.

Fosslien E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. efosslie@uic.edu

During experimental hypertensive cardiac hypertrophy, the heart energy metabolism
reverts from the normal adult type that obtains the majority of its requirement
for adenosine triphosphate (ATP) from metabolism of fatty acids and oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS), to the fetal form, which metabolizes glucose and
lactate. Mitochondrial synthesis and function require an estimated 1000
polypeptides, 37 of which are encoded by mitochondrial (mt) DNA, the rest by
nuclear (n) DNA. Inherited or acquired aberrations of either mtDNA or nDNA
mitochondrial genes cause mitochondrial dysfunction. Tissue expression of OXPHOS 
enzyme defects is often heterogeneous. As a result, cardiomyopathy and cardiac
failure are frequent but unpredictable complications of mitochondrial
encephalopathy, neuropathy, and myopathy. Several nuclear genes that encode
mitochondrial proteins have been sequenced and specific defects associated with
nuclear genes that affect mitochondrial structure and function have been linked
to hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathies and to cardiac conduction defects.
Thyroid hormone and exercise stimulate expression of a nuclear respiratory factor
(NRF) that induces the nuclear gene TFAM, which encodes the mitochondrial
transcription factor A that controls mitochondrial replication and transcription.
TFAM-null mouse embryos lack mitochondria and fail to develop a heart.
Mitochondrial dysfunction enhances the generation of radical oxygen species
(ROS), which damage mtDNA, nDNA, proteins, and lipid membranes. Mice lacking the 
mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme manganese-superoxide dismutase (SOD) develop
dilated cardiomyopathy. Palliative mitochondrial therapy with L-acetyl-carnitine 
and coenzyme Q10 improves cardiac function in patients with cardiomyopathy. Cure 
is only achievable by mitochondrial gene therapy. Experimental direct gene
therapy uses vectors or targeting signal sequences to insert genes into mtDNA;
indirect gene therapy employs viral or non-viral vectors to introduce genes into 
nDNA. Clinical repair of damaged somatic and germline genes that encode
mitochondrial proteins may soon be within reach.

PMID: 14584751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 24;310(3):779-84.

PGC-1-related coactivator and targets are upregulated in thyroid oncocytoma.

Savagner F(1), Mirebeau D, Jacques C, Guyetant S, Morgan C, Franc B, Reynier P,
Malthièry Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM EMI-U 00-18, Laboratoire de Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, CHU,
Angers, France. frsavagner@chu-angers.fr

Thyroid oncocytomas are tumors characterized by dense mitochondrial accumulation,
the cause of which is currently unknown. Members of the PGC-1 coactivator family 
have been identified as important mediators of mitochondrial biogenesis because
of their ability to activate nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins. We
have investigated the influence of the PGC-1 related coactivator (PRC) on the
high mitochondrial content observed in oncocytoma by quantifying the transcripts 
of PRC, the nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) and the mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM), in 30 oncocytic tumors and corresponding normal
tissues. The three genes studied were found to be significantly overexpressed in 
thyroid oncocytomas, concomitantly with an increase in cytochrome oxidase
activity and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content. However, no mtDNA variant in the 
D-loop region appeared to be involved in oncocytic development. We conclude that 
overexpression of the PRC pathway is responsible for mitochondrial proliferation 
in the context of thyroid oncocytoma.

PMID: 14550271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Nutr. 2003 Oct;133(10):3085-90.

Fetal and early postnatal protein malnutrition cause long-term changes in rat
liver and muscle mitochondria.

Park KS(1), Kim SK, Kim MS, Cho EY, Lee JH, Lee KU, Pak YK, Lee HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Epidemiologic data suggest a strong association between low birth weight and
increased risk of metabolic syndrome in adult life. However, the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. To test the hypothesis that mitochondrial changes
may serve as a link between poor nutrition in early life and insulin resistance
in later life, we investigated the effect of protein malnutrition during
gestation and lactation on mitochondria of the liver and skeletal muscle. Female 
offspring of Sprague-Dawley rats fed a low protein diet (casein, 80 g/kg) were
randomly divided into two groups and weaned onto either the low protein diet or a
control diet (casein, 180 g/kg). As a control group, offspring of rats fed the
control diet were weaned onto the control diet. The rats in each group were
randomly divided into four groups that were killed at 5, 10, 15 and 20 wk of age.
Both mitochondrial DNA content and the expression of mitochondrial DNA-encoded
genes in liver and muscle were measured. Mitochondrial transcription factor A and
antioxidant enzyme activities were also determined. The mitochondrial DNA content
of the liver and skeletal muscle were reduced in fetal and early postnatal
malnourished rats even when proper nutrition was supplied after weaning. These
changes were accompanied by a decrease in mitochondrial DNA-encoded gene
expression; however, they were not dependent on mitochondrial transcriptional
factor A. Our findings indicate that poor nutrition in early life causes
long-lasting changes in mitochondria that may contribute to the development of
insulin resistance in later life.

PMID: 14519789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2004 Jan;96(1):189-94. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

PGC-1alpha mRNA expression is influenced by metabolic perturbation in exercising 
human skeletal muscle.

Norrbom J(1), Sundberg CJ, Ameln H, Kraus WE, Jansson E, Gustafsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of Molecular Exercise
Physiology, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
Jessica.Norrbom@fyfa.ki.se

Endurance training leads to many adaptational changes in several tissues. In
skeletal muscle, fatty acid usage is enhanced and mitochondrial content is
increased. The exact molecular mechanisms regulating these functional and
structural changes remain to be elucidated. Contractile activity-induced
metabolic perturbation has repeatedly been shown to be important for the
induction of mitochondrial biogenesis. Recent reports suggest that the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha
(PGC-1alpha)/mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) pathway is involved in
exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis. In the present study, nine healthy men
performed two 45-min bouts of one-legged knee extension exercise: one bout with
restricted blood flow, and the other with nonrestricted blood flow to the working
muscle. Muscle biopsies were obtained from the vastus lateralis muscle before
exercise and at 0, 30, 120, and 360 min after the exercise bout. Biopsies were
analyzed for whole muscle, as well as fiber-type specific mRNA expression of
myocyte-enriched calcineurin interacting protein (MCIP)-1, PGC-1alpha, and
downstream mitochondrial transcription factors. A novel finding was that, in
human skeletal muscle, PGC-1alpha mRNA increased more after exercise with
restricted blood flow than in the nonrestricted condition. No changes were
observed for the mRNA of NRF-1, Tfam, mitochondrial transcription factor B1, and 
mitochondrial transcription factor B2. Muscle fiber type I and type II did not
differ in the basal PGC-1alpha mRNA levels or in the expression increase after
ischemic training. Another novel finding was that there was no difference between
the restricted and nonrestricted exercise conditions in the increase of MCIP-1
mRNA, a marker for calcineurin activation. This suggests that calcineurin may be 
activated by exercise in humans and does not exclude that calcineurin could play 
a role in PGC-1 transcription activation in human skeletal muscle.

PMID: 12972445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Sep 1;31(17):5039-47.

Import of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) into rat liver mitochondria
stimulates transcription of mitochondrial DNA.

Garstka HL(1), Schmitt WE, Schultz J, Sogl B, Silakowski B, Pérez-Martos A,
Montoya J, Wiesner RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) has been shown to stimulate
transcription from mitochondrial DNA promoters in vitro. In order to determine
whether changes in TFAM levels also regulate RNA synthesis in situ, recombinant
human precursor proteins were imported into the matrix of rat liver mitochondria.
After uptake of wt-TFAM, incorporation of [alpha-32P]UTP into mitochondrial mRNAs
as well as rRNAs was increased 2-fold (P < 0.05), whereas import of truncated
TFAM lacking 25 amino acids at the C-terminus had no effect. Import of wt-TFAM
into liver mitochondria from hypothyroid rats stimulated RNA synthesis up to
4-fold. We conclude that the rate of transcription is submaximal in freshly
isolated rat liver mitochondria and that increasing intra-mitochondrial TFAM
levels is sufficient for stimulation. The low transcription rate associated with 
the hypothyroid state observed in vivo as well as in organello seems to be a
result of low TFAM levels, which can be recovered by treating animals with T3 in 
vivo or by importing TFAM in organello. Thus, this protein meets the criteria for
being a key factor in regulating mitochondrial gene expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC212813
PMID: 12930954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Aug;23(16):5816-24.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor B1 interacts with the C-terminal
activation region of h-mtTFA and stimulates transcription independently of its
RNA methyltransferase activity.

McCulloch V(1), Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rollins Research Center, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322-3050, USA.

A significant advancement in understanding mitochondrial gene expression is the
recent identification of two new human mitochondrial transcription factors,
h-mtTFB1 and h-mtTFB2. Both proteins stimulate transcription in collaboration
with the high-mobility group box transcription factor, h-mtTFA, and are
homologous to rRNA methyltransferases. In fact, the dual-function nature of
h-mtTFB1 was recently demonstrated by its ability to methylate a conserved rRNA
substrate. Here, we demonstrate that h-mtTFB1 binds h-mtTFA both in HeLa cell
mitochondrial extracts and in direct-binding assays via an interaction that
requires the C-terminal tail of h-mtTFA, a region necessary for transcriptional
activation. In addition, point mutations in conserved methyltransferase motifs of
h-mtTFB1 revealed that it stimulates transcription in vitro independently of
S-adenosylmethionine binding and rRNA methyltransferase activity. Furthermore,
one mutation (G65A) eliminated the ability of h-mtTFB1 to bind DNA yet did not
affect transcriptional activation. These results, coupled with the observation
that h-mtTFB1 and human mitochondrial RNA (h-mtRNA) polymerase can also be
coimmunoprecipitated, lead us to propose a model in which h-mtTFA demarcates
mitochondrial promoter locations and where h-mtTFB proteins bridge an interaction
between the C-terminal tail of h-mtTFA and mtRNA polymerase to facilitate
specific initiation of transcription. Altogether, these data provide important
new insight into the mechanism of transcription initiation in human mitochondria 
and indicate that the dual functions of h-mtTFB1 can be separated.

PMCID: PMC166325
PMID: 12897151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Diabetes. 2003 Aug;52(8):1888-96.

Impact of aerobic exercise training on age-related changes in insulin sensitivity
and muscle oxidative capacity.

Short KR(1), Vittone JL, Bigelow ML, Proctor DN, Rizza RA, Coenen-Schimke JM,
Nair KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Insulin resistance increases and muscle oxidative capacity decreases during
aging, but lifestyle changes-especially physical activity-may reverse these
trends. Here we report the effect of a 16-week aerobic exercise program (n = 65) 
or control activity (n = 37) performed by men and women aged 21-87 years on
insulin sensitivity and muscle mitochondria. Insulin sensitivity, measured by
intravenous glucose tolerance test, decreased with age (r = -0.32) and was
related to abdominal fat content (r = -0.65). Exercise increased peak oxygen
uptake (VO(2peak); 10%), activity of muscle mitochondrial enzymes (citrate
synthase and cytochrome c oxidase, 45-76%) and mRNA levels of mitochondrial genes
(COX4, ND4, both 66%) and genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis (PGC-1alpha,
55%; NRF-1, 15%; TFAM, 85%). Exercise also increased muscle GLUT4 mRNA and
protein (30-52%) and reduced abdominal fat (5%) and plasma triglycerides (25%).
None of these changes were affected by age. In contrast, insulin sensitivity
improved in younger people but not in middle-aged or older groups. Thus, the
muscle mitochondrial response to 4 months of aerobic exercise training was
similar in all age-groups, although the older people did not have an improvement 
in insulin sensitivity.

PMID: 12882902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 8;307(4):962-6.

Modulation of the antioxidant activity of HO* scavengers by albumin binding: a
19F-NMR study.

Aime S(1), Digilio G, Bruno E, Mainero V, Baroni S, Fasano M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry I.F.M., University of Torino, Via Pietro Giuria 7,
Turin I-10125, Italy.

The interaction between different HO(z.rad;) radical scavengers in a
three-component antioxidant system has been investigated by means of 19F-NMR
spectroscopy. This system is composed of bovine serum albumin (BSA), trolox, and 
N-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-trifluoroacetamide (CF(3)PAF). The antioxidant capacity of
BSA and trolox has been assessed by measuring the amount of trifluoroacetamide
(TFAM) arising from the radical mediated decomposition of CF(3)PAF. When assayed 
separately, both trolox and BSA behaved as antioxidants, as they were effective
to protect CF(3)PAF from HO* radical-mediated decomposition. By contrast, trolox 
enhanced the production of TFAM in the presence of BSA, thus behaving as a
pro-oxidant. Urate, carnosine, glucose, and propylgallate showed antioxidant
properties both with or without BSA. CF(3)PAF and trolox were found to bind to
BSA with association constants in the order of 5 x 10(3)M(-1) and to compete for 
the same binding sites. These results have been discussed in terms of
BSA-catalysed cross-reactions between trolox-derived secondary radicals and
CF(3)PAF.

PMID: 12878205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Cancer Res. 2003 Jul 1;63(13):3729-34.

P53 physically interacts with mitochondrial transcription factor A and
differentially regulates binding to damaged DNA.

Yoshida Y(1), Izumi H, Torigoe T, Ishiguchi H, Itoh H, Kang D, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, School of Medicine, Kitakyushu Fukuoka 807-8555, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA; also designated Tfam) is necessary
for both transcription and maintenance of mitochondrial DNA. mtTFA preferentially
recognizes cisplatin-damaged DNA, as well as oxidized DNA. Increased apoptosis
has been observed in mtTFA knockout animals, suggesting that mtTFA is involved in
apoptosis. A fraction of p53 protein localizes to mitochondria at the onset of
p53-dependent apoptosis, but not during p53-independent apoptosis. Using
immunochemical coprecipitation, we observed binding of mtTFA and p53. Interaction
between mtTFA and p53 required the high mobility group-box1 or high mobility
group-box2 of mtTFA and amino acids 363-376 of p53. Binding of mtTFA to
cisplatin-modified DNA was significantly enhanced by p53, whereas binding to
oxidized DNA was inhibited. Our findings suggest that the interaction of p53 with
mtTFA may play an important role in apoptosis.

PMID: 12839966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Cells. 2003 Apr 30;15(2):181-5.

Expression of the mitochondrial ATPase6 gene and Tfam in Down syndrome.

Lee SH(1), Lee S, Jun HS, Jeong HJ, Cha WT, Cho YS, Kim JH, Ku SY, Cha KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, Seoul 110-744, Korea.

We investigated the expression of the mitochondrial ATPase6 gene whose product is
active in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS), and compared it to the expression
of Tfam, an important regulator of the transcription and replication of mtDNA.
Our aim was to examine a possible relation between mitochondrial gene expression 
and Down syndrome. The expression of ATPase6 and Tfam was analyzed by RT-PCR
amplification of the mRNA in cultured amniocytes from Down syndrome and normal
fetuses. The band intensities obtained were normalized against those of HPRT. The
Down syndrome fetuses were found to have lower ATPase6 and Tfam expression than
the normal fetuses. This finding suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction
resulting from decreased ATPase6 and Tfam expression during meiotic oocyte
maturation of oocytes might affect ATP generation and cause the nondisjunctional 
error. Hence this study suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction may be associated
with the developmental mechanism of Down syndrome.

PMID: 12803480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cell Biol Int. 2003;27(4):361-74.

Spatio-temporal expression of Drosophila mitochondrial transcription factor A
during development.

Takata K(1), Inoue YH, Hirose F, Murakami S, Shimanouchi K, Sakimoto I, Sakaguchi
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Tokyo University of Science, 2641 Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba-ken 278-8510, Japan.

We previously reported cloning of the Drosophila mitochondrial transcription
factor A (D-mtTFA) gene, and characterization of a recombinant protein. In this
report, the expression and distribution patterns of D-mtTFA during development
are described. D-mtTFA mRNA and its protein product were found to be abundant in 
cells of tissues undergoing both proliferation and polytenization. Furthermore, a
DRE-like sequence present in the D-mtTFA gene showed promotor activity in
Drosophila Kc cells. In addition, D-mtTFA was detected in brain throughout the
developmental process, as well as in non-proliferating tissues, such as flight
muscle and cardia, and was also found in spermatids of imagos. D-mtTFA possesses 
a nuclear-targeting sequence, and is present in the nucleus at the syncytial
stage, where bundles of 64 spermatids are present during spermatogenesis. The
results suggest that D-mtTFA not only contributes to the mitochondrial DNA
transcription and replication system, but also has a role in cell proliferation
and development, including spermatogenesis.

PMID: 12788053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 15;278(33):31149-58. Epub 2003 May 20.

Functional domains of chicken mitochondrial transcription factor A for the
maintenance of mitochondrial DNA copy number in lymphoma cell line DT40.

Matsushima Y(1), Matsumura K, Ishii S, Inagaki H, Suzuki T, Matsuda Y, Beck K,
Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Courses for Regulation of Biological Signals, Nagoya University,
Nagoya-shi, Japan.

Nuclear and mitochondrial (mt) forms of chicken mt transcription factor A
(c-TFAM) generated by alternative splicing of a gene (c-tfam) were cloned. c-tfam
mapped at 6q1.1-q1.2 has similar exon/intron organization as mouse tfam except
that the first exons encoding the nuclear and the mt form-specific sequences were
positioned oppositely. When cDNA encoding the nuclear form was transiently
expressed in chicken lymphoma DT40 cells after tagging at the C terminus with
c-Myc, the product was localized into nucleus, whereas the only endogenous mt
form of DT40 cells was immunostained exclusively within mitochondria. c-TFAM is
most similar to Xenopus (xl-) TFAM in having extended C-terminal regions in
addition to two high mobility group (HMG) boxes, a linker region between them,
and a C-terminal tail, also found in human and mouse TFAM. Similarities between
c- and xl-TFAM are higher in linker and C-terminal regions than in HMG boxes.
Disruption of both tfam alleles in DT40 cells prevented proliferation. The
tfam+/tfam- cells showed a 50 and 40-60% reduction of mtDNA and its transcripts, 
respectively. Expression of exogenous wild type c-tfam cDNA in the tfam+/tfam-
cells increased mtDNA up to 4-fold in a dose-dependent manner, whereas its
transcripts increased only marginally. A deletion mutant lacking the first HMG
box lost this activity, whereas only marginal reduction of the activity was
observed in a deletion mutant at the second HMG box. Despite the essential role
of the C-terminal tail in mtDNA transcription demonstrated in vitro, deletion of 
c-TFAM at this region reduced the activity of maintenance of the mtDNA level only
by 50%. A series of deletion mutant at the tail region suggested stimulatory and 
suppressive sequences in this region for the maintenance of mtDNA level.

PMID: 12759347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003 Jun;284(6):C1669-77.

PPARgamma coactivator-1alpha expression during thyroid hormone- and contractile
activity-induced mitochondrial adaptations.

Irrcher I(1), Adhihetty PJ, Sheehan T, Joseph AM, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M3J 1P3.

The transcriptional coactivator the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) has been identified as an important
mediator of mitochondrial biogenesis based on its ability to interact with
transcription factors that activate nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial
proteins. The induction of PGC-1alpha protein expression under conditions that
provoke mitochondrial biogenesis, such as contractile activity or thyroid hormone
(T(3)) treatment, is not fully characterized. Thus we related PGC-1alpha protein 
expression to cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity in 1) tissues of varying
oxidative capacities, 2) tissues from animals treated with T(3), and 3) skeletal 
muscle subject to contractile activity both in cell culture and in vivo. Our
results demonstrate a strong positive correlation (r = 0.74; P < 0.05) between
changes in PGC-1alpha and COX activity, used as an index of mitochondrial
adaptations. The highest constitutive levels of PGC-1alpha were found in the
heart, whereas the lowest were measured in fast-twitch white muscle and liver.
T(3) increased PGC-1alpha content similarly in both fast- and slow-twitch muscle,
as well as in the liver, but not in heart. T(3) also induced early (6 h)
increases in AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPKalpha) activity, as well as later 
(5 day) increases in p38 MAP kinase activity in slow-twitch, but not in
fast-twitch, muscle. Contractile activity provoked early increases in PGC-1alpha,
coincident with increases in mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), and
nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1) protein expression, suggesting that
PGC-1alpha is physiologically important in coordinating the expression of the
nuclear and mitochondrial genomes. Ca(2+) ionophore treatment of muscle cells led
to an approximately threefold increase in PGC-1alpha protein, and contractile
activity induced rapid and marked increases in both p38 MAP kinase and AMPKalpha 
activities. 5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-d-ribofuranoside (AICAR)
treatment of muscle cells also led to parallel increases in AMPKalpha activity
and PGC-1alpha protein levels. These data are consistent with observations that
indicate that increases in PGC-1alpha protein are affected by Ca(2+) signaling
mechanisms, AMPKalpha activity, as well as posttranslational phosphorylation
events that increase PGC-1alpha protein stability. Our data support a role for
PGC-1alpha in the physiological regulation of mitochondrial content in a variety 
of tissues and suggest that increases in PGC-1alpha expression form part of a
unifying pathway that promotes both T(3)- and contractile activity-induced
mitochondrial adaptations.

PMID: 12734114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Mol Biol Cell. 2003 Apr;14(4):1583-96.

Composition and dynamics of human mitochondrial nucleoids.

Garrido N(1), Griparic L, Jokitalo E, Wartiovaara J, van der Bliek AM, Spelbrink 
JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Technology and Tampere University Hospital,
Lenkkeilijänkatu 6, 33014 University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland.

The organization of multiple mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecules in discrete
protein-DNA complexes called nucleoids is well studied in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Similar structures have recently been observed in human cells by the 
colocalization of a Twinkle-GFP fusion protein with mtDNA. However, nucleoids in 
mammalian cells are poorly characterized and are often thought of as relatively
simple structures, despite the yeast paradigm. In this article we have used
immunocytochemistry and biochemical isolation procedures to characterize the
composition of human mitochondrial nucleoids. The results show that both the
mitochondrial transcription factor TFAM and mitochondrial single-stranded
DNA-binding protein colocalize with Twinkle in intramitochondrial foci defined as
nucleoids by the specific incorporation of bromodeoxyuridine. Furthermore, mtDNA 
polymerase POLG and various other as yet unidentified proteins copurify with
mtDNA nucleoids using a biochemical isolation procedure, as does TFAM. The
results demonstrated that mtDNA in mammalian cells is organized in discrete
protein-rich structures within the mitochondrial network. In vivo time-lapse
imaging of nucleoids show they are dynamic structures able to divide and
redistribute in the mitochondrial network and suggest that nucleoids are the
mitochondrial units of inheritance. Nucleoids did not colocalize with
dynamin-related protein 1, Drp1, a protein of the mitochondrial fission
machinery.

PMCID: PMC153124
PMID: 12686611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Hepatology. 2003 Apr;37(4):842-51.

Changes in mitochondrial adenine nucleotides and in permeability transition in
two models of rat liver regeneration.

Hernández-Muñoz R(1), Sánchez-Sevilla L, Martínez-Gómez A, Dent MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad
Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico.

Although enhanced phosphorylative activity can be a requisite for later DNA
synthesis during liver regeneration (LR), mitochondrial generation of reactive
oxygen species could lead to altered mitochondrial membrane permeability during
the prereplicative phase of LR. Therefore, the role of mitochondrial permeability
transition (MPT) was evaluated during rat LR, induced by either partial
hepatectomy (PH) or after CCl(4) administration. Parameters indicative of
mitochondrial function and membrane potentials, those of oxidative stress, and in
vivo changes of the intramitochondrial pool of adenine nucleotides were
determined. Twelve hours after PH, mitochondrial oxidative and phosphorylative
activities and adenosine diphosphate (ADP) content were increased, reaching a
maximal peak at 24 hours after surgery (maximal DNA synthesis). Parameters
suggestive of oxidant stress were enhanced, but mitochondrial volume and membrane
electrical potential remained unaltered. Interestingly, moderate mitochondrial
swelling and depolarization were found at later post-PH times (72 hours). In
CCl(4)-treated animals, it was found that an active liver cell necrosis delayed
mitotic activity and mitochondrial uncoupled respiration. Starting 12 hours after
CCl(4) intoxication, a drastic increase of inorganic phosphate occurred within
swollen and strongly depolarized mitochondria, suggesting changes in the MPT.
Despite expression of messenger RNA (mRNA) for mitochondrial transcription,
factor A showed a similar time course in both experimental models. The so-called 
augmenter liver regeneration was found significantly elevated only in PH rats. In
conclusion, onset of MPT could be associated with cell necrosis and inflammation 
after CCl(4) treatment, whereas this mitochondrial event could constitute a
putative effector mechanism, through which growth or inflammatory factors
inhibiting cell proliferation could initiate LR termination.

PMID: 12668977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Mar 15;31(6):1640-5.

Human mitochondrial DNA is packaged with TFAM.

Alam TI(1), Kanki T, Muta T, Ukaji K, Abe Y, Nakayama H, Takio K, Hamasaki N,
Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), a member of the high mobility group 
proteins, is essential for maintenance of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). Most TFAM
and mtDNA (both of which are normally soluble) was recovered from the particulate
fraction of human placental mitochondria when extracted with the non-ionic
detergent Nonidet P-40. mtDNA and TFAM were co-immunoprecipitated by anti-TFAM
antibodies. TFAM was released into the supernatant by DNase I digestion of mtDNA 
in the particulate fraction. Thus, TFAM and mtDNA are tightly associated with
each other, and it is likely that few TFAM or mtDNA molecules exist in an unbound
form in mitochondria. Based on the fact that TFAM is abundant enough to wrap
mtDNA entirely, these results suggest that human mtDNA is packaged with TFAM.

PMCID: PMC152855
PMID: 12626705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. IUBMB Life. 2002 Jun;53(6):295-301.

Nutrient-gene interactions: dietary vitamin A and mitochondrial gene expression.

Everts HB(1), Claassen DO, Hermoyian CL, Berdanier CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Foods and Nutrition, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia
30602, USA.

The BHE/Cdb rat is a model for mitochondrial diabetes due to a mutation in the
ATPase 6 gene. These rats require more dietary vitamin A to optimize
mitochondrial function than do normal Sprague-Dawley rats. To determine a
possible mechanism for this effect, cultured hepatocytes and hepatic tissues were
studied. ATPase 6 (F0ATPase subunit a), retinoic acid receptors (RARs), and
mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) gene products were determined using 
Western blot analysis. Northern analysis was used to determine ATPase 6, ATPase
6,8, and ND1 mRNA. Mitochondrial density was determined using confocal
microscopy. Dose response studies using primary hepatocyte cultures showed that
both ATPase 6 gene product and mRNA were optimized with additions of 10(-9) M
retinoic acid. Retinoic acid receptors were found in the mitochondrial
compartment. MtTFA levels were increased by vitamin A. Mitochondrial density was 
greater in the BHE/Cdb tissue than in Sprague-Dawley tissue. These results show
that vitamin A affects mitochondrial function via an effect on both nuclear and
mitochondrial encoded genes.

PMID: 12625368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Science. 2003 Feb 7;299(5608):896-9.

Mitochondrial biogenesis in mammals: the role of endogenous nitric oxide.

Nisoli E(1), Clementi E, Paolucci C, Cozzi V, Tonello C, Sciorati C, Bracale R,
Valerio A, Francolini M, Moncada S, Carruba MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preclinical Sciences, Center for Study and Research on Obesity, 
Luigi Sacco Hospital, University of Milan, Milan 20157, Italy.
enzo.nisoli@unimi.it

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Feb 7;299(5608):838-9.
    Bioessays. 2003 Jun;25(6):538-41.

Nitric oxide was found to trigger mitochondrial biogenesis in cells as diverse as
brown adipocytes and 3T3-L1, U937, and HeLa cells. This effect of nitric oxide
was dependent on guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) and was mediated by the
induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha,
a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis. Moreover, the mitochondrial
biogenesis induced by exposure to cold was markedly reduced in brown adipose
tissue of endothelial nitric oxide synthase null-mutant (eNOS-/-) mice, which had
a reduced metabolic rate and accelerated weight gain as compared to wild-type
mice. Thus, a nitric oxide-cGMP-dependent pathway controls mitochondrial
biogenesis and body energy balance.

PMID: 12574632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Physiol. 2003 Feb 1;546(Pt 3):851-8.

Exercise induces transient transcriptional activation of the PGC-1alpha gene in
human skeletal muscle.

Pilegaard H(1), Saltin B, Neufer PD.

Author information: 
(1)Copenhagen Muscle Research Centre and The August Krogh Institute, University
of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Endurance exercise training induces mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle. 
The peroxisome proliferator activated receptor co-activator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha)
has recently been identified as a nuclear factor critical for coordinating the
activation of genes required for mitochondrial biogenesis in cell culture and
rodent skeletal muscle. To determine whether PGC-1alpha transcription is
regulated by acute exercise and exercise training in human skeletal muscle, seven
male subjects performed 4 weeks of one-legged knee extensor exercise training. At
the end of training, subjects completed 3 h of two-legged knee extensor exercise.
Biopsies were obtained from the vastus lateralis muscle of both the untrained and
trained legs before exercise and after 0, 2, 6 and 24 h of recovery. Time to
exhaustion (2 min maximum resistance), as well as hexokinase II (HKII), citrate
synthase and 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase mRNA, were higher in the trained
than the untrained leg prior to exercise. Exercise induced a marked transient
increase (P < 0.05) in PGC-1alpha transcription (10- to > 40-fold) and mRNA
content (7- to 10-fold), peaking within 2 h after exercise. Activation of
PGC-1alpha was greater in the trained leg despite the lower relative workload.
Interestingly, exercise did not affect nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) mRNA,
a gene induced by PGC-1alpha in cell culture. HKII, mitochondrial transcription
factor A, peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha, and calcineurin
Aalpha and Abeta mRNA were elevated (approximately 2- to 6-fold; P < 0.05) at 6 h
of recovery in the untrained leg but did not change in the trained leg. The
present data demonstrate that exercise induces a dramatic transient increase in
PGC-1alpha transcription and mRNA content in human skeletal muscle. Consistent
with its role as a transcriptional coactivator, these findings suggest that
PGC-1alpha may coordinate the activation of metabolic genes in human muscle in
response to exercise.

PMCID: PMC2342594
PMID: 12563009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2001 Oct;32(4):359-61.

[A study of controlling mechanism on mitochondrial respiratory chain function].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang HH, Xie Y, Liu ZJ.

PMID: 12545871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2003 Jan;35(1):95-104.

Plasticity of skeletal muscle mitochondria: structure and function.

Hoppeler H(1), Fluck M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Bern, Switzerland. hoppeler@ana.unibe.ch

Mitochondria in skeletal muscle tissue can undergo rapid and characteristic
changes as a consequence of manipulations of muscle use and environmental
conditions. Endurance exercise training leads to increases of mitochondrial
volume of up to 50% in training interventions of a few weeks in previously
untrained subjects. Additionally, a shift of substrate metabolism toward a higher
reliance on lipids is observed, structurally reflected as a doubling of the
intramyocellular lipid content. A similar increase in intramyocellular lipids
without an increase in mitochondrial volume is observed as a consequence of a
high-fat diet. Strength training has a major impact on muscle myofibrillar
volume, however the mitochondrial compartment appears relatively unchanged.
Bedrest and microgravity conditions lead to losses of both myofibrillar and
mitochondrial volume, likely as a consequence of the decrease in metabolic and
mechanical stress on muscle tissue. Permanent severe hypoxia leads to a loss of
muscle mass and muscle oxidative capacity; however, hypoxia signaling events are 
triggered, which lead to distinct reprogramming phenomena of the transcriptome of
the muscle cells. The molecular mechanisms that orchestrate the plasticity of
skeletal muscle mitochondria are just beginning to unfold. The present data
indicate that transcriptional events largely contribute to increases in
mitochondrial mass in human skeletal muscle with endurance training. Expression
of mitochondrial proteins from the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes is
coordinated and involves the nuclear-encoded transcription factors NRF-1 and
TFAM. Transcription of genes encoding the mitochondrial proteins involved in beta
oxidation can be regulated separately from the genes of the Krebs cycle and the
respiratory chain. Transcription factors AP-1 and PPARalpha/gamma and the protein
kinase AMPK are signaling molecules that transduce the metabolic and mechanical
factors sensed during endurance training into the complex transcriptional
adaptations of mitochondrial proteins.

PMID: 12544642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jan 31;301(1):187-91.

Acetylation and level of mitochondrial transcription factor A in several organs
of young and old rats.

Dinardo MM(1), Musicco C, Fracasso F, Milella F, Gadaleta MN, Gadaleta G,
Cantatore P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Università di Bari, Via
Orabona 4, Bari 70125, Italy.

To gain further information on the role of mitochondrial transcription factor A
(TFAM) in mitochondrial biogenesis, we studied the post-translational
modifications of the protein in 6- and 28-month-old rat liver. Mass spectrometry 
and immunoblot analysis revealed that TFAM was acetylated at a single lysine
residue and that the level of acetylation did not change with age. The
measurement of the content of TFAM and of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in several
organs (cerebellum, heart, kidney, and liver) of young and old rats showed an
age-related increase of mtDNA and TFAM in all the organs analyzed, except in
heart. These data are discussed in the light of the multiple roles of TFAM in
mitochondrial biogenesis and of the age-related change of the mitochondrial
transcription.

PMID: 12535660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2003 Apr;94(4):1479-84. Epub 2002 Dec 20.

Reduced amount of mitochondrial DNA in aged human muscle.

Welle S(1), Bhatt K, Shah B, Needler N, Delehanty JM, Thornton CA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Pharmacology and Physiology, and Neurology,
University of Rochester, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.
stephen_welle@urmc.rochester.edu

Muscle concentrations of mRNAs encoded by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) decline with 
aging. To determine whether this can be explained by diminished mtDNA levels, we 
measured the relative concentrations of mtDNA and a representative mtDNA
transcript [encoding cytochrome-c oxidase, subunit 2 (COX-2)] in muscle of young 
(21-27 yr) and older subjects (65-75 yr). The amount of COX-2 mRNA (relative to
28S rRNA) was 22% lower (P = 0.04) in older muscle, and the amount of mtDNA
(relative to nuclear DNA) was 38% lower (P = 0.0002). The average level of
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam), a protein essential for mtDNA
replication, was similar in younger and older muscle. Tfam mRNA, nuclear
respiratory factor-1 mRNA, and several mRNAs encoding proteins required for mtDNA
replication were expressed at similar levels in younger and older muscle. The
mtDNA concentrations were only weakly related to age-adjusted aerobic fitness
(maximal oxygen consumption) and self-reported physical activity levels. We
conclude that the lower concentration of mitochondrial mRNAs in older muscle can 
be explained by a reduced concentration of mtDNA.

PMID: 12496142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2003 Feb 15;167(4):570-9. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Postlipopolysaccharide oxidative damage of mitochondrial DNA.

Suliman HB(1), Carraway MS, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA.

Selected structural and functional alterations of mitochondria induced by
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were investigated on the basis of the
hypothesis that LPS initiates hepatic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) damage by
oxidative mechanisms. After a single intraperitoneal injection of Escherichia
coli LPS, liver mtDNA copy number decreased, as determined by Southern analysis, 
within 24 hours relative to nuclear 18S rRNA (p < 0.05). LPS induced a novel
oxidant-dependent 3.8-kb mtDNA deletion in the region encoding NADH dehydrogenase
subunits 1 and 2 and cytochrome c oxidase subunit I, which correlated with
mitochondrial glutathione depletion. Expression of mitochondrial mRNA and
transcription of mitochondrial RNA were suppressed, whereas mRNA expression
increased for selected nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins. Resolution of
mtDNA damage was mediated by importation of mitochondrial transcription factor A 
protein, a central regulator of mtDNA copy number, accompanied by binding of
mitochondrial protein extract to the mitochondrial transcription factor A
DNA-binding site. Hence, mtDNA integrity and transcriptional capacity after LPS
administration appeared to be reinstated by mitochondrial biogenesis. These data 
provide the first link between LPS-mediated hepatic injury and a specific
oxidative mtDNA deletion, which inhibits mitochondrial transcription and is
restored by activation of mechanisms that lead to biogenesis.

PMID: 12480607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Neuroophthalmol. 2002 Dec;22(4):279-85.

The eyes of mito-mouse: mouse models of mitochondrial disease.

Biousse V(1), Pardue MT, Wallace DC, Newman NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia, USA. vbiouss@emory.edu

The recent creation of several mouse models of mitochondrial diseases has
provided new insights into the understanding of human mitochondrial disorders.
Whether these animals have clinical or histologic ophthalmologic abnormalities is
of great interest given the high frequency of such abnormalities in humans with
mitochondrial disorders. In this article, we describe the currently available
mouse models for mitochondrial diseases with special emphasis on their ocular
phenotype. These mouse models demonstrate multiple and varied ophthalmologic
manifestations.

PMID: 12464732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Med. 2002 Jun;8(6):326-33.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A reduction and mitochondrial
dysfunction in Hashimoto's hypothyroid myopathy.

Siciliano G(1), Monzani F, Manca ML, Tessa A, Caraccio N, Tozzi G, Piemonte F,
Mancuso M, Santorelli FM, Ferrannini E, Murri L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pisa, Italy.
gsicilia@neuro.med.unipi.it

BACKGROUND: Mitochondrial changes have been described in muscle tissue in
acquired hypothyroidism. Among the molecular mechanisms by which thyroid hormones
regulate expression of nuclear genes encoding for regulatory proteins of
mitochondrial respiratory function, the mitochondrial transcription factor A
(h-mtTFA) has been proposed to be a target of thyroid hormone action. The aim of 
this study has been to relate h-mtTFA levels in the skeletal muscle of patients
affected by Hashimoto's hypothyroidism and myopathy (HHM) to muscle disease and
thyroid status.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eleven HHM patients underwent complete thyroid status and
neurologic assessment, along with determination of exercise lactate anaerobic
threshold (LT) and muscle biopsy in which h-mtTFA levels were measured and mtDNA 
was analyzed.
RESULTS: Decreased exercise lactate threshold, presence of cytochrome c oxidase
negative fibers, reduction of cytochrome c oxidase activity, and mitochondrial
DNA copy number at muscle biopsy were indicative of mitochondrial involvement in 
these patients. Furthermore, muscle h-mtTFA levels were reduced to a variable
extent in comparison with a group of euthyroid controls. The h-mtTFA levels were 
inversely correlated with TSH and LT lactate, and positively correlated with FT4.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that low levels of the h-mtTFA occur in
skeletal muscle of HHM and suggest that abnormal h-mtTFA turnover may be
implicated in the pathogenesis of mitochondrial alterations in this disease.

PMCID: PMC2039994
PMID: 12428064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 12;99(23):15066-71. Epub 2002 Nov 4.

Increased mitochondrial mass in mitochondrial myopathy mice.

Wredenberg A(1), Wibom R, Wilhelmsson H, Graff C, Wiener HH, Burden SJ, Oldfors
A, Westerblad H, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition and Biosciences, Karolinska Institute,
Huddinge Hospital, Sweden.

We have generated an animal model for mitochondrial myopathy by disrupting the
gene for mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) in skeletal muscle of the
mouse. The knockout animals developed a myopathy with ragged-red muscle fibers,
accumulation of abnormally appearing mitochondria, and progressively
deteriorating respiratory chain function in skeletal muscle. Enzyme
histochemistry, electron micrographs, and citrate synthase activity revealed a
substantial increase in mitochondrial mass in skeletal muscle of the myopathy
mice. Biochemical assays demonstrated that the increased mitochondrial mass
partly compensated for the reduced function of the respiratory chain by
maintaining overall ATP production in skeletal muscle. The increased
mitochondrial mass thus was induced by the respiratory chain deficiency and may
be beneficial by improving the energy homeostasis in the affected tissue.
Surprisingly, in vitro experiments to assess muscle function demonstrated that
fatigue development did not occur more rapidly in myopathy mice, suggesting that 
overall ATP production is sufficient. However, there were lower absolute muscle
forces in the myopathy mice, especially at low stimulation frequencies. This
reduction in muscle force is likely caused by deficient formation of
force-generating actin-myosin cross bridges and/or disregulation of Ca(2+)
homeostasis. Thus, both biochemical measurements of ATP-production rate and in
vitro physiological studies suggest that reduced mitochondrial ATP production
might not be as critical for the pathophysiology of mitochondrial myopathy as
thought previously.

PMCID: PMC137544
PMID: 12417746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Sep;60 Suppl 9:267-72.

[Exercise induced utilization of glucose and lipids in skeletal muscle].

[Article in Japanese]

Miura S(1), Ezaki O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Nutrition, Department of Human Nutrition, National
Institute of Health and Nutrition.

PMID: 12387004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Sep 10;1555(1-3):106-10.

Manipulation of mitochondrial DNA gene expression in the mouse.

Silva JP(1), Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge
Hospital, S-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

Mitochondrial dysfunction due to impaired respiratory chain function is
increasingly recognized as an important cause of human disease. Mitochondrial
disorders are relatively common and have an estimated incidence of 1:10,000 live 
births. There are more than 100 different point mutations and numerous large
rearrangements of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA; mainly single deletions) that cause
human disease. We aimed at obtaining an animal model to study physiological
aspects of mtDNA mutation disorders. There are as yet unsolved technical problems
associated with transfection of mammalian mitochondria. We therefore choose to
manipulate mtDNA expression by targeting of the nuclear gene encoding Tfam. We
utilised the cre-loxP recombination system to disrupt Tfam since this system
allows manipulation of respiratory chain function in selected mouse tissues. We
have found increased cell death or apoptosis induction in both germ line and
tissue-specific Tfam knockouts. Our results further suggest that increased
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is not a prominent feature in cells
with impaired mtDNA expression.

PMID: 12206900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 8;277(45):43309-18. Epub 2002 Aug 26.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A and its downstream targets are up-regulated 
in a rat hepatoma.

Dong X(1), Ghoshal K, Majumder S, Yadav SP, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Medicine, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A is a key regulator involved in mitochondrial
DNA transcription and replication. In a poorly differentiated rat hepatoma,
Morris hepatoma 3924A, the mRNA and protein levels of this factor were elevated
about 10- and 11-fold, respectively, relative to the host liver. The mRNA levels 
for the hepatoma cytochrome c oxidase I, II, and NADH dehydrogenase 5, 6, the
downstream targets of Tfam, were augmented 10-, 8-, 5-, and 3-fold, respectively.
Interestingly, Tfam was also found in the hepatoma nucleus. The mRNA levels for
nuclear respiratory factor 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and -2), the proteins that are known to
interact with specific regulatory elements on human TFAM promoter, were 5- and
3-fold higher, respectively, in the hepatoma relative to the host liver. Unlike
the human promoter, the rat Tfam promoter did not form a specific complex with
the NRF-1 in the liver or hepatoma nuclear extracts, which is consistent with the
absence of an NRF-1 consensus sequence in the proximal rat promoter. A single
specific complex formed between the rat promoter and the NRF-2 protein was
comparable in the two extracts. The DNA binding activity of Sp1 in the hepatoma
nuclear extract was 4-fold greater than that in the liver extract. In vivo
genomic footprinting showed occupancy of NRF-2 and Sp1 consensus sites on the
promoter of rat Tfam gene. Tfam was also up-regulated in other hepatoma cells.
Together, these results show up-regulation of Tfam in some tumors, particularly
the liver tumors. Further, the relatively high level of Sp1 binding to the
promoter in the hepatoma could play a major role in the up-regulation of Tfam in 
these tumor cells.

PMCID: PMC2242728
PMID: 12198131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jul 26;295(4):945-51.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A binds preferentially to oxidatively
damaged DNA.

Yoshida Y(1), Izumi H, Ise T, Uramoto H, Torigoe T, Ishiguchi H, Murakami T,
Tanabe M, Nakayama Y, Itoh H, Kasai H, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka,
Japan.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) is necessary for both transcription 
and maintenance of mtDNA, and is also one of the high mobility group (HMG)
proteins that preferentially binds to cisplatin-damaged DNA. In this study we
confirmed the preferential binding of mtTFA to cisplatin-damaged DNA, and also
discovered that mtTFA binds to oxidatively damaged DNA. The affinity for
oxidatively damaged DNA of mtTFA is higher for A/8-oxo-dG and C/8-oxo-dG than for
G/8-oxo-dG and T/8-oxo-dG. Our findings suggest that mtTFA plays an important
role in the recognition of oxidative DNA damage.

PMID: 12127986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2002 Aug;283(2):H540-8.

Bioenergetic remodeling of heart during treatment of spontaneously hypertensive
rats with enalapril.

Leary SC(1), Michaud D, Lyons CN, Hale TM, Bushfield TL, Adams MA, Moyes CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada K7L 3N6.

We used spontaneously hypertensive rats to study remodeling of cardiac
bioenergetics associated with changes in blood pressure. Blood pressure was
manipulated with aggressive antihypertensive treatment combining low dietary salt
and the angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor enalapril. Successive cycles of 2
wk on, 2 wk off treatment led to rapid, reversible changes in left ventricular
(LV) mass (30% change in <10 days). Despite changes in LV mass, specific
activities of bioenergetic (cytochrome-c oxidase, citrate synthase, lactate
dehydrogenase) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) (total cellular superoxide
dismutase) enzymes were actively maintained within relatively narrow ranges
regardless of treatment duration, organismal age, or transmural region. Although 
enalapril led to parallel declines in mitochondrial enzyme content and
ventricular mass, total ventricular mtDNA content was unaffected. Altered
enzymatic content occurred without significant changes in relevant mRNA and
protein levels. Transcript levels of gene products involved in mtDNA maintenance 
(Tfam), mitochondrial protein degradation (LON protease), fusion (fuzzy onion
homolog), and fission (dynamin-like protein, synaptojanin-2alpha) were also
unchanged. In contrast, enalapril-mediated ventricular and mitochondrial
remodeling was accompanied by a twofold increase in specific activity of
catalase, an indicator of oxidative stress, suggesting that rapid cardiac
adaptation is accompanied by tight regulation of mitochondrial enzyme activities 
and increased ROS production.

PMID: 12124199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Gene. 2002 May 29;291(1-2):223-32.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA): gene structure and
characterization of related pseudogenes.

Reyes A(1), Mezzina M, Gadaleta G.

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Studio sui Mitocondri e Metabolismo Energetico, CNR, via Amendola
165/A, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA or Tfam) is a 25 kDa protein encoded 
by a nuclear gene and imported to mitochondria, where it functions as a key
regulator of mammalian mitochondrial (mt) DNA transcription and replication. The 
coding sequence of the human mtTFA gene is reported in the literature and the
sizes of few introns are known. In this paper we present the genomic structure of
the human mtTFA gene along with the complete sequence of its six intronic
regions. Three of the introns (I, III, VI) have been found to be less than 600
bp, while the other three were greater than 1.8 kb. In the course of this work,
we discovered that, in addition to the active copy, different homologous
sequences identified as processed pseudogenes psi h-mtTFA have been isolated and 
sequenced. Using an 'in silico' mapping approach we determined their locations on
chromosomes 7, 11 and X. psi h-mtTFA locations are different from that of the
gene, previously reported on chromosome 10. Transcription analysis by means of
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction has shown that other than the RNA
corresponding to the full-length transcript, an isoform lacking 96 bp is also
present. Among the three sequenced pseudogenes only one of them located on
chromosome 11 has been found to be transcribed in Jurkat cells under these
culture conditions, even though transcription initiation and binding sites for
different transcription factors have also been found upstream from the other two 
pseudogenes.

PMID: 12095695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nat Genet. 2002 Jul;31(3):227-8.

The ABCs of mitochondrial transcription.

Shoubridge EA.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2002 Jul;31(3):289-94.

PMID: 12089513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Methods Enzymol. 2002;353:409-21.

Tissue-specific knockout model for study of mitochondrial DNA mutation disorders.

Trifunovic A(1), Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge
Hospital, S-14186 Huddinge, Sweden.

PMID: 12078514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Methods Mol Biol. 2002;197:391-400.

Breeding and genotyping of Tfam conditional knockout mice.

Ekstrand M(1), Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge
Hospital, Sweden.

PMID: 12013812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Methods Mol Biol. 2002;197:3-54.

Animal models for mitochondrial disease.

Wallace DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
GA, USA.

Mutations in mitochondrial genes encoded by both mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and
nuclear DNA (nDNA have been implicated in a wide range of degenerative diseases. 
MtDNA base substitution and rearrangement mutations can cause myopathy,
cardiomyopathy, ophthalmological defects, growth retardation, movement disorders,
dementias, and diabetes. nDNA mutations can affect mtDNA replication and
transcription, increase mtDNA mutations through defects in the adenine nucleotide
translocator isoform 1 (ANT1), or cause Leigh's syndrome, as a result of defects 
in oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) structural genes. Mouse models of mtDNA
base substitution mutations have been created by introducing the mtDNA 16S rRNA
chloramphenicol (CAP)-resistance mutation into the mouse female germline. This
resulted in ophthalmological defects in chimeras and perinatal lethality
resulting from myopathy and cardiomyopathy in mutant animals. Mouse models of
mtDNA rearrangements have resulted in animals with myopathy, cardiomyopathy, and 
nephropathy. Conditional inactivation of the mouse nDNA mitochondrial
transcription factor (Tfam) gene in the heart caused neonatal lethal
cardiomyopathy, whereas its inactivation in the pancreatic beta-cells caused
diabetes. Mutational inactivation of the mouse Ant1 gene resulted in myopathy,
cardiomyopathy, and multiple mtDNA deletions in association with elevated
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. This suggests that multiple mtDNA
deletion syndrome can be caused by increased ROS damage. The inactivation of the 
uncoupler protein genes (Ucp) 1-3 resulted in alterations in delta mu H+ and
increased ROS production. Inactivation of the Ucp2 gene, which is expressed in
the pancreatic beta-cells, resulted in increased islet ATP, increased serum
insulin levels, and suppression of the diabetes of the ob/ob mouse genotype.
Transgenic mice with altered beta-cell ATP-sensitive K+ channels (KATP) also
developed diabetes. Mutational inactivation of the mitochondrial antioxidant
genes for glutathione peroxidase (GPx1) and Mn superoxide dismutase (Sod2) caused
reduced energy production and neonatal lethal dilated cardiomyopathy,
respectively, the later being ameliorated by treatment with MnSOD mimics. Partial
Sod2 deficiency (+/-) resulted in mice with increased mitochondrial damage during
aging, and treatment of C. elegans with catalytic antioxidant drugs can extend
their life-span. Mice deficient in cytochrome-c died early in embryogenesis, but 
cells derived from these embryos had a complete deficiency in mitochondrial
apoptosis. Mice lacking the proapoptotic Bax and Bak genes were not able to
release cytochrome-c from the mitochondrion and were blocked in apoptosis. Mice
lacking Apaf1, Cas9, and Cas3 did release mitochondrial cytochrome-c and were
blocked in the downstream steps of apoptosis. These animal studies confirm that
alterations in mitochondrial energy generation, ROS production, and apoptosis can
all contribute to the pathophysiology of mitochondrial disease.

PMID: 12013805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 May 1;30(9):1929-34.

Modulation of mitochondrial transcription in response to mtDNA depletion and
repletion in HeLa cells.

Seidel-Rogol BL(1), Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rollins Research Center, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The steady-state amounts of mitochondrial transcripts and transcription proteins 
were analyzed during mtDNA depletion and subsequent repletion to gain insight
into the regulation of human mitochondrial gene expression. As documented
previously, HeLa cells depleted of mtDNA via treatment with ethidium bromide (EB)
were found to contain reduced steady-state levels of the mitochondrial
transcription factor h-mtTFA. When partially mtDNA-depleted cells were cultured
in the absence of EB, h-mtTFA recovered to normal levels at a significantly
slower rate than mtDNA. Human mtRNA polymerase exhibited a similar
depletion-repletion profile, suggesting that the mitochondrial transcription
machinery is coordinately regulated in response to changes in mtDNA copy number. 
Newly synthesized mitochondrial transcripts were detected early in the recovery
phase, despite the fact that mtDNA, h-mtTFA and h-mtRNA polymerase were
simultaneously depleted. Although delayed relative to mtDNA, the amounts of
h-mtTFA and h-mtRNA polymerase sharply increased during the later stages of the
recovery phase, which was accompanied by accelerated rates of transcription and
mtDNA replication. Altogether, these data indicate that when mtDNA copy number is
low, it is beneficial to prevent accumulation of mitochondrial transcription
proteins. In addition, h-mtTFA and h-mtRNA polymerase are either normally present
in excess of the amount required for transcription or their activity is
up-regulated to ensure continued expression and transcription-dependent
replication of the mitochondrial genome during mtDNA-depleted states.

PMCID: PMC113853
PMID: 11972329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. EMBO Rep. 2002 May;3(5):451-6. Epub 2002 Apr 18.

Regulation of mitochondrial D-loops by transcription factor A and single-stranded
DNA-binding protein.

Takamatsu C(1), Umeda S, Ohsato T, Ohno T, Abe Y, Fukuoh A, Shinagawa H, Hamasaki
N, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Kyushu University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

During replication, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) takes on a triple-stranded
structure called a D-loop. Although their physiological roles are not understood,
D-loops are implicated in replication and transcription of mtDNA. Little is known
about the turnover of D-loops. We investigated the effects of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) and single-stranded DNA-binding protein (mtSSB) on 
D-loops. In human HeLa cells, TFAM and mtSSB are, respectively, 1700- and
3000-fold more abundant than mtDNA. This level of TFAM is two orders of magnitude
higher than reported previously and is sufficient to wrap human mtDNA entirely.
TFAM resolves D-loops in vitro if added in similar stoichiometries. mtSSB
inhibits the resolution of mtDNA by TFAM but enhances resolution by RecG, a
junction-specific helicase from Escherichia coli. Hence, mtSSB functions in both 
stabilization and resolution. We propose that TFAM and mtSSB are cooperatively
involved in stabilizing D-loops and in the maintenance of mtDNA.

PMCID: PMC1084112
PMID: 11964388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Mar 16;1586(2):146-54.

Events upstream of mitochondrial protein import limit the oxidative capacity of
fibroblasts in multiple mitochondrial disease.

Rungi AA(1), Primeau A, Nunes Christie L, Gordon JW, Robinson BH, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Toronto, ON, Canada M3J 1P3.

To investigate whether protein import is defective in mitochondrial disease, we
compared the rate of import and the expression of protein import machinery
components in skin fibroblasts from control subjects and a patient with multiple 
mitochondrial disease (MMD). The patient exhibited a 35% decrease in cytochrome c
oxidase activity and a 59% decrease in cellular oxygen consumption compared to
control. Western blot analyses revealed that patient levels of MDH, mtHSP70,
HSP60, and Tom20 protein were 57%, 20%, 75% and 100% of control cells,
respectively. MDH and Tom20 mRNA levels were not different from control levels,
whereas mtHSP70 mRNA were 50% greater than control. Radiolabeled MDH was imported
into mitochondria with equal efficiency between patient (44% of total
synthesized) and control (43%) cells, although the total MDH synthesized in
patient cells was reduced by about 40%. The unaffected levels of mRNA and
post-translational import into mitochondria, combined with reduced protein levels
of MDH, mtHSP70, and HSP60 suggest a translational defect in this patient with
MMD. This was verified by the 50% reduction in overall cellular protein synthesis
in the patient compared to control. Further, the similar import rates between
patient and control cells suggest an important role for Tom20, but a lesser role 
for mtHSP70 in regulating protein import into mitochondria.

PMID: 11959456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Mar 19;1574(2):200-4.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the rat gene for mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam).

Choi YS(1), Lee HK, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
National Institute of Health, 122-701, Seoul, South Korea.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is essential for the initiation of
transcription and the replication of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). The 5'-upstream
region of the rat Tfam gene was isolated from rat genomic DNA by extending the 5'
sequence of newly identified Tfam cDNA using PCR-based Genome Walker. The
identified rat Tfam gene showed little sequence homology with the upstream region
of human Tfam. No typical TATA or potential nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1) 
binding site was found, whereas three potential binding sites for Sp1 and one for
NRF-2 were present in the proximal upstream region. Transfection of the Tfam
5'-upstream region ligated to luciferase into rat skeletal muscle L6 cells
demonstrated that the promoter activity was 10 times higher than that of control 
vectors. Despite the absence of the NRF-1 consensus binding sequence,
co-transfection of human NRF-1 expression vector increased the Tfam promoter
activity 2-fold. The gel mobility shift assays for NRF-1 demonstrated that NRF-1 
could bind to the proximal region of the promoter between -112 and +49. The
addition of 50 mM glucose for 24 h increased Tfam promoter activity by up to
2-fold, but 100 microM H(2)O(2) for 24 h repressed the activity to 40% of the
control. From these results, the sequence presented here is that of authentic rat
Tfam promoter and it is hoped that it will prove useful in studies of mtDNA
transcription and replication.

PMID: 11955630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Gene. 2002 Mar 6;286(1):105-12.

Characterization of the mtTFA gene and identification of a processed pseudogene
in rat.

Mezzina M(1), Reyes A, D'Errico I, Gadaleta G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biologia Molecolare, Università di Bari, Via
Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.

Mitochondrial DNA replication and transcription are regulated from essential
nucleus-encoded components that interact with the mitochondrial (mt) D-loop
region. Among these there is the mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA or
Tfam). We have determined the sequence of the cDNA mtTFA in rat and have
demonstrated that the gene has a mosaic organization with six introns whose sizes
we have calculated. A differential splicing transcript lacking exon 5 has been
detected in all assayed tissues and represents 9.85% of the full length
transcript. Beside the gene which is homologous to the one found in man and
mouse, rat nuclear genome contains at least 12 copies of this gene or genome
fragments with high similarity to mtTFA. We have determined the sequence of one
of these copies. This resulted to have 76.26% similarity to the active gene but
to lack introns, suggesting it might be a processed pseudogene. RT-PCR
experiments have demonstrated that this pseudogene (psi mtTFA) is transcribed in 
liver tissue.

PMID: 11943465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. FEBS Lett. 2002 Mar 13;514(2-3):309-14.

Thyroid hormone increases transcription of GA-binding protein/nuclear respiratory
factor-2 alpha-subunit in rat liver.

Rodríguez-Peña A(1), Escrivá H, Handler AC, Vallejo CG.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (CSIC-UAM), Arturo
Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Thyroid hormone (TH) regulates mitochondrial respiratory rate by activating
coordinated transcription in the nucleus and mitochondria. Whereas TH activates
transcription of mitochondrial genes directly, the activation of nuclear-encoded 
mitochondrial genes is probably executed by indirect unknown mechanisms. Nuclear 
respiratory factors (NRF)-1 and GA-binding protein (BP)/NRF-2 may function as
transacting genes, but regulation of these genes by TH is not demonstrated. We
show that TH administration to hypothyroid rats promptly increases GABP/NRF-2
alpha-subunit mRNA levels in the liver, without significant changes in beta,
gamma subunits. In run-on and time-course experiments, the transcription rate and
protein levels increased three-fold in response to TH, indicating GABP/NRF-2
transcriptional regulation. The results also support the notion that ATP synthase
beta-subunit is regulated by TH through the indirect activation of GABP/NRF-2.

PMID: 11943172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;282(4):E802-9.

Mitochondrial biogenesis during skeletal muscle regeneration.

Duguez S(1), Féasson L, Denis C, Freyssenet D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie, Groupe Physiologie et Physiopathologie de
l'Exercice et du Handicap Groupement d'Intérêt Public-E2S, Faculté de Médecine,
42023 Saint-Etienne, France.

Myogenesis requires energy production for the execution of a number of regulatory
and biosynthesis events. We hypothesized that mitochondrial biogenesis would be
stimulated during skeletal muscle regeneration. Tibialis anterior muscles of male
Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with 0.75% bupivacaine and removed at 3, 5, 7, 
10, 14, 21, or 35 days after injection (n = 5-7/group). Two main periods emerged 
from the histochemical analyses of muscle sections and the expression of
proliferating cell nuclear antigen, desmin, and creatine phosphokinase: 1)
activation/proliferation of satellite cells (days 3-14) and 2) differentiation
into muscle fibers (days 5-35). The onset of muscle differentiation was
accompanied by a marked stimulation of mitochondrial biogenesis, as indicated by 
a nearly fivefold increase in citrate synthase activity and state 3 rate of
respiration between days 5 and 10. Peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PGC-1) mRNA level and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (mtTFA) protein level peaked on day 10 concurrently with the state 3
rate of respiration. Therefore, transcriptional activation by PGC-1 and mtTFA may
be one of the mechanisms regulating mitochondrial biogenesis in regenerating
skeletal muscle. Taken together, our results suggest that mitochondrial
biogenesis may be an important regulatory event during muscle regeneration.

PMID: 11882500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Apr;282(4):E778-85.

Reduced activity of mtTFA decreases the transcription in mitochondria isolated
from diabetic rat heart.

Kanazawa A(1), Nishio Y, Kashiwagi A, Inagaki H, Kikkawa R, Horiike K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga
520-2192, Japan.

To evaluate abnormalities in the mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA)
function as a cause of mitochondrial dysfunction in diabetes, we measured the
mRNA contents of the proteins consisting of the mitochondrial respiratory chain
as well as transcriptional and translational activities in the mitochondria
isolated from controls and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rat hearts. Using
Northern blot analysis, we found 40% reduced mRNA contents of
mitochondrial-encoded cytochrome b and ATP synthase subunit 6 in diabetic rat
hearts compared with control rats (P < 0.05). These abnormalities were completely
recovered by insulin treatment. Furthermore, the mitochondrial activities of
transcription and translation were decreased significantly in mitochondria
isolated from diabetic rats by 60% (P < 0.01) and 71% (P < 0.01), respectively,
compared with control rats. The insulin treatment also completely normalized
these abnormalities in diabetic rats. Consistently, gel retardation assay showed 
a reduced binding of mtTFA to the D-loop of mitochondrial DNA in diabetic rats,
although there was no difference in the mtTFA mRNA and protein content between
the two groups. On the basis of these findings, a reduced binding activity of
mtTFA to the D-loop region in the hearts of diabetic rats may contribute to the
decreased mitochondrial protein synthesis.

PMID: 11882497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Feb;22(4):1116-25.

A human mitochondrial transcription factor is related to RNA adenine
methyltransferases and binds S-adenosylmethionine.

McCulloch V(1), Seidel-Rogol BL, Shadel GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rollins Research Center, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

A critical step toward understanding mitochondrial genetics and its impact on
human disease is to identify and characterize the full complement of
nucleus-encoded factors required for mitochondrial gene expression and
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) replication. Two factors required for transcription
initiation from a human mitochondrial promoter are h-mtRNA polymerase and the DNA
binding transcription factor, h-mtTFA. However, based on studies in model
systems, the existence of a second human mitochondrial transcription factor has
been postulated. Here we report the isolation of a cDNA encoding h-mtTFB, the
human homolog of Saccharomyces cerevisiae mitochondrial transcription factor B
(sc-mtTFB) and the first metazoan member of this class of transcription factors
to which a gene has been assigned. Recombinant h-mtTFB is capable of binding
mtDNA in a non-sequence-specific fashion and activates transcription from the
human mitochondrial light-strand promoter in the presence of h-mtTFA in vitro.
Remarkably, h-mtTFB and its fungal homologs are related in primary sequence to a 
superfamily of N6 adenine RNA methyltransferases. This observation, coupled with 
the ability of recombinant h-mtTFB to bind S-adenosylmethionine in vitro,
suggests that a structural, and perhaps functional, relationship exists between
this class of transcription factors and this family of RNA modification enzymes
and that h-mtTFB may perform dual functions during mitochondrial gene expression.

PMCID: PMC134642
PMID: 11809803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Trends Mol Med. 2001 Dec;7(12):578-81.

Animal models for respiratory chain disease.

Larsson NG(1), Rustin P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, NOVUM, Huddinge
Hospital, S-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden. Nils_Goran.Larsson@mednut.ki.se

Elucidation of the pathogenesis in respiratory chain diseases is of great
importance for developing specific treatments. The limitations inherent to the
use of patient material make studies of human tissues often difficult and the
mouse has therefore emerged as a suitable model organism for studies of
respiratory chain diseases. In this review, we present an overview of the field
and discuss in depth a few examples of animal models reproducing pathology of
human disease with primary and secondary respiratory chain involvement.

PMID: 11733222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2001 Dec;54 Suppl 2:S3-9.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) and diabetes.

Choi YS(1), Kim S, Pak YK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolic Disease Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
National Institute of Health, 122-701, Seoul, South Korea.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content decreased in an age-dependent manner and may be
one of the causal factors in age-related type 2 diabetes. Mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA), which provides the replication primer, plays a
key role for the regulation of mtDNA replication and its level is proportional to
mtDNA. Here, we studied on the regulatory mechanism of mtTFA expression and the
factors affecting the transcriptional activity of the mtTFA promoter. The
promoter of human mtTFA contains 67 CpG dinucleotides. When the plasmids bearing 
the mtTFA promoter (2378 bp) linked to luciferase were transiently transfected
into HepG2 cells, in vitro methylation of NRF-1 site by HhaI methylase abolished 
the mtTFA promoter activity up to 90%, implying that the CpG methylation of NRF-1
site inactivate mtTFA promoter-driven transcriptional activity. Besides the
promoter methylation, the exogenous hydrogen peroxide or glucose also modulates
the promoter activity of mtTFA. The bacterially overexpressed mtTFA protein
exhibits a strong binding affinity to circular DNA (perhaps to mtDNA in
mitochondria in vivo) and the protection of the DNA from cleavage by a hydrogen
peroxide attack. Taken all these results together, age-related alterations of
oxidative stress may affect mtDNA replication via regulating mtTFA activity.
Furthermore, a vicious cycle may be present between mtTFA protein level and
oxidative stress in the sense of DNA damage. Further studies were necessary to
prove the presence of methyl cytosine in the mtTFA promoter of either an aged or 
a diabetic person and the effect of oxidative stress on the mtTFA function and
expression resulting in a change of the mtDNA copy number.

PMID: 11733104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2001 Oct;83(1):57-68.

Nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 are upregulated in hearts from
copper-deficient rats.

Mao S(1), Medeiros DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Food Management, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus 43210, USA.

It is known that mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) plays a pivotal
role in coordinating the expression of proteins in the nuclear and mitochondrial 
genomes as it pertains to mitochondrial biogenesis. Hearts from copper-deficient 
rats have elevated mtTFA levels compared to copper-adequate rats. This study
evaluated whether two proteins that control activation of mtTFA by binding to its
promotor, nuclear respiratory factors 1 (NRF-1) and 2 (NRF-2), are also
upregulated prior to any upregulation of mtTFA. Long-Evans male rats were fed
either copper-adequate or copper-deficient diets from weanling for periods of
time up to 26 d. At d 26, mtTFA levels were elevated in the hearts from the
copper-deficient rats, but not at earlier time points of 14, 18, and 22 d.
However, NRF-1 and NRF-2 levels were increased at d 14 and 18, but not at the
other two later time-points. These results revealed that the upregulation of
mtTFA and mitochondrial biogenesis is preceded by upregulation of NRF-1 and
NRF-2, which is consistent with the known molecular events controlling
mitochondrial biogenesis in other systems.

PMID: 11694003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Pflugers Arch. 2001 Oct;443(1):61-6.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A and respiratory complex IV increase in
response to exercise training in humans.

Bengtsson J(1), Gustafsson T, Widegren U, Jansson E, Sundberg CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Environmental Physiology, Department of Physiology and
Pharmacology, Karolinska Institutet, S-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Protein levels of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) and nuclear- and
mitochondrial-encoded subunits of respiratory chain complex IV (COX I and COX IV)
as well as citrate synthase activity were analysed in muscle biopsy samples of
vastus lateralis in six healthy male subjects before and after 4 weeks of
one-legged cycle training. One leg was trained with restricted blood flow. The
other leg was trained with the same power profile but with non-restricted blood
flow. Tfam, COX I and COX IV levels all increased with training, with no
differences observed between the legs. The training-induced increase in citrate
synthase activity was greater in the leg trained with restricted blood flow.
These findings indicate that changed expression of Tfam protein could be one
mechanism of exercise-induced mitochondrial biogenesis. The increases of COX I
and COX IV indicate a concurrent increase of nuclear- and mitochondrial-encoded
subunits of respiratory enzyme complex IV at the protein level in skeletal muscle
in response to increased muscle activity. In this study, it was not possible to
demonstrate that the greater energy disturbance induced by reduced blood flow
further stimulates the expression of mitochondrial proteins, even though it did
cause a greater enhancement of citrate synthase activity in concordance with
earlier studies.

PMID: 11692267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Mamm Genome. 2001 Oct;12(10):787-92.

Downregulation of Tfam and mtDNA copy number during mammalian spermatogenesis.

Rantanen A(1), Jansson M, Oldfors A, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Novum, Huddinge
Hospital, S-14186 Huddinge, 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is required for mtDNA maintenance,
and mitochondrial Tfam protein levels directly affect mtDNA copy number. Previous
studies have shown significant reduction of Tfam protein levels in mitochondria
together with the appearance of abundant testis-specific Tfam mRNA isoforms as
spermatogenesis proceeds in both mouse and man. Interestingly, an abundant
testis-specific nuclear Tfam protein isoform of unknown function is found in the 
mouse, but not in humans. We have now characterized Tfam expression in rat testis
to identify conserved features in mammalian spermatogenesis. The nuclear Tfam
protein isoform is absent in the rat and is thus dispensable for mammalian
spermatogenesis. Similar to mice and humans, we found expression of alternate
Tfam transcripts, downregulation of mitochondrial Tfam protein levels, and
downregulation of mtDNA copy number during rat spermatogenesis. These features
are thus common to all mammals and may provide one of several mechanisms
preventing paternal mtDNA transmission.

PMID: 11668394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Neurosci. 2001 Oct 15;21(20):8082-90.

Late-onset corticohippocampal neurodepletion attributable to catastrophic failure
of oxidative phosphorylation in MILON mice.

Sörensen L(1), Ekstrand M, Silva JP, Lindqvist E, Xu B, Rustin P, Olson L,
Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Nutrition and Biosciences, Karolinska Institutet,
Novum, Huddinge Hospital, S-141 86 Huddinge, Sweden.

We generated mitochondrial late-onset neurodegeneration (MILON) mice with
postnatal disruption of oxidative phosphorylation in forebrain neurons. They
develop normally and display no overt behavioral disturbances or histological
changes during the first 5 months of life. The MILON mice display reduced levels 
of mitochondrial DNA and mitochondrial RNA from 2 and 4 months of age,
respectively, and severely respiratory chain-deficient neurons from 4 months of
age. Surprisingly, these respiratory chain-deficient neurons are viable for at
least 1 month without showing signs of neurodegeneration or major induction of
defenses against oxidative stress. Prolonged neuronal respiratory chain
deficiency is thus required for the induction of neurodegeneration. Before
developing neurological symptoms, MILON mice show increased vulnerability to
excitotoxic stress. We observed a markedly enhanced sensitivity to excitotoxic
challenge, manifest as an abundance of terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated biotinylated UTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) reactive cells
after kainic acid injection, in 4-month-old MILON mice, showing that respiratory 
chain-deficient neurons are more vulnerable to stress. At approximately 5-5.5
months of age, MILON mice start to show signs of disease, followed by death
shortly thereafter. The debut of overt disease in MILON mice coincides with onset
of rapidly progressive neurodegeneration and massive cell death in hippocampus
and neocortex. This profound neurodegenerative process is manifested as axonal
degeneration, gliosis, and abundant TUNEL-positive nuclei. The MILON mouse model 
provides a novel and powerful tool for additional studies of the role for
respiratory chain deficiency in neurodegeneration and aging.

PMID: 11588181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Spring;106(1):71-93.

Mouse models for mitochondrial disease.

Wallace DC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta,
Georgia 30322, USA. dwallace@gen.emory.edu

Mutations in mitochondrial genes encoded by both mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and
nuclear DNA (nDNA) genes have been implicated in a wide range of neuromuscular
diseases. MtDNA base substitution and rearrangement mutations generally
inactivate one or more tRNA or rRNA genes and can cause myopathy, cardiomyopathy,
cataracts, growth retardation, diabetes, etc. nDNA mutations can cause Leigh
syndrome, cardiomyopathy, and nephropathy, due to defects in oxidative
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) enzyme complexes; cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH) and
mtDNA depletion syndrome, through defects in mitochondrial nucleic acid
metabolism; and ophthalmoplegia with multiple mtDNA deletions, caused by adenine 
nucleotide translocator-1 (ANT1) mutations. Mouse models have been prepared that 
recapitulate a number of these diseases. The mtDNA 16S rRNA chloramphenicol (CAP)
resistance mutation was introduced into the mouse female germline and caused
cataracts and rod and cone abnormalities in chimeras and neonatal lethal myopathy
and cardiomyopathy in mutant animals. A mtDNA deletion was introduced into the
mouse germline and caused myopathy, cardiomyopathy, and nephropathy. Conditional 
inactivation of the nDNA mitochondrial transcription factor (Tfam) gene in the
heart resulted in neonatal lethal cardiomyopathy, while its inactivation in the
pancreatic beta-cells caused diabetes. The ATP/ADP ratio was implicated in
mitochondrial diabetes through transgenic modification of the beta-cell
ATP-sensitive K(+) channel (K(ATP)). Mutational inactivation of the mouse Ant1
gene resulted in myopathy, cardiomyopathy, and multiple mtDNA deletions in
association with elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) production. Inactivation 
of uncoupler proteins (Ucp) 1-3 revealed that mitochondrial Delta Psi regulated
ROS production. The role of mitochondrial ROS toxicity in disease and aging was
confirmed by inactivating glutathione peroxidase (GPx1), resulting in growth
retardation, and by total and partial inactivation of Mn superoxide dismutase
(MnSOD; Sod2), resulting in neonatal lethal dilated cardiomyopathy and
accelerated apoptosis in aging, respectively. The importance of mitochondrial ROS
in degenerative diseases and aging was confirmed by treating Sod2 -/- mice and C.
elegans with catalytic antioxidant drugs.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11579427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Sep 21;287(2):474-83.

Drosophila mitochondrial transcription factor A: characterization of its cDNA and
expression pattern during development.

Takata K(1), Yoshida H, Hirose F, Yamaguchi M, Kai M, Oshige M, Sakimoto I,
Koiwai O, Sakaguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Science, Faculty of Science and Technology,
Science University of Tokyo, 2641 Yamazaki, Noda-shi, Chiba-ken 278-8510, Japan.

We cloned a cDNA for Drosophila mitochondrial transcription factor A (D-mtTFA)
and characterized the recombinant protein. In Drosophila Kc cells, D-mtTFA was
localized in the mitochondria, but not in the nucleus. By repetitive
precipitation with His-tag and PCR amplification, the consensus nucleotide
sequence for D-mtTFA-binding was determined to be 5'-TTATC/G. The binding
sequence was found to be clustered in the A + T region of mitochondrial DNA which
is suggested to be a replication origin and promoter region for light strand and 
heavy strand. We found a DNA replication-related element (DRE)-like sequence
located upstream of the transcription initiation site of the D-mtTFA gene and
obtained results indicating that DRE-binding factor (DREF) can bind to the
DRE-like sequence of the D-mtTFA gene. The data suggest that transcription of the
D-mtTFA gene is under control of the DRE/DREF regulatory system. Based on these
results, the functions of D-mtTFA were discussed in relation to mitochondrial
biogenesis of Drosophila melanogaster.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11554753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Sep 1;29(17):3657-63.

Mechanism of mammalian mitochondrial DNA replication: import of mitochondrial
transcription factor A into isolated mitochondria stimulates 7S DNA synthesis.

Gensler S(1), Weber K, Schmitt WE, Pérez-Martos A, Enriquez JA, Montoya J,
Wiesner RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

The light strand promoter of mammalian mitochondrial DNA gives rise to a primary 
transcript, but also to the RNA primer necessary for initiation of replication
and 7S DNA synthesis as well as 7S RNA. Here we have studied the turnover of 7S
DNA in isolated rat liver mitochondria and whether import of mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA), which is necessary for transcription initiation, 
increases its rate of synthesis. 7S DNA was present as two species, probably due 
to two different sites of RNA-DNA transition. Time course and pulse-chase
experiments showed that the half-life of this DNA is approximately 45 min. Import
of mtTFA, produced in vitro, into the mitochondrial matrix in stoichiometric
amounts significantly increased the rate of 7S DNA formation. We conclude that
isolated rat liver mitochondria faithfully synthesize and degrade 7S DNA and that
increased matrix levels of mtTFA are sufficient to increase its rate of
synthesis, strongly supporting the hypothesis that this process is transcription 
primed.

PMCID: PMC55882
PMID: 11522837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. FEBS Lett. 2001 Aug 10;503(1):51-5.

A study on the human mitochondrial RNA polymerase activity points to existence of
a transcription factor B-like protein.

Prieto-Martín A(1), Montoya J, Martínez-Azorín F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad de
Zaragoza, Miguel Servet 177, 50013, Zaragoza, Spain.

In the present work, the RNA polymerase activity of the human mitochondrial RNA
polymerase mature protein (h-mtRPOLm) is shown, and its molecular activity
calculated (2.1+/-0.9 min(-1)). An activity analysis of h-mtRPOLm and deleted
versions of it has demonstrated that the entire recombinant protein is required
for this activity. In addition, h-mtRPOLm alone or in presence of the known
mitochondrial transcription factors (human mitochondrial transcription factor A
and/or human mitochondrial transcription termination factor) is not able to
initiate transcription from the specific human mitochondrial promoters pointing
to the existence of a human mitochondrial transcription factor B-like protein.

PMID: 11513853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jul 13;501(1):74-8.

Increased expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A and nuclear
respiratory factor-1 in skeletal muscle from aged human subjects.

Lezza AM(1), Pesce V, Cormio A, Fracasso F, Vecchiet J, Felzani G, Cantatore P,
Gadaleta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, university of Bari, and
Center of Study on Mitochondria and Energetic Mechanism, CNR, Italy.

The expression of two factors involved in the nuclear-mitochondrial crosstalk,
namely the mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) and the nuclear
respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), was studied in human skeletal muscle biopsies of
young and aged subjects. Aged subjects presented a 2.6-fold and an 11-fold
increase of the levels of TFAM protein and TFAM mRNA, respectively. The increased
expression of TFAM was associated to the doubling of NRF-1 DNA-binding affinity
and to a 6-fold increase of NRF-1 mRNA level. The upregulation of TFAM and NRF-1,
in aged skeletal muscle, appears involved in the pathway leading to the
age-related increase of mitochondrial DNA content.

PMID: 11457459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Neurol Sci. 2000;21(5 Suppl):S985-7.

Abnormal levels of human mitochondrial transcription factor A in skeletal muscle 
in mitochondrial encephalomyopathies.

Siciliano G(1), Mancuso M, Pasquali L, Manca ML, Tessa A, Iudice A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurological Clinics, University of Pisa, Via Roma
67, I-56126 Pisa, Italy.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A (hmtTFA or Tfam), a 25-kDa protein
encoded by a nuclear gene located on chromosome 10q21, is involved in the control
of replication and transcription of mtDNA. To better understand the complex
relationship between h-mtTFA and mitochondrial function, we assessed by western
blot the levels of h-mtTFA in skeletal muscle from 7 patients affected by
mitochondrial diseases (MD) caused by different mtDNA mutations. We related these
results to exercise lactate production as well as to the pathologic features of
the underlying myopathy. h-mtTFA levels were significantly inversely related to
blood lactate and the percent of RRF, borderline to cox negative fibers. Our
results indicate that hmtTFA may be involved in the cascade of events which
determine functional impairment of MD.

PMID: 11382203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Mar 27;98(7):4038-43. Epub 2001 Mar 20.

Increased in vivo apoptosis in cells lacking mitochondrial DNA gene expression.

Wang J(1), Silva JP, Gustafsson CM, Rustin P, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, L8: 02, Karolinska
Hospital, S-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.

We have attempted to determine whether loss of mtDNA and respiratory chain
function result in apoptosis in vivo. Apoptosis was studied in embryos with
homozygous disruption of the mitochondrial transcription factor A gene (Tfam) and
tissue-specific Tfam knockout animals with severe respiratory chain deficiency in
the heart. We found massive apoptosis in Tfam knockout embryos at embryonic day
(E) 9.5 and increased apoptosis in the heart of the tissue-specific Tfam
knockouts. Furthermore, mtDNA-less (rho(0)) cell lines were susceptible to
apoptosis induced by different stimuli in vitro. The data presented here provide 
in vivo evidence that respiratory chain deficiency predisposes cells to
apoptosis, contrary to previous assumptions based on in vitro studies of cultured
cells. These results suggest that increased apoptosis is a pathogenic event in
human mtDNA mutation disorders. The finding that respiratory chain deficiency is 
associated with increased in vivo apoptosis may have important therapeutic
implications for human disease. Respiratory chain deficiency and cell loss and/or
apoptosis have been associated with neurodegeneration, heart failure, diabetes
mellitus, and aging. Furthermore, chemotherapy and radiation treatment of cancer 
are intended to induce apoptosis in tumor cells. It would therefore be of
interest to determine whether manipulation of respiratory chain function can be
used to inhibit or enhance apoptosis in these conditions.

PMCID: PMC31175
PMID: 11259653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Funct Neurol. 2000 Oct-Dec;15(4):211-4.

Abnormal H-Tfam in a patient harboring a single mtDNA deletion.

Tessa A(1), Manca ML, Mancuso M, Renna MR, Murri L, Martini B, Santorelli FM,
Siciliano G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Institute of Neurology, University of Pisa.

We report on a patient suffering from a progressive mitochondrial disorder
characterized by ocular myopathy, exercise intolerance, and muscle wasting.
Morphological examination of muscle biopsy showed increased variability in fiber 
size and scattered ragged-red fibers. Analysis of muscle mitochondrial DNA by
Southern blot and PCR revealed a heteroplasmic single deletion of 4100 base
pairs, located between nucleotide positions 8300 and 12,400. Western blot
analysis showed high levels of the human mitochondrial transcription factor A
(Tfam). Interestingly, we also detected an additional Tfam product, of
approximately 22 kDa. This is the first case in which a qualitatively abnormal
Tfam has been found to be associated with a mitochondrial disorder in humans.

PMID: 11213524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2001 Mar;90(3):1137-57.

Invited Review: contractile activity-induced mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal
muscle.

Hood DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada M3J 1P3. dhood@yorku.ca

Chronic contractile activity produces mitochondrial biogenesis in muscle. This
adaptation results in a significant shift in adenine nucleotide metabolism, with 
attendant improvements in fatigue resistance. The vast majority of mitochondrial 
proteins are derived from the nuclear genome, necessitating the transcription of 
genes, the translation of mRNA into protein, the targeting of the protein to a
mitochondrial compartment via the import machinery, and the assembly of
multisubunit enzyme complexes in the respiratory chain or matrix. Putative
signals involved in initiating this pathway of gene expression in response to
contractile activity likely arise from combinations of accelerations in ATP
turnover or imbalances between mitochondrial ATP synthesis and cellular ATP
demand, and Ca(2+) fluxes. These rapid events are followed by the activation of
exercise-responsive kinases, which phosphorylate proteins such as transcription
factors, which subsequently bind to upstream regulatory regions in DNA, to alter 
transcription rates. Contractile activity increases the mRNA levels of
nuclear-encoded proteins such as cytochrome c and mitochondrial transcription
factor A (Tfam) and mRNA levels of upstream transcription factors like c-jun and 
nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1). mRNA level changes are often most evident
during the postexercise recovery period, and they can occur as a result of
contractile activity-induced increases in transcription or mRNA stability. Tfam
is imported into mitochondria and controls the expression of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA). mtDNA contributes only 13 protein products to the respiratory chain, but
they are vital for electron transport and ATP synthesis. Contractile activity
increases Tfam expression and accelerates its import into mitochondria, resulting
in increased mtDNA transcription and replication. The result of this coordinated 
expression of the nuclear and the mitochondrial genomes, along with poorly
understood changes in phospholipid synthesis, is an expansion of the muscle
mitochondrial reticulum. Further understanding of 1) regulation of mtDNA
expression, 2) upstream activators of NRF-1 and other transcription factors, 3)
the identity of mRNA stabilizing proteins, and 4) potential of contractile
activity-induced changes in apoptotic signals are warranted.

PMID: 11181630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 1;354(Pt 2):243-8.

Drosophila mitochondrial transcription factor A (d-TFAM) is dispensable for the
transcription of mitochondrial DNA in Kc167 cells.

Goto A(1), Matsushima Y, Kadowaki T, Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Course for Regulation of Biological Signals, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya-shi
464-8601, Japan.

We have cloned cDNA encoding Drosophila mitochondrial (mt) transcription factor A
(d-TFAM). RNA interference (RNAi) of d-TFAM by lipofection of haemocyte-derived
Kc167 cells with double-stranded RNA reduced d-TFAM to less than 5% of the normal
level. Reflecting the ability of TFAM to stabilize mtDNA, RNAi of d-TFAM reduced 
mtDNA to 40%. Nonetheless, transcription of the ND2 and ND5 genes and their mRNAs
remained unchanged for 8 days of the duration of RNAi. We thus show that d-TFAM
is not essential for the transcription of Drosophila mtDNA.

PMCID: PMC1221649
PMID: 11171100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2001 Jan;90(1):389-96.

Effects of contractile activity on mitochondrial transcription factor A
expression in skeletal muscle.

Gordon JW(1), Rungi AA, Inagaki H, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)Kinesiology and Health Science, Faculty of Pure and Applied Science, York
University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam) is a nuclear-encoded gene product
that is imported into mitochondria and is required for the transcription of
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA). We hypothesized that conditions known to produce
mitochondrial biogenesis in skeletal muscle would be preceded by an increase in
Tfam expression. Therefore, rat muscle was stimulated (10 Hz, 3 h/day). Tfam mRNA
levels were significantly elevated (by 55%) at 4 days and returned to control
levels at 14 days. Tfam import into intermyofibrillar (IMF) mitochondria was
increased by 52 and 61% (P < 0.05) at 5 and 7 days, respectively. This
corresponded to an increase in the level of import machinery components.
Immunoblotting data indicated that IMF Tfam protein content was increased by 63% 
(P < 0.05) at 7 days of stimulation. This was associated with a 49% (P < 0.05)
increase in complex formation at the mtDNA promoter and a 65% (P < 0.05) increase
in the levels of a mitochondrial transcript, cytochrome-c oxidase (COX) subunit
III. Similarly, COX enzyme activity was elevated by 71% (P < 0.05) after 7 days
of contractile activity. These results indicate that early events in
mitochondrial biogenesis include increases in Tfam mRNA, followed by
accelerations in mitochondrial import and increased Tfam content, which
correspond with increased binding to the mtDNA promoter region. This was
accompanied by increased mitochondrial transcript levels and elevated COX
activity. These data support the role of Tfam as a regulatory protein involved in
contractile activity-induced mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMID: 11133932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Biochimie. 2000 Dec;82(12):1129-33.

Evidence of tissue-specific, post-transcriptional regulation of NRF-2 expression.

Vallejo CG(1), Escrivá H, Rodríguez-Peña A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols' (CSIC-UAM), Arturo
Duperier, 4, 28029, Madrid, Spain. cvallejo@iib.uam.es

Mitochondrial respiratory function requires the expression of genes both from the
mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. Nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF-2) is a
transcription factor required for the expression of several nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial proteins, including the specific mitochondrial transcription factor
Tfam. This makes NRF-2 a likely candidate to coordinate expression of
mitochondrial components. NRF-2 is a multisubunit complex of which the alpha
subunit binds DNA and the beta subunit enhances this binding, respectively. We
have analysed in vivo the expression patterns of NRF-2 subunits both at the mRNA 
and protein level, in three rat tissues, liver, testis and brain. In contrast
with Tfam or the 'housekeeping' beta-actin expressions in which a parallel
gradient was observed, no correlation was found between NRF-2 mRNAs and proteins 
levels, thus suggesting post-transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 11120355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Nov 15;1494(1-2):91-103.

Alterations in mitochondria and mtTFA in response to LPS-induced differentiation 
of B-cells.

Kain KH(1), Popov VL, Herzog NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The WHO Collaborating Center for Tropical Diseases,
The University of Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Avenue, Galveston, TX
77555-0609, USA.

Stimulation of immune cells results in altered cell function and metabolism,
which must be recognized by and coordinated with energy production from
mitochondria. Mitochondria contain their own DNA genome encoding 13 polypeptides 
that combine with nuclear-derived subunits to create functional enzyme complexes 
of the electron transport chain. Therefore, coordination of mitochondrial and
nuclear transcription is necessary to achieve a sustained elevation in
mitochondrial ATP production. Pre-B-lymphocytes stimulated with
lipopolysaccharide exhibit increased activity levels of the mitochondrial
enzymes, succinate dehydrogenase and cytochrome c oxidase. Immunoblot analyses of
purified mitochondria indicate an increase in the mitochondrial transcription
factor (mtTFA) levels in mitochondria induced by cell stimulation. This increase 
is consistent with increased mtTFA production in the cytoplasm. In addition,
mitochondrial protein extracts indicate an increase in protein binding to a
mtTFA-DNA binding site from the mitochondrial genome, subsequent to cell
stimulation. These results indicate that mitochondrial activity changes during
B-lymphocyte stimulation, and mtTFA may contribute to the coordination of
respiration with cellular energy demand.

PMID: 11072072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):336-40.

Impaired insulin secretion and beta-cell loss in tissue-specific knockout mice
with mitochondrial diabetes.

Silva JP(1), Köhler M, Graff C, Oldfors A, Magnuson MA, Berggren PO, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is an important contributor to human pathology and it
is estimated that mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) cause approximately
0.5-1% of all types of diabetes mellitus. We have generated a mouse model for
mitochondrial diabetes by tissue-specific disruption of the nuclear gene encoding
mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam, previously mtTFA; ref. 7) in
pancreatic beta-cells. This transcriptional activator is imported to
mitochondria, where it is essential for mtDNA expression and maintenance. The
Tfam-mutant mice developed diabetes from the age of approximately 5 weeks and
displayed severe mtDNA depletion, deficient oxidative phosphorylation and
abnormal appearing mitochondria in islets at the ages of 7-9 weeks. We performed 
physiological studies of beta-cell stimulus-secretion coupling in islets isolated
from 7-9-week-old mutant mice and found reduced hyperpolarization of the
mitochondrial membrane potential, impaired Ca(2+)-signalling and lowered insulin 
release in response to glucose stimulation. We observed reduced beta-cell mass in
older mutants. Our findings identify two phases in the pathogenesis of
mitochondrial diabetes; mutant beta-cells initially display reduced
stimulus-secretion coupling, later followed by beta-cell loss. This animal model 
reproduces the beta-cell pathology of human mitochondrial diabetes and provides
genetic evidence for a critical role of the respiratory chain in insulin
secretion.

PMID: 11062475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Biochem J. 2000 Nov 15;352 Pt 1:109-15.

3'-untranslated regions of oxidative phosphorylation mRNAs function in vivo as
enhancers of translation.

Di Liegro CM(1), Bellafiore M, Izquierdo JM, Rantanen A, Cuezva JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Recent findings have indicated that the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of the
mRNA encoding the beta-catalytic subunit of the mitochondrial H(+)-ATP synthase
has an in vitro translation-enhancing activity (TEA) [Izquierdo and Cuezva, Mol. 
Cell. Biol. (1997) 17, 5255-5268; Izquierdo and Cuezva, Biochem. J. (2000) 346,
849-855]. In the present work, we have expressed chimaeric plasmids that encode
mRNA variants of green fluorescent protein in normal rat kidney and liver clone 9
cells to determine whether the 3'-UTRs of nuclear-encoded mRNAs involved in the
biogenesis of mitochondria have an intrinsic TEA. TEA is found in the 3'-UTR of
the mRNAs encoding the alpha- and beta-subunits of the rat H(+)-ATP synthase
complex, as well as in subunit IV of cytochrome c oxidase. No TEA is present in
the 3'-UTR of the somatic mRNA encoding rat mitochondrial transcription factor A.
Interestingly, the TEA of the 3'-UTR of mRNAs of oxidative phosphorylation is
different, depending upon the cell type analysed. These data provide the first in
vivo evidence of a novel cell-specific mechanism for the control of the
translation of mRNAs required in mitochondrial function.

PMCID: PMC1221437
PMID: 11062063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Dig Liver Dis. 2000 Aug-Sep;32(6):510-7.

The augmenter of liver regeneration induces mitochondrial gene expression in rat 
liver and enhances oxidative phosphorylation capacity of liver mitochondria.

Polimeno L(1), Capuano F, Marangi LC, Margiotta M, Lisowsky T, Ierardi E,
Francavilla R, Francavilla A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian augmenter of liver regeneration gene encodes a protein 
involved in the unique process of liver regeneration. The augmenter of liver
regeneration respective protein stimulates hepatocyte proliferation in
hepatectomized rats and inhibits cytotoxic activity of liver-derived Natural
Killer cells from intact rats. Augmenter of liver regeneration protein shares
homology with a Saccharomyces Cerevisiae protein essential for the viability,
oxidative phosphorylation and cell-division cycle.
AIMS: To demonstrate if augmenter of liver regeneration protein, like the
homologous in the yeast, plays a role in the regulation of biogenesis of
mitochondria.
METHODS: Augmenter of liver regeneration protein was injected in intact rats and,
in the hepatic tissue, the expression of two genes located in two different
regions of the mitochondrial genome, mitochondrial ATPase 6/8, and ND1 subunit,
and of a nuclear gene, mitochondrial Transcription Factor A, were considered. In 
addition, cytochrome content and oxidative phosphorylation capacity of
liver-derived mitochondria were evaluated.
RESULTS: The augmenter of liver regeneration protein administration induces an
increase in the mitochondrial gene expression and enhances cytochrome content and
oxidative phosphorylation capacity of liver-derived mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data demonstrate a comparable role in the regulation of 
mitochondria biogenesis in the eukaryotic cell like the yeast protein. This
phenomenon could be part of the complex mechanism through which augmenter of
liver regeneration regulates hepatocyte proliferation.

PMID: 11057927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Hum Reprod. 2000 Jul;15 Suppl 2:86-91.

Regulation of mitochondrial DNA copy number during spermatogenesis.

Rantanen A(1), Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

The nuclear genome is physically compacted during spermatogenesis by replacing
histones with protamines and transition proteins. This altered nuclear protein
context may make gene regulation at the transcriptional level less efficient and 
could explain why post-transcriptional regulation is prominent in haploid male
germ cells. Mitochondria and mitochondrial (mt) DNA are maternally inherited,
whereas the transmission of paternal mtDNA is blocked in mammals. The paternal
mtDNA enters the oocyte but is no longer detectable in the preimplantation
embryo. Several mechanisms could be responsible for preventing the transmission
of paternal mtDNA, including the down-regulation of mtDNA copy number during
spermatogenesis, specific elimination of paternal mitochondria in fertilized
oocytes, and the suspension of mtDNA replication in the fertilized oocyte. It is 
the first of these that is the subject of the present review. Mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA, or Tfam) is a key regulator of mtDNA copy number
in mammals. Germ cell-specific Tfam transcript isoforms are expressed during
spermatogenesis in mice and humans. These alternative Tfam transcript isoforms
have a structure that could prevent protein translation; their expression
coincides with down-regulation of the mitochondrial Tfam protein values. We
propose that this down-regulation of mitochondrial Tfam protein levels in turn
down-regulates mtDNA copy number during mammalian spermatogenesis.

PMID: 11041516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Dig Liver Dis. 2000 Apr;32(3):217-25.

Molecular mechanisms of augmenter of liver regeneration as immunoregulator: its
effect on interferon-gamma expression in rat liver.

Polimeno L(1), Margiotta M, Marangi L, Lisowsky T, Azzarone A, Ierardi E,
Frassanito MA, Francavilla R, Francavilla A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Emergency and Organ Transplantation, University of Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: We have shown that the administration of exogenous Augmenter of Liver
Regeneration protein in intact rats i) regulates mitochondrial gene expression by
inducing the transcription and translation of the nuclear-encoded mitochondrial
transcription factor A, and ii) inhibits the lytic activity of liver-resident
Natural Killer cells.
AIMS: The present investigation was carried out to study the effect, in intact
rats, of exogenous administration of Augmenter of Liver Regeneration protein on
Interferon-gamma, a cytokine produced by activated Natural Killer cells and known
to control the expression of mitochondrial transcription factor A, a nuclear gene
responsible for mitochondrial metabolism.
METHODS: Interferon-gamma was measured as messenger RNA in liver-derived
mononuclear leukocytes and as protein in liver-derived Natural Killer cells after
a single injection of Augmenter of Liver Regeneration protein.
RESULTS: The data obtained demonstrate that: i) in intact rats, Augmenter of
Liver Regeneration protein administration induces a reduction of Interferon-gamma
in the liver-resident Natural Killer cells and ii) the administration of
Interferon-gamma in 70% hepatectomized rats is followed by a significant
reduction both of the mitochondrial transcription factor A expression and of
liver regeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate the pivotal role of Augmenter of Liver
Regeneration as Growth Factor and as immunoregulator by controlling, through
Interferon-gamma levels, the mitochondrial transcription factor A expression and 
the lytic activity of liver-resident Natural Killer cells.

PMID: 10975772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Nutr. 2000 Sep;130(9):2143-50.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A is increased but expression of ATP synthase 
beta subunit and medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase genes are decreased in
hearts of copper-deficient rats.

Mao S(1), Leone TC, Kelly DP, Medeiros DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Food Management, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The mechanism(s) by which impaired mitochondrial respiratory function and the
accumulation of lipid droplets and mitochondria in hearts of copper-deficient
rats occur remains unclear. It is not known whether specific components of the
regulatory pathway involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, such as mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA) and nuclear respiratory factors 1 and 2 (NRF-1 and
NRF-2), are activated in copper deficiency. Little is known about gene expression
of enzymes involved in fatty acid oxidation (FAO) in hearts of copper-deficient
rats. Male weanling rats were fed copper-adequate (CuA), copper-deficient (CuD)
or pair-fed (CuP) diets for 5 wk. Mitochondria and lipid droplet volume densities
from electron micrographs were greater and there was an elevation in the mtTFA
protein level in hearts of copper-deficient rats. DNA binding activities of NRF-1
and NRF-2 did not differ among the groups. Northern blot analysis of cardiac
tissue revealed that transcripts of F(1)F(0)-ATP synthase subunit c were greater,
but mRNA levels of ATP synthase beta subunit and the FAO enzyme, medium-chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD), were lower in hearts of copper-deficient rats.
Long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (LCAD) mRNA levels did not differ among
treatment groups. These results suggest that certain components of the
mitochondrial biogenesis program are activated in hearts of copper-deficient
rats. F(1)F(0)-ATP synthase beta subunit and MCAD transcript levels remain low,
which may contribute to impaired mitochondrial respiratory function, decreased
fatty acid utilization and lipid droplet accumulation in hearts of
copper-deficient rats.

PMID: 10958805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. DNA Seq. 2000;11(1-2):131-5.

Isolation of rat mitochondrial transcription factor A (r-Tfam) cDNA.

Inagaki H(1), Hayashi T, Matsushima Y, Lin KH, Maeda S, Ichihara S, Kitagawa Y,
Saito T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Industrial Research Institute of Nagoya,
Japan. hinagaki@nirin.go.jp

We have isolated rat mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam; formerly known
as mtTFA) cDNA clones from a rat cerebellum cDNA library using human Tfam cDNA as
a probe. The deduced amino acid sequence of r-Tfam shows 62% and 89% overall
identity to human and mouse Tfam, respectively. We also show the presence of two 
r-Tfam isoforms in testis as for mouse. Our findings suggest that the mechanisms 
underlying transcription of mitochondrial genes are conserved among rat, mouse,
and human.

PMID: 10902920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Mar 28;97(7):3467-72.

Genetic modification of survival in tissue-specific knockout mice with
mitochondrial cardiomyopathy.

Li H(1), Wang J, Wilhelmsson H, Hansson A, Thoren P, Duffy J, Rustin P, Larsson
NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, CMM L8:02, Karolinska Hospital, S-17176
Stockholm, Sweden.

We recently described a mouse model that reproduces important pathophysiological 
features of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutation diseases. The gene for mouse
mitochondrial transcription factor A, Tfam (also called mtTFA), a nucleus-encoded
key regulator of mtDNA expression, was targeted with loxP sites (Tfam(loxP)) and 
disrupted in vivo by transgenic expression of cre-recombinase from the muscle
creatinine kinase (Ckmm) promoter. This promoter is active from embryonic day 13,
and the knockouts had normal respiratory chain function in the heart at birth and
developed mitochondrial cardiomyopathy postnatally. In this paper, we describe a 
heart-knockout strain obtained by mating Tfam(loxP) mice to animals expressing
cre-recombinase from the alpha-myosin heavy chain (Myhca) promoter. This promoter
is active from embryonic day 8, and the knockouts had onset of mitochondrial
cardiomyopathy during embryogenesis. The age of onset of cardiac respiratory
chain dysfunction can thus be controlled by temporal regulation of
cre-recombinase expression. Further characterization demonstrated that
approximately 75% of the knockouts died in the neonatal period, whereas,
surprisingly, approximately 25% survived for several months before dying from
dilated cardiomyopathy with atrioventricular heart conduction blocks. Modifying
gene(s) affect the life span of the knockouts, because approximately 95% of the
knockout offspring from an intercross of the longer-living knockouts survived the
neonatal period. Thus, the tissue-specific knockouts we describe here not only
reproduce important pathophysiological features of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy
but also provide a powerful system by which to identify modifying genes of
potential therapeutic value.

PMCID: PMC16263
PMID: 10737799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochimie. 1999 Oct;81(10):965-71.

Expression of mitochondrial genes and of the transcription factors involved in
the biogenesis of mitochondria Tfam, NRF-1 and NRF-2, in rat liver, testis and
brain.

Escrivá H(1), Rodríguez-Peña A, Vallejo CG.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols'(CSIC-UAM), Arturo
Duperier, 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Mitochondrial function requires genes encoded in both mitochondrial and nuclear
genomes. Tfam, the activator of mammalian mitochondrial transcription, is encoded
in the nucleus and its expression has been shown in in vitro studies to be
controlled by nuclear respiratory factors NRF-1 and NRF-2. In order to understand
the physiological dependence of mitochondrial gene expression, we have analyzed
in rat liver, testis and brain the expression level of mitochondrial genes in
parallel with those of the three transcription factors. We found that: a) Tfam
expression is down-regulated in rat testis, both at the protein and transcript
level. The three-fold reduction in the abundance of Tfam protein in rat testis
does not result in low steady-state levels of mitochondrial gene transcripts,
suggesting that Tfam is in excess and does not limit transcription in vivo; and
b) NRF-1 and NRF-2 (alpha, beta and gamma subunits) mRNAs were analyzed by
Northern blotting; for each mRNA, several transcripts were observed as well as
tissue-specific patterns of expression. The mRNA steady-state levels of NRF-1 and
NRF-2 were higher in testis than in liver or brain. These data suggest that the
low expression level of Tfam found in testis is not due to decreased NRF-1 and/or
NRF-2 expression and further suggest the existence of tissue-specific
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms for the expression of NRF-1/NRF-2
genes.

PMID: 10575350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 1999 Apr;31(2):129-35.

On the role of the general transcription factor Sp1 in the activation and
repression of diverse mammalian oxidative phosphorylation genes.

Zaid A(1), Li R, Luciakova K, Barath P, Nery S, Nelson BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Arrhenius Laboratories, Stockholm University,
Sweden.

To gain insight into the role of the general transcription factor, Sp1, in the
expression of nuclear genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis, we investigated
Sp1 activation of the adenine nucleotide translocator 2, cytochrome c1, F1-ATPase
beta subunit, and the mitochondria transcription factor (mtTFA) promoters
transfected into Drosophila cell lines. The numbers and organization of GC
elements vary in the four promoters, but the magnitude of activation by
coexpressed human Sp1 was similar. A feature common to the four promoters is the 
presence of multiple, proximal Sp1-activating elements that account for 50% or
more of the transcription activation by Sp1. The distribution and function of
individual distal Sp1 elements is less defined and appear to be more
promoter-specific. Finally, data from transfected Drosophila cells provide the
first direct proof for the involvement of Sp1 in the negative regulation of the
ANT2 promoter and as a possible participant in repression of the beta-subunit
promoter. The role of Sp1 in both the positive and negative regulation of OXPHOS 
promoters is unique.

PMID: 10449239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 29;258(1):44-9.

Oxidative stress and upregulation of mitochondrial biogenesis genes in
mitochondrial DNA-depleted HeLa cells.

Miranda S(1), Foncea R, Guerrero J, Leighton F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Molecular, Pontificia Universidad Católica 
de Chile, Casilla, Santiago, 114-D, Chile.

The signaling mechanism through which deficitary mitochondrial function would
activate nuclear genes required for mitochondrial biogenesis, has not been
established. To explore the hypothesis that reactive oxygen species (ROS), a
mitochondrial product, constitute part of the mitochondria-nuclei signaling
pathway, we obtained HeLa cells depleted of mitochondrial DNA (rho0 cells)
through exposure to ethidium bromide. We found evidences of oxidative stress in
rho0 cells, employing a fluorescent probe and measuring NF-kappaB activation.
Nuclear Respiratory Factor-1 (NRF-1) and Mitochondrial Transcription Factor A
(Tfam) mRNA were measured by RT-PCR. For both transcription factors, rho0 cells
revealed significantly higher levels of mRNA. These results support several
hypothesis: that endogenous ROS enhance the expression of nuclear mitochondrial
biogenesis genes NRF-1 and Tfam; that DNA deprived mitochondria lead to cellular 
oxidative stress, probably because of incomplete biogenesis of the mitochondrial 
electron transport chain, and consequently, that ROS are part of a
mitochondria-nuclei regulatory signaling pathway.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10222232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Nat Genet. 1999 Jan;21(1):133-7.

Dilated cardiomyopathy and atrioventricular conduction blocks induced by
heart-specific inactivation of mitochondrial DNA gene expression.

Wang J(1), Wilhelmsson H, Graff C, Li H, Oldfors A, Rustin P, Brüning JC, Kahn
CR, Clayton DA, Barsh GS, Thorén P, Larsson NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine L8:02,
Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

Mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) cause several well-recognized human
genetic syndromes with deficient oxidative phosphorylation and may also have a
role in ageing and acquired diseases of old age. We report here that hallmarks of
mtDNA mutation disorders can be reproduced in the mouse using a conditional
mutation strategy to manipulate the expression of the gene encoding mitochondrial
transcription factor A (Tfam, previously named mtTFA), which regulates
transcription and replication of mtDNA. Using a loxP-flanked Tfam allele
(TfamloxP) in combination with a cre-recombinase transgene under control of the
muscle creatinine kinase promoter, we have disrupted Tfam in heart and muscle.
Mutant animals develop a mosaic cardiac-specific progressive respiratory chain
deficiency, dilated cardiomyopathy, atrioventricular heart conduction blocks and 
die at 2-4 weeks of age. This animal model reproduces biochemical, morphological 
and physiological features of the dilated cardiomyopathy of Kearns-Sayre
syndrome. Furthermore, our findings provide genetic evidence that the respiratory
chain is critical for normal heart function.

PMID: 9916807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Virchows Arch. 1998 Dec;433(6):529-36.

Immunohistochemical detection of human mtDNA polymerase gamma and of human
mitochondrial transcription factor A in cytochrome-c-oxidase-deficient oxyphil
cells of hyperfunctional parathyroids.

Müller-Höcker J(1), Schäfer S, Copeland WC, Wiesner R, Seibel P.

Author information: 
(1)Pathologisches Institut der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, Germany.

Immunohistochemical studies were performed in 18 hyperfunctional parathyroids
with oxyphil cell aggregates for the detection of cytochrome-c-oxidase (complex
IV of the respiratory chain), mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma and human
mitochondrial transcription factor A (h-mtTFA). Seventy-three oxyphil areas
exhibiting a defect of cytochrome-c-oxidase were found. The defect involved both 
the mitochondrially coded subunits II/III and the nuclear derived subunits Vab.
There was no loss of mtDNA polymerase gamma or of h-mtTFA in these foci,
corresponding to a high content of mtDNA revealed by in situ hybridization.
Isolated defects of h-mtTFA were also not found. In contrast, isolated defects of
mtDNA polymerase gamma were present in 22 oxyphil foci. These results show that
defects of cytochrome-c-oxidase in oxyphil cells are not due to altered
expression of h-mtTFA or DNA polymerase gamma, indicating that other nuclear
factors involved in the generation of the respiratory chain may be impaired. The 
low incidence of defects of mtDNA polymerase gamma and the absence of alterations
of h-mtTFA and cytochrome-c-oxidase in these foci suggest that defects of mtDNA
polymerase gamma are of minor pathogenetic significance.

PMID: 9870686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Genomics. 1998 Jun 1;50(2):260-6.

Fine genetic and comparative mapping of the deafness mutation Ames waltzer on
mouse chromosome 10.

Zobeley E(1), Sufalko DK, Adkins S, Burmeister M.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
48109-0720, USA.

The Ames waltzer (av) mouse mutant is an autosomal recessive deafness mutation on
mouse Chromosome 10. Previously, av had not been mapped relative to molecular
markers. We have performed an intersubspecific backcross with Mus musculus
castaneus and mapped microsatellite markers in this cross. Toothpick PCR on
previously frozen tissue samples from offspring was used as an efficient strategy
to screen a large number of animals quickly. In 1258 progeny tested we found
three recombinants for each of the flanking markers D10Mit199 and D10Mit64. In
addition, nine different genes (Ank3, Bcr, Gnaz, Tfam, Mif, Mmp11, Dcoh, Pyp, and
Gstt2) were mapped and eliminated genetically as candidate genes for av. av had
been discussed as a potential mouse model for the human deafness loci Usher
syndrome type ID (USH1D) and DFNB12. Comparative mapping shows that av maps near 
an evolutionary break point and makes it unlikely that those loci are human
homologues of av. A human homologue of av is predicted to lie either on 22q11.2
or on 10q21. The orientation of conserved linkage groups between these two human 
chromosomal regions relative to mouse Chromosome 10 was determined.

PMID: 9653653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Hum Genet. 1998 Mar;102(3):327-31.

Familial mitochondrial DNA depletion in liver: haplotype analysis of candidate
genes.

Spelbrink JN(1), Van Galen MJ, Zwart R, Bakker HD, Rovio A, Jacobs HT, Van den
Bogert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Two sons and one daughter of healthy consanguineous parents presented with fatal 
hepatic failure in association with severe depletion of mitochondrial (mt)DNA in 
liver; a third son is healthy. Other published cases of mtDNA depletion concern
single members of a family, which excludes the use of haplotype analysis. In the 
family presented here, the inheritance of the genes for mitochondrial
transcription factor A (mtTFA), nuclear respiratory factor 1 (NRF-1),
mitochondrial single-stranded DNA-binding protein (mtSSBP), and endonuclease G
(EndoG) was studied using microsatellite markers linked to these genes. The
inheritance of the gene for mtDNA polymerase (pol gamma) was studied using a
polymorphic CAG repeat present within the coding region of the gene. EndoG and
mtSSBP were excluded, but mtTFA remains a candidate. Pol gamma or NRF-1
involvement would be compatible only with autosomal dominant inheritance. Coding 
sequence analysis of NRF-1 and mtTFA revealed no novel mutations in affected
individuals.

PMID: 9544847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):231-6.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A is necessary for mtDNA maintenance and
embryogenesis in mice.

Larsson NG(1), Wang J, Wilhelmsson H, Oldfors A, Rustin P, Lewandoski M, Barsh
GS, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine L8:02,
Stockholm, Sweden. nils-goran.larsson@cmm.ki.se

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):199-200.

The regulation of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) expression is crucial for
mitochondrial biogenesis during development and differentiation. We have
disrupted the mouse gene for mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam; formerly
known as m-mtTFA) by gene targetting of loxP-sites followed by cre-mediated
excision in vivo. Heterozygous knockout mice exhibit reduced mtDNA copy number
and respiratory chain deficiency in heart. Homozygous knockout embryos exhibit a 
severe mtDNA depletion with abolished oxidative phosphorylation. Mutant embryos
proceed through implantation and gastrulation, but die prior to embryonic day
(E)10.5. Thus, Tfam is the first mammalian protein demonstrated to regulate mtDNA
copy number in vivo and is essential for mitochondrial biogenesis and embryonic
development.

PMID: 9500544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):199-200.

An essential guide to mtDNA maintenance.

Turnbull DM, Lightowlers RN.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1998 Mar;18(3):231-6.

PMID: 9500531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochemistry. 1997 Dec 2;36(48):14807-15.

Binding of tsHMG, a mouse testis-specific HMG-domain protein, to cisplatin-DNA
adducts.

Ohndorf UM(1), Whitehead JP, Raju NL, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139, USA.

The anticancer drug cisplatin is particularly effective against testicular
tumors. Although the clinical consequences of cisplatin chemotherapy are
well-known, the precise mechanism of action remains elusive. Specific recognition
of cisplatin-damaged DNA by a class of proteins containing the high-mobility
group (HMG) domain DNA-binding motif could play a role in mediating the
cytotoxicity of the drug. This study presents a quantitative investigation of
binding of the murine testis-specific high-mobility group protein tsHMG to DNA
modified by cisplatin. The binding affinity and specificity of this protein to a 
site-specific 1,2-d(GpG) cisplatin-DNA intrastrand cross-link in a 20 bp probe
were determined. A value for the apparent dissociation constant, Kd(app), of 24
+/- 5 nM was obtained by gel mobility shift assays. Binding competition assays
with the corresponding unmodified 20 bp probe gave a ratio (rho) of nonspecific
to specific Kd(app) values of 230. A polypeptide containing tsHMG domain A
(residues 1-82) was expressed and purified to homogeneity. This domain alone was 
sufficient for specific recognition of cisplatin-modified DNA with a Kd(app) of
300 +/- 50 nM and a rho of 20, a comparatively high discrimination factor. DNase 
I interference analysis of the adduct-containing strand revealed that tsHMG
binding extends over 14 nucleotides, centered around the platinated bases. The
domain A polypeptide protection pattern covers a slightly smaller area of 13
nucleotides. The binding affinity and specificity of tsHMG for cisplatin-modified
DNA are exceptional compared to those of other HMG-domain proteins studied
previously. The possible relevance of these findings to the mechanism of action
of cisplatin is discussed.

PMID: 9398202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1997 May;17(5):263-9.

Interferons suppress mitochondrial gene transcription by depleting mitochondrial 
transcription factor A (mtTFA).

Inagaki H(1), Matsushima Y, Ohshima M, Kitagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program of Biochemical Regulation, Graduate School of Agricultural
Sciences, Nagoya University, Japan.

Mitochondrial gene transcription activity in organello was suppressed after
culturing HeLa cells with 1000 U/ml of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) or IFN-gamma 
for 18 h. The suppression was associated with reduced levels of mitochondrial
gene transcripts. Northern blot analysis of HeLa cell RNA showed marked reduction
of the mRNA encoding for mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA).
Immunoblotting with antiserum directed against recombinant mtTFA showed a reduced
level of the protein as well. Consistently, gel-retardation assay of
mitochondrial extract showed reduced level of functional mtTFA, which is known to
bind to both heavy and light strand promoters of bidirectionally transcribed
mitochondrial DNA. We suggest that depletion of mtTFA is a pathway through which 
IFNs depress the mitochondrial respiration.

PMID: 9181464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 1997 Apr;29(2):109-19.

Nuclear control of respiratory chain expression in mammalian cells.

Scarpulla RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The majority of gene products for mitochondrial respiratory function are encoded 
in the nuclear genome. These include most of the respiratory subunits and all of 
the proteins that regulate the mitochondrial genetic system. One approach to
understanding nucleo-mitochondrial interactions in mammalian cells is to identify
the nuclear transcription factors that are common to the expression of these gene
products. This has led to the purification and molecular cloning of nuclear
respiratory factors, NRF-1 and NRF-2. The DNA binding and transcriptional
specificities of these proteins have implicated them in the expression of many
respiratory subunits along with key components of the mitochondrial
transcription, replication, and heme biosynthetic machinery. In addition,
tissue-specific transcription factors have been linked to the coordinate
synthesis of contractile proteins and muscle-specific respiratory subunits
whereas other more ubiquitous factors may have a dual function in nuclear and
mitochondrial gene activation. These findings provide a framework for further
investigations of the nuclear genetic mechanisms that integrate the expression of
the respiratory apparatus with that of other cellular systems during growth and
development.

PMID: 9239537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Feb;6(2):185-91.

Down-regulation of mitochondrial transcription factor A during spermatogenesis in
humans.

Larsson NG(1), Oldfors A, Garman JD, Barsh GS, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
CA 94305-5427, USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) is a key activator of mitochondrial 
transcription in mammals. It also has a role in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
replication, since transcription generates an RNA primer necessary for initiation
of mtDNA replication. In the mouse, testis-specific mtTFA transcripts encode a
protein isoform that is imported to the nucleus rather than into mitochondria of 
spermatocytes and elongating spermatids. We now report molecular characterization
of human mtTFA (h-mtTFA) expression in somatic tissues and male germ cells.
Similarly to the mouse, analysis of cDNAs and Northern blots identified abundant 
testis-specific transcript isoforms generated by use of alternate transcription
initiation sites. However, unlike the mouse, none of the testis-specific
transcripts predicts a nuclear protein isoform, and Western blot analysis
identified only the mitochondrial form of h-mtTFA in human testis.
Immunohistochemistry and in situ were used to compare the distribution of mtTFA
protein, testis-specific mtTFA transcripts, mtDNA and mtRNA in sections of human 
testis. Our results show that the mtTFA protein and mtDNA exhibit parallel
gradients with high levels in undifferentiated male germ cells and low levels or 
an absence in different male germ cells. Testis-specific transcripts exhibit the 
opposite pattern, suggesting that in both humans and mice, these testis-specific 
mtTFA transcripts down-regulate mtTFA protein levels in mammalian mitochondria.
Our findings demonstrate that mtTFA does not have a critical role in the nucleus,
suggest a mechanism for reducing mtDNA copy number during spermatogenesis and
have implications for the understanding of maternal transmission of mtDNA.

PMID: 9063738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mamm Genome. 1997 Feb;8(2):139-40.

Structure and chromosomal localization of the mouse mitochondrial transcription
factor A gene (Tfam).

Larsson NG(1), Barsh GS, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University, School of Medicine, 
California 94305-5427, USA.

PMID: 9060414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 15;24(14):2753-9.

Mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma is expressed and translated in the absence of 
mitochondrial DNA maintenance and replication.

Davis AF(1), Ropp PA, Clayton DA, Copeland WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic 
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine 94305-5427, USA.

Mitochondria are essential organelles in all eukaryotic cells where cellular ATP 
is generated through the process of oxidative phosphorylation. Protein components
of the respiratory assembly are gene products of both mitochondrial and nuclear
genes. The mitochondrial genome itself encodes several protein and nucleic acid
components required for such oxidative phosphorylative processes, but the vast
majority of genes encoding respiratory chain components are nuclear. Similarly,
the processes of replication and transcription of mitochondrial DNA rely
exclusively upon RNA and protein species encoded by nuclear genes. We have
analyzed two key nuclear-encoded proteins involved in mitochondrial DNA
replication and transcription as a function of the presence or absence of
mitochondrial DNA. Mitochondrial DNA polymerase (DNA polymerase gamma), the
nuclear-encoded enzyme which synthesizes mtDNA, is expressed and translated in
cells devoid of mitochondrial DNA itself. In contrast, mitochondrial
transcription factor A protein levels are tightly linked to the mtDNA status of
the cell. These results demonstrate that the DNA polymerase gamma protein is
stable in the absence of mitochondrial DNA, and that there appears to be no
regulatory mechanism present in these cells to alter levels of this protein in
the complete absence of mitochondrial DNA. Alternatively, it is possible that
this enzyme plays an additional, as yet undefined, role in the cell, thereby
mandating its continued production.

PMCID: PMC146014
PMID: 8759007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Nat Genet. 1996 Jul;13(3):296-302.

A single mouse gene encodes the mitochondrial transcription factor A and a
testis-specific nuclear HMG-box protein.

Larsson NG(1), Garman JD, Oldfors A, Barsh GS, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development Biology, Bechman Center for Molecular and Genetic
Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Calfornia 94305-5427, USA.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA) is a key regulator of mammalian
mitochondrial DNA transcription. We report here that a testis-specific isoform of
mouse mtTFA lacks the mitochondrial targeting sequence and is present in the
nucleus of spermatocytes and elongating spermatids, thus representing the first
reported mammalian gene encoding protein isoforms targeted for the mitochondria
or the nucleus. The presence of the mitochondrial transcriptional activator in
the nucleus raises the possibility of a role for this protein in both genetic
systems. Mutations in the nuclear mtTFA gene may therefore exhibit phenotypic
consequences due to altered function in either or both genetic compartments.

PMID: 8673128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3720-9.

The testis-specific high-mobility-group protein, a phosphorylation-dependent
DNA-packaging factor of elongating and condensing spermatids.

Alami-Ouahabi N(1), Veilleux S, Meistrich ML, Boissonneault G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Sherbrooke,
Quebec, Canada.

Mammalian spermiogenesis is characterized by a striking restructuring of the
spermatid chromatin caused by the replacement of nucleohistones with transition
proteins and their subsequent replacement with nucleoprotamines. The onset of
nuclear elongation and chromatin condensation in spermatids is accompanied by a
general decrease in the transcriptional activity of the DNA. A recently
identified testis-specific high-mobility-group (tsHMG) protein, similar to the
human mitochondrial transcription factor I and to the linker-associated protein
delta of Tetrahymena thermophila micronuclei, is thought to play a structural
role in this process. We confirm by immunoblot analysis of fractionated germ
cells that the presence of tsHMG is restricted to transcriptionally quiescent
elongating and condensing spermatids. Purified recombinant tsHMG protein displays
preferential binding to supercoiled plasmid DNA, which reversibly protects the
DNA against the DNA-relaxing activity of eukaryotic topoisomerase I and also
impairs the transcriptional activity of this template when assayed in vitro. The 
tsHMG protein can also introduce negative supercoils into a relaxed plasmid
substrate in a topoisomerase I-dependent manner. We also show that the tsHMG
protein is the substrate of a Ca2+-phospholipid-dependent protein kinase (protein
kinase C) present in testis extracts of adult mice and demonstrate that
phosphorylation by protein kinase C is required for both the DNA-binding and the 
topoisomerase I-dependent supercoiling activities of tsHMG. Our results support
the hypothesis that the spermatid tsHMG protein is a topological factor
(transition protein) that can modulate the activity of topoisomerase I. This
activity could contribute to the important transition in chromatin structure
which leads to the decrease in DNA metabolism observed at the early stages of
spermatid elongation.

PMCID: PMC231368
PMID: 8668189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Methods Enzymol. 1996;264:149-58.

Isolation and characterization of vertebrate mitochondrial transcription factor A
homologs.

Shadel GS(1), Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305, USA.

PMID: 8965689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Mol Biol. 1995 May 26;249(1):11-28.

Addition of a 29 residue carboxyl-terminal tail converts a simple HMG
box-containing protein into a transcriptional activator.

Dairaghi DJ(1), Shadel GS, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
CA 94305-5427, USA.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A (h-mtTFA) is essential for initiation 
of transcription from the two promoters located in the displacement-loop region
of human mitochondrial DNA. This 25 kDa protein contains two tandem, HMG box
DNA-binding domains separated by a 27 amino acid residue linker region and
followed by a 25 residue carboxyl-terminal tail; both the linker and tail are
rich in basic amino acid residues. Mutational analysis of h-mtTFA revealed that
the tail region is important for specific DNA recognition and essential for
transcriptional activation. The critical role of the human tail in transcription 
was confirmed by constructing chimeric proteins that exchanged similar regions
between h-mtTFA and its Saccharomyces cerevisiae homolog, sc-mtTFA. Wild-type
sc-mtTFA is unable to activate transcription from the human mitochondrial
light-strand promoter (LSP). Addition of the human tail region to sc-mtTFA
conferred LSP-specific promoter activation. In all of the different h-mtTFA
mutations tested, transcriptional activation was correlated with specific
DNA-binding activity, suggesting that these two functions may be inseparable, a
situation entirely consistent with previous mutational analyses of human
mitochondrial promoters.

PMID: 7776365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 May 24;1271(1):127-34.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A and promoter spacing integrity are
required for transcription initiation.

Dairaghi DJ(1), Shadel GS, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
CA 94305-5427, USA.

The two major promoters for transcription of the human mitochondrial genome are
located near each other in the displacement-loop region of the molecule. Previous
work has localized these promoters to regions of < 100 nucleotides each; the DNA 
sequence at the transcription start site is stringently required, as is the
region from -10 to -40 base pairs upstream of each respective start site. Each
upstream site is recognized and bound by human mitochondrial transcription factor
A (h-mtTFA), an event previously shown to be important for transcriptional
activation. We report here results using recombinant h-mtTFA that demonstrate the
dependence of transcription initiation of h-mtTFA. In addition, altering the
distance between the h-mtTFA binding site and the transcription start site
greatly impairs transcription initiation efficiency. The decrease in
transcription initiation efficiency was shown to be a consequence of altering the
position of h-mtTFA binding as opposed to the strength of h-mtTFA binding, as
judged by DNA footprinting ability. Analysis of a chimeric yeast-human promoter
revealed that the yeast mtTFA homologue cannot substitute for the human protein, 
even when bound at an appropriate position upstream of the human transcription
start site.

PMID: 7599198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochemistry. 1995 Mar 7;34(9):2956-64.

A single HMG domain in high-mobility group 1 protein binds to DNAs as small as 20
base pairs containing the major cisplatin adduct.

Chow CS(1), Barnes CM, Lippard SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

Proteins containing a relatively new DNA-binding motif known as the high-mobility
group (HMG) domain bind specifically to DNA modified by the anticancer drug
cisplatin, but not to unmodified DNA (McA'Nulty & Lippard, 1995).
Southwestern-blot analyses of the binding of proteolytic fragments of HMG1 to a
123-bp globally platinated DNA demonstrate that the HMG domains A and B of HMG1
are responsible for its specific interactions with cisplatin-modified DNA. An 81 
amino acid recombinant protein representing a single HMG motif, HMG1 domain B,
binds with an affinity (Kd = 10(-7) M) equal to that of HMG1 itself to 92- and
100-bp DNAs containing the major adduct of cisplatin, a
cis-[Pt(NH3)2-[d(GpG)-N7(1), -N7(2)]] intrastrand cross-link, at a specific site.
The isolated HMG domain B binds with comparable affinity to cisplatin-modified
DNAs having as few as 20 bp. The related human mitochondrial HMG domain protein
mtTFA also recognizes the 123-bp globally platinated DNA, providing further
evidence that HMG domains are responsible for modulating binding of this class of
proteins to cisplatin-modified DNA. This work provides direct biochemical
evidence in support of conclusions drawn previously from analyses of sequence
conservation (Bruhn et al., 1992) that HMG domains are the key elements in
protein binding to cisplatin-modified DNA.

PMID: 7893709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Clin Invest. 1995 Mar;95(3):1383-8.

Increased expression of mitochondrial-encoded genes in skeletal muscle of humans 
with diabetes mellitus.

Antonetti DA(1), Reynet C, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215.

Screening subtraction libraries from normal and type II diabetic human skeletal
muscle, we identified four different mitochondrially encoded genes which were
increased in expression in diabetes. The genes were cytochrome oxidase I,
cytochrome oxidase III, NADH dehydrogenase IV, and 12s rRNA, all of which are
located on the heavy strand of the mitochondrial genome. There was a 1.5- to
2.2-fold increase in the expression of these mRNA molecules relative to total RNA
in both type I and type II diabetes as assessed by Northern blot analyses. Since 
there was approximately 50% decrease in mitochondrial DNA copy number as
estimated by Southern blot analyses, mitochondrial gene expression increased
approximately 2.5-fold when expressed relative to mitochondrial DNA copy number. 
For cytochrome oxidase I similar changes in mitochondrial gene expression were
observed in muscle of nonobese diabetic and ob/ob mice, models of type I and type
II diabetes, respectively. By contrast there was no change or a slight decrease
in expression of cytochrome oxidase 7a, a nuclear-encoded subunit of cytochrome
oxidase, and the expression of mitochondrial transcription factor 1 in human
skeletal muscle did not change with type I or type II diabetes. The increased
mitochondrial gene expression may contribute to the increase in mitochondrial
respiration observed in uncontrolled diabetes.

PMCID: PMC441479
PMID: 7533791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Nat Genet. 1995 Feb;9(2):146-51.

An autosomal locus predisposing to deletions of mitochondrial DNA.

Suomalainen A(1), Kaukonen J, Amati P, Timonen R, Haltia M, Weissenbach J,
Zeviani M, Somer H, Peltonen L.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Human Molecular Genetics,
Helsinki, Finland.

The molecular mechanisms by which the nuclear genome regulates the biosynthesis
of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are only beginning to be unravelled. A naturally
occurring in vivo model for a defect in this cross-talk of two physically
separate genomes is a human disease, an autosomal dominant progressive external
ophthalmoplegia, in which multiple deletions of mtDNA accumulate in the patients'
tissues. The assignment of this disease locus to 10q 23.3-24.3 is the first
direct evidence for involvement of both nuclear and mitochondrial genomes in a
single disorder.

PMID: 7719341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genomics. 1995 Jan 20;25(2):559-64.

Chromosomal localization of mitochondrial transcription factor A (TCF6),
single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSBP), and endonuclease G (ENDOG), three
human housekeeping genes involved in mitochondrial biogenesis.

Tiranti V(1), Rossi E, Ruiz-Carrillo A, Rossi G, Rocchi M, DiDonato S, Zuffardi
O, Zeviani M.

Author information: 
(1)Divisione di Biochimica e Genetica, Milano, Istituto Nazionale Neurologico
Carlo Besta, Italy.

By using a PCR-based screening of a somatic cell hybrid panel and FISH, we have
assigned the loci of mitochondrial single-stranded DNA-binding protein (SSBP),
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TCF6), and mitochondrial endonuclease G
(ENDOG) genes to human chromosomes 7q34, 10q21, and 9q34.1, respectively. The
products of these three genes are involved in fundamental aspects of
mitochondrial biogenesis, such as replication and transcription of the
mitochondrial genome. The chromosomal localization of these genes is important to
testing whether the corresponding proteins may play a role in the
etiopathogenesis of human disorders associated with qualitative or quantitative
abnormalities of mitochondrial DNA.

PMID: 7789991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):7717-30.

In organello footprint analysis of human mitochondrial DNA: human mitochondrial
transcription factor A interactions at the origin of replication.

Ghivizzani SC(1), Madsen CS, Nelen MR, Ammini CV, Hauswirth WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Medical Microbiology, University of Florida,
College of Medicine, Gainesville 32610-0266.

Using in organello footprint analysis, we demonstrate that within human placental
mitochondria there is a high level of protein-DNA binding at regularly phased
intervals throughout a 500-bp region encompassing the D-loop DNA origins and two 
promoter regions. Comparison with in vitro DNase I protection studies indicates
that this protein-DNA interaction is due to non-sequence-specific binding by
human mitochondrial transcription factor A (h-mtTFA). Since h-mtTFA can bend and 
wrap DNA, like its yeast counterpart ABF2, a primary function of h-mtTFA appears 
to be specific packaging of the mitochondrial DNA control region in vivo.
Intervals of protein binding coincide with the spacing of the RNA start sites and
prominent D-loop DNA 5' ends, suggesting a role for phased h-mtTFA binding in
defining transcription and H-strand DNA replication origins. Significant
protein-DNA interaction was also observed within the human homolog of conserved
sequence block 1, both in organello and in vitro, using purified h-mtTFA.

PMCID: PMC359313
PMID: 7969115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Oct;3(10):1763-9.

Deficiency of the human mitochondrial transcription factor h-mtTFA in infantile
mitochondrial myopathy is associated with mtDNA depletion.

Poulton J(1), Morten K, Freeman-Emmerson C, Potter C, Sewry C, Dubowitz V, Kidd
H, Stephenson J, Whitehouse W, Hansen FJ, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital,
Headington, UK.

Recent studies show that patients presenting with cytochrome oxidase (COX)
deficiency in infancy may have reduced mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in muscle. The
human mitochondrial transcription factor A (h-mtTFA) may be an important
regulator of both transcription and replication of mtDNA. h-mtTFA levels were
investigated in cell lines which were either free of mtDNA (rho 0) or temporarily
depleted by treatment with dideoxycytidine (ddC), and in tissue from three
patients with mtDNA depletion and cytochrome oxidase deficiency. h-mtTFA was
compared with other mitochondrial proteins such as pyruvate dehydrogenase and
porin by Western blotting. The ratio of mtDNA and h-mtTFA mRNA to reference
nuclear probes was measured by dual labelling of dot blots. The ratio of mtDNA to
nuclear DNA in skeletal muscle was low in muscle in the three patients and in
other tissues in one. h-mtTFA was low in cells depleted either permanently or
transiently of mtDNA, and this reduction in h-mtTFA roughly paralleled mtDNA
levels. Similarly, treatment of rho 0 cell lines with ddC induced a reduction in 
mtDNA as well as h-mtTFA protein. The relationship between h-mtTFA and mtDNA
levels suggests that they may be causally linked. MtDNA depletion was accompanied
by an increase in the level of h-mtTFA RNA in the cell lines but low levels in
the patient. This suggests that either h-mtTFA regulates mtDNA levels, or that
h-mtTFA expression may be regulated by a feedback mechanism initiated by MtDNA
Depletion.

PMID: 7849699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1994 Jun;40(4):489-93.

DNA binding properties of recombinant human mitochondrial transcription factor 1.

Ikeda S(1), Sumiyoshi H, Oda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Okayama University of Science,
Japan.

Recombinant mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (r-mtTF1) was overproduced in
Escherichia coli, and purified to near homogeneity by DNA affinity
chromatography. Binding affinities of r-mtTF1 to the light strand promoter (LSP) 
and heavy strand promoter (HSP) of human mitochondrial DNA and a non-promoter
fragment derived from pUC vector were quantitatively measured by electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay. The order of the affinities for these DNAs estimated by
competition experiments was LSP > HSP = pUC, which was essentially the same as
that of transcriptional activity from each promoter in vitro. Recombinant mtTF1
bound more tightly to supercoiled or relaxed DNA than to linear DNA, moreover to 
single-stranded DNA with the same affinity for linear DNA. The results suggest
that the mechanism of activation of HSP by mtTF1 is different from that of LSP,
and that multiple binding of mtTF1 to mitochondrial DNA, in a non-specific
manner, may significantly participate in activation of transcription from HSP and
replication of mitochondrial DNA.

PMID: 8061564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Apr 15;200(1):619-26.

Stoichiometry of mitochondrial transcripts and regulation of gene expression by
mitochondrial transcription factor A.

Garstka HL(1), Fäcke M, Escribano JR, Wiesner RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology II, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

The steady state concentration of cytochrome c oxidase subunit I mRNA and 12 S
rRNA, respectively, measured by a quantitative reverse transcription/polymerase
chain reaction method, was 4 and 15 molecules per molecule of mt DNA in rat liver
and 2 and 9 molecules in rat muscle, respectively. These results imply that in
the mitochondrial compartment, the molar concentration of all thirteen mRNAs by
far exceeds the concentration of ribosomes, a situation fundamentally different
from the cytosolic compartment. Following thyroid hormone treatment, both
mitochondrial transcripts increased, in parallel with the mRNA encoding
mitochondrial transcription factor A. We conclude that this transcription factor 
might be the rate limiting factor for mitochondrial transcription in vivo, at
least under these conditions.

PMID: 8166737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Feb 15;91(4):1309-13.

Activation of the human mitochondrial transcription factor A gene by nuclear
respiratory factors: a potential regulatory link between nuclear and
mitochondrial gene expression in organelle biogenesis.

Virbasius JV(1), Scarpulla RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell, Molecular and Structural Biology, Northwestern University 
Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611.

Mitochondrial transcription factor A (mtTFA), the product of a nuclear gene,
stimulates transcription from the two divergent mitochondrial promoters and is
likely the principal activator of mitochondrial gene expression in vertebrates.
Here we establish that the proximal promoter of the human mtTFA gene is highly
dependent upon recognition sites for the nuclear respiratory factors, NRF-1 and
NRF-2, for activity. These factors have been previously implicated in the
activation of numerous nuclear genes that contribute to mitochondrial respiratory
function. The affinity-purified factors from HeLa cells specifically bind to the 
mtTFA NRF-1 and NRF-2 sites through guanine nucleotide contacts that are
characteristic for each site. Mutations in these contacts eliminate NRF-1 and
NRF-2 binding and also dramatically reduce promoter activity in transfected
cells. Although both factors contribute, NRF-1 binding appears to be the major
determinant of promoter function. This dependence on NRF-1 activation is
confirmed by in vitro transcription using highly purified recombinant proteins
that display the same binding specificities as the HeLa cell factors. The
activation of the mtTFA promoter by both NRF-1 and NRF-2 therefore provides a
link between the expression of nuclear and mitochondrial genes and suggests a
mechanism for their coordinate regulation during organelle biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC43147
PMID: 8108407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Jul 15;194(1):544-51.

Smaller isoform of human mitochondrial transcription factor 1: its wide
distribution and production by alternative splicing.

Tominaga K(1), Hayashi J, Kagawa Y, Ohta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical School, Japan.

Mitochondrial transcriptional factor 1 (mtTF1) is required for both transcription
and replication of mammalian mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and it has two consensus
sequences of HMG (high mobility group) boxes. In studies on the regulation of
gene expression of mtTF1, we examined the steady state level of the mRNA in
cultured HeLa cells. We found that in addition to the major mRNA, 30% of the mRNA
of mtTF1 in the cells was a smaller isoform with a 96 base deletion. This smaller
mRNA was also found in most human tissues. The region of the deletion corresponds
to the second HMG-box, which may interact directly with DNA. We examined the
structure of the genomic gene encoding the human mtTF1 to determine the mechanism
of the deletion. We found that the gene is composed of 7 exons spanning over 10
kilobase-pairs and that its 5th exon is identical to the 96 bases skipped in the 
shorter mRNA. Therefore, the shorter mtTF1 is concluded to be generated by
alternative splicing.

PMID: 8333869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4323-30.

A testis-specific gene encoding a nuclear high-mobility-group box protein located
in elongating spermatids.

Boissonneault G(1), Lau YF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Developmental Genetics, University of California, San
Francisco 94121.

A cDNA encoding a DNA-binding protein has been isolated by screening a mouse
testicular expression cDNA library with a concatemer of a 12-bp putative
protein-binding element present in the promoter of the testis-specific gene
PGK-2. Sequence analysis of the isolated cDNA indicated the presence of an open
reading frame that encodes a protein with two conserved DNA-binding motifs known 
as the high-mobility-group (HMG) boxes. Northern (RNA) blot analysis demonstrated
that expression of the gene is restricted to the postpuberal testis. The
DNA-binding activity and sequence specificity of the recombinant HMG protein were
confirmed by DNA mobility shift assay using the initial concatemer of the PGK-2
promoter element as a probe as well as the wild-type or mutated versions of the
12-bp element within its natural sequence context. Immunocytochemical staining of
adult testis sections with polyclonal antisera recognizing this recombinant HMG
protein demonstrated that it is located predominantly in the nuclei of elongated 
spermatids at steps 9 and 10. These results suggest that this novel HMG box
protein gene may be involved in the regulation of gene expression of the haploid 
male genome. The gene from which the cDNA was derived has been termed
testis-specific HMG (tsHMG).

PMCID: PMC359989
PMID: 8321234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1951-61.

A human mitochondrial transcriptional activator can functionally replace a yeast 
mitochondrial HMG-box protein both in vivo and in vitro.

Parisi MA(1), Xu B, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5427.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor A is a 25-kDa protein that binds
immediately upstream of the two major mitochondrial promoters, thereby leading to
correct and efficient initiation of transcription. Although the nature of yeast
mitochondrial promoters is significantly different from that of human promoters, 
a potential functional homolog of the human transcriptional activator protein has
been previously identified in yeast mitochondria. The importance of the yeast
protein in yeast mitochondrial DNA function has been shown by inactivation of its
nuclear gene (ABF2) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells resulting in loss of
mitochondrial DNA. We report here that the nuclear gene for human mitochondrial
transcription factor A can be stably expressed in yeast cells devoid of the yeast
homolog protein. The human protein is imported efficiently into yeast
mitochondria, is processed correctly, and rescues the loss-of-mitochondrial DNA
phenotype in a yeast abf2 strain, thus functionally substituting for the yeast
protein. Both human and yeast proteins affect yeast mitochondrial transcription
initiation in vitro, suggesting that the two proteins may have a common role in
this fundamental process.

PMCID: PMC359509
PMID: 8441424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Interferon Res. 1992 Dec;12(6):425-30.

Identification of a new interferon-alpha/beta-inducible DNA-binding protein that 
interacts with the regulatory element A of 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase ME-12 
gene.

Yan C(1), Tamm I.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

A new interferon (IFN)-stimulated response factor (ISRF) has been identified in
nuclear extracts of IFN-alpha/beta-treated murine BALB/c-3T3 fibroblasts by the
mobility-shift electrophoresis assay. The factor, ISRF-2, displays murine
2',5'-oligoadenylate (2-5A) synthetase ME-12 gene 5' regulatory element A
specificity and differs from the previously described IFN response element
B-specific factor ISRF-1 in several aspects. ISRF-2 is restricted to the nucleus,
whereas ISRF-1 exists in the cytoplasm and translocates into the nucleus upon
treatment of cells with IFN-alpha/beta. The ionic strength requirement of ISRF-2 
for maximal DNA-binding activity is lower than that of ISRF-1. The DNA-binding
activity of ISRF-2, but not that of ISRF-1, is markedly suppressed by Mg2+. In
common with ISRF-1, the phosphorylated form of ISRF-2 appears to be required for 
DNA-binding activity. A model is proposed for the mechanism whereby murine
IFN-alpha/beta regulates 2-5A synthetase ME-12 gene expression.

PMID: 1289410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1992 Jun 15;1131(2):217-9.

Upstream region of a genomic gene for human mitochondrial transcription factor 1.

Tominaga K(1), Akiyama S, Kagawa Y, Ohta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi-ken, Japan.

A genomic gene for human mitochondrial transcription factor 1 was cloned from a
human genomic library and its 5' flanking region was sequenced. No typical TATA
and three consensus sequences for potential Sp1 binding site were found in its 5'
flanking region of 2 kilobase pairs. There were, at least, four common sequences 
among some nuclear genes for mitochondrial-related proteins.

PMID: 1610904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Biol Chem. 1992 Feb 15;267(5):3358-67.

DNA wrapping and bending by a mitochondrial high mobility group-like
transcriptional activator protein.

Fisher RP(1), Lisowsky T, Parisi MA, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5427.

Mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (mtTF1) is the only accessory protein known 
to be required for accurate and efficient promoter recognition by mammalian
mitochondrial RNA polymerase. It activates transcription by binding immediately
upstream of transcriptional start sites and shows an inherent flexibility in
primary DNA sequence requirement. By application of a purification strategy
designed for human and mouse mtTF1, a protein resembling mtTF1 was recently
isolated from yeast mitochondria; its size (19 kDa), DNA-binding properties, and 
amino acid composition suggest identity to HM, a previously described abundant
protein of yeast mitochondria. Both human and yeast proteins show a general
ability to wrap or condense and unwind DNA in vitro and bend DNA at specific
sequences. Recent determinations of the amino acid sequences of the human and
yeast proteins reveal that both contain domains homologous to the nuclear high
mobility group (HMG) proteins which have been implicated in diverse functions
such as chromatin compaction and transcription stimulation. The ability to unwind
and bend DNA may be fundamental to the documented roles of the mammalian protein 
in mitochondrial DNA transcription and replication priming and suggests a similar
function for the yeast protein in yeast mitochondria.

PMID: 1737790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Science. 1991 May 17;252(5008):965-9.

Similarity of human mitochondrial transcription factor 1 to high mobility group
proteins.

Parisi MA(1), Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
CA 94305.

Human mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (mtTF1) has been sequenced and is a
nucleus-encoded DNA binding protein of 204 amino acids (24,400 daltons).
Expression of human mtTF1 in bacteria yields a protein with correct physical
properties and the ability to activate mitochondrial DNA promoters. Analysis of
the protein's sequence reveals no similarities to any other DNA binding proteins 
except for the existence of two domains that are characteristic of high mobility 
group (HMG) proteins. Human mtTF1 is most closely related to a DNA binding
HMG-box region in hUBF, a human protein known to be important for transcription
by RNA polymerase I.

PMID: 2035027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 1991 May 15;266(14):9153-60.

A rapid, efficient method for purifying DNA-binding proteins.
Denaturation-renaturation chromatography of human and yeast mitochondrial
extracts.

Fisher RP(1), Lisowsky T, Breen GA, Clayton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5427.

We describe a novel method for the purification of DNA-binding proteins. Isolated
mitochondria were lysed in boiling sodium dodecyl sulfate-containing buffer, the 
extracts were chromatographed on hydroxylapatite in the presence of sodium
dodecyl sulfate, and DNA-binding activities were identified after adding a large 
excess of nonionic detergent (Triton X-100) and assaying fractions by a gel
retardation procedure. Fractions containing DNA-binding activity were bulk
renatured and chromatographed on phosphocellulose in the presence of Triton
X-100. When applied to human mitochondria, the technique resulted in the
purification to homogeneity of fully functional mitochondrial transcription
factor 1 (mtTF1), the major activator of mammalian mitochondrial transcription.
Moreover, the yield of mtTF1 purified by this method was at least 25 times higher
than that obtained by conventional nondenaturing chromatographies. When yeast
mitochondria were subjected to the same protein isolation scheme, a 19-kilodalton
putative yeast homologue of mtTF1 was purified to homogeneity. These results
suggest that the denaturation-renaturation approach may be a valuable general
method for the identification and high yield purification of DNA-binding
proteins.

PMID: 1851168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Biol Chem. 1991 Feb 15;266(5):3278-86.

Conformational studies of the nucleic acid binding sites for Xenopus
transcription factor IIIA.

Huber PW(1), Blobe GC, Hartmann KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame, Indiana
46556.

The CD spectrum of a restriction fragment that contains a single copy of a
Xenopus borealis somatic 5 S rRNA gene, like those of two smaller fragments from 
the binding site for transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA), is that of B-form DNA.
Under dehydrating conditions (76% ethanol) the 5 S rDNA undergoes a transition
into an A conformation. The spectra of the three fragments, however, do exhibit
some perturbation in that the longwave positive peaks are shifted to shorter
wavelengths and have enhanced rotational strength compared with reference B-form 
spectra. The helical repeats measured for the smaller fragments indicate that the
helix winding angle can account for these features in the CD spectra. We suggest 
that G:C-rich boxes that punctuate not only the TFIIIA binding site but the whole
5 S gene are responsible for the conformational perturbation manifest in the CD
spectra and may play a role in the recognition of the DNA by the factor. The
spectrum of the gene is unchanged in the presence of TFIIIA, indicating that the 
structural heterogeneity of the DNA persists upon complex formation. The CD
spectra of native TFIIIA.5 S rRNA particles isolated from oocytes and of
particles reconstituted in vitro are identical and only moderately different from
the spectrum of free 5 S rRNA, suggesting that the protein effects only limited
changes in the secondary and/or tertiary structure of the RNA. The helical
structure of the two binding sites is discussed with respect to a common mode of 
interaction of TFIIIA with DNA and RNA.

PMID: 1993700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Neurosci Lett. 1988 Jun 29;89(2):246-50.

ID sequence-binding protein factor complexed in ribonucleoprotein particles.

Anzai K(1), Goto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Science and Technology, Nihon
University, Tokyo, Japan.

We analyzed brain extracts from fetal or adult mice with a 32P-labeled 5'-half
fragment of identifier (ID) sequence in a gel mobility shift assay. Upon
digestion of extracts with RNase A prior to the binding reactions, a protein
factor(s) that specifically binds to the fragment was shown to appreciably
increase in amount with either of the extracts. Furthermore, the binding was
competed with single-stranded ID sequences. These observations suggest that the
protein factor is capable of interacting with either the genes or their small RNA
transcripts.

PMID: 2455878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Annu Rev Nutr. 1987;7:251-72.

Zinc in DNA replication and transcription.

Wu FY, Wu CW.

PMID: 2440465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Biol Chem. 1986 Sep 15;261(26):12202-8.

DNA-activated ATPase activity associated with Xenopus transcription factor A.

Hazuda DJ, Wu CW.

Highly purified preparations of Xenopus transcription factor A exhibit
DNA-activated ATPase (ATP phosphorylase, EC 3.6.1.3) activity, which is inhibited
by affinity-purified anti-factor A antibodies but not by nonspecific
gamma-globulins. This enzymatic activity copurifies with both factor A and the 7 
S particle, a ribonucleoprotein complex composed of factor A and 5 S RNA in a
one-to-one stoichiometric ratio. At equal concentrations of protein, factor A and
the 7 S particle catalyze the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and Pi at similar rates.
Kinetic analysis demonstrates that factor A is a fairly typical ATPase with a
Vmax of 1.7 nmol/min/mg of protein and a KM of 5.0 X 10(-5) M, whereas the
corresponding values for the 7 S particle are 2.7 nmol/min/mg of protein and 1.4 
X 10(-4) M, respectively. Besides ATP, dATP is also an effective substrate for
the enzyme with a Vmax of 0.7 nmol/min/mg of protein and a KM of 3.3 X 10(-5) M
in reactions catalyzed by the 7 S particle. The ATPase activity of free factor A,
but not the 7 S particle, can be stimulated approximately 3-fold by the addition 
of pBR322 plasmid DNA. Proteolytic fragments of factor A generated by treatment
of the 7 S particle with papain and trypsin retain a portion of their catalytic
activity, 50 and 10%, respectively, in concert with their relative size.
Radioactive ATP and dATP can be photocross-linked to factor A by UV irradiation. 
These radioactive substrates are also cross-linked to the papain- and
trypsin-generated fragments with markedly decreased efficiencies. UV
photocross-linking of non-substrate nucleotides to factor A was not detectable.
These results provide evidence that the ATPase activity is intrinsic to the
factor A protein which is essential for the specific initiation of 5 S RNA gene
transcription.

PMID: 2943735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 1985 Oct 25;260(24):13316-20.

Xenopus transcription factor A promotes DNA reassociation.

Hanas JS, Hazuda DJ, Wu CW.

We demonstrate by agarose gel electrophoresis and DNase I footprinting that
Xenopus transcription factor A promotes DNA reassociation. This ability of factor
A is dependent upon the domain-like structure of the protein. Digestion of factor
A by papain results in a protein fragment which promotes DNA reassociation
whereas a smaller fragment obtained by trypsin digestion does not. Although
factor A requires zinc for specific binding to the 5 S RNA gene, the metal is not
required for single-stranded DNA binding or promotion of DNA reassociation by
this protein. The factor A-dependent renaturation of the 5 S RNA gene from its
individual 32P end-labeled strands results in the proper gene conformation as
evidenced by the restoration of the DNase I footprint characteristic of the
intragenic control region. Alterations in DNase I cleavage patterns induced by
factor A on the individual 5 S DNA strands are distinct from those induced by the
protein on the duplex 5 S RNA gene. The ability of factor A to promote DNA
reassociation further defines the possible roles of this protein in the formation
of active transcription complexes and their maintenance during repeated rounds of
transcription.

PMID: 2414278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Biol Chem. 1985 May 25;260(10):6466-71.

The intragenic control region of the Xenopus 5 S RNA gene contains two factor A
binding domains that must be aligned properly for efficient transcription
initiation.

Bogenhagen DF.

The in vitro recombination of deletion mutants of the Xenopus borealis somatic 5 
S RNA gene allows construction of mutants containing substitutions of synthetic
linker DNA for blocks of 9 or 10 nucleotides within the intragenic control region
that binds transcription factor A. Two of the mutants containing exact linker
replacements without insertion or deletion of nucleotides together alter 12 of 21
base pairs within the center of the control region. Both of these mutants bind
factor A in an essentially normal pattern and support transcription, suggesting
that a remarkable sequence variability can be tolerated in the center of the
control region. The data obtained with these linker substitution mutants, along
with data obtained previously with unidirectional deletion mutants, indicate that
two short sequences at the boundaries of the control region serve as important
recognition sites for the transcription factor. Additional closely related
mutants containing slight deletions or insertions of form 2 to 10 base pairs do
not bind factor A normally and do not support transcription in vitro. Thus,
precise relative spacing of the boundaries of the control region is of critical
importance for transcription.

PMID: 2581955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Biochemistry. 1984 Nov 20;23(24):5759-66.

5S RNA structure and interaction with transcription factor A. 2. Ribonuclease
probe of the 7S particle from Xenopus laevis immature oocytes and RNA exchange
properties of the 7S particle.

Andersen J, Delihas N, Hanas JS, Wu CW.

The 5S RNA complexed in the 7S particle of immature Xenopus laevis oocytes was
32P labeled at its 3' end and then subjected in situ to partial digestion using
ribonucleases T1, T2, A, and V1 in order to study the conformation of the
complexed RNA and its interaction with the transcription factor A (TFIIIA).
Digested samples were gel purified to retrieve 5S RNA that was still complexed
with the transcription factor protein, and the cleavages in these RNAs were
analyzed on sequencing gels. The RNA associated with the 7S particle is very
susceptible to ribonuclease activity despite the presence of the protein. Also,
the 5S RNA in the 7S particle is in a different conformation from renatured
Xenopus laevis (Xlo) 5S RNA and appears to have less secondary structure
predominantly in the stem that includes helices IV and V. A species of native Xlo
5S RNA which was isolated from 7S particle preparations under nondenaturing
conditions revealed a conformation that was more similar to the 5S RNA in the 7S 
particle than to renatured 5S RNA. Comparison of data from partial ribonuclease
digestions performed on renatured 5S RNA, on the native 5S RNA, and on the
complexed 5S RNA allowed us to approximate sites of protein-induced structural
change in the complexed 5S RNA, which may signal protein interaction domains.
These sites include the 5' side of helices III and V. In another approach to the 
study of 5S RNA-TFIIIA interactions, we have observed that incubation of
32P-labeled Xlo 5S RNA with 7S particles results in the incorporation of labeled 
RNA into 7S particles.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6084516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Biochemistry. 1984 Nov 20;23(24):5752-9.

5S RNA structure and interaction with transcription factor A. 1. Ribonuclease
probe of the structure of 5S RNA from Xenopus laevis oocytes.

Andersen J, Delihas N, Hanas JS, Wu CW.

The structure of Xenopus laevis oocyte (Xlo) 5S ribosomal RNA has been probed
with single-strand-specific ribonucleases T1, T2, and A with
double-strand-specific ribonuclease V1 from cobra venom. The digestion of 5'- or 
3'-labeled renatured 5S RNA samples followed by gel purification of the digested 
samples allowed the determination of primary cleavage sites. Results of these
ribonuclease digestions provide support for the generalized 5S RNA secondary
structural model derived from comparative sequence analysis. However, three
putative single-stranded regions of the molecule exhibited unexpected V1 cuts,
found at C36, U73, U76, and U102. These V1 cuts reflect additional secondary
structural features of the RNA including A.G base pairs and support the extended 
base pairing in the stem containing helices IV and V which was proposed by Stahl 
et al. [Stahl, D. A., Luehrsen, K. R., Woese, C. R., & Pace, N. R. (1981) Nucleic
Acids Res. 9, 6129-6137]. A conserved structure for helix V having a common
unpaired uracil residue at Xlo position 84 is proposed for all eukaryotic 5S
RNAs. Our results are compared with nuclease probes of other 5S RNAs.

PMID: 6084515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


