
1. Exp Eye Res. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0014-4835(16)30040-9. doi:
10.1016/j.exer.2016.03.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Systems biology of lens development: A paradigm for disease gene discovery in the
eye.

Anand D(1), Lachke SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA;
Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Delaware,
Newark, DE, USA. Electronic address: salil@udel.edu.

Over the past several decades, the biology of the developing lens has been
investigated using molecular genetics-based approaches in various vertebrate
model systems. These efforts, involving target gene knockouts or knockdowns, have
led to major advances in our understanding of lens morphogenesis and the
pathological basis of cataracts, as well as of other lens related eye defects. In
particular, we now have a functional understanding of regulators such as Pax6,
Six3, Sox2, Oct1 (Pou2f1), Meis1, Pnox1, Zeb2 (Sip1), Mab21l1, Foxe3, Tfap2a
(Ap2-alpha), Pitx3, Sox11, Prox1, Sox1, c-Maf, Mafg, Mafk, Hsf4, Fgfrs, Bmp7, and
Tdrd7 in this tissue. However, whether these individual regulators interact or
their targets overlap, and the significance of such interactions during lens
morphogenesis, is not well defined. The arrival of high-throughput approaches for
gene expression profiling (microarrays, RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq), etc.), which
can be coupled with chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) or RNA
immunoprecipitation (RIP) assays, along with improved computational resources and
publically available datasets (e.g. those containing comprehensive
protein-protein, protein-DNA information), presents new opportunities to advance 
our understanding of the lens tissue on a global systems level. Such
systems-level knowledge will lead to the derivation of the underlying lens gene
regulatory network (GRN), defined as a circuit map of the regulator-target
interactions functional in lens development, which can be applied to expedite
cataract gene discovery. In this review, we cover the various systems-level
approaches such as microarrays, RNA-seq, and ChIP that are already being applied 
to lens studies and discuss strategies for assembling and interpreting these vast
amounts of high-throughput information for effective dispersion to the scientific
community. In particular, we discuss strategies for effective interpretation of
this new information in the context of the rich knowledge obtained through the
application of traditional single-gene focused experiments on the lens. Finally, 
we discuss our vision for integrating these diverse high-throughput datasets in a
single web-based user-friendly tool iSyTE (integrated Systems Tool for Eye gene
discovery) - a resource that is already proving effective in the identification
and characterization of genes linked to lens development and cataract. We
anticipate that application of a similar approach to other ocular tissues such as
the retina and the cornea, and even other organ systems, will significantly
impact disease gene discovery.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26992779  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 11. pii: S0012-1606(16)30081-1. doi:
10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.02.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Sf3b4-depleted Xenopus embryos: A model to study the pathogenesis of craniofacial
defects in Nager syndrome.

Devotta A(1), Juraver-Geslin H(1), Gonzalez JA(2), Hong CS(3), Saint-Jeannet
JP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science & Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New 
York University, New York, USA. (2)Department of Basic Science & Craniofacial
Biology, College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, USA; Master Program
in Biology, New York University, New York, USA. (3)Department of Biological
Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Daegu University, Gyeongsan, Republic of
Korea. (4)Department of Basic Science & Craniofacial Biology, College of
Dentistry, New York University, New York, USA. Electronic address: jsj4@nyu.edu.

Mandibulofacial dysostosis (MFD) is a human developmental disorder characterized 
by defects of the facial bones. It is the second most frequent craniofacial
malformation after cleft lip and palate. Nager syndrome combines many features of
MFD with a variety of limb defects. Mutations in SF3B4 (splicing factor 3b,
subunit 4) gene, which encodes a component of the pre-mRNA spliceosomal complex, 
were recently identified as a cause of Nager syndrome, accounting for 60% of
affected individuals. Nothing is known about the cellular pathogenesis underlying
Nager type MFD. Here we describe the first animal model for Nager syndrome,
generated by knocking down Sf3b4 function in Xenopus laevis embryos, using
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides. Our results indicate that Sf3b4-depleted
embryos show reduced expression of the neural crest genes sox10, snail2 and twist
at the neural plate border, associated with a broadening of the neural plate.
This phenotype can be rescued by injection of wild-type human SF3B4 mRNA but not 
by mRNAs carrying mutations that cause Nager syndrome. At the tailbud stage,
morphant embryos had decreased sox10 and tfap2a expression in the pharyngeal
arches, indicative of a reduced number of neural crest cells. Later in
development, Sf3b4-depleted tadpoles exhibited hypoplasia of neural crest-derived
craniofacial cartilages, phenocopying aspects of the craniofacial skeletal
defects seen in Nager syndrome patients. With this animal model we are now poised
to gain important insights into the etiology and pathogenesis of Nager type MFD, 
and to identify the molecular targets of Sf3b4.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26874011  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Pharmacogenomics. 2016 Feb 5. [Epub ahead of print]

Novel regulatory variant detected on the VKORC1 haplotype that is associated with
warfarin dose.

Cavalli M(1), Pan G(1), Nord H(1), Eriksson N(2), Wadelius C(1), Wadelius M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics & Pathology, & Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Uppsala Clinical Research Center &
Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences & Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala, Sweden.

AIM: Warfarin dose requirement is associated with VKORC1 rs9923231, and we
studied whether it is a functional variant.
MATERIALS & METHODS: We selected variants in linkage disequilibrium with
rs9923231 that bind transcription factors in an allele-specific way.
Representative haplotypes were cloned or constructed, nuclear protein binding and
transcriptional activity were evaluated.
RESULTS: rs56314408C>T and rs2032915C>T were detected in a liver enhancer in
linkage disequilibrium with rs9923231. The rs56314408-rs2032915 C-C haplotype
preferentially bound nuclear proteins and had higher transcriptional activity
than T-T and the African-specific T-C. A motif for TFAP2A/C was disrupted by
rs56314408T. No difference in transcriptional activity was detected for
rs9923231G>A.
CONCLUSION: Our results supported an activating role for rs56314408C, while
rs9923231G>A had no evidence of being functional.

PMID: 26847243  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):398-410. doi: 10.1242/dev.130849.

WNT/ß-catenin signaling mediates human neural crest induction via a pre-neural
border intermediate.

Leung AW(1), Murdoch B(2), Salem AF(3), Prasad MS(3), Gomez GA(3), García-Castro 
MI(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kline Biology Tower, Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology, Yale University, 266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA Yale Stem 
Cell Center, 10 Amistad Street, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. (2)Department of
Biology, Eastern Connecticut State University, 83 Windham St., Willimantic, CT
06226, USA. (3)203 School of Medicine Research Building, School of Medicine,
University of California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA. (4)Kline Biology
Tower, Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale
University, 266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA 203 School of Medicine
Research Building, School of Medicine, University of California Riverside,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA martin.garcia-castro@ucr.edu.

Neural crest (NC) cells arise early in vertebrate development, migrate
extensively and contribute to a diverse array of ectodermal and mesenchymal
derivatives. Previous models of NC formation suggested derivation from neuralized
ectoderm, via meso-ectodermal, or neural-non-neural ectoderm interactions. Recent
studies using bird and amphibian embryos suggest an earlier origin of NC,
independent of neural and mesodermal tissues. Here, we set out to generate a
model in which to decipher signaling and tissue interactions involved in human NC
induction. Our novel human embryonic stem cell (ESC)-based model yields high
proportions of multipotent NC cells (expressing SOX10, PAX7 and TFAP2A) in
5 days. We demonstrate a crucial role for WNT/ß-catenin signaling in launching NC
development, while blocking placodal and surface ectoderm fates. We provide
evidence of the delicate temporal effects of BMP and FGF signaling, and find that
NC development is separable from neural and/or mesodermal contributions. We
further substantiate the notion of a neural-independent origin of NC through PAX6
expression and knockdown studies. Finally, we identify a novel pre-neural border 
state characterized by early WNT/ß-catenin signaling targets that displays
distinct responses to BMP and FGF signaling from the traditional neural border
genes. In summary, our work provides a fast and efficient protocol for human NC
differentiation under signaling constraints similar to those identified in vivo
in model organisms, and strengthens a framework for neural crest ontogeny that is
separable from neural and mesodermal fates.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4760313 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26839343  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Virol. 2016 Mar 28;90(8):3873-89. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03227-15. Print 2016 Apr 15.

Induction of Epstein-Barr Virus Oncoprotein LMP1 by Transcription Factors AP-2
and Early B Cell Factor.

Murata T(1), Noda C(2), Narita Y(3), Watanabe T(4), Yoshida M(4), Ashio K(4),
Sato Y(4), Goshima F(4), Kanda T(5), Yoshiyama H(6), Tsurumi T(2), Kimura H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research
Institute, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan tmurata@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp. (2)Division of
Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Virology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan Division of Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research
Institute, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. (4)Department of Virology, Nagoya
University Graduate School of Medicine, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. (5)Division of
Virology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan
Division of Microbiology and Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. (6)Research Center for Infection-associated Cancer,
Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan
Department of Microbiology, Shimane University Faculty of Medicine, Izumo City,
Shimane, Japan.

Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is a major oncogene essential for primary B cell
transformation by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Previous studies suggested that some 
transcription factors, such as PU.1, RBP-J<U+03BA>, NF-<U+03BA>B, and STAT, are involved in
this expression, but the underlying mechanism is unclear. Here, we identified
binding sites for PAX5, AP-2, and EBF in the proximal LMP1 promoter (ED-L1p). We 
first confirmed the significance of PU.1 and POU domain transcription factor
binding for activation of the promoter in latency III. We then focused on the
transcription factors AP-2 and early B cell factor (EBF). Interestingly, among
the three AP-2-binding sites in the LMP1 promoter, two motifs were also bound by 
EBF. Overexpression, knockdown, and mutagenesis in the context of the viral
genome indicated that AP-2 plays an important role in LMP1 expression in latency 
II in epithelial cells. In latency III B cells, on the other hand, the B
cell-specific transcription factor EBF binds to the ED-L1p and activates LMP1
transcription from the promoter.IMPORTANCE: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent
membrane protein 1 (LMP1) is crucial for B cell transformation and oncogenesis of
other EBV-related malignancies, such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma and T/NK
lymphoma. Its expression is largely dependent on the cell type or condition, and 
some transcription factors have been implicated in its regulation. However, these
previous reports evaluated the significance of specific factors mostly by
reporter assay. In this study, we prepared point-mutated EBV at the binding sites
of such transcription factors and confirmed the importance of AP-2, EBF, PU.1,
and POU domain factors. Our results will provide insight into the transcriptional
regulation of the major oncogene LMP1.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26819314  [PubMed - in process]


6. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17321-32. eCollection 2015.

Analysis of differentially expressed genes based on microarray data of glioma.

Jiang CM(1), Wang XH(1), Shu J(1), Yang WX(2), Fu P(3), Zhuang LL(1), Zhou GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, 
Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001,
China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Hangzhou First People's Hospital, Affiliated 
Hangzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province
310003, China.

Glioma represents one of the main causes of cancer-related death worldwide.
Unfortunately, its exact molecular mechanisms remain poorly understood, which
limits the prognosis and therapy. This study aimed to identify the critical
genes, transcription factors and the possible biochemical pathways that may
affect glioma progression at transcription level. After downloading micro-array
data from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) between glioma and normal samples were screened. We predicted novel
glioma-related genes and carried on online software DAVID to conduct GO
enrichment and transcription factor analysis of these selected genes. String
software was applied to construct a PPI protein interaction network, as well as
to find the key genes and transcription factors in the regulation of glioma. A
total of 97 DEGs were identified associated with cancer, the GO enrichment
analysis indicated these DEGs were mainly relevant to immune responses as well as
regulation of cell growth. In addition, the transcription factor analysis showed 
these DEGs were regulated by the binding sites of transcription factors GLI2,
SP1, SMAD7, SMAD3, RELA, STAT5B, CTNNB1, STAT5A, TFAP2A and SP3. PPI protein
interaction network analysis demonstrated the hub nodes in the interaction
network were EGFR, TGFB1, FN1 and MYC. The hub DEGs may be the most critical in
glioma and could be considered as drug targets for glioma therapy after further
exploration. Besides, with the identification of regulating transcription
factors, the pathogenesis of glioma at transcription level might be brought to
light.

PMCID: PMC4694224
PMID: 26770324  [PubMed]


7. Mol Hum Reprod. 2016 Mar;22(3):208-25. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav072. Epub 2016 Jan 
5.

Does mouse embryo primordial germ cell activation start before implantation as
suggested by single-cell transcriptomics dynamics?

Gerovska D(1), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health
Research Institute, Calle Doctor Beguiristain s/n, 20014 San Sebastián -
Donostia, Spain. (2)Group of Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine,
Biodonostia Health Research Institute, Calle Doctor Beguiristain s/n, 20014 San
Sebastián - Donostia, Spain IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao,
Spain mararabra@yahoo.co.uk.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: Does primordial germ cell (PGC) activation start before mouse
embryo implantation, and does the possible regulation of the DNA
(cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase 3-like (Dnmt3l) by transcription factor AP-2,
gamma (TCFAP2C) have a role in this activation and in the primitive endoderm
(PE)-epiblast (EPI) lineage specification?
STUDY FINDING: A burst of expression of PGC markers, such as Dppa3/Stella,
Ifitm2/Fragilis, Fkbp6 and Prdm4, is observed from embryonic day (E) 3.25, and
some of them, together with the late germ cell markers Zp3, Mcf2 and Morc1,
become restricted to the EPI subpopulation at E4.5, while the dynamics analysis
of the PE-EPI transitions in the single-cell data suggests that TCFAP2C
transitorily represses Dnmt3l in EPI cells at E3.5 and such repression is
withdrawn with reactivation of Dnmt3l expression in PE and EPI cells at E4.5.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: In the mouse preimplantation embryo, cells with the same
phenotype take different fates based on the orchestration between topological
clues (cell polarity, positional history and division orientation) and gene
regulatory rules (at transcriptomics and epigenomics level), prompting the
proposal of positional, stochastic and combined models explaining the
specification mechanism. PGC specification starts at E6.0-6.5 post-implantation. 
In view of the important role of DNA methylation in developmental events, the
cross-talk between some transcription factors and DNA methyltransferases is of
particular relevance. TCFAP2C has a CpG DNA methylation motif that is not
methylated in pluripotent cells and that could potentially bind on DNMT3L, the
stimulatory DNA methyltransferase co-factor that assists in the process of de
novo DNA methylation. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analysis has demonstrated
that Dnmt3l is indeed a target of TCFAP2C.  
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: We aimed to assess the timing of early 
preimplantation events and to understand better the segregation of the inner cell
mass (ICM) into PE and EPI. We designed a single-cell transcriptomics dynamics
computational study to identify markers of the PE-EPI bifurcation in ICM cells
through searching for statistically significant (using the Student's t-test
method) differently expressed genes (DEGs) between PE and EPI cells from E3.5 to 
E4.5. The DEGs common for E3.5 and E4.5 were used as the markers defining the
steady states. We collected microarray and next-generation sequencing
transcriptomics data from public databases from bulk populations and single cells
from mice at E3.25, E3.5 and E4.5. The results are based on three independent
single-cell transcriptomics data sets, with a fold change of 3 and P-value <0.01 
for the DEG selection.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The dynamics analysis revealed new
transitory E3.5 and steady PE and EPI markers. Among the transitory E3.5 PE
markers (Dnmt3l, Dusp4, Cpne8, Akap13, Dcaf12l1, Aaed1, B4galt6, BC100530, Rnpc3,
Tfpi, Lgalsl, Ckap4 and Fbxl20), several (Dusp4, Akap13, Cpn8, Dcaf12l1 and Tfpi)
are related to the extracellular regulated kinase pathway. We also identified new
transitory E3.5 EPI markers (Sgk1, Mal, Ubxn2a, Atg16l2, Gm13102, Tcfap2c, Hexb, 
Slc1a1, Svip, Liph and Mier3), six new stable PE markers (Sdc4, Cpn1, Dkk1,
Havcr1, F2r/Par1 and Slc7a6os) as well as three new stable EPI markers (Zp3, Mcf2
and Hexb), which are known to be late stage germ cell markers. We found that
mouse PGC marker activation starts at least at E3.25 preimplantation. The
transcriptomics dynamics analyses support the regulation of Dnmt3l expression by 
TCFAP2C.  
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Since the regulation of Dnmt3l by TCFAP2C is
based on computational prediction of DNA methylation motifs, Chip-Seq and
transcriptomics data, functional studies are required to validate this result.  
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We identified a collection of previously
undescribed E3.5-specific PE and EPI markers, and new steady PE and EPI markers. 
Identification of these genes, many of which encode cell membrane proteins, will 
facilitate the isolation and characterization of early PE and EPI populations.
Since it is so well established in the literature that mouse PGC specification is
a post-implantation event, it was surprising for us to see activation of PGC
markers as early as E3.25 preimplantation, and identify the newly found steady
EPI markers as late germ cell markers. The discovery of such early activation of 
PGC markers has important implications in the derivation of germ cells from
pluripotent cells (embryonic stem cells or induced pluripotent stem cells), since
the initial stages of such derivation resemble early development. The early
activation of PGC markers points out the difficulty of separating PGC cells from 
pluripotent populations. Collectively, our results suggest that the combining of 
the precision of single-cell omics data with dynamic analysis of time-series data
can establish the timing of some developmental stages as earlier than previously 
thought.  LARGE-SCALE DATA: Not applicable.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported by grants DFG15/14
and DFG15/020 from Diputación Foral de Gipuzkoa (Spain), and grant II14/00016
from I + D + I National Plan 2013-2016 (Spain) and FEDER funds. The authors
declare no conflict of interest.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26740066  [PubMed - in process]


8. J Diabetes Res. 2016;2016:7684038. doi: 10.1155/2016/7684038. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Bioinformatic Evaluation of Transcriptional Regulation of WNT Pathway Genes with 
reference to Diabetic Nephropathy.

McKay GJ(1), Kavanagh DH(1), Crean JK(2), Maxwell AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast BT12 6BA, UK.
(2)Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: WNT/ß-catenin pathway members have been implicated in interstitial
fibrosis and glomerular sclerosis disease processes characteristic of diabetic
nephropathy (DN), processes partly controlled by transcription factors (TFs) that
bind to gene promoter regions attenuating regulation. We sought to identify
predicted cis-acting transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) overrepresented
within WNT pathway members.
METHODS: We assessed 62 TFBS motif frequencies from the JASPAR databases in 65
WNT pathway genes. P values were estimated on the hypergeometric distribution for
each TF. Gene expression profiles of enriched motifs were examined in DN-related 
datasets to assess clinical significance.
RESULTS: Transcription factor AP-2 alpha (TFAP2A), myeloid zinc finger 1 (MZF1), 
and specificity protein 1 (SP1) were significantly enriched within WNT pathway
genes (P values < 6.83 × 10(-29), 1.34 × 10(-11), and 3.01 × 10(-6), resp.). MZF1
expression was significantly increased in DN in a whole kidney dataset (fold
change = 1.16; 16% increase; P = 0.03). TFAP2A expression was decreased in an
independent dataset (fold change = -1.02; P = 0.03). No differential expression
of SP1 was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: Three TFBS profiles are significantly enriched within WNT pathway
genes highlighting the potential of in silico analyses for identification of
pathway regulators. Modification of TF binding may possibly limit DN progression,
offering potential therapeutic benefit.

PMCID: PMC4677197
PMID: 26697505  [PubMed - in process]


9. Eur J Cancer. 2016 Jan;53:25-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2015.10.009. Epub 2015 Dec
13.

MicroRNAs as potential diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers in melanoma.

Mirzaei H(1), Gholamin S(2), Shahidsales S(3), Sahebkar A(4), Jaafari MR(5),
Mirzaei HR(6), Hassanian SM(7), Avan A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (2)Institute of Stem Cell Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Cancer Research Center, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (4)Biotechnology Research Center, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (5)Biotechnology Research Center, School of
Pharmacy, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (6)Department of
Immunology, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. (7)Biochemistry of Nutrition Research Center, School of Medicine, Mashhad
University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran; Department of Medical
Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences,
Mashhad, Iran; Microanatomy Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. (8)Molecular Medicine Group, Department of Modern
Sciences and Technologies, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran; Biochemistry of Nutrition Research Center, School of
Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. Electronic
address: avana@mums.ac.ir.

Melanoma is a life-threatening malignancy with poor prognosis and a relatively
high burden of mortality in advanced stages. The efficacy of current available
therapeutic strategies is limited, with a survival rate of less than 10%. Despite
rapid advances in biomarker-guided drug development in different tumour types,
including melanoma, only a very small number of biomarkers have been identified. 
Recently, microRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as a molecular regulator in the
development and progression of melanoma. Aberrant activation of some known
miRNAs, e.g. let-7a and b, miR-148, miR-155, miR-182, miR-200c, miR-211, miR-214,
miR-221 and 222, has been recognised to be linked with melanoma-associated genes 
such as NRAS, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, receptor tyrosine
kinase c-KIT, AP-2 transcription factor, etc. There is accumulating evidence
suggesting the potential impact of circulating miRNAs as diagnostic and
therapeutic markers in diseases. In addition, miRNAs have turned out to play
important roles in drug-resistance mechanisms; suggesting their modulation as a
potential approach to overcome chemoresistance. This review highlights recent
preclinical and clinical studies on circulating miRNAs and their potential role
as diagnosis, and therapeutic targets in melanoma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26693896  [PubMed - in process]


10. Epigenetics. 2015 Dec 2;10(12):1166-76. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1117889.

Periconceptional folate consumption is associated with neonatal DNA methylation
modifications in neural crest regulatory and cancer development genes.

Gonseth S(1), Roy R(2), Houseman EA(3), de Smith AJ(1), Zhou M(1), Lee ST(4),
Nusslé S(5), Singer AW(6), Wrensch MR(7), Metayer C(6), Wiemels JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics ; Laboratory for Molecular
Epidemiology; University of California ; San Francisco , CA , USA. (2)b
Computational Biology Core; HDF Comprehensive Cancer Center; University of
California ; San Francisco , CA , USA. (3)c College of Public Health and Human
Sciences; Oregon State University ; Corvallis , OR , USA. (4)d Department of
Laboratory Medicine ; Yonsei University College of Medicine ; Seoul , Republic of
Korea. (5)e Department of Environmental Science ; Policy & Management; University
of California ; Berkeley , CA , USA. (6)f School of Public Health; University of 
California ; Berkeley , CA , USA. (7)g Department of Neurological Surgery ;
University of California ; San Francisco , CA , USA.

Folate deficiency during early embryonic development constitutes a risk factor
for neural tube defects and potentially for childhood leukemia via unknown
mechanisms. We tested whether folate consumption during the 12 months prior to
conception induced DNA methylation modifications at birth in healthy neonates
with a genome-wide and agnostic approach. We hypothesized that DNA methylation in
genes involved in neural tube development and/or cancer susceptibility would be
affected by folate exposure. We retrospectively assessed folate exposure at the
time of conception by food-frequency questionnaires administered to the mothers
of 343 healthy newborns. We measured genome-wide DNA methylation from neonatal
blood spots. We implemented a method based on bootstrap resampling to decrease
false-positive findings. Folate was inversely associated with DNA methylation
throughout the genome. Among the top folate-associated genes that were replicated
in an independent Gambian study were TFAP2A, a gene critical for neural crest
development, STX11, a gene implicated in acute myeloid leukemia, and CYS1, a
candidate gene for cystic kidney disease. Reduced periconceptional folate intake 
was associated with increased methylation and, in turn, decreased gene expression
at these 3 loci. The top folate-sensitive genes defined by their associated CpG
sites were enriched for numerous transcription factors by Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis, including those implicated in cancer development (e.g., MYC-associated 
zinc finger protein). The influence of estimated periconceptional folate intake
on neonatal DNA methylation levels provides potential mechanistic insights into
the role of this vitamin in the development of neural tube defects and childhood 
cancers.

PMID: 26646725  [PubMed - in process]


11. Pediatr Int. 2015 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/ped.12861. [Epub ahead of print]

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in AGTR1, TFAP2B, and TRAF1 are not associated
with the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus in Japanese preterm infants.

Kawase K(1), Sugiura T(1), Nagaya Y(1), Yamada T(2), Sugimoto M(2), Ito K(1),
Togawa T(1), Nagasaki R(1), Kato T(1), Kouwaki M(2), Koyama N(2), Saitoh S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Toyohashi
Municipal Hospital, Aichi, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Persistent patent ductus arteriosus is a frequent complication in
preterm infants. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in several genes,
including angiotensin II receptor, type 1 (AGTR1), transcription factor AP-2 beta
(TFAP2B) and TNF receptor-associated factor 1 (TRAF1), have been reported to be
associated with the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus in preterm infants. The
aim of this study was to evaluate the relationships between the incidence of
patent ductus arteriosus in preterm infants and polymorphisms in AGTR1, TFAP2B
and TRAF1 in the Japanese population.
METHODS: The subjects consisted of 107 preterm infants with a gestational age of 
less than 32<U+2009>weeks. Extremely-low-birth-weight infants were administrated
prophylactic indomethacin during the first 24<U+2009>hr after birth. Five SNPs, namely, 
rs5186 in AGTR1, rs987237 and rs6930924 in TFAP2B, and rs1056567 and rs10985070
in TRAF1, were genotyped using TaqMan SNP genotyping assays.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the distributions of the
genotypes and allele frequencies of all studied single nucleotide polymorphisms
between the patent ductus arteriosus group (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>46) and the non-patent ductus
arteriosus group (n = 61).
CONCLUSIONS: There were no significant associations between the studied SNPs and 
the incidence of patent ductus arteriosus in Japanese preterm infants. These SNPs
may not be clinically important predisposing factors for patent ductus arteriosus
in Japanese preterm infants. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26615960  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2016 Jan;44(1):16-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2015.07.026.
Epub 2015 Aug 13.

A multicentric association study between 39 genes and nonsyndromic cleft lip and 
palate in a Brazilian population.

Araujo TK(1), Secolin R(1), Félix TM(2), Souza LT(2), Fontes MÍ(3), Monlleó
IL(4), Souza Jd(5), Fett-Conte AC(6), Ribeiro EM(7), Xavier AC(8), Rezende AA(9),
Simioni M(1), Ribeiro-Dos-Santos ÂK(10), Santos SE(10), Gil-da-Silva-Lopes
VL(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), 13083-887 Campinas, SP, Brazil. (2)Medical Genetics Service, 
Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, 90035-903 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Medical Genetics Sector, State University of Alagoas (UNCISAL), 57010-300
Maceió, AL, Brazil. (4)Clinical Genetics Service, Faculty of Medicine, University
Hospital, Federal University of Alagoas (UFAL), 57072-970 Maceió, AL, Brazil.
(5)Centro de Atendimento Integral ao Fissurado Labiopalatal (CAIF), 81050-00
Curitiba, PR, Brazil. (6)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical School in São
José do Rio Preto (FAMERP FUNFARME), 15090-000 São José do Rio Preto, SP, Brazil.
(7)Medical Genetics Service, Hospital Infantil Albert Sabin - HIAS, 60410-790
Fortaleza, CE, Brazil. (8)Center for Research and Rehabilitation of Lip and
Palate Lesions (CRRLPL), Centrinho Prefeito Luiz Gomes, 89203-020 Joinville, SC, 
Brazil. (9)Department of Clinical and Toxicological Analysis, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hospital Onofre Lopes (HUOL), Federal University of Rio 
Grande do Norte (UFRN), 59012-570 Natal, RN, Brazil. (10)Laboratory of Human and 
Medical Genetics, Institute of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Pará,
Belém, 66.075-970 PA, Brazil. (11)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), 13083-887 Campinas, SP,
Brazil. Electronic address: vlopes@fcm.unicamp.br.

PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to use the TaqMan OpenArray system to evaluate
associations between 39 genes and the etiology of nonsyndromic cleft lip and
palate (NSCLP) in a Brazilian population.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This case-control association study was designed with
80.11% statistical power according to logistic regression (GPOWER software). The 
case group had 182 patients with NSCLP enrolled in the Brazilian Database on
Orofacial Clefts. The controls included 355 healthy individuals with no history
of oral clefting in the past three generations. All samples were genotyped for
253 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (tagSNPs) in 39 genes, including two that
had recently been associated with this process. The association analysis was
performed using logistic regression and stepwise regression. The results were
corrected for multiple testing [Bonferroni correction and False Discovery Rate
(FDR)].
RESULTS: Twenty-four SNPs in 16 genes were significantly associated with the
etiology of NSCLP, including MSX1, SPRY1, MSX2, PRSS35, TFAP2A, SHH, VAX1, TBX10,
WNT11, PAX9, BMP4, JAG2, AXIN2, DVL2, KIF7, and TCBE3. Stepwise regression
analysis revealed that 11 genes contributed to 15.5% of the etiology of NSCLP in 
the sample.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to associate KIF7 and TCEB3 with the etiology
of NSCLP. New technological approaches using the same design should help to
identify further etiological susceptibility variants.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for Cranio-Maxillo-Facial Surgery.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26602496  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 26;36(1):197-209. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00655-15.

A Positive Feedback Loop between Glial Cells Missing 1 and Human Chorionic
Gonadotropin (hCG) Regulates Placental hCGß Expression and Cell Differentiation.

Cheong ML(1), Wang LJ(2), Chuang PY(3), Chang CW(2), Lee YS(4), Lo HF(3), Tsai
MS(5), Chen H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cathay General Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Biotechnology, Ming Chuan University, Tao-Yuan, 
Taiwan. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Cathay General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Graduate Institute of Biochemical Sciences, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Nankang,
Taipei, Taiwan hwchen@gate.sinica.edu.tw.

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) is composed of a common a subunit and a
placenta-specific ß subunit. Importantly, hCG is highly expressed in the
differentiated and multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast, which is formed via
trophoblast cell fusion and stimulated by cyclic AMP (cAMP). Although the
ubiquitous activating protein 2 (AP2) transcription factors TFAP2A and TFAP2C may
regulate hCGß expression, it remains unclear how cAMP stimulates
placenta-specific hCGß gene expression and trophoblastic differentiation. Here we
demonstrated that the placental transcription factor glial cells missing 1 (GCM1)
binds to a highly conserved promoter region in all six hCGß paralogues by
chromatin immunoprecipitation-on-chip (ChIP-chip) analyses. We further showed
that cAMP stimulates GCM1 and the CBP coactivator to activate the hCGß promoter
through a GCM1-binding site (GBS1), which also constitutes a previously
identified AP2 site. Given that TFAP2C may compete with GCM1 for GBS1, cAMP
enhances the association between the hCGß promoter and GCM1 but not TFAP2C.
Indeed, the hCG-cAMP-protein kinase A (PKA) signaling pathway also stimulates
Ser269 and Ser275 phosphorylation of GCM1, which recruits CBP to mediate GCM1
acetylation and stabilization. Consequently, hCG stimulates the expression of
GCM1 target genes, including the fusogenic protein syncytin-1, to promote
placental cell fusion. Our study reveals a positive feedback loop between GCM1
and hCG regulating placental hCGß expression and cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702603 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26503785  [PubMed - in process]


14. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 27;13(4):840-53. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.037. Epub 2015 
Oct 17.

New Functional Signatures for Understanding Melanoma Biology from Tumor Cell
Lineage-Specific Analysis.

Rambow F(1), Job B(2), Petit V(1), Gesbert F(1), Delmas V(1), Seberg H(3),
Meurice G(2), Van Otterloo E(3), Dessen P(2), Robert C(4), Gautheret D(2),
Cornell RA(3), Sarasin A(5), Larue L(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Normal and Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405
Orsay, France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, 91405
Orsay, France; INSERM U1021, 91405 Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée - Ligue
Nationale contre le Cancer, 91405 Orsay, France. (2)Plateforme de
Bioinformatique, UMS AMMICA, Gustave-Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. (4)INSERM U981, Gustave-Roussy, 94805 Villejuif, France. (5)Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR8200, Gustave-Roussy and
University Paris-Sud, 94805 Villejuif, France. (6)Institut Curie, Normal and
Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405 Orsay, France; Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) UMR3347, 91405 Orsay, France; INSERM U1021,
91405 Orsay, France; Equipe Labellisée - Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, 91405 
Orsay, France. Electronic address: lionel.larue@curie.fr.

Molecular signatures specific to particular tumor types are required to design
treatments for resistant tumors. However, it remains unclear whether tumors and
corresponding cell lines used for drug development share such signatures. We
developed similarity core analysis (SCA), a universal and unsupervised
computational framework for extracting core molecular features common to tumors
and cell lines. We applied SCA to mRNA/miRNA expression data from various
sources, comparing melanoma cell lines and metastases. The signature obtained was
associated with phenotypic characteristics in vitro, and the core genes CAPN3 and
TRIM63 were implicated in melanoma cell migration/invasion. About 90% of the
melanoma signature genes belong to an intrinsic network of transcription factors 
governing neural development (TFAP2A, DLX2, ALX1, MITF, PAX3, SOX10, LEF1, and
GAS7) and miRNAs (211-5p, 221-3p, and 10a-5p). The SCA signature effectively
discriminated between two subpopulations of melanoma patients differing in
overall survival, and classified MEKi/BRAFi-resistant and -sensitive melanoma
cell lines.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26489459  [PubMed - in process]


15. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 12;4(11):1436-47. doi: 10.1242/bio.014308.

Genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis of human TOP2B occupancy in MCF7 breast cancer
epithelial cells.

Manville CM(1), Smith K(1), Sondka Z(1), Rance H(1), Cockell S(2), Cowell IG(1), 
Lee KC(1), Morris NJ(3), Padget K(4), Jackson GH(5), Austin CA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biosciences, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (2)The Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2
4HH, UK. (4)Department of Applied Biology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon
Tyne NE1 8ST, UK. (5)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK. (6)Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biosciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK
caroline.austin@ncl.ac.uk.

We report the whole genome ChIP seq for human TOP2B from MCF7 cells. Using three 
different peak calling methods, regions of binding were identified in the
presence or absence of the nuclear hormone estradiol, as TOP2B has been reported 
to play a role in ligand-induced transcription. TOP2B peaks were found across the
whole genome, 50% of the peaks fell either within a gene or within 5 kb of a
transcription start site. TOP2B peaks coincident with gene promoters were less
frequently associated with epigenetic features marking active promoters in
estradiol treated than in untreated cells. Significantly enriched transcription
factor motifs within the DNA sequences underlying the peaks were identified.
These included SP1, KLF4, TFAP2A, MYF, REST, CTCF, ESR1 and ESR2. Gene ontology
analysis of genes associated with TOP2B peaks found neuronal development terms
including axonogenesis and axon guidance were significantly enriched. In the
absence of functional TOP2B there are errors in axon guidance in the zebrafish
eye. Specific heparin sulphate structures are involved in retinal axon targeting.
The glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis-heparin sulphate/heparin pathway is
significantly enriched in the TOP2B gene ontology analysis, suggesting changes in
this pathway in the absence of TOP2B may cause the axon guidance faults.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728365
PMID: 26459242  [PubMed]


16. Pak J Pharm Sci. 2015 Jul;28(4 Suppl):1523-32.

Identification of essential regulatory elements responsible for the explicit
expression of IL-28Ra and their effect on critical SNPs using in-Silico methods.

Akhtar H(1), Islam G(2), Jan SU(3), Nawaz A(4), Akhtar S(5), Hartmann R(6), Sadia
H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Atta-Ur-Rahman School of Applied Biosciences, National University of Sciences 
and Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. (2)Ghulam Ishaq Khan Institute of
Engineering Sciences and Technology, Topi, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Pakistan.
(3)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Balochistan, Quetta, Pakistan. (4)Research 
Center of Modelling and Simulation, National University of Sciences and
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. (5)Riphah Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Riphah International University, Islamabad, Pakistan. (6)Department of Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

IL-28Ra and IL10Rß collectively construct a fully functional hetero-dimeric
receptor for type III interferons (IFNs). IL-28Ra is the private chain for type
III IFNs since their involvement in any other pathway has not been reported yet
and they are highly expressed in response to certain viral attack or cancers.
IL-28Ra is specific in their expression pattern and it expresses within few cell 
types only. The regulatory mechanisms governing the expression of IL-28Ra at the 
molecular level are not completely known yet and need to be scrutinized at
primary levels. In the present study, various in-silico techniques were applied
and it was observed that AP1-2, STAT 1-6, P-53, LyF-1 (lymphoid transcription
factor), c-Jun, PU.1, CREB (cAMP response element-binding), PLAG (pleotropic
adenoma gene), MYOD (myoblast determination protein 1), NOFL and KLFS as
transcription factors that are selected with preference. Interestingly AP-2,
c-Jun, LyF-1, STAT, NF-Y and P53 have also been reported in literature recently
as some of the key regulatory elements as well. Based on the fact that
interlinking between different interferon stimulation genes (ISGs) is also not
very clear and induction of one type of interferon can affect the efficacy of the
other, we found that IFN-<U+03BB>4 induction can increase the expression of IL-28Ra,
similar to IFN-<U+03BB>3 but contrary to type I IFNs, which has either no effect on the 
expression of IL-28Ra or can down regulate its expression at higher
concentrations (data not published).

PMID: 26431664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 2;10(10):e0139342. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139342.
eCollection 2015.

Identification of Target Genes Involved in Wound Healing Angiogenesis of
Endothelial Cells with the Treatment of a Chinese 2-Herb Formula.

Tam JC(1), Ko CH(1), Koon CM(1), Cheng Z(1), Lok WH(1), Lau CP(1), Leung PC(1),
Fung KP(2), Chan WY(3), Lau CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin,
New Territories, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of Phytochemistry and Plant
Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong. (2)Institute of Chinese Medicine, The Chinese University 
of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; State Key Laboratory of
Phytochemistry and Plant Resources in West China, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong; School of Biomedical Sciences, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong. (3)School of
Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New
Territories, Hong Kong.

Angiogenesis is vitally important in diabetic wound healing. We had previously
demonstrated that a Chinese 2-herb formula (NF3) significantly stimulated
angiogenesis of HUVEC in wound healing. However, the molecular mechanism has not 
yet been elucidated. In line with this, global expression profiling of
NF3-treated HUVEC was performed so as to assess the regulatory role of NF3
involved in the underlying signaling pathways in wound healing angiogenesis. The 
microarray results illustrated that different panels of differentially expressed 
genes were strictly governed in NF3-treated HUVEC in a time-regulated manner. The
microarray analysis followed by qRT-PCR and western blotting verification of
NF3-treated HUVEC at 6 h revealed the involvement of various genes in diverse
biological process, e.g., MAP3K14 in anti-inflammation; SLC5A8 in
anti-tumorogenesis; DNAJB7 in protein translation; BIRC5, EPCAM, INSL4, MMP8 and 
NPR3 in cell proliferation; CXCR7, EPCAM, HAND1 and MMP8 in migration; CXCR7,
EPCAM and MMP8 in tubular formation; and BIRC5, CXCR7, EPCAM, HAND1, MMP8 and UBD
in angiogenesis. After 16 h incubation of NF3, other sets of genes were shown
with differential expression in HUVEC, e.g., IL1RAPL2 and NR1H4 in
anti-inflammation; miR28 in anti-tumorogenesis; GRIN1 and LCN1 in anti-oxidation;
EPB41 in intracellular signal transduction; PRL and TFAP2A in cell proliferation;
miR28, PRL and SCG2 in cell migration; PRL in tubular formation; and miR28, NR1H4
and PRL in angiogenesis. This study provided concrete scientific evidence in
support of the regulatory role of NF3 on endothelial cells involved in wound
healing angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4591983
PMID: 26430762  [PubMed - in process]


18. Dev Dyn. 2016 Mar;245(3):220-32. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24341. Epub 2015 Sep 17.

Toward an orofacial gene regulatory network.

Kousa YA(1), Schutte BC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan. (2)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan.

Orofacial clefting is a common birth defect with significant morbidity. A panoply
of candidate genes have been discovered through synergy of animal models and
human genetics. Among these, variants in interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6)
cause syndromic orofacial clefting and contribute risk toward isolated cleft lip 
and palate (1/700 live births). Rare variants in IRF6 can lead to Van der Woude
syndrome (1/35,000 live births) and popliteal pterygium syndrome (1/300,000 live 
births). Furthermore, IRF6 regulates GRHL3 and rare variants in this downstream
target can also lead to Van der Woude syndrome. In addition, a common variant
(rs642961) in the IRF6 locus is found in 30% of the world's population and
contributes risk for isolated orofacial clefting. Biochemical studies revealed
that rs642961 abrogates one of four AP-2alpha binding sites. Like IRF6 and GRHL3,
rare variants in TFAP2A can also lead to syndromic orofacial clefting with lip
pits (branchio-oculo-facial syndrome). The literature suggests that AP-2alpha,
IRF6 and GRHL3 are part of a pathway that is essential for lip and palate
development. In addition to updating the pathways, players and pursuits, this
review will highlight some of the current questions in the study of orofacial
clefting. Developmental Dynamics 245:220-232, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4755791 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26332872  [PubMed - in process]


19. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:955-73. eCollection 2015.

Chromatin features, RNA polymerase II and the comparative expression of lens
genes encoding crystallins, transcription factors, and autophagy mediators.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(2), Chauss D(3), Wang P(4), Kantorow M(3), Zheng D(5),
Cvekl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. (4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

PURPOSE: Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies
have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II),
and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first
genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and
lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis
and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by
predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying
their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
METHODS: The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions
(FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq 
data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data
interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers,
erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish 
the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene
expression across other differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that
crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These 
findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the
crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as 
well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The
expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g.,
Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts 
form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The
expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1a, 
was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors
compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the
remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features 
of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred
DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf,
E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRß, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and
Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high 
levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber 
cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4551281
PMID: 26330747  [PubMed - in process]


20. Dev Biol. 2015 Nov 1;407(1):75-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.006. Epub 2015
Aug 13.

AP-2ß is a transcriptional regulator for determination of digit length in
tetrapods.

Seki R(1), Kitajima K(2), Matsubara H(2), Suzuki T(3), Saito D(4), Yokoyama H(2),
Tamura K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan; Mammalian 
Genetics Laboratory, Genetic Strains Research Center, National Institute of
Genetics, 1111 Yata, Mishima, Shizuoka 411-8540, Japan. (2)Department of
Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan. (3)Division of Biological
Science, Guraduate School of Science, Nagoya University, Furo-Cho, Chikusa-ku,
Nagoya 464-8602, Japan. (4)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences,
Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai
980-8578, Japan; Frontier Research Institute for Interdisciplinary Sciences,
Tohoku University, Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan. (5)Department of
Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life Sciences, Tohoku
University, Aobayama Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan. Electronic address:
tam@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

The species-specific morphology of digits in the tetrapod limb, including the
length and number of metacarpal, metatarsal, and phalangeal bones, suggests that 
a common developmental mechanism for digit formation is modified in a
species-specific manner. Here, we examined the function of the AP-2ß
transcription factor in regulating digit length in the chicken autopod. Mutations
in the gene encoding AP-2ß are associated with Char syndrome, a human autosomal
dominant disorder. Char syndrome patients exhibit autopod skeletal defects,
including loss of phalanges and shortened fingers, suggestive of a function for
AP-2ß in normal digit development. The ectopic expression of two different
dominant-negative forms of chick AP-2ß, equivalent to mutant forms associated
with human Char syndrome, in the developing chick hindlimb bud resulted in
defective digit formation, including reductions in the number and length of
phalanges and metatarsals. A detailed analysis of the AP-2ß expression pattern in
the limb bud indicated a correlation between the pattern/duration of AP-2ß
expression in the limb mesenchyme and digit length in three amniote species, the 
chicken, mouse and gecko. In addition, we found that AP-2ß expression was
downstream of Fgf signals from the apical ectodermal ridge, which is crucial in
digit morphogenesis, and that excessive AP-2ß function resulted in dysregulated
digit length. Taken together, these results suggest that AP-2ß functions as a
novel transcriptional regulator for digit morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26277217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Reprod. 2015 Oct;30(10):2351-63. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev194. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Ex vivo culture of human fetal gonads: manipulation of meiosis signalling by
retinoic acid treatment disrupts testis development.

Jørgensen A(1), Nielsen JE(2), Perlman S(3), Lundvall L(3), Mitchell RT(4), Juul 
A(2), Rajpert-De Meyts E(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction and EDMaRC, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark aj@rh.regionh.dk. (2)University
Department of Growth and Reproduction and EDMaRC, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department of Gynaecology, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (4)MRC
Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, The Queen's Medical 
Research Institute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK Edinburgh
Royal Hospital for Sick Children, 9 Sciennes Road, Edinburgh EH9 1LF, UK.

STUDY QUESTION: What are the effects of experimentally manipulating meiosis
signalling by addition of retinoic acid (RA) in cultured human fetal gonads?
SUMMARY ANSWER: RA-treatment accelerated meiotic entry in cultured fetal ovary
samples, while addition of RA resulted in a dysgenetic gonadal phenotype in fetal
testis cultures.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: One of the first manifestations of sex differentiation is 
the initiation of meiosis in fetal ovaries. In contrast, meiotic entry is
actively prevented in the fetal testis at this developmental time-point. It has
previously been shown that RA-treatment mediates initiation of meiosis in human
fetal ovary ex vivo.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: This was a controlled ex vivo study of human fetal 
gonads treated with RA in 'hanging-drop' tissue cultures. The applied
experimental set-up preserves germ cell-somatic niche interactions and the
investigated outcomes included tissue integrity and morphology, cell
proliferation and survival and the expression of markers of meiosis and sex
differentiation.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Tissue from 24 first trimester human
fetuses was included in this study, all from elective terminations at gestational
week (GW) 7-12. Gonads were cultured for 2 weeks with and without addition of 1
µM RA. Samples were subsequently formalin-fixed and investigated by
immunohistochemistry and cell counting. Proteins investigated and quantified
included; octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4), transcription factor
AP-2 gamma (AP2<U+03B3>) (embryonic germ cell markers), SRY (sex determining region
Y)-box 9 (SOX9), anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) (immature Sertoli cell markers),
COUP transcription factor 2 (COUP-TFII) (marker of interstitial cells), forkhead 
box L2 (FOXL2) (granulosa cell marker), H2A histone family, member X (<U+03B3>H2AX)
(meiosis marker), doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (DMRT1)
(meiosis regulator), cleaved poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP), cleaved Caspase 3
(apoptosis markers) and Ki-67 antigen (Ki-67) (proliferation marker). Also,
proliferation was determined using a 5'-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
incorporation assay.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: A novel ex vivo 'hanging-drop' culture model
for human fetal gonads was successfully established. Continued proliferation of
cells without signs of increased apoptosis was observed after 2 weeks of culture.
In cultured fetal ovaries treated with RA, an increased number of meiotic germ
cells (P < 0.05) and DMRT1-positive oogonia initiating meiosis (P < 0.05) was
observed, which is in agreement with a previous study. In fetal testes,
RA-treatment resulted in a decreased number of gonocytes (P < 0.05), a reduced
percentage of proliferating gonocytes (P < 0.05), altered expression pattern of
the somatic cell markers AMH and COUP-TFII, as well as disrupted seminiferous
cord structure and testis morphology.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The number of samples included in this study
was relatively small due to the limited availability of human fetal tissue.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The hanging-drop culture, similarly to other 
organ culture approaches, allows studies of germ cell-somatic niche interactions 
and determination of effects after manipulating specific signalling pathways. Our
novel finding of disrupted fetal testis development after treatment with RA
indicates that abnormal meiosis regulation can potentially cause gonadal
dysgenesis. Further studies will elucidate the exact mechanisms and timing of
observed effects.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported in part by an ESPE
Research Fellowship, sponsored by Novo Nordisk A/S to A.Jø. Additional funding
for this project was obtained from The Research Council of the Capital Region of 
Denmark (E.R.-D.M.), The Research Fund at Rigshospitalet (A.Ju. and J.E.N.),
Familien Erichssens Fund (A.Jø.), Dagmar Marshalls Fund (A.Jø.) and Aase & Ejnar 
Danielsens Fund (A.Jø.). The authors have no conflicts of interest.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26251460  [PubMed - in process]


22. Eur J Gynaecol Oncol. 2015;36(3):268-73.

Correlation between transcription factor activator protein-2ß (TFAP-2ß) and
endometrial carcinoma.

Cui P, Shi K, Cui HX, Hao LY, Su Y, Li PL.

AIMS: To investigate the correlation between transcription factor activator
protein-2ß (TFAP-2ß) and endometrial carcinoma (EC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study comprised 60 randomly selected patients
diagnosed and treated at the 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University
from November 2011 to June 2012 for endometrial carcinoma (n = 30) and myoma of
uterus (n = 30). The expression of TFAP-2Pß mRNA in endometrial carcinoma was
analyzed by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Body mass index (BMI), waist circumference, and venous blood samples were
obtained before abdominal surgery clinically.
RESULTS: The expression of TFAP-2ß mRNA in endometrial tissue of patients with EC
was higher than that of normal endometrium (p < 0.05). The expression of TFAP-2ß 
mRNA in endometrial tissue of patients with metabolism syndrome was higher than
that of lean ones (p < 0.05). There was no significant difference in the
expression of TFAP-2ß mRNA in endometrial tissue between patients with both EC
and metabolism syndrome and in those with EC only. The expression levels of
TFAP-2ß mRNA had positive correlation with triglyceride (r = 0.271, p < 0.05) and
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) (r = 0.314, p < 0.05). There was no significant
correlation between the expression of TFAP-2ß mRNA and CA125, fasting plasma
glucose, low-density lipoprotein (LDL), waist circumference, total cholesterol,
and BMI.
CONCLUSIONS: TFAP-2ß constituted promoter activity in EC and also contributed to 
the development of the metabolic syndrome. TFAP-2ß may influence the oc- currence
and development of EC through regulating the expression of various adipokines and
lipoprotein metabolism. Probably TFAP-2ß can be a candidate tumor marker for EC.

PMID: 26189251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Arch Oral Biol. 2015 Sep;60(9):1450-60. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2015.06.008.
Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Transcriptional analysis of human cranial compartments with different embryonic
origins.

Homayounfar N(1), Park SS(2), Afsharinejad Z(3), Bammler TK(3), MacDonald JW(3), 
Farin FM(3), Mecham BH(4), Cunningham ML(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Seattle Children's
Research Institute, 1900 - 9th Avenue, Seattle, WA 98101, United States;
Department of Oral Health Sciences, Dental School, University of Washington,
United States; Department of Endodontics, Prosthodontics and Operative Dentistry,
School of Dentistry, University of Maryland, Baltimore, United States. Electronic
address: nehoma@u.washington.edu. (2)Center for Developmental Biology and
Regenerative Medicine, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 1900 - 9th Avenue, 
Seattle, WA 98101, United States. (3)Department of Environmental and Occupational
Health Sciences, University of Washington, 4225 Roosevelt Way NE, # 100, Seattle,
WA 98105-6099, United States. (4)Trialomics, 1700 7th Avenue, # 116, Seattle, WA 
98101, United States. (5)Center for Developmental Biology and Regenerative
Medicine, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 1900 - 9th Avenue, Seattle, WA
98101, United States; Seattle Children's Craniofacial Center, 4800 Sand Point Way
NE, Seattle, WA 98105, United States.

OBJECTIVE: Previous investigations suggest that the embryonic origins of the
calvarial tissues (neural crest or mesoderm) may account for the molecular
mechanisms underlying sutural development. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the differences in the gene expression of human cranial tissues and assess the
presence of an expression signature reflecting their embryonic origins.
METHODS: Using microarray technology, we investigated global gene expression of
cells from the frontal and parietal bones and the metopic and sagittal
intrasutural mesenchyme (ISM) of four human foetal calvaria. qRT-PCR of a
selected group of genes was done to validate the microarray analysis. Paired
comparison and correlation analyses were performed on microarray results.
RESULTS: Of six paired comparisons, frontal and parietal compartments (distinct
tissue types of calvaria, either bone or intrasutural mesenchyme) had the most
different gene expression profiles despite being composed of the same tissue type
(bone). Correlation analysis revealed two distinct gene expression profiles that 
separate frontal and metopic compartments from parietal and sagittal
compartments. TFAP2A, TFAP2B, ICAM1, SULF1, TNC and FOXF2 were among
differentially expressed genes.
CONCLUSION: Transcriptional profiles of two groups of tissues, frontal and
metopic compartments vs. parietal and sagittal compartments, suggest differences 
in proliferation, differentiation and extracellular matrix production. Our data
suggest that in the second trimester of human foetal development, a gene
expression signature of neural crest origin still exists in frontal and metopic
compartments while gene expression of parietal and sagittal compartments is more 
similar to mesoderm.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4750879 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26188427  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS Pathog. 2015 May 27;11(5):e1004905. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004905.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-Wide Identification of the Target Genes of AP2-O, a Plasmodium AP2-Family 
Transcription Factor.

Kaneko I(1), Iwanaga S(1), Kato T(1), Kobayashi I(2), Yuda M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tsu, Mie, Japan. (2)Core-Lab, Graduate School of Regional Innovation Studies, Mie
University, Tsu, Mie, Japan.

Stage-specific transcription is a fundamental biological process in the life
cycle of the Plasmodium parasite. Proteins containing the AP2 DNA-binding domain 
are responsible for stage-specific transcriptional regulation and belong to the
only known family of transcription factors in Plasmodium parasites. Comprehensive
identification of their target genes will advance our understanding of the
molecular basis of stage-specific transcriptional regulation and stage-specific
parasite development. AP2-O is an AP2 family transcription factor that is
expressed in the mosquito midgut-invading stage, called the ookinete, and is
essential for normal morphogenesis of this stage. In this study, we identified
the genome-wide target genes of AP2-O by chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing
and elucidate how this AP2 family transcription factor contributes to the
formation of this motile stage. The analysis revealed that AP2-O binds
specifically to the upstream genomic regions of more than 500 genes, suggesting
that approximately 10% of the parasite genome is directly regulated by AP2-O.
These genes are involved in distinct biological processes such as morphogenesis, 
locomotion, midgut penetration, protection against mosquito immunity and
preparation for subsequent oocyst development. This direct and global regulation 
by AP2-O provides a model for gene regulation in Plasmodium parasites and may
explain how these parasites manage to control their complex life cycle using a
small number of sequence-specific AP2 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4446032
PMID: 26018192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Sci. 2015 Jul 1;128(13):2244-58. doi: 10.1242/jcs.160879. Epub 2015 May
14.

Regulation of epithelial cell polarity by PAR-3 depends on Girdin transcription
and Girdin-Gai3 signaling.

Sasaki K(1), Kakuwa T(1), Akimoto K(2), Koga H(3), Ohno S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medical Science, 3-9 Fuku-ura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medical Science, 3-9 Fuku-ura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan Department
of Molecular Medical Science, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo
University of Science, 2641 Yamazaki, Noda, Chiba 278-8510, Japan. (3)Department 
of Human Genome Research, Kazusa DNA Research Institute, 2-6-7 Kazusa-Kamatari,
Kisarazu, Chiba 292-0818, Japan. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, Yokohama
City University Graduate School of Medical Science, 3-9 Fuku-ura, Kanazawa-ku,
Yokohama 236-0004, Japan ohnos@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp.

Epithelial apicobasal polarity has fundamental roles in epithelial physiology and
morphogenesis. The PAR complex, comprising PAR-3, PAR-6 and atypical protein
kinase C (aPKC), is involved in determining cell polarity in various biological
contexts, including in epithelial cells. However, it is not fully understood how 
the PAR complex induces apicobasal polarity. In this study, we found that PAR-3
regulates the protein expression of Girdin (also known as GIV or CCDC88A), a
guanine-nucleotide-exchange factor (GEF) for heterotrimeric Gai subunits, at the 
transcriptional level by cooperating with the AP-2 transcription factor. In
addition, we confirmed that PAR-3 physically interacts with Girdin, and show that
Girdin, together with the Gai3 (also known as GNAI3), controls tight junction
formation, apical domain development and actin organization downstream of PAR-3. 
Taken together, our findings suggest that transcriptional upregulation of Girdin 
expression and Girdin-Gai3 signaling play crucial roles in regulating epithelial 
apicobasal polarity through the PAR complex.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25977476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Brain. 2015 May 13;8:28. doi: 10.1186/s13041-015-0118-x.

Tfap2a and 2b act downstream of Ptf1a to promote amacrine cell differentiation
during retinogenesis.

Jin K(1), Jiang H(2,)(3), Xiao D(4), Zou M(5), Zhu J(6), Xiang M(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, 54 South Xianlie Road, Guangzhou, 510060, China.
kxjin@yahoo.com. (2)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Department
of Pediatrics, Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 679 Hoes
Lane West, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA. hjiang14@jhmi.edu. (3)Present address:
Institute for Cell Engineering, Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 733 North Broadway, Baltimore, MD, 21206, 
USA. hjiang14@jhmi.edu. (4)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan
Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University, 54 South Xianlie Road, Guangzhou,
510060, China. xdc1115@163.com. (5)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine
and Department of Pediatrics, Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, 679 Hoes Lane West, Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA. mz2484@columbia.edu.
(6)Systems Biology Center, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA. jun.zhu@nih.gov. (7)State Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun Yat-sen University,
54 South Xianlie Road, Guangzhou, 510060, China. xiang@cabm.rutgers.edu.
(8)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 679 Hoes Lane West,
Piscataway, NJ, 08854, USA. xiang@cabm.rutgers.edu.

Retinogenesis is a precisely controlled developmental process during which
different types of neurons and glial cells are generated under the influence of
intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Three transcription factors, Foxn4, RORß1 and
their downstream effector Ptf1a, have been shown to be indispensable intrinsic
regulators for the differentiation of amacrine and horizontal cells. At present, 
however, it is unclear how Ptf1a specifies these two cell fates from competent
retinal precursors. Here, through combined bioinformatic, molecular and genetic
approaches in mouse retinas, we identify the Tfap2a and Tfap2b transcription
factors as two major downstream effectors of Ptf1a. RNA-seq and immunolabeling
analyses show that the expression of Tfap2a and 2b transcripts and proteins is
dramatically downregulated in the Ptf1a null mutant retina. Their overexpression 
is capable of promoting the differentiation of glycinergic and GABAergic amacrine
cells at the expense of photoreceptors much as misexpressed Ptf1a is, whereas
their simultaneous knockdown has the opposite effect. Given the demonstrated
requirement for Tfap2a and 2b in horizontal cell differentiation, our study thus 
defines a Foxn4/RORß1-Ptf1a-Tfap2a/2b transcriptional regulatory cascade that
underlies the competence, specification and differentiation of amacrine and
horizontal cells during retinal development.

PMCID: PMC4429372
PMID: 25966682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Arthritis Res Ther. 2015 May 12;17:119. doi: 10.1186/s13075-015-0648-8.

Activating enhancer binding protein 2 epsilon (AP-2e)-deficient mice exhibit
increased matrix metalloproteinase 13 expression and progressive osteoarthritis
development.

Niebler S(1,)(2), Schubert T(3), Hunziker EB(4), Bosserhoff AK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry (Emil-Fischer-Center), Friedrich Alexander
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, Fahrstrasse17, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
stephan.niebler@ukr.de. (2)Institute of Pathology, University Regensburg,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, 93053, Regensburg, Germany. stephan.niebler@ukr.de.
(3)Institute of Pathology, Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Krankenhausstrasse 8-10, 91054, Erlangen, Germany. dr.t.schubert@googlemail.com. 
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University Hospital of Bern, Murtenstrasse
35, 3010, Bern, Switzerland. ernst.hunziker@dkf.unibe.ch. (5)Institute of
Biochemistry (Emil-Fischer-Center), Friedrich Alexander University
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Fahrstrasse17, 91054, Erlangen, Germany.
anja.bosserhoff@fau.de.

INTRODUCTION: The transcription factor activating enhancer binding protein 2
epsilon (AP-2e) was recently shown to be expressed during chondrogenesis as well 
as in articular chondrocytes of humans and mice. Furthermore, expression of AP-2e
was found to be upregulated in affected cartilage of patients with osteoarthritis
(OA). Despite these findings, adult mice deficient for AP-2e (Tfap2e(-/-)) do not
exhibit an obviously abnormal cartilaginous phenotype. We therefore analyzed
embryogenesis of Tfap2e(-/-) mice to elucidate potential transient abnormalities 
that provide information on the influence of AP-2e on skeletal development. In a 
second part, we aimed to define potential influences of AP-2e on articular
cartilage function and gene expression, as well as on OA progression, in adult
mice.
METHODS: Murine embryonic development was accessed via in situ hybridization,
measurement of skeletal parameters and micromass differentiation of mesenchymal
cells. To reveal discrepancies in articular cartilage of adult wild-type (WT) and
Tfap2e(-/-) mice, light and electron microscopy, in vitro culture of cartilage
explants, and quantification of gene expression via real-time PCR were performed.
OA was induced via surgical destabilization of the medial meniscus in both
genotypes, and disease progression was monitored on histological and molecular
levels.
RESULTS: Only minor differences between WT and embryos deficient for AP-2e were
observed, suggesting that redundancy mechanisms effectively compensate for the
loss of AP-2e during skeletal development. Surprisingly, though, we found matrix 
metalloproteinase 13 (Mmp13), a major mediator of cartilage destruction, to be
significantly upregulated in articular cartilage of adult Tfap2e(-/-) mice. This 
finding was further confirmed by increased Mmp13 activity and extracellular
matrix degradation in Tfap2e(-/-) cartilage explants. OA progression was
significantly enhanced in the Tfap2e(-/-) mice, which provided evidence for in
vivo relevance. This finding is most likely attributable to the increased basal
Mmp13 expression level in Tfap2e(-/-) articular chondrocytes that results in a
significantly higher total Mmp13 expression rate during OA as compared with the
WT.
CONCLUSIONS: We reveal a novel role of AP-2e in the regulation of gene expression
in articular chondrocytes, as well as in OA development, through modulation of
Mmp13 expression and activity.

PMCID: PMC4453098
PMID: 25964075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Tumori. 2015 Jul-Aug;101(4):384-9. doi: 10.5301/tj.5000319. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Screening the molecular targets of ovarian cancer based on bioinformatics
analysis.

Du L(1), Qian X, Dai C, Wang L, Huang D, Wang S, Shen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, the International Peace Maternity and Child Health
Hospital of China Welfare Institute, Shanghai - China.

AIMS AND BACKGROUND: Ovarian cancer (OC) is the most lethal gynecologic
malignancy. This study aims to explore the molecular mechanisms of OC and
identify potential molecular targets for OC treatment.
METHODS AND STUDY DESIGN: Microarray gene expression data (GSE14407) including 12
normal ovarian surface epithelia samples and 12 OC epithelia samples were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) between 2 kinds of ovarian tissue were identified by using limma package
in R language (|log2 fold change| gt;1 and false discovery rate [FDR] lt;0.05).
Protein-protein interactions (PPIs) and known OC-related genes were screened from
COXPRESdb and GenBank database, respectively. Furthermore, PPI network of top 10 
upregulated DEGs and top 10 downregulated DEGs was constructed and visualized
through Cytoscape software. Finally, for the genes involved in PPI network,
functional enrichment analysis was performed by using DAVID (FDR lt;0.05).
RESULTS: In total, 1136 DEGs were identified, including 544 downregulated and 592
upregulated DEGs. Then, PPI network was constructed, and DEGs CDKN2A, MUC1, OGN, 
ZIC1, SOX17, and TFAP2A interacted with known OC-related genes CDK4, EGFR/JUN,
SRC, CLI1, CTNNB1, and TP53, respectively. Moreover, functions about oxygen
transport and embryonic development were enriched by the genes involved in the
network of downregulated DEGs.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that 4 DEGs (OGN, ZIC1, SOX17, and TFAP2A) and 2
functions (oxygen transport and embryonic development) might play a role in the
development of OC. These 4 DEGs and known OC-related genes might serve as
therapeutic targets for OC. Further studies are required to validate these
predictions.

PMID: 25953442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1606-15. doi: 10.1242/dev.120238. Epub 2015 Apr 9.

Transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> induces early Cdx2 expression and represses HIPPO
signaling to specify the trophectoderm lineage.

Cao Z(1), Carey TS(1), Ganguly A(2), Wilson CA(1), Paul S(2), Knott JG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Institute of Reproductive Health and Regenerative Medicine, 
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA. (3)Developmental
Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824, USA knottj@msu.edu.

Cell fate decisions are fundamental to the development of multicellular
organisms. In mammals the first cell fate decision involves segregation of the
pluripotent inner cell mass and the trophectoderm, a process regulated by cell
polarity proteins, HIPPO signaling and lineage-specific transcription factors
such as CDX2. However, the regulatory mechanisms that operate upstream to specify
the trophectoderm lineage have not been established. Here we report that
transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> (TFAP2C) functions as a novel upstream regulator of
Cdx2 expression and position-dependent HIPPO signaling in mice. Loss- and
gain-of-function studies and promoter analysis revealed that TFAP2C binding to an
intronic enhancer is required for activation of Cdx2 expression during early
development. During the 8-cell to morula transition TFAP2C potentiates cell
polarity to suppress HIPPO signaling in the outside blastomeres. TFAP2C depletion
triggered downregulation of PARD6B, loss of apical cell polarity, disorganization
of F-actin, and activation of HIPPO signaling in the outside blastomeres. Rescue 
experiments using Pard6b mRNA restored cell polarity but only partially corrected
position-dependent HIPPO signaling, suggesting that TFAP2C negatively regulates
HIPPO signaling via multiple pathways. Several genes involved in regulation of
the actin cytoskeleton (including Rock1, Rock2) were downregulated in
TFAP2C-depleted embryos. Inhibition of ROCK1 and ROCK2 activity during the 8-cell
to morula transition phenocopied TFAP2C knockdown, triggering a loss of
position-dependent HIPPO signaling and decrease in Cdx2 expression. Altogether,
these results demonstrate that TFAP2C facilitates trophectoderm lineage
specification by functioning as a key regulator of Cdx2 transcription, cell
polarity and position-dependent HIPPO signaling.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4419278 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25858457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Elife. 2015 Mar 24;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06857.

Transcription factor MITF and remodeller BRG1 define chromatin organisation at
regulatory elements in melanoma cells.

Laurette P(1), Strub T(1), Koludrovic D(1), Keime C(1), Le Gras S(1), Seberg
H(2), Van Otterloo E(2), Imrichova H(3), Siddaway R(4), Aerts S(3), Cornell
RA(2), Mengus G(1), Davidson I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Genomics and Cancer, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Strasbourg, France. (2)University of Iowa
College of Medicine, Iowa City, United States. (3)Laboratory of Computational
Biology, Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(4)Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumor Research Centre, Peter Gilgan Centre for
Research and Learning, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.

Microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) is the master regulator of 
the melanocyte lineage. To understand how MITF regulates transcription, we used
tandem affinity purification and mass spectrometry to define a comprehensive MITF
interactome identifying novel cofactors involved in transcription, DNA
replication and repair, and chromatin organisation. We show that MITF interacts
with a PBAF chromatin remodelling complex comprising BRG1 and CHD7. BRG1 is
essential for melanoma cell proliferation in vitro and for normal melanocyte
development in vivo. MITF and SOX10 actively recruit BRG1 to a set of
MITF-associated regulatory elements (MAREs) at active enhancers. Combinations of 
MITF, SOX10, TFAP2A, and YY1 bind between two BRG1-occupied nucleosomes thus
defining both a signature of transcription factors essential for the melanocyte
lineage and a specific chromatin organisation of the regulatory elements they
occupy. BRG1 also regulates the dynamics of MITF genomic occupancy. MITF-BRG1
interplay thus plays an essential role in transcription regulation in melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4407272
PMID: 25803486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biotech Histochem. 2015 Jul;90(5):353-60. doi: 10.3109/10520295.2015.1007481.
Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Identification of genes associated with disc degeneration using bioinformatics.

Ji SC(1), Han N, Liu Y, Li G, Sun Z, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Trauma Surgery, East Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medicine , Shanghai , China.

Intervertebral disc degeneration is a common orthopedic disease that has been
recognized as the major cause of low back pain. About 80% of the population is
affected by this disease. We explored molecular mechanisms of disc degeneration
and identified the genes associated with the disease. The transcription profile
of GSE34095 was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus database with three
degenerative disc samples and three healthy disc samples. Gene ontology and
pathway enrichment analysis were performed. We constructed a protein-protein
interaction (PPI) network and a transcription factor (TF) target network.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in normal and disc degeneration samples
were identified including 243 up-regulated genes and 351 down-regulated genes.
Meanwhile, seven Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were
obtained by mapping the 594 DEGs to the KEGG and we found that the calcium
signaling pathway was the most significant for developing disc degeneration. The 
pathways interaction network analysis showed that the adherens junction pathway
interacted with other six pathways. In addition, the top five genes, FYN, PRKCD, 
YWHAB, YWHAZ and AR, with a high degree of interaction of 7, 4, 4, 4 and 4,
respectively, were related to the disc degeneration in the PPI network.
Furthermore, transcription factors including TFAP2A, E2F4, SP3 and AR had the
potential to regulate disc degeneration through the mitogen-activated protein
kinase, vascular endothelial growth factor and p53 pathways. The genes and
pathways that we identified may be involved in disc degeneration.

PMID: 25801299  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 17;11(3):e1005037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005037.
eCollection 2015.

Tfap2a promotes specification and maturation of neurons in the inner ear through 
modulation of Bmp, Fgf and notch signaling.

Kantarci H(1), Edlund RK(2), Groves AK(3), Riley BB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America. (2)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Program in Developmental
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America;
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America; Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Neurons of the statoacoustic ganglion (SAG) transmit auditory and vestibular
information from the inner ear to the hindbrain. SAG neuroblasts originate in the
floor of the otic vesicle. New neuroblasts soon delaminate and migrate towards
the hindbrain while continuing to proliferate, a phase known as transit
amplification. SAG cells eventually come to rest between the ear and hindbrain
before terminally differentiating. Regulation of these events is only partially
understood. Fgf initiates neuroblast specification within the ear. Subsequently, 
Fgf secreted by mature SAG neurons exceeds a maximum threshold, serving to
terminate specification and delay maturation of transit-amplifying cells. Notch
signaling also limits SAG development, but how it is coordinated with Fgf is
unknown. Here we show that transcription factor Tfap2a coordinates multiple
signaling pathways to promote neurogenesis in the zebrafish inner ear. In both
zebrafish and chick, Tfap2a is expressed in a ventrolateral domain of the otic
vesicle that includes neurogenic precursors. Functional studies were conducted in
zebrafish. Loss of Tfap2a elevated Fgf and Notch signaling, thereby inhibiting
SAG specification and slowing maturation of transit-amplifying cells. Conversely,
overexpression of Tfap2a inhibited Fgf and Notch signaling, leading to excess and
accelerated SAG production. However, most SAG neurons produced by Tfap2a
overexpression died soon after maturation. Directly blocking either Fgf or Notch 
caused less dramatic acceleration of SAG development without neuronal death,
whereas blocking both pathways mimicked all observed effects of Tfap2a
overexpression, including apoptosis of mature neurons. Analysis of genetic
mosaics showed that Tfap2a acts non-autonomously to inhibit Fgf. This led to the 
discovery that Tfap2a activates expression of Bmp7a, which in turn inhibits both 
Fgf and Notch signaling. Blocking Bmp signaling reversed the effects of
overexpressing Tfap2a. Together, these data support a model in which Tfap2a,
acting through Bmp7a, modulates Fgf and Notch signaling to control the duration, 
amount and speed of SAG neural development.

PMCID: PMC4364372
PMID: 25781991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Mar 4;7(1):19. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0057-5. eCollection
2015.

Replicative senescence is associated with nuclear reorganization and with DNA
methylation at specific transcription factor binding sites.

Hänzelmann S(1), Beier F(2), Gusmao EG(1), Koch CM(3), Hummel S(2), Charapitsa
I(4), Joussen S(3), Benes V(5), Brümmendorf TH(2), Reid G(4), Costa IG(1), Wagner
W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Centre for Clinical Research (IZKF), RWTH University Medical
School, Aachen, Germany ; Institute for Biomedical Technology - Cell Biology,
RWTH University Medical School, Aachen, Germany. (2)Department of Hematology,
Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University
Medical School, Aachen, Germany. (3)Institute for Biomedical Technology - Cell
Biology, RWTH University Medical School, Aachen, Germany ; Helmholtz-Institute
for Biomedical Engineering, Stem Cell Biology and Cellular Engineering, RWTH
University Medical School, Aachen, Germany. (4)Institute for Molecular Biology,
Mainz, Germany. (5)Genomics Core Facility, European Molecular Biology Laboratory 
(EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Primary cells enter replicative senescence after a limited number of 
cell divisions. This process needs to be considered in cell culture experiments, 
and it is particularly important for regenerative medicine. Replicative
senescence is associated with reproducible changes in DNA methylation (DNAm) at
specific sites in the genome. The mechanism that drives senescence-associated
DNAm changes remains unknown - it may involve stochastic DNAm drift due to
imperfect maintenance of epigenetic marks or it is directly regulated at specific
sites in the genome.
RESULTS: In this study, we analyzed the reorganization of nuclear architecture
and DNAm changes during long-term culture of human fibroblasts and mesenchymal
stromal cells (MSCs). We demonstrate that telomeres shorten and shift towards the
nuclear center at later passages. In addition, DNAm profiles, either analyzed by 
MethylCap-seq or by 450k IlluminaBeadChip technology, revealed consistent
senescence-associated hypermethylation in regions associated with H3K27me3,
H3K4me3, and H3K4me1 histone marks, whereas hypomethylation was associated with
chromatin containing H3K9me3 and lamina-associated domains (LADs). DNA
hypermethylation was significantly enriched in the vicinity of genes that are
either up- or downregulated at later passages. Furthermore, specific
transcription factor binding motifs (e.g. EGR1, TFAP2A, and ETS1) were
significantly enriched in differentially methylated regions and in the promoters 
of differentially expressed genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Senescence-associated DNA hypermethylation occurs at specific sites 
in the genome and reflects functional changes in the course of replicative
senescence. These results indicate that tightly regulated epigenetic
modifications during long-term culture contribute to changes in nuclear
organization and gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4356053
PMID: 25763115  [PubMed]


34. Int J Mol Med. 2015 May;35(5):1219-29. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2132. Epub 2015 Mar
11.

Stem cells derived from human first-trimester umbilical cord have the potential
to differentiate into oocyte-like cells in vitro.

Hu X(1), Lu H(1), Cao S(1), Deng YL(1), Li QJ(1), Wan Q(1), Yie SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The Second Medical College/Teaching
Hospital, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, Sichuan
610041, P.R. China.

Compared to stem cells derived from human term umbilical cord, stem cells derived
from human first-trimester umbilical cord (hFTUC) exhibit a significantly greater
proliferative potential, and more efficiency in terms of their in vitro
differentiation. In the present study, we investigated whether hFTUC-derived stem
cells are able to differentiate into germ cells. The hFTUC-derived stem cells
were first isolated, expanded and then cultured in differentiation medium
containing human follicular fluid, follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)/luteinizing
hormone (LH) and estradiol for 24 days. During the period of induction, a
subpopulation of the cultured cells appeared that had a morphological resemblance
to primordial germ cells (PGCs) and cumulus-oocyte complex (COC)-like cells, and 
oocyte-like cells (OLCs). The PGC-like cells expressed specific markers
indicative of germ cell formation such as octamer-binding transcription factor 4 
(OCT4), stage-specific embryonic antigen 1 (SSEA1), B lymphocyte-induced
maturation protein-1 (Blimp1), PR domain containing 14 (Prdm14), transcription
factor AP-2 gamma (Tfap2C), VASA, STELLA, deleted in azoospermia-like (DAZL) and 
interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3). The OLCs, which contained a 
single germinal vesicle, expressed oocyte-specific markers, such as synaptonemal 
complex protein 3 (SCP3), growth/differentiation factor-9 (GDF9), GDF9B and zona 
pellucida (ZP)1, ZP2 and ZP3. The COC-like cells secreted estradiol, vascular
endothelial growth factor and leukemia inhibitory factor. Thus, our findings
suggest that hFTUC-derived stem cells have an intrinsic ability to differentiate 
into OLCs, which may provide an in vitro model for the identification of factors 
involved in germ cell formation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4380121
PMID: 25760093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 3;10(8):1398-409. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.062. Epub 2015
Feb 26.

Cell-type phylogenetics and the origin of endometrial stromal cells.

Kin K(1), Nnamani MC(1), Lynch VJ(2), Michaelides E(3), Wagner GP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06511, USA; Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06516,
USA. (2)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06511, USA; Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven,
CT 06516, USA; Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL
60637, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06519, USA. 
(4)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06511, USA; Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06516,
USA. Electronic address: gunter.wagner@yale.edu.

A challenge of genome annotation is the identification of genes performing
specific biological functions. Here, we propose a phylogenetic approach that
utilizes RNA-seq data to infer the historical relationships among cell types and 
to trace the pattern of gene-expression changes on the tree. The hypothesis is
that gene-expression changes coincidental with the origin of a cell type will be 
important for the function of the derived cell type. We apply this approach to
the endometrial stromal cells (ESCs), which are critical for the initiation and
maintenance of pregnancy. Our approach identified well-known regulators of ESCs, 
PGR and FOXO1, as well as genes not yet implicated in female fertility, including
GATA2 and TFAP2C. Knockdown analysis confirmed that they are essential for ESC
differentiation. We conclude that phylogenetic analysis of cell transcriptomes is
a powerful tool for discovery of genes performing cell-type-specific functions.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25732829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 May;1853(5):1165-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2015.02.013. Epub 2015 Feb 23.

Nuclear envelope proteins Nesprin2 and LaminA regulate proliferation and
apoptosis of vascular endothelial cells in response to shear stress.

Han Y(1), Wang L(1), Yao QP(1), Zhang P(1), Liu B(1), Wang GL(1), Shen BR(1),
Cheng B(2), Wang Y(3), Jiang ZL(1), Qi YX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences &
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Bioengineering, University of CA, San Diego, USA. (3)Institute of Mechanobiology 
& Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences & Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China; Department of Bioengineering, University of CA,
San Diego, USA. (4)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of
Life Sciences & Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: qiyx@sjtu.edu.cn.

The dysfunction of vascular endothelial cells (ECs) influenced by flow shear
stress is crucial for vascular remodeling. However, the roles of nuclear envelope
(NE) proteins in shear stress-induced EC dysfunction are still unknown. Our
results indicated that, compared with normal shear stress (NSS), low shear stress
(LowSS) suppressed the expression of two types of NE proteins, Nesprin2 and
LaminA, and increased the proliferation and apoptosis of ECs. Targeted small
interfering RNA (siRNA) and gene overexpression plasmid transfection revealed
that Nesprin2 and LaminA participate in the regulation of EC proliferation and
apoptosis. A protein/DNA array was further used to detect the activation of
transcription factors in ECs following transfection with target siRNAs and
overexpression plasmids. The regulation of AP-2 and TFIID mediated by Nesprin2
and the activation of Stat-1, Stat-3, Stat-5 and Stat-6 by LaminA were verified
under shear stress. Furthermore, using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software and
real-time RT-PCR, the effects of Nesprin2 or LaminA on the downstream target
genes of AP-2, TFIID, and Stat-1, Stat-3, Stat-5 and Stat-6, respectively, were
investigated under LowSS. Our study has revealed that NE proteins are novel
mechano-sensitive molecules in ECs. LowSS suppresses the expression of Nesprin2
and LaminA, which may subsequently modulate the activation of important
transcription factors and eventually lead to EC dysfunction.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25721888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 18;10(2):e0117645. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117645.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular description of eye defects in the zebrafish Pax6b mutant, sunrise,
reveals a Pax6b-dependent genetic network in the developing anterior chamber.

Takamiya M(1), Weger BD(1), Schindler S(1), Beil T(1), Yang L(1), Armant O(1),
Ferg M(1), Schlunck G(2), Reinhard T(2), Dickmeis T(1), Rastegar S(1), Strähle
U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT),
Postfach 3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany. (2)Eye Center, Freiburg University
Medical Center, Killianstr. 5, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

The cornea is a central component of the camera eye of vertebrates and even
slight corneal disturbances severely affect vision. The transcription factor PAX6
is required for normal eye development, namely the proper separation of the lens 
from the developing cornea and the formation of the iris and anterior chamber.
Human PAX6 mutations are associated with severe ocular disorders such as
aniridia, Peters anomaly and chronic limbal stem cell insufficiency. To develop
the zebrafish as a model for corneal disease, we first performed transcriptome
and in situ expression analysis to identify marker genes to characterise the
cornea in normal and pathological conditions. We show that, at 7 days post
fertilisation (dpf), the zebrafish cornea expresses the majority of marker genes 
(67/84 tested genes) found also expressed in the cornea of juvenile and adult
stages. We also characterised homozygous pax6b mutants. Mutant embryos have a
thick cornea, iris hypoplasia, a shallow anterior chamber and a small lens.
Ultrastructure analysis revealed a disrupted corneal endothelium. pax6b mutants
show loss of corneal epithelial gene expression including regulatory genes (sox3,
tfap2a, foxc1a and pitx2). In contrast, several genes (pitx2, ctnnb2, dcn and
fabp7a) were ectopically expressed in the malformed corneal endothelium. Lack of 
pax6b function leads to severe disturbance of the corneal gene regulatory
programme.

PMCID: PMC4334901
PMID: 25692557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Nov 26;7(12):8666-74. eCollection 2014.

Ectopic expression of AP-2a transcription factor suppresses glioma progression.

Su W(1), Xia J(2), Chen X(1), Xu M(1), Nie L(1), Chen N(1), Gong J(1), Li X(1),
Zhou Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Department of 
Pathology, West China Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan University
Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Laboratory of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy and Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, West China Medical
School, Sichuan University Chengdu 610041, China ; Suining Central Hospital
Suining 629000, China.

The transcriptional factor AP-2a is a tumor suppressor gene and is downregulated 
in various neoplasms including glioma. Although the level of AP-2a is negatively 
associated with the grade of human glioma, the specific functions of AP-2a in
glioma are still unknown. In this study, we experimentally showed that artificial
overexpression of AP-2a in glioma T98G and U251 cells significantly downregulated
the mRNA levels of Bcl-xl, Bcl-2, c-IAP2 and survivin, together with upregulation
of the Hrk mRNA levels. Reintroduction of AP-2a also induced downregulation of
the protein levels of survivin and VEGF in glioma cells. In biological assays
with T98G and U251 cells, AP-2a reduced tumor cell growth, increased cell death, 
attenuated cell migration and endothelial tube formation. The AP-2a transcription
factor may play an important role in suppressing glioma progression.

PMCID: PMC4314016
PMID: 25674231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 10;6(7):5005-21.

Activating enhancer-binding protein-2a induces cyclooxygenase-2 expression and
promotes nasopharyngeal carcinoma growth.

Shi D(1), Xiao X(1), Tian Y(1), Qin L(2), Xie F(1), Sun R(1), Wang J(1), Li W(1),
Liu T(1), Xiao Y(3), Yu W(3), Guo W(3), Xiong Y(1), Qiu H(1), Kang T(1), Huang
W(1,)(4), Zhao C(1), Deng W(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in
South China, Collaborative Innovation Center of Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou,
China. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Targeted Drug for Tumors of
Guangdong Province, Guangzhou Double Bioproduct Inc., Guangzhou, China.

Activating enhancer-binding protein-2a (AP-2a) regulates the expression of many
cancer-related genes. Here, we demonstrated a novel mechanism by which AP-2a
up-regulated cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression to promote the growth of
nasopharyngeal carcinomas (NPCs). High expression of AP-2a in NPC cell lines and 
tumor tissues from NPC patients was detected and significantly correlated with
COX-2 expression. Overexpression of AP-2a and COX-2 in tumor tissues was
associated with advanced tumor stage, clinical progression, and short survival of
patients with NPCs. Knockdown of AP-2a by siRNA markedly inhibited COX-2
expression and PGE2 production in NPC cells. Exogenous expression of AP-2a
up-regulated the COX-2 and PGE2. Knockdown of AP-2a also significantly suppressed
cell proliferation in NPC cells in vitro and tumor growth in a NPC xenograft
mouse model. Moreover, we found that p300 played an important role in the
AP-2a/COX-2 pathway. AP-2a could co-localize and interact with p300 in NPC cells.
Overexpression of the p300, but not its histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain
deletion mutant, promoted the acetylation of AP-2a and its binding on the COX-2
promoter, thereby up-regulated COX-2 expression. Our results indicate that AP-2a 
activates COX-2 expression to promote NPC growth and suggest that the AP-2a/COX-2
signaling is a potential therapeutic target for NPC treatment.

PMCID: PMC4467130
PMID: 25669978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1851-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1760. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

ETS1 induces human trophoblast differentiation.

Kessler CA(1), Stanek JW, Stringer KF, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Endocrinology (C.A.K., S.H.) and Pathology (J.W.S., K.F.S.),
Children's Hospital Medical Center, and Departments of Pediatrics (C.A.K., S.H.) 
and Pathology (J.W.S., K.F.S.), University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.

A possible role for the transcription factor v-ets avian erythroblastosis virus
E26 oncogene homolog 1 (ETS1) in human trophoblast cell differentiation was
examined using a highly enriched fraction of human mononuclear cytotrophoblast
cells (CTBs) that differentiate spontaneously in vitro to a multinucleated
syncytiotrophoblast cell (STB) phenotype. ETS1 mRNA and protein levels were
abundant in freshly isolated CTBs and decreased as the cells differentiated.
Silencing of ETS1 expression in freshly prepared CTBs markedly attenuated
syncytialization, as demonstrated by desmoplakin staining, and blocked the
induction of syncytin, the transcription factor activator protein-2a, placental
lactogen, and other STB-specific genes. Conversely, overexpression of ETS1 in
primary trophoblast cells induced STB marker gene mRNAs and transactivated each
of the gene proximal promoters. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest a
critical role for ETS1 in the induction of human villus CTB differentiation. The 
effect of ETS1 on syncytialization likely results, at least in part, from
inhibition of syncytin expression, whereas the induction of STB marker genes
likely results in part from transactivation by activator protein-2a.

PMCID: PMC4398769 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25651508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):2966-80.

miR-638 promotes melanoma metastasis and protects melanoma cells from apoptosis
and autophagy.

Bhattacharya A(1), Schmitz U(2), Raatz Y(1), Schönherr M(1), Kottek T(1), Schauer
M(1), Franz S(1), Saalbach A(1), Anderegg U(1), Wolkenhauer O(2), Schadendorf
D(3), Simon JC(1), Magin T(4), Vera J(5), Kunz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany. (2)Department of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, University
of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. (3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and
Allergology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. (4)Institute of Biology
and Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine (TRM), University of Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany. (5)Laboratory of Systems Tumor Immunology, Department of
Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen,
Germany.

The present study identified miR-638 as one of the most significantly
overexpressed miRNAs in metastatic lesions of melanomas compared with primary
melanomas. miR-638 enhanced the tumorigenic properties of melanoma cells in vitro
and lung colonization in vivo. mRNA expression profiling identified new candidate
genes including TP53INP2 as miR-638 targets, the majority of which are involved
in p53 signalling. Overexpression of TP53INP2 severely attenuated proliferative
and invasive capacity of melanoma cells which was reversed by miR-638. Depletion 
of miR-638 stimulated expression of p53 and p53 downstream target genes and
induced apoptosis and autophagy. miR-638 promoter analysis identified the miR-638
target transcription factor associated protein 2a (TFAP2A/AP-2a) as a direct
negative regulator of miR-638, suggestive for a double-negative regulatory
feedback loop. Taken together, miR-638 supports melanoma progression and
suppresses p53-mediated apoptosis pathways, autophagy and expression of the
transcriptional repressor TFAP2A/AP-2a.

PMCID: PMC4413631
PMID: 25650662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1641-7. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.988062.

Aberrant CpG methylation of the TFAP2A gene constitutes a mechanism for loss of
TFAP2A expression in human metastatic melanoma.

Hallberg AR(1), Vorrink SU, Hudachek DR, Cramer-Morales K, Milhem MM, Cornell RA,
Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)a Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology;
Graduate College ; The University of Iowa ; Iowa City , IA USA ;

Metastatic melanoma is a deadly treatment-resistant form of skin cancer whose
global incidence is on the rise. During melanocyte transformation and melanoma
progression the expression profile of many genes changes. Among these, a gene
implicated in several steps of melanocyte development, TFAP2A, is frequently
silenced; however, the molecular mechanism of TFAP2A silencing in human melanoma 
remains unknown. In this study, we measured TFAP2A mRNA expression in primary
human melanocytes compared to 11 human melanoma samples by quantitative real-time
RT-PCR. In addition, we assessed CpG DNA methylation of the TFAP2A promoter in
these samples using bisulfite sequencing. Compared to primary melanocytes, which 
showed high TFAP2A mRNA expression and no promoter methylation, human melanoma
samples showed decreased TFAP2A mRNA expression and increased promoter
methylation. We further show that increased CpG methylation correlates with
decreased TFAP2A mRNA expression. Using The Cancer Genome Atlas, we further
identified TFAP2A as a gene displaying among the most decreased expression in
stage 4 melanomas vs. non-stage 4 melanomas, and whose CpG methylation was
frequently associated with lack of mRNA expression. Based on our data, we
conclude that TFAP2A expression in human melanomas can be silenced by aberrant
CpG methylation of the TFAP2A promoter. We have identified aberrant CpG DNA
methylation as an epigenetic mark associated with TFAP2A silencing in human
melanoma that could have significant implications for the therapy of human
melanoma using epigenetic modifying drugs.

PMCID: PMC4622677
PMID: 25625848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Arch Argent Pediatr. 2015 Jan;113(1):e14-6. doi: 10.1590/S0325-00752015000100013.

[New oral manifestations of Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome. Case report].

[Article in Spanish]

García Flores JB(1), Escamilla Ocañas CE(1), Martínez Menchaca HR(1), Treviño
Alanís MG(1), Rivera Silva G(1).

Author information: 
(1)División de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Monterrey, San Pedro Garza
García, NL, MEX.

The branchio-oculo-facial syndrome is a dominant autosomic condition with
variable expressivity that affects particularly the facial and neck structures by
an inadequate development of the first and second branchial arch. It is
characterized by malformations of eyes and ears, with distinct facial
characteristics. It is associated with alterations in TFAP2A gene. We present a
patient with 9 years of age with phenotype of the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome 
and the presence of 2 new oral manifestations, the bifid uvula and the tongue
with partial central cleft, not yet described in this clinical condition.

PMID: 25622170  [PubMed - in process]


44. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jul 10;363(1):7-16. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.01.006. Epub
2015 Jan 12.

Gelatinases-stimuli nanoparticles encapsulating 5-fluorouridine and
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine enhance the sensitivity of gastric cancer cells to
chemical therapeutics.

Wu FL(1), Li RT(2), Yang M(2), Yue GF(3), Wang HY(4), Liu Q(2), Cui FB(5), Wu
PY(2), Ding H(2), Yu LX(2), Qian XP(2), Liu BR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Clinical College of Nanjing Medical University,
321 Zhongshan Rd, Nanjing 210008, China; Department of Oncology, The First
People's Hospital of Lianyungang, Lianyungang, Jiangsu, China. (2)The
Comprehensive Cancer Centre of Drum Tower Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University, Clinical Cancer Institute of Nanjing University, 321 Zhongshan Rd,
Nanjing 210008, China. (3)Nanjing Medical University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing 
210029, China. (4)Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Clinical College of Nanjing
Medical University, 321 Zhongshan Rd, Nanjing 210008, China. (5)The Comprehensive
Cancer Centre of Drum Tower Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University,
Clinical Cancer Institute of Nanjing University, 321 Zhongshan Rd, Nanjing
210008, China; Department of Oncology, The People' Hospital of Ma Anshan, Ma
Anshan City 243000, Anhui, China. (6)Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital, Clinical
College of Nanjing Medical University, 321 Zhongshan Rd, Nanjing 210008, China.
Electronic address: baoruiliu@nju.edu.cn.

Aberrant methylation of the transcription factor AP-2 epsilon (TFAP2E) has been
attributed to 5-fluorouridine (5-FU) sensitivity. 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (DAC),
an epigenetic drug that inhibits DNA methylation, is able to cause reactive
expression of TFAP2E by demethylating activity. This property might be useful in 
enhancing the sensitivity of cancer cells to 5-FU. However, the effect of DAC is 
transient because of its instability. Here, we report the use of intelligent
gelatinases-stimuli nanoparticles (NPs) to coencapsulate and deliver DAC and 5-FU
to gastric cancer (GC) cells. The results showed that NPs encapsulating DAC,
5-FU, or both could be effectively internalized by GC cells. Furthermore, we
found that the NPs enhanced the stability of DAC, resulting in improved
re-expression of TFAP2E. Thus, the incorporation of DAC into NPs significantly
enhanced the sensitivity of GC cells to 5-FU by inhibiting cell growth rate and
inducing cell apoptosis. In conclusion, the results of this study clearly
demonstrated that the gelatinases-stimuli NPs are an efficient means to
simultaneously deliver epigenetic and chemotherapeutic drugs that may effectively
inhibit cancer cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25592042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Ann Hum Genet. 2015 Mar;79(2):148-52. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12098. Epub 2015 Jan 15.

A clinical and molecular analysis of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome patients in
Russia revealed new mutations in TFAP2A.

Meshcheryakova TI(1), Zinchenko RA, Vasilyeva TA, Marakhonov AV, Zhylina SS,
Petrova NV, Kozhanova TV, Belenikin MS, Petrin AN, Mutovin GR.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific and Practical Centre of Medical Care for Children, Aviatorov Str., 
38, Moscow, 119620, Russian Federation.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS, OMIM# 113620) is a rare autosomal dominant 
disorder characterised by branchial cleft sinus defects, ocular anomalies and
facial dysmorphisms, including lip or palate cleft or pseudocleft, and is
associated with mutations in the TFAP2A gene. Here, we performed clinical
analysis and mutation diagnostics in seven BOFS patients in Russia. The
phenotypic presentation of BOFS observed in three patients showed high
heterogeneity, including variation in its main clinical manifestations (linear
loci of cervical cutaneous aplasia, ocular anomalies and orofacial cleft). In
certain other cases, isolated ocular anomalies, or an orofacial cleft with
accessory BOFS symptoms, were observed. In five BOFS patients, conductive hearing
loss was diagnosed. Direct sequencing of the coding region of the TFAP2A gene
revealed missense mutations in four BOFS patients. One patient was observed to
have a previously described mutation (p.Arg251Gly), while three patients from two
families were found to have novel mutations: p.Arg213Ser and p.Val210Asp. These
novel mutations were not present in healthy members of the same family and
therefore should be classified as de novo.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 25590586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Nat Prod Res. 2015;29(18):1703-10. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2014.998216. Epub 2015
Jan 9.

Triglyceride accumulation inhibitory effects of new chromone glycosides from
Drynaria fortunei.

Han L(1), Zheng F, Zhang Y, Liu E, Li W, Xia M, Wang T, Gao X.

Author information: 
(1)a Tianjin State Key Laboratory of Modern Chinese Medicine , Tianjin University
of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 312 Anshanxi Road, Nankai District, Tianjin
300193 , P.R. China.

Two new chromone glycosides, drynachromosides C (1) and D (2), along with five
known chromones (3-7), were isolated from the rhizomes of Drynaria fortunei. The 
structures of the two new compounds were elucidated on the basis of
physico-chemical property and spectroscopic data. Triglyceride (TG) accumulation 
inhibitory effects of the obtained chromones on 3T3-L1 cells were investigated.
The results showed that 1, 2 and 5 exhibited inhibitory activity on TG
accumulation. Effects of compounds 1 and 2 on mRNA expression of PPAR<U+03B3>, C/EBPa
and aP2 in 3T3-L1 cells were also investigated.

PMID: 25571786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jan 8;11(1):e1004897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004897.
eCollection 2015.

A discrete transition zone organizes the topological and regulatory autonomy of
the adjacent tfap2c and bmp7 genes.

Tsujimura T(1), Klein FA(2), Langenfeld K(1), Glaser J(1), Huber W(2), Spitz
F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg,
Germany. (2)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany; Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

Despite the well-documented role of remote enhancers in controlling developmental
gene expression, the mechanisms that allocate enhancers to genes are poorly
characterized. Here, we investigate the cis-regulatory organization of the locus 
containing the Tfap2c and Bmp7 genes in vivo, using a series of engineered
chromosomal rearrangements. While these genes lie adjacent to one another, we
demonstrate that they are independently regulated by distinct sets of enhancers, 
which in turn define non-overlapping regulatory domains. Chromosome conformation 
capture experiments reveal a corresponding partition of the locus in two distinct
structural entities, demarcated by a discrete transition zone. The impact of
engineered chromosomal rearrangements on the topology of the locus and the
resultant gene expression changes indicate that this transition zone functionally
organizes the structural partition of the locus, thereby defining enhancer-target
gene allocation. This partition is, however, not absolute: we show that it allows
competing interactions across it that may be non-productive for the competing
gene, but modulate expression of the competed one. Altogether, these data
highlight the prime role of the topological organization of the genome in
long-distance regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4288730
PMID: 25569170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2015 Jan 7. doi: 10.1071/RD14198. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression and function of transcription factor AP-2? in early embryonic
development of porcine parthenotes.

Lee SH, Kwon JW, Choi I, Kim NH.

Transcription factor AP-2? (TFAP2C) is a member of the transcription factor
activating enhancer binding protein (AP) family. In the present study we
determined the temporal and spatial expression patterns of TFAP2C in porcine
parthenotes during preimplantation development. Porcine TFAP2C transcripts were
expressed at all stages of preimplantation development, with highest expression
at the 8-cell stage. In contrast with the mouse, TFAP2C protein was not
restricted to the trophectoderm and was also detected in the ICM in blastocyst
stage porcine parthenotes. In knockdown (KD) experiments, most TFAP2C-depleted
embryos were arrested before the compacted 8-cell stage. This developmental
failure is attributed to abnormal expression of genes involved in cell adhesion, 
tight junction biogenesis and cell proliferation. Interestingly, although the
conserved region 4 (CR4) of the porcine OCT4 5? upstream regionlacked the
AP2C-binding motif, OCT4 transcript levels were elevated in porcine TFAP2C-KD
8-cell embryos, suggesting TFAP2C may be involved in the regulation of OCT4 in
porcine embryos through other mechanisms. In summary, the results suggest that
TFAP2C is necessary for the transition from de novo transcript synthesis by
activation to compaction and further development, and the different expression
patterns of TFAP2C in porcine embryos may reflect species-specific functions
during preimplantation embryo development.

PMID: 25562461  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 6;457(2):221-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.12.091. Epub 2014 Dec 27.

Double-stranded RNA transcribed from vector-based oligodeoxynucleotide acts as
transcription factor decoy.

Xiao X(1), Gang Y(2), Wang H(3), Wang J(4), Zhao L(5), Xu L(6), Liu Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032,
Shaanxi Province, PR China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing 
Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, PR China; Department of Infectious
Diseases, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710038,
Shaanxi Province, PR China. (3)No. 518 Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation
Army, Xi'an 710043, Shaanxi Province, PR China. (4)The Genome Institute,
Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA. (5)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an
710032, Shaanxi Province, PR China. (6)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and
Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province, PR China. Electronic address:
lxuhelen@163.com. (7)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital
of Digestive Diseases, Xijing Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an
710032, Shaanxi Province, PR China. Electronic address: liuzhiguo@fmmu.edu.cn.

In this study, we designed a short hairpin RNA vector-based oligodeoxynucleotide 
(VB-ODN) carrying transcription factor (TF) consensus sequence which could
function as a decoy to block TF activity. Specifically, VB-ODN for Nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) could inhibit cell viability and decrease downstream gene
expression in HEK293 cells without affecting expression of NF-<U+03BA>B itself. The
specific binding between VB-ODN produced double-stranded RNA and NF-<U+03BA>B was
evidenced by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Moreover, similar VB-ODNs
designed for three other TFs also inhibit their downstream gene expression but
not that of themselves. Our study provides a new design of decoy for blocking TF 
activity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25550185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2014 Nov;79(11):1226-36. doi: 10.1134/S0006297914110108.

Overexpression of the Jatropha curcas JcERF1 gene coding an AP2/ERF-type
transcription factor increases tolerance to salt in transgenic tobacco.

Yang H(1), Yu C, Yan J, Wang X, Chen F, Zhao Y, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdum, 610064, P. R. China.
wwscu.ed@gmail.com.

The JcERF1 gene, which is related to the ERF family (ethylene responsive factor
coding genes), was isolated and characterized from the oil tree Jatropha curcas. 
The JcERF1 protein contains conserved an AP2/EREBP DNA-binding domain of 58 amino
acid residues. The JcERF1 gene could be induced by abscisic acid, high salinity, 
hormones, and osmotic stress, suggesting that JcERF1 is regulated by certain
components of the stress-signaling pathway. The full-length and C-terminus of
JcERF1 driven by the GAL4 promoter functioned effectively as a transactivator in 
yeast, while its N-terminus was completely inactive. Transient expression
analysis using a JcERF1-mGFP fusion gene in onion epidermal cells revealed that
the JcERF1 protein is targeted to the nucleus. Transgenic tobacco plants carrying
CaMV35S::JcERF1 fragments were shown to be much more salt tolerant compared to
wild-type plants. Our results indicate that JcERF1 is a new member of the ERF
transcription factors family that may play an important role in tolerance to
environmental stress.

PMID: 25540008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Diabetes. 2015 May;64(5):1853-66. doi: 10.2337/db14-0732. Epub 2014 Dec 18.

Genetic Variants Associated With Quantitative Glucose Homeostasis Traits
Translate to Type 2 Diabetes in Mexican Americans: The GUARDIAN (Genetics
Underlying Diabetes in Hispanics) Consortium.

Palmer ND(1), Goodarzi MO(2), Langefeld CD(3), Wang N(4), Guo X(5), Taylor KD(5),
Fingerlin TE(6), Norris JM(7), Buchanan TA(8), Xiang AH(9), Haritunians T(10),
Ziegler JT(3), Williams AH(3), Stefanovski D(10), Cui J(10), Mackay AW(11),
Henkin LF(12), Bergman RN(13), Gao X(14), Gauderman J(14), Varma R(15), Hanis
CL(16), Cox NJ(17), Highland HM(16), Below JE(16), Williams AL(18), Burtt NP(19),
Aguilar-Salinas CA(20), Huerta-Chagoya A(21), Gonzalez-Villalpando C(22), Orozco 
L(23), Haiman CA(11), Tsai MY(24), Johnson WC(25), Yao J(26), Rasmussen-Torvik
L(27), Pankow J(28), Snively B(29), Jackson RD(30), Liu S(31), Nadler JL(32),
Kandeel F(33), Chen YD(5), Bowden DW(34), Rich SS(35), Raffel LJ(10), Rotter
JI(36), Watanabe RM(37), Wagenknecht LE(38).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 
Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC Center for Diabetes Research, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School
of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. (2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 
Medical Genetics Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA. (3)Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. (4)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Diabetes & Obesity
Research Institute, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA. (5)Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences,
Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-University of California, Los
Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, CA Department of Pediatrics, Los Angeles
Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-University of California, Los Angeles
Medical Center, Torrance, CA. (6)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of
Public Health, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO Department of
Biostatistics and Informatics, Colorado School of Public Health, University of
Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO. (7)Department of Epidemiology, Colorado School of
Public Health, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO. (8)Diabetes & Obesity
Research Institute, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Keck School of Medicine 
of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Department of Medicine,
Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA.
(9)Research and Evaluation Branch, Kaiser Permanente of Southern California,
Pasadena, CA. (10)Medical Genetics Research Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA. (11)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA. (12)Center for
Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC
Division of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC. (13)Cedars-Sinai Diabetes & Obesity Research Institute, Los
Angeles, CA. (14)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Department of Ophthalmology
and Visual Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL. (16)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health,
University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, TX. (17)Department of Human
Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. (18)Program in Medical and
Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chicago, IL Biological Sciences Department, Columbia University, New
York, NY. (19)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute,
Cambridge, MA. (20)Endocrinología y Metabolismo, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, Mexico. (21)Endocrinología y
Metabolismo, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán,
Mexico City, Mexico Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico.
(22)Centro de Estudios en Diabetes, Instituto Nacional de Salud Pública, Mexico
City, Mexico. (23)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico.
(24)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, MN. (25)Collaborative Health Studies Coordinating
Center, Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(26)Institute for Translational Genomics and Population Sciences, Los Angeles
Biomedical Research Institute at Harbor-University of California, Los Angeles
Medical Center, Torrance, CA. (27)Division of Epidemiology, Department of
Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Evanston, IL. (28)Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN. (29)Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC. (30)Ohio State University Medical
Center, Columbus, OH. (31)Department of Epidemiology, Brown University,
Providence, RI. (32)Department of Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk, VA. (33)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, City of
Hope, Duarte, CA. (34)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC Center for Diabetes Research, Wake
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC Section on Endocrinology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC.
(35)Center for Public Health Genomics, Department of Public Health Sciences,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA. (36)Institute for Translational
Genomics and Population Sciences, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at
Harbor-University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, CA
Department of Pediatrics, Los Angeles Biomedical Research Institute at
Harbor-University of California, Los Angeles Medical Center, Torrance, CA
jrotter@labiomed.org. (37)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA Diabetes & Obesity
Research Institute, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Keck School of Medicine 
of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA rwatanab@usc.edu.
(38)Center for Public Health Genomics, Wake Forest School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC Division of Public Health Sciences, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC lwgnkcht@wakehealth.edu.

Insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion, insulin clearance, and glucose
effectiveness exhibit strong genetic components, although few studies have
examined their genetic architecture or influence on type 2 diabetes (T2D) risk.
We hypothesized that loci affecting variation in these quantitative traits
influence T2D. We completed a multicohort genome-wide association study to search
for loci influencing T2D-related quantitative traits in 4,176 Mexican Americans. 
Quantitative traits were measured by the frequently sampled intravenous glucose
tolerance test (four cohorts) or euglycemic clamp (three cohorts), and
random-effects models were used to test the association between loci and
quantitative traits, adjusting for age, sex, and admixture proportions
(Discovery). Analysis revealed a significant (P < 5.00 × 10(-8)) association at
11q14.3 (MTNR1B) with acute insulin response. Loci with P < 0.0001 among the
quantitative traits were examined for translation to T2D risk in 6,463 T2D case
and 9,232 control subjects of Mexican ancestry (Translation). Nonparametric
meta-analysis of the Discovery and Translation cohorts identified significant
associations at 6p24 (SLC35B3/TFAP2A) with glucose effectiveness/T2D, 11p15
(KCNQ1) with disposition index/T2D, and 6p22 (CDKAL1) and 11q14 (MTNR1B) with
acute insulin response/T2D. These results suggest that T2D and insulin secretion 
and sensitivity have both shared and distinct genetic factors, potentially
delineating genomic components of these quantitative traits that drive the risk
for T2D.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4407862 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25524916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proteome Sci. 2014 Nov 18;12(1):53. doi: 10.1186/s12953-014-0053-2. eCollection
2014.

Promoter trapping method: transcription factor purification using human
telomerase reverse transcriptase promoter.

Nagore LI(1), Zhou Y(1), Nadeau RJ(1), Jia Y(1), Jarrett HW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Texas at San Antonio, One UTSA Circle, 
San Antonio, TX 78249 USA.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors bind to response elements on the promoter
regions of genes to regulate transcriptional activity. One of the major problems 
with identifying transcription factors is their low abundance relative to other
proteins in the cell. Developing a purification technique specific for
transcription factors is crucial to the understanding of gene regulation.
Promoter trapping is a method developed that uses the promoter regions as bait to
trap proteins of interest and then purified using column chromatography. Here we 
utilize this technique to study the telomerase promoter, which has increased
transcriptional activity in cancer cells. Gaining insight on how to control the
enzyme at the promoter level may give new routes towards cancer treatments.
RESULTS: Our findings show that the telomerase promoter (-170 - +91) and Promoter
Trapping isolate a transcriptionally active and reproducible complex, when
analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. We were also able to 
identify transcription factors, including AP-2 and SP1 known to bind this
promoter, as well as show that these two proteins can bind to each other's
response element.
CONCLUSION: Here we focus on verifying the ability and versatility of Promoter
Trapping coupled with additional well-characterized methods to identify already
known factors responsible for telomerase transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC4240814
PMID: 25425973  [PubMed]


53. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 13;9(11):e111297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111297.
eCollection 2014.

Distinct strains of Toxoplasma gondii feature divergent transcriptomes regardless
of developmental stage.

Croken MM(1), Ma Y(2), Markillie LM(3), Taylor RC(4), Orr G(3), Weiss LM(5), Kim 
K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America. (2)Department of Pathology, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.
(3)Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory, Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory, Richland, Washington, United States of America. (4)Computational
Biology and Bioinformatics Group, Biological Sciences Division, Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, Richland, Washington, United States of America.
(5)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York,
United States of America; Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America. (6)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New
York, United States of America; Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College 
of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America; Department of Medicine,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Using high through-put RNA sequencing, we assayed the transcriptomes of three
different strains of Toxoplasma gondii representing three common genotypes under 
both in vitro tachyzoite and in vitro bradyzoite-inducing alkaline stress culture
conditions. Strikingly, the differences in transcriptional profiles between the
strains, RH, PLK, and CTG, is much greater than differences between tachyzoites
and alkaline stressed in vitro bradyzoites. With an FDR of 10%, we identified 241
genes differentially expressed between CTG tachyzoites and in vitro bradyzoites, 
including 5 putative AP2 transcription factors. We also observed a close
association between cell cycle regulated genes and differentiation. By Gene Set
Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), there are a number of KEGG pathways associated with
the in vitro bradyzoite transcriptomes of PLK and CTG, including pyrimidine
metabolism and DNA replication. These functions are likely associated with
cell-cycle arrest. When comparing mRNA levels between strains, we identified
1,526 genes that were differentially expressed regardless of culture-condition as
well as 846 differentially expressed only in bradyzoites and 542 differentially
expressed only in tachyzoites between at least two strains. Using GSEA, we
identified that ribosomal proteins were expressed at significantly higher levels 
in the CTG strain than in either the RH or PLK strains. This association holds
true regardless of life cycle stage.

PMCID: PMC4230917
PMID: 25393307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Jan;8(1):31-43. doi: 10.1242/dmm.017616. Epub 2014 Nov 7.

Tfap2a-dependent changes in mouse facial morphology result in clefting that can
be ameliorated by a reduction in Fgf8 gene dosage.

Green RM(1), Feng W(1), Phang T(2), Fish JL(3), Li H(1), Spritz RA(4), Marcucio
RS(3), Hooper J(5), Jamniczky H(6), Hallgrímsson B(7), Williams T(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Denver, 12801 East 
17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Colorado Denver, 12801 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (3)University of 
California San Francisco, Orthopaedic Trauma Institute, Department of Orthopaedic
Surgery, San Francisco, CA 94110, USA. (4)Human Medical Genetics and Genomics
Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 12800 East 17th Avenue,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Colorado Denver, 12801 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(6)McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, Department of Cell Biology &
Anatomy, University of Calgary, 3280 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB T2N3Z6,
Canada. (7)McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, Department of Cell Biology
& Anatomy, University of Calgary, 3280 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB T2N3Z6,
Canada. Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of Calgary,
3280 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary, AB T2N3Z6, Canada. (8)Department of Craniofacial
Biology, University of Colorado Denver, 12801 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA. Human Medical Genetics and Genomics Program, University of Colorado School
of Medicine, 12800 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado Denver, 12801 East 17th Avenue,
Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Trevor.Williams@ucdenver.edu.

Failure of facial prominence fusion causes cleft lip and palate (CL/P), a common 
human birth defect. Several potential mechanisms can be envisioned that would
result in CL/P, including failure of prominence growth and/or alignment as well
as a failure of fusion of the juxtaposed epithelial seams. Here, using geometric 
morphometrics, we analyzed facial outgrowth and shape change over time in a novel
mouse model exhibiting fully penetrant bilateral CL/P. This robust model is based
upon mutations in Tfap2a, the gene encoding transcription factor AP-2a, which has
been implicated in both syndromic and non-syndromic human CL/P. Our findings
indicate that aberrant morphology and subsequent misalignment of the facial
prominences underlies the inability of the mutant prominences to fuse.
Exencephaly also occured in some of the Tfap2a mutants and we observed additional
morphometric differences that indicate an influence of neural tube closure
defects on facial shape. Molecular analysis of the CL/P model indicates that Fgf 
signaling is misregulated in the face, and that reducing Fgf8 gene dosage can
attenuate the clefting pathology by generating compensatory changes. Furthermore,
mutations in either Tfap2a or Fgf8 increase variance in facial shape, but the
combination of these mutations restores variance to normal levels. The
alterations in variance provide a potential mechanistic link between clefting and
the evolution and diversity of facial morphology. Overall, our findings suggest
that CL/P can result from small gene-expression changes that alter the shape of
the facial prominences and uncouple their coordinated morphogenesis, which is
necessary for normal fusion.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4283648
PMID: 25381013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cancer Biol Med. 2014 Sep;11(3):182-90. doi:
10.7497/j.issn.2095-3941.2014.03.004.

Hepatitis B virus X protein accelerates the development of hepatoma.

Zhang XD(1), Wang Y(1), Ye LH(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cancer Research, 2 Department of Biochemistry, College of Life
Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Medicinal Chemical Biology, Nankai University, 
Tianjin 300071, China.

The chronic infection of hepatitis B virus (HBV) is closely related to the
occurrence and development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Accumulated
evidence has shown that HBV X protein (HBx protein) is a multifunctional
regulator with a crucial role in hepatocarcinogenesis. However, information on
the mechanism by which HBV induces HCC is lacking. This review focuses on the
pathological functions of HBx in HBV-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. As a
transactivator, HBx can modulate nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of
activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B) and transcription factor AP-2. Moreover, HBx can affect
regulatory non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) including microRNAs and long ncRNAs
(lncRNAs), such as miRNA-205 and highly upregulated in liver cancer (HULC),
respectively. HBx is also involved in epigenetic modification, including
methylation and acetylation. HBx interacts with various signal-transduction
pathways, such as protein kinase B/Akt, Wnt/ß-catenin, signal transducer and
activator of transcription, and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. Moreover, HBx affects cellular
fate by shifting the balance toward cell survival. HBx may lead to the loss of
apoptotic functions or directly contributes to oncogenesis by achieving
transforming functions, which induce hepatocarcinogenesis. Additionally, HBx can 
modulate apoptosis and immune response by direct or indirect interaction with
host factors. We conclude that HBx hastens the development of hepatoma.

PMCID: PMC4197427
PMID: 25364579  [PubMed]


56. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Nov;81(11):1009-18. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22421. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Inhibin alpha gene expression in human trophoblasts is regulated by interactions 
between TFAP2 and cAMP signaling pathways.

Depoix CL(1), Debiève F, Hubinont C.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'obstétrique, Institut de recherche expérimentale et clinique
(IREC), Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Inhibin a (Inha) gene expression is regulated, in rat granulosa cells, via a
cyclic 3',5'-adenosine monophosphate (AMP)-response element (CRE) found in a
region of the promoter that is homologous to the human INHA promoter. We
previously found that during in vitro cytotrophoblast differentiation, human INHA
gene expression was regulated by TFAP2A via association with an AP-2 site located
upstream of this CRE. The aim of this study was to evaluate if the human INHA
gene was also regulated by cAMP in trophoblasts, and to investigate the possible 
crosstalk between TFAP2 and cAMP signaling pathways in the regulation of INHA
gene expression. Treatment with cAMP or forskolin increased INHA mRNA expression 
by 7- and 2-fold in primary cytotrophoblasts and choriocarcinoma-derived BeWo
cells, respectively. Treatment with the protein kinase A inhibitor H-89 reduced
forskolin-induced luciferase activity by ~40% in BeWo cells transfected with an
INHA promoter-driven luciferase reporter vector. TFAP2 overexpression increased
basal luciferase activity, whereas the dominant repressor KCREB abolished it.
Surprisingly, mutation of the CRE also eliminated the TFAP2-induced
transcription, although TFAP2 overexpression was still able to increase
forskolin-induced luciferase activity when the AP-2 binding site, but not the CRE
site, was mutated. Thus, INHA gene expression is upregulated by cAMP via CRE in
human trophoblasts, and TFAP2 regulates this expression by interacting with CRE.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25358080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncology. 2015;88(2):122-32. doi: 10.1159/000362820. Epub 2014 Oct 23.

TFAP2E methylation status and prognosis of patients with radically resected
colorectal cancer.

Park SJ(1), Kim SM, Hong YS, Lee JL, Kim JE, Kim KP, Hong SM, Jin DH, Kim CW,
Yoon YS, Park IJ, Lim SB, Yu CS, Kim JC, Kim TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Asan Institute for Life Science, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: This study investigates the clinical significance of the gene
encoding AP-2e (TFAP2E) in colorectal cancer (CRC) patients undergoing curative
resection.
METHODS: A single-institution cohort of 248 patients who underwent curative
resection of stage I/II/III CRCs between March and December 2004 was enrolled,
and 193 patients whose tumors were available for the determination of the TFAP2E 
methylation status were included in the analysis.
RESULTS: TFAP2E hypermethylation was detected in 112 patients (58%) and was
significantly associated with distally located CRCs, low pathologic T stage
(T1/T2), and stage I tumors. After a median follow-up of 86.3 months, the
patients with TFAP2E hypermethylation tended to show better relapse-free survival
(RFS) and overall survival (OS) than the patients with TFAP2E hypomethylation
(5-year RFS rate: 90 vs. 80%, p = 0.063; 6-year OS rate: 88 vs. 80%, p = 0.083). 
Multivariate analysis showed that the pathologic nodal stage and TFAP2E
methylation status were independent prognostic factors for RFS and OS, and they
remained significant factors in the subgroup analysis that included 154 patients 
with stage II/III CRCs who had received adjuvant chemotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: TFAP2E hypermethylation is associated with good clinical outcomes
and may be considered as an independent prognostic factor in patients with
curatively resected CRCs.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25341849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 22;5:5200. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6200.

Vascular channels formed by subpopulations of PECAM1+ melanoma cells.

Dunleavey JM(1), Xiao L(1), Thompson J(1), Kim MM(1), Shields JM(2), Shelton
SE(3), Irvin DM(4), Brings VE(1), Ollila DW(5), Brekken RA(6), Dayton PA(3),
Melero-Martin JM(7), Dudley AC(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA. (3)Joint Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and North Carolina State University, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599, USA. (4)Curriculum in Genetics and Molecular Biology,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599,
USA. (5)Department of Surgery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. (6)Departments of Surgery and
Pharmacology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75235, USA.
(7)Department of Cardiac Surgery, Harvard Medical School and Children's Hospital 
Boston, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. (8)1] Department of Cell Biology and
Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA [2] Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA [3]
McAllister Heart Institute, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Targeting the vasculature remains a promising approach for treating solid
tumours; however, the mechanisms of tumour neovascularization are diverse and
complex. Here we uncover a new subpopulation of melanoma cells that express the
vascular cell adhesion molecule PECAM1, but not VEGFR-2, and participate in a
PECAM1-dependent form of vasculogenic mimicry (VM). Clonally derived PECAM1(+)
tumour cells coalesce to form PECAM1-dependent networks in vitro and they
generate well-perfused, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-independent
channels in mice. The neural crest specifier AP-2a is diminished in PECAM1(+)
melanoma cells and is a transcriptional repressor of PECAM1. Re-introduction of
AP-2a into PECAM1(+) tumour cells represses PECAM1 and abolishes tube-forming
ability, whereas AP-2a knockdown in PECAM1(-) tumour cells upregulates PECAM1
expression and promotes tube formation. Thus, VM-competent subpopulations, rather
than all cells within a tumour, may instigate VM, supplant host-derived
endothelium, and form PECAM1-dependent conduits that are not diminished by
neutralizing VEGF.

PMCID: PMC4261234
PMID: 25335460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Clin Dysmorphol. 2015 Jan;24(1):13-6. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0000000000000056.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: a three generational family with markedly
variable phenotype including neonatal lethality.

Titheradge HL(1), Patel C, Ragge NK.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham bDepartment of Biological and Medical Sciences, Faculty of Health and 
Life Sciences, Oxford Brookes University, Oxford, UK cGenetic Health Queensland, 
Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare autosomal dominant condition with
variable expressivity, caused by mutations in the TFAP2A gene. We report a three 
generational family with four affected individuals. The consultand has typical
features of BOFS including infra-auricular skin nodules, coloboma, lacrimal duct 
atresia, cleft lip, conductive hearing loss and typical facial appearance. She
also exhibited a rare feature of preaxial polydactyly. Her brother had a lethal
phenotype with multiorgan failure. We also report a novel variant in TFAP2A gene.
This family highlights the variable severity of BOFS and, therefore, the
importance of informed genetic counselling in families with BOFS.

PMID: 25325185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Oncol Rep. 2014 Dec;32(6):2549-56. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3546. Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Regulation of BGC-823 cell sensitivity to adriamycin via miRNA-135a-5p.

Pan Y(1), Ren F(1), Zhang W(2), Liu G(3), Yang D(1), Hu J(1), Feng K(3), Feng
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tumor Prevention and Treatment (Heilongjiang Higher
Education Institutions), Mudanjiang Medical University, Mudanjiang 157011, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Respiration, Hongqi Hospital of Mudanjiang Medical
University, Mudanjiang 157011, P.R. China. (3)School of Basic Medical Science,
Mudanjiang Medical University, Mudanjiang 157011, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in the genesis and development of
gastric cancer. In the present study, we determined whether miRNA-135a-5p
expression was increased in gastric cancer compared with adjacent non-tumor
tissues using 20 pairs of gastric cancer and para-carcinoma tissue samples which 
were assessed via microarray and bioinformatics analysis, and western blotting.
The protein content detection showed that miRNA-135a-5p expression was inversely 
correlated with AP-2a. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that AP-2a contains a
putative miRNA-135a-5p target, which was confirmed as a direct target using the
3'-UTR luciferase reporter system. Additionally, an increase and decrease of
miRNA-135a-5p inhi-bited or impaired adriamycin-induced apoptosis in BGC-823
cells (p<0.05, compared with the group without gene intervention), respectively. 
Luciferase reporter experiments confirmed that AP-2a bound to the BCL-2 promoter 
and affected its transcription. Therefore, miRNA-135a-5p increased BCL-2 via
AP-2a and consequently enhanced cell resistance to apoptosis. This newly
identified miRNA-135a-5p-AP-2a-BCL-2 pathway provides insight for the treatment
of gastric cancer and solution for insensitivity of gastric cancer to
chemotherapy drugs.

PMID: 25322930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2015 May;291(5):1015-21. doi: 10.1007/s00404-014-3473-4.
Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Expression of AP-2<U+03B3> in placentas of patients with preeclampsia and of smokers.

Schneider HA(1), Gembruch U, Fimmers R, Schmitz J, Müller AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Pathology, University Clinic Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127, Bonn, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: There is evidence of a probable key role of the activator protein-2
<U+03B3> (AP-2<U+03B3>) in placental development. It is still an open question whether AP-2<U+03B3>
expression may be influenced by preeclampsia, which is a serious pregnancy
complication, or by smoking, which has deleterious effects on trophoblastic
development.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thus, the expression of AP-2<U+03B3> was studied in trophoblastic 
epithelium and endothelium of placentas from patients with preeclampsia (n = 43) 
and smokers (n = 45) as well as placentas of healthy pregnant women (control
group, n = 26) between gestational ages 23 and 43 weeks. To allow differential
expression in primary, secondary and tertiary villi, AP-2<U+03B3> expression (arbitrary 
units) was determined immunohistologically.
RESULTS: In preeclamptic placentas trophoblastic as well as endothelial cells
AP-2<U+03B3> expression was significantly higher compared to that in control placentas. 
Endothelial AP-2<U+03B3> expression in placentas from smokers was similar to that of
healthy women while trophoblastic AP-2<U+03B3> expression in smokers' placenta was
insignificantly higher compared to that of control placentas. In all three groups
expression rates of AP-2<U+03B3> did not differ between primary, secondary and tertiary 
villi.
CONCLUSION: A correlation between increased trophoblastic and endothelial AP-2<U+03B3>
expression in patients with preeclampsia and reduced trophoblastic invasion and
migration in preeclampsia has to be discussed. Furthermore, increased AP-2<U+03B3>
expression may play a protective role in preeclampsia, protecting from raised
blood pressure. The tendency of an enhanced trophoblastic AP-2<U+03B3> expression in
smokers may indicate a compensatory response to the disturbed balance between
proliferation and differentiation of villi induced by smoking.

PMID: 25315380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 2014 Dec 10;553(1):49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.10.001. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

Identification and characterization of 5'-flanking region of the human riboflavin
transporter 1 gene (SLC52A1).

Sabui S(1), Ghosal A(1), Said HM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics, University of
California-Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA; Department of Medical Research,
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long Beach, CA 90822, USA. (2)Department of
Medicine and Physiology/Biophysics, University of California-Irvine, Irvine, CA
92697, USA; Department of Medical Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long
Beach, CA 90822, USA. Electronic address: hmsaid@uci.edu.

The human SLC52A1 gene encodes the riboflavin transporter-1 (RFVT-1), a plasma
membrane protein that transports vitamin B2 (riboflavin, RF) into cells, and
thus, plays a role in controlling cellular homeostasis of RF in those tissues
that express the carrier protein (e.g. placenta and intestine). Currently, there 
is nothing known about transcriptional regulation of the SLC52A1 gene, therefore,
we aimed to clone and characterize its 5'-flanking region. Using rapid
amplification of the cDNA ends (5'-RACE), we identified one transcription start
site (TSS). A 579 bp segment of the 5'-flanking region of this gene was cloned
which exhibited robust promoter activity upon transfection in human intestinal
epithelial cells. Deletion analysis revealed that the core promoter activity to
be embedded in a region between -234 and -23 that lacked TATA element, was
GC-rich, and harbored several putative cis-regulatory sites including KLFs, AP-2,
EGRF and Sp-1. Mutating each of these sites led to a significant decrease in
promoter activity (which was highest for the Sp-1 site), suggesting their
possible involvement in regulating SLC52A1 transcription. Focusing on the Sp-1
site, EMSA, super-shift and ChIP analysis was performed that established the
interaction of the Sp-1 transcription factor with the SLC52A1 promoter; also,
co-transfection of the minimal SLC52A1 promoter with an Sp-1 containing vector in
Drosophila SL-2 cells led to significant promoter activation. These results are
the first to reveal the identity of the minimal SLC52A1 promoter and to establish
an important role for Sp-1 in its activity.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4254174
PMID: 25284511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 4;10(9):e1004499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004499.
eCollection 2014.

Obesity-linked homologues TfAP-2 and Twz establish meal frequency in Drosophila
melanogaster.

Williams MJ(1), Goergen P(1), Rajendran J(1), Zheleznyakova G(1), Hägglund MG(1),
Perland E(1), Bagchi S(1), Kalogeropoulou A(1), Khan Z(1), Fredriksson R(1),
Schiöth HB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

In all animals managing the size of individual meals and frequency of feeding is 
crucial for metabolic homeostasis. In the current study we demonstrate that the
noradrenalin analogue octopamine and the cholecystokinin (CCK) homologue
Drosulfakinin (Dsk) function downstream of TfAP-2 and Tiwaz (Twz) to control the 
number of meals in adult flies. Loss of TfAP-2 or Twz in octopaminergic neurons
increased the size of individual meals, while overexpression of TfAP-2
significantly decreased meal size and increased feeding frequency. Of note, our
study reveals that TfAP-2 and Twz regulate octopamine signaling to initiate
feeding; then octopamine, in a negative feedback loop, induces expression of Dsk 
to inhibit consummatory behavior. Intriguingly, we found that the mouse TfAP-2
and Twz homologues, AP-2ß and Kctd15, co-localize in areas of the brain known to 
regulate feeding behavior and reward, and a proximity ligation assay (PLA)
demonstrated that AP-2ß and Kctd15 interact directly in a mouse
hypothalamus-derived cell line. Finally, we show that in this mouse hypothalamic 
cell line AP-2ß and Kctd15 directly interact with Ube2i, a mouse sumoylation
enzyme, and that AP-2ß may itself be sumoylated. Our study reveals how two
obesity-linked homologues regulate metabolic homeostasis by modulating
consummatory behavior.

PMCID: PMC4154645
PMID: 25187989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Hum Genet. 2014 Dec;133(12):1497-511. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1481-x. Epub 2014
Sep 3.

Whole exome sequence analysis of Peters anomaly.

Weh E(1), Reis LM, Happ HC, Levin AV, Wheeler PG, David KL, Carney E, Angle B,
Hauser N, Semina EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Children's Research Institute, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, 53226, USA.

Peters anomaly is a rare form of anterior segment ocular dysgenesis, which can
also be associated with additional systemic defects. At this time, the majority
of cases of Peters anomaly lack a genetic diagnosis. We performed whole exome
sequencing of 27 patients with syndromic or isolated Peters anomaly to search for
pathogenic mutations in currently known ocular genes. Among the eight previously 
recognized Peters anomaly genes, we identified a de novo missense mutation in
PAX6, c.155G>A, p.(Cys52Tyr), in one patient. Analysis of 691 additional genes
currently associated with a different ocular phenotype identified a heterozygous 
splicing mutation c.1025+2T>A in TFAP2A, a de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation
c.715C>T, p.(Gln239*) in HCCS, a hemizygous mutation c.385G>A, p.(Glu129Lys) in
NDP, a hemizygous mutation c.3446C>T, p.(Pro1149Leu) in FLNA, and compound
heterozygous mutations c.1422T>A, p.(Tyr474*) and c.2544G>A, p.(Met848Ile) in
SLC4A11; all mutations, except for the FLNA and SLC4A11 c.2544G>A alleles, are
novel. This is the first study to use whole exome sequencing to discern the
genetic etiology of a large cohort of patients with syndromic or isolated Peters 
anomaly. We report five new genes associated with this condition and suggest
screening of TFAP2A and FLNA in patients with Peters anomaly and relevant
syndromic features and HCCS, NDP and SLC4A11 in patients with isolated Peters
anomaly.

PMCID: PMC4395516
PMID: 25182519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Fertil Steril. 2014 Oct;102(4):1175-1182.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.06.016. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Methylation status of human chorionic gonadotropin beta subunit promoter and
TFAP2A expression as factors regulating CGB gene expression in placenta.

Glodek A(1), Kubiczak MJ(1), Walkowiak GP(1), Nowak-Markwitz E(2), Jankowska
A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan,
Poland. (2)Gynecologic Oncology Department, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Poznan University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Electronic address: ajanko@ump.edu.pl.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate mechanisms regulating the expression of CGB genes in
placental tissues from uncomplicated pregnancies and chorionic samples from
spontaneous miscarriages.
DESIGN: Molecular analyses in human samples.
SETTING: Laboratory of molecular biology.
PATIENT(S): Nine placental samples from term deliveries and 21 chorionic samples 
from miscarriages at 7-13 weeks of gestation.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The expression level of CGBs and genes encoding SP1,
SP3, and AP2 transcription factors was analyzed using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR). The methylation status of the CGBs' promoter regions was
determined using methylation-specific PCR.
RESULT(S): The experiments showed significant differences in CGBs' expression and
their regulation between placental and chorionic tissues. In placental tissues
and chorionic tissues from 7 to 9 weeks of gestation, the expression level of
CGBs was shown to be associated with the amount of TFAP2A transcripts. It was
also demonstrated that variation in the expression level of CGB genes relies on
changes in methylation of CGB3-9 and CGB1-2 promoter sequences.
CONCLUSION(S): During pregnancy, regulation of hCG beta subunit genes expression 
correlates with both methylation of their promoters and TFAP2A expression level. 
The results suggest that these factors may be very influential in the early
stages of pregnancy and may be associated with pregnancy outcome.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25063728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Oct;34(4):1094-100. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1857. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

AP-2a downregulation by cigarette smoke condensate is counteracted by p53 in
human lung cancer cells.

Meng X(1), Meng C(2), Yang B(3), Zhao L(1), Sun X(4), Su Y(5), Liu H(1), Fan
F(6), Liu X(1), Jia L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Radiobiology (Ministry of Health), School of Public Health, 
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, China-Japan Union Hospital, Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin 130033, P.R. China. (3)Department of Cell Biology,
Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, P.R. China. (4)Department of
Emergency, China-Japan Union Hospital, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Orthopedics, Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital, Dalian University,
Dalian, Liaoning 116001, P.R. China. (6)Department of Radiation Hazard
Evaluation, Institute of Radiation Medicine of Chinese Academy of Medical Science
and Peking Union Medical College, Tianjin 300192, P.R. China.

Cumulative findings have demonstrated that the dysregulation of tumor suppressor 
genes may be implicated in cigarette smoke-induced carcinogenesis. Activating
enhancer-binding protein 2 (AP-2) is a eukaryotic transcriptional factor that
plays a significant role in embryonic development and tumorigenesis. The
vertebrate AP-2 family consists of AP-2a, AP-2ß, AP-2<U+03B3>, AP-2d and AP-2e. Previous
studies have suggested that cigarette smoking disrupts AP-2 regulation. In the
present study, we investigated the effects of cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) on
AP-2a expression in human lung cancer cell lines (NCI-H1299, NCI-H446 and A549), 
as well as the potential mechanisms involved. Using RT-qPCR, we found that CSC
decreased AP-2a expression by suppressing its transcription in human lung cancer 
cell lines, particularly in p53-deficient NCI-H1299 cells. Western blotting and
luciferase assays were implemented and we found that the restoration of p53
expression rescued the NCI-H1299 cells from CSC-induced AP-2a loss, while the
silencing of p53 resulted in increased AP-2a loss induced by CSC, suggesting an
antagonizing role of p53 in the regulation of AP-2a by CSC. Our results indicate 
that AP-2a downregulation may be involved in smoke-induced lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 25050743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2014 Dec;140(12):2119-27. doi:
10.1007/s00432-014-1766-4. Epub 2014 Jul 6.

TFAP2E hypermethylation was associated with survival advantage in patients with
colorectal cancer.

Zhang ZM(1), Wang Y, Huang R, Liu YP, Li X, Hu FL, Zhu L, Wang F, Cui BB, Dong
XS, Zhao YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Harbin Medical
University, 157 Baojian Road, Harbin, 150086, Heilongjiang Province, People's
Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Hypermethylation of TFAP2E (AP-2E) is associated with the
chemotherapy-resistant in patients with colorectal cancer (CRC), but its
implications on prognosis directly remain unknown. This study was aimed to
investigate the role of AP-2E methylation status and other clinicopathologic
parameters as predictors of prognosis.
METHODS: We detected the methylation status of AP-2E in tumor and adjacent
non-tumor tissues from 311 sporadic CRC patients by methylation-sensitive
high-resolution melting analysis. Log-rank tests and multivariate Cox analyses
were performed to evaluate the role of AP-2E methylation status and other
clinicopathologic parameters as predictors of prognosis.
RESULTS: Hypermethylation of AP-2E was detected in 61 % (190/311) tumor tissues. 
It occurred more frequently in tumors in earlier stages (I/II; P = 0.02), lower
levels of tumor invasion (T1-T3; P = 0.04), fewer lymph nodes involved (N0;
P < 0.01), and higher histologic grades (G1/G2; P < 0.01). The overall 5-year
survival rates in hypermethylation and hypomethylation group were 76.91 and
47.17 % (P < 0.0001), respectively. AP-2E hypermethylation was significantly
associated with a favorable clinical outcome with a hazard ratio of 0.486 (95 %
CI 0.342-0.692, P < 0.0001) after controlling for age, gender, tumor location,
histologic type, TNM staging, and histologic grade.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2E was frequently hypermethylated in tumors from patients with
CRC. Aberrant hypermethylation of AP-2E occurred more frequently in tumors with
earlier stages, lower levels of tumor invasion, fewer lymph nodes involved, and
higher histologic grades. AP-2E hypermethylation might be an independent
predictor of survival advantage in patients with CRC.

PMID: 24996990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 27;9(6):e99367. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099367. eCollection
2014.

Sequence and expression analyses of ethylene response factors highly expressed in
latex cells from Hevea brasiliensis.

Piyatrakul P(1), Yang M(2), Putranto RA(3), Pirrello J(4), Dessailly F(4), Hu
S(2), Summo M(4), Theeravatanasuk K(5), Leclercq J(4), Kuswanhadi(6), Montoro
P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Unité mixte de recherche Amélioration Génétique et Adaptation des Plantes
méditerranéennes et tropicales, Centre International de Recherche Agronomique
pour le Développement, Montpellier, France; Department of Agriculture, Rubber
Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand. (2)Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese 
Academy of Science, Beijing, China. (3)Unité mixte de recherche Amélioration
Génétique et Adaptation des Plantes méditerranéennes et tropicales, Centre
International de Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement, Montpellier,
France; Indonesian Biotechnology Research Institute for Estate Crops, Bogor,
Indonesia. (4)Unité mixte de recherche Amélioration Génétique et Adaptation des
Plantes méditerranéennes et tropicales, Centre International de Recherche
Agronomique pour le Développement, Montpellier, France. (5)Department of
Agriculture, Rubber Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand. (6)Sembawa Research
Center, Indonesian Rubber Research Institute, Palembang, Indonesia.

The AP2/ERF superfamily encodes transcription factors that play a key role in
plant development and responses to abiotic and biotic stress. In Hevea
brasiliensis, ERF genes have been identified by RNA sequencing. This study set
out to validate the number of HbERF genes, and identify ERF genes involved in the
regulation of latex cell metabolism. A comprehensive Hevea transcriptome was
improved using additional RNA reads from reproductive tissues. Newly assembled
contigs were annotated in the Gene Ontology database and were assigned to 3 main 
categories. The AP2/ERF superfamily is the third most represented compared with
other transcription factor families. A comparison with genomic scaffolds led to
an estimation of 114 AP2/ERF genes and 1 soloist in Hevea brasiliensis. Based on 
a phylogenetic analysis, functions were predicted for 26 HbERF genes. A relative 
transcript abundance analysis was performed by real-time RT-PCR in various
tissues. Transcripts of ERFs from group I and VIII were very abundant in all
tissues while those of group VII were highly accumulated in latex cells. Seven of
the thirty-five ERF expression marker genes were highly expressed in latex.
Subcellular localization and transactivation analyses suggested that HbERF-VII
candidate genes encoded functional transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC4074046
PMID: 24971876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2014;15(11):4671-6.

miR-200a inhibits tumor proliferation by targeting AP-2<U+03B3> in neuroblastoma cells.

Gao SL(1), Wang LZ, Liu HY, Liu DL, Xie LM, Zhang ZW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, University of South
China, Hengyang, China E-mail : nhdxzzw@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA-200a (miR-200a) has been reported to regulate tumour
progression in several tumours but little is known about its role in
neuroblastoma. Our aim was to investigate the potential role and mechanism of
miR-200a in neuroblastomas.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression levels of miR-200a in tissues were determined
using RT-PCR. The effect of miR-200a and shAP-2<U+03B3> on cell viability was evaluated 
using MTS assays, and target protein expression was determined using Western
blotting and RT-PCR. Luciferase reporter plasmids were constructed to confirm
direct targeting. RESULTS were reported as mean±S.E.M and differences were tested
for significance using the 2-tailed Students t-test.
RESULTS: We determined that miR-200a expression was significantly lower in
neuroblastoma tumors than the adjacent non-cancer tissue. Over-expression of
miR-200 are reduced cell viability in neuroblastoma cells and inhibited tumor
growth in mouse xenografts. We identified AP-2<U+03B3> as a novel target for miR-200a in
neuroblastoma cells. Thus miR-200a targets the 3'UTR of AP-2<U+03B3> and inhibits its
mRNA and protein expression. Furthermore, our result showed that shRNA knockdown 
of AP-2<U+03B3> in neuroblastoma cells results in significant inhibit of cell
proliferation and tumor growth in vitro, supporting an oncogenic role of AP-2<U+03B3> in
neuroblastoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed that miR-200a is a candidate tumor suppressor in 
neuroblastoma, through direct targeting of AP-2<U+03B3>. These findings re-enforce the
proposal of AP-2<U+03B3> as a therapeutic target in neuroblastoma.

PMID: 24969902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Sep;12(9):1334-43. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0049. Epub 
2014 Jun 19.

ID1 promotes breast cancer metastasis by S100A9 regulation.

Gumireddy K(1), Li A(1), Kossenkov AV(1), Cai KQ(2), Liu Q(1), Yan J(3), Xu H(4),
Showe L(1), Zhang L(5), Huang Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Cancer Biology Program,
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)University of Washington 
Medical Center, Seattle, Washington. (4)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Sciences and Technology, Wuhan,
China. Institute of Urology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Sciences and Technology, Wuhan, China. (5)Center for Research on
Early Detection and Cure of Ovarian Cancer, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (6)The Wistar Institute,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. qhuang@wistar.org.

Metastasis is a major factor responsible for mortality in patients with breast
cancer. Inhibitor of DNA binding 1 (Id1) has been shown to play an important role
in cell differentiation, tumor angiogenesis, cell invasion, and metastasis.
Despite the data establishing Id1 as a critical factor for lung metastasis in
breast cancer, the pathways and molecular mechanisms of Id1 functions in
metastasis remain to be defined. Here, we show that Id1 interacts with TFAP2A to 
suppress S100A9 expression. We show that expression of Id1 and S100A9 is
inversely correlated in both breast cancer cell lines and clinical samples. We
also show that the migratory and invasive phenotypes in vitro and metastasis in
vivo induced by Id1 expression are rescued by reestablishment of S100A9
expression. S100A9 also suppresses the expression of known metastasis-promoting
factor RhoC activated by Id1 expression. Our results suggest that Id1 promotes
breast cancer metastasis by the suppression of S100A9 expression.IMPLICATIONS:
Novel pathways by Id1 regulation in metastasis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4163515
PMID: 24948111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 3;15:422. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-422.

Genome-wide analysis of the distribution of AP2/ERF transcription factors reveals
duplication and CBFs genes elucidate their potential function in Brassica
oleracea.

Thamilarasan SK, Park JI, Jung HJ, Nou IS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Horticulture, Sunchon National University, 413 Jungangno,
Suncheon, Jeonnam 540-950, Republic of Korea. nis@sunchon.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Cabbage (Brassica oleracea) is one of the most important leaf
vegetables grown worldwide. The entire cabbage genome sequence and more than
fifty thousand proteins have been obtained to date. However a high degree of
sequence similarity and conserved genome structure remain between cabbage and
Arabidopsis; therefore, Arabidopsis is a viable reference species for comparative
genomics studies. Transcription factors (TFs) are important regulators involved
in plant development and physiological processes and the AP2/ERF protein family
contains transcriptional factors that play a crucial role in plant growth and
development, as well as response to biotic and abiotic stress conditions in
plants. However, no detailed expression profile of AP2/ERF-like genes is
available for B. oleracea.
RESULTS: In the present study, 226 AP2/ERF TFs were identified from B. oleracea
based on the available genome sequence. Based on sequence similarity, the AP2/ERF
superfamily was classified into five groups (DREB, ERF, AP2, RAV and Soloist) and
15 subgroups. The identification, classification, phylogenetic construction,
conserved motifs, chromosome distribution, functional annotation, expression
patterns and interaction network were then predicted and analyzed. AP2/ERF
transcription factor expression levels exhibited differences in response to
varying abiotic stresses based on expressed sequence tags (ESTs). BoCBF1a, 1b, 2,
3 and 4, which were highly conserved in Arabidopsis and B. rapa CBF/DREB genes
families were well characterized. Expression analysis enabled elucidation of the 
molecular and genetic level expression patterns of cold tolerance (CT) and
susceptible lines (CS) of cabbage and indicated that all BoCBF genes responded to
abiotic stresses.
CONCLUSIONS: Comprehensive analysis of the physiological functions and biological
roles of AP2/ERF superfamily genes and BoCBF family genes in B. oleracea is
required to fully elucidate AP2/ERF, which will provide rich resources and
opportunities to understand abiotic stress tolerance in crops.

PMCID: PMC4229850
PMID: 24888752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Food Funct. 2014 Jul 25;5(7):1547-55. doi: 10.1039/c3fo60716j.

Fucoidan from the sea cucumber Acaudina molpadioides exhibits anti-adipogenic
activity by modulating the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and down-regulating the SREBP-1c
expression.

Xu H(1), Wang J, Chang Y, Xu J, Wang Y, Long T, Xue C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Food Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao,
Shandong Province 266003, China. jfwang@ouc.edu.cn.

A novel fucoidan, which consists of a 1 <U+2192> 3-linked tetrafucose repeating unit
that is distinctive in its sulphation pattern, was isolated from the sea cucumber
Acaudina molpadioides. In the present study, we examined the anti-adipogenic
effect of the fucoidan from Acaudina molpadioides (Am-FUC) in vitro and in vivo. 
Results showed that Am-FUC exhibited an inhibitory effect on the proliferation
and differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells. Am-FUC suppressed the differentiation of
3T3-L1 cells, decreasing the content of intracellular triglyceride by 34.07% at
the concentration of 200 µg ml(-1). In vivo experiments showed that the
subcutaneous, perirenal and epididymal fat content of Am-FUC-treated mice were
significantly reduced compared to the HFFD-fed mice. A reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assay revealed that Am-FUC significantly 
increased the mRNA expressions of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway related factors, namely, 
Wnt10b, ß-catenin, Fz and LRP5, and decreased that of the key transcriptional
factors, such as SREBP-1c, PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa. ß-Catenin acts as an anti-adipogenic
factor to inhibit the expression of PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa, while SREBP-1c can promote 
the adipocyte differentiation by enhancing the activity of PPAR<U+03B3>. Western
blotting results showed that Am-FUC significantly increased the protein level of 
the total ß-catenin and nuclear ß-catenin and suppressed that of the SREBP-1c.
Am-FUC also significantly inhibited the mRNA expressions of the lipid synthesis
related genes such as FAS and GPAT, while had no effect on that of the lipolysis 
related genes such as HSL and ATGL. These findings suggest that Am-FUC possesses 
marked anti-adipogenic activity by modulating the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and
down-regulating the expression of SREBP-1c.

PMID: 24847504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. MBio. 2014 May 20;5(3):e00979-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00979-14.

Uptake of Helicobacter pylori vesicles is facilitated by clathrin-dependent and
clathrin-independent endocytic pathways.

Olofsson A(1), Nygård Skalman L(1), Obi I(1), Lundmark R(1), Arnqvist A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University,
Umeå, Sweden anna.arnqvist@medchem.umu.se.

Bacteria shed a diverse set of outer membrane vesicles that function as transport
vehicles to deliver effector molecules and virulence factors to host cells.
Helicobacter pylori is a gastric pathogen that infects half of the world's
population, and in some individuals the infection progresses into peptic ulcer
disease or gastric cancer. Here we report that intact vesicles from H. pylori are
internalized by clathrin-dependent endocytosis and further dynamin-dependent
processes, as well as in a cholesterol-sensitive manner. We analyzed the uptake
of H. pylori vesicles by gastric epithelial cells using a method that we refer to
as quantification of internalized substances (qIS). The qIS assay is based on a
near-infrared dye with a cleavable linker that enables the specific
quantification of internalized substances after exposure to reducing conditions. 
Both chemical inhibition and RNA interference in combination with the qIS assay
showed that H. pylori vesicles enter gastric epithelial cells via both
clathrin-mediated endocytosis and additional endocytic processes that are
dependent on dynamin. Confocal microscopy revealed that H. pylori vesicles
colocalized with clathrin and dynamin II and with markers of subsequent endosomal
and lysosomal trafficking. Interestingly, however, knockdown of components
required for caveolae had no significant effect on internalization and knockdown 
of components required for clathrin-independent carrier (CLIC) endocytosis
increased internalization of H. pylori vesicles. Furthermore, uptake of vesicles 
by both clathrin-dependent and -independent pathways was sensitive to depletion, 
but not sequestering, of cholesterol in the host cell membrane suggesting that
membrane fluidity influences the efficiency of H. pylori vesicle
uptake.IMPORTANCE: Bacterial vesicles act as long-distance tools to deliver
toxins and effector molecules to host cells. Vesicles can cause a variety of host
cell responses via cell surface-induced cell signaling or internalization.
Vesicles of diverse bacterial species enter host cells via different endocytic
pathways or via membrane fusion. With the combination of a fluorescence-based
quantification assay that quantifies internalized vesicles in a large number of
cells and either chemical inhibition or RNA interference, we show that
clathrin-mediated endocytosis is the major pathway for uptake of Helicobacter
pylori vesicles and that lipid microdomains of the host cell membrane affect
uptake of vesicles via clathrin-independent pathways. Our results provide
important insights about membrane fluidity and its important role in the complex 
process that directs the H. pylori vesicle to a specific endocytic pathway.
Understanding the mechanisms that operate in vesicle-host interactions is
important to fully recognize the impact of vesicles in pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Olofsson et al.

PMCID: PMC4030451
PMID: 24846379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cancer Cell. 2014 Jun 16;25(6):748-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.04.008. Epub 2014 
May 15.

Sumoylation pathway is required to maintain the basal breast cancer subtype.

Bogachek MV(1), Chen Y(1), Kulak MV(1), Woodfield GW(1), Cyr AR(1), Park JM(2),
Spanheimer PM(1), Li Y(1), Li T(3), Weigel RJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA; The Genome Institute, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO
63108, USA. (4)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA; Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, 
USA. Electronic address: ronald-weigel@uiowa.edu.

The TFAP2C/AP-2<U+03B3> transcription factor regulates luminal breast cancer genes, and 
loss of TFAP2C induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition. By contrast, the highly
homologous family member, TFAP2A, lacks transcriptional activity at luminal gene 
promoters. A detailed structure-function analysis identified that sumoylation of 
TFAP2A blocks its ability to induce the expression of luminal genes. Disruption
of the sumoylation pathway by knockdown of sumoylation enzymes, mutation of the
SUMO-target lysine of TFAP2A, or treatment with sumoylation inhibitors induced a 
basal-to-luminal transition, which was dependent on TFAP2A. Sumoylation
inhibitors cleared the CD44(+/hi)/CD24(-/low) cell population characterizing
basal cancers and inhibited tumor outgrowth of basal cancer xenografts. These
findings establish a critical role for sumoylation in regulating the
transcriptional mechanisms that maintain the basal cancer phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4096794
PMID: 24835590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2014 Jul;13(7):1644-58. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.038596. Epub
2014 May 5.

Proteomic analysis of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) interactome and
post-translational modifications associated with receptor endocytosis in response
to EGF and stress.

Tong J(1), Taylor P(1), Moran MF(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the The Hospital For Sick Children, Program in Molecular Structure and
Function, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto. Peter Gilgan Centre for Research and Learning, 686 Bay
Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada. (2)From the The Hospital For Sick Children,
Program in Molecular Structure and Function, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto. Peter Gilgan Centre for 
Research and Learning, 686 Bay Street, Toronto M5G 0A4, Canada
m.moran@utoronto.ca.

Aberrant expression, activation, and stabilization of epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) are causally associated with several human cancers.
Post-translational modifications and protein-protein interactions directly
modulate the signaling and trafficking of the EGFR. Activated EGFR is
internalized by endocytosis and then either recycled back to the cell surface or 
degraded in the lysosome. EGFR internalization and recycling also occur in
response to stresses that activate p38 MAP kinase. Mass spectrometry was applied 
to comprehensively analyze the phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and
protein-protein interactions of wild type and endocytosis-defective EGFR variants
before and after internalization in response to EGF ligand and stress. Prior to
internalization, EGF-stimulated EGFR accumulated ubiquitin at 7 K residues and
phosphorylation at 7 Y sites and at S(1104). Following internalization, these
modifications diminished and there was an accumulation of S/T phosphorylations.
EGFR internalization and many but not all of the EGF-induced S/T phosphorylations
were also stimulated by anisomycin-induced cell stress, which was not associated 
with receptor ubiquitination or elevated Y phosphorylation. EGFR protein
interactions were dramatically modulated by ligand, internalization, and stress. 
In response to EGF, different E3 ubiquitin ligases became maximally associated
with EGFR before (CBL, HUWE1, and UBR4) or after (ITCH) internalization, whereas 
CBLB was distinctively most highly EGFR associated following anisomycin
treatment. Adaptin subunits of AP-1 and AP-2 clathrin adaptor complexes also
became EGFR associated in response to EGF and anisomycin stress. Mutations
preventing EGFR phosphorylation at Y(998) or in the S(1039) region abolished or
greatly reduced EGFR interactions with AP-2 and AP-1, and impaired receptor
trafficking. These results provide new insight into spatial, temporal, and
mechanistic aspects of EGFR regulation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4083106
PMID: 24797263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Jul;10(1):423-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2196. Epub 2014 Apr 28.

Regulation of the HMOX1 gene by the transcription factor AP-2d with unique DNA
binding site.

Sun L(1), Zhao Y(1), Gu S(2), Mao Y(2), Ji C(2), Xin X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Bioreactor Engineering, East China University of
Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237, P.R. China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.

AP-2 transcription factors are important sequence-specific DNA-binding regulators
that are expressed in the neural crest and other tissues during mammalian
development. The human AP-2 family of transcription factors consists of five
members, AP-2a, -ß, -<U+03B3>, -d and -e, which have an important role in the regulation
of gene expression during development and in the differentiation of multiple
organs and tissues. The present study aimed to investigate the mechanism by which
AP-2d mediates heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) gene expression. It was identified that
the human AP-2d protein exhibited weak binding to a suboptimal AP-2 sequence,
5'-GCCN3GGC-3', to which all other AP-2 proteins bind in vitro, providing the
first example of DNA target specificity amongst the AP-2 family. AP-2d protein
bound to an optimized AP-2 consensus DNA sequence, 5'-GCCTGAGGC-3', in vitro and 
transactivated gene expression in eukaryotic cells. The transactivation domain of
Ap-2d differs notably from those in the other AP-2 proteins as it lacks the PY
motif (XPPXY) and several other conserved residues that are important for the
transcriptional activity of AP-2 proteins, yet it functions as an equally strong 
activator.

PMID: 24789576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Genet Couns. 2014;25(1):41-7.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome in a newborn caused by a novel TFAP2A mutation.

Günes N, Cengiz FB, Duman D, Dervisoglu S, Tekin M, Tüysüz B.

We present an 18-day old boy with bilateral cervical cutaneous defect in the
retroauricular region, low-set and posteriorly rotated ears, bilateral
microphtalmia and bilateral pseudocleft of the upper lip. Histopathological
evaluation of cervical cutaneous defect showed ulceration on the surface and
ectopic thymus tissue in the deep dermis with cortex, medulla and Hassal's
corpuscles. Clinical findings led to the diagnosis of Branchio-oculo-facial
syndrome, characterized by branchial defects (erythematous cutaneous defects in
cervical region), ocular anomalies (microphthalmia, anophthalmia, lacrimal duct
obstruction, coloboma, cataract, ptosis) and facial defects (cleft lip and/or
palate, pseudocleft or abnormal philtrum). DNA sequencing showed a novel
heterozygous mutation, c.731T>C (p.L244P), in TFAP2A gene confirming the
diagnosis of this rare autosomal dominant developmental disorder with variable
clinical findings.

PMID: 24783654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Br J Cancer. 2014 May 13;110(10):2604-14. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.160. Epub 2014
Apr 29.

Hanging drop cultures of human testis and testis cancer samples: a model used to 
investigate activin treatment effects in a preserved niche.

Jørgensen A(1), Young J(2), Nielsen JE(1), Joensen UN(3), Toft BG(4), Rajpert-De 
Meyts E(1), Loveland KL(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 
9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)1] Department of Anatomy and Developmental
Biology, Monash University, Melbourne, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia [2]
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Melbourne,
Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia. (3)Department of Urology, Rigshospitalet,
Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department of Pathology,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Testicular germ cell tumours of young adults, seminoma or
non-seminomas, are preceded by a pre-invasive precursor, carcinoma in situ (CIS),
understood to arise through differentiation arrest of embryonic germ cells.
Knowledge about the malignant transformation of germ cells is currently limited
by the lack of experimental models. The aim of this study was to establish an
experimental tissue culture model to maintain normal and malignant germ cells
within their niche and allow investigation of treatment effects.
METHODS: Human testis and testis cancer specimens from orchidectomies were
cultured in 'hanging drops' and effects of activin A and follistatin treatment
were investigated in seminoma cultures.
RESULTS: Testis fragments with normal spermatogenesis or CIS cells were cultured 
for 14 days with sustained proliferation of germ cells and CIS cells and without 
increased apoptosis. Seminoma cultures survived 7 days, with proliferating cells 
detectable during the first 5 days. Activin A treatment significantly reduced KIT
transcript and protein levels in seminoma cultures, thereby demonstrating a
specific treatment response.
CONCLUSIONS: Hanging drop cultures of human testis and testis cancer samples can 
be employed to delineate mechanisms governing growth of normal, CIS and
tumorigenic germ cells retained within their niche.

PMCID: PMC4021512
PMID: 24781282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cancer. 2014 Apr 26;13:89. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-89.

TFAP2B overexpression contributes to tumor growth and a poor prognosis of human
lung adenocarcinoma through modulation of ERK and VEGF/PEDF signaling.

Fu L, Shi K, Wang J, Chen W, Shi D, Tian Y, Guo W, Yu W, Xiao X, Kang T, Wang
S(1), Huang W, Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Colaborative Innovation
Center of Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 651 Dongfeng
East Road, Guangzhou 510060, China. wangshs@sysucc.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: TFAP2B is a member of the AP2 transcription factor family, which
orchestrates a variety of cell processes. However, the roles of TFAP2B in
regulating carcinogenesis remain largely unknown. Here, we investigated the
regulatory effects of TFAP2B on lung adenocarcinomas growth and identified the
underlying mechanisms of actions in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.
METHODS: We first examined the expression of TFAP2B in lung cancer cell lines and
tumor tissues. We also analyzed the prognostic predicting value of TFAP2B in lung
adenocarcinomas. Then we investigated the molecular mechanisms by which TFAP2B
knockdown or overexpression regulated lung cancer cell growth, angiogenesis and
apoptosis, and further confirmed the role of TFAP2B in tumor growth in a lung
cancer xenograft mouse model.
RESULTS: TFAP2B was highly expressed in NSCLC cell lines and tumor tissues.
Strong TFAP2B expression showed a positive correlation with the poor prognoses of
patients with lung adenocarcinomas (P<U+2009>< 0.001). TFAP2B knockdown by siRNA
significantly inhibited cell growth and induced apoptosis in NSCLC cells in vitro
and in a lung cancer subcutaneous xenograft model, whereas TFAP2B overexpression 
promoted cell growth. The observed regulation of cell growth was accompanied by
the TFAP2B-mediated modulation of the ERK/p38, caspase/cytochrome-c and
VEGF/PEDF-dependent signaling pathways in NSCLC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that TFAP2B plays a critical role in
regulating lung adenocarcinomas growth and could serve as a promising therapeutic
target for lung cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4021500
PMID: 24766673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 13;289(24):16662-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.551549. Epub
2014 Apr 22.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress triggers gametocytogenesis in the malaria parasite.

Chaubey S(1), Grover M(1), Tatu U(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biochemistry, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore
560012, Karnataka, India. (2)From the Department of Biochemistry, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, Karnataka, India
tatu@biochem.iisc.ernet.in.

The malaria parasite experiences a significant amount of redox stress during its 
growth in human erythrocytes and heavily relies on secretory functions for
pathogenesis. Most certainly, the parasite is equipped with machinery to tackle
perturbations in the secretory pathway, like the unfolded protein response
pathway in higher eukaryotes. Our bioinformatics analysis revealed the complete
absence of genes involved in the canonical unfolded protein response pathway in
Plasmodium falciparum. Accordingly, the parasite was unable to up-regulate
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones or ER-associated degradation in response to
DTT-mediated ER stress. Global profiling of gene expression upon DTT treatment
revealed a network of AP2 transcription factors and their targets being
activated. The overall outcome was up-regulation of genes involved in protein
export and the sexual stage of the parasite life cycle culminating in
gametocytogenesis. Our results suggest that the malaria parasite uses ER stress
as a cue to switch to the transmissible sexual stages.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4059112
PMID: 24755215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Dyn. 2014 Oct;243(10):1298-309. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24141. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

AP-2a is required after lens vesicle formation to maintain lens integrity.

Kerr CL(1), Zaveri MA, Robinson ML, Williams T, West-Mays JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University Health
Science Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factors are critical in regulating lens development.
The AP-2 family of transcription factors functions in differentiation, cell
growth and apoptosis, and in lens and eye development. AP-2a, in particular, is
important in early lens development, and when conditionally deleted at the
placode stage defective separation of the lens vesicle from the surface ectoderm 
results. AP-2a's role during later stages of lens development is unknown. To
address this, the MLR10-Cre transgene was used to delete AP-2a from the lens
epithelium beginning at embryonic day (E) 10.5.
RESULTS: The loss of AP-2a after lens vesicle separation resulted in
morphological defects beginning at E18.5. By P4, a small highly vacuolated lens
with a multilayered epithelium was evident in the MLR10-AP-2a mutants. Epithelial
cells appeared elongated and expressed fiber cell specific ßB1 and <U+03B3>-crystallins.
Epithelial cell polarity and lens cell adhesion was disrupted and accompanied by 
the misexpression of ZO-1, N-Cadherin, and ß-catenin. Cell death was observed in 
the mutant lens epithelium between postnatal day (P) 14 and P30, and correlated
with altered arrangements of cells within the epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that AP-2a continues to be required after
lens vesicle separation to maintain a normal lens epithelial cell phenotype and
overall lens integrity and to ensure correct fiber cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24753151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Exp Bot. 2014 Jul;65(12):3111-9. doi: 10.1093/jxb/eru154. Epub 2014 Apr 17.

The AP2/ERF transcription factor SlERF52 functions in flower pedicel abscission
in tomato.

Nakano T(1), Fujisawa M(1), Shima Y(1), Ito Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8642,
Japan. (2)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8642, Japan yasuito@affrc.go.jp.

In plants, abscission removes senescent, injured, infected, or dispensable
organs. Induced by auxin depletion and an ethylene burst, abscission requires
pronounced changes in gene expression, including genes for cell separation
enzymes and regulators of signal transduction and transcription. However, the
understanding of the molecular basis of this regulation remains incomplete. To
examine gene regulation in abscission, this study examined an ERF family
transcription factor, tomato (Solanum lycopersicum) ETHYLENE-RESPONSIVE FACTOR 52
(SlERF52). SlERF52 is specifically expressed in pedicel abscission zones (AZs)
and SlERF52 expression is suppressed in plants with impaired function of
MACROCALYX and JOINTLESS, which regulate pedicel AZ development. RNA interference
was used to knock down SlERF52 expression to show that SlERF52 functions in
flower pedicel abscission. When treated with an abscission-inducing stimulus, the
SlERF52-suppressed plants showed a significant delay in flower abscission
compared with wild type. They also showed reduced upregulation of the genes for
the abscission-associated enzymes cellulase and polygalacturonase. SlERF52
suppression also affected gene expression before the abscission stimulus,
inhibiting the expression of pedicel AZ-specific transcription factor genes, such
as the tomato WUSCHEL homologue, GOBLET, and Lateral suppressor, which may
regulate meristematic activities in pedicel AZs. These results suggest that
SlERF52 plays a pivotal role in transcriptional regulation in pedicel AZs at both
pre-abscission and abscission stages.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Experimental Biology.

PMCID: PMC4071829
PMID: 24744429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jun;34(12):2330-8. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00070-14. Epub 2014 Apr
14.

Suv39h1 mediates AP-2a-dependent inhibition of C/EBPa expression during
adipogenesis.

Zhang ZC(1), Liu Y(1), Li SF(1), Guo L(2), Zhao Y(1), Qian SW(1), Wen B(1), Tang 
QQ(1), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China Institute of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Medicine, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China. (2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of
Education, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Fudan University
Shanghai Medical College, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Key Laboratory
of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Fudan University Shanghai Medical College, Shanghai, People's 
Republic of China Institute of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Institutes of
Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China
lixi@shmu.edu.cn.

Previous studies have shown that CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa) plays 
a very important role during adipocyte terminal differentiation and that AP-2a
(activator protein 2a) acts as a repressor to delay the expression of C/EBPa.
However, the mechanisms by which AP-2a prevents the expression of C/EBPa are not 
fully understood. Here, we present evidence that Suv39h1, a histone H3 lysine 9
(H3K9)-specific trimethyltransferase, and G9a, a euchromatic methyltransferase,
both interact with AP-2a and enhance AP-2a-mediated transcriptional repression of
C/EBPa. Interestingly, we discovered that G9a mediates dimethylation of H3K9,
thus providing the substrate, which is methylated by Suv39h1, to H3K9me3 on the
C/EBPa promoter. The expression level of AP-2a was consistent with enrichment of 
H3K9me2 and H3K9me3 on the C/EBPa promoter in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. Knockdown of 
Suv39h markedly increased C/EBPa expression and promoted adipogenesis.
Conversely, ectopic expression of Suv39h1 delayed C/EBPa expression and impaired 
the accumulation of triglyceride, while simultaneous knockdown of AP-2a or G9a
partially rescued this process. These findings indicate that Suv39h1 enhances
AP-2a-mediated transcriptional repression of C/EBPa in an epigenetic manner and
further inhibits adipocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054298
PMID: 24732798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Hum Genet. 2014 Jun;59(6):307-13. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2014.23. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Association study of common polymorphisms in MSRA, TFAP2B, MC4R, NRXN3, PPARGC1A,
TMEM18, SEC16B, HOXB5 and OLFM4 genes with obesity-related traits among
Portuguese children.

Albuquerque D(1), Nóbrega C(2), Rodríguez-López R(3), Manco L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Research Centre for Anthropology and Health
(CIAS), University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (2)Center for Neurosciences and
Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. (3)Servicio de Análisis
Clínicos, Consorcio Hospital General de Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

At least 52 genetic loci were associated with obesity-related traits. However,
little is known about the genetic basis of obesity among children. This study
aims to test whether 10 polymorphisms in obesity-related genes methionine
sulfoxide reductase A (MSRA), transcription factor AP-2 beta (TFAP2B),
melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R), neurexin 3 (NRXN3), peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1 alpha (PPARGC1A),
transmembrane protein 18 (TMEM18), homolog of S. cerevisiae Sec16 (SEC16B),
homeobox B5 (HOXB5) and olfactomedin 4 (OLFM4) are associated with the risk of
obesity in Portuguese children. A total of 730 children aging from 6 to 12 years 
old, recruited randomly from public schools in Portugal, were analysed.
Anthropometric measurements were obtained and children were classified into three
phenotypic groups, normal weight (n=256), overweight (n=320) and obese (n=154),
according to the International Obesity Task Force cutoffs. Polymorphisms were
genotyped by allelic discrimination TaqMan assays. The MC4R rs12970134
polymorphism was nominally associated with body mass index (BMI) (P=0.035), BMI
Z-score (P=0.043) and waist circumference (P=0.020), and borderline associated
with weight (P=0.053). Near nominal associations were also found for the PPARGC1A
rs8192678 polymorphism with weight (P=0.061), and for the MSRA rs545854
polymorphism with BMI (P=0.055) and BMI Z-score (P=0.056). Furthermore, logistic 
regression showed that MC4R rs12970134 and TFAP2B rs987237 were nominally,
respectively, associated (P=0.029) and borderline associated (P=0.056) with the
obese phenotype. This study highlighted the possible association of MC4R,
PPARGC1A, MSRA and TFAP2B polymorphisms with several obesity-related traits in a 
sample of Portuguese children. The two significant associated TFAP2B rs987237 and
MC4R rs12970134 polymorphisms showed an opposite direction of effect to that in
the original reports.

PMID: 24670271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Med Oncol. 2014 Apr;31(4):916. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0916-5. Epub 2014 Mar 22.

Association of the human astrocyte elevated gene-1 promoter variants with
susceptibility to hepatocellular carcinoma.

Motalleb G(1), Gholipour N, Samaei NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Zabol, P.O. Box
98615-53, Zabol, Iran, rezamotalleb@gmail.com.

Central role of astrocyte elevated gene-1 (AEG-1) in regulating diverse aspects
of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) pathogenesis and association of its
overexpression with HCC progression has been demonstrated. The positive
regulatory regions of AEG-1 promoter contain several putative transcription
factor binding sites critical for basal promoter activity. In this study, the aim
was to explore the association of AEG-1 promoter variant with HCC. In this study,
the human AEG-1 promoter including the region -538 to -42 was explored in 53 HCC 
patients and 108 healthy controls. The polymerase chain reaction-sequencing
method was used for investigating AEG-1 promoter polymorphisms. A novel mutation 
in AEG-1 promoter in human HCC patients at a potential AP-2 binding site was
explored. An A>C mutation was observed in -483 of AEG-1 promoter in 4 out of 53
HCC patients but not in 108 control individuals. Sequencing data showed genetic
variations in 11 HCC patients and 3 healthy controls. Among them, one novel SNP
was found in activator protein-1 (AP2), a transcription factor binding site (-483
A to C) that may be associated with the susceptibility to HCC (P = 0.012) but no 
associations were found for other observed variations. This mutation could be
tumor-specific. AEG-1 promoter variant -483 A>C may be associated with the
susceptibility to HCC in Iranian population. To our knowledge, this is the first 
study that has reported this association with the susceptibility to HCC.
Therefore, further studies need to be conducted in larger sample sizes and other 
populations to validate these findings.

PMID: 24659263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2015 Mar;52(2):135-42. doi: 10.1597/13-151. Epub 2014
Mar 19.

Genome-wide Chromatin Mapping Defines AP2a in the Etiology of Craniofacial
Disorders.

Enkhmandakh B, Bayarsaihan D.

Objective : The aim of this study is to identify direct AP2a target genes
implicated in craniofacial morphogenesis. Design : AP2a, a product of the TFAP2A 
gene, is a master regulator of neural crest differentiation and development. AP2a
is expressed in ectoderm and in migrating cranial neural crest (NC) cells that
provide patterning information during orofacial development and generate most of 
the skull bones and the cranial ganglia. Mutations in TFAP2A cause
branchio-oculo-facial syndrome characterized by dysmorphic facial features
including cleft or pseudocleft lip/palate. We hypothesize that AP2a primes a
distinctive group of genes associated with NC development. Human promoter
ChIP-chip arrays were used to define chromatin regions bound by AP2a in neural
crest progenitors differentiated from human embryonic stem cells. Results :
High-confidence AP2a-binding peaks were detected in the regulatory regions of
many target genes involved in the development of facial tissues including MSX1,
IRF6, TBX22, and MAFB. In addition, we uncovered multiple single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) disrupting a conserved AP2a consensus sequence. Conclusions 
: Knowledge of noncoding SNPs in the genomic loci occupied by AP2a provides an
insight into the regulatory mechanisms underlying craniofacial development.

PMID: 24641171  [PubMed - in process]


87. Dev Neurobiol. 2014 Sep;74(9):894-906. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22173. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Transcription factor AP2 epsilon (Tfap2e) regulates neural crest specification in
Xenopus.

Hong CS(1), Devotta A, Lee YH, Park BY, Saint-Jeannet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Daegu
University, Gyeongsan, Republic of Korea; Department of Basic Science and
Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, New
York.

Transcription factors Pax3 and Zic1 are two important regulators of cell fate
decision at the neural plate border, where they act synergistically to promote
neural crest (NC) formation. To understand the role of these factors in NC
development, we performed a microarray analysis to identify downstream targets of
Pax3 and Zic1 in Xenopus embryos. Among the genes identified was a member of
transcription factor activator protein 2 (Tfap2) family, Tfap2 epsilon (Tfap2e). 
Tfap2e is first expressed at early neurula stage in NC progenitors and
Rohon-Beard sensory neurons, and persists in a subset of migrating cranial NC
cells as they populate the pharyngeal arches. This is in contrast to other
species in which Tfap2e is not detected in the early NC lineage. Tfap2e
morpholino-mediated knockdown results in a loss of NC progenitors and an
expansion of the neural plate. Tfap2e is also sufficient to activate NC-specific 
genes in animal cap explants, and gain-of-function experiments in the whole
embryo indicate that Tfap2e can promote NC formation. We propose that Tfap2e is a
novel player in the gene regulatory network controlling NC specification in
Xenopus downstream of Pax3 and Zic1.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4107115
PMID: 24616412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1501-14. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0329. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Establishment of bovine trophoblast stem-like cells from in vitro-produced
blastocyst-stage embryos using two inhibitors.

Huang X(1), Han X, Uyunbilig B, Zhang M, Duo S, Zuo Y, Zhao Y, Yun T, Tai D, Wang
C, Li J, Li X, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University , Hohhot, China .

The trophoblast (TR) is the first to differentiate during mammalian embryogenesis
and play a pivotal role in the development of the placenta. We used a dual
inhibitor system (PD0325901 and CHIR99021) with mixed feeders to successfully
obtain bovine trophoblast stem-like (bTS) cells, which were similar in phenotype 
to mouse trophoblast stem cells (TSCs). The bTS cells that were generated using
this system continually proliferated, displayed a normal diploid karyotype, and
had no signs of altered morphology or differentiation even after 150 passages.
These cells exhibited alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and expressed
pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, NANOG, SOX2, SSEA-1, SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and
TRA-1-81, and TR lineage markers such as CDX2, as determined by both
immunofluorescence and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). 
Additionally, these cells generated dome-like structures, formed teratomas when
injected into NOD-SCID mice, and differentiated into placenta TR cells in vitro. 
The microarray analysis of bTS cells showed high expression levels of many TR
markers, such as TEAD4, EOMES, GATA3, ETS2, TFAP2A, ELF5, SMARCA4 (BRG1), CDH3,
MASH2, HSD17B1, CYP11A1, PPARG, ID2, GCM1, HAND1, TDK, PAG, IFN-t, and THAP11.
The expression of many pluripotency markers, such as OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and GDF3,
was lower in bTS cells compared with in vitro-produced blastocysts; however,
compared with bovine fetal fibroblasts, the expression of these pluripotency
markers was elevated in bTS cells. The DNA methylation status of the promoter
regions of OCT4, NANOG, and SOX2 was investigated, which were significantly
higher in bTS cells (OCT4 23.90%, NANOG 74.40%, and SOX2 8.50%) compared with
blastocysts (OCT4 8.90%, NANOG 34.4%, and SOX2 3.80%). In contrast, two promoter 
regions of CDX2 were hypomethylated in bTS cells (13.80% and 3.90%) compared with
blastocysts (18.80% and 9.10%). The TSC lines that were established in this study
may be used either for basic research that is focused on peri-implantation and
placenta development or as donor cells for transgenic animal production.

PMID: 24605918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4261-71. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3297-0. Epub 2014
Feb 25.

Isolation, classification and transcription profiles of the AP2/ERF transcription
factor superfamily in citrus.

Xie XL(1), Shen SL, Yin XR, Xu Q, Sun CD, Grierson D, Ferguson I, Chen KS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fruit Quality Biology/The State Agriculture Ministry Laboratory 
of Horticultural Plant Growth, Development and Quality Improvement, Zhejiang
University, Zijingang Campus, Hangzhou, 310058, People's Republic of China.

The AP2/ERF gene family encodes plant-specific transcription factors. In model
plants, AP2/ERF genes have been shown to be expressed in response to
developmental and environmental stimuli, and many function downstream of the
ethylene, biotic, and abiotic stress signaling pathways. In citrus, ethylene is
effective in regulation citrus fruit quality, such as degreening and aroma.
However, information about the citrus AP2/ERF family is limited, and would
enhance our understanding of fruit responses to environmental stress, fruit
development and quality. CitAP2/ERF genes were isolated using the citrus genome
database, and their expression patterns analyzed by real-time PCR using various
orange organs and samples from a fruit developmental series. 126 sequences with
homologies to AP2/ERF proteins were identified from the citrus genome, and, on
the basis of their structure and sequence, assigned to the ERF family (102), AP2 
family (18), RAV family (4) and Soloist (2). MEME motif analysis predicted the
defining AP2/ERF domain and EAR repressor domains. Analysis of transcript
accumulation in Citrus sinensis cv. 'Newhall' indicated that CitAP2/ERF genes
show organ-specific and temporal expression, and provided a framework for
understanding the transcriptional regulatory roles of AP2/ERF gene family members
in citrus. Hierarchical cluster analysis and t tests identified regulators that
potentially function during orange fruit growth and development.

PMID: 24566692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Surg Res. 2014 May 15;188(2):466-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2014.01.015. Epub 2014 
Jan 12.

Characterization of transcription factor AP-2 ß mutations involved in familial
isolated patent ductus arteriosus suggests haploinsufficiency.

Ji W(1), Benson MA(2), Bhattacharya S(2), Chen Y(1), Hu J(1), Li F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)Department of
Cardiology, Shanghai Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
jiweimedsci@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is one of the most common congenital
heart defects. Transcription factor AP-2 beta (TFAP2B) mutations are associated
with the Char syndrome, a disorder associated with PDA, and with facial and
fingers abnormalities. Recently, we identified two TFAP2B mutations in two
families without Char syndrome phenotype, c.601+5G>A and c.435_438delCCGG, and
these TFAP2B mutations were associated with familial isolated PDA. The aim of
this study was to identify the effects of these mutations on TFAP2B function.
METHODS: Plasmids containing the wild-type or mutated TFAP2B were constructed and
transfected in cells. Plasmids containing the TFAP2B coactivator,
Cpb/p300-interacting transactivator 2 (CITED2), was also transfected. TFAP2B
expression was detected by luciferase expression and by Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: These mutations resulted in loss of transactivation function, which
could not be improved by Cpb/p300-interacting transactivator 2. The c.601+5G>A
mutated gene did not express any protein, whereas the c.435_438delCCGG mutation
did not impact the transactivation function activated by the wild-type TFAP2B.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that a haploinsufficiency effect of TFAP2B
could be involved in familial isolated PDA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4594773
PMID: 24507797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Oncogene. 2015 Jan 22;34(4):436-44. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.569. Epub 2014 Jan 27.

TFAP2C governs the luminal epithelial phenotype in mammary development and
carcinogenesis.

Cyr AR(1), Kulak MV(2), Park JM(2), Bogachek MV(2), Spanheimer PM(2), Woodfield
GW(2), White-Baer LS(2), O'Malley YQ(2), Sugg SL(2), Olivier AK(3), Zhang W(3),
Domann FE(4), Weigel RJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [2]
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department
of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)1] Department of
Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [2] Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [3] Department of Pathology,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (5)1] Department of Surgery, University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA [2] Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA.

Molecular subtypes of breast cancer are characterized by distinct patterns of
gene expression that are predictive of outcome and response to therapy. The
luminal breast cancer subtypes are defined by the expression of estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERa)-associated genes, many of which are directly responsive to
the transcription factor activator protein 2C (TFAP2C). TFAP2C participates in a 
gene regulatory network controlling cell growth and differentiation during
ectodermal development and regulating ESR1/ERa and other luminal cell-associated 
genes in breast cancer. TFAP2C has been established as a prognostic factor in
human breast cancer, however, its role in the establishment and maintenance of
the luminal cell phenotype during carcinogenesis and mammary gland development
have remained elusive. Herein, we demonstrate a critical role for TFAP2C in
maintaining the luminal phenotype in human breast cancer and in influencing the
luminal cell phenotype during normal mammary development. Knockdown of TFAP2C in 
luminal breast carcinoma cells induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition with
morphological and phenotypic changes characterized by a loss of
luminal-associated gene expression and a concomitant gain of basal-associated
gene expression. Conditional knockout of the mouse homolog of TFAP2C, Tcfap2c, in
mouse mammary epithelium driven by MMTV-Cre promoted aberrant growth of the
mammary tree leading to a reduction in the CD24(hi)/CD49f(mid) luminal cell
population and concomitant gain of the CD24(mid)/CD49f(hi) basal cell population 
at maturity. Our results establish TFAP2C as a key transcriptional regulator for 
maintaining the luminal phenotype in human breast carcinoma. Furthermore, Tcfap2c
influences development of the luminal cell type during mammary development. The
data suggest that TFAP2C has an important role in regulated luminal-specific
genes and may be a viable therapeutic target in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4112181
PMID: 24469049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 May;92(5):509-21. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1118-x. Epub
2014 Jan 25.

A novel gene regulator, pyrrole-imidazole polyamide targeting ABCA1 gene
increases cholesterol efflux from macrophages and plasma HDL concentration.

Tsunemi A(1), Ueno T, Fukuda N, Watanabe T, Tahira K, Haketa A, Hatanaka Y,
Tanaka S, Matsumoto T, Matsumoto Y, Nagase H, Soma M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Hypertension and
Endocrinology, Nihon University School of Medicine, 30-1 Oyaguchi-kami, Itabashi,
Tokyo, Japan.

Pyrrole-imidazole (PI) polyamides are nuclease-resistant novel compounds that
inhibit transcription factors by binding to the minor groove of DNA. A PI
polyamide that targets mouse ABCA1 and increases ABCA1 gene expression was
designed and evaluated as an agent to increase plasma HDL concentration. A PI
polyamide was designed to bind the activator protein-2 binding site of the mouse 
ABCA1 promoter. The effect of this PI polyamide on ABCA1 expression was evaluated
by real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting using RAW264 cells. In vivo effects of
this polyamide on ABCA1 gene expression and plasma HDL level were examined in
C57B6 mice. One milligram per kilogram of body weight of PI polyamide was
injected via the tail veins every 2 days for 1 week, and plasma lipid profiles
were evaluated. PI polyamide showed a specific binding to the target DNA in gel
mobility shift assay. Treatment of RAW264 cells with 1.0 µM PI polyamide
significantly increased ABCA1 mRNA expression. PI polyamide also significantly
increased apolipoprotein AI-mediated HDL biogenesis in RAW264 cells. Cellular
cholesterol efflux mediated by apolipoprotein AI was significantly increased by
the PI polyamide treatment. PI polyamide significantly increased expression of
ABCA1 mRNA in the liver of C57B6 mice. Plasma HDL concentration was increased by 
PI polyamide administration. All of the HDL sub-fractions showed a tendency to
increase after PI polyamide administration. The designed PI polyamide that
targeted ABCA1 successfully increased ABCA1 expression and HDL biogenesis. This
novel gene-regulating agent is promising as a useful compound to increase plasma 
HDL concentration.KEY MESSAGES: A novel pyrrole-imidazole (PI) polyamide binds to
ABCA1. PI polyamide interfered with binding of AP-2<U+0251> protein to the ABCA1 gene
promoter. PI polyamide inhibited the AP-2<U+0251>-mediated reduction of ABCA1 gene and
protein expression. PI polyamide increased ABCA1 protein and apolipoprotein AI
mediated HDL biogenesis. PI polyamide is a new gene regulator for the prevention 
of atherosclerotic diseases.

PMID: 24463557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. FEBS Lett. 2014 Mar 3;588(5):770-5. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.024. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Transcription factor AP-2delta regulates the expression of polysialyltransferase 
ST8SIA2 in chick retina.

Li X(1), Persad AR(1), Monckton EA(1), Godbout R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute, 11560
University Avenue, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 1Z2, Canada. (2)Department of Oncology, 
University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute, 11560 University Avenue, Edmonton,
Alberta T6G 1Z2, Canada. Electronic address: rgodbout@ualberta.ca.

The AP-2d transcription factor is restricted to a subset of retinal ganglion
cells. Overexpression of AP-2d in chick retina results in induction of
polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) accompanied by misrouting
and bundling of ganglion cell axons. Two polysialyltransferases, ST8SIA2 and
ST8SIA4, are responsible for polysialylation of NCAM. Here, we investigate the
mechanism driving the increase in PSA-NCAM observed upon AP-2d overexpression. We
show that ST8SIA2 is induced by AP-2d overexpression in chick retina. We use
chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays to demonstrate direct
interaction between AP-2d and the ST8SIA2 promoter. We propose that up-regulation
of ST8SIA2 upon AP-2d overexpression in retina increases ectopic polysialylation 
of NCAM which in turn causes premature bundling of axons and alters axonal
response to guidance cues.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 13;9(1):e85172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085172. eCollection
2014.

Silencing of CHD5 gene by promoter methylation in leukemia.

Zhao R(1), Meng F(2), Wang N(1), Ma W(1), Yan Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, PR
China. (2)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, PR China.

Chromodomain helicase DNA binding protein 5 (CHD5) was previously proposed to
function as a potent tumor suppressor by acting as a master regulator of a
tumor-suppressive network. CHD5 is down-regulated in several cancers, including
leukemia and is responsible for tumor generation and progression. However, the
mechanism of CHD5 down-regulation in leukemia is largely unknown. In this study, 
quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and western blotting
analyses revealed that CHD5 was down-regulated in human leukemia cell lines and
samples. Luciferase reporter assays showed that most of the baseline regulatory
activity was localized from 500 to 200 bp upstream of the transcription start
site. Bisulfite DNA sequencing of the identified regulatory element revealed that
the CHD5 promoter was hypermethylated in human leukemia cells and samples. Thus, 
CHD5 expression was inversely correlated with promoter DNA methylation in these
samples. Treatment with DNA methyltransferase inhibitor 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(DAC) activates CHD5 expression in human leukemia cell lines. In vitro luciferase
reporter assays demonstrated that methylation of the CHD5 promoter repressed its 
promoter activity. Furthermore, a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay combined
with qualitative PCR identified activating protein 2 (AP2) as a potential
transcription factor involved in CHD5 expression and indicated that treatment
with DAC increases the recruitment of AP2 to the CHD5 promoter. In vitro
transcription-factor activity studies showed that AP2 over-expression was able to
activate CHD5 promoter activity. Our findings indicate that repression of CHD5
gene expression in human leukemia is mediated in part by DNA methylation of its
promoter.

PMCID: PMC3890315
PMID: 24454811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. EMBO J. 2014 Feb 18;33(4):312-26. doi: 10.1002/embj.201385895. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

Tissue-specific pioneer factors associate with androgen receptor cistromes and
transcription programs.

Pihlajamaa P(1), Sahu B, Lyly L, Aittomäki V, Hautaniemi S, Jänne OA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Androgen receptor (AR) binds male sex steroids and mediates physiological
androgen actions in target tissues. ChIP-seq analyses of AR-binding events in
murine prostate, kidney and epididymis show that in vivo AR cistromes and their
respective androgen-dependent transcription programs are highly tissue specific
mediating distinct biological pathways. This high order of tissue specificity is 
achieved by the use of exclusive collaborating factors in the three
androgen-responsive tissues. We find two novel collaborating factors for AR
signaling in vivo--Hnf4a (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a) in mouse kidney and AP-2a
(activating enhancer binding protein 2a) in mouse epididymis--that define
tissue-specific AR recruitment. In mouse prostate, FoxA1 serves for the same
purpose. FoxA1, Hnf4a and AP-2a motifs are over-represented within unique
AR-binding loci, and the cistromes of these factors show substantial overlap with
AR-binding events distinct to each tissue type. These licensing or pioneering
factors are constitutively bound to chromatin and guide AR to specific genomic
loci upon hormone exposure. Collectively, liganded receptor and its DNA-response 
elements are required but not sufficient for establishment of tissue-specific
transcription programs.

PMCID: PMC3989639
PMID: 24451200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 1;74(5):1484-94. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2020. Epub
2014 Jan 10.

Differential regulation of estrogen receptor a expression in breast cancer cells 
by metastasis-associated protein 1.

Kang HJ(1), Lee MH, Kang HL, Kim SH, Ahn JR, Na H, Na TY, Kim YN, Seong JK, Lee
MO.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: College of Pharmacy and Bio-MAX institute, Research
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences; and College of Veterinary Medicine, BK21
Plus Program for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Metastasis-associated protein 1 (MTA1) is a component of the nucleosome
remodeling and histone deacetylase (HDAC) complex, which plays an important role 
in progression of breast cancer. Although MTA1 is known as a repressor of the
transactivation function of estrogen receptor a (ERa), its involvement in the
epigenetic control of transcription of the ERa gene ESR1 has not been studied.
Here, we show that silencing of MTA1 reduced the level of expression of ERa in
ERa-positive cells but increased it in ERa-negative cells. In both MCF7 and
MDA-MB-231, MTA1 was recruited to the region +146 to +461 bp downstream of the
transcription start site of ESR1 (ERpro315). Proteomics analysis of the MTA1
complex that was pulled down by an oligonucleotide encoding ERpro315 revealed
that the transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> (TFAP2C) and the IFN-<U+03B3>-inducible protein 16
(IFI16) were components of the complex. Interestingly, in MCF7, TFAP2C activated 
the reporter encoding ERpro315 and the level of ERa mRNA. By contrast, in
MDA-MB-231, IFI16 repressed the promoter activity and silencing of MTA1 increased
expression of ERa. Importantly, class II HDACs are involved in the MTA1-mediated 
differential regulation of ERa. Finally, an MDA-MB-231-derived cell line that
stably expressed shIFI16 or shMTA1 was more susceptible to tamoxifen-induced
growth inhibition in in vitro and in vivo experiments. Taken together, our
findings suggest that the MTA1-TFAP2C or the MTA1-IFI16 complex may contribute to
the epigenetic regulation of ESR1 expression in breast cancer and may determine
the chemosensitivity of tumors to tamoxifen therapy in patients with breast
cancer.

©2014 AACR

PMID: 24413532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2014 Feb;46(2):136-40. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt136. Epub 2013 Dec 26.

RNF20 promotes the polyubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation of
AP-2a protein.

Ren P(1), Sheng Z, Wang Y, Yi X, Zhou Q, Zhou J, Xiang S, Hu X, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081,
China.

Transcription factor activator protein 2a (AP-2a) is a negative regulator of
adipogenesis by repressing the transcription of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBPa) gene. During adipogenesis, AP-2a is degraded, leading to transcriptional
up-regulation of C/EBPa. However, the mechanism for AP-2a degradation is not
clear. Here, using immunoprecipitation assay and mass spectrometry, we identified
ring finger protein 20 (RNF20) as an AP-2a-interacting protein in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes. RNF20 has been proved to be an E3 ubiquitin ligase for both
histone H2B and tumor suppressor ErbB3-binding protein 1 (Ebp1). In this study,
we demonstrated that RNF20 co-localized and interacted with AP-2a, and promoted
its polyubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. Over-expression of
RNF20 inhibited the activity of AP-2a and rescued the C/EBPa expression which was
inhibited by AP-2a. These results suggested that RNF20 may play roles in
adipocyte differentiation by stimulating ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent
degradation of AP-2a.

PMID: 24374663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cell Signal. 2014 Mar;26(3):639-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.12.004. Epub 2013
Dec 20.

Repression of integrin-linked kinase by antidiabetes drugs through cross-talk of 
PPAR<U+03B3>- and AMPKa-dependent signaling: role of AP-2a and Sp1.

Hahn SS(1), Tang Q(2), Zheng F(2), Zhao S(2), Wu J(2), Chen J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Targeted Therapies, University of
Guangzhou Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese 
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province 510120, China. Electronic address:
swhan2010@live.com. (2)Laboratory of Tumor Molecular Biology and Targeted
Therapies, University of Guangzhou Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangdong
Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province 510120,
China. (3)School of Chinese Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University
of Hong Kong, 10 Sassoon Road, 00852, Hong Kong, China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is one of the most common cancers of the head and 
neck, particularly in Southern China and Southeast Asia with high treatment
failure due to the development of local recurrence and distant metastasis. The
molecular mechanisms related to the progression of NPC have not been fully
understood. In this study, we showed that antidiabetes drugs rosiglitazone and
metformin inhibit NPC cell growth through reducing the expression of
integrin-linked kinase (ILK). Blockade of PPAR<U+03B3> and AMPKa overcame the effects of
rosiglitazone and metformin on ILK protein. Importantly, overexpression of ILK
abrogated the effect of rosiglitazone and metformin on NPC cell growth.
Furthermore, these agents reduced ILK promoter activity, which was not observed
in AP-2a, but not Sp1 site mutation in ILK gene promoter. In addition, silencing 
of AP-2a or overexpression of Sp1 reversed the effect of these agents on ILK
protein expression and cell growth. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
showed that rosiglitazone induced AP-2a, while metformin reduced Sp1 protein
binding to the DNA sequences in the ILK gene promoter. Intriguingly,
overexpression of Sp1 abolished the effect of rosiglitazone on AP-2a protein
expression. Collectively, we show that rosiglitazone and metformin inhibit ILK
gene expression through PPAR<U+03B3>- and AMPKa-dependent signaling pathways that are
involved in the regulation of AP-2a and Sp1 protein expressions. The effect of
combination of rosiglitazone and metformin demonstrates greater extent than
single agent alone. The cross-talk of PPAR<U+03B3> and AMPKa signaling enhances the
synergistic effects of rosiglitazone and metformin. This study unveils novel
mechanisms by which oral antidiabetes drugs inhibit the growth of human NPC
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Regen Med. 2014 Jan;9(1):53-66. doi: 10.2217/rme.13.86.

Human embryonic stem cell-derived neural crest cells capable of expressing
markers of osteochondral or meningeal-choroid plexus differentiation.

Sternberg H(1), Jiang J, Sim P, Kidd J, Janus J, Rinon A, Edgar R, Shitrit A,
Larocca D, Chapman KB, Binette F, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., 1301 Harbor Bay, Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIMS: The transcriptome and fate potential of three diverse human embryonic stem 
cell-derived clonal embryonic progenitor cell lines with markers of cephalic
neural crest are compared when differentiated in the presence of combinations of 
TGFß3, BMP4, SCF and HyStem-C matrices.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The cell lines E69 and T42 were compared with MEL2, using
gene expression microarrays, immunocytochemistry and ELISA.
RESULTS: In the undifferentiated progenitor state, each line displayed unique
markers of cranial neural crest including TFAP2A and CD24; however, none
expressed distal HOX genes including HOXA2 or HOXB2, or the mesenchymal stem cell
marker CD74. The lines also showed diverse responses when differentiated in the
presence of exogenous BMP4, BMP4 and TGFß3, SCF, and SCF and TGFß3. The clones
E69 and T42 showed a profound capacity for expression of endochondral
ossification markers when differentiated in the presence of BMP4 and TGFß3,
choroid plexus markers in the presence of BMP4 alone, and leptomeningeal markers 
when differentiated in SCF without TGFß3.
CONCLUSION: The clones E69 and T42 may represent a scalable source of primitive
cranial neural crest cells useful in the study of cranial embryology, and
potentially cell-based therapy.

PMID: 24351006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Feb;7(2):266-77. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0271. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

TFAP2A regulates nasopharyngeal carcinoma growth and survival by targeting HIF-1a
signaling pathway.

Shi D(1), Xie F, Zhang Y, Tian Y, Chen W, Fu L, Wang J, Guo W, Kang T, Huang W,
Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 651 Dongfeng East Road, Guangzhou
510060, China. dengwg@sysucc.org.cn; and Wenlin Huang, huangwl@sysucc.org.cn.

TFAP2A is a transcription factor that orchestrates a variety of cell processes,
including cell growth and tissue differentiation. However, the regulation of
TFAP2A in human nasopharyngeal carcinoma tumorigenesis and its precise mechanism 
of action remain largely unknown. In this study, we investigated the biologic
role and clinical significance of TFAP2A in nasopharyngeal carcinoma growth and
progression and identified the underlying molecular mechanisms. We found that
TFAP2A was highly expressed in various nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines and
tumor tissue specimens and was significantly correlated with hypoxia-inducible
factor-1a (HIF-1a) expression. A positive correlation of TFAP2A overexpression
with advanced tumor stage, local invasion, clinical progression, and poor
prognosis of patients with nasopharyngeal carcinomas were also observed.
Moreover, we found that knockdown of TFAP2A expression by siRNA significantly
inhibited tumor cell growth in nasopharyngeal carcinoma cell lines and in a
subcutaneous xenograft mouse model by targeting the HIF-1a-mediated VEGF/pigment 
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) signaling pathway. Treatment of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma cells with TFAP2A siRNA dramatically inhibited the expression and the
release of VEGF protein but did not change the level of PEDF protein, resulting
in a significant reduction of the ratio of VEGF/PEDF. Pretreatment with a HIF-1a 
siRNA did not significantly change the TFAP2A siRNA-mediated inhibition in cell
viability. Our results indicate that TFAP2A regulates nasopharyngeal carcinoma
growth and survival through the modulation of the HIF-1a-mediated VEGF/PEDF
signaling pathway, and suggest that TFAP2A could be a potential prognostic
biomarker and therapeutic target for nasopharyngeal carcinoma treatment.

PMID: 24335623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Metab. 2013 Sep 25;2(4):337-47. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2013.09.002.

Genetic and epigenetic control of metabolic health.

Schwenk RW, Vogel H, Schürmann A.

Obesity is characterized as an excess accumulation of body fat resulting from a
positive energy balance. It is the major risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D).
The evidence for familial aggregation of obesity and its associated metabolic
diseases is substantial. To date, about 150 genetic loci identified in
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are linked with obesity and T2D, each
accounting for only a small proportion of the predicted heritability. However,
the percentage of overall trait variance explained by these associated loci is
modest (~5-10% for T2D, ~2% for BMI). The lack of powerful genetic associations
suggests that heritability is not entirely attributable to gene variations. Some 
of the familial aggregation as well as many of the effects of environmental
exposures, may reflect epigenetic processes. This review summarizes our current
knowledge on the genetic basis to individual risk of obesity and T2D, and
explores the potential role of epigenetic contribution.

PMCID: PMC3854991
PMID: 24327950  [PubMed]


102. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 2;8(12):e82302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082302. eCollection
2013.

Estimation of the fraction of cancer cells in a tumor DNA sample using DNA
methylation.

Takahashi T(1), Matsuda Y, Yamashita S, Hattori N, Kushima R, Lee YC, Igaki H,
Tachimori Y, Nagino M, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan ; Esophageal Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan ; Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, Nagoya University
Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

Contamination of normal cells is almost always present in tumor samples and
affects their molecular analyses. DNA methylation, a stable epigenetic
modification, is cell type-dependent, and different between cancer and normal
cells. Here, we aimed to demonstrate that DNA methylation can be used to estimate
the fraction of cancer cells in a tumor DNA sample, using esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma (ESCC) as an example. First, by an Infinium HumanMethylation450
BeadChip array, we isolated three genomic regions (TFAP2B, ARHGEF4, and RAPGEFL1)
i) highly methylated in four ESCC cell lines, ii) hardly methylated in a pooled
sample of non-cancerous mucosae, a pooled sample of normal esophageal mucosae,
and peripheral leukocytes, and iii) frequently methylated in 28 ESCCs (TFAP2B,
24/28; ARHGEF4, 20/28; and RAPGEFL1, 19/28). Second, using eight pairs of cancer 
and non-cancer cell samples prepared by laser capture microdissection, we
confirmed that at least one of the three regions was almost completely methylated
in ESCC cells, and all the three regions were almost completely unmethylated in
non-cancer cells. We also confirmed that DNA copy number alterations of the three
regions in 15 ESCC samples were rare, and did not affect the estimation of the
fraction of cancer cells. Then, the fraction of cancer cells in a tumor DNA
sample was defined as the highest methylation level of the three regions, and we 
confirmed a high correlation between the fraction assessed by the DNA methylation
fraction marker and the fraction assessed by a pathologist (r=0.85; p<0.001).
Finally, we observed that, by correction of the cancer cell content, CpG islands 
in promoter regions of tumor-suppressor genes were almost completely methylated. 
These results demonstrate that DNA methylation can be used to estimate the
fraction of cancer cells in a tumor DNA sample.

PMCID: PMC3846724
PMID: 24312652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Nov 15;6(12):3042-8. eCollection 2013.

Development of a model system to analyze chondrogenic differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells.

Ruedel A(1), Hofmeister S, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, D-93053 Regensburg, Germany.

High-density cell culture is widely used for the analysis of cartilage
development of human mesenchymal stem cells (HMSCs) in vitro. Several cell
culture systems, as micromass, pellet culture and alginate culture, are applied
by groups in the field to induce chondrogenic differentiation of HMSCs. A draw
back of all model systems is the high amount of cells necessary for the
experiments. Further, handling of large experimental approaches is difficult due 
to culturing e.g. in 15 ml tubes. Therefore, we aimed to develop a new model
system based on "hanging drop" cultures using 10 to 100 fold less cells. Here, we
demonstrate that differentiation of chondrogenic cells was induced as previously 
shown in other model systems. Real time RT-PCR analysis demonstrated that
Collagen type II and MIA/CD-RAP were upregulated during culturing whereas for
induction of hypertrophic markers like Collagen type X and AP-2 epsilon treatment
with TGF beta was needed. To further test the system, siRNA against Sox9 was used
and effects on chondrogenic gene expression were evaluated. In summary, the
hanging drop culture system was determined to be a promising tool for in vitro
chondrogenic studies.

PMCID: PMC3843294
PMID: 24294400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;46:148-60. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.11.009.
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

AP2a transcriptional activity is essential for retinoid-induced neuronal
differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Bi Y(1), Gong M(1), He Y(2), Zhang X(1), Zhou X(1), Zhang Y(1), Nan G(1), Wei
X(1), Liu Y(1), Chen J(3), Li T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Research Center, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400014, China; Chongqing Stem Cell Therapy Engineering
Technical Center, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders, Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing International
Science and Technology Collaboration Center for Child Development and Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China.
(2)Chongqing Stem Cell Therapy Engineering Technical Center, Ministry of
Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Key Laboratory of
Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing International Science and Technology
Collaboration Center for Child Development and Disorders, Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China. (3)Nutritional Research
Center, The Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400014, China; Chongqing Stem Cell Therapy Engineering Technical Center, Ministry
of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, Key Laboratory of
Pediatrics in Chongqing, Chongqing International Science and Technology
Collaboration Center for Child Development and Disorders, Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China. Electronic address:
Jiechen010@gmail.com. (4)Nutritional Research Center, The Children's Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400014, China; Chongqing Stem Cell
Therapy Engineering Technical Center, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Child Development and Disorders, Key Laboratory of Pediatrics in Chongqing,
Chongqing International Science and Technology Collaboration Center for Child
Development and Disorders, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400014, China. Electronic address: tyli@vip.sina.com.

Pre-activation of the retinoid signaling pathway by all-trans retinoic acid
facilitates neuronal differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells. Using protein/DNA
based screening assays, we identified activator protein 2a as an important
downstream target of all-trans retinoic acid. Although all-trans retinoic acid
treatment significantly increased activator protein 2a transcriptional activity, 
it did not affect its expression. Inhibition of activator protein 2a with
dominant-negative mutants reduced ATRA-induced differentiation of mesenchymal
stem cells into neurons and reversed its associated functional recovery of memory
impairment in the cell-based treatment of a hypoxic-ischemic brain damage rat
model. Dominant-negative mutants of activator protein 2a inhibited the expression
of neuronal markers which were induced by retinoic acid receptor ß activation.
All-trans retinoic acid treatment increased phosphorylation of activator protein 
2a and resulted in its nuclear translocation. This was blocked by siRNA-mediated 
knockdown of retinoic acid receptor ß. Furthermore, we found that retinoic acid
receptor ß directly interacted with activator protein 2a. In summary, the
regulation of all-trans retinoic acid on activator protein 2a transcriptional
activity was mediated by activation of retinoic acid receptor ß and subsequent
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of activator protein 2a. Our results
strongly suggest that activator protein 2a transcriptional activity is essential 
for all-trans retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation of mesenchymal stem 
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24275093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Nov;33(11):1571-6.

[Construction of a luciferase reporter vector containing response element of
activator protein 2a and its application in study of osteogenetic
differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong M(1), Zhou J, Bi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology and Therapy Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University; Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and
Disorders; Chongqing Municipal Stem Cell Therapy Engineering Technical Center,
Chongqing 400014, China.E-mail: gmj.0710@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVE: To construct a luciferase reporter vector containing the response
element of transcription protein AP2a for screening the effect of bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) on the transcriptional activity of AP2a.
METHODS: Four tandem-linked response elements of AP2a were cloned to the pBGLuc
luciferase reporter gene plasmid, which was digested with Bam HI and Mlu I to
construct pBGLuc-AP2a-RE vector. The recombinant adenovirus Ad-AP2a and its
dominant negative mutant Ad-dnAP2a were used to infect mouse mesenchymal stem
cells C3H10; the changes in cellular AP2a mRNA and protein expressions were
detected by real-time PCR and Western blotting, and electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) was carried out to assess the DNA-binding ability of AP2a.
C3H10 cells were transfected with pBGLuc-AP2a-RE vector, and AP2a transcriptional
activity was measured using luciferase reporter gene assay. In pBGLuc-AP2a-RE
vector-transfected C3H10 cells infected with Ad-BMPs, luciferase reporter gene
assay was performed to screen the effect of BMPs on AP2a transcriptional
activity.
RESULTS: The results of PCR, enzyme digestion and sequencing all confirmed
correct cloning of AP2a-RE into pBGLuc-AP2a-RE luciferase reporter vector, and
Ad-AP2a infection significantly increased AP2a expression and its DNA binding
ability. The dominant negative mutants expressed the corresponding mutants, and
EMSA results showed that Ad-dnAP2a-dbHLH significantly lowered while
Ad-dnAP2a-dTAD enhanced the DNA-binding ability of AP2a. AP2a over-expression
promoted AP2a transcriptional activity, which was suppressed by the two dominant 
negative mutants. AP2a transcriptional activity increased in the cells infected
with the recombinant adenovirus BMPs, especially in cells with BMP9 infection.
CONCLUSIONS: The luciferase reporter vector containing the response element of
AP2a we constructed allows detection of AP2a transcriptional activity. BMP9 can
significantly enhance AP2a transcriptional activity.

PMID: 24273255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell. 2013 Nov 21;155(5):1022-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.10.022.

A polymorphism in IRF4 affects human pigmentation through a tyrosinase-dependent 
MITF/TFAP2A pathway.

Praetorius C(1), Grill C, Stacey SN, Metcalf AM, Gorkin DU, Robinson KC, Van
Otterloo E, Kim RS, Bergsteinsdottir K, Ogmundsdottir MH, Magnusdottir E, Mishra 
PJ, Davis SR, Guo T, Zaidi MR, Helgason AS, Sigurdsson MI, Meltzer PS, Merlino G,
Petit V, Larue L, Loftus SK, Adams DR, Sobhiafshar U, Emre NC, Pavan WJ, Cornell 
R, Smith AG, McCallion AS, Fisher DE, Stefansson K, Sturm RA, Steingrimsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Biomedical Center, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegur 16, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland.

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2014 May;27(3):322-3.

Sequence polymorphisms linked to human diseases and phenotypes in genome-wide
association studies often affect noncoding regions. A SNP within an intron of the
gene encoding Interferon Regulatory Factor 4 (IRF4), a transcription factor with 
no known role in melanocyte biology, is strongly associated with sensitivity of
skin to sun exposure, freckles, blue eyes, and brown hair color. Here, we
demonstrate that this SNP lies within an enhancer of IRF4 transcription in
melanocytes. The allele associated with this pigmentation phenotype impairs
binding of the TFAP2A transcription factor that, together with the melanocyte
master regulator MITF, regulates activity of the enhancer. Assays in zebrafish
and mice reveal that IRF4 cooperates with MITF to activate expression of
Tyrosinase (TYR), an essential enzyme in melanin synthesis. Our findings provide 
a clear example of a noncoding polymorphism that affects a phenotype by
modulating a developmental gene regulatory network.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3873608
PMID: 24267888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 13;14:785. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-785.

Genome-wide survey and expression profiles of the AP2/ERF family in castor bean
(Ricinus communis L.).

Xu W, Li F, Ling L, Liu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kunming Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 132 Lanhei Road,
Kunming 650204, China. liuaizhong@mail.kib.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: The AP2/ERF transcription factor, one of the largest gene families in
plants, plays a crucial role in the regulation of growth and development,
metabolism, and responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. Castor bean (Ricinus
communis L., Euphobiaceae) is one of most important non-edible oilseed crops and 
its seed oil is broadly used for industrial applications. The available genome
provides a great chance to identify and characterize the global information on
AP2/ERF transcription factors in castor bean, which might provide insights in
understanding the molecular basis of the AP2/ERF family in castor bean.
RESULTS: A total of 114 AP2/ERF transcription factors were identified based on
the genome in castor bean. According to the number of the AP2/ERF domain, the
conserved amino acid residues within AP2/ERF domain, the conserved motifs and
gene organization in structure, and phylogenetical analysis, the identified 114
AP2/ERF transcription factors were characterized. Global expression profiles
among different tissues using high-throughput sequencing of digital gene
expression profiles (DGEs) displayed diverse expression patterns that may provide
basic information in understanding the function of the AP2/ERF gene family in
castor bean.
CONCLUSIONS: The current study is the first report on identification and
characterization of the AP2/ERF transcription factors based on the genome of
castor bean in the family Euphobiaceae. Results obtained from this study provide 
valuable information in understanding the molecular basis of the AP2/ERF family
in castor bean.

PMCID: PMC4046667
PMID: 24225250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2759. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3759.

Stargazin regulates AMPA receptor trafficking through adaptor protein complexes
during long-term depression.

Matsuda S(1), Kakegawa W, Budisantoso T, Nomura T, Kohda K, Yuzaki M.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo
160-8582, Japan [2] Japan Science and Technology Agency, PRESTO, 4-1-8 Honcho
Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan.

Long-term depression (LTD) underlies learning and memory in various brain
regions. Although postsynaptic AMPA receptor trafficking mediates LTD, its
underlying molecular mechanisms remain largely unclear. Here we show that
stargazin, a transmembrane AMPA receptor regulatory protein, forms a ternary
complex with adaptor proteins AP-2 and AP-3A in hippocampal neurons, depending on
its phosphorylation state. Inhibiting the stargazin-AP-2 interaction disrupts
NMDA-induced AMPA receptor endocytosis, and inhibiting that of stargazin-AP-3A
abrogates the late endosomal/lysosomal trafficking of AMPA receptors, thereby
upregulating receptor recycling to the cell surface. Similarly, stargazin's
interaction with AP-2 or AP-3A is necessary for low-frequency stimulus-evoked LTD
in CA1 hippocampal neurons. Thus, stargazin has a crucial role in NMDA-dependent 
LTD by regulating two trafficking pathways of AMPA receptors--transport from the 
cell surface to early endosomes and from early endosomes to late
endosomes/lysosomes--through its sequential binding to AP-2 and AP-3A.

PMID: 24217640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Neurochem. 2014 Apr;129(1):72-84. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12521. Epub 2013 Nov 26.

Ectopic expression of transcription factor AP-2d in developing retina: effect on 
PSA-NCAM and axon routing.

Li X(1), Monckton EA, Godbout R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Retinal ganglion cells transmit the visual signal from the retina to the brain.
We have previously shown that the activator protein 2 (AP-2)d (TFAP2D)
transcription factor is expressed in one third of ganglion cells in developing
retina suggesting a specialized role for these AP-2d-expressing cells. Here, we
address the role of AP-2d in retina by in ovo electroporation of RCAS/AP-2d
retroviral constructs into the eyes of chick embryos at day 2 of gestation.
Ectopic expression of AP-2d does not affect lineage differentiation in the
developing retina. However, immunostaining of retinal tissue with markers
associated with axonal growth such as growth-associated protein 43 and polysialic
acid-neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM) demonstrates axonal misrouting and 
abnormal axonal bundling. Treatment of AP-2d-misexpressing retinal cell cultures 
with endoneuraminidase, an enzyme that removes PSA from NCAM, decreases
AP-2d-induced axonal bundling. Our data suggest a role for AP-2d in
polysialylation of NCAM, with ectopic expression of AP-2d resulting in premature 
bundling of emerging axons and misrouting of axons. We propose that expression of
AP-2d in a subset of ganglion cells contributes to the fine-tuning of axonal
growth in the developing retina.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMCID: PMC4459862
PMID: 24188130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jan;41(1):45-56. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2836-4. Epub 2013 Nov
2.

Analysis of Brassica napus ESTs: gene discovery and expression patterns of
AP2/ERF-family transcription factors.

Zhuang J(1), Zhu B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, 1 Weigang, Nanjing, 210095, China,
zhuangjing@njau.edu.cn.

Starting from expressed sequence tag sequences and using the conserved amino acid
sequence of the Arabidopsis thaliana AP2/ERF domain as a probe, we used in silico
cloning to identify 87 genes that encode putative AP2/ERF transcription factors
(TFs) from the Brassica napus. Almost all of the putative AP2/ERF factors from B.
napus were similar to genes previously defined as AP2/ERF genes from A. thaliana.
Based on the number of AP2-domains and the function of the genes, the AP2/ERF TFs
from B. napus were classified into four subfamilies, named the AP2, DREB, ERF,
and RAV subfamilies. We then predicted and analyzed cDNA sequences and amino acid
sequences, amino acid compositions, physical and chemical characteristics,
phylogenetic trees, conserved domain sequences, functional domains, molecular
models, and folding states of the proteins they are predicted to encode.
Expression analysis showed that four factors, which belonged to the ERF and DREB 
subfamilies, were induced by abiotic stresses, as well as by hormone treatment.
This suggests that those AP2/ERF factors may be involved in signaling pathways
responsive to abiotic and biotic stresses. The results from this study, reported 
herein, form a basis for future functional analyses of B. napus TFs that belong
to the AP2/ERF family.

PMID: 24186851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2013 Oct 30;67:1034-46.

[Multilevel maturation of Toll-like receptor 9].

[Article in Polish]

Zyzak J(1), Matuszyk J, Siednienko J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorium Bialek Sygnalowych, Instytut Immunologii i Terapii Doswiadczalnej
PAN im. L. Hirszfelda we Wrocl

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are essential elements of the innate immune response. 
TLRs induce expression of inflammatory cytokines or interferons after recognition
of microbial or viral structures called pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs). Two different groups of TLRs can be distinguished: TLRs residing in the 
plasma membrane or in the endosomal compartment. TLRs localized in endosomes act 
as sensors for nucleic acids. TLR9, which recognizes unmethylated CpG, belongs to
endosomal TLRs. The proper ligand detection by TLR9 depends on its specific
subcellular localization and maturation. TLR9 delivery to the endosomes is
mediated by two distinct proteins, UNC93B1 and AP-2, and post-early endosome
distribution is determined by AP-3. TLR9 localized in the endosome is cleaved by 
at least two classes of proteases, AEP and cathepsins, which generate the mature 
form of receptor. Functional C-terminal form of TLR9 is capable of recognition of
CpG and activation of signal pathways. Ligand binding to TLR9 causes
conformational changes in the structure of this receptor which facilitates
recruitment of MyD88 adaptor protein and activation of two distinct
cytokine-inducing pathways: IRF-7- and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent. The specific structure of
the synthetic ligand (CpG-A or CpG-B) determines activation of certain
transcription factors. Recognition of multimeric CpG-A results in IRF-7-dependent
induction of type I interferon production. Monomeric CpG-B activates
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent induction of proinflammatory cytokines, in particular TNFa and
IL-6.

PMID: 24184955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Curr Biol. 2013 Nov 18;23(22):2215-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.09.028. Epub 2013 
Oct 31.

An AP2 transcription factor is required for a sleep-active neuron to induce
sleep-like quiescence in C. elegans.

Turek M(1), Lewandrowski I, Bringmann H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077
Goettingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Sleep is an essential behavior that is found in all animals that have
a nervous system. Neural activity is thought to control sleep, but little is
known about the identity and the function of neural circuits underlying sleep.
Lethargus is a developmentally regulated period of behavioral quiescence in C.
elegans larvae that has sleep-like properties.
RESULTS: We studied sleep-like behavior in C. elegans larvae and found that it
requires a highly conserved AP2 transcription factor, aptf-1, which was expressed
strongly in only five interneurons in the head. Expression of aptf-1 in one of
these neurons, the GABAergic neuron RIS, was required for quiescence. RIS was
strongly and acutely activated at the transition from wake-like to sleep-like
behavior. Optogenetic activation of aptf-1-expressing neurons ectopically induced
acute behavioral quiescence in an aptf-1-dependent manner. RIS ablation caused a 
dramatic reduction of quiescence. RIS-dependent quiescence, however, does not
require GABA but requires neuropeptide signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that RIS acts as a sleep-active, sleep-promoting neuron 
that requires aptf-1 to induce sleep-like behavior through neuropeptide
signaling. Sleep-promoting GABAergic-peptidergic neurons have also been
identified in vertebrate brains, suggesting that common circuit principles exist 
between sleep in vertebrates and sleep-like behavior in invertebrates.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24184105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Genetics. 2014 Jan;196(1):91-105. doi: 10.1534/genetics.113.157529. Epub 2013 Oct
30.

Inducible protein traps with dominant phenotypes for functional analysis of the
Drosophila genome.

Singari S(1), Javeed N, Tardi NJ, Marada S, Carlson JC, Kirk S, Thorn JM, Edwards
KA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Illinois State University, Normal, Illinois
61790.

The Drosophila melanogaster genome has been extensively characterized, but there 
remains a pressing need to associate gene products with phenotypes, subcellular
localizations, and interaction partners. A multifunctional, Minos
transposon-based protein trapping system called Hostile takeover (Hto) was
developed to facilitate in vivo analyses of endogenous genes, including live
imaging, purification of protein complexes, and mutagenesis. The Hto transposon
features a UAS enhancer with a basal promoter, followed by an artificial exon 1
and a standard 5' splice site. Upon GAL4 induction, exon 1 can splice to the next
exon downstream in the flanking genomic DNA, belonging to a random target gene.
Exon 1 encodes a dual tag (FLAG epitope and mCherry red fluorescent protein),
which becomes fused to the target protein. Hto was mobilized throughout the
genome and then activated by eye-specific GAL4; an F1 screen for abnormal eye
phenotypes was used to identify inserts that express disruptive fusion proteins. 
Approximately 1.7% of new inserts cause eye phenotypes. Of the first 23 verified 
target genes, 21 can be described as regulators of cell biology and development. 
Most are transcription factor genes, including AP-2, CG17181, cut, klu, mamo,
Sox102F, and sv. Other target genes [l(1)G0232, nuf, pum, and Syt4] make
cytoplasmic proteins, and these lines produce diverse fluorescence localization
patterns. Hto permits the expression of stable carboxy-terminal subfragments of
proteins, which are rarely tested in conventional genetic screens. Some of these 
may disrupt specific cell pathways, as exemplified by truncated forms of
Mastermind and Nuf.

PMCID: PMC3872200
PMID: 24172131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Genetics. 2014 Jan;196(1):349-62. doi: 10.1534/genetics.113.158402. Epub 2013 Oct
18.

Regulation of aggression by obesity-linked genes TfAP-2 and Twz through
octopamine signaling in Drosophila.

Williams MJ(1), Goergen P, Rajendran J, Klockars A, Kasagiannis A, Fredriksson R,
Schiöth HB.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University, 75
124 Uppsala, Sweden.

In Drosophila, the monoamine octopamine, through mechanisms that are not
completely understood, regulates both aggression and mating behavior.
Interestingly, our study demonstrates that the Drosophila obesity-linked homologs
Transcription factor AP-2 (TfAP-2; TFAP2B in humans) and Tiwaz (Twz; KCTD15 in
humans) interact to modify male behavior by controlling the expression of
Tyramine ß-hydroxylase and Vesicular monanime transporter, genes necessary for
octopamine production and secretion. Furthermore, we reveal that octopamine in
turn regulates aggression through the Drosophila cholecystokinin satiation
hormone homolog Drosulfakinin (Dsk). Finally, we establish that TfAP-2 is
expressed in octopaminergic neurons known to control aggressive behavior and that
TfAP-2 requires functional Twz for its activity. We conclude that genetically
manipulating the obesity-linked homologs TfAP-2 and Twz is sufficient to affect
octopamine signaling, which in turn modulates Drosophila male behavior through
the regulation of the satiation hormone Dsk.

PMCID: PMC3872196
PMID: 24142897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cell Rep. 2013 Oct 31;5(2):302-13. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.09.009. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

Chromatin modifications sequentially enhance ErbB2 expression in ErbB2-positive
breast cancers.

Mungamuri SK(1), Murk W, Grumolato L, Bernstein E, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY 10029 USA.

ErbB2 gene amplification occurs in 20%-25% of breast cancers, and its therapeutic
targeting has markedly improved survival of patients with breast cancer in the
adjuvant setting. However, resistance to these therapies can develop. Because
epigenetic mechanisms can importantly influence oncogene expression and be
druggable as well, we investigated histone modifications that influence ErbB2
overexpression, independent of gene amplification. We demonstrate here that
ErbB2-overexpressing breast carcinomas acquire the H3K4me3 mark on the erbB2
promoter and that receptor-amplified tumors further acquire the H3K9ac mark,
which is dependent on H3K4me3 mark acquisition. Targeting WD repeat domain 5
(Wdr5), which is absolutely required for H3K4me3 enrichment, decreased ErbB2
overexpression, associated with a decrease in the H3K4me3 mark on the erbB2
promoter. Of note, Wdr5 silencing cooperated with trastuzumab or chemotherapy in 
specifically inhibiting the growth of ErbB2-positive breast tumor cells. Thus,
our studies illuminate epigenetic steps in the selection for ErbB2 activation.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3905738
PMID: 24120871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mol Cell. 2013 Nov 7;52(3):380-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.09.002. Epub 2013
Oct 10.

Context-dependent wiring of Sox2 regulatory networks for self-renewal of
embryonic and trophoblast stem cells.

Adachi K(1), Nikaido I, Ohta H, Ohtsuka S, Ura H, Kadota M, Wakayama T, Ueda HR, 
Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 6500047, Japan. Electronic
address: kenjiro.adachi@mpi-muenster.mpg.de.

Sox2 is a transcription factor required for the maintenance of pluripotency. It
also plays an essential role in different types of multipotent stem cells,
raising the possibility that Sox2 governs the common stemness phenotype. Here we 
show that Sox2 is a critical downstream target of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 
signaling, which mediates self-renewal of trophoblast stem cells (TSCs).
Sustained expression of Sox2 together with Esrrb or Tfap2c can replace FGF
dependency. By comparing genome-wide binding sites of Sox2 in embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) and TSCs combined with inducible knockout systems, we found that,
despite the common role in safeguarding the stem cell state, Sox2 regulates
distinct sets of genes with unique functions in these two different yet
developmentally related types of stem cells. Our findings provide insights into
the functional versatility of transcription factors during embryogenesis, during 
which they can be recursively utilized in a variable manner within discrete
network structures.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Mar;54(3):178-88. doi: 10.1002/mc.22085. Epub 2013 Sep 24.

Genome-wide screening of aberrant DNA methylation which associated with gene
expression in mouse skin cancers.

Fujiwara K(1), Ghosh S, Liang P, Morien E, Soma M, Nagase H.

Author information: 
(1)Innovative Therapy Research Group, Nihon University Research Institute of
Medical Science, Nihon University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Division of
General Medicine, Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Epigenetic alteration of genomic DNA is a common and key process in
carcinogenesis. There is considerable evidence indicating that some of the
somatic alterations occurring during carcinogenesis in humans also involve the
same processes as those observed in mice. Therefore, we analyzed mouse skin
cancer tissues induced by the 2-stage carcinogenesis model to identify skin
tumor-specific differentially methylated regions (ST-DMRs) during the multistep
carcinogenesis process. We have previously identified ST-DMRs using the
restriction landmark genomic scanning (RLGS) technique and reported that some of 
the mouse ST-DMRs were also epigenetically modified in human cancers, such as
melanoma, neuroblastoma, and brain tumor. These results encouraged us to pursue
global methylation screening in mouse skin carcinogenesis. Using the methylated
DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) method combined with the NimbleGen promoter plus 
CpG island (CpGi) array, we identified 615 ST-DMRs. In combination with global
gene expression analysis, 91 of these ST-DMRs were shown to be located on or
around the genes differentially expressed between normal skin and tumor tissues, 
including a candidate human tumor suppressor gene Tfap2e. As observed in human
colorectal cancers, Tfap2e was methylated at a CpGi located in intron 3 and
downregulated in skin tumors. Our results identified aberrant methylated regions 
that were associated with gene expression regulation during carcinogenesis, which
may indicate critical genetic regions also involved in human carcinogenesis. ©
2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24115114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 24;8(9):e75016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075016. eCollection
2013.

The BTB-containing protein Kctd15 is SUMOylated in vivo.

Zarelli VE(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Potassium Channel Tetramerization Domain containing 15 (Kctd15) has a role in
regulating the neural crest (NC) domain in the embryo. Kctd15 inhibits NC
induction by antagonizing Wnt signaling and by interaction with the transcription
factor AP-2a activation domain blocking its activity. Here we demonstrate that
Kctd15 is SUMOylated by SUMO1 and SUMO2/3. Kctd15 contains a classical SUMO
interacting motif, <U+03C8>KxE, at the C-terminal end, and variants of the motif within 
the molecule. Kctd15 SUMOylation occurs exclusively in the C-terminal motif.
Inability to be SUMOylated did not affect Kctd15's subcellular localization, or
its ability to repress AP-2 transcriptional activity and to inhibit NC formation 
in zebrafish embryos. In contrast, a fusion of Kctd15 and SUMO had little
effectiveness in AP-2 inhibition and in blocking of NC formation. These data
suggest that the non-SUMOylated form of Kctd15 functions in NC development.

PMCID: PMC3782465
PMID: 24086424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Hum Hered. 2013;75(2-4):213-9. doi: 10.1159/000353591. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

TFAP2B -dietary protein and glycemic index interactions and weight maintenance
after weight loss in the DiOGenes trial.

Stocks T(1), Ängquist L, Hager J, Charon C, Holst C, Martinez JA, Saris WH,
Astrup A, Sørensen TI, Larsen LH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg University
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: TFAP2B rs987237 is associated with obesity and has shown interaction 
with the dietary fat-to-carbohydrate ratio, which has an effect on weight loss.
We investigated interactions between rs987237 and protein-to-carbohydrate ratio
or glycemic index (GI) in relation to weight maintenance after weight loss.
METHODS: This study included 742 obese individuals from 8 European countries who 
participated in the Diet, Obesity, and Genes (DiOGenes) trial, lost = 8% of their
initial body weight during an 8-week low-calorie diet and were randomized to one 
of 5 ad libitum diets with a fixed energy percentage from fat: either
low-protein/low-GI, low-protein/high-GI, high-protein/low-GI, or
high-protein/high-GI diets, or a control diet for a 6-month weight maintenance
period. Using linear regression analyses and additive genetic models, we
investigated main and dietary interaction effects of TFAP2B rs987237 in relation 
to weight maintenance.
RESULTS: In total, 468 completers of the trial were genotyped for rs987237.
High-protein diets were beneficial for weight maintenance in the AA genotype
group (67% of participants), but in the AG and GG groups no differences were
observed for low- or high-protein diets. On the high-protein diet, carriers of
the obesity risk allele (G allele) regained 1.84 kg (95% CI: 0.02; 3.67, p =
0.047) more body weight per risk allele than individuals on a low-protein diet.
There was no interaction effect between rs987237 and GI on weight maintenance.
CONCLUSION: TFAP2B rs987237 and dietary protein/carbohydrate interacted to modify
weight maintenance. Considering the carbohydrate proportion of the diet, the
interaction was different from the previously reported
rs987237-fat-to-carbohydrate ratio interaction for weight loss. Thus,
TFAP2B-macronutrient interactions might diverge depending on the nutritional
state.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24081236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biomaterials. 2013 Dec;34(38):9789-802. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.08.084. 
Epub 2013 Sep 23.

BMP10 as a potent inducer of trophoblast differentiation in human embryonic and
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lichtner B(1), Knaus P, Lehrach H, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany; Department of Biology, Chemistry
and Pharmacy, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, 
Thielallee 63, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are known to induce diverse differentiation
fates in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs). In the present study, we compared
the potency at which BMP5, BMP10 and BMP13, which are members of distinct BMP
subgroups due to differences in sequential and structural homology, induce
differentiation in hESCs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs). We
observed, in agreement with previous BMP4 model studies, that all ligands induced
differentiation to the trophoblast lineage in the absence of bFGF. However,
distinct BMPs exerted differences in the kinetics of induced differentiation,
with BMP10 being the most potent. hiPSCs and hESCs shared comparable expression
patterns of BMP type-I and -II receptor subtypes, which might explain conserved
properties with respect to ligand potency and activation of SMAD-dependent (via
SMAD1/5/8) and -independent (via MAPK p38) signal transduction pathways. The
tested BMPs had distinct and also conserved target genes such as CDX2, DLX3,
DLX5, GATA2, GATA3, HAND1, ID2, MSX2 and TFAP2A, known to be associated with the 
emergence of trophoblast cells. hESCs induced expression of the BMP antagonist
NOGGIN as a protection mechanism to constrict extensive BMP action. Unlike BMP4, 
BMP10 has been shown to be resistant to NOGGIN-induced inhibition which in part
might explain its potency. BMPs, in particular BMP4, are commonly used cytokines 
in differentiation protocols to generate diverse mesoderm- and endoderm-derivates
from human pluripotent stem cells. Our study has identified BMP10, a
cardiac-specific protein, as a superior alternative to BMP4 for inducing
trophoblast differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24070570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(9):e1003785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003785. Epub 2013 Sep 
19.

MicroRNA-17-92, a direct Ap-2a transcriptional target, modulates T-box factor
activity in orofacial clefting.

Wang J(1), Bai Y, Li H, Greene SB, Klysik E, Yu W, Schwartz RJ, Williams TJ,
Martin JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2013 Dec;9(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/90602bc3-5052-49ac-a7fb-33210d7c8b4d.

Among the most common human congenital anomalies, cleft lip and palate (CL/P)
affects up to 1 in 700 live births. MicroRNA (miR)s are small, non-coding RNAs
that repress gene expression post-transcriptionally. The miR-17-92 cluster
encodes six miRs that have been implicated in human cancers and heart
development. We discovered that miR-17-92 mutant embryos had severe craniofacial 
phenotypes, including incompletely penetrant CL/P and mandibular hypoplasia.
Embryos that were compound mutant for miR-17-92 and the related miR-106b-25
cluster had completely penetrant CL/P. Expression of Tbx1 and Tbx3, the
DiGeorge/velo-cardio-facial (DGS) and Ulnar-mammary syndrome (UMS) disease genes,
was expanded in miR-17-92 mutant craniofacial structures. Both Tbx1 and Tbx3 had 
functional miR seed sequences that mediated gene repression. Analysis of
miR-17-92 regulatory regions uncovered conserved and functional AP-2a recognition
elements that directed miR-17-92 expression. Together, our data indicate that
miR-17-92 modulates expression of critical T-box transcriptional regulators
during midface development and is itself a target of Bmp-signaling and the
craniofacial pioneer factor AP-2a. Our data are the first genetic evidence that
an individual miR or miR cluster is functionally important in mammalian CL/P.

PMCID: PMC3777996
PMID: 24068957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Ann Surg. 2014 Apr;259(4):793-9. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e3182a6f552.

Distinct pathways regulated by RET and estrogen receptor in luminal breast cancer
demonstrate the biological basis for combination therapy.

Spanheimer PM(1), Cyr AR, Gillum MP, Woodfield GW, Askeland RW, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated directed therapy based on TFAP2C-regulated pathways to
inform new therapeutic approaches for treatment of luminal breast cancer.
BACKGROUND: TFAP2C regulates the expression of genes characterizing the luminal
phenotype including ESR1 and RET, but pathway cross talk and potential for
distinct elements have not been characterized.
METHODS: Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) and AKT was
assessed using phosphorylation-specific Western blot. Cell proliferation was
measured with MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] 
after siRNA (small interfering RNA) gene knockdown or drug treatment. Cell cycle,
Ki-67, and cleaved caspase 3 were measured by fluorescence-activated cell
sorting. Tumorigenesis was assessed in mice xenografts.
RESULTS: Knockdown of TFAP2C or RET inhibited GDNF (glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor)-mediated activation of ERK and AKT in MCF-7 cells.
Similarly, sunitinib, a small-molecule inhibitor of RET, blocked GDNF-mediated
activation of ERK and AKT. Inhibition of RET either by gene knockdown or by
treatment with sunitinib or vandetanib reduced RET-dependent growth of luminal
breast cancer cells. Interestingly, knockdown of TFAP2C, which controls both ER
(estrogen receptor) and RET, demonstrated a greater effect on cell growth than
either RET or ER alone. Parallel experiments using treatment with tamoxifen and
sunitinib confirmed the increased effectiveness of dual inhibition of the ER and 
RET pathways in regulating cell growth. Whereas targeting the ER pathway altered 
cell proliferation, as measured by Ki-67 and S-phase, anti-RET primarily
increased apoptosis, as demonstrated by cleaved caspase 3 and increased TUNEL
(terminal deoxyneucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling) expression in
xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS: ER and RET primarily function through distinct pathways regulating
proliferation and cell survival, respectively. The findings inform a therapeutic 
approach based on combination therapy with antiestrogen and anti-RET in luminal
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3986044
PMID: 24045439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 2;8(9):e73953. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073953. eCollection 
2013.

Human Melanoma cells over-express extracellular matrix 1 (ECM1) which is
regulated by TFAP2C.

Lal G(1), Contreras PG, Kulak M, Woodfield G, Bair T, Domann FE, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of
America.

Extracellular matrix 1 (ECM1) is over-expressed in multiple epithelial
malignancies. However, knowledge regarding the expression of ECM1 in melanomas
and the mechanisms of ECM1 regulation is limited. In this study, we found that
ECM1 is over-expressed in several melanoma cell lines, when compared to primary
melanocytes, and furthermore, that ECM1 expression paralleled that of TFAP2C
levels in multiple cell lines. Knockdown of TFAP2C in the A375 cell line with
siRNA led to a reduction in ECM1 expression, and upregulation of TFAP2C with
adenoviral vectors in the WM793 cell line resulted in ECM1 upregulation.
Utilizing 5' RACE to identify transcription start sites (TSS) and luciferase
reporter assays in the ECM1-overexpressing A375 cell line, we identified the
minimal promoter region of human ECM1 and demonstrate that an approximately 100bp
fragment upstream of the TSS containing a TATA box and binding sites for AP1, SP1
and Ets is sufficient for promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
direct sequencing (ChIP-seq) for TFAP2C in the A375 cell line identified an AP2
regulatory region in the promoter of the ECM1 gene. Gelshift assays further
confirmed binding of TFAP2C to this site. ECM1 knockdown reduces melanoma cell
attachment and is consistent with findings that ECM1 overexpression has been
associated with a poor prognosis. Our investigations show an as yet unrecognized 
role for TFAP2C in melanoma via its regulation of ECM1.

PMCID: PMC3759440
PMID: 24023917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Plant Cell Physiol. 2013 Nov;54(11):1822-36. doi: 10.1093/pcp/pct124. Epub 2013
Sep 4.

LaAP2L1, a heterosis-associated AP2/EREBP transcription factor of Larix,
increases organ size and final biomass by affecting cell proliferation in
Arabidopsis.

Li A(1), Zhou Y, Jin C, Song W, Chen C, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China.

In Larix and in some crops, heterosis is prevalent and has been widely used in
breeding to produce excellent varieties. However, the molecular basis of
heterosis in Larix remains ambiguous. LaAP2L1, a member of the AP2/EREBP
transcription factor family, has been suggested to be involved in heterosis in
Larix hybrids. Here, the function and regulation of LaAP2L1 were further
explored. Overexpression of LaAP2L1 led to markedly enlarged organs and
heterosis-like traits in Arabidopsis. Fresh weight of leaves was almost twice as 
great as in vector controls. Likewise, seed yield of 35S::LaAP2L1 individual
plants was >200% greater than that of control plants. The enlarged organs and
heterosis-like traits displayed by 35S::LaAP2L1 plants were mainly due to
enhanced cell proliferation and prolonged growth duration. At the molecular
level, LaAP2L1 upregulated the expression of ANT, EBP1, and CycD3;1 and inhibited
the expression of ARGOS in 35S::LaAP2L1 plants, suggesting an important molecular
role of LaAP2L1 in regulating plant organ development. These findings provide new
insights into the formation of heterosis in woody plants and suggest that LaAP2L1
has potential applications in breeding high-yielding crops and energy plants. In 
addition, 50 AP2/EREBP transcription factors, including LaAP2L1, in Larix were
identified by transcriptome sequencing, and phylogenetic analysis was conducted. 
This provided information that will be important in further revealing the
functions of these transcription factors.

PMID: 24009335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. FASEB J. 2013 Dec;27(12):4940-53. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-233528. Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Ubiquitin-specific protease 2-69 in macrophages potentially modulates
metainflammation.

Kitamura H(1), Kimura S, Shimamoto Y, Okabe J, Ito M, Miyamoto T, Naoe Y,
Kikuguchi C, Meek B, Toda C, Okamoto S, Kanehira K, Hase K, Watarai H, Ishizuka
M, El-Osta A, Ohara O, Miyoshi I.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Comparative and Experimental Medicine, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku,
Nagoya 467-8601, Japan. ktmr@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

Macrophages play a critical role in chronic inflammation and metabolic diseases. 
We identified a longer splice variant of ubiquitin specific protease (USP) 2-69
as a novel molecule that modulates pathways implicated in metabolic disorders.
Expression levels of aP2/FABP4 and PAI-1/SERPINE1 genes were increased by 4- and 
1.8-fold, respectively, after short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown (KD) of the
USP2 gene, and such expression was alleviated by overexpression of USP2-69 in
human myeloid cell lines. Supernatants derived from USP2-KD cells induced IL6
(~6-fold) and SAA3 (~15-fold) in 3T3-L1 adipocytes to suggest the
anti-inflammatory properties of USP2. In addition, we observed a 30% decrease in 
the number of macrophages in mesenteric adipose tissue derived from USP2-69
transgenic mice fed a high-fat diet for 14 wk compared with that in their C57BL/6
littermates (P<0.01), which was consistent with a ~40% decrease in transcription 
of aP2 and PAI-1. The aP2 locus exhibited elevated chromatin accessibility
(>2.1-fold), methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (>4.5-fold), and acetylation of
histone H4 (>2.5-fold) in USP2-KD cells. Transfection of isopeptidase-mutated
USP2-69 did not alter chromatin conformation on the aP2 locus in USP2-KD cells.
Our results suggest that USP2-69 suppresses meta-inflammatory molecules involved 
in the development of type-2 diabetes.

PMID: 24005904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. BMC Genomics. 2013 Aug 23;14:573. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-573.

Genome-wide analysis of the AP2/ERF transcription factor superfamily in Chinese
cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis).

Song X(1), Li Y, Hou X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement/Key Laboratory
of Biology and Germplasm Enhancement of Horticultural Crops in East China,
Ministry of Agriculture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095, China.

BACKGROUND: Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis) is a member of one of
the most important leaf vegetables grown worldwide, which has experienced
thousands of years in cultivation and artificial selection. The entire Chinese
cabbage genome sequence, and more than forty thousand proteins have been obtained
to date. The genome has undergone triplication events since its divergence from
Arabidopsis thaliana (13 to 17 Mya), however a high degree of sequence similarity
and conserved genome structure remain between the two species. Arabidopsis is
therefore a viable reference species for comparative genomics studies. Variation 
in the number of members in gene families due to genome triplication may
contribute to the broad range of phenotypic plasticity, and increased tolerance
to environmental extremes observed in Brassica species. Transcription factors are
important regulators involved in plant developmental and physiological processes.
The AP2/ERF proteins, one of the most important families of transcriptional
regulators, play a crucial role in plant growth, and in response to biotic and
abiotic stressors. Our analysis will provide resources for understanding the
tolerance mechanisms in Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis.
RESULTS: In the present study, 291 putative AP2/ERF transcription factor proteins
were identified from the Chinese cabbage genome database, and compared with
proteins from 15 additional species. The Chinese cabbage AP2/ERF superfamily was 
classified into four families, including AP2, ERF, RAV, and Soloist. The ERF
family was further divided into DREB and ERF subfamilies. The AP2/ERF superfamily
was subsequently divided into 15 groups. The identification, classification,
phylogenetic reconstruction, conserved motifs, chromosome distribution,
functional annotation, expression patterns, and interaction networks of the
AP2/ERF transcription factor superfamily were predicted and analyzed.
Distribution mapping results showed AP2/ERF superfamily genes were localized on
the 10 Chinese cabbage chromosomes. AP2/ERF transcription factor expression
levels exhibited differences among six tissue types based on expressed sequence
tags (ESTs). In the AP2/ERF superfamily, 214 orthologous genes were identified
between Chinese cabbage and Arabidopsis. Orthologous gene interaction networks
were constructed, and included seven CBF and four AP2 genes, primarily involved
in cold regulatory pathways and ovule development, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The evolution of the AP2/ERF transcription factor superfamily in
Chinese cabbage resulted from genome triplication and tandem duplications. A
comprehensive analysis of the physiological functions and biological roles of
AP2/ERF superfamily genes in Chinese cabbage is required to fully elucidate
AP2/ERF, which provides us with rich resources and opportunities to understand
crop stress tolerance mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3765354
PMID: 23972083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Dev Biol. 2013 Oct 15;382(2):567-75. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.009. Epub 2013 
Aug 19.

Identification and dissection of a key enhancer mediating cranial neural crest
specific expression of transcription factor, Ets-1.

Barembaum M(1), Bronner ME.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, MC 139-74, Pasadena, 
CA 91125 USA. Electronic address: mbaremba@caltech.edu.

Neural crest cells form diverse derivatives that vary according to their level of
origin along the body axis, with only cranial neural crest cells contributing to 
facial skeleton. Interestingly, the transcription factor Ets-1 is uniquely
expressed in cranial but not trunk neural crest, where it functions as a direct
input into neural crest specifier genes, Sox10 and FoxD3. We have isolated and
interrogated a cis-regulatory element, conserved between birds and mammals, that 
drives reporter expression in a manner that recapitulates that of endogenous
Ets-1 expression in the neural crest. Within a minimal Ets-1 enhancer region,
mutation of putative binding sites for SoxE, homeobox, Ets, TFAP2 or Fox proteins
results in loss or reduction of neural crest enhancer activity.
Morpholino-mediated loss-of-function experiments show that Sox9, Pax7, Msx1/2,
Ets-1, TFAP2A and FoxD3, all are required for enhancer activity. In contrast,
mutation of a putative cMyc/E-box sequence augments reporter expression,
consistent with this being a repressor binding site. Taken together, these
results uncover new inputs into Ets-1, revealing critical links in the cranial
neural crest gene regulatory network.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3872135
PMID: 23969311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 13;8(8):e71113. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071113. eCollection
2013.

Transcription factor TFAP2C regulates major programs required for murine fetal
germ cell maintenance and haploinsufficiency predisposes to teratomas in male
mice.

Schemmer J(1), Araúzo-Bravo MJ, Haas N, Schäfer S, Weber SN, Becker A, Eckert D, 
Zimmer A, Nettersheim D, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bonn Medical School, Institute of Pathology, Department of
Developmental Pathology, Bonn, Germany.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(8). doi:10.1371/annotation/579ac618-0ed0-4451-a4fc-10bad989024b.

Maintenance and maturation of primordial germ cells is controlled by complex
genetic and epigenetic cascades, and disturbances in this network lead to either 
infertility or malignant aberration. Transcription factor TFAP2C has been
described to be essential for primordial germ cell maintenance and to be
upregulated in several human germ cell cancers. Using global gene expression
profiling, we identified genes deregulated upon loss of Tfap2c in embryonic stem 
cells and primordial germ cell-like cells. We show that loss of Tfap2c affects
many aspects of the genetic network regulating germ cell biology, such as
downregulation of maturation markers and induction of markers indicative for
somatic differentiation, cell cycle, epigenetic remodeling and pluripotency.
Chromatin-immunoprecipitation analyses demonstrated binding of TFAP2C to
regulatory regions of deregulated genes (Sfrp1, Dmrt1, Nanos3, c-Kit, Cdk6,
Cdkn1a, Fgf4, Klf4, Dnmt3b and Dnmt3l) suggesting that these genes are direct
transcriptional targets of TFAP2C in primordial germ cells. Since Tfap2c
deficient primordial germ cell-like cells display cancer related deregulations in
epigenetic remodeling, cell cycle and pluripotency control, the Tfap2c-knockout
allele was bred onto 129S2/Sv genetic background. There, mice heterozygous for
Tfap2c develop with high incidence germ cell cancer resembling human pediatric
germ cell tumors. Precursor lesions can be observed as early as E16.5 in
developing testes displaying persisting expression of pluripotency markers. We
further demonstrate that mice with a heterozygous deletion of the TFAP2C target
gene Nanos3 are also prone to develop teratomas. These data highlight TFAP2C as a
critical and dose-sensitive regulator of germ cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3742748
PMID: 23967156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Oct;161A(10):2535-44. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36133. Epub 2013
Aug 15.

Search for genetic modifiers of IRF6 and genotype-phenotype correlations in Van
der Woude and popliteal pterygium syndromes.

Leslie EJ(1), Mancuso JL, Schutte BC, Cooper ME, Durda KM, L'heureux J, Zucchero 
TM, Marazita ML, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.

Van der Woude syndrome is the most common form of syndromic orofacial clefting,
accounting for 1-2% of all patients with cleft lip and/or cleft palate. Van der
Woude and popliteal pterygium syndromes are caused by mutations in IRF6, but
phenotypic variability within and among families with either syndrome suggests
that other genetic factors contribute to the phenotypes. The aim of this study
was to identify common variants acting as genetic modifiers of IRF6 as well as
genotype-phenotype correlations based on mutation type and location. We
identified an association between mutations in the DNA-binding domain of IRF6 and
limb defects (including pterygia). Although we did not detect formally
significant associations with the genes tested, borderline associations suggest
several genes that could modify the VWS phenotype, including FOXE1, TGFB3, and
TFAP2A. Some of these genes are hypothesized to be part of the IRF6 gene
regulatory network and may suggest additional genes for future study when larger 
sample sizes are also available. We also show that families with the Van de Woude
phenotype but in whom no mutations have been identified have a lower frequency of
cleft lip, suggesting there may be locus and/or mutation class differences in Van
de Woude syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3898350
PMID: 23949966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nature. 2013 Sep 12;501(7466):222-6. doi: 10.1038/nature12417. Epub 2013 Aug 4.

Induction of mouse germ-cell fate by transcription factors in vitro.

Nakaki F(1), Hayashi K, Ohta H, Kurimoto K, Yabuta Y, Saitou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

The germ-cell lineage ensures the continuity of life through the generation of
male and female gametes, which unite to form a totipotent zygote. We have
previously demonstrated that, by using cytokines, embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cells can be induced into epiblast-like cells (EpiLCs)
and then into primordial germ cell (PGC)-like cells with the capacity for both
spermatogenesis and oogenesis, creating an opportunity for understanding and
regulating mammalian germ-cell development in both sexes in vitro. Here we show
that, without cytokines, simultaneous overexpression of three transcription
factors, Blimp1 (also known as Prdm1), Prdm14 and Tfap2c (also known as AP2<U+03B3>),
directs EpiLCs, but not embryonic stem cells, swiftly and efficiently into a PGC 
state. Notably, Prdm14 alone, but not Blimp1 or Tfap2c, suffices for the
induction of the PGC state in EpiLCs. The transcription-factor-induced PGC state,
irrespective of the transcription factors used, reconstitutes key transcriptome
and epigenetic reprogramming in PGCs, but bypasses a mesodermal program that
accompanies PGC or PGC-like-cell specification by cytokines including bone
morphogenetic protein 4. Notably, the transcription-factor-induced PGC-like cells
contribute to spermatogenesis and fertile offspring. Our findings provide a new
insight into the transcriptional logic for PGC specification, and create a
foundation for the transcription-factor-based reconstitution and regulation of
mammalian gametogenesis.

PMID: 23913270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Development. 2013 Aug;140(16):3445-55. doi: 10.1242/dev.096164.

Prdm1a directly activates foxd3 and tfap2a during zebrafish neural crest
specification.

Powell DR(1), Hernandez-Lagunas L, LaMonica K, Artinger KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The neural crest comprises multipotent precursor cells that are induced at the
neural plate border by a series of complex signaling and genetic interactions.
Several transcription factors, termed neural crest specifiers, are necessary for 
early neural crest development; however, the nature of their interactions and
regulation is not well understood. Here, we have established that the PR/SET
domain-containing transcription factor Prdm1a is co-expressed with two essential 
neural crest specifiers, foxd3 and tfap2a, at the neural plate border. Through
rescue experiments, chromatin immunoprecipitation and reporter assays, we have
determined that Prdm1a directly binds to and transcriptionally activates
enhancers for foxd3 and tfap2a and that they are functional, direct targets of
Prdm1a at the neural plate border. Additionally, analysis of dominant activator
and dominant repressor Prdm1a constructs suggests that Prdm1a is required both as
a transcriptional activator and transcriptional repressor for neural crest
development in zebrafish embryos.

PMCID: PMC3737723
PMID: 23900542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neuropsychobiology. 2013;68(2):79-90. doi: 10.1159/000350997. Epub 2013 Jul 19.

Neuropsychological correlates of transcription factor AP-2Beta, and its
interaction with COMT and MAOA in healthy females.

Schabram I(1), Eggermann T, Siegel SJ, Gründer G, Zerres K, Vernaleken I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen
University, and JARA-Translational Brain Medicine, Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor AP-2ß has been shown to impact clinical and 
neuropsychological properties. Apparently, it regulates the transcription of
genes that code for molecules which are part of the catecholaminergic
transmission system. This investigation focuses on possible effects of the
transcription factor AP-2ß intron 2 polymorphism on cognitive performance
parameters.
METHODS: This hypothesis-driven investigation examined the effects and
interactions of the transcription factor AP-2ß intron 2 polymorphism, the
Val158Met catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) polymorphism, and the variable
number of tandem repeat polymorphism of monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) on cognitive
performance parameters within a group of 200 healthy women (age: mean ± SD, 23.93
± 3.33 years).
RESULTS: The AP-2ß polymorphism significantly influenced cognitive performance
(in particular, the Trail Making Test part B), whereas the MAOA and COMT
polymorphisms did not. However, there was an interaction effect of the AP-2ß ×
MAOA × COMT genotypes on the decision bias ß of the degraded-stimulus version of 
the continuous performance task. Only the Val158Met COMT polymorphism showed an
influence on personality questionnaires (openness and self-transcendence; NEO
Five-Factor Inventory, Temperament and Character Inventory).
CONCLUSION: The transcription factor AP-2ß intron 2 polymorphism had more
influence on cognition than the MAOA and COMT polymorphisms. Possibly, the AP-2ß 
genotype might influence cognition through pathways other than those that
regulate MAOA and COMT transcription. Interactions of transcription factor AP-2ß,
COMT, and MAOA polymorphisms suggest higher leverage effects of transcription
factor AP-2ß in subjects with high dopamine availability.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23881096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 15;8(7):e69240. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069240. Print 2013.

Berberine Targets AP-2/hTERT, NF-<U+03BA>B/COX-2, HIF-1a/VEGF and Cytochrome-c/Caspase
Signaling to Suppress Human Cancer Cell Growth.

Fu L(1), Chen W, Guo W, Wang J, Tian Y, Shi D, Zhang X, Qiu H, Xiao X, Kang T,
Huang W, Wang S, Deng W.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer
Center, Guangzhou, China.

Berberine (BBR), an isoquinoline derivative alkaloid isolated from Chinese herbs,
has a long history of uses for the treatment of multiple diseases, including
cancers. However, the precise mechanisms of actions of BBR in human lung cancer
cells remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the molecular mechanisms by 
which BBR inhibits cell growth in human non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells.
Treatment with BBR promoted cell morphology change, inhibited cell migration,
proliferation and colony formation, and induced cell apoptosis. Further molecular
mechanism study showed that BBR simultaneously targeted multiple cell signaling
pathways to inhibit NSCLC cell growth. Treatment with BBR inhibited AP-2a and
AP-2ß expression and abrogated their binding on hTERT promoters, thereby
inhibiting hTERT expression. Knockdown of AP-2a and AP-2ß by siRNA considerably
augmented the BBR-mediated inhibition of cell growth. BBR also suppressed the
nuclear translocation of p50/p65 NF-<U+03BA>B proteins and their binding to COX-2
promoter, causing inhibition of COX-2. BBR also downregulated HIF-1a and VEGF
expression and inhibited Akt and ERK phosphorylation. Knockdown of HIF-1a by
siRNA considerably augmented the BBR-mediated inhibition of cell growth.
Moreover, BBR treatment triggered cytochrome-c release from mitochondrial
inter-membrane space into cytosol, promoted cleavage of caspase and PARP, and
affected expression of BAX and Bcl-2, thereby activating apoptotic pathway. Taken
together, these results demonstrated that BBR inhibited NSCLC cell growth by
simultaneously targeting AP-2/hTERT, NF-<U+03BA>B/COX-2, HIF-1a/VEGF, PI3K/AKT,
Raf/MEK/ERK and cytochrome-c/caspase signaling pathways. Our findings provide new
insights into understanding the anticancer mechanisms of BBR in human lung cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3711861
PMID: 23869238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):905-15. doi: 10.1038/ncb2798. Epub 2013 Jul 14.

A tripartite transcription factor network regulates primordial germ cell
specification in mice.

Magnúsdóttir E(1), Dietmann S, Murakami K, Günesdogan U, Tang F, Bao S, Diamanti 
E, Lao K, Gottgens B, Azim Surani M.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge,
Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QN, UK.

Transitions in cell states are controlled by combinatorial actions of
transcription factors. BLIMP1, the key regulator of primordial germ cell (PGC)
specification, apparently acts together with PRDM14 and AP2<U+03B3>. To investigate
their individual and combinatorial functions, we first sought an in vitro system 
for transcriptional readouts and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
analysis. We then integrated this data with information from single-cell
transcriptome analysis of normal and mutant PGCs. Here we show that BLIMP1 binds 
directly to repress somatic and cell proliferation genes. It also directly
induces AP2<U+03B3>, which together with PRDM14 initiates the PGC-specific fate. We
determined the occupancy of critical genes by AP2<U+03B3>-which, when computed
altogether with those of BLIMP1 and PRDM14 (both individually and cooperatively),
reveals a tripartite mutually interdependent transcriptional network for PGCs. We
also demonstrate that, in principle, BLIMP1, AP2<U+03B3> and PRDM14 are sufficient for
PGC specification, and the unprecedented resetting of the epigenome towards a
basal state.

PMCID: PMC3796875
PMID: 23851488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Cell Biol. 2013 Jul 8;202(1):113-27. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201211110.

ARH directs megalin to the endocytic recycling compartment to regulate its
proteolysis and gene expression.

Shah M(1), Baterina OY Jr, Taupin V, Farquhar MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Receptors internalized by endocytosis can return to the plasma membrane (PM)
directly from early endosomes (EE; fast recycling) or they can traffic from EE to
the endocytic recycling compartment (ERC) and recycle from there (slow
recycling). How receptors are sorted for trafficking along these two pathways
remains unclear. Here we show that autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH)
is required for trafficking of megalin, a member of the LDL receptor family, from
EE to the ERC by coupling it to dynein; in the absence of ARH, megalin returns
directly to the PM from EE via the connecdenn2/Rab35 fast recycling pathway.
Binding of ARH to the endocytic adaptor AP-2 prevents fast recycling of megalin. 
ARH-mediated trafficking of megalin to the ERC is necessary for <U+03B3>-secretase
mediated cleavage of megalin and release of a tail fragment that mediates
transcriptional repression. These results identify a novel mechanism for sorting 
receptors for trafficking to the ERC and link ERC trafficking to regulated
intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) and expression of megalin.

PMCID: PMC3704979
PMID: 23836931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Neuroscience. 2013 Sep 17;248:602-19. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.06.029.
Epub 2013 Jun 27.

Status epilepticus triggers early and late alterations in brain-derived
neurotrophic factor and NMDA glutamate receptor Grin2b DNA methylation levels in 
the hippocampus.

Ryley Parrish R(1), Albertson AJ(2), Buckingham SC(3), Hablitz JJ(4), Mascia
KL(5), Davis Haselden W(6), Lubin FD(7).

Author information: 
(1)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Neurobiology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
Electronic address: rparris1@uab.edu. (2)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute,
Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University 
Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. Electronic address: asher693@uab.edu.
(3)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Neurobiology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
Electronic address: sbucking@uab.edu. (4)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute,
Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University 
Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. Electronic address: Hablitz@nrc.uab.edu.
(5)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Neurobiology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
Electronic address: Kmascia@uab.edu. (6)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute,
Department of Neurobiology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University 
Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA. Electronic address: haselden@uab.edu.
(7)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Neurobiology, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, 1825 University Boulevard, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
Electronic address: flubin@uab.edu.

Status epilepticus (SE) triggers abnormal expression of genes in the hippocampus,
such as glutamate receptor subunit epsilon-2 (Grin2b/Nr2b) and brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (Bdnf), that is thought to occur in temporal lobe epilepsy
(TLE). We examined the underlying DNA methylation mechanisms and investigated
whether these mechanisms contribute to the expression of these gene targets in
the epileptic hippocampus. Experimental TLE was provoked by kainic acid-induced
SE. Bisulfite sequencing analysis revealed increased Grin2b/Nr2b and decreased
Bdnf DNA methylation levels that corresponded to decreased Grin2b/Nr2b and
increased Bdnf mRNA and protein expression in the epileptic hippocampus. Blockade
of DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity with zebularine decreased global DNA
methylation levels and reduced Grin2b/Nr2b, but not Bdnf, DNA methylation levels.
Interestingly, we found that DNMT blockade further decreased Grin2b/Nr2b mRNA
expression whereas GRIN2B protein expression increased in the epileptic
hippocampus, suggesting that a posttranscriptional mechanism may be involved.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis we found that DNMT inhibition
restored the decreases in AP2alpha transcription factor levels at the Grin2b/Nr2b
promoter in the epileptic hippocampus. DNMT inhibition increased field excitatory
postsynaptic potential in hippocampal slices isolated from epileptic rats.
Electroencephalography (EEG) monitoring confirmed that DNMT inhibition did not
significantly alter the disease course, but promoted the latency to seizure onset
or SE. Thus, DNA methylation may be an early event triggered by SE that persists 
late into the epileptic hippocampus to contribute to gene expression changes in
TLE.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3830613
PMID: 23811393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Aug 15;319(14):2282-95. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.06.011. Epub
2013 Jun 26.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) plays a role in the
anti-tumorigenic effects of 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) in breast cancer cells.

Zeng L(1), Jarrett C, Brown K, Gillespie KM, Holly JM, Perks CM.

Author information: 
(1)IGFs & Metabolic Endocrinology Group, University of Bristol, Learning &
Research Building, Southmead Hospital, Bristol BS10 5NB, United Kingdom.

Breast cancer progression is associated with loss of estrogen receptor (ER-a),
often due to epigenetic silencing. IGFBP genes have consistently been identified 
among the most common to be aberrantly methylated in tumours. To understand the
impact of losing IGFBP-3 tumour expression via DNA methylation, we treated four
breast cancer cell lines (MCF-7, T47D, Hs578T and MDA-MB-231) with a DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) to determine IGFBP-3's 
role in the effects of AZA on total cell number and survival relative to changes 
in the ER. AZA induced cell growth inhibition, death and a reduction in the
formation of colonies, despite increasing ER-a expression in ER-negative cells
but reducing ER-a in ER-positive cells. Regardless of the differential effects on
the ER-a, AZA consistently increased the abundance of IGFBP-3 and negating this
increase in IGFBP-3 with siRNA reduced the AZA-induced growth inhibition and
induction of cell death and virtually negated the AZA-induced inhibition of
colony formation. With ER-a positive cells AZA increased the abundance of the
tumour suppressor gene, p53 and induced demethylation of the IGFBP-3 promoter,
whereas with ER negative cells, AZA epigenetically increased the transcription
factor AP2-a, which when silenced prevented the increase in IGFBP-3. IGFBP-3
plays an important role in the anti-tumorigenic effects of AZA on breast cancer
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Gene. 2013 Sep 25;527(2):606-15. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.05.078. Epub 2013 Jun
19.

Novel polymorphisms in UTR and coding region of inducible heat shock protein 70.1
gene in tropically adapted Indian zebu cattle (Bos indicus) and riverine buffalo 
(Bubalus bubalis).

Sodhi M(1), Mukesh M, Kishore A, Mishra BP, Kataria RS, Joshi BK.

Author information: 
(1)National Bureau of Animal Genetic resources, Karnal 132001, India.
monikasodhi@yahoo.com

Due to evolutionary divergence, cattle (taurine, and indicine) and buffalo are
speculated to have different responses to heat stress condition. Variation in
candidate genes associated with a heat-shock response may provide an insight into
the dissimilarity and suggest targets for intervention. The present work was
undertaken to characterize one of the inducible heat shock protein genes promoter
and coding regions in diverse breeds of Indian zebu cattle and buffaloes. The
genomic DNA from a panel of 117 unrelated animals representing 14 diversified
native cattle breeds and 6 buffalo breeds were utilized to determine the complete
sequence and gene diversity of HSP70.1 gene. The coding region of HSP70.1 gene in
Indian zebu cattle, Bos taurus and buffalo was similar in length (1,926 bp)
encoding a HSP70 protein of 641 amino acids with a calculated molecular weight
(Mw) of 70.26 kDa. However buffalo had a longer 5' and 3' untranslated region
(UTR) of 204 and 293 nucleotides respectively, in comparison to Indian zebu
cattle and Bos taurus wherein length of 5' and 3'-UTR was 172 and 286
nucleotides, respectively. The increased length of buffalo HSP70.1 gene compared 
to indicine and taurine gene was due to two insertions each in 5' and 3'-UTR.
Comparative sequence analysis of cattle (taurine and indicine) and buffalo
HSP70.1 gene revealed a total of 54 gene variations (50 SNPs and 4 INDELs) among 
the three species in the HSP70.1 gene. The minor allele frequencies of these
nucleotide variations varied from 0.03 to 0.5 with an average of 0.26. Among the 
14 B. indicus cattle breeds studied, a total of 19 polymorphic sites were
identified: 4 in the 5'-UTR and 15 in the coding region (of these 2 were
non-synonymous). Analysis among buffalo breeds revealed 15 SNPs throughout the
gene: 6 at the 5' flanking region and 9 in the coding region. In bubaline 5'-UTR,
2 additional putative transcription factor binding sites (Elk-1 and C-Re1) were
identified, other than three common sites (CP2, HSE and Pax-4) observed across
all the analyzed animals. No polymorphism was found within the 3'-UTR of Indian
cattle or buffalo as it was found to be monomorphic. The promoter sequences
generated in 117 individuals showed a rich array of sequence elements known to be
involved in transcription regulation. A total of 11 nucleotide changes were
observed in the promoter sequence across the analyzed species, 3 of these changes
were located within the potential transcription factor binding domains. We also
identified 4 microsatellite markers within the buffalo HSP70.1 gene and 3
microsatellites within bovine HSP70.1. The present study identified several
distinct changes across indicine, taurine and bubaline HSP70.1 genes that could
further be evaluated as molecular markers for thermotolerance.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23792016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 13;8(6):e65498. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065498. Print 2013.

Landscape of transcriptional deregulations in the preeclamptic placenta.

Vaiman D(1), Calicchio R, Miralles F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1016-CNRS UMR8104, Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, Paris,
France.

Preeclampsia is a pregnancy disease affecting 5 to 8% of pregnant women and a
leading cause of both maternal and fetal mortality and morbidity. Because of a
default in the process of implantation, the placenta of preeclamptic women
undergoes insufficient vascularization. This results in placental ischemia,
inflammation and subsequent release of placental debris and vasoactive factors in
the maternal circulation causing a systemic endothelial activation. Several
microarray studies have analyzed the transcriptome of the preeclamptic placentas 
to identify genes which could be involved in placental dysfunction. In this
study, we compared the data from publicly available microarray analyses to obtain
a consensus list of modified genes. This allowed to identify consistently
modified genes in the preeclamptic placenta. Of these, 67 were up-regulated and
31 down-regulated. Assuming that changes in the transcription level of
co-expressed genes may result from the coordinated action of a limited number of 
transcription factors, we looked for over-represented putative transcription
factor binding sites in the promoters of these genes. Indeed, we found that the
promoters of up-regulated genes are enriched in putative binding sites for NFkB, 
CREB, ANRT, REEB1, SP1, and AP-2. In the promoters of down-regulated genes, the
most prevalent putative binding sites are those of MZF-1, NFYA, E2F1 and MEF2A.
These transcriptions factors are known to regulate specific biological pathways
such as cell responses to inflammation, hypoxia, DNA damage and proliferation. We
discuss here the molecular mechanisms of action of these transcription factors
and how they can be related to the placental dysfunction in the context of
preeclampsia.

PMCID: PMC3681798
PMID: 23785430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Surg Res. 2013 Sep;184(1):519-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2013.04.042. Epub 2013 May
11.

High TFAP2C/low CD44 expression is associated with an increased rate of
pathologic complete response following neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast cancer.

Spanheimer PM(1), Askeland RW, Kulak MV, Wu T, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242-1086, USA.

BACKGROUND: In luminal breast cancer cell lines, TFAP2C regulates expression of
key genes in the estrogen receptor-associated cluster and represses
basal-associated genes including CD44. We examined the effect of TFAP2C
overexpression in a basal cell line and characterized the expression of TFAP2C
and CD44 in breast cancer specimens to determine if expression was associated
with clinical response.
METHODS: MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells were treated with a TFAP2C-containing
plasmid and evaluated for effects on CD44 expression. Pretreatment biopsy cores
from patients receiving neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer were evaluated
for TFAP2A, p53, TFAP2C, and CD44 expression by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Overexpression of TFAP2C in MDA-MB-231 cells resulted in decreased
expression of CD44 mRNA and protein, P < 0.05. A pathologic complete response
(pCR) following neoadjuvant chemotherapy was achieved in 17% of patients (4/23). 
Average expression for TFAP2C by immunohistochemistry in patients with a pCR was 
93%, compared with 46% in patients with residual disease, P = 0.016; and in
tumors that stained at =80% for TFAP2C, 4 of 9 (44%) achieved pCR, compared with 
0 of 14 below 80%, P = 0.01. Additionally, in tumors that stained =80% for CD44, 
4 of 10 (40%) achieved pCR, compared with 0 of 13 >80%, P = 0.02. In tumors that 
stained high for TFAP2C (=80%) and low for CD44 (=80%), 4 of 7 (57%) achieved
pCR, compared with 0 of 16 in all other groups (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: TFAP2C repressed CD44 expression in basal-derived breast cancer. In 
primary breast cancer specimens, high TFAP2C and low CD44 expression were
associated with pCR after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and could be predictive of
tumors that have improved response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3820425
PMID: 23764310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e65771. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065771. Print 2013.

Evidence that transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> is not required for Oct4 repression in
mouse blastocysts.

Choi I(1), Carey TS, Wilson CA, Knott JG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Epigenetics Laboratory, Department of Animal Science, Michigan
State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States of America.

In mouse blastocysts segregation of the inner cell mass (ICM) and the
trophectoderm (TE) is regulated by the mutually antagonistic effects of the
transcription factors Oct4 and Cdx2 expressed in the ICM and TE, respectively. In
contrast, in other species such as bovine and human, Oct4 is not restricted to
the ICM and continues to be expressed in the Cdx2-positive TE. A recent
comparative study of the bovine and mouse Oct4 promoters revealed that additional
mechanisms might act in conjunction with Cdx2 to downregulate Oct4 expression in 
the mouse TE lineage. For instance, the mouse Oct4 distal enhancer contains an
AP-2<U+03B3> (Tcfap2c) binding motif that is absent in the bovine and human Oct4 distal 
enhancer. Nonetheless, the functional relevance of Tcfap2c in Oct4 repression
during mouse preimplantation development was not tested. To elucidate the role of
Tcfap2c in Oct4 expression an RNA interference approach was utilized. Depletion
of Tcfap2c triggered a decrease in Oct4 expression at the 8-cell and morula
stage. Remarkably, at the blastocyst stage depletion of Tcfap2c and/or its family
member Tcfap2a had no effect on Oct4 repression. To test whether Tcfap2c
interacts with Oct4 to positively regulate Oct4 expression, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and in situ co-immunoprecipitation analyses were performed.
These experiments revealed Tcfap2c and Oct4 binding were enriched at the Oct4
distal enhancer in embryonic stem (ES) cells, but were rapidly lost during
differentiation into trophoblast-like cells when Oct4 became repressed. Moreover,
Tcfap2c and Oct4 interactions were detected at the morula stage, but were lost
during blastocyst formation. In summary, these data demonstrate that Tcfap2c is
not required for Oct4 silencing in mouse blastocysts, but may be necessary for
the maintenance of Oct4 expression during the 8 cell-to-morula transition. These 
findings support the notion Cdx2 is the predominant negative regulator of Oct4
expression during blastocyst formation in mice.

PMCID: PMC3669238
PMID: 23741512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Plant Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;82(4-5):439-55. doi: 10.1007/s11103-013-0073-9. Epub
2013 May 24.

OsRMC, a negative regulator of salt stress response in rice, is regulated by two 
AP2/ERF transcription factors.

Serra TS(1), Figueiredo DD, Cordeiro AM, Almeida DM, Lourenço T, Abreu IA,
Sebastián A, Fernandes L, Contreras-Moreira B, Oliveira MM, Saibo NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics of Plant Stress Laboratory, Instituto de Tecnologia Química e
Biológica, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Oeiras, Portugal.

High salinity causes remarkable losses in rice productivity worldwide mainly
because it inhibits growth and reduces grain yield. To cope with environmental
changes, plants evolved several adaptive mechanisms, which involve the regulation
of many stress-responsive genes. Among these, we have chosen OsRMC to study its
transcriptional regulation in rice seedlings subjected to high salinity. Its
transcription was highly induced by salt treatment and showed a
stress-dose-dependent pattern. OsRMC encodes a receptor-like kinase described as 
a negative regulator of salt stress responses in rice. To investigate how OsRMC
is regulated in response to high salinity, a salt-induced rice cDNA expression
library was constructed and subsequently screened using the yeast one-hybrid
system and the OsRMC promoter as bait. Thereby, two transcription factors (TFs), 
OsEREBP1 and OsEREBP2, belonging to the AP2/ERF family were identified. Both TFs 
were shown to bind to the same GCC-like DNA motif in OsRMC promoter and to
negatively regulate its gene expression. The identified TFs were characterized
regarding their gene expression under different abiotic stress conditions. This
study revealed that OsEREBP1 transcript level is not significantly affected by
salt, ABA or severe cold (5 °C) and is only slightly regulated by drought and
moderate cold. On the other hand, the OsEREBP2 transcript level increased after
cold, ABA, drought and high salinity treatments, indicating that OsEREBP2 may
play a central role mediating the response to different abiotic stresses. Gene
expression analysis in rice varieties with contrasting salt tolerance further
suggests that OsEREBP2 is involved in salt stress response in rice.

PMID: 23703395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2013 Sep;34(9):1192-200. doi: 10.1038/aps.2013.38. Epub 2013 
May 20.

Curcumin inhibits AP-2<U+03B3>-induced apoptosis in the human malignant testicular germ 
cells in vitro.

Zhou C(1), Zhao XM, Li XF, Wang C, Zhang XT, Liu XZ, Ding XF, Xiang SL, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of Protein
Chemistry and Developmental Biology, Ministry of Education of China, College of
Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410081, China.
zhouchang1972@126.com

AIM: To investigate the effects of curcumin on proliferation and apoptosis in
testicular cancer cells in vitro and to investigate its molecular mechanisms of
action.
METHODS: NTera-2 human malignant testicular germ cell line and F9 mouse
teratocarcinoma stem cell line were used. The anti-proliferative effect was
examined using MTT and colony formation assays. Hoechst 33258 staining, TUNEL and
Annexin V-FITC/PI staining assays were used to analyze cell apoptosis. Protein
expression was examined with Western blot analysis and immunocytochemical
staining.
RESULTS: Curcumin (5, 10 and 15 µmol/L) inhibited the viability of NTera-2 cells 
in dose- and time-dependent manners. Curcumin significantly inhibited the colony 
formation in both NTera-2 and F9 cells. Curcumin dose-dependently induced
apoptosis of NTera-2 cells by reducing FasL expression and Bcl-2-to-Bax ratio,
and activating caspase-9, -8 and -3. Furthermore, curcumin dose-dependently
reduced the expression of AP transcription factor AP-2<U+03B3> in NTera-2 cells, whereas
the pretreatment with the proteasome inhibitor MG132 blocked both the
curcumin-induced reduction of AP-2<U+03B3> and antiproliferative effect. Curcumin
inhibited ErbB2 expression, and decreased the phosphorylation of Akt and ERK in
NTera-2 cells.
CONCLUSION: Curcumin induces apoptosis and inhibits proliferation in NTera-2
cells via the inhibition of AP-2<U+03B3>-mediated downstream cell survival signaling
pathways.

PMCID: PMC4003153
PMID: 23685957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1594-9. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.05.003. Epub 2013 May 13.

Upregulation of Toll-like receptor 2 gene expression by acetylation of AP-2 alpha
in THP-1 cells, a human monocytic cell line.

Li M(1), Li X, Wang E, Luo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, China
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China.

Human Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) is a receptor for a variety of microbial
products and mediates activation signals in cells of the innate immune system.
Therefore, it is of great interest to investigate the molecular mechanisms that
control the expression of TLR2. In this study, using real-time PCR and western
blot assays, we show that trichostatin A (TSA), which is a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, upregulates the expression of both TLR2 mRNA and protein in the human 
THP-1 cell line. A luciferase activity analysis of the truncated TLR2 promoter
indicated that the region from -230 to -140 in the TLR2 promoter was sensitive to
TSA. Moreover, using electrophoresis mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we identified an AP-2 alpha (AP-2a) responsive
element at position -184 and found that the binding of AP-2a to this element was 
enhanced by TSA under in vitro and in vivo conditions. Immunoprecipitation and
western blot analyses showed that the levels of acetylated AP-2a were increased
in THP-1 cells after TSA treatment, and this increase is consistent with the
increased binding affinity to the AP-2a responsive elements. In summary, these
data define a mechanism through which AP-2a acetylation and increased promoter
access induce the expression of the TLR2 gene. This mechanism may provide insight
into a regulatory mode of TLR2 expression and the molecular foundations of
certain immunological diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23680675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;73(13):4098-111. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3686. Epub 
2013 May 10.

miR-214 coordinates melanoma progression by upregulating ALCAM through TFAP2 and 
miR-148b downmodulation.

Penna E(1), Orso F, Cimino D, Vercellino I, Grassi E, Quaglino E, Turco E,
Taverna D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center, Department of Molecular Biotechnology and
Health Sciences, University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Malignant melanoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers, but the
mechanisms governing its metastatic dissemination are not fully understood.
Upregulation of miR-214 and ALCAM and the loss of TFAP2 expression have been
implicated in this process, with TFAP2 a direct target of miR-214. Here, we link 
miR-214 and ALCAM as well as identify a core role for miR-214 in organizing
melanoma metastasis. miR-214 upregulated ALCAM, acting transcriptionally through 
TFAP2 and also posttranscriptionally through miR-148b (itself controlled by
TFAP2), both negative regulators of ALCAM. We also identified several
miR-214-mediated prometastatic functions directly promoted by ALCAM. Silencing
ALCAM in miR-214-overexpressing melanoma cells reduced cell migration and
invasion without affecting growth or anoikis in vitro, and it also impaired
extravasation and metastasis formation in vivo. Conversely, cell migration and
extravasation was reduced in miR-214-overexpressing cells by upregulation of
either miR-148b or TFAP2. These findings were consistent with patterns of
expression of miR-214, ALCAM, and miR-148b in human melanoma specimens. Overall, 
our results define a pathway involving miR-214, miR-148b, TFAP2, and ALCAM that
is critical for establishing distant metastases in melanoma.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23667173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Sep;381(1-2):31-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1685-8. Epub
2013 May 10.

AP-2a suppresses invasion in BeWo cells by repression of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 and -9 and up-regulation of E-cadherin.

Zhang Z(1), Zhang L, Jia L, Cui S, Shi Y, Chang A, Zeng X, Wang P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, China. zhangzhan27@gmail.com

Preeclampsia complicates 5-10% of pregnancies and is a leading cause of
maternal/fetal morbidity and mortality. Although the cause is unknown, the
reduced migration/invasion of extravillous trophoblasts is generally regarded as 
a key feature of preeclampsia genesis. The present study examined the expression 
of activator protein-2a (AP-2a), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 2
(TIMP-2), matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9),
and E-cadherin in severe preeclamptic placentas and normal placentas using
real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. The expression levels of AP-2a, TIMP-2,
and E-cadherin were elevated, while MMP-2 and MMP-9 levels were decreased in
severe preeclamptic placentas when compared with normal placentas. To explore the
underlying molecular mechanisms, BeWo cells were transfected with an
AP-2a-expression construct as well as a siRNA against AP-2a. The over-expression 
of AP-2a decreased the invasive abilities of BeWo cells. AP-2a induction was
followed by the induction of TIMP-2 and E-cadherin and a significant reduction of
MMP-2 and MMP-9. Whereas in AP-2a-silencing BeWo cells, we observed the decreased
expression of TIMP-2 and E-cadherin and the increased expression of MMP-2 and
MMP-9. We presume that AP-2a may suppress trophoblast invasion by repression of
MMP-2 and MMP-9 and up-regulation of E-cadherin, thus leading to shallow
placentation in severe preeclampsia.

PMID: 23660954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1647-56. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.04.024. Epub 2013 May 6.

Transcription factor AP-2a regulates acute myeloid leukemia cell proliferation by
influencing Hoxa gene expression.

Ding X(1), Yang Z, Zhou F, Wang F, Li X, Chen C, Li X, Hu X, Xiang S, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Development Biology of State Education
Ministry of China, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha
410081, PR China.

Transcription factor AP-2a mediates transcription of a number of genes implicated
in mammalian development, cell proliferation and carcinogenesis. In the current
study, we identified Hoxa7, Hoxa9 and Hox cofactor Meis1 as AP-2a target genes,
which are involved in myeloid leukemogenesis. Luciferase reporter assays revealed
that overexpression of AP-2a activated transcription activities of Hoxa7, Hoxa9
and Meis1, whereas siRNA of AP-2a inhibited their transcription activities. We
found that AP-2 binding sites in regulatory regions of three genes activated
their transcription by mutant analysis and AP-2a could interact with AP-2 binding
sites in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Further results showed
that the AP-2a shRNA efficiently inhibited mRNA and protein levels of Hoxa7,
Hoxa9 and Meis1 in AML cell lines U937 and HL60. Moreover, decreased expression
of AP-2a resulted in a significant reduction in the growth and proliferation of
AML cells in vitro. Remarkably, AP-2a knockdown leukemia cells exhibit decreased 
tumorigenicity in vivo compared with controls. Finally, AP-2a and target genes in
clinical acute myeloid leukemia samples of M5b subtype revealed variable
expression levels and broadly paralleled expression. These data support a role of
AP-2a in mediating the expression of Hoxa genes in acute myeloid leukemia to
influence the proliferation and cell survival.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23660297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 May 6;368(1620):20120360. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2012.0360. Print 2013.

Human genetic variation within neural crest enhancers: molecular and phenotypic
implications.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Prescott SL, Wysocka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Developmental gene expression programmes are coordinated by the specialized
distal cis-regulatory elements called enhancers, which integrate lineage- and
signalling-dependent inputs to guide morphogenesis. In previous work, we
characterized the genome-wide repertoire of active enhancers in human neural
crest cells (hNCC), an embryonic cell population with critical roles in
craniofacial development. We showed that in hNCC, co-occupancy of a master
regulator TFAP2A with nuclear receptors NR2F1 and NR2F2 correlates with the
presence of permissive enhancer chromatin states. Here, we take advantage of
pre-existing human genetic variation to further explore potential cooperation
between TFAP2A and NR2F1/F2. We demonstrate that isolated single nucleotide
polymorphisms affecting NR2F1/F2-binding sites within hNCC enhancers can alter
TFAP2A occupancy and overall chromatin features at the same enhancer allele. We
propose that a similar strategy can be used to elucidate other cooperative
relationships between transcription factors involved in developmental
transitions. Using the neural crest and its major contribution to human
craniofacial phenotypes as a paradigm, we discuss how genetic variation might
modulate the molecular properties and activity of enhancers, and ultimately
impact human phenotypic diversity.

PMCID: PMC3682725
PMID: 23650634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Oct;114(10):2203-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24584.

Estrogen receptor alpha: molecular mechanisms and emerging insights.

Candelaria NR(1), Liu K, Lin CY.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, Department of Biology and
Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77204-5506, USA.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is a cellular receptor for the female sex hormone
estrogen and other natural and synthetic ligands and play critical roles in
normal development and physiology and in the etiology and treatment of
endocrine-related diseases. ERa is a member of the nuclear receptor superfamily
of transcription factors and regulates target gene expression in a
ligand-dependent manner. It has also been shown to interact with G-protein
coupled receptors and associated signaling molecules in the cytoplasm.
Transcriptionally, ERa either binds DNA directly through conserved estrogen
response element sequence motifs or indirectly by tethering to other interacting 
transcription factors and nucleate transcriptional regulatory complexes which
include an array of co-regulator proteins. Genome-scale studies of ERa
transcriptional activity and localization have revealed mechanistic complexity
and insights including novel interactions with several transcription factors,
including FOXA1, AP-2g, GATA3, and RUNX1, which function as pioneering,
collaborative, or tethering factors. The major challenge and exciting prospect
moving forward is the comprehensive definition and integration of ERa complexes
and mechanisms and their tissue-specific roles in normal physiology and in human 
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23649536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Planta. 2013 Aug;238(2):271-82. doi: 10.1007/s00425-013-1890-4. Epub 2013 May 5.

Identification, characterization of an AP2/ERF transcription factor that promotes
adventitious, lateral root formation in Populus.

Trupiano D(1), Yordanov Y, Regan S, Meilan R, Tschaplinski T, Scippa GS, Busov V.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze e Territorio, University of Molise, Pesche, IS,
Italy.

Using activation tagging in Populus, we have identified five mutant lines showing
changes in their adventitious rooting. Among the affected lines, three showed
increased and two decreased adventitious rooting. We have positioned the tag in
the mutant lines via recovering genomic sequences flanking the left-hand border
of the activation tagging vector and validated the transcriptional activation of 
the proximal genes. We further characterized one line in which the cause of the
observed rooting phenotype was up-regulation of a gene encoding a transcription
factor of the AP2/ERF family of unknown function (PtaERF003). We show, through
retransformation, that this gene has a positive effect on both adventitious and
lateral root proliferation. Comparative expression analyses show that the
phenotype does not result from ectopic expression but rather up-regulation of the
native expression pattern of the gene. PtaERF003 function is linked to auxin
signal transduction pathway, as suggested by the rapid induction and accentuated 
phenotypes of the transgenic plants in presence of the hormone. Upregulation of
PtaERF003 led to most significant metabolic changes in the shoot suggesting of a 
broader regulatory role of the gene that is not restricted to root growth and
development. Our study shows that dominant tagging approaches in poplar can
successfully identify novel molecular factors controlling adventitious and
lateral root formation in woody plants. Such discoveries can lead to technologies
that can increase root proliferation and, thus, have significant economic and
environmental benefits.

PMID: 23645259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Dev Biol. 2013 Jul 15;379(2):208-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.023. Epub 2013 
Apr 30.

Differential BMP signaling controls formation and differentiation of multipotent 
preplacodal ectoderm progenitors from human embryonic stem cells.

Leung AW(1), Kent Morest D, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA.

Sensory and endoneurocrine tissues as diverse as the lens, the olfactory
epithelium, the inner ear, the cranial sensory ganglia, and the anterior
pituitary arise from a common pool of progenitors in the preplacodal ectoderm
(PPE). Around late gastrulation, the PPE forms at the border surrounding the
anterior neural plate, and expresses a unique set of evolutionarily conserved
transcription regulators including Six1, Eya 1 and Eya2. Here, we describe the
first report to generate and characterize the SIX1(+) PPE cells from human
embryonic stem (ES) cells by adherent differentiation. Before forming PPE cells, 
differentiating cultures first expressed the non-neural ectoderm specific
transcriptional factors TFAP2A, GATA2, GATA3, DLX3, and DLX5, which are crucial
in establishing the PPE competence. We demonstrated that bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) activity plays a transient but essential role in inducing
expression of these PPE competence factors and eventually the PPE cells.
Interestingly, we found that attenuating BMP signaling after establishing the
competence state induces anterior placode precursors. By manipulating BMP and
hedgehog signaling pathways, we further differentiate these precursors into
restricted lineages including the lens placode and the oral ectoderm (pituitary
precursor) cells. Finally, we also show that sensory neurons can be generated
from human PPE cells, demonstrating the multipotency of the human ES-derived PPE 
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3712508
PMID: 23643939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Gene. 2013 Jul 25;524(2):114-23. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.051. Epub 2013 Apr
28.

A 914-bp promoter is sufficient to reproduce the endogenous prolyl oligopeptidase
gene localization in the mouse placenta if not subject to position effect.

Matsubara S(1), Maruyama Y, Kimura AP.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan.

Prolyl oligopeptidase (POP) is a widely distributed multifunctional protein which
has an endopeptidase activity to cleave a Pro-X peptide bond. In spite of
numerous studies about POP, the mechanism by which its transcription is
controlled has not been well investigated. Here we generated transgenic mice
bearing a transgene which contained a 914-bp POP gene promoter linked to the
enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) gene to assess the in vivo promoter
activity. We established six transgenic lines with different copy numbers, but no
EGFP signal was observed in four lines due to a high level of DNA methylation,
which suggested that the transgene was subject to position effect. However, in
the other two lines, we detected the EGFP expression in many tissues, and its
placental localization showed a similar change to POP. A strong EGFP signal was
observed in the junctional and labyrinthine zones of E10.5-E12.5 placentas and in
the junctional zone and the maternal decidua after that. This placental gene
activation might be attributed to AP-2<U+03B3> because we detected its binding to the
POP promoter. In contrast, we did not obtain any evidence that EGFP was expressed
in a similar pattern compared with POP in the ovary. The current data
demonstrated that the 914-bp promoter had sufficient activity to reproduce the
POP localization in the placenta if it was not subject to position effect and
suggest that the regulatory mechanism of the POP gene expression differs between 
tissues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23632239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pediatr Obes. 2014 Aug;9(4):272-80. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00166.x. Epub
2013 Apr 29.

Genetic risk profiles for a childhood with severe overweight.

González JR(1), Estévez MN, Giralt PS, Cáceres A, Pérez LM, González-Carpio M,
Ballester F, Sunyer J, Rodríguez-López R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL), Barcelona, Spain;
Institut Municipal d'Investigació Mèdica, Barcelona, Spain; CIBER Epidemiología y
Salud Pública, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was the description of a valid genetic
risk score (GRS) to predict individuals with high susceptibility to childhood
overweight by their genetic profiles.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Case-control study including a group of children with
high-risk familial predisposition to morbid obesity. Birth cohort from general
population constituted the validation sample. For the discovery sample, 218
children with non-syndromic obesity and 190 control individuals were included.
The validation sample was 653 children from two birth cohorts belonging to the
INMA (Infancia y Medio Ambiente [Environment and Childhood]<U+2009>)project. 109 SNPs
located in the genes FTO, SEC16B, BDNF, ETV5, SH2B1, GNPDA2, LYPLAL1, MSRA,
TFAP2, KCTD15, MTCH2 and NEGR1, previously reported in association to body mass
index (BMI) were analysed. For the validation sample, association between
genome-wide data and BMI measurements between 3.5 and 5 years of age, were
evaluated.
RESULTS: The GRS includes six SNPs in the genes FTO, TFAP2B, SEC16B, ETV5 and
SH2B1. The score distribution differs among cases and controls (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-14)
) showing a significant linear association with obesity (odds ratio [OR] per
allele<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.69; confidence interval [CI] 95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.46-1.97; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-1) and
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve [AUC]<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.727; CI
95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.676-0.778). The results were validated by the INMA cohort (OR per
allele<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.23 CI 95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.03-1.48 and AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.601 CI 95%<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.522-0.680).
CONCLUSIONS: The use of our proposed genetic score provides useful information to
determine those children who are susceptible to obesity. To improve the
efficiency of clinical prevention and treatment of obesity, it is essential to
design individualized based protocols in advance knowledge of the molecular basis
of inherited susceptibility.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatric Obesity © 2013 International Association for the
Study of Obesity.

PMID: 23629956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Jun;24(11):1735-48, S1-8. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-08-0625. Epub 
2013 Apr 17.

Trafficking of the Menkes copper transporter ATP7A is regulated by clathrin-,
AP-2-, AP-1-, and Rab22-dependent steps.

Holloway ZG(1), Velayos-Baeza A, Howell GJ, Levecque C, Ponnambalam S, Sztul E,
Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
7BN, United Kingdom.

The transporter ATP7A mediates systemic copper absorption and provides
cuproenzymes in the trans-Golgi network (TGN) with copper. To regulate metal
homeostasis, ATP7A constitutively cycles between the TGN and plasma membrane
(PM). ATP7A trafficking to the PM is elevated in response to increased copper
load and is reversed when copper concentrations are lowered. Molecular mechanisms
underlying this trafficking are poorly understood. We assess the role of
clathrin, adaptor complexes, lipid rafts, and Rab22a in an attempt to decipher
the regulatory proteins involved in ATP7A cycling. While RNA interference
(RNAi)-mediated depletion of caveolin 1/2 or flotillin had no effect on ATP7A
localization, clathrin heavy chain depletion or expression of AP180
dominant-negative mutant not only disrupted clathrin-regulated pathways, but also
blocked PM-to-TGN internalization of ATP7A. Depletion of the µ subunits of either
adaptor protein-2 (AP-2) or AP-1 using RNAi further provides evidence that both
clathrin adaptors are important for trafficking of ATP7A from the PM to the TGN. 
Expression of the GTP-locked Rab22aQ64L mutant caused fragmentation of TGN
membrane domains enriched for ATP7A. These appear to be a subdomain of the
mammalian TGN, showing only partial overlap with the TGN marker golgin-97. Of
importance, ATP7A remained in the Rab22aQ64L-generated structures after copper
treatment and washout, suggesting that forward trafficking out of this
compartment was blocked. This study provides evidence that multiple
membrane-associated factors, including clathrin, AP-2, AP-1, and Rab22, are
regulators of ATP7A trafficking.

PMCID: PMC3667726
PMID: 23596324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Aug 15;22(16):3195-206. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt173. Epub 2013
Apr 10.

Analysis of TFAP2A mutations in Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome indicates
functional complexity within the AP-2a DNA-binding domain.

Li H(1), Sheridan R, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology and Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Multiple lines of evidence indicate that the AP-2 transcription factor family has
an important regulatory function in human craniofacial development. Notably,
mutations in TFAP2A, the gene encoding AP-2a, have been identified in patients
with Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome (BOFS). BOFS is an autosomal-dominant trait
that commonly presents with facial clefting, eye defects and branchial skin
anomalies. Examination of multiple cases has suggested either simple
haploinsufficiency or more complex genetic causes for BOFS, especially as the
clinical manifestations are variable, with no clear genotype-phenotype
correlation. Mutations occur throughout TFAP2A, but mostly within conserved
sequences within the DNA contact domain of AP-2a. However, the consequences of
the various mutations for AP-2a protein function have not been evaluated.
Therefore, it remains unclear if all BOFS mutations result in similar changes to 
the AP-2a protein or if they each produce specific alterations that underlie the 
spectrum of phenotypes. Here, we have investigated the molecular consequences of 
the mutations that localize to the DNA-binding region. We show that although
individual mutations have different effects on DNA binding, they all demonstrate 
significantly reduced transcriptional activities. Moreover, all mutant
derivatives have an altered nuclear:cytoplasmic distribution compared with the
predominantly nuclear localization of wild-type AP-2a and several can exert a
dominant-negative activity on the wild-type AP-2a protein. Overall, our data
suggest that the individual TFAP2A BOFS mutations can generate null, hypomorphic 
or antimorphic alleles and that these differences in activity, combined with a
role for AP-2a in epigenetic events, may influence the resultant pathology and
the phenotypic variability.

PMCID: PMC3723307
PMID: 23578821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 May 9;51(1):1-13. doi: 10.1530/JME-12-0234. Print 2013.

A novel first exon directs hormone-sensitive transcription of the pig prolactin
receptor.

Schennink A(1), Trott JF, Freking BA, Hovey RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California Davis, Davis,
California 95616, USA. aschennink@ucdavis.edu

Endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine prolactin (PRL) acts through its receptor
(PRLR) to confer a wide range of biological functions, including its established 
role during lactation. We have identified a novel first exon of the porcine PRLR 
that gives rise to three different mRNA transcripts. Transcription of this first 
exon is tissue specific, where it increases during gestation in the adrenal
glands and uterus. Within the mammary glands, its transcription is induced by
estrogen and PRL, while in the uterus, its expression is downregulated by
progestin. The promoter region has an enhancer element located between -453 and
-424 bp and a putative repressor element between -648 and -596 bp. Estrogen,
acting through the estrogen receptor, activates transcription from this promoter 
through both E-box and transcription factor AP-2 a binding sites. These findings 
support the concept that the multilevel hormonal regulation of PRLR transcription
contributes to the various biological functions of PRL.

PMID: 23576686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Apr 23;110(17):6871-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300059110. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

ApiAP2 transcription factor restricts development of the Toxoplasma tissue cyst.

Radke JB(1), Lucas O, De Silva EK, Ma Y, Sullivan WJ Jr, Weiss LM, Llinas M,
White MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL
33612, USA.

Cellular differentiation leading to formation of the bradyzoite tissue cyst stage
is the underlying cause of chronic toxoplasmosis. Consequently, mechanisms
responsible for controlling development in the Toxoplasma intermediate life cycle
have long been sought. Here, we identified 15 Toxoplasma mRNAs induced in early
bradyzoite development that encode proteins with apicomplexan AP2 (ApiAP2) DNA
binding domains. Of these 15 mRNAs, the AP2IX-9 mRNA demonstrated the largest
expression increase during alkaline-induced differentiation. At the protein
level, we found that AP2IX-9 was restricted to the early bradyzoite nucleus and
is repressed in tachyzoites and in mature bradyzoites from 30-d infected animals.
Conditional overexpression of AP2IX-9 significantly reduced tissue cyst formation
and conferred alkaline pH-resistant growth, whereas disruption of the AP2IX-9
gene increased tissue cyst formation, indicating AP2IX-9 operates as a repressor 
of bradyzoite development. Consistent with a role as a repressor, AP2IX-9
specifically inhibited the expression of bradyzoite mRNAs, including the
canonical bradyzoite marker, bradyzoite antigen 1 (BAG1). Using protein binding
microarrays, we established the AP2 domain of AP2IX-9 binds a CAGTGT DNA sequence
motif and is capable of binding cis-regulatory elements controlling the BAG1 and 
bradyzoite-specific nucleoside triphosphatase (B-NTPase) promoters. The effect of
AP2IX-9 on BAG1 expression was direct because this factor inhibits expression of 
a firefly luciferase reporter under the control of the BAG1 promoter in vivo, and
epitope-tagged AP2IX-9 can be immunoprecipitated with the BAG1 promoter in
parasite chromatin. Altogether, these results indicate AP2IX-9 restricts
Toxoplasma commitment to develop the mature bradyzoite tissue cyst.

PMCID: PMC3637731
PMID: 23572590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Jun-Jul;13(5-6):177-82. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.03.003. 
Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Irx7, a Smarca4-regulated gene for retinal differentiation, regulates other genes
controlled by Smarca4 in zebrafish retinas.

Zhang Y(1), Bonilla S, Chong L, Leung YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, 915 W. State Street,
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA. yqzhang1981@gmail.com

The iroquois 7 (irx7) in zebrafish encodes a homeodomain transcription factor
(TF) in the retinal differentiation network regulated by smarca4, a component of 
chromatin remodeling complex. The function of Irx7 on retinal development has
recently been revealed by antisense morpholino knockdown experiments. In
particular, the normal expression of irx7 in the inner nuclear layer (INL) is
essential for the differentiation of cells in the INL and the outer nuclear layer
(ONL), as well as the dendritic projection of GCs into the inner plexiform layer 
(IPL). Irx7 also exerts its effect on retinal differentiation through activating 
the expression of TFs that specify various retinal cell types. However, the
relationship between irx7 and the other Smarca4-regulated genes for retinal
differentiation was not clear. This study reports an investigation of the
regulatory role of irx7 on 13 genes including aanat2, barhl2, bhlhe22, cdh11,
ckmt1, gnat1, irx4a, ndrg1a, nme2l, pbx1a, rcv1, robo2 and tfap2a. These genes
were originally used in a study that characterized the cellular expression
pattern of Smarca4-regulated genes and had a diverse expression pattern in the
retina. Their expression in the normal wild-type (WT), Irx7-knockdown and the
injection control embryos was characterized by in situ hybridization at 52h
post-fertilization (hpf). This is the stage when irx7's expression level is the
highest in the developing retinas. The results indicate that the expression of 11
of the 13 genes was reduced and one was overexpressed in the Irx7-knockdown
retinas. Consistent with a previous report, one of these 13 genes was not
expressed in the retina. Among the 12 Irx7-regulated genes, 11 had an expression 
change in the Irx7-knockdown retinas similar to that in the smarca4 retinas,
indicating that Smarca4 regulates the expression of these 11 genes at least in
part through irx7. Interestingly, bhlhe22 was only over-expressed in the
Irx7-knockdown but not the smarca4 retinas. These observations suggest a
different regulatory mechanism on bhlhe22 expression by smarca4 and irx7.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23557786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:460927. doi: 10.1155/2013/460927. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Lactobacillus plantarum LG42 isolated from gajami sik-hae inhibits adipogenesis
in 3T3-L1 adipocyte.

Park JE(1), Oh SH, Cha YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Chonbuk National University,
Jeonju 561-756, Republic of Korea.

We investigated whether lactic acid bacteria isolated from gajami sik-hae (GLAB) 
are capable of reducing the intracellular lipid accumulation by downregulating
the expression of adipogenesis-related genes in differentiated 3T3-L1 cells. The 
GLAB, Lactobacillus plantarum LG42, significantly decreased the intracellular
triglyceride storage and the glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPDH) activity
in a dose-dependent manner. mRNA expression of transcription factors like
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) <U+03B3> and CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) a involved in adipogenesis was markedly decreased by the GLAB
treatment. Moreover, the GLAB also decreased the expression level of adipogenic
markers like adipocyte fatty acid binding protein (aP2), leptin, GPDH, and fatty 
acid translocase (CD36) significantly. These results suggest that the GLAB
inhibits lipid accumulation in the differentiated adipocyte through
downregulating the expression of adipogenic transcription factors and other
specific genes involved in lipid metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3600254
PMID: 23555088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003173. Epub 2013 Mar 
27.

Identification of a BRCA2-specific modifier locus at 6p24 related to breast
cancer risk.

Gaudet MM, Kuchenbaecker KB, Vijai J, Klein RJ, Kirchhoff T, McGuffog L,
Barrowdale D, Dunning AM, Lee A, Dennis J, Healey S, Dicks E, Soucy P,
Sinilnikova OM, Pankratz VS, Wang X, Eldridge RC, Tessier DC, Vincent D, Bacot F,
Hogervorst FB, Peock S, Stoppa-Lyonnet D; KConFab Investigators, Peterlongo P,
Schmutzler RK, Nathanson KL, Piedmonte M, Singer CF, Thomassen M; Ontario Cancer 
Genetics Network, Hansen Tv, Neuhausen SL, Blanco I, Greene MH, Garber J, Weitzel
JN, Andrulis IL, Goldgar DE, D'Andrea E, Caldes T, Nevanlinna H, Osorio A, van
Rensburg EJ, Arason A, Rennert G, van den Ouweland AM, van der Hout AH, Kets CM, 
Aalfs CM, Wijnen JT, Ausems MG; HEBON; EMBRACE, Frost D, Ellis S, Fineberg E,
Platte R, Evans DG, Jacobs C, Adlard J, Tischkowitz M, Porteous ME, Damiola F;
GEMO Study Collaborators, Golmard L, Barjhoux L, Longy M, Belotti M, Ferrer SF,
Mazoyer S, Spurdle AB, Manoukian S, Barile M, Genuardi M, Arnold N, Meindl A,
Sutter C, Wappenschmidt B, Domchek SM, Pfeiler G, Friedman E, Jensen UB, Robson
M, Shah S, Lazaro C, Mai PL, Benitez J, Southey MC, Schmidt MK, Fasching PA, Peto
J, Humphreys MK, Wang Q, Michailidou K, Sawyer EJ, Burwinkel B, Guénel P, Bojesen
SE, Milne RL, Brenner H, Lochmann M; GENICA Network, Aittomäki K, Dörk T,
Margolin S, Mannermaa A, Lambrechts D, Chang-Claude J, Radice P, Giles GG, Haiman
CA, Winqvist R, Devillee P, García-Closas M, Schoof N, Hooning MJ, Cox A, Pharoah
PD, Jakubowska A, Orr N, González-Neira A, Pita G, Alonso MR, Hall P, Couch FJ,
Simard J, Altshuler D, Easton DF, Chenevix-Trench G, Antoniou AC, Offit K.

Common genetic variants contribute to the observed variation in breast cancer
risk for BRCA2 mutation carriers; those known to date have all been found through
population-based genome-wide association studies (GWAS). To comprehensively
identify breast cancer risk modifying loci for BRCA2 mutation carriers, we
conducted a deep replication of an ongoing GWAS discovery study. Using the ranked
P-values of the breast cancer associations with the imputed genotype of 1.4 M
SNPs, 19,029 SNPs were selected and designed for inclusion on a custom Illumina
array that included a total of 211,155 SNPs as part of a multi-consortial
project. DNA samples from 3,881 breast cancer affected and 4,330 unaffected BRCA2
mutation carriers from 47 studies belonging to the Consortium of Investigators of
Modifiers of BRCA1/2 were genotyped and available for analysis. We replicated
previously reported breast cancer susceptibility alleles in these BRCA2 mutation 
carriers and for several regions (including FGFR2, MAP3K1, CDKN2A/B, and PTHLH)
identified SNPs that have stronger evidence of association than those previously 
published. We also identified a novel susceptibility allele at 6p24 that was
inversely associated with risk in BRCA2 mutation carriers (rs9348512; per allele 
HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.85, 95% CI 0.80-0.90, P = 3.9 × 10(-8)). This SNP was not associated with 
breast cancer risk either in the general population or in BRCA1 mutation
carriers. The locus lies within a region containing TFAP2A, which encodes a
transcriptional activation protein that interacts with several tumor suppressor
genes. This report identifies the first breast cancer risk locus specific to a
BRCA2 mutation background. This comprehensive update of novel and previously
reported breast cancer susceptibility loci contributes to the establishment of a 
panel of SNPs that modify breast cancer risk in BRCA2 mutation carriers. This
panel may have clinical utility for women with BRCA2 mutations weighing options
for medical prevention of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3609647
PMID: 23544012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr 4;92(4):621-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.002. Epub
2013 Mar 28.

Mutations in KCTD1 cause scalp-ear-nipple syndrome.

Marneros AG(1), Beck AE, Turner EH, McMillin MJ, Edwards MJ, Field M, de Macena
Sobreira NL, Perez AB, Fortes JA, Lampe AK, Giovannucci Uzielli ML, Gordon CT,
Plessis G, Le Merrer M, Amiel J, Reichenberger E, Shively KM, Cerrato F, Labow
BI, Tabor HK, Smith JD, Shendure J, Nickerson DA, Bamshad MJ; University of
Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Scalp-ear-nipple (SEN) syndrome is a rare, autosomal-dominant disorder
characterized by cutis aplasia of the scalp; minor anomalies of the external
ears, digits, and nails; and malformations of the breast. We used linkage
analysis and exome sequencing of a multiplex family affected by SEN syndrome to
identify potassium-channel tetramerization-domain-containing 1 (KCTD1) mutations 
that cause SEN syndrome. Evaluation of a total of ten families affected by SEN
syndrome revealed KCTD1 missense mutations in each family tested. All of the
mutations occurred in a KCTD1 region encoding a highly conserved bric-a-brac,
tram track, and broad complex (BTB) domain that is required for transcriptional
repressor activity. KCTD1 inhibits the transactivation of the transcription
factor AP-2a (TFAP2A) via its BTB domain, and mutations in TFAP2A cause cutis
aplasia in individuals with branchiooculofacial syndrome (BOFS), suggesting a
potential overlap in the pathogenesis of SEN syndrome and BOFS. The
identification of KCTD1 mutations in SEN syndrome reveals a role for this
BTB-domain-containing transcriptional repressor during ectodermal development.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3617379
PMID: 23541344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Curr Biol. 2013 Apr 8;23(7):581-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.02.020. Epub 2013 Mar 
21.

Numb inhibits the recycling of Sanpodo in Drosophila sensory organ precursor.

Cotton M(1), Benhra N, Le Borgne R.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 6290, Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Université
de Rennes 1, 35043 Rennes, France.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2013 Apr 8;23(7):R270-2.

In metazoans, unequal partitioning of the cell-fate determinant Numb underlies
the generation of distinct cell fates following asymmetric cell division [1-5].
In Drosophila, during asymmetric division of the sensory organ precursor (SOP)
cell, Numb is unequally inherited by the pIIb daughter cell, where it antagonizes
Notch [1, 6-8]. Numb inhibits Notch partly through inhibiting the plasma membrane
localization of Sanpodo (Spdo), a transmembrane protein required for Notch
signaling during asymmetric cell division [9, 10]. Numb, by binding to Spdo and
a-Adaptin, was proposed to mediate Spdo endocytosis alone or bound to Notch in
the pIIb cell, thereby preventing Notch activation [11-16]. However, in addition 
to endocytosis, Numb also controls the postendocytic trafficking and degradation 
of Notch in mammals [17, 18] and negatively regulates basolateral recycling in
C. elegans [19, 20]. Thus, whether Numb promotes the endocytosis of Spdo is a
question that requires experimental demonstration and is therefore investigated
in this article. Based on internalization assays, we show that Spdo endocytosis
is restricted to cells in interphase and requires AP-2 activity. Surprisingly,
the bulk endocytosis of Spdo occurs properly in numb mutant SOP, indicating that 
Numb does not regulate the steady-state localization of Spdo via Spdo
internalization. We report that Numb genetically and physically interacts with
AP-1, a complex regulating the basolateral recycling of Spdo [21]. In numb mutant
organs, Spdo is efficiently internalized and recycled back to the plasma
membrane. We propose that Numb acts in concert with AP-1 to control the endocytic
recycling of Spdo to regulate binary-fate decisions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23523246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mech Ageing Dev. 2013 Jul-Aug;134(7-8):298-306. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.02.009.
Epub 2013 Mar 13.

A functional and genetic analysis of SOD2 promoter variants and their
contribution to age-related hearing loss.

Nolan LS(1), Cadge BA, Gomez-Dorado M, Dawson SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Auditory Research, Ear Institute, University College London, 332
Gray's Inn Road, London WC1X 8EE, UK.

Genetic variation in superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) is implicated in several
ageing pathologies and with noise-induced hearing loss. Here, we have
investigated the role of SOD2 promoter variants in age related hearing loss
(ARHL).METHODS: Putative regulatory variants identified in the SOD2 promoter
using bioinformatics were functionally evaluated in an inner-ear-derived cell
line (OC-2). Variants with effects on transcription factor binding were then
tested in association studies in discovery and replication cohorts (London ARHL
and ELSA cohorts, n=2177).
RESULTS: The rs5746092 (-38C>G) and rs2758343 (-299C>A) SNPs alter the affinity
of the SOD2 promoter for AP-2a and SP1 respectively. Evidence of an association
between the -38C>G SNP and ARHL was detected in the London cohort only; p=0.0436,
OR=1.35 [1.05-1.73]. This effect was strongest in males reporting family history 
of ARHL (p=0.0095) and was independent of reported noise exposure. The rs2758343 
(-299C>A) rSNP was found to be in complete LD with the well characterised
functional variant rs4880 (Ala16Val) and was not associated with hearing loss.
CONCLUSION: This study describes the effect of common SOD2 promoter variation on 
SOD2 promoter regulation and links it to ARHL risk in men. However, due to lack
of replication, this association should be regarded as suggestive only.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23500038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Apr;161A(4):901-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35804. Epub 2013
Mar 12.

6p.24 microdeletion involving TFAP2A without classic features of
branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

LeBlanc SK(1), Yu S, Barnett CP.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric and Reproductive Genetics Unit, SA Pathology/Women's and Children's 
Hospital, South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, North Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia.

PMID: 23495225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013 Nov;67(2):607-13. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9548-1.

Raloxifene upregulated mesangial cell MMP-2 activity via ER-ß through
transcriptional regulation.

Fang M(1), Wu XC, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangyin People's Hospital, School
of Medicine, Southeast University, Jiangyin, 214400, China.

Raloxifene, a second-generation selective estrogen receptor modulator, exerts
estrogen-like effects in specific tissues. In this present study, we examined the
effect of raloxifene on mesangial cell matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2)
activity in streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice. Raloxifene increased the MMP-2 
level in a dose-dependent and receptor-mediated manner. An antibody against
estrogen receptor-ß (ER-ß) blocked the effect of raloxifene on MMP-2 expression, 
suggesting that the effect of raloxifene on MMP-2 activity was mediated by ER-ß. 
In addition, the transcription factor AP-2, that plays an important role in MMP-2
gene transcription, was overexpressed under raloxifene simulation. The effect of 
MMP-2 was blocked by a selective inhibitor of the extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK/MAPK) pathway, PD98059. Our results 
suggested that raloxifene-induced MMP-2 activity increases function through
ERK/MAPK signaling via AP-2. In addition, we also found that the effect of
raloxifene on MMP-2 expression was mediated via its binding to ER-ß. However, at 
this stage of our investigation, (i) we could only show that both the binding to 
ER-ß and the activation of the ERK/MAPK pathway impacted MMP-2 expression and
(ii) we were unable to establish a relationship between ER-ß binding and ERK/MAPK
pathway activation.

PMID: 23471663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056737. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Promoter of CaZF, a chickpea gene that positively regulates growth and stress
tolerance, is activated by an AP2-family transcription factor CAP2.

Jain D(1), Chattopadhyay D.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi,
India.

Plants respond to different forms of stresses by inducing transcription of a
common and distinct set of genes by concerted actions of a cascade of
transcription regulators. We previously reported that a gene, CaZF encoding a
C2H2-zinc finger family protein from chickpea (Cicer arietinum) imparted high
salinity tolerance when expressed in tobacco plants. We report here that in
addition to promoting tolerance against dehydration, salinity and high
temperature, the CaZF overexpressing plants exhibited similar phenotype of growth
and development like the plants overexpressing CAP2, encoding an AP2-family
transcription factor from chickpea. To investigate any relationship between these
two genes, we performed gene expression analysis in the overexpressing plants,
promoter-reporter analysis and chromatin immunoprecipitation. A number of
transcripts that exhibited enhanced accumulation upon expression of CAP2 or CaZF 
in tobacco plants were found common. Transient expression of CAP2 in chickpea
leaves resulted in increased accumulation of CaZF transcript. Gel mobility shift 
and transient promoter-reporter assays suggested that CAP2 activates CaZF
promoter by interacting with C-repeat elements (CRTs) in CaZF promoter. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay demonstrated an in vivo interaction of CAP2
protein with CaZF promoter.

PMCID: PMC3572041
PMID: 23418595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Oct;21(10):2130-7. doi: 10.1002/oby.20349. Epub
2013 May 29.

Adipocytokines levels at delivery, functional variation of TFAP2ß, and maternal
and neonatal anthropometric parameters.

Comasco E(1), Iliadis SI, Larsson A, Olovsson M, Oreland L, Sundström-Poromaa I, 
Skalkidou A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University, 75 124 Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Adipocytokines participate in the regulation of glucose metabolism and
fetal development. The transcription factor activating protein 2B (TFAP2ß) has
been associated with adipocytokine regulation, and gene variations with type 2
diabetes and obesity. This study investigated associations between maternal
TFAP2B variation, adipocytokine levels, and maternal and neonatal anthropometric 
characteristics.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A population-based sample of women was followed from delivery
to 6 months postpartum. Adiponectin, leptin, and interleukin-6 levels at
delivery, and maternal as well as neonatal anthropometric variables were
assessed. The TFAP2ß intron 1 variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) was genotyped.
RESULTS: Maternal interleukin-6 correlated positively with leptin at delivery,
with peripartum weight changes and weight of newborn males, adjusted for
potential confounders. Leptin at delivery was associated with TFAP2ß intron 1
VNTR genotype, adjusted for confounders, maternal weight and negatively with
birth weight among female neonates. A path model suggested a link between TFAP2ß 
genotype, leptin levels, and newborn females' weight.
CONCLUSIONS: The present results stress a role for the TFAP2 ß in
adiposity-related conditions and intrauterine growth. The association between
neonatal birth weight and maternal adipocytokine levels, together with the
observed sex effect, call for further studies on the mechanisms behind
neuroendocrine fetal programming.

Copyright © 2013 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 23408462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Apr;33(4):785-94. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.301143. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Activator protein-2a mediates carbon monoxide-induced stromal cell-derived
factor-1a expression and vascularization in ischemic heart.

Lin HH(1), Chen YH, Chiang MT, Huang PL, Chau LY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei 115,
Taiwan, ROC.

OBJECTIVE: Increased cardiac stromal cell-derived factor-1a (SDF-1a) expression
promotes neovascularization and myocardial repair after ischemic injury through
recruiting stem cells and reducing cardiomyocyte death. Previous studies have
shown that heme oxygenase-1 and its reaction byproduct, carbon monoxide (CO),
induce SDF-1a expression in ischemic heart. However, the mechanism underlying
heme oxygenase-1/CO-induced cardiac SDF-1a expression remains elusive. This study
aims to investigate the signaling pathway and the transcriptional factor that
mediate CO-induced SDF-1a gene expression and cardioprotection.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: CO gas and a CO-releasing compound,
tricarbonyldichlororuthenium (II) dimer, dose-dependently induced SDF-1a
expression in primary neonatal cardiomyocytes and H9C2 cardiomyoblasts. Promoter 
luciferase-reporter assay, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated that the activator protein 2a (AP-2a) mediated
tricarbonyldichlororuthenium (II) dimer-induced SDF-1a gene transcription.
Tricarbonyldichlororuthenium (II) dimer induced AP-2a expression via protein
kinase B (AKT)-dependent signaling. AKT inhibition or AP-2a knockdown reduced
tricarbonyldichlororuthenium (II) dimer-induced SDF-1a expression. Coronary
ligation induced transient increases of cardiac AP-2a and SDF-1a expression,
which were declined at 1 week postinfarction in mice. Periodic exposure of
coronary-ligated mice to CO (250 ppm for 1 hour/day, 6 days) resumed the
induction of AP-2a and SDF-1a gene expression in infarcted hearts.
Immunohistochemistry and echocardiography performed at 4 weeks after coronary
ligation revealed that CO treatment enhanced neovascularization in the myocardium
of peri-infarct region and improved cardiac function. CO-mediated SDF-1a
expression and cardioprotection was ablated by intramyocardial injection of
lentivirus bearing specific short hairpin RNA targeting AP-2a.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that AKT-dependent upregulation of AP-2a is
essential for CO-induced SDF-1a expression and myocardial repair after ischemic
injury.

PMID: 23393395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 19;110(8):2870-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300203110. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Inhibition of neural crest formation by Kctd15 involves regulation of
transcription factor AP-2.

Zarelli VE(1), Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The neural crest develops in vertebrate embryos within a discrete domain at the
neural plate boundary and eventually gives rise to a migrating population of
cells that differentiate into a multitude of derivatives. We have shown that the 
broad-complex, tramtrack and bric a brac (BTB) domain-containing factor potassium
channel tetramerization domain containing 15 (Kctd15) inhibits neural crest
formation, and we proposed that its function is to delimit the neural crest
domain. Here we report that Kctd15 is a highly effective inhibitor of
transcription factor activating enhancer binding protein 2 (AP-2) in zebrafish
embryos and in human cells; AP-2 is known to be critical for several steps of
neural crest development. Kctd15 interacts with AP-2a but does not interfere with
its nuclear localization or binding to cognate sites in the genome. Kctd15 binds 
specifically to the activation domain of AP-2a and efficiently inhibits
transcriptional activation by a hybrid protein composed of the regulatory protein
Gal4 DNA binding and AP-2a activation domains. Mutation of one proline residue in
the activation domain to an alanine (P59A) yields a protein that is highly active
but largely insensitive to Kctd15. These results indicate that Kctd15 acts in the
embryo at least in part by specifically binding to the activation domain of
AP-2a, thereby blocking the function of this critical factor in the neural crest 
induction hierarchy.

PMCID: PMC3581937
PMID: 23382213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;774:103-20. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-5590-1_6.

MicroRNAs in melanoma biology.

Kunz M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
manfred.kunz@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Malignant melanoma is a highly aggressive tumour with increasing -incidence and
poor prognosis in the metastatic stage. In recent years, a substantial number of 
reports on individual miRNAs or miRNA patterns have been published providing
strong evidence that miRNAs might play an important role in malignant melanoma
and might help to better understand the molecular mechanisms of melanoma
development and progression. A major preliminary finding was that
melanoma-associated miRNAs are often located in genomic regions with frequent
gains and losses in tumours. Detailed studies of different groups thereafter
identified miRNAs with differential expression in benign melanocytes compared
with melanoma cell lines or in benign melanocytic lesions compared with
melanomas. Among these were let-7a and b, miR-23a and b, miR-148, miR-155,
miR-182, miR-200c, miR-211, miR214, and miR-221 and 222. Some of these miRNAs
target well-known melanoma-associated genes like the NRAS oncogene,
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), receptor tyrosine kinase
c-KIT or AP-2 transcription factors (TFAP2). Although we are still far from a
complete understanding of the role of miRNA-target gene interactions in malignant
melanoma, these findings further underscore the notion of a direct involvement of
miRNAs in melanoma biology. Very recently, a prognostic signature of six miRNAs
has been identified consisting of miRNAs miR-150, miR-342-3p, miR-455-3p,
miR-145, miR-155, and miR-497. High expression of these miRNAs was shown to be
associated with improved long-term survival of metastatic patients.

PMID: 23377970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Urology. 2013 Feb;81(2):464.e1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2012.09.029.

Establishment and characterization of a new human extragonadal germ cell line,
SEM-1, and its comparison with TCam-2 and JKT-1.

Russell SM(1), Lechner MG, Mokashi A, Megiel C, Jang JK, Taylor CR, Looijenga LH,
French CA, Epstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the establishment and characterization of a human cell
line, SEM-1, from a patient diagnosed with a mediastinal seminoma.
METHODS: A small percentage of germ cell tumors develop as primary lesions in
extragonadal sites, and the etiology of these tumors is poorly understood.
Currently, only 2 cell lines from seminoma patients have been reported, JKT-1 and
TCam-2, both derived from the testis. The cell line was characterized by
heterotransplantation in Nude mice, cytogenetic studies, immunohistochemical and 
flow cytometry staining for germ cell tumor biomarkers, quantitative
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction for cancer testis antigen
expression, and BRAF mutation screening with quantitative polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: Characterization studies confirmed the human extragonadal seminoma
origin of SEM-1 and demonstrated that it had more features in common with TCam-2 
than JKT-1. Specifically, SEM-1 was positive for Sal-like protein 4 (SALL-4),
activator protein-2<U+03B3> (AP-2<U+03B3>), and cytokeratin CAM5.2, and demonstrated
heterogeneous expression of stem cell markers octamer-binding transcription
factor 3/4, NANOG, c-KIT, SOX17, and SOX2. Cytogenetic analysis revealed a
hypotriploid chromosome number, with multiple copies of 12p, but isochromosome
12p and the BRAF mutation V600E were not identified. The cell lines also did not 
contain the BRD4/NUT gene rearrangement [t(15,19)] seen in midline carcinomas nor
did they contain overexpressed nuclear protein in testis (NUT) genes.
CONCLUSION: SEM-1 is the first cell line derived from an extragonadal germ cell
tumor showing intermediate characteristics between seminoma and nonseminoma, and 
as such, is an important model to study the molecular pathogenesis of this
malignancy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4179199
PMID: 23374840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cell Cycle. 2013 Feb 15;12(4):684-97. doi: 10.4161/cc.23598. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Phospho-<U+0394>Np63a/microRNA feedback regulation in squamous carcinoma cells upon
cisplatin exposure.

Huang Y(1), Kesselman D, Kizub D, Guerrero-Preston R, Ratovitski EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Our previous reports showed that the cisplatin exposure induced the ATM-dependent
phosphorylation of <U+0394>Np63a, which is subsequently involved in transcriptional
regulation of gene promoters encoding mRNAs and microRNAs in squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) cells upon cisplatin-induced cell death. We showed that
phosphorylated (p)-<U+0394>Np63a plays a role in upregulation of pro-apoptotic proteins,
while non-p-<U+0394>Np63a is implicated in pro-survival signaling. In contrast to
non-p-<U+0394>Np63a, p-<U+0394>Np63a modulated expression of specific microRNAs in SCC cells
exposed to cisplatin. These microRNAs were shown to attenuate the expression of
several proteins involved in cell death/survival, suggesting the critical role
for p-<U+0394>Np63a in regulation of tumor cell resistance to cisplatin. Here, we
studied the function of <U+0394>Np63a in transcriptional activation and repression of
the specific microRNA promoters whose expression is affected by cisplatin
treatment of SCC cells. We quantitatively studied chromatin-associated proteins
bound to tumor protein (TP) p63-responsive element, we found that p-<U+0394>Np63a along 
with certain transcription coactivators (e.g., CARM1, KAT2B, TFAP2A, etc.)
necessary to induce gene promoters for microRNAs (630 and 885-3p) or with
transcription corepressors (e.g., EZH2, CTBP1, HDACs, etc.) needed to repress
promoters for microRNAs (181a-5p, 374a-5p and 519a-3p) in SCC cells exposed to
cisplatin.

PMCID: PMC3594269
PMID: 23343772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 30;33(5):619-31. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.625. Epub 2013 Jan 21.

Integrative molecular and functional profiling of ERBB2-amplified breast cancers 
identifies new genetic dependencies.

Shiu KK(1), Wetterskog D(1), Mackay A(1), Natrajan R(1), Lambros M(1), Sims D(1),
Bajrami I(1), Brough R(1), Frankum J(1), Sharpe R(1), Marchio C(2), Horlings
H(3), Reyal F(3), van der Vijver M(3), Turner N(1), Reis-Filho JS(1), Lord CJ(1),
Ashworth A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, UK. (2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Human Oncology,
University of Turin, Turin, Italy. (3)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical
Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Overexpression of the receptor tyrosine kinase ERBB2 (also known as HER2) occurs 
in around 15% of breast cancers and is driven by amplification of the ERBB2 gene.
ERBB2 amplification is a marker of poor prognosis, and although
anti-ERBB2-targeted therapies have shown significant clinical benefit, de novo
and acquired resistance remains an important problem. Genomic profiling has
demonstrated that ERBB2+ve breast cancers are distinguished from ER+ve and
'triple-negative' breast cancers by harbouring not only the ERBB2 amplification
on 17q12, but also a number of co-amplified genes on 17q12 and amplification
events on other chromosomes. Some of these genes may have important roles in
influencing clinical outcome, and could represent genetic dependencies in
ERBB2+ve cancers and therefore potential therapeutic targets. Here, we describe
an integrated genomic, gene expression and functional analysis to determine
whether the genes present within amplicons are critical for the survival of
ERBB2+ve breast tumour cells. We show that only a fraction of the ERBB2-amplified
breast tumour lines are truly addicted to the ERBB2 oncogene at the mRNA level
and display a heterogeneous set of additional genetic dependencies. These include
an addiction to the transcription factor gene TFAP2C when it is amplified and
overexpressed, suggesting that TFAP2C represents a genetic dependency in some
ERBB2+ve breast cancer cells.

PMID: 23334330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. FEBS J. 2013 Mar;280(6):1397-408. doi: 10.1111/febs.12130. Epub 2013 Feb 11.

The transcription factor activating enhancer-binding protein epsilon (AP-2e)
regulates the core promoter of type II collagen (COL2A1).

Niebler S(1), Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

The transcription factor activating enhancer-binding protein epsilon (AP-2e) was 
recently shown to be expressed during late chondrocyte differentiation,
especially in hypertrophic chondrocytes. In this study, we were able to reveal
that the promoter of the type II collagen (COL2A1) gene, encoding the
extracellular matrix protein type II collagen, is specifically regulated by
AP-2e. Expression of COL2A1 is downregulated at the transition of chondroblasts
into hypertrophic chondrocytes and our data provide evidence that AP-2e is
involved in this process. In reporter gene assays, overexpression of AP-2e in
cartilaginous cell lines resulted in a significant reduction in COL2A1 core
promoter activity of ~ 45%. Furthermore, we found that this process is
dose-dependent and highly specific for the epsilon isoform. Computational
analysis offered only a single putative AP-2-binding motif within the chosen
promoter fragment but site-directed mutagenesis revealed this motif to be
regulatory inactive. After expanding our screening to motifs containing minor
differences from the classical AP-2 consensus sequence (5'-GCCN3 GGC-3'), we
determined the sequence 5'-GCCCAGGC-3' ranging from position -128 to -135 bp as
an important regulatory site and responsible for COL2A1 downregulation through
AP-2e. Interaction of AP-2e with the COL2A1 promoter at this site was confirmed
by chromatin immunoprecipitation and electromobility shift assay. Further, our
experiments suggest that at least one additional factor is involved in this
process. This is the first study to prove regulation of COL2A1 by AP-2e
highlighting the role of the transcription factor as a modulator of cartilage
development.

© 2013 The Authors Journal compilation © 2013 FEBS.

PMID: 23331625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Feb;161A(2):371-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35733. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

A family with a complex clinical presentation characterized by arrhythmogenic
right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy and features of branchio-oculo-facial 
syndrome.

Murray B(1), Wagle R, Amat-Alarcon N, Wilkens A, Stephens P, Zackai EH, Goldmuntz
E, Calkins H, Deardorff MA, Judge DP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy (ARVD/C) is a familial 
form of cardiomyopathy typically caused by mutations in genes that encode an
element of the cardiac desmosome. Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a
craniofacial disorder caused by TFAP2A mutations. In a family segregating ARVD/C,
some members also had features of BOFS. Genetic testing for ARVD/C identified a
mutation in PKP2, encoding plakophilin-2, a component of the cardiac desmosome.
Evaluation of dysmorphology by chromosome microarray (CMA) identified a 4.4 Mb
deletion at chromosome 6p24 that included both TFAP2A and DSP, encoding
desmoplakin, an additional component of the cardiac desmosome implicated in
ARVD/C. A family member with both the 6p24 deletion and PKP2 mutation had more
severe cardiac dysfunction. These findings suggest that this contiguous gene
deletion contributes to both ARVD/C and BOFS, and that DSP haploinsufficiency may
contribute to cardiomyopathy. This family provides a clinical example that
underscores the need for careful evaluation in clinical scenarios where genetic
heterogeneity is known to exist. Finally, it suggests that individuals with
unexplained cardiomyopathy and dysmorphic facial features may benefit from CMA
analysis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23307527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Mar;7(3):909-14. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1257. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Direct regulation of caspase-3 by the transcription factor AP-2a is involved in
aspirin-induced apoptosis in MDA-MB-453 breast cancer cells.

Yan F(1), He Q, Hu X, Li W, Wei K, Li L, Zhong Y, Ding X, Xiang S, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Development Biology of State Education
Ministry of China, College of Life Sciences, Hunan Normal University, Changsha,
Hunan 410081, PR China.

Aspirin has been reported to trigger apoptosis in various cancer cell lines.
However, the detailed mechanisms involved remain elusive. The present study aimed
to investigate whether aspirin plays a role in apoptosis of MDA-MB-453 cells. The
effect of aspirin on the proliferation of human MDA-MB-453 cells breast cancer
cells was evaluated using MTT assay, flow cytometry and western blotting. The
present study reports that aspirin induces the apoptosis of MDA-MB-453 breast
cancer cells which was attributed to the increased expression and activation of
caspase-3. Moreover, AP-2a, a transcription factor highly expressed in MDA-MB-453
cells, was identified as a negative regulator of caspase-3 transcription and
AP-2a was attenuated following aspirin treatment. Therefore, aspirin may increase
the expression of caspase-3 by inducing the degradation of AP-2a, which increases
activated caspase-3 expression, thereby triggering apoptosis in MDA-MB-453 cells.
Thus, aspirin may be used in breast cancer therapy.

PMID: 23292806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Epigenetics. 2013 Feb;8(2):149-56. doi: 10.4161/epi.23398. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

DNA methylation profiles of long- and short-term glioblastoma survivors.

Shinawi T(1), Hill VK, Krex D, Schackert G, Gentle D, Morris MR, Wei W,
Cruickshank G, Maher ER, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rare Diseases and Personalized Medicine, Department of Medical &
Molecular Genetics, School of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of
Birmingham College of Medical and Dental Sciences, Birmingham, UK.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant type of primary brain tumor
in adults and prognosis of most GBM patients is poor. However, a small percentage
of patients show a long term survival of 36 mo or longer after diagnosis.
Epigenetic profiles can provide molecular markers for patient prognosis:
recently, a G-CIMP positive phenotype associated with IDH1 mutations has been
described for GBMs with good prognosis. In the present analysis we performed
genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of short-term survivors (STS; overall
survival < 1 y) and long-term survivors (LTS; overall survival > 3 y) by
utilizing the HumanMethylation450K BeadChips to assess quantitative methylation
at > 480,000 CpG sites. Cluster analysis has shown that a subset of LTS showed a 
G-CIMP positive phenotype that was tightly associated with IDH1 mutation status
and was confirmed by analysis of the G-CIMP signature genes. Using high
stringency criteria for differential hypermethylation between non-cancer brain
and tumor samples, we identified 2,638 hypermethylated CpG loci (890 genes) in
STS GBMs, 3,101 hypermethylated CpG loci (1,062 genes) in LTS (wild type IDH1)
and 11,293 hypermethylated CpG loci in LTS (mutated for IDH1), reflecting the
CIMP positive phenotype. The location of differentially hypermethylated CpG loci 
with respect to CpG content, neighborhood context and functional genomic
distribution was similar in our sample set, with the majority of CpG loci
residing in CpG islands and in gene promoters. Our preliminary study also
identified a set of CpG loci differentially hypermethylated between STS and LTS
cases, including members of the homeobox gene family (HOXD8, HOXD13 and HOXC4),
the transcription factors NR2F2 and TFAP2A, and Dickkopf 2, a negative regulator 
of the wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3592900
PMID: 23291739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2013 Mar;12(3):736-48. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M112.020727. Epub
2012 Dec 28.

Identification of the hypoxia-inducible factor 2a nuclear interactome in melanoma
cells reveals master proteins involved in melanoma development.

Steunou AL(1), Ducoux-Petit M, Lazar I, Monsarrat B, Erard M, Muller C, Clottes
E, Burlet-Schiltz O, Nieto L.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, IPBS, Toulouse, France.

Hypoxia-inducible factors (HIFs) are heterodimeric transcription factors that
play a key role in cellular adaptation to hypoxia. HIF proteins are composed of
an a subunit regulated by oxygen pressure (essentially HIF1a or HIF2a) and a
constitutively expressed ß subunit. These proteins are often overexpressed in
cancer cells, and HIF overexpression frequently correlates with poor prognosis,
making HIF proteins promising therapeutic targets. HIF proteins are involved in
melanoma initiation and progression; however, the specific function of HIF2 in
melanoma has not yet been studied comprehensively. Identifying protein complexes 
is a valuable way to uncover protein function, and affinity purification coupled 
with mass spectrometry and label-free quantification is a reliable method for
this approach. We therefore applied quantitative interaction proteomics to
identify exhaustively the nuclear complexes containing HIF2a in a human melanoma 
cell line, 501mel. We report, for the first time, a high-throughput analysis of
the interactome of an HIF subunit. Seventy proteins were identified that interact
with HIF2a, including some well-known HIF partners and some new interactors. The 
new HIF2a partners microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, SOX10, and
AP2a, which are master actors of melanoma development, were confirmed via
co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Their ability to bind to HIF1a was also
tested: microphthalmia-associated transcription factor and SOX10 were confirmed
as HIF1a partners, but the transcription factor AP2a was not. AP2a expression
correlates with low invasive capacities. Interestingly, we demonstrated that when
HIF2a was overexpressed, only cells expressing large amounts of AP2a exhibited
decreased invasive capacities in hypoxia relative to normoxia. The simultaneous
presence of both transcription factors therefore reduces cells' invasive
properties. Knowledge of the HIF2a interactome is thus a useful resource for
investigating the general mechanisms of HIF function and regulation, and here we 
reveal unexpected, distinct roles for the HIF1 and HIF2 isoforms in melanoma
progression.

PMCID: PMC3591665
PMID: 23275444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Arch Virol. 2013 Apr;158(4):887-94. doi: 10.1007/s00705-012-1561-y. Epub 2012 Dec
7.

Hepatitis B virus regulation of Raf1 promoter activity through activation of
transcription factor AP-2a.

Qu J(1), Li J, Chen K, Qin D, Li K, Sheng Y, Zou C, Wang S, Huang A, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016, China.

The X protein of hepatitis B virus (HBx) is one of the important factors in the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma. Raf1 kinase is a central component of
many signaling pathways that are involved in normal cell growth and oncogenic
transformation. We previously demonstrated that hepatitis B virus regulates Raf1 
expression in HepG2.2.15 cells by enhancing its promoter activity and that HBx
and HBs might play an important role in this process. However, the underlying
molecular mechanisms remain unclear. In this study, we show that nucleotides -209
to -133 of the Raf1 promoter sequence constitute the core region where hepatitis 
B virus is regulated. This regulation was found to require the involvement of
cis-regulatory element AP-2a. We further demonstrated that AP-2a expression was
higher in HepG2.2.15 cells (HBV-expressing cells) than in HepG2 cells in vitro.
Silencing AP-2a expression by siRNA significantly inhibited the Raf1 promoter
activity in HepG2.2.15 cells. These findings indicated that HBV regulates Raf1
promoter activity, possibly through AP-2a.

PMID: 23224762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Exp Neurol. 2013 Mar;241:75-83. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.11.025. Epub 2012
Dec 5.

Mutant huntingtin affects endocytosis in striatal cells by altering the binding
of AP-2 to membranes.

Borgonovo JE(1), Troncoso M, Lucas JJ, Sosa MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología y Fisiología Celular Dr. Francisco Bertini, Instituto 
de Histología y Embriología-CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, Universidad
Nacional de Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis plays an important role in the maintenance of
neuronal integrity in the synaptic terminals. Here we studied the effect of
anomalous polyglutamine expansion in huntingtin on the interaction of coat
proteins with membranes, in areas of mouse brain or in cultured striatal cells.
We observed that this anomaly induces a redistribution of AP-2, but not other
coat proteins, from the membrane to the cytosol in the striatum, and in the
cultured striatal cells. It was also noted that huntingtin associates with AP-2, 
and that this association decreases due to the mutation in huntingtin. This
decreased receptor-mediated endocytosis, measured by the internalization of
transferrin in the mutated cells. It was also confirmed that huntingtin mutation 
made the cells more vulnerable to the action of quinolinic acid, with an
increasing degradation of the AP-2 alpha subunits. On the basis of these results,
we conclude that abnormal polyglutamine expansion in huntingtin affects
clathrin-mediated endocytosis, and may be one of the pathogenic mechanisms of
neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23219902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Biol. 2013 Feb 1;374(1):96-107. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.11.020. Epub 2012
Nov 30.

Deciphering gene expression program of MAP3K1 in mouse eyelid morphogenesis.

Jin C(1), Chen J, Meng Q, Carreira V, Tam NN, Geh E, Karyala S, Ho SM, Zhou X,
Medvedovic M, Xia Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Kettering Laboratory, Suite 410, P.O. Box 670056,
Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.

Embryonic eyelid closure involves forward movement and ultimate fusion of the
upper and lower eyelids, an essential step of mammalian ocular surface
development. Although its underlying mechanism of action is not fully understood,
a functional mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase 1 (MAP3K1) is
required for eyelid closure. Here we investigate the molecular signatures of
MAP3K1 in eyelid morphogenesis. At mouse gestational day E15.5, the developmental
stage immediately prior to eyelid closure, MAP3K1 expression is predominant in
the eyelid leading edge (LE) and the inner eyelid (IE) epithelium. We used laser 
capture microdissection (LCM) to obtain highly enriched LE and IE cells from wild
type and MAP3K1-deficient fetuses and analyzed genome-wide expression profiles.
The gene expression data led to the identification of three distinct
developmental features of MAP3K1. First, MAP3K1 modulated Wnt and Sonic hedgehog 
signals, actin reorganization, and proliferation only in LE but not in IE
epithelium, illustrating the temporal-spatial specificity of MAP3K1 in
embryogenesis. Second, MAP3K1 potentiated AP-2a expression and SRF and AP-1
activity, but its target genes were enriched for binding motifs of AP-2a and SRF,
and not AP-1, suggesting the existence of novel MAP3K1-AP-2a/SRF modules in gene 
regulation. Third, MAP3K1 displayed variable effects on expression of lineage
specific genes in the LE and IE epithelium, revealing potential roles of MAP3K1
in differentiation and lineage specification. Using LCM and expression array, our
studies have uncovered novel molecular signatures of MAP3K1 in embryonic eyelid
closure.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3549005
PMID: 23201579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jan;182(1):84-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.09.018. Epub 2012 
Nov 13.

Synergistic silencing by promoter methylation and reduced AP-2a transactivation
of the proapoptotic HRK gene confers apoptosis resistance and enhanced tumor
growth.

Xu M(1), Chen X, Chen N, Nie L, Li X, Li Q, Zeng H, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

The Harakiri (HRK) gene encodes an important proapoptotic mitochondrial protein
of the Bcl-2 family. HRK is expressed in normal tissues but is decreased in many 
cancers such as melanoma, the mechanisms of which have not been fully elucidated.
Here, we demonstrate that HRK is silenced by hypermethylation of a major proximal
CpG island in the HRK promoter. Furthermore, we show that HRK is a novel target
gene regulated by the transcription factor AP-2a, which interacts with an AP-2a
binding site in the HRK promoter. Hypermethylation of the major proximal CpG
island (which contains the AP-2a binding site within the most densely methylated 
-218- to -194-bp region) inhibited AP-2a binding and transcriptional activity.
Artificial overexpression of AP-2a in melanoma cells up-regulated HRK
transcription, which was further restored by treatment with DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-azacytidine. Artificial overexpression of HRK by recombinant
adenovirus induced caspase-dependent apoptosis, inhibited melanoma cell growth
in vitro, and markedly reduced in vivo melanoma growth in a nude mouse xenograft 
model. RNA interference by siHRK or siAP-2a reversed the above effects. We
conclude that the synergistic effects of HRK promoter hypermethylation and loss
of AP-2a transactivation lead to HRK gene silencing and confer resistance to
apoptosis and enhanced tumor growth. These novel molecular lesions may provide
the basis for new therapeutic approaches to treating AP-2a- and HRK-deficient
cancers.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23159945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Med Food. 2012 Nov;15(11):959-67. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2012.2286.

Alpinia officinarum inhibits adipocyte differentiation and high-fat diet-induced 
obesity in mice through regulation of adipogenesis and lipogenesis.

Jung CH(1), Jang SJ, Ahn J, Gwon SY, Jeon TI, Kim TW, Ha TY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism and Functionality Research, Korea Food Research
Institute, Seongnam, Korea.

Although Alpinia officinarum has been used in traditional medicine for the
treatment of several conditions, such as abdominal pain, emesis, diarrhea,
impaired renal function, and dysentery, little is known about its function in
obesity. In this study, we investigated the antiobesity effect of A. officinarum 
ethanol extract (AOE) on lipid accumulation in 3T3-L1 cells and obesity in mice
fed a high-fat diet (HFD). AOE dose-dependently suppressed lipid accumulation
during differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes by downregulating CCAAT enhancer
binding protein a (C/EBPa), sterol regulatory element binding protein-1
(SREBP-1), and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR-<U+03B3>) genes.
Galangin, a major component of A. officinarum, had antiadipogenic effects in
3T3-L1 cells. AOE supplementation in mice fed a HFD revealed that AOE
significantly decreased HFD-induced increases in body, liver, and white adipose
tissue weights and decreased serum insulin and leptin levels. To elucidate the
inhibitory mechanism of AOE in obesity, lipid metabolism-related genes were
identified. AOE efficiently suppressed protein expressions of C/EBPa, fatty acid 
synthase, SREBP-1, and PPAR-<U+03B3> in the liver and adipose tissue. The protein
expression patterns, observed by immunoblot, were confirmed by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction. Collectively, these results suggest that AOE
prevents obesity by suppressing adipogenic and lipogenic genes. AOE has potential
for use as an antiobesity therapeutic agent that can function by regulating lipid
metabolism.

PMID: 23126661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Dermatology. 2012;225(3):193-203. doi: 10.1159/000342509. Epub 2012 Oct 27.

Cathepsin C gene 5'-untranslated region mutation in papillon-lefèvre syndrome.

Kosem R(1), Debeljak M, Repic Lampret B, Kansky A, Battelino T, Trebuak
Podkrajek K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric and Preventive Dentistry, University Childrens
Hospital, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

BACKGROUND: Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome (PLS) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by palmoplantar keratoderma together with a severe form of
generalized aggressive periodontitis and associated with mutations in cathepsin C
gene (CTSC).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical and mutational characteristics of 6 PLS
patients from 4 unrelated Slovenian families.
METHODS: CTSC mutational and functional analyses were performed.
RESULTS: In all patients, a novel homozygous substitution, c.-55C>A, in the CTSC 
5'-untranslated region (UTR) was detected on genomic DNA level and confirmed by
mRNA analysis, resulting in the almost complete loss of CTSC mRNA expression and 
CTSC activity. In silico analysis revealed the potential of the mutation to
disrupt putative transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) for AP-2 and Sp
families of transcription factors.
CONCLUSION: Identification of a novel CTSC 5'-UTR mutation together with a severe
reduction of CTSC mRNA expression and virtually nonexistent CTSC activity was
suggestive of a novel mechanism of TFBS dysfunction associated with PLS.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23108224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Placenta. 2012 Dec;33(12):977-81. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2012.10.001. Epub 2012 
Oct 24.

Abnormal regulation for progesterone production in placenta with prenatal cocaine
exposure in rats.

Wu L(1), Yan J, Qu SC, Feng YQ, Jiang XL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maternal and Child Health Care, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention of Suzhou Industrial Park, Suzhou 215021, China.

Cocaine abuse in pregnant women is currently a significant public hygiene problem
and is tightly associated with elevated risk for preterm delivery. Placental
steroidogenesis especially progesterone production was essential for success and 
maintenance of pregnancy in humans and rodents. In the present study, we
determined the impact of prenatal cocaine exposure on pathways of placental
progesterone synthesis in rats. Pregnant rats were treated cocaine twice daily
(15 mg/kg/day) during the third trimester, and the maternal and fetal plasma
progesterone and pregnenolone concentrations were detected. We also examined both
the protein and mRNA expression of some key enzymes and regulators for
progesterone production in placenta. Results showed that, after maternal cocaine 
use during pregnancy, progesterone and pregnenolone concentrations in both
maternal and fetal rats were significantly decreased. Although prenatal cocaine
exposure had no effects on placental 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 1
(3ßHSD1) expression, protein and mRNA expression of the cholesterol side-chain
cleavage enzyme (P450scc/CYP11a) in placenta was significantly inhibited.
Moreover, protein and mRNA expressions of MLN64 that regulating cholesterol
transport and activating protein 2<U+03B3> (AP2<U+03B3>/Tfap2c) that controlling P450scc/CYP11a
gene expression in placenta were both decreased following maternal cocaine use in
pregnancy. Collectively, this study suggested that prenatal cocaine exposure
could insult the placental progesterone production in rats possibly associated
with the high risk for preterm delivery.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23103204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Sci Signal. 2012 Oct 23;5(247):pt11. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003318.

P450 oxidoreductase deficiency: a disorder of steroidogenesis with multiple
clinical manifestations.

Miller WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0978, USA.
wlmlab@ucsf.edu

Cytochrome P450 enzymes catalyze the biosynthesis of steroid hormones and
metabolize drugs. There are seven human type I P450 enzymes in mitochondria and
50 type II enzymes in endoplasmic reticulum. Type II enzymes, including both
drug-metabolizing and some steroidogenic enzymes, require electron donation from 
a two-flavin protein, P450 oxidoreductase (POR). Although knockout of the POR
gene causes embryonic lethality in mice, we discovered human POR deficiency as a 
disorder of steroidogenesis associated with the Antley-Bixler skeletal
malformation syndrome and found mild POR mutations in phenotypically normal
adults with infertility. Assay results of mutant forms of POR using the
traditional but nonphysiologic assay (reduction of cytochrome c) did not
correlate with patient phenotypes; assays based on the 17,20 lyase activity of
P450c17 (CYP17) correlated with clinical phenotypes. The POR sequence in 842
normal individuals revealed many polymorphisms; amino acid sequence variant A503V
is encoded by ~28% of human alleles. POR A503V has about 60% of wild-type
activity in assays with CYP17, CYP2D6, and CYP3A4, but nearly wild-type activity 
with P450c21, CYP1A2, and CYP2C19. Activity of a particular POR variant with one 
P450 enzyme will not predict its activity with another P450 enzyme: Each POR-P450
combination must be studied individually. Human POR transcription, initiated from
an untranslated exon, is regulated by Smad3/4, thyroid receptors, and the
transcription factor AP-2. A promoter polymorphism reduces transcription to 60%
in liver cells and to 35% in adrenal cells. POR deficiency is a newly described
disorder of steroidogenesis, and POR variants may account for some genetic
variation in drug metabolism.

PMID: 23092891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046256. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Functional significance of SRJ domain mutations in CITED2.

Chen CM(1), Bentham J, Cosgrove C, Braganca J, Cuenda A, Bamforth SD, Schneider
JE, Watkins H, Keavney B, Davies B, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

CITED2 is a transcriptional co-activator with 3 conserved domains shared with
other CITED family members and a unique Serine-Glycine Rich Junction (SRJ) that
is highly conserved in placental mammals. Loss of Cited2 in mice results in
cardiac and aortic arch malformations, adrenal agenesis, neural tube and
placental defects, and partially penetrant defects in left-right patterning. By
screening 1126 sporadic congenital heart disease (CHD) cases and 1227 controls,
we identified 19 variants, including 5 unique non-synonymous sequence variations 
(N62S, R92G, T166N, G180-A187del and A187T) in patients. Many of the CHD-specific
variants identified in this and previous studies cluster in the SRJ domain.
Transient transfection experiments show that T166N mutation impairs TFAP2
co-activation function and ES cell proliferation. We find that CITED2 is
phosphorylated by MAPK1 in vitro at T166, and that MAPK1 activation enhances the 
coactivation function of CITED2 but not of CITED2-T166N. In order to investigate 
the functional significance in vivo, we generated a T166N mutation of mouse
Cited2. We also used PhiC31 integrase-mediated cassette exchange to generate a
Cited2 knock-in allele replacing the mouse Cited2 coding sequence with human
CITED2 and with a mutant form deleting the entire SRJ domain. Mouse embryos
expressing only CITED2-T166N or CITED2-SRJ-deleted alleles surprisingly show no
morphological abnormalities, and mice are viable and fertile. These results
indicate that the SRJ domain is dispensable for these functions of CITED2 in mice
and that mutations clustering in the SRJ region are unlikely to be the sole cause
of the malformations observed in patients with sporadic CHD. Our results also
suggest that coding sequence mutations observed in case-control studies need
validation using in vivo models and that predictions based on structural
conservation and in vitro functional assays, or even in vivo global loss of
function models, may be insufficient.

PMCID: PMC3474824
PMID: 23082118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 1;373(1):107-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Oct 16.

A gene network that coordinates preplacodal competence and neural crest
specification in zebrafish.

Bhat N(1), Kwon HJ, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Preplacodal ectoderm (PPE) and neural crest (NC) are specified at the interface
of neural and nonneural ectoderm and together contribute to the peripheral
nervous system in all vertebrates. Bmp activates early steps for both fates
during late blastula stage. Low Bmp activates expression of transcription factors
Tfap2a and Tfap2c in the lateral neural plate, thereby specifying neural crest
fate. Elevated Bmp establishes preplacodal competence throughout the ventral
ectoderm by coinducing Tfap2a, Tfap2c, Foxi1 and Gata3. PPE specification occurs 
later at the end of gastrulation and requires complete attenuation of Bmp, yet
expression of PPE competence factors continues well past gastrulation. Here we
show that competence factors positively regulate each other's expression during
gastrulation, forming a self-sustaining network that operates independently of
Bmp. Misexpression of Tfap2a in embryos blocked for Bmp from late blastula stage 
can restore development of both PPE and NC. However, Tfap2a alone is not
sufficient to activate any other competence factors nor does it rescue individual
placodes. On the other hand, misexpression of any two competence factors in
Bmp-blocked embryos can activate the entire transcription factor network and
support the development of NC, PPE and some individual placodes. We also show
that while these factors are partially redundant with respect to PPE
specification, they later provide non-redundant functions needed for development 
of specific placodes. Thus, we have identified a gene regulatory network that
coordinates development of NC, PPE and individual placodes in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3508392
PMID: 23078916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Dermatol Sci. 2012 Dec;68(3):202-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.09.008. Epub
2012 Sep 18.

Expression of AP-2a, AP-2<U+03B3> and ESDN in primary melanomas: correlation with
histopathological features and potential prognostic value.

Osella-Abate S, Novelli M, Quaglino P, Orso F, Ubezio B, Tomasini C, Berardengo
E, Bernengo MG, Taverna D.

PMID: 23036739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Dent Res. 2012 Jul;91(7 Suppl):38S-44S.

Cleft lip in oculodentodigital dysplasia suggests novel roles for connexin43.

Amano K(1), Ishiguchi M, Aikawa T, Kimata M, Kishi N, Fujimaki T, Murakami A,
Kogo M.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Osaka, Japan. k-tenno@ace.ocn.ne.jp

Oculodentodigital Dysplasia (ODDD) is a rare syndrome involving anomalies in eye,
tooth, and digit formation, caused by mutations in CX43/GJA1. In addition to
classic dental features, ODDD includes oral and craniofacial accessory symptoms
such as characteristic facial appearance and cleft palate. However, there have
been no reports of ODDD accompanied by cleft lip. Herein we report, for the first
time, a male, sporadic, Asian proband presenting bilateral cleft lip. By direct
sequence analysis, our proband was diagnosed as having ODDD with a heterozygous
mutation, codon 142 G>A in GJA1 and CX43E48K. We excluded the possibility of
pathogenic mutations in B3GALTL, BMP4, TFAP2A, PVRL1, IRF6, and MSX1. To address 
how CX43/GJA1 is related to cleft lip, we performed immunohistochemistry using
mouse and human mid-facial tissue. CX43 expression was detected in the nasal
compartment and nasal and maxillary processes at murine developmental stage
E12.5. Furthermore, CX43 expression was found in the epithelial tissue inside the
human subepithelial cleft lip that completes epithelial fusion. Therefore, we
suggest that CX43/GJA1 is involved in lip formation. Our case report of ODDD with
a bilateral cleft lip suggests that CX43/GJA1 might be a novel candidate gene for
syndromic cleft lip.

PMID: 22699666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Nov;136(1):89-105. doi: 10.1007/s10549-012-2238-7. 
Epub 2012 Sep 15.

Recombinant viral protein VP1 suppresses HER-2 expression and
migration/metastasis of breast cancer.

Hung SW(1), Chiu CF, Chen TA, Chu CL, Huang CC, Shyur LF, Liang CM, Liang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115,
Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Feb;155(3):609-12.

Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in women worldwide and metastasis
is the major cause of breast cancer death. Development of new therapeutic agents 
for inhibiting breast cancer metastasis is therefore an urgent need. We
previously demonstrated that recombinant DNA-derived viral capsid protein VP1
(rVP1) of foot-and-mouth disease virus-induced apoptosis of MCF-7 breast cancer
cells in vitro. Here, we investigated whether rVP1 exhibits any inhibitory
effects on migration/metastasis and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER-2), a well-known biomarker for poor prognosis of breast cancer. The effects 
of rVP1 on cancer cell migration/invasion and metastasis were evaluated using
Transwell migration assay and animal cancer models of metastasis. Western
blotting, RT-PCR, flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, and immunofluorescence
staining techniques were used to investigate the effects of rVP1 on HER-2 and
signal transduction mediators. Non-cytotoxic concentrations of rVP1-induced
mesenchymal-epithelial transition and significantly suppressed AP-2a and HER-2
expression as well as the migration and invasion of a variety of breast cancer
cell lines in a ß1-integrin-dependent manner in vitro. Gross and histopathologic 
examinations showed that rVP1 also suppressed metastasis of several breast cancer
cell lines, including HER-2-overexpressing SK-BR-3 and BT-474 cells to lung,
liver, or peripheral lymph node in orthotopic allograft/xenograft murine models. 
In addition, rVP1 significantly prolonged survival in breast cancer-bearing mice.
Notably, no apparent side effects of rVP1 were detected, as shown by normal
complete blood count levels and serum biochemistry profiles, including AST, ALT, 
BUN, and creatine. This study demonstrates that rVP1 suppresses the migration,
invasion, and metastasis of breast cancer cells via binding to ß1 integrin
receptor and down-regulation of AP-2a and HER-2 expression. The effectiveness of 
rVP1 on inhibiting migration/metastasis of breast cancer and HER-2 expression
suggests that it may be suitable for serving as potential therapeutics for
metastatic breast cancer particularly HER-2-overexpressing cancer.

PMID: 22983836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Nov 2;11(5):633-48. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.07.006. Epub
2012 Sep 13.

Epigenomic annotation of enhancers predicts transcriptional regulators of human
neural crest.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Bajpai R, Prescott S, Brugmann SA, Swigut T, Wysocka J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Systems Biology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Neural crest cells (NCC) are a transient, embryonic cell population characterized
by unusual migratory ability and developmental plasticity. To annotate and
characterize cis-regulatory elements utilized by the human NCC, we coupled a hESC
differentiation model with genome-wide profiling of histone modifications and of 
coactivator and transcription factor (TF) occupancy. Sequence analysis predicted 
major TFs binding at epigenomically annotated hNCC enhancers, including a master 
NC regulator, TFAP2A, and nuclear receptors NR2F1 and NR2F2. Although many TF
binding events occur outside enhancers, sites coinciding with enhancer chromatin 
signatures show significantly higher sequence constraint, nucleosomal depletion, 
correlation with gene expression, and functional conservation in NCC isolated
from chicken embryos. Simultaneous co-occupancy by TFAP2A and NR2F1/F2 is
associated with permissive enhancer chromatin states, characterized by high
levels of p300 and H3K27ac. Our results provide global insights into human NC
chromatin landscapes and a rich resource for studies of craniofacial development 
and disease.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3751405
PMID: 22981823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 22;32(34):4043-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.400. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

Transcriptional regulation of the GPX1 gene by TFAP2C and aberrant CpG
methylation in human breast cancer.

Kulak MV(1), Cyr AR, Woodfield GW, Bogachek M, Spanheimer PM, Li T, Price DH,
Domann FE, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242-1086, USA.

The complexity of gene regulation has created obstacles to defining mechanisms
that establish the patterns of gene expression characteristic of the different
clinical phenotypes of breast cancer. TFAP2C is a transcription factor that has a
critical role in the regulation of both estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa) and
c-ErbB2/HER2 (Her2). Herein, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation and
direct sequencing (ChIP-seq) for TFAP2C in four breast cancer cell lines.
Comparing the genomic binding sites for TFAP2C, we identified that glutathione
peroxidase (GPX1) is regulated by TFAP2C through an AP-2 regulatory region in the
promoter of the GPX1 gene. Knockdown of TFAP2C, but not the related factor
TFAP2A, resulted in an abrogation of GPX1 expression. Selenium-dependent GPX
activity correlated with endogenous GPX1 expression and overexpression of
exogenous GPX1 induced GPX activity and significantly increased resistance to
tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Methylation of the CpG island encompassing the AP-2
regulatory region was identified in cell lines where TFAP2C failed to bind the
GPX1 promoter and GPX1 expression was unresponsive to TFAP2C. Furthermore, in
cell lines where GPX1 promoter methylation was associated with gene silencing,
treatment with 5'-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5'-aza-dC) (an inhibitor of DNA
methylation) allowed TFAP2C to bind to the GPX1 promoter resulting in the
activation of GPX1 RNA and protein expression. Methylation of the GPX1 promoter
was identified in ~20% of primary breast cancers and a highly significant
correlation between the TFAP2C and GPX1 expression was confirmed when considering
only those tumors with an unmethylated promoter, whereas the related factor,
TFAP2A, failed to demonstrate a correlation. The results demonstrate that TFAP2C 
regulates the expression of GPX1, which influences the redox state and
sensitivity to oxidative stress induced by peroxides. Given the established role 
of GPX1 in breast cancer, the results provide an important mechanism for TFAP2C
to further influence oncogenesis and progression of breast carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC3522755
PMID: 22964634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2012 Aug-Sep;139(8-9):550-4. doi:
10.1016/j.annder.2012.05.006. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

[Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome].

[Article in French]

Frascari F(1), Bieth E, Galinier P, Just W, Mazereeuw-Hautier J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de dermatologie, centre de référence des maladies rares de la peau,
université Paul-Sabatier, hôpital Larrey, CHU de Toulouse, 24, chemin de
Pouvourville, TSA 30030, 31059 Toulouse cedex 9, France. frascari.flora@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome (BOFS, MIM#113620) is a rare,
polymalformational disorder with cutaneous and ocular abnormalities and
characteristic facial anomalies. It is an autosomal dominant developmental
disorder caused by mutations or deletions in the transcription factor AP-2 alpha 
gene (TFAP2A, 6p24). We report a new case of atypical BOFS with a unilateral
cervical cutaneous defect.
PATIENT AND METHODS: A 5-year-old girl was admitted to our dermatology department
for a congenital, linear, erythematous cutaneous anomaly on the right side of her
neck. There was no family history. She also presented characteristic facial and
ocular anomalies. BOFS was suspected. TFAP2A molecular analysis revealed a
heterozygous missense mutation c.767C>T (p.Ala256Val).
DISCUSSION: BOFS is variable and remains unknown to dermatologists in spite of
distinctive cutaneous features. Identification of this syndrome is important to
improving medical care (multidisciplinary care, further tests, genetic
counselling). We report a case of atypical BOFS with a unilateral cervical
cutaneous defect in one patient and bilateral cutaneous anomalies in the other
four patients. In agreement with the literature, there did not appear to be
mutation-specific genotype-phenotype correlations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22963965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2013 Mar-Apr;22(2):141-5. doi: 10.1016/j.carpath.2012.07.001. 
Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Analyses of GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B genes in subjects from southern China with 
sporadic congenital heart disease.

Xiong F(1), Li Q, Zhang C, Chen Y, Li P, Wei X, Li Q, Zhou W, Li L, Shang X, Xu
X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart disease is the most common birth defect in newborns 
in southern China. The germline mutations in GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B genes have
been identified to be responsible for congenital heart disease. The frequency of 
GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B mutations in subjects with congenital heart disease in 
southern China and the correlation between their genotype and congenital heart
disease phenotype are not known.
METHODS: We screened germline mutations in the coding exons and the flanking
intron sequences of the GATA4, NKX2.5, and TFAP2B genes in 224 congenital heart
disease patients located in southern China by denaturing high-performance liquid 
chromatography and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Fifteen heterozygous mutations in the GATA4 gene were identified in 30
congenital heart disease patients, including a novel heterozygous missense
mutation (c.788 C>G) of GATA4 in one patient with ventricular septal defect. A
novel TFAP2B mutation (c.31 A>G) in a patient with endocardial cushion defect and
an unreported novel TFAP2B variant (c.1006 G>A) in six patients suffering from
tetralogy of Fallot (one patient), persistent truncus arteriosus (two patients)
and patent ductus arteriosus (three patients) was found. There were no reported
NKX2.5 mutations except for several single nucleotide polymorphisms in the
patients.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genomic GATA4 and TFAP2B missense
mutations may be associated with nonfamilial congenital heart disease with
diverse clinical phenotypes in patients with congenital heart disease from
southern China. They also revealed that the variation of the NKX2.5 gene may not 
be a risk factor for sporadic patients with congenital heart disease in this
population.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22959235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43212. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043212. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

TFAP2B influences the effect of dietary fat on weight loss under energy
restriction.

Stocks T(1), Angquist L, Banasik K, Harder MN, Taylor MA, Hager J, Arner P,
Oppert JM, Martinez JA, Polak J, Rousseau F, Langin D, Rössner S, Holst C,
MacDonald IA, Kamatani Y, Pfeiffer AF, Kunesova M, Saris WH, Hansen T, Pedersen
O, Astrup A, Sørensen TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Medicine, Copenhagen University Hospital,
Frederiksberg, Denmark. tst@ipm.regionh.dk

BACKGROUND: Numerous gene loci are related to single measures of body weight and 
shape. We investigated if 55 SNPs previously associated with BMI or waist
measures, modify the effects of fat intake on weight loss and waist reduction
under energy restriction.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Randomized controlled trial of 771 obese adults. (
REGISTRATION: ISRCTN25867281.) One SNP was selected for replication in another
weight loss intervention study of 934 obese adults. The original trial was a
10-week 600 kcal/d energy-deficient diet with energy percentage from fat (fat%)
in range of 20-25 or 40-45. The replication study used an 8-weeks diet of 880
kcal/d and 20 fat%; change in fat% intake was used for estimation of interaction 
effects. The main outcomes were intervention weight loss and waist reduction. In 
the trial, mean change in fat% intake was -12/+4 in the low/high-fat groups. In
the replication study, it was -23/-12 among those reducing fat% more/less than
the median. TFAP2B-rs987237 genotype AA was associated with 1.0 kg (95% CI, 0.4; 
1.6) greater weight loss on the low-fat, and GG genotype with 2.6 kg (1.1; 4.1)
greater weight loss on the high-fat (interaction p-value; p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.00007). The
replication study showed a similar (non-significant) interaction pattern. Waist
reduction results generally were similar. Study-strengths include (i) the
discovery study randomised trial design combined with the replication opportunity
(ii) the strict dietary intake control in both studies (iii) the large sample
sizes of both studies. Limitations are (i) the low minor allele frequency of the 
TFAP2B polymorphism, making it hard to investigate non-additive genetic effects
(ii) the different interventions preventing identical replication-discovery study
designs (iii) some missing data for non-completers and dietary intake. No adverse
effects/outcomes or side-effects were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Under energy restriction, TFAP2B may modify the effect of dietary
fat intake on weight loss and waist reduction.

PMCID: PMC3428346
PMID: 22952648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Cell Res. 2012 Nov;22(11):1546-61. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.122. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

AP2<U+03B3> regulates neural and epidermal development downstream of the BMP pathway at 
early stages of ectodermal patterning.

Qiao Y(1), Zhu Y, Sheng N, Chen J, Tao R, Zhu Q, Zhang T, Qian C, Jing N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) inhibits neural specification and induces
epidermal differentiation during ectodermal patterning. However, the mechanism of
this process is not well understood. Here we show that AP2<U+03B3>, a transcription
factor activator protein (AP)-2 family member, is upregulated by BMP4 during
neural differentiation of pluripotent stem cells. Knockdown of AP2<U+03B3> facilitates
mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) neural fate determination and impairs epidermal
differentiation, whereas AP2<U+03B3> overexpression inhibits neural conversion and
promotes epidermal commitment. In the early chick embryo, AP2<U+03B3> is expressed in
the entire epiblast before HH stage 3 and gradually shifts to the putative
epidermal ectoderm during HH stage 4. In the future neural plate AP2<U+03B3> inhibits
excessive neural expansion and it also promotes epidermal development in the
surface ectoderm. Moreover, AP2<U+03B3> knockdown in ESCs and chick embryos partially
rescued the neural inhibition and epidermal induction effects of BMP4.
Mechanistic studies showed that BMP4 directly regulates AP2<U+03B3> expression through
Smad1 binding to the AP2<U+03B3> promoter. Taken together, we propose that during the
early stages of ectodermal patterning in the chick embryo, AP2<U+03B3> acts downstream
of the BMP pathway to restrict precocious neural expansion in the prospective
neural plate and initiates epidermal differentiation in the future epidermal
ectoderm.

PMCID: PMC3494389
PMID: 22945355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Histol Histopathol. 2012 Oct;27(10):1333-42.

A fluorescence-based demonstration of intestinal villi and epithelial cell in
chickens fed dietary silicic acid powder including bamboo vinegar compound
liquid.

Ruttanavut J(1), Matsumoto Y, Yamauchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Kagawa University,
Miki-cho, Kagawa-ken, Japan.

This study investigates the combined effect of silicic acid and bamboo vinegar
compound liquid (SPV) on the growth and intestinal histological alterations in
poultry. Forty-eight 7-day-old male Sanuki Cochin chickens were fed a commercial 
mash diet supplemented with SPV at 0, 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3% level ad libitum for 112
days. Body weight gain tended to improve with increased concentrations of dietary
SPV, although these results were not statistically significant (P<0.1). Tissue
observation by light microscopy revealed that the jejunal villus height (P<0.01) 
and duodenal and jejunal villus area (P<0.05) increased in the 0.2 and 0.3% SPV
groups, respectively, compared with the control. Cell mitosis within the duodenum
and jejunum also increased in the 0.2 and 0.3% SPV groups. Scanning electron
microscopy revealed a prominent increase in the number of protuberant cells on
the villus apical surface of the duodenum and jejunum for the 0.2 and 0.3% SPV
groups compared with the control. Poultry in the 0.3% SPV group had the highest
body weight gain and hypertrophied histological alterations of intestinal villi. 
Fluorescent microscopic images of cell mitosis and protuberant cells in the
duodenal crypt clearly confirmed positive reactions for the activator protein 2a 
(AP-2a) and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), compared with the control.
The present results indicate that dietary SPV stimulates adsorption by the
epithelial cells, which activate cell proliferation and self-renewal and regulate
the expression of cell cycle regulators AP-2a and PCNA, resulting in higher body 
weight gain. Thus, we can conclude that a concentration of 0.3% dietary SPV is
ideal for promoting growth in poultry.

PMID: 22936452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2012 Jul;112(7):1048-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jand.2012.03.034.

Susceptibility variants for waist size in relation to abdominal, visceral, and
hepatic adiposity in postmenopausal women.

Lim U(1), Ernst T, Wilkens LR, Albright CL, Lum-Jones A, Seifried A, Buchthal SD,
Novotny R, Kolonel LN, Chang L, Cheng I, Le Marchand L.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology Program, University of Hawaii Cancer Center, Honolulu, HI 96813, 
USA. ulim@cc.hawaii.edu

Genome-wide association studies have identified common genetic variants that can 
contribute specifically to the risk of abdominal adiposity, as measured by waist 
circumference or waist-to-hip ratio. However, it is unknown whether these genetic
risk factors affect relative body fat distribution in the abdominal visceral and 
subcutaneous compartments. The association between imaging-based abdominal fat
mass and waist-size risk variants in the FTO, LEPR, LYPLAL1, MSRA, NRXN3, and
TFAP2B genes was investigated. A cross-sectional sample of 60 women was selected 
among study participants of The Multiethnic Cohort, who were aged 60 to 65 years,
of European or Japanese descent, and with a body mass index (calculated as
kg/m(2)) between 18.5 and 40. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry and abdominal
magnetic resonance imaging scans were used to measure adiposity. After
adjustments for age, ethnicity, and total fat mass, the FTO variants showed an
association with less abdominal subcutaneous fat and a higher
visceral-to-subcutaneous abdominal fat ratio, with the variant rs9941349 showing 
significant associations most consistently (P=0.003 and 0.03, respectively).
Similarly, the LEPR rs1137101 variant was associated with less subcutaneous fat
(P=0.01) and a greater visceral-to-subcutaneous fat ratio (P=0.03) and percent
liver fat (P=0.007). MSRA rs545854 variant carriers had a lower percent of leg
fat. Our findings provide initial evidence that some of the genetic risk factors 
identified for larger waist size might also contribute to disproportionately
greater intra-abdominal and liver fat distribution in postmenopausal women. If
replicated, these genetic variants can be incorporated with other biomarkers to
predict high-risk body fat distribution.

Copyright © 2012 Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3419359
PMID: 22889634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Mol Histol. 2012 Dec;43(6):681-9. doi: 10.1007/s10735-012-9439-6. Epub 2012 Aug
11.

AP-2a-dependent regulation of Bcl-2/Bax expression affects apoptosis in the
trophoblast.

Zhang L(1), Jia L, Cui S, Shi Y, Chang A, Wang P, Zhang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Third Affilicated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Kangfuqian Street 7, Zhengzhou, 450052, China.

Enhanced apoptosis of the cytotrophoblast in early pregnancy is associated with a
high risk of preeclampsia. We and others have previously reported that the
transcriptional factor, activator protein AP-2a, suppressed trophoblast migration
and invasion. However, it is not clear whether AP-2a affects apoptosis in
trophoblast cells and whether it regulates expression of apoptosis-related
factors Bcl-2 and Bax. We analyzed the expression of AP-2a, Bcl-2 and Bax in
placental tissues in severe preeclamptic pregnancies and normotensive pregnancies
using immunohistochemistry and real time-PCR. Further, apoptosis was assessed by 
flow cytometric analysis in the human trophoblastic cell line, BeWo cells, in
which AP-2a expression was transiently overexpressed or down-regulated by siRNA. 
There was significantly higher expression of AP-2a and Bax, but lower expression 
of Bcl-2 in severe preeclampsia placentas as compared to the control placentas.
Overexpression of AP-2a in BeWo cells led to an increased rate of apoptosis,
whereas apoptosis was decreased when AP-2a expression was reduced. Furthermore,
overexpression of AP-2a increased Bax expression and decreased Bcl-2 expression, 
whereas down-regulation of AP-2a expression resulted in a decrease in Bax
expression and an increase in Bcl-2 expression. AP-2a regulates expression of
Bcl-2 and Bax and apoptosis in BeWo cells. These results suggest that
AP-2a-mediated regulation of Bcl-2 and Bax regulation influences apoptosis which 
in turn leads to the pathogenesis of preeclampsia.

PMID: 22886241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Jul;20(7):2204-12. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2570-5. Epub 2012
Aug 10.

Expression of the RET proto-oncogene is regulated by TFAP2C in breast cancer
independent of the estrogen receptor.

Spanheimer PM(1), Woodfield GW, Cyr AR, Kulak MV, White-Baer LS, Bair TB, Weigel 
RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The RET proto-oncogene is expressed as part of the estrogen receptor 
(ER) cluster in breast cancer. We sought to determine if TFAP2C regulates Ret
expression directly or indirectly through ER.
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) and gel-shift assay 
were used to identify TFAP2C binding sites in the RET promoter in four breast
cancer cell lines. Ret mRNA and protein levels were evaluated in ER-positive and 
ER-negative breast cancer cell lines after knockdown of TFAP2C. Luciferase
expression assay was performed to assess expression from two of the identified
sites.
RESULTS: ChIP-Seq identified five main binding peaks for TFAP2C in the RET
promoter at -101.5 kb, -50.7 kb, -32.5 kb, +5.0 kb, and +33.6 from the RET
transcriptional start site. Binding at three of the AP-2 sites was conserved
across all four cell lines, whereas the RET -101.5 and RET +33.6 sites were each 
found to be unbound by TFAP2C in one cell line. A TFAP2C consensus element was
confirmed for all five sites. Knockdown of TFAP2C by siRNA in ER-positive MCF-7
cells resulted in significant down regulation of Ret mRNA compared to
nontargeting (NT) siRNA (0.09 vs. 1.0, P < 0.001). Knockdown of TFAP2C in
ER-negative MDA-MB-453 cells also led to a significant reduction in Ret mRNA
compared to NT siRNA (0.16 vs. 1.0, P < 0.001). In MCF-7 cells, knockdown of
TFAP2C abrogated Ret protein expression (0.02 vs. 1.0, P < 0.001) before
reduction in ER.
CONCLUSIONS: TFAP2C regulates expression of the RET proto-oncogene through five
AP-2 regulatory sites in the RET promoter. Regulation of Ret by TFAP2C occurs
independently of ER expression in breast carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3697477
PMID: 22878616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Yi Chuan. 2012 Jul;34(7):835-47.

[Progresses on plant AP2/ERF transcription factors].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang JY(1), Wang QJ, Guo ZR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Botany, Jiangsu Province and the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Nanjing 210014, China. maxzhangjy@163.com

Plant AP2/ERF transcription factor with AP2/ERF domain containing 60-70 amino
acids is a huge gene family present in all plant. AP2/ERF transcriptional factors
are involved in various biological functions such as plant development, flower
development, fruit and seed maturation, wounding, pathogen defense, high salty,
drought, and so on. AP2/ERF transcription factor are involved in salicylic acid, 
jasmonic acid, ethylene, abscisic acid signal transduction pathways and among
them. The transcription factors are cross-talk factor in stress signal pathway.
This paper summarizes the most advanced researches on types, biological
functions, and gene regulations of plant AP2/ERF transcription factors.

PMID: 22805209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Genomics. 2012 Oct;100(4):252-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.06.012. Epub 2012 Jul
4.

The DNA-binding activity of an AP2 protein is involved in transcriptional
regulation of a stress-responsive gene, SiWD40, in foxtail millet.

Mishra AK(1), Puranik S, Bahadur RP, Prasad M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Plant Genome Research, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New
Delhi-110067, India.

A differentially expressed transcript, encoding a putative WD protein (Setaria
italica WD40; SiWD40), was identified in foxtail millet. Tertiary structure
modeling revealed that its C-terminus possesses eight blade ß-propeller
architecture. Its N-terminal has three a-helices and two 3(10)-helices and was
highly induced by different abiotic stresses. The SiWD40:GFP fusion protein was
nuclear localized. Promoter analysis showed the presence of many cis-acting
elements, including two dehydration responsive elements (DRE). A
stress-responsive SiAP2 domain containing protein could specifically bind to
these elements in the SiWD40 promoter. Thus, for the first time, we report that
DREs probably regulate expression of SiWD40 during environmental stress.
Molecular docking analysis revealed that the circumference of the ß-propeller
structure was involved in an interaction with a SiCullin4 protein, supporting the
adaptability of SiWD40 to act as a scaffold. Our study thus provides a vital clue
for near future research on the stress-regulation of WD proteins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Sep;97(9):E1667-76. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1753. Epub
2012 Jun 28.

Ascorbic acid uptaken by sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 2 induces ßhCG
expression through Sp1 and TFAP2A transcription factors in human choriocarcinoma 
cells.

Chen L(1), Zhu H, Pan Y, Tang C, Watanabe M, Ruan H, Wang Y, Wang J, Yao HY,
Iguchi T, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, No. 866, 
Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou 310058, People's Republic of China.

CONTEXT: Vitamin C [ascorbic acid (AA)] is transported by sodium-dependent
vitamin C transporters (SVCT) 1 and 2, and our previous studies show AA induces a
dramatic production of steroid hormones in human choriocarcinoma cells. However, 
whether AA induces the production of placental polypeptide hormones remains
unknown. Here we investigated the mechanisms governing AA-induced ß-human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) expression.
METHODS: Frozen sections from human term placentas were used for immunostaining
of SVCT, and ßhCG mRNA expression and its production in primary human placental
cytotrophoblasts and JEG-3 cells were examined by quantitative RT-PCR and ELISA, 
respectively. Knockdown of SVCT2, transcription factor activating
enhancer-binding protein 2a (TFAP2A), or specificity protein-1 (Sp1) expression
was achieved by retrovirus-mediated short hairpin RNA, and the transcriptional
factors responsible for AA-induced ßhCG expression was identified by reporter
constructs.
RESULTS: Both SVCT1 and SVCT2 are expressed in human term placentas. SVCT2 is
predominantly localized in the syncytial layer, whereas SVCT1 is predominantly
distributed in the villous core. AA dramatically induces ßhCG mRNA expression and
its production in JEG-3 cells and primary human cytotrophoblasts, and knockdown
of SVCT2 expression in JEG-3 cells significantly decreases AA-induced ßhCG
expression. Data from ßhCG5 construct and its deletion mutants further indicate
that AA induces ßhCG5 transactivation through Sp1 and TFAP2A transcriptional
factors, and silence of Sp1 and/or TFAP2A expression significantly decreased
AA-induced ßhCG5 reporter activity and ßhCG expression as well.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study revealed the novel effects of AA on polypeptide
hormone, ßhCG, production and the potential mechanisms governing AA-induced ßhCG 
expression, suggesting the potentially indispensable roles of AA in placental
endocrine and pregnant maintenance.

PMID: 22745243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 13;423(4):895-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.099. Epub 2012 Jun 23.

CITED2 mutation links congenital heart defects to dysregulation of the cardiac
gene VEGF and PITX2C expression.

Li Q(1), Pan H, Guan L, Su D, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School, Peking Union Medical College, 9, Dongdan Santiao, Dongcheng, 
Beijing 100730, China.

CITED2, a cardiac transcription factor, plays an important role in cardiac
development. CITED2 mutations lead to a constellation of cardiac defects, which
include tetralogy of Fallot and outflow tract malformations. However, the
mechanisms underlying these mutations are poorly understood. We investigated the 
function and mechanism of two missense mutations, G184S and S192G, responsible
for tetralogy of Fallot and aortic stenosis, respectively. We found that CITED2
variants decreased its ability to mediate the expression of vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF) and the expression of the paired-like homeodomain
transcription factor 2-gamma (PITX2C), both of which are closely related to
cardiac development. Luciferase reporter and mammalian two-hybrid assays showed
that G184S and S192G in CITED2 restored the expression of VEGF, which was due to 
a reduction in its competitiveness with hypoxia inducible factor 1-alpha (HIF1-a)
for binding to CBP/p300. In addition, we found that the G184S and S192G mutant
decreased cooperation between CITED2 and transcription factor AP2-gamma (TFAP2C) 
in the transactivation of the PITX2C gene. These results provide important
evidence that the mutation of CITED2 may play a role in the development of
congenital heart disease (CHD) in humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22735262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Anadolu Kardiyol Derg. 2012 Sep;12(6):523-4. doi: 10.5152/akd.2012.165. Epub 2012
Jun 22.

Char syndrome, a familial form of patent ductus arteriosus, with a new finding:
hypoplasia [corrected] of the 3rd finger.

Babaoglu K(1), Oruç M, Günlemez A, Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University,
Kocaeli-Turkey. babaogluk@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    Anadolu Kardiyol Derg. 2012 Nov;12(7):619.

PMID: 22728731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Oct;39(10):9521-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1816-4. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Characterization of a novel ERF transcription factor in Artemisia annua and its
induction kinetics after hormones and stress treatments.

Lu X(1), Jiang W, Zhang L, Zhang F, Shen Q, Wang T, Chen Y, Wu S, Lv Z, Gao E,
Qiu B, Tang K.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Biotechnology Research Center, SJTU-Cornell Institute of Sustainable
Agriculture and Biotechnology, Fudan-SJTU-Nottingham Plant Biotechnology R&D
Center, School of Agriculture and Biology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200240, People's Republic of China.

The full-length cDNA sequence of AaERF3 was cloned and characterized from
Artemisia annua. The bioinformatic analysis and phylogenetic tree analysis
implied that the AaERF3 encoded a putative protein of 193 amino acids which
formed a closely related subgroup with AtERF1, ERF1 and ORA59 in Arabidopsis. The
result of subcellular localization showed that AaERF3 targeted to both of the
nuclei and the cytoplasm. The qRT-PCR analysis showed that Green young
alabastrums had the highest expression level of AaERF3 in the 5-months-old
plants. The qRT-PCR analysis also revealed that ABA, Wound and Cold treatments
significantly enhanced the transcript expression of AaERF3. MeJA and Ethylene
treatment could also slightly induce the accumulation of AaERF3 transcription.

PMID: 22714923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2012 Dec;31(3-4):621-32. doi: 10.1007/s10555-012-9358-8.

Driving transcriptional regulators in melanoma metastasis.

Mobley AK(1), Braeuer RR, Kamiya T, Shoshan E, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas at Houston, MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Unit 173, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The progression of melanoma toward the metastatic phenotype occurs in a defined
stepwise manner. While many molecular changes take place early in melanoma
development, progression toward the malignant phenotype, most notably during the 
transition from the radial growth phase (RGP) to the vertical growth phase (VGP) 
involves deregulated expression of several transcription factors. For example,
the switch from RGP to VGP is associated with the loss of the transcription
factor AP2a and gain of transcriptional activity of cAMP-responsive element
binding protein. Together with the upregulation of microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor, activating transcription factor 2, nuclear factor kappa B, 
and other transcription factors, these changes lead to dysregulated expression or
function of important cellular adhesion molecules, matrix degrading enzymes,
survival factors, as well as other factors leading to metastatic melanoma.
Additionally, recent evidence suggests that microRNAs and RNA editing machinery
influence the expression of transcription factors or are regulated themselves by 
transcription factors. Many of the downstream signaling molecules regulated by
transcription factors, such as protease activated receptor-1, interleukin-8, and 
MCAM/MUC18 represent new treatment prospects.

PMID: 22684365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e37040. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037040. Epub 2012 May 23.

Mutations in an AP2 transcription factor-like gene affect internode length and
leaf shape in maize.

Jiang F(1), Guo M, Yang F, Duncan K, Jackson D, Rafalski A, Wang S, Li B.

Author information: 
(1)National Maize Improvement Center of China, College of Agriculture and
Biotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Plant height is an important agronomic trait that affects yield and
tolerance to certain abiotic stresses. Understanding the genetic control of plant
height is important for elucidating the regulation of maize development and has
practical implications for trait improvement in plant breeding.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, two independent, semi-dwarf maize 
EMS mutants, referred to as dwarf & irregular leaf (dil1), were isolated and
confirmed to be allelic. In comparison to wild type plants, the mutant plants
have shorter internodes, shorter, wider and wrinkled leaves, as well as smaller
leaf angles. Cytological analysis indicated that the leaf epidermal cells and
internode parenchyma cells are irregular in shape and are arranged in a more
random fashion, and the mutants have disrupted leaf epidermal patterning. In
addition, parenchyma cells in the dil1 mutants are significantly smaller than
those in wild-type plants. The dil1 mutation was mapped on the long arm of
chromosome 6 and a candidate gene, annotated as an AP2 transcription factor-like,
was identified through positional cloning. Point mutations near exon-intron
junctions were identified in both dil1 alleles, resulting in mis-spliced
variants.
CONCLUSION: An AP2 transcription factor-like gene involved in stalk and leaf
development in maize has been identified. Mutations near exon-intron junctions of
the AP2 gene give mis-spliced transcript variants, which result in shorter
internodes and wrinkled leaves.

PMCID: PMC3359370
PMID: 22649507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2012 Aug;26(8):291-300. doi: 10.1002/jbt.21415. Epub 2012 
May 29.

Aloe-emodin inhibits adipocyte differentiation and maturation during in vitro
human mesenchymal stem cell adipogenesis.

Subash-Babu P(1), Alshatwi AA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Research Lab, Department of Food and Nutrition, College of
Food and Agricultural Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh 11451, Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia.

In this study, we examined the effects of Aloe-emodin (AE) on the inhibition of
adipocyte differentiation during 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX)-induced
adipocyte differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs). AE treatment
(5, 10, and 20 µM) of preadipocyte cells resulted in a significant (p < 0.05)
decrease in glycerol phosphate dehydrogenase and triglyceride levels as well as
an increase in lactate dehydrogenase activity and attenuated lipid accumulation
compared with untreated differentiated adipocytes. Using quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction, we studied the mRNA expression levels of
resistin, adiponectin, aP(2), lipoprotein lipase, PPAR<U+03B3>, and tumor necrosis
factor-a in hMSCs undergoing adipocyte differentiation; treatment with AE
decreased the expression of these adipogenic genes and decreased adipocyte
differentiation. In addition, AE suppresses the differentiation of hMSCs into
adipocytes by downregulating PPAR<U+03B3> and C/EBPa expressions. AE significantly
inhibited hMSCs proliferation and preadipocyte differentiation within the first 2
days of treatment, indicating that the antiadipogenic effect.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22645054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biol Reprod. 2012 Aug 23;87(2):37. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.098079. Print 2012
Aug.

Connexin 31 (GJB3) deficiency in mouse trophoblast stem cells alters giant cell
differentiation and leads to loss of oxygen sensing.

Koch Y(1), van Fürden B, Kaiser S, Klein D, Kibschull M, Schorle H, Carpinteiro
A, Gellhaus A, Winterhager E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical School,
Essen, Germany.

The nonphysiological placental oxidative environment has been implicated in many 
complications during human pregnancy. Oxygen tension can influence a broad
spectrum of molecular changes leading to alterations in trophoblast cell lineage 
development. In this study, we report that mouse wild-type trophoblast stem cells
(TSCs) react to low oxygen (3%) with an enhanced differentiation into the giant
cell pathway, indicated by a downregulation of the early stem cell markers Eomes 
and Cdx2 as well as by a significant upregulation of Tfap2c and the
differentiation markers Tpbpa and Prl3d1. Here we demonstrated that connexin
31/GJB3-deficient TSCs failed to stabilize HIF-1A under low oxygen, resulting in 
nonresponsiveness of different marker genes, such as Cdx2 and Eomes and Tfap2c
and Tpbpa. Moreover, connexin 31-deficient TSCs revealed a shift in giant cell
differentiation from Prl3d1 expressing parietal giant cells to Ctsq, Prl3b1, and 
Prl2c2-positive giant cells, probably sinusoidal and canal lining trophoblast
giant cells. Thus, loss of connexin 31 led to different giant cell subtypes which
bypass the progenitor regulators Tfap2c and Tpbpa under low oxygen conditions.

PMID: 22623621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hum Pathol. 2012 Nov;43(11):1866-74. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.01.011. Epub
2012 May 9.

Abnormal expression of transcription factor activator protein-2a in pathologic
placentas.

Sheridan RM(1), Stanek J, Khoury J, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. Rachel.Sheridan@cchmc.org

Recent studies from our laboratory have indicated that the transcription factor
activator protein-2a plays a critical role in the differentiation of human
villous cytotrophoblast cells to syncytiotrophoblast cells. However, little is
known about the expression of activator protein-2a in placentas from pathologic
pregnancies. This study compares the expression of activator protein-2a in
placentas from high-risk pregnancies to gestational age-matched controls.
Paracentral sections from grossly unremarkable areas of 10 placentas from each
group of pregnancies complicated by mild preeclampsia, severe preeclampsia,
diabetes mellitus, chronic hypertension, and fetal growth restriction and 10
control cases of placentas from normal pregnancies matched for gestational age
were double immunostained for activator protein-2a and E-cadherin. The total
numbers of cytotrophoblast cells and syncytiotrophoblast nuclei and the numbers
of activator protein-2a-positive and activator protein-2a-negative nuclei in both
of these cell types were counted by 2 pathologists blinded to disease status, in 
10 representative×40 high-power fields for each placenta. Abnormal placental
maturation in most of pathologic pregnancies was evidenced by a 1.5- to 1.7-fold 
lower expression ratio of syncytiotrophoblast cell to cytotrophoblast cell.
Activator protein-2a in syncytiotrophoblast cells was lower in mild preeclampsia,
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and fetal growth restriction (P<.0001 in each
instance) and was higher by 2-fold in severe preeclampsia, although this increase
was not statistically significant (P=.3). Because activator protein-2a has been
shown to be critical for villous cytotrophoblast cell differentiation, our
findings suggest that abnormalities in the activator protein-2a cascade of
transcription factors and/or signaling molecules may contribute to the
pathogenesis of the abnormal maturation in placentas in certain types of
high-risk pregnancies. The different pattern of activator protein-2a expression
in mild and severe preeclampsia clearly suggests that these conditions may have 2
independent pathogenic mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3433582
PMID: 22575257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(15):7190-206. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks389. Epub 2012
May 9.

Genome-wide analysis of p63 binding sites identifies AP-2 factors as
co-regulators of epidermal differentiation.

McDade SS(1), Henry AE, Pivato GP, Kozarewa I, Mitsopoulos C, Fenwick K, Assiotis
I, Hakas J, Zvelebil M, Orr N, Lord CJ, Patel D, Ashworth A, McCance DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast BT9 7BL, UK.

The p63 transcription factor (TP63) is critical in development, growth and
differentiation of stratifying epithelia. This is highlighted by the severity of 
congenital abnormalities caused by TP63 mutations in humans, the dramatic
phenotypes in knockout mice and de-regulation of TP63 expression in neoplasia
altering the tumour suppressive roles of the TP53 family. In order to define the 
normal role played by TP63 and provide the basis for better understanding how
this network is perturbed in disease, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation
combined with massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) to identify >7500
high-confidence TP63-binding regions across the entire genome, in primary human
neonatal foreskin keratinocytes (HFKs). Using integrative strategies, we
demonstrate that only a subset of these sites are bound by TP53 in response to
DNA damage. We identify a role for TP63 in transcriptional regulation of multiple
genes genetically linked to cleft palate and identify AP-2alpha (TFAP2A) as a
co-regulator of a subset of these genes. We further demonstrate that AP-2gamma
(TFAP2C) can bind a subset of these regions and that acute depletion of either
TFAP2A or TFAP2C alone is sufficient to reduce terminal differentiation of
organotypic epidermal skin equivalents, indicating overlapping physiological
functions with TP63.

PMCID: PMC3424553
PMID: 22573176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nat Med. 2012 Jun;18(6):902-10. doi: 10.1038/nm.2711.

Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase a2 by nicotine instigates formation of
abdominal aortic aneurysms in mice in vivo.

Wang S(1), Zhang C, Zhang M, Liang B, Zhu H, Lee J, Viollet B, Xia L, Zhang Y,
Zou MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Smoking is the only modifiable risk factor that is associated with the
development, expansion and rupture of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). However,
the causative link between cigarette smoke and AAA is unknown. Here we report a
causative link between smoking and AAA in vivo. Acute infusion of angiotensin II 
(AngII) or nicotine, a major component of cigarette smoke, markedly increased the
incidence of AAA in apolipoprotein E (apoE) knockout (Apoe(-/-)) mice and in mice
deficient in both apoE and the AMP-activated kinase a1 subunit (AMPK-a1)
(Apoe(-/-); Prkaa1(-/-) mice). In contrast, genetic deletion of AMPK-a2
(Apoe(-/-); Prkaa2(-/-) mice) ablated nicotine- or AngII-triggered AAA in vivo.
Mechanistically, we found that both nicotine and AngII activated AMPK-a2 in
cultured vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), resulting in the phosphorylation
of activator protein 2a (AP-2a) and consequent matrix metallopeptidase 2 (MMP2)
gene expression. We conclude that smoking (through nicotine) instigates AAA
through AMPK-a2mediated AP-2adependent MMP2 expression in VSMCs.

PMCID: PMC3559018
PMID: 22561688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Reprod Biomed Online. 2012 Jul;25(1):12-20. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.02.015. Epub
2012 Mar 3.

The role of transcription factor Tcfap2c/TFAP2C in trophectoderm development.

Kuckenberg P(1), Kubaczka C, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of
Bonn, Germany.

In recent years, knowledge regarding the genetic and epigenetic programmes
governing specification, maintenance and differentiation of the extraembryonic
lineage has advanced substantially. Establishment and analysis of mice deficient 
in genes implicated in trophoblast lineage and the option to generate and
manipulate murine stem cell lines from the inner cell mass and the trophectoderm 
in vitro represent major advances. The activating enhancer binding protein 2
(AP2) family of transcription factors is expressed during mammalian development
and in certain malignant diseases. This article summarizes the data regarding
expression and function of murine Tcfap2 and human TFAP2 in extraembryonic
development and differentiation. It also presents a model integrating Tcfap2c
into the framework of trophoblast development and highlights the requirement of
Tcfap2c to maintain trophoblast stem cells. With regard to human trophoblast
cell-lineage restriction, the role of TFAP2C in lineage specification and
maintenance is speculated upon. Furthermore, an overview of target genes of AP2
in mouse and human affecting placenta development and function is provided and
the evidence suggesting that defects in regulating TFAP2 members might contribute
to placental defects is discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22560121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e36263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036263. Epub 2012 Apr 30.

MDM2 promoter SNP344T>A (rs1196333) status does not affect cancer risk.

Knappskog S(1), Gansmo LB, Romundstad P, Bjørnslett M, Trovik J,
Sommerfelt-Pettersen J, Løkkevik E; Norwegian Breast Cancer Group trial NBCG VI, 
Tollenaar RA, Seynaeve C, Devilee P, Salvesen HB, Dørum A, Hveem K, Vatten L,
Lønning PE.

Collaborators: Anker G, Ostenstad B, Lundgren S, Risberg T, Mjaaland I.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Oncology, Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen,
Norway. stian.knappskog@med.uib.no

The MDM2 proto-oncogene plays a key role in central cellular processes like
growth control and apoptosis, and the gene locus is frequently amplified in
sarcomas. Two polymorphisms located in the MDM2 promoter P2 have been shown to
affect cancer risk. One of these polymorphisms (SNP309T>G; rs2279744) facilitates
Sp1 transcription factor binding to the promoter and is associated with increased
cancer risk. In contrast, SNP285G>C (rs117039649), located 24 bp upstream of
rs2279744, and in complete linkage disequilibrium with the SNP309G allele,
reduces Sp1 recruitment and lowers cancer risk. Thus, fine tuning of MDM2
expression has proven to be of significant importance with respect to
tumorigenesis. We assessed the potential functional effects of a third MDM2
promoter P2 polymorphism (SNP344T>A; rs1196333) located on the SNP309T allele.
While in silico analyses indicated SNP344A to modulate TFAP2A, SPIB and AP1
transcription factor binding, we found no effect of SNP344 status on MDM2
expression levels. Assessing the frequency of SNP344A in healthy Caucasians (n = 
2,954) and patients suffering from ovarian (n = 1,927), breast (n = 1,271),
endometrial (n = 895) or prostatic cancer (n = 641), we detected no significant
difference in the distribution of this polymorphism between any of these cancer
forms and healthy controls (6.1% in healthy controls, and 4.9%, 5.0%, 5.4% and
7.2% in the cancer groups, respectively). In conclusion, our findings provide no 
evidence indicating that SNP344A may affect MDM2 transcription or cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3340411
PMID: 22558411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Aug;128(2):365-76. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs163. Epub 2012 May 2.

Phthalates stimulate the epithelial to mesenchymal transition through an
HDAC6-dependent mechanism in human breast epithelial stem cells.

Hsieh TH(1), Tsai CF, Hsu CY, Kuo PL, Lee JN, Chai CY, Hou MF, Chang CC, Long CY,
Ko YC, Tsai EM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

Phthalates are environmental hormone-like molecules that are associated with
breast cancer risk and are involved in metastasis, a process that requires the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). However, few studies have addressed the 
potential effects of phthalates on stem cells. Here we tested the hypothesis that
phthalates such as butyl benzyl phthalate and di-n-butyl phthalate induce EMT in 
R2d cells, a stem cell-derived human breast epithelial cell line that is
responsive to estradiol for tumor development. We observed that phthalates
induced EMT as evidenced by morphological changes concomitant with increased
expression of mesenchymal markers and decreased expression of epithelial markers.
Molecular mechanism studies revealed that histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) is
required for phthalate-induced cell migration and invasion during EMT in vitro
and metastasis into the lungs of nude mice. We also constructed a series of
mutant HDAC6 promoter fragments and found that the transcription factor AP-2a
plays a novel role in regulating the HDAC6 promoter. Furthermore, phthalates
stimulated estrogen receptors and triggered the downstream EGFR-PKA signaling
cascade, leading to increased expression of AP-2a in the nucleus. We also
observed that phthalates increased expression of the PP1/HDAC6 complex and caused
Akt activation and GSK3ß inactivation, leading to transcriptional activation of
vimentin through the ß-catenin-TCF-4/LEF1 pathway. Understanding the signaling
cascades of phthalates that activate EMT through HDAC6 in breast epithelial stem 
cells provides the identification of novel therapeutic target for human breast
cancer.

PMID: 22552774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Plast Reconstr Aesthet Surg. 2012 Nov;65(11):1573-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bjps.2012.03.045. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Branchi-oculo-facial syndrome: a case report to highlight recent genetic
considerations.

Abbo O(1), Bieth E, Ballouhey Q, Vaysse F, Just W, Galinier P.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Department of Children's Hospital of Toulouse, 330, Avenue de Grande 
Bretagne, TSA 70034, 31059 Toulouse Cedex 9, France. olivier.abbo@gmail.com

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare entity described during the last 
century which has been recently linked to mutations of the gene encoding for the 
transcription factor named 'TFAPA2'. We report here a sporadic case of BOFS with 
a partial phenotype caused by a de novo mutation of this gene and discuss recent 
genetic findings.

Copyright © 2012 British Association of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic
Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22537416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2012 Apr;48(4):251-8. doi:
10.1007/s11626-012-9494-z. Epub 2012 Apr 17.

Effect of neuronal induction on NSE, Tau, and Oct4 promoter methylation in bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells.

Duan P(1), Zhang Y, Han X, Liu J, Yan W, Xing Y.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells Research Center, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, People's Republic
of China.

Cell differentiation involves widespread epigenetic reprogramming, including
modulation of DNA methylation patterns. The differentiation potential differences
in DNA methylation patterns might function in pluripotency restriction, while
tissue-specific differences might work in lineage restriction. To investigate the
effects of neuronal induction on promoter methylation pattern in rat bone marrow 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), we used bisulfite sequencing to analyze the
methylation status of the promoter regions in neuron-specific enolase (NSE),
microtubule-associated protein Tau, and Oct4 genes in MSCs pre- and post-chemical
induction. Neurocytes from the newborn rat brains were used as control. Data
showed that NSE and Tau were abundantly expressed in the brain cells and
MSC-derived neurocyte-like cells as well but not in the MSCs. However, both NSE
promoter (-214~+57 bp) and Tau promoter (-239~+131 bp) were hypomethylated (<4 % 
CpG methylation). Oct4 was expressed in MSCs, and the Oct4 promoter (-293~-85 bp)
was hypermethylated (>79 % CpG methylation). Interestingly, it was found that the
methylation of the locus -113 bp upstream of Oct4 transcription start site was
specifically enhanced in the process of MSCs' neuronal differentiation. Further
experiments in hepatocytes derived from MSCs and hepar tissue proved that the
-113 bp locus methylation increased also in non-neurogenic lineages. Tfsitescan
prediction showed that AP-2-alpha/gamma and Sp1 might regulate Oct4 transcription
upon MSC differentiation by binding the -113 bp locus. So, we conclude that
promoter methylation modifies pluripotency-specific gene, rather than regulates
the expression of neural-specific genes when MSCs differentiate into
neurocyte-like cells.

PMID: 22528735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Eur Heart J. 2013 Aug;34(32):2557-65. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehs056. Epub 2012
Apr 14.

A cell-autonomous role of Cited2 in controlling myocardial and coronary vascular 
development.

MacDonald ST(1), Bamforth SD, Bragança J, Chen CM, Broadbent C, Schneider JE,
Schwartz RJ, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford and Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

AIMS: Myocardial development is dependent on concomitant growth of cardiomyocytes
and a supporting vascular network. The coupling of myocardial and coronary
vascular development is partly mediated by vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGFA) signalling and additional unknown mechanisms. We examined the
cardiomyocyte specific role of the transcriptional co-activator Cited2 on
myocardial microstructure and vessel growth, in relation to Vegfa expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A cardiomyocyte-specific knockout of mouse Cited2
(Cited2(Nkx)) was analysed using magnetic resonance imaging and histology.
Ventricular septal defects and significant compact layer thinning (P < 0.02 at
right ventricular apex, P < 0.009 at the left ventricular apex in Cited2(Nkx) vs.
controls, n = 11 vs. n = 7, respectively) were found. This was associated with a 
significant decrease in the number of capillaries to larger vessels (ratio 1.56 ±
0.56 vs. 3.25 ± 1.63, P = 2.7 × 10(-6) Cited2(Nkx) vs. controls, n = 11 vs. n =
7, respectively) concomitant with a 1.5-fold reduction in Vegfa expression (P <
0.02, Cited2(Nkx) vs. controls, n = 12 vs. n = 12, respectively). CITED2 was
subsequently found at the Vegfa promoter in mouse embryonic hearts using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and moreover found to stimulate human VEGFA
promoter activity in cooperation with TFAP2 transcription factors in transient
transfection assays. There was no change in the myocardial expression of the
left-right patterning gene Pitx2c, a previously known target of CITED2.
CONCLUSIONS: This study delineates a novel cell-autonomous role of Cited2 in
regulating VEGFA transcription and the development of myocardium and coronary
vasculature in the mouse. We suggest that coupling of myocardial and coronary
growth in the developing heart may occur in part through a Cited2<U+2192>Vegfa pathway.

PMCID: PMC3748368
PMID: 22504313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Korean Med Sci. 2012 Apr;27(4):343-9. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2012.27.4.343. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Potential association of DCBLD2 polymorphisms with fall rates of FEV(1) by
aspirin provocation in Korean asthmatics.

Park TJ(1), Kim JH, Park BL, Cheong HS, Bae JS, Pasaje CF, Park JS, Uh ST, Kim
MK, Choi IS, Park CS, Shin HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea.

Aspirin exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD) is a clinical syndrome
characterized by chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyposis and aspirin
hypersensitivity. The aspirin-induced bronchospasm is mediated by mast cell and
eosinophilic inflammation. Recently, it has been reported that the expression of 
discoidin, CUB and LCCL domain-containing protein 2 (DCBLD2) is up-regulated in
lung cancers and is regulated by transcription factor AP-2 alpha (TFAP2A), a
component of activator protein-2 (AP-2) that is known to regulate IL-8 production
in human lung fibroblasts and epithelial cells. To investigate the associations
between AERD and DCBLD2 polymorphisms, 12 common variants were genotyped in 163
AERD subjects and 429 aspirin tolerant asthma (ATA) controls. Among these
variants, seven SNPs (rs1371687, rs7615856, rs828621, rs828618, rs828616,
rs1062196, and rs8833) and one haplotype (DCBLD2-ht1) show associations with
susceptibility to AERD. In further analysis, this study reveals significant
associations between the SNPs or haplotypes and the percentage of forced
expiratory volume in one second (FEV(1)) decline following aspirin challenge
using multiple linear regression analysis. Furthermore, a non-synonymous SNP
rs16840208 (Asp723Asn) shows a strong association with FEV(1) decline in AERD
patients. Although further studies for the non-synonymous Asp723Asn variation are
needed, our findings suggest that DCBLD2 could be related to FEV(1)-related
phenotypes in asthmatics.

PMCID: PMC3314844
PMID: 22468095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Pathol. 2012 Jul;227(3):367-79. doi: 10.1002/path.4029. Epub 2012 May 23.

The tumour suppressor Fhit positively regulates MHC class I expression on cancer 
cells.

Romero I(1), Martinez M, Garrido C, Collado A, Algarra I, Garrido F, Garcia-Lora 
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Análisis Clínicos & Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen de 
las Nieves, Granada, Spain.

MHC class I (MHC-I) molecules are ubiquitously expressed on the cells of an
organism. Study of the regulation of these molecules in normal and disease
conditions is important. In tumour cells, the expression of MHC-I molecules is
very frequently lost, allowing these cells to evade the immune response. Cancers 
of different histology have shown total loss of MHC-I molecule expression, due to
a coordinated transcriptional down-regulation of various antigen-processing
machinery (APM) components and/or MHC-I heavy chains. The mechanisms responsible 
for these alterations remain unclear. We determined the possible genes involved
by comparing MHC-I-positive with MHC-I-negative murine metastases derived from
the same fibrosarcoma tumour clone. MHC-I-negative metastases showed
transcriptional down-regulation of APM and MHC-I heavy chains. The use of
microarrays and subtraction cDNA libraries revealed four candidate genes
responsible for this alteration, but two of them were ruled out by real-time
RT-PCR analyses. The other two genes, AP-2a and Fhit tumour suppressors, were
studied by using siRNA to silence their expression in a MHC-I-positive metastatic
cell line. AP-2a inhibition did not modify transcriptional expression of APM
components or MHC-I heavy chains or surface expression of MHC-I. In contrast,
silencing of the Fhit gene produced the transcriptional down-regulation of APM
components and MHC-I heavy chains and decreased MHC-I surface expression.
Moreover, transfection of Fhit in MHC-I-negative tumour cell lines restored MHC-I
cell surface expression. These data indicate that defects in Fhit expression may 
promote MHC-I down-regulation in cancer cells and allow escape from
immunosurveillance(#).

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22451343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Gene. 2012 May 10;499(1):169-75. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.005. Epub 2012 Mar
9.

Delivery of AP-2a siRNA into cultured bovine trophoblast cells by electroporation
repressed key placenta-specific gene expression.

Zhou X(1), Wang Z, Zhang Z, Cui Q, Wang Y, Wang G.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, 1
Tongwei Lu, Xuanwu District, Nanjing 210095, PR China.

Binucleate trophoblast giant cells (BNC) characteristically appear early in
gestation in the bovine placenta. They secret pivotal hormones and cytokines for 
feto-maternal communication, for example, expression of placental lactogens
(CSH1), prolactin-related protein 1 (PRP1) and pregnancy-associated glycoprotein 
1 (PAG1) are necessary for pregnancy establishment in bovine. These genes
transcription are regulated in a temporal and spatial manner, however, molecular 
mechanisms by which these gene transcriptions are regulated in this manner have
not been firmly elucidated. In this study, a cell culture model for bovine
trophoblast cells was initially established, small interfering RNA duplexes
against Activator Protein-2a (TFAP2A) was transfected into the cells by
electroporation, and transcripts of CSH1, PRP1 and PAG1 were measured by qPCR.
The results showed that trophoblast giant cells were confluent for 90% after
cultured for 10 days, and BNC constituted of a population of more than 45% of the
total cells. Using a fluorescein-labeled non-silencing siRNA duplex, an
electroporation protocol yielding routinely >93% positive cells could be
established, and siRNA duplex transfection demonstrated an efficient knockdown of
cellular AP-2a mRNA level by 72.30 ± 3.28% in electroporated cells. Finally,
CSH1, PRP1 and PAG1 genes expression were effectively down-regulated by 65.45 ±
6.38% (P<0.01), 40.73±11.72% (P<0.01) and 11.59 ± 1.88% (P<0.05), respectively.
It was therefore suggested that electroporating siRNA into bovine trophoblast
cells could be an efficient method to manipulate BNC function and to study the
regulation mechanism of specific gene transcription without the use of chemical
transfection reagents. It was suggested that AP-2a could be at least involved in 
the regulation of expression CSH1 and PRP1 transcripts.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22425968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Semin Perinatol. 2012 Apr;36(2):98-104. doi: 10.1053/j.semperi.2011.09.019.

Genetics of patent ductus arteriosus susceptibility and treatment.

Hajj H(1), Dagle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

The ductus arteriosus is a vital fetal structure designed to close shortly after 
birth. Although many physiologic and pharmacologic investigations have
characterized the closure of this structure, genetic studies of persistent
patency of the ductus arteriosus (patent ductus arteriosus, PDA) are relatively
recent. Progress in the identification of specific genes associated with PDA is
well behind that of many adult-onset diseases because of several reasons ranging 
from the lack of large biorepositories for this unique population to the belief
that any genetic contribution to PDA is minimal. Viewing the PDA as a complex,
developmentally influenced disease with both genetic and environmental risk
factors has resulted in initial successes in some genetic studies. We will
introduce several genetic approaches, which have been or are currently being
applied to the study of PDA, that have been successful in identifying
polymorphisms associated with adult diseases. Genetic investigations of PDA will 
be discussed with respect to heritability, in general, and to specific risk
genes. Several animal models that have been used to study PDA-related genes will 
also be presented. Further advances in discovering genetic variation causing PDA 
will drive the more rational use of current therapies, and may help identify
currently unknown targets for future therapeutic manipulation.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22414880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033204. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Meta-profiles of gene expression during aging: limited similarities between mouse
and human and an unexpectedly decreased inflammatory signature.

Swindell WR(1), Johnston A, Sun L, Xing X, Fisher GJ, Bulyk ML, Elder JT,
Gudjonsson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America. wswindell@genetics.med.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Skin aging is associated with intrinsic processes that compromise the
structure of the extracellular matrix while promoting loss of functional and
regenerative capacity. These processes are accompanied by a large-scale shift in 
gene expression, but underlying mechanisms are not understood and conservation of
these mechanisms between humans and mice is uncertain.
RESULTS: We used genome-wide expression profiling to investigate the aging skin
transcriptome. In humans, age-related shifts in gene expression were
sex-specific. In females, aging increased expression of transcripts associated
with T-cells, B-cells and dendritic cells, and decreased expression of genes in
regions with elevated Zeb1, AP-2 and YY1 motif density. In males, however, these 
effects were contrasting or absent. When age-associated gene expression patterns 
in human skin were compared to those in tail skin from CB6F1 mice, overall
human-mouse correspondence was weak. Moreover, inflammatory gene expression
patterns were not induced with aging of mouse tail skin, and well-known aging
biomarkers were in fact decreased (e.g., Clec7a, Lyz1 and Lyz2). These unexpected
patterns and weak human-mouse correspondence may be due to decreased abundance of
antigen presenting cells in mouse tail skin with age.
CONCLUSIONS: Aging is generally associated with a pro-inflammatory state, but we 
have identified an exception to this pattern with aging of CB6F1 mouse tail skin.
Aging therefore does not uniformly heighten inflammatory status across all mouse 
tissues. Furthermore, we identified both intercellular and intracellular
mechanisms of transcriptome aging, including those that are sex- and
species-specific.

PMCID: PMC3296693
PMID: 22413003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Dyn. 2012 Apr;241(4):814-29. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23762.

Overlapping expression patterns and redundant roles for AP-2 transcription
factors in the developing mammalian retina.

Bassett EA(1), Korol A, Deschamps PA, Buettner R, Wallace VA, Williams T,
West-Mays JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: We have previously shown that the transcription factor AP-2a
(Tcfap2a) is expressed in postmitotic developing amacrine cells in the mouse
retina. Although retina-specific deletion of Tcfap2a did not affect
retinogenesis, two other family members, AP-2ß and AP-2<U+03B3>, showed expression
patterns similar to AP-2a.
RESULTS: Here we show that, in addition to their highly overlapping expression
patterns in amacrine cells, AP-2a and AP-2ß are also co-expressed in developing
horizontal cells. AP-2<U+03B3> expression is restricted to amacrine cells, in a subset
that is partially distinct from the AP-2a/ß-immunopositive population. To address
possible redundant roles for AP-2a and AP-2ß during retinogenesis,
Tcfap2a/b-deficient retinas were examined. These double mutants showed a striking
loss of horizontal cells and an altered staining pattern in amacrine cells that
were not detected upon deletion of either family member alone.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies have uncovered critical roles for AP-2 activity in
retinogenesis, delineating the overlapping expression patterns of Tcfap2a,
Tcfap2b, and Tcfap2c in the neural retina, and revealing a redundant requirement 
for Tcfap2a and Tcfap2b in horizontal and amacrine cell development.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3700368
PMID: 22411557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. N Engl J Med. 2012 Mar 8;366(10):966; author reply 966. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc1201170#SA1.

TFAP2E-DKK4 and chemoresistance in colorectal cancer.

Giovannetti E, Codacci-Pisanelli G, Peters GJ.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 5;366(1):44-53.

PMID: 22397669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Cell Sci. 2012 Feb 1;125(Pt 3):634-48. doi: 10.1242/jcs.090167.

AP-1 clathrin adaptor and CG8538/Aftiphilin are involved in Notch signaling
during eye development in Drosophila melanogaster.

Kametaka S(1), Kametaka A, Yonekura S, Haruta M, Takenoshita S, Goto S, Waguri S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology, Fukushima Medical University, 1
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima, Fukushima 960-1295, Japan. kametaks@fmu.ac.jp

Clathrin adaptor protein complex-1 (AP-1) and its accessory proteins play a role 
in the sorting of integral membrane proteins at the trans-Golgi network and
endosomes. Their physiological functions in complex organisms, however, are not
fully understood. In this study, we found that CG8538p, an uncharacterized
Drosophila protein, shares significant structural and functional characteristics 
with Aftiphilin, a mammalian AP-1 accessory protein. The Drosophila Aftiphilin
was shown to interact directly with the ear domain of <U+03B3>-adaptin of Drosophila
AP-1, but not with the GAE domain of Drosophila GGA. In S2 cells, Drosophila
Aftiphilin and AP-1 formed a complex and colocalized at the Golgi compartment.
Moreover, tissue-specific depletion of AP-1 or Aftiphilin in the developing eyes 
resulted in a disordered alignment of photoreceptor neurons in larval stage and
roughened eyes with aberrant ommatidia in adult flies. Furthermore, AP-1-depleted
photoreceptor neurons showed an intracellular accumulation of a Notch regulator, 
Scabrous, and downregulation of Notch by promoting its degradation in the
lysosomes. These results suggest that AP-1 and Aftiphilin are cooperatively
involved in the intracellular trafficking of Notch during eye development in
Drosophila.

PMID: 22389401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e29527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029527. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Transcriptional regulation of N-acetylglutamate synthase.

Heibel SK(1), Lopez GY, Panglao M, Sodha S, Mariño-Ramírez L, Tuchman M, Caldovic
L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States of America.

The urea cycle converts toxic ammonia to urea within the liver of mammals. At
least 6 enzymes are required for ureagenesis, which correlates with dietary
protein intake. The transcription of urea cycle genes is, at least in part,
regulated by glucocorticoid and glucagon hormone signaling pathways.
N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) produces a unique cofactor, N-acetylglutamate
(NAG), that is essential for the catalytic function of the first and
rate-limiting enzyme of ureagenesis, carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1).
However, despite the important role of NAGS in ammonia removal, little is known
about the mechanisms of its regulation. We identified two regions of high
conservation upstream of the translation start of the NAGS gene. Reporter assays 
confirmed that these regions represent promoter and enhancer and that the
enhancer is tissue specific. Within the promoter, we identified multiple
transcription start sites that differed between liver and small intestine.
Several transcription factor binding motifs were conserved within the promoter
and enhancer regions while a TATA-box motif was absent. DNA-protein pull-down
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed binding of Sp1 and CREB, but
not C/EBP in the promoter and HNF-1 and NF-Y, but not SMAD3 or AP-2 in the
enhancer. The functional importance of these motifs was demonstrated by decreased
transcription of reporter constructs following mutagenesis of each motif. The
presented data strongly suggest that Sp1, CREB, HNF-1, and NF-Y, that are known
to be responsive to hormones and diet, regulate NAGS transcription. This provides
molecular mechanism of regulation of ureagenesis in response to hormonal and
dietary changes.

PMCID: PMC3287996
PMID: 22383952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 May;32(9):1633-44. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06373-11. Epub 2012 Feb
27.

Histone demethylase KDM5B collaborates with TFAP2C and Myc to repress the cell
cycle inhibitor p21(cip) (CDKN1A).

Wong PP(1), Miranda F, Chan KV, Berlato C, Hurst HC, Scibetta AG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Bart's Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of
London, London, United Kingdom.

The TFAP2C transcription factor has been shown to downregulate transcription of
the universal cell cycle inhibitor p21(cip) (CDKN1A). In examining the mechanism 
of TFAP2C-mediated repression, we have identified a ternary complex at the
proximal promoter containing TFAP2C, the oncoprotein Myc, and the trimethylated
lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me3) demethylase, KDM5B. We demonstrated that while
TFAP2C and Myc can downregulate the CDKN1A promoter independently, KDM5B acts as 
a corepressor dependent on the other two proteins. All three factors collaborate 
for optimal CDKN1A repression, which requires the AP-2 binding site at -111/-103 
and KDM5B demethylase activity. Silencing of TFAP2C-KDM5B-Myc led to increased
H3K4me3 at the endogenous promoter and full induction of CDKN1A expression.
Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that TFAP2C and Myc associate with distinct
domains of KDM5B and the TFAP2C C-terminal 270 amino acids (aa) are required for 
Myc and KDM5B interaction. Overexpression of all three proteins resulted in
forced S-phase entry and attenuation of checkpoint activation, even in the
presence of chemotherapy drugs. Since each protein has been linked to poor
prognosis in breast cancer, our findings suggest that the TFAP2C-Myc-KDM5B
complex promotes cell cycle progression via direct CDKN1A repression, thereby
contributing to tumorigenesis and therapy failure.

PMCID: PMC3347242
PMID: 22371483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031158. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Identification of transcription factors regulating CTNNAL1 expression in human
bronchial epithelial cells.

Xiang Y(1), Qin XQ, Liu HJ, Tan YR, Liu C, Liu CX.

Author information: 
(1)Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

Adhesion molecules play important roles in airway hyperresponsiveness or airway
inflammation. Our previous study indicated catenin alpha-like 1 (CTNNAL1), an
alpha-catenin-related protein, was downregulated in asthma patients and animal
model. In this study, we observed that the expression of CTNNAL1 was increased in
lung tissue of the ozone-stressed Balb/c mice model and in acute ozone stressed
human bronchial epithelial cells (HBEC). In order to identify the possible
DNA-binding proteins regulating the transcription of CTNNAL1 gene in HBEC, we
designed 8 oligo- nucleotide probes corresponding to various regions of the
CTNNAL1 promoter in electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA). We detected 5
putative transcription factors binding sites within CTNNAL1 promoter region that 
can recruit LEF-1, AP-2a and CREB respectively by EMSA and antibody supershift
assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay verified that AP-2 a and LEF-1 
could be recruited to the CTNNAL1 promoter. Therefore we further analyzed the
functions of putative AP-2 and LEF-1 sites within CTNNAL1 promoter by
site-directed mutagenesis of those sites within pGL3/FR/luc. We observed a
reduction in human CTNNAL1 promoter activity of mutants of both AP-2a and LEF-1
sites. Pre-treatment with ASOs targeting LEF-1and AP-2a yielded significant
reduction of ozone-stress-induced CTNNAL1 expression. The activation of AP-2a and
LEF-1, followed by CTNNAL1 expression, showed a correlation during a 16-hour time
course. Our data suggest that a robust transcriptional CTNNAL1 up-regulation
occurs during acute ozone-induced stress and is mediated at least in part by
ozone-induced recruitments of LEF-1 and AP-2a to the human CTNNAL1 promoter.

PMCID: PMC3281047
PMID: 22359570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Sci Rep. 2011;1:192. doi: 10.1038/srep00192. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Francisella tularensis uses cholesterol and clathrin-based endocytic mechanisms
to invade hepatocytes.

Law HT(1), Lin AE, Kim Y, Quach B, Nano FE, Guttman JA.

Author information: 
(1)Simon Fraser University Department of Biological Sciences Shrum Science Centre
Room B8276 Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6.

Francisella tularensis are highly infectious microbes that cause the disease
tularemia. Although much of the bacterial burden is carried in non-phagocytic
cells, the strategies these pathogens use to invade these cells remains elusive. 
To examine these mechanisms we developed two in vitro Francisella-based infection
models that recapitulate the non-phagocytic cell infections seen in livers of
infected mice. Using these models we found that Francisella novicida exploit
clathrin and cholesterol dependent mechanisms to gain entry into hepatocytes. We 
also found that the clathrin accessory proteins AP-2 and Eps15 co-localized with 
invading Francisella novicida as well as the Francisella Live Vaccine Strain
(LVS) during hepatocyte infections. Interestingly, caveolin, a protein involved
in the invasion of Francisella in phagocytic cells, was not required for
non-phagocytic cell infections. These results demonstrate a novel endocytic
mechanism adopted by Francisella and highlight the divergence in strategies these
pathogens utilize between non-phagocytic and phagocytic cell invasion.

PMCID: PMC3240981
PMID: 22355707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Biotechnol. 2013 Feb;53(2):198-206. doi: 10.1007/s12033-012-9515-x.

Expression and function of a modified AP2/ERF transcription factor from Brassica 
napus enhances cold tolerance in transgenic Arabidopsis.

Xiong AS(1), Jiang HH, Zhuang J, Peng RH, Jin XF, Zhu B, Wang F, Zhang J, Yao QH.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Germplasm Enhancement, College of
Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, 1 Weigang, 210095 Nanjing, China. 
xiongaisheng@njau.edu.cn

One of the most rapid and effective defensive mechanisms plants have for
protecting themselves, from a variety of biotic and abiotic stresses, is the
regulation of plant signal transcription factors. AP2/ERF factors play an
important role in plant development as well as in hormonal regulation and cold
response. Directed evolution is a powerful tool to modify proteins, improving
their properties, and for studying their structure-function relations. Here, the 
transgenic Arabidopsis plants over-expressed a mutant gene, BnaERF-B3-hy15-mu3,
which encoded for a factor that exhibited more binding activity with the GCC box 
element than the wild-type gene BnaERF-B3-hy15 encode factor, and exhibited more 
freezing tolerance than transgenic plants containing the original BnaERF-B3-hy15 
gene. Real-time PCR analyses also revealed that the expression levels of several 
stress-regulated genes were altered in the over-expressed BnaERF-B3-hy15-mu3
transgenic lines. The BnaERF-B3-hy15 responded to exogenous ABA. Using RT-PCR
analysis, the expression of BnaERF-B3-hy15 at different stages and stress
treatments were also analyzed.

PMID: 22351429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Curr Biol. 2012 Mar 20;22(6):451-60. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.01.060. Epub 2012
Feb 16.

Endocytosis genes facilitate protein and membrane transport in C. elegans sensory
cilia.

Kaplan OI(1), Doroquez DB, Cevik S, Bowie RV, Clarke L, Sanders AA, Kida K,
Rappoport JZ, Sengupta P, Blacque OE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, UCD Conway Institute,
University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Multiple intracellular transport pathways drive the formation,
maintenance, and function of cilia, a compartmentalized organelle associated with
motility, chemo-/mechano-/photosensation, and developmental signaling. These
pathways include cilium-based intraflagellar transport (IFT) and poorly
understood membrane trafficking events. Defects in ciliary transport contribute
to the etiology of human ciliary disease such as Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS). In 
this study, we employ the genetically tractable nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
to investigate whether endocytosis genes function in cilium formation and/or the 
transport of ciliary membrane or ciliary proteins.
RESULTS: Here we show that localization of the clathrin light chain, AP-2
clathrin adaptor, dynamin, and RAB-5 endocytic proteins overlaps with a
morphologically discrete periciliary membrane compartment associated with sensory
cilia. In addition, ciliary transmembrane proteins such as G protein-coupled
receptors concentrate at periciliary membranes. Disruption of endocytic gene
function causes expansion of ciliary and/or periciliary membranes as well as
defects in the ciliary targeting and/or transport dynamics of ciliary
transmembrane and IFT proteins. Finally, genetic analyses reveal that the ciliary
membrane expansions in dynamin and AP-2 mutants require bbs-8 and rab-8 function 
and that sensory signaling and endocytic genes may function in a common pathway
to regulate ciliary membrane volume.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implicate C. elegans endocytosis proteins localized at
the ciliary base in regulating ciliary and periciliary membrane volume and
suggest that membrane retrieval from these compartments is counterbalanced by
BBS-8 and RAB-8-mediated membrane delivery.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3678972
PMID: 22342749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Brain Res. 2012 Mar 20;1444:87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.01.017. Epub 2012
Jan 18.

AP-2ß regulates amyloid beta-protein stimulation of apolipoprotein E
transcription in astrocytes.

Rossello XS(1), Igbavboa U, Weisman GA, Sun GY, Wood WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota School of Medicine,
Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VAMC, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA.

Two key players involved in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are amyloid beta protein
(Aß) and apolipoprotein E (apoE). Aß increases apoE protein levels in astrocytes 
which is associated with cholesterol trafficking, neuroinflammatory responses and
Aß clearance. The mechanism for the increase in apoE protein abundance is not
understood. Based on different lines of evidence, we propose that the
beta-adrenergic receptor (ßAR), cAMP and the transcription factor activator
protein-2 (AP-2) are contributors to the Aß-induced increase in apoE abundance.
This hypothesis was tested in mouse primary astrocytes and in cells transfected
with an apoE promoter fragment with binding sites for AP-2. Aß(42) induced a
time-dependent increase in apoE mRNA and protein levels which were significantly 
inhibited by ßAR antagonists. A novel finding was that Aß incubation
significantly reduced AP-2a levels and significantly increased AP-2ß levels in
the nuclear fraction. The impact of Aß-induced translocation of AP-2 into the
nucleus was demonstrated in cells expressing AP-2 and incubated with Aß(42). AP-2
expressing cells had enhanced activation of the apoE promoter region containing
AP-2 binding sites in contrast to AP-2 deficient cells. The transcriptional
upregulation of apoE expression by Aß(42) may be a neuroprotective response to
Aß-induced cytotoxicity, consistent with apoE's role in cytoprotection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3292686
PMID: 22325097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Pediatr Dermatol. 2012 May-Jun;29(3):383-4. doi:
10.1111/j.1525-1470.2011.01667.x. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome presenting with concomitant thyroglossal duct
cyst.

Shabbir AQ(1), Nazareth MR, Rothman IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State
University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14222, USA.

Branchial cleft anomalies are rare developmental defects of the neck, with an
estimated 2% to 3% being bilateral. Although most are isolated findings, some are
associated with syndromes. We report a 2-month-old boy with bilateral branchial
cleft anomalies, low-set ears, and hydronephrosis who tested positive for a
mutation in the TFAP2A gene (A256V) implicated in branchio-oculo-facial (BOF)
syndrome. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a thyroglossal duct cyst at
the base of the tongue. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of BOF 
syndrome presenting concomitantly with a thyroglossal duct cyst.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22276601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 5;366(1):44-53. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1009473.

TFAP2E-DKK4 and chemoresistance in colorectal cancer.

Ebert MP(1), Tänzer M, Balluff B, Burgermeister E, Kretzschmar AK, Hughes DJ,
Tetzner R, Lofton-Day C, Rosenberg R, Reinacher-Schick AC, Schulmann K, Tannapfel
A, Hofheinz R, Röcken C, Keller G, Langer R, Specht K, Porschen R,
Stöhlmacher-Williams J, Schuster T, Ströbel P, Schmid RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Universitätsmedizin Mannheim,
Ruprecht-Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. matthias.ebert@umm.de

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Mar 8;366(10):966; author reply 966.

BACKGROUND: Chemotherapy for advanced colorectal cancer leads to improved
survival; however, predictors of response to systemic treatment are not
available. Genomic and epigenetic alterations of the gene encoding transcription 
factor AP-2 epsilon (TFAP2E) are common in human cancers. The gene encoding
dickkopf homolog 4 protein (DKK4) is a potential downstream target of TFAP2E and 
has been implicated in chemotherapy resistance. We aimed to further evaluate the 
role of TFAP2E and DKK4 as predictors of the response of colorectal cancer to
chemotherapy.
METHODS: We analyzed the expression, methylation, and function of TFAP2E in
colorectal-cancer cell lines in vitro and in patients with colorectal cancer. We 
examined an initial cohort of 74 patients, followed by four cohorts of patients
(total, 220) undergoing chemotherapy or chemoradiation.
RESULTS: TFAP2E was hypermethylated in 38 of 74 patients (51%) in the initial
cohort. Hypermethylation was associated with decreased expression of TFAP2E in
primary and metastatic colorectal-cancer specimens and cell lines.
Colorectal-cancer cell lines overexpressing DKK4 showed increased chemoresistance
to fluorouracil but not irinotecan or oxaliplatin. In the four other patient
cohorts, TFAP2E hypermethylation was significantly associated with nonresponse to
chemotherapy (P<0.001). Conversely, the probability of response among patients
with hypomethylation was approximately six times that in the entire population
(overall estimated risk ratio, 5.74; 95% confidence interval, 3.36 to 9.79).
Epigenetic alterations of TFAP2E were independent of mutations in key regulatory 
cancer genes, microsatellite instability, and other genes that affect
fluorouracil metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: TFAP2E hypermethylation is associated with clinical
nonresponsiveness to chemotherapy in colorectal cancer. Functional assays confirm
that TFAP2E-dependent resistance is mediated through DKK4. In patients who have
colorectal cancer with TFAP2E hypermethylation, targeting of DKK4 may be an
option to overcome TFAP2E-mediated drug resistance. (Funded by Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft and others.).

PMID: 22216841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Indian J Med Res. 2011 Nov;134(5):621-6. doi: 10.4103/0971-5916.90986.

Mutations of TFAP2B in congenital heart disease patients in Mysore, South India.

Lingaiah K(1), Sosalagere DM, Mysore SR, Krishnamurthy B, Narayanappa D, Nallur
RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Studies in Zoology, University of Mysore, Mysore, India.

Comment in
    Indian J Med Res. 2011 Nov;134(5):588-90.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Cardiac malformations in the young constitute a major
portion of clinically significant birth defects. Congenital heart disease (CHD)
is a common congenital cardiac birth defect, affecting nearly 1 per cent of all
live births. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is clinically significant foetal
circulation anomaly, second most common form of CHD which constitutes
approximately 10 per cent of total CHDs. The study aimed to screen for TFAP2B
mutations in CHD patients of Mysore.
METHODS: With informed consent, 100 clinically diagnosed CHD patients and 50
healthy controls in Mysore, south India, were recruited for the analysis of
screening of mutations. MassARRAY analysis of 5 prominent mutations of TFAP2B was
performed.
RESULTS: The analysis did not show any of the five mutations of TFAP2B screened
by massARRAY in patients and controls, indicating that these mutations were not
involved in the manifestation of CHD in the patients at Mysore, south India.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest the lack of involvement of
known mutations of TFAP2B with syndromic or nonsyndromic CHDs in Mysore patients.

PMCID: PMC3249959
PMID: 22199100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Indian J Med Res. 2011 Nov;134(5):588-90. doi: 10.4103/0971-5916.90981.

The hunt for genetic risk among Mysore, south India patent ductus arteriosus
patients.

Iovannisci DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Birth Defects Research Lab, Children's Hospital & Research Centre Oakland,
5700 Martin Luther King Jr. Way, Oakland, CA 94609, USA. Diovannisci@chori.org

Comment on
    Indian J Med Res. 2011 Nov;134(5):621-6.

PMCID: PMC3249954
PMID: 22199095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029043. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

A miR-200b/200c/429-binding site polymorphism in the 3' untranslated region of
the AP-2a gene is associated with cisplatin resistance.

Wu Y(1), Xiao Y, Ding X, Zhuo Y, Ren P, Zhou C, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of Ministry of
Education, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China.

The transcription factor AP-2a functions as a tumor suppressor by regulating
various genes that are involved in cell proliferation and apoptosis.
Chemotherapeutic drugs including cisplatin induce post-transcriptionally
endogenous AP-2a, which contributes to chemosensitivity by enhancing
therapy-induced apoptosis. microRNAs (miRNAs) miR-200b, miR-200c and miR-429
(miR-200b/200c/429) are up-regulated in endometrial and esophageal cancers, and
their overexpression correlates with resistance to cisplatin treatment. Using
computational programs, we predicted that the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of
AP-2a gene contains a potential miRNA response element (MRE) for the
miR-200b/200c/429 family, and the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) site
rs1045385 (A or C allele) resided within the predicted MRE. Luciferase assays and
Western blot analysis demonstrated that the miR-200b/200c/429 family recognized
the MRE in the 3' UTR of AP-2a gene and negatively regulated the expression of
endogenous AP-2a proteins. SNP rs1045385 A>C variation enhanced AP-2a expression 
by disrupting the binding of the miR-200b/200c/429 family to the 3' UTR of AP-2a.
The effects of the two polymorphic variants on cisplatin sensitivity were
determined by clonogenic assay. The overexpression of AP-2a with mutant 3' UTR (C
allele) in the endometrial cancer cell line HEC-1A, which has high levels of
endogenous miR-200b/200c/429 and low levels of AP-2a protein, significantly
increased cisplatin sensitivity, but overexpression of A allele of AP-2a has no
significant effects, compared with mock transfection. We concluded that
miR-200b/200c/429 induced cisplatin resistance by repressing AP-2a expression in 
endometrial cancer cells. The SNP (rs1045385) A>C variation decreased the binding
of miR-200b/200c/429 to the 3' UTR of AP-2a, which upregulated AP-2a protein
expression and increased cisplatin sensitivity. Our results suggest that SNP
(rs1045385) may be a potential prognostic marker for cisplatin treatment.

PMCID: PMC3237583
PMID: 22194984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Ophthalmic Genet. 2012 Jun;33(2):100-6. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2011.634878. Epub
2011 Dec 22.

A family with branchio-oculo-facial syndrome with primarily ocular involvement
associated with mutation of the TFAP2A gene.

Dumitrescu AV(1), Milunsky JM, Longmuir SQ, Drack AV.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science,
University of Iowa Hospital and Clinics, Iowa City, IA 52246, USA.

BACKGROUND: Branchio-Oculo-Facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare, autosomal dominant
developmental disorder that has a distinct phenotype with characteristic
craniofacial abnormalities. We report a family with extensive ocular
manifestations of BOFS caused by a novel mutation in the transcription factor
AP-2 alpha (TFAP2A) gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Case report of phenotypic and genotypic characterization
of a family with BOFS.
RESULTS: An infant presenting with anophththalmia/coloboma and subtle
craniofacial symptoms was found to have a family history of congenital cataracts 
and colobomas in her mother. A mutation in the TFAP2A gene associated with BOFS
(heterozygous H384Y in exon 7) was found in both the proband and her mother. This
mutation had not been reported previously. Compared with other molecularly
confirmed cases in the literature, this family has primarily ocular features,
which are severe.
CONCLUSIONS: BOFS can have profound ocular involvement without prominent
extraocular features. When the syndrome presents in this way, it may be confused 
with isolated autosomal dominant chorioretinal coloboma. Testing for mutations in
the TFAP2A gene is recommended to establish an accurate diagnosis for the family.

PMID: 22191992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Am J Pathol. 2012 Feb;180(2):661-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.10.040. Epub 2011
Dec 16.

Modulation of IFN-<U+03B3> receptor 1 expression by AP-2a influences IFN-<U+03B3> sensitivity
of cancer cells.

Chen C(1), Guo L, Shi M, Hu M, Hu M, Yu M, Wang T, Song L, Shen B, Qian L, Guo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Beijing, China.

Interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> plays crucial roles in regulating both innate and adaptive
immunity. The existence of IFN-<U+03B3> receptor 1 (IFNGR1) molecules on the cell
surface is a prerequisite to the initiation of IFN-<U+03B3> signaling; low expression of
IFNGR1 leads to a functional blockade of IFN-<U+03B3> signaling. However, the molecular 
mechanisms by which IFNGR1 expression is controlled are unclear. In the present
study, we demonstrated that IFNGR1 expression was reduced or lost in breast
cancer. Heterogeneous IFNGR1 immunoreactivity appeared to be associated with the 
morphological heterogeneity of breast cancer, and loss of IFNGR1 expression was
predominantly observed in poorly differentiated areas. We identified the
functional activating protein (AP)-2 and specificity protein (SP)-1 sites within 
the IFNGR1 promoter. Ectopic expression of AP-2a drastically repressed the
expression of IFNGR1 and hindered IFN-<U+03B3> signaling, whereas AP-2a gene silencing
elevated IFNGR1 levels. Overexpression of SP-1 effectively antagonized the
repressive effects of AP-2a. Simultaneous recruitment of both transcription
factors to the AP-2 and SP-1 motifs, respectively, in the IFNGR1 promoter was
demonstrated, implying that AP-2a and SP-1 may synergistically modulate IFNGR1
transcription. Moreover, AP-2a overexpression in AP-2-deficient SW480 cells
remarkably inhibited Stat1 phosphorylation and the anti-proliferative effects of 
IFN-<U+03B3>, whereas knockdown of the AP-2a expression dramatically enhanced the
sensitivities of HeLa cells highly expressing AP-2 to IFN-<U+03B3>, indicating that
dysregulation of AP-2a expression is associated with impaired IFN-<U+03B3> actions in
cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22182699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Tumour Biol. 2012 Apr;33(2):287-96. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0282-2. Epub 2011 Dec
6.

DNA methylation biomarkers for lung cancer.

Rauch TA(1), Wang Z, Wu X, Kernstine KH, Riggs AD, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

Changes in DNA methylation patterns are an important characteristic of human
cancer including lung cancer. In particular, hypermethylation of CpG islands is a
signature of malignant progression. Methylated CpG islands are promising
diagnostic markers for the early detection of cancer. However, the full extent
and sequence context of DNA hypermethylation in lung cancer has remained unknown.
We have used the methylated CpG island recovery assay and high-resolution
microarray analysis to find hypermethylated CpG islands in squamous cell
carcinomas (SCC) and adenocarcinomas of the lung. Each tumor contained several
hundred hypermethylated CpG islands. In an initial microarray screen, 36 CpG
islands were methylated in five of five (=100%) of the SCC tumors tested and 52
CpG islands were methylated in at least 75% of the adenocarcinomas tested (n=8). 
Using sodium-bisulfite-based approaches, 12 CpG islands (associated with the
BARHL2, EVX2, IRX2, MEIS1, MSX1, NR2E1, OC2, OSR1, OTX1, PAX6, TFAP2A, and ZNF577
genes) were confirmed to be methylated in 85% to 100% of the squamous cell
carcinomas and 11 CpG islands (associated with the CHAD, DLX4, GRIK2, KCNG3,
NR2E1, OSR1, OTX1, OTX2, PROX1, RUNX1, and VAX1 genes) were methylated in >80% of
the adenocarcinomas. From the list of genes that were methylated in lung
adenocarcinomas, we identified the gene FAT4 and found that this gene was
methylated in 39% of the tumors. FAT4 is the closest mammalian homologue of the
Drosophila tumor suppressor Fat which is an important component of the Hippo
growth control pathway. Many of these newly discovered methylated CpG islands
hold promise for becoming biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer.

PMID: 22143938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2011;2011:461979. doi: 10.1155/2011/461979. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

Emerging functions of transcription factors in malaria parasite.

Tuteja R(1), Ansari A, Chauhan VS.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,
P.O. Box 10504, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110067, India. renu@icgeb.res.in

Comment in
    J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:754054.

Transcription is a process by which the genetic information stored in DNA is
converted into mRNA by enzymes known as RNA polymerase. Bacteria use only one RNA
polymerase to transcribe all of its genes while eukaryotes contain three RNA
polymerases to transcribe the variety of eukaryotic genes. RNA polymerase also
requires other factors/proteins to produce the transcript. These factors
generally termed as transcription factors (TFs) are either associated directly
with RNA polymerase or add in building the actual transcription apparatus. TFs
are the most common tools that our cells use to control gene expression.
Plasmodium falciparum is responsible for causing the most lethal form of malaria 
in humans. It shows most of its characteristics common to eukaryotic
transcription but it is assumed that mechanisms of transcriptional control in P. 
falciparum somehow differ from those of other eukaryotes. In this article we
describe the studies on the main TFs such as myb protein, high mobility group
protein and ApiA2 family proteins from malaria parasite. These studies show that 
these TFs are slowly emerging to have defined roles in the regulation of gene
expression in the parasite.

PMCID: PMC3216465
PMID: 22131806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):4110-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.23.18243. Epub 2011 Dec 
1.

Drosophila endocytic neoplastic tumor suppressor genes regulate Sav/Wts/Hpo
signaling and the c-Jun N-terminal kinase pathway.

Robinson BS(1), Moberg KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA.

Genetic screens in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster have identified a class 
of neoplastic tumor suppressor genes (endocytic nTSGs), which encode proteins
that localize to endosomes and facilitate the trafficking of membrane-bound
receptors and adhesion molecules into the degradative lysosome. Loss of endocytic
nTSGs transforms imaginal disc epithelia into highly proliferative, invasive
tissues that fail to differentiate and display defects in cellular apicobasal
polarity, adhesion and tissue architecture. As vertebrate homologs of some
Drosophila nTSGs are linked to tumor formation, identifying molecular changes in 
signaling associated with nTSG loss could inform understanding of neoplastic
transformation in vertebrates. Here we show that mutations in genes that act at
multiple steps of the endolysosomal pathway lead to autonomous activation of the 
Sav/Wts/Hpo (SWH) transcriptional effector Yki (YAP/TAZ in vertebrates) and the
Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), which is known to promote Yki activity in cells with
disrupted polarity. Yki and JNK activity are elevated by mutations at multiple
steps in the endolysosomal pathway including mutations in the AP-2s gene, which
encodes a component of the AP-2 adaptor complex that recruits cargoes into
clathrin-coated pits for subsequent internalization. Moreover, reduction of JNK
activity can decrease elevated Yki-signaling caused by altered endocytosis. These
studies reveal a broad requirement for components of the endocytic pathway in
regulating SWH and JNK outputs, and place Drosophila endocytic nTSGs into a
network that involving two major signaling pathways implicated in oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3272291
PMID: 22101275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Yao Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Aug;46(8):1008-14.

[Cloning and bioinformatic analysis of PqERF1 gene in Panax quinquefolius].

[Article in Chinese]

Sun YZ(1), Niu YY, Li Y, Zhu YJ, Luo HM, Chen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100193, China.

ERF family transcription factor (TF) represented ethylene-responsive protein
which harbored a conserved AP2 domain. After searching the plant transcription
factor database, a total of 75 unigenes was found which contained AP2 domain from
the transcriptome dataset of Panax quinquefolius L. One unique sequence of ERF
transcript, named as PqERF1, was cloned with entire open reading frame of 933
base pairs (bp). Protein prediction result indicated that the gene was localized 
in nucleus and had a conserved AP2 domain. PqERF1 gene could be induced by methyl
jasmonate (MeJA) which was consistent to the inducing profile of triterpene
ginsenosides. InterproScan prediction indicated that PqERF1 was probably a
pathogenesis-related gene. Sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis
demonstrated PqERF1 was with high identity and had relative close relationship to
the NtERF4 (Nicotiana tabacum), PhERF12 (Petunia x hybrida) and DcERF1 (Daucus
carota) which was related to plant defense, regulation of secondary metabolism
and the flower senescence respectively. Therefore, the gene was likely involved
in regulation of secondary metabolism, plant defense and physical processes which
would provide gene resource for further study on secondary metabolite synthesis
and molecular breeding of P. quinquefolius.

PMID: 22007529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Bioorg Med Chem. 2011 Nov 15;19(22):6860-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2011.09.033. Epub
2011 Sep 22.

Cytotoxicity and gene expression profiles of novel synthesized steroid
derivatives as chemotherapeutic anti-breast cancer agents.

Elmegeed GA(1), Khalil WK, Mohareb RM, Ahmed HH, Abd-Elhalim MM, Elsayed GH.

Author information: 
(1)Hormones Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Giza, Egypt.
gamalae@hotmail.com

Anti-cancer agents which combine two biologically active compounds in one such as
steroidal heterocyclic derivatives attain both hormone and cytotoxic effects on
cancer cells. The aim of the present study is to synthesize and evaluate new
potential chemotherapeutic anti-breast cancer agents. Several pyridazino-,
pyrimido-, quinazolo-, oxirano- and thiazolo-steroid derivatives were
synthesized. The structure of the novel steroid derivatives was confirmed using
the analytical and spectral data. The most structurally promising of the novel
synthesized steroid derivatives, compounds 8, 12, 17, 20, 22c, 24c, 30a and 30b, 
were investigated individually as anti-breast cancer agents against human breast 
cancer cells (MCF-7) using sulforhodamine B (SRB) assay. The tested compounds 17,
20, 22c and 8 showed potent broad spectrum cytotoxic activity in vitro after 48 h
incubation. Compound 17 (IC(50)=2.5 µM) exhibited more inhibitory influence on
MCF-7 growth than the reference drug doxorubicin (Dox) (IC(50)=4.5 µM) after 48 h
incubation. Also, the present study showed that all the tested steroid
derivatives exhibited significant depletion with various intensities in gene
expression of breast cancer related genes (VEGF, CYP19 and hAP-2<U+03B3>). Noteworthy,
compounds 17, 20 and 22c showed the most pronounced effect in this respect.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22000946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Dec;50(12):1033-42. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20918. Epub
2011 Aug 24.

The seminoma cell line TCam-2 is sensitive to HDAC inhibitor depsipeptide but
tolerates various other chemotherapeutic drugs and loss of NANOG expression.

Nettersheim D(1), Gillis A, Biermann K, Looijenga LH, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Seminomas and embryonal carcinomas (EC) are both type II germ cell tumor (GCT)
entities and develop from the same precursor lesion (carcinoma-in situ, CIS).
However, they show significant differences in growth behavior, differentiation
potential, and gene expression. Although ECs are prone to differentiate into all 
three germ layers and give rise to the non-seminomatous GCT entities teratoma,
choriocarcinoma, and yolk-sac tumor, differentiation of seminomas to these
entities is only rarely observed. This might reflect the ability of seminomas to 
actively inhibit differentiation processes evoked by environmental cues. Also, it
is not known why CIS gives rise to seminoma in some patients and to non-seminoma 
in the others. Here, we treated the seminoma-like cell line TCam-2 with the
HDAC-inhibitor Depsipeptide, the global demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deocycytidine, all-trans retinoic acid and the monaminooxidase inhibitor
Tranylcipromine and also used knock down approaches to reduce expression of the
pluripotency marker NANOG and/or the inhibitor of primordial germ cell
differentiation TFAP2C. We found that TCam-2 cells induce apoptosis when treated 
with Depsipeptide (> 10 nM) but are resistant to treatments with
5-aza-2'-deocycytidine, all-trans retinoic acid and Tranylcipromine, highlighting
Depsi as a treatment option for seminomas. We show that TCam-2 cells up-regulate 
endoderm- and throphectoderm-associated genes after down-regulation of NANOG
expression; however, morphologically no indications of differentiation could be
found. Instead, we observed up-regulation of OCT3/4 and SOX17 in TCam-2-NANOG
knockdown and speculate that this compensates for the loss of the NANOG protein. 
Hence, NANOG is not a primary target gene responsible for the inhibition of
differentiation in seminomas.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21987446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42123-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.276014. Epub 2011
Oct 6.

Transcriptional repression of the a7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit
gene (CHRNA7) by activating protein-2a (AP-2a).

Finlay-Schultz J(1), Canastar A, Short M, El Gazzar M, Coughlan C, Leonard S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

The CHRNA7 gene, which encodes the a7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(a7*nAChR), has been implicated as a candidate gene in schizophrenia. Expression 
of the a7*nAChR mRNA and protein are reduced in multiple regions of post-mortem
brain from patients diagnosed with schizophrenia. Transcriptional regulation may 
therefore be an important mechanism for the regulation of this gene. A 230-bp
proximal promoter fragment, necessary for transcription in cultured neuroblastoma
cells, was used to study a putative AP-2a binding site. Mutation of the site
indicates that AP-2a plays a negative role in regulating CHRNA7 transcription.
This was confirmed through knockdown and overexpression of AP-2a. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSAs) identified positive DNA-protein interaction at this
same site, and supershift assays indicate that the complex includes AP-2a. The
interaction was confirmed in cells using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP).
DNA methylation was discovered as an anomalous mechanism for CHRNA7 regulation in
one cell line. These studies suggest a role for AP-2a regulation of CHRNA7 mRNA
expression in multiple tissues during development.

PMCID: PMC3234925
PMID: 21979958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24897. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024897. Epub 2011 Sep 26.

Reduced expression of transcription factor AP-2a is associated with gastric
adenocarcinoma prognosis.

Wang W(1), Lv L, Pan K, Zhang Y, Zhao JJ, Chen JG, Chen YB, Li YQ, Wang QJ, He J,
Chen SP, Zhou ZW, Xia JC.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China and Department of Experimental
Research, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of 
China.

BACKGROUND: This study aims to investigate the expression and prognostic
significance of activator protein 2a (AP-2a) in gastric adenocarcinoma.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: AP-2a expression was analyzed using real-time
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), western blotting, and immunohistochemical staining
methods on tissue samples from a consecutive series of 481 gastric adenocarcinoma
patients who underwent resections between 2003 and 2006. The relationship between
AP-2a expression, clinicopathological factors, and patient survival was
investigated. RT- qPCR results showed that the expression of AP-2a mRNA was
reduced in tumor tissue samples, compared with expression in matched adjacent
non-tumor tissue samples (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.009); this finding was confirmed by western
blotting analysis (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.012). Immunohistochemical staining data indicated that
AP-2a expression was significantly decreased in 196 of 481 (40.7%) gastric
adenocarcinoma cases; reduced AP-2a expression was also observed in patients with
poorly differentiated tumors (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001) and total gastric carcinomas
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.002), as well as in patients who underwent palliative tumor resection
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.004). Additionally, reduced expression of AP-2a was more commonly observed
in tumors that were staged as T4a/b (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.018), N3 (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006), and M1
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.008). Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed that reduced expression of
AP-2a was associated with poor prognosis in gastric adenocarcinoma patients
(P<0.001). Multivariate Cox analysis identified AP-2a expression as an
independent prognostic factor for overall survival (HR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.512, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.127-2.029, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.006).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest that AP-2a plays an important role in 
tumor progression and that reduced AP-2a expression independently predicts an
unfavorable prognosis in gastric adenocarcinoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3180284
PMID: 21966377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 1;360(1):173-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.019. Epub 2011
Sep 22.

Tfap2a and Foxd3 regulate early steps in the development of the neural crest
progenitor population.

Wang WD(1), Melville DB, Montero-Balaguer M, Hatzopoulos AK, Knapik EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA.

The neural crest is a stem cell-like population exclusive to vertebrates that
gives rise to many different cell types including chondrocytes, neurons and
melanocytes. Arising from the neural plate border at the intersection of Wnt and 
Bmp signaling pathways, the complexity of neural crest gene regulatory networks
has made the earliest steps of induction difficult to elucidate. Here, we report 
that tfap2a and foxd3 participate in neural crest induction and are necessary and
sufficient for this process to proceed. Double mutant tfap2a (mont blanc, mob)
and foxd3 (mother superior, mos) mob;mos zebrafish embryos completely lack all
neural crest-derived tissues. Moreover, tfap2a and foxd3 are expressed during
gastrulation prior to neural crest induction in distinct, complementary, domains;
tfap2a is expressed in the ventral non-neural ectoderm and foxd3 in the dorsal
mesendoderm and ectoderm. We further show that Bmp signaling is expanded in
mob;mos embryos while expression of dkk1, a Wnt signaling inhibitor, is increased
and canonical Wnt targets are suppressed. These changes in Bmp and Wnt signaling 
result in specific perturbations of neural crest induction rather than general
defects in neural plate border or dorso-ventral patterning. foxd3 overexpression,
on the other hand, enhances the ability of tfap2a to ectopically induce neural
crest around the neural plate, overriding the normal neural plate border limit of
the early neural crest territory. Although loss of either Tfap2a or Foxd3 alters 
Bmp and Wnt signaling patterns, only their combined inactivation sufficiently
alters these signaling gradients to abort neural crest induction. Collectively,
our results indicate that tfap2a and foxd3, in addition to their respective roles
in the differentiation of neural crest derivatives, also jointly maintain the
balance of Bmp and Wnt signaling in order to delineate the neural crest induction
domain.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3236700
PMID: 21963426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Dec;32(12):1773-81. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr212. Epub 2011
Sep 22.

Reversal of epigenetic silencing of AP-2alpha results in increased zinc uptake in
DU-145 and LNCaP prostate cancer cells.

Makhov PB(1), Golovine KV, Kutikov A, Canter DJ, Rybko VA, Roshchin DA, Matveev
VB, Uzzo RG, Kolenko VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA. petr.makhov@fccc.edu

Zinc accumulation is lost during prostate carcinogenesis. Recent studies reveal a
strong association between prostate cancer progression and the downregulation of 
the zinc uptake transporters hZip1 and hZip3. The aim of this work was to assess 
the involvement of epigenetic processes in the disruption of zinc uptake
homeostasis in prostate adenocarcinoma. In this report, we demonstrate an
increase in hZip1 and hZip3 zinc transporters' expression and zinc uptake by the 
prostate cancer cells DU-145 and LNCaP in response to 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
This effect is due to demethylation of the promoter region of the activator
protein (AP)-2alpha protein, which is crucial for hZip1 and hZip3 genes
expression. Loss of AP-2alpha expression in DU-145 and LNCaP prostate cancer
cells is due to hypermethylation of its promoter region. Similarly, we found
higher AP-2alpha promoter methylation levels in clinical samples of early-stage
prostate adenocarcinoma when compared with adjacent non-malignant prostate
tissue. Taken together, our findings provide a better understanding of the
epigenetic mechanisms that are involved in the loss of AP-2alpha protein in
prostate cancer cells which lead to decreased cellular zinc uptake-a sine qua non
of prostate cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3220607
PMID: 21940908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hum Pathol. 2012 May;43(5):684-94. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.06.015. Epub 2011 
Sep 19.

Gene expression signatures differentiate adenocarcinoma of lung and breast origin
in effusions.

Davidson B(1), Stavnes HT, Risberg B, Nesland JM, Wohlschlaeger J, Yang Y, Shih
IeM, Wang TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Norwegian Radium Hospital, Oslo University Hospital,
N-0310 Oslo, Norway. bend@medisin.uio.no

Lung and breast adenocarcinoma at advanced stages commonly involve the serosal
cavities, giving rise to malignant effusions. The aim of the present study was to
compare the global gene expression patterns of metastases from these 2
malignancies, to expand and improve the diagnostic panel of biomarkers currently 
available for their differential diagnosis, as well as to define type-specific
biological targets. Gene expression profiles of 7 breast and 4 lung
adenocarcinoma effusions were analyzed using the HumanRef-8 BeadChip from
Illumina. Differentially expressed candidate genes were validated using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry.
Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using all 54,675 genes in the array
separated lung from breast adenocarcinoma samples. We identified 289 unique
probes that were significantly differentially expressed in the 2 cancers by
greater than 2-fold using moderated t statistics, of which 65 and 224 were
overexpressed in breast and lung adenocarcinoma, respectively. Genes
overexpressed in breast adenocarcinoma included TFF1, TFF3, FOXA1, CA12, PITX1,
RARRES1, CITED4, MYC, TFAP2A, EFHD1, TOB1, SPDEF, FASN, and TH. Genes
overexpressed in lung adenocarcinoma included TITF1, SFTPG, MMP7, EVA1, GPR116,
HOP, SCGB3A2, and MET. The differential expression of 15 genes was validated by
quantitative real-time PCR, and differences in 8 gene products were confirmed by 
immunohistochemistry. Expression profiling distinguishes breast adenocarcinoma
from lung adenocarcinoma and identifies genes that are differentially expressed
in these 2 tumor types. The molecular signatures unique to these cancers may
facilitate their differential diagnosis and may provide a molecular basis for
therapeutic target discovery.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21937081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24303. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024303. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Genome-wide population-based association study of extremely overweight young
adults--the GOYA study.

Paternoster L(1), Evans DM, Nohr EA, Holst C, Gaborieau V, Brennan P, Gjesing AP,
Grarup N, Witte DR, Jørgensen T, Linneberg A, Lauritzen T, Sandbaek A, Hansen T, 
Pedersen O, Elliott KS, Kemp JP, St Pourcain B, McMahon G, Zelenika D, Hager J,
Lathrop M, Timpson NJ, Smith GD, Sørensen TI.

Author information: 
(1)MRC CAiTE centre, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.
paternoster@bristol.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Thirty-two common variants associated with body mass index (BMI) have
been identified in genome-wide association studies, explaining ~1.45% of BMI
variation in general population cohorts. We performed a genome-wide association
study in a sample of young adults enriched for extremely overweight individuals. 
We aimed to identify new loci associated with BMI and to ascertain whether using 
an extreme sampling design would identify the variants known to be associated
with BMI in general populations.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: From two large Danish cohorts we selected all
extremely overweight young men and women (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,633), and equal numbers of
population-based controls (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,740, drawn randomly from the same populations as
the extremes, representing ~212,000 individuals). We followed up novel (at the
time of the study) association signals (p<0.001) from the discovery cohort in a
genome-wide study of 5,846 Europeans, before attempting to replicate the most
strongly associated 28 SNPs in an independent sample of Danish individuals
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>20,917) and a population-based cohort of 15-year-old British adolescents
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,418). Our discovery analysis identified SNPs at three loci known to be
associated with BMI with genome-wide confidence (P<5×10(-8); FTO, MC4R and
FAIM2). We also found strong evidence of association at the known TMEM18, GNPDA2,
SEC16B, TFAP2B, SH2B1 and KCTD15 loci (p<0.001), and nominal association (p<0.05)
at a further 8 loci known to be associated with BMI. However, meta-analyses of
our discovery and replication cohorts identified no novel associations.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our results indicate that the detectable genetic variation
associated with extreme overweight is very similar to that previously found for
general BMI. This suggests that population-based study designs with enriched
sampling of individuals with the extreme phenotype may be an efficient method for
identifying common variants that influence quantitative traits and a valid
alternative to genotyping all individuals in large population-based studies,
which may require tens of thousands of subjects to achieve similar power.

PMCID: PMC3174168
PMID: 21935397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 9;4:345. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-345.

Lactogenic differentiation of HC11 cells is not accompanied by downregulation of 
AP-2 transcription factor genes.

Jäger R(1), Pappas L, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Apoptosis Research Centre, School of Natural Sciences, National University of 
Ireland, Galway, Ireland. richard.jaeger@nuigalway.ie.

PMCID: PMC3180471
PMID: 21906301  [PubMed]


256. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22895. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022895. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

Protein-binding microarray analysis of tumor suppressor AP2a target gene
specificity.

Kerschgens J(1), Renaud S, Schütz F, Grasso L, Egener-Kuhn T, Delaloye JF, Lehr
HA, Vogel H, Mermod N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Cheap and massively parallel methods to assess the DNA-binding specificity of
transcription factors are actively sought, given their prominent regulatory role 
in cellular processes and diseases. Here we evaluated the use of protein-binding 
microarrays (PBM) to probe the association of the tumor suppressor AP2a with 6000
human genomic DNA regulatory sequences. We show that the PBM provides accurate
relative binding affinities when compared to quantitative surface plasmon
resonance assays. A PBM-based study of human healthy and breast tumor tissue
extracts allowed the identification of previously unknown AP2a target genes and
it revealed genes whose direct or indirect interactions with AP2a are affected in
the diseased tissues. AP2a binding and regulation was confirmed experimentally in
human carcinoma cells for novel target genes involved in tumor progression and
resistance to chemotherapeutics, providing a molecular interpretation of AP2a
role in cancer chemoresistance. Overall, we conclude that this approach provides 
quantitative and accurate assays of the specificity and activity of tumor
suppressor and oncogenic proteins in clinical samples, interfacing genomic and
proteomic assays.

PMCID: PMC3158074
PMID: 21876733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 Sep;92(3):1050. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.04.075.

Invited commentary.

D'Amico TA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of General Thoracic Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3496,
Duke South, White Zone, Rm 3589, Durham, NC 27710, USA. damic001@mc.duke.edu

Comment on
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 Sep;92(3):1044-50.

PMID: 21871298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 Sep;92(3):1044-50. doi: 10.1016/j.athoracsur.2011.04.029.

Activating enhancer-binding protein-2ß nucleolar localization predicts poor
survival after stage I non-small cell lung cancer resection.

Kim MP(1), Chen Y, Bekele BN, Lopez A, Khanna A, Chen JQ, Spitz MR, Behrens C,
Solis L, Wismach M, Ji L, Wistuba II, Roth JA, Katz RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. mpkim@tmhs.org

Comment in
    Ann Thorac Surg. 2011 Sep;92(3):1050.

BACKGROUND: Activating enhancer-binding protein-2ß (AP2ß) is a transcription
factor involved in apoptosis. The purpose of the current study was to assess the 
cellular location and level of AP2ß in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and
normal lung tissue and investigate whether the level and localization of AP2ß
expression is predictive of overall survival in patients with stage I NSCLC.
METHODS: We performed immunohistochemical analysis of tissue microarrays (TMAs)
prepared from stage I NSCLC specimens with adjacent normal lung tissue from two
independent sets of patients who underwent lung resection with curative intent at
our institution. The AP2ß intensity was assessed in TMAs, and AP2ß staining
patterns were classified as either diffuse or nucleolar in the TMAs. The AP2ß
intensity and localization were analyzed for correlation with patients' survival.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis of TMAs showed that the intensity of AP2ß
immunohistochemical staining did not correlate with overall survival. When
location of AP2ß was analyzed in TMAs, all of the normal lung tissue had diffuse 
pattern of AP2ß. In the first set of NSCLC, patients with nucleolar pattern had a
significantly lower 5-year survival rate than patients with diffuse pattern (67% 
versus 100%; p=0.004); this finding was confirmed in the second set (64% versus
91%; p=0.02). Multivariate analysis revealed that nucleolar pattern was an
independent predictor of poor overall survival in both sets.
CONCLUSIONS: The AP2ß, which is located in the nucleoplasm in normal lung tissue,
is found in either nucleoplasm or nucleoli in NSCLC. The patients with AP2ß in
the nucleoli had poor survival compared with patients with AP2ß in the cytoplasm.

Copyright © 2011 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3272351
PMID: 21871297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23483. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023483. Epub 2011 Aug 9.

AP-2d is a crucial transcriptional regulator of the posterior midbrain.

Hesse K(1), Vaupel K, Kurt S, Buettner R, Kirfel J, Moser M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Ap-2 transcription factors comprise a family of 5 closely related
sequence-specific DNA binding proteins that play pivotal and non-redundant roles 
in embryonic organogenesis. To investigate the function of Ap-2d, wde analyzed
its expression during embryogenesis and generated Ap-2d-deficient mice. In line
with the specific expression pattern of Ap-2d in the mesencephalic tectum and the
dorsal midbrain, Ap-2d-deficient mice failed to maintain the colliculus inferior,
a derivative of the dorsal midbrain, as a consequence of increased apoptotic cell
death. To identify specific Ap-2d target genes in cells of the developing dorsal 
midbrain, we performed whole genome analysis of cDNA expression levels. This
approach identified a set of 12 putative target genes being expressed in the
developing midbrain, including the transcription factors Pitx2, Mef2c, Bhlhb4 and
Pou4f3. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (CHIP) we showed that some of these
genes are direct targets of Ap-2d. Consistently, we demonstrate that Ap-2d
occupies and activates the Pou4f3 and Bhlhb4 promoters. In addition, known Pou4f3
target genes were downregulated in the posterior midbrain of Ap-2d-deficient
mice. Despite the absence of a central part of the auditory pathway, the presence
of neuronal responses to sounds in the neocortex of Ap-2d-deficient mice
indicates that auditory information from the brainstem still reaches the
neocortex. In summary, our data define Ap-2d as an important transcription
factor, specifying gene expression patterns required for the development of the
posterior midbrain.

PMCID: PMC3153493
PMID: 21858141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Apoptosis. 2011 Dec;16(12):1245-52. doi: 10.1007/s10495-011-0638-5.

The natural diterpene ent-16ß-17a-dihydroxykaurane down-regulates Bcl-2 by
disruption of the Ap-2a/Rb transcription activating complex and induces E2F1
up-regulation in MCF-7 cells.

Morales A(1), Alvarez A, Arvelo F, Suárez AI, Compagnone RS, Galindo-Castro I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genómica y Proteómica, Fundación IDEA, Caracas, Venezuela.

ent-Kauranes are diterpene-type compounds commonly found in most plant species,
especially from the Euphorbiaceae family. These compounds have been studied due
to their anti-inflammatory and anti-tumor properties. Regulation of apoptosis, or
programmed cell death, is commonly bypassed by tumoral cells, giving rise to
uncontrolled proliferating cells, which eventually become carcinogenic. In a
previous work, we showed that both mRNA and protein expression levels of the
antiapoptotic gene Bcl-2 are reduced in MCF-7 cancer cells by the effect of the
natural diterpene ent-16ß-17a-dihydroxykaurane (DHK). This effect was not
directly associated with the inactivation of NF-<U+03BA>B, as has been shown with other 
diterpenes compounds. Herein, we report that DHK is dissociating the Ap2a-Rb
activating complex, affecting its binding ability for the Bcl-2 gene promoter.
These events down-regulate Bcl-2 and is temporally accompanied by the induction
of E2F1 and its target pro-apoptotic gene Puma. Disruption of the Rb-Ap2a
activation complex was corroborated by chromatin immunoprecipitation and protein 
immunolocalization, which also revealed that Ap2a sorts out from the nucleus and 
relocalizes in the cell periphery. Taken together, our study confirms the
regulation of Bcl-2 gene transcription by the Ap2a-Rb complex and describes a
singular protein relocalization for Ap2a induced by DHK, implicating a new
potential therapeutic target to differentially onset apoptosis in tumor cells.

PMID: 21850486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23110. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023110. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Aurora-A interacts with AP-2a and down regulates its transcription activity.

Zou L(1), Sun Y, Wang M, Zhan Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Cancer Institute and Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

Aurora-A is a serine/threonine protein kinase and plays an important role in the 
control of mitotic progression. Dysregulated expression of Aurora-A impairs
centrosome separation and maturation, which lead to disrupted cell cycle
progression and tumorigenesis. However, the molecular mechanism by which Aurora-A
causes cell malignant transformation remains to be further defined. In this
report, using transcription factors array and mRNA expression profiling array, we
found that overexpression of Aurora-A suppressed transcription activity of AP-2a,
a tumor suppressor that is often downregulated in variety of tumors, and
inhibited expression of AP-2a-regulated downstream genes. These array-based
observations were further confirmed by microwell colorimetric TF assay and
luciferase reporter assay. Downregulated transcription activity of AP-2a by
Aurora-A was found to be associated with reduced AP-2a protein stability, which
appeared to be mediated by Aurora-A enhanced ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal
degradation of AP-2a protein. Interestingly, Aurora-A-mediated AP-2a degradation 
was likely dependent Aurora-A kinase activity since inhibition of Aurora-A kinase
activity was able to rescue Aurora-A-induced degradation of AP-2a. Moreover, we
defined a physical interaction between Aurora-A and AP-2a, and such interaction
might bridge the suppressive effect of Aurora-A on AP-2a protein stability. These
findings provide new insights into molecular mechanism by which Aurora-A acts as 
an oncogenic molecule in tumor occurrence and malignant development.

PMCID: PMC3148253
PMID: 21829699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022908. Epub 2011 Jul 29.

A heart-hand syndrome gene: Tfap2b plays a critical role in the development and
remodeling of mouse ductus arteriosus and limb patterning.

Zhao F(1), Bosserhoff AK, Buettner R, Moser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, 
United States of America. zhaof@mskcc.org

BACKGROUND: Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is one of the most common forms of
congenital heart disease. Mutations in transcription factor TFAP2B cause Char
syndrome, a human disorder characterized by PDA, facial dysmorphysm and hand
anomalies. Animal research data are needed to understand the mechanisms. The aim 
of our study was to elucidate the pathogenesis of Char syndrome at the molecular 
level.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Gene expression of Tfap2b during mouse
development was studied, and newborns of Tfap2b-deficient mice were examined to
identify phenotypes. Gel shift assays had been carried out to search for Tfap2
downstream genes. Promoters of candidate genes were cloned into a reporter
construct and used to demonstrate their regulation by Tfap2b in cell
transfection. In situ hybridizations showed that the murine transcription factor 
Tfap2b was expressed during the entire development of mouse ductus arteriosus.
Histological examination of ductus arteriosus from Tfap2b knockout mice 6 hours
after birth revealed that they were not closed. Consequently, the lungs of
Tfap2b(-/-) mice demonstrated progressive congestion of the pulmonary
capillaries, which was postulated to result secondarily from PDA. In addition,
Tfap2b was expressed in the limb buds, particularly in the posterior limb field
during development. Lack of Tfap2b resulted in bilateral postaxial accessory
digits. Further study indicated that expressions of bone morphogenetic protein
(Bmp) genes, which are reported to be involved in the limb patterning and ductal 
development, were altered in limb buds of Tfap2b-deficient embryos, due to direct
control of Bmp2 and Bmp4 promoter activity by Tfap2b.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Tfap2b plays important roles in the development of
mouse ductus arteriosus and limb patterning. Loss of Tfap2b results in altered
Bmp expression that may cause the heart-limb defects observed in Tfap2b mouse
mutants and Char syndrome patients. The Tfap2b knockout mouse may add to the very
limited available animal models of PDA.

PMCID: PMC3146506
PMID: 21829553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2011 Oct;92(5):487-97. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.20321. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Altered gene expression in rat cranial neural crest cells exposed to a
teratogenic glucose concentration in vitro: paradoxical downregulation of
antioxidative defense genes.

Wentzel P(1), Eriksson UJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Biomedical Center,
Sweden. parri.wentzel@mcb.uu.se

BACKGROUND: Diabetic pregnancy is associated with increased risk of malformation 
in the infant. Diabetes-induced anomalies of the face and heart are strongly
correlated with neural crest cell (NCC) maldevelopment. We aimed to study
glucose-induced alterations of mRNA levels in cranial and trunk NCCs isolated
from rat embryos with increased risk of developing mandibular and cardiac
malformations in diabetic pregnancy.
METHODS: Inbred Sprague-Dawley rat embryos were used for NCC isolation from
neural tube explants. The migrating cells were exposed to 5.5 or 30<U+2009>mmol/l
glucose concentration for 48<U+2009>hr, harvested, and prepared for gene expression
measurement by RT-PCR or immunostaining with either distal-less (Dlx) or AP-2-a
antibodies.
RESULTS: Evaluation of the immunostained slides showed that approximately 75% of 
the cells were of NCC origin. Exposure to 30<U+2009>mM glucose decreased mRNA levels of 
Copper-Zinc superoxide dismutase, manganese superoxide dismutase, extracellular
superoxide dismutase, Catalase, Gpx-1, Nrf2, poly-ADP ribose polymerase, B-cell
leukemia/lymphoma protein 2, and ß-Catenin genes in cranial neural crest explant 
cultures. In addition, Pax-3, Pax-6, Wnt3a, and Apc mRNA levels were decreased by
high glucose exposure in both cranial and trunk neural crest explant cultures.
CONCLUSION: Cranial NCCs diminish their mRNA levels of antioxidative enzymes and 
the Nrf2 response factor, as well as the antiapoptotic B-cell leukemia/lymphoma
protein 2 gene, in response to increased ambient glucose concentration.
Furthermore, both cranial and trunk NCC decrease the mRNA levels of the
transcription factors Pax-3 and Pax-6, as well as key components of the Wnt
pathway. These patterns of glucose-altered gene expression in a developmentally
important cell population may be of etiological importance for NCC-associated
malformations in diabetic pregnancy.

© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21818840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2011 Apr-Jun;24(2 Suppl):7-10.

Evidence of an involvement of TFAP2A gene in non-syndromic cleft lip with or
without cleft palate: an Italian study.

Martinelli M(1), Masiero E, Carinci F, Morselli PG, Palmieri A, Girardi A,
Baciliero U, Scapoli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, Embryology and Applied Biology, Centre of Molecular
Genetics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Unraveling of factors involved in multifactorial diseases is a great challenge.
Different approaches can be contemplate and applied to a variety of congenital
malformations. In the present investigation TFAP2A has been considered a good
candidate gene for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCLP)
aetiology, basing on a sum of considerations. TFAP2A has been seen involved in
orofacial development in mice; it is located in the NSCLP candidate region 6p24; 
it codes for a transcription factor which regulates expression of IRF6, a gene
implied in NSCLP; finally, it is embroiled in the branchiooculofacial syndrome,
that includes clefting as feature. A family based association analysis was
performed with a sample study of 405 NSCLP triads. Evidence of association was
obtained with both single marker and haplotype analyses, thus providing a support
for TFAP2A in NSCLP aetiology.

PMID: 21781438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022034. Epub 2011 Jul 13.

Transgenic overexpression of Tcfap2c/AP-2gamma results in liver failure and
intestinal dysplasia.

Holl D(1), Kuckenberg P, Woynecki T, Egert A, Becker A, Huss S, Stabenow D,
Zimmer A, Knolle P, Tolba R, Fischer HP, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Tcfap2c has been demonstrated to be
essential for various processes during mammalian development. It has been found
to be upregulated in various undifferentiated tumors and is implicated with poor 
prognosis. Tcfap2c is reported to impinge on cellular proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis. However, the physiological consequences of
Tcfap2c-expression remain largely unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Therefore we established a gain of function model
to analyze the role of Tcfap2c in development and disease. Induction of the
transgene led to robust expression in all tissues (except brain and testis) and
lead to rapid mortality within 3-7 days. In the liver cellular proliferation and 
apoptosis was detected. Accumulation of microvesicular lipid droplets and
breakdown of major hepatic metabolism pathways resulted in steatosis. Serum
analysis showed a dramatic increase of enzymes indicative for hepatic failure.
After induction of Tcfap2c we identified a set of 447 common genes, which are
deregulated in both liver and primary hepatocyte culture. Further analysis showed
a prominent repression of the cytochrome p450 system, PPARA, Lipin1 and Lipin2.
These data indicate that in the liver Tcfap2c represses pathways, which are
responsible for fatty acid metabolism. In the intestine, Tcfap2c expression
resulted in expansion of Sox9 positive and proliferative active epithelial
progenitor cells resulting in dysplastic growth of mucosal crypt cells and loss
of differentiated mucosa.
CONCLUSIONS: The transgenic mice show that ectopic expression of Tcfap2c is not
tolerated. Due to the phenotype observed, iTcfap2c-mice represent a model system 
to study liver failure. In intestine, Tcfap2c induced cellular hyperplasia and
suppressed terminal differentiation indicating that Tcfap2c serves as a repressor
of differentiation and inducer of proliferation. This might be achieved by the
Tcfap2c mediated activation of Sox9 known to be expressed in intestinal and
hepatic stem/progenitor cell populations.

PMCID: PMC3135619
PMID: 21779369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. BMB Rep. 2011 Jul;44(7):490-5. doi: 10.5483/BMBRep.2011.44.7.490.

CK2 phosphorylates AP-2a and increases its transcriptional activity.

Ren K(1), Xian S, He F, Zhang W, Ding X, Wu Y, Yang L, Zhou J, Gao X, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Model Animal Research Center, MOE Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease
Research, Medical School, Nanjing University, China.

Transcription factor AP-2a involves in the process of mammalian embryonic
development and tumorigenesis. Many studies have shown that AP-2a functions in
association with other interacting proteins. In a two-hybrid screening, the
regulatory subunit ß of protein casein kinase 2 (CK2ß) was identified as an
interacting protein of AP-2a; we confirmed this interaction using in-vitro GST
pull-down and in-vivo co-immunoprecipitation assays; in an endogenous
co-immunoprecipitation experiment, we further found the catalytic subunit a of
protein casein kinase 2 (CK2a) also exists in the complex. Phosphorylation
analysis revealed that AP-2a was phosphorylated by CK2 kinase majorly at the site
of Ser429, and such phosphorylation could be blocked by CK2 specific inhibitor
4,5,6,7-tetrabromobenzotriazole (TBB) in a dose-dependent manner. Luciferase
assays demonstrated that both CK2a and CK2ß enhanced the transcription activity
of AP-2a; moreover, CK2ß increased the stability of AP-2a. Our data suggest a
novel cellular function of CK-2 as a transcriptional co-activator of AP-2a.

PMID: 21777522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nihon Rinsho. 2011 Jan;69 Suppl 1:269-74.

[Role of TFAP2B and WntSB in adipose tissue].

[Article in Japanese]

Ugi S(1), Maegawa H, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science.

PMID: 21766608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Genes Cells. 2011 Aug;16(8):868-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01536.x. Epub
2011 Jul 18.

Characterization of the EFC/F-BAR domain protein, FCHO2.

Uezu A(1), Umeda K, Tsujita K, Suetsugu S, Takenawa T, Nakanishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

We have previously shown that SGIP1a is an endocytic protein specifically
expressed in neural tissues. SGIP1a has a lipid-binding domain called the MP
domain, which shows no significant homology to any other domains. In this study, 
we characterized FCHO2, a protein with a high level of homology to SGIP1a. FCHO2 
lacks the MP domain but has another lipid-binding domain, the EFC/F-BAR domain.
FCHO2 was ubiquitously expressed. The FCHO2 EFC domain bound to
phosphatidylserine and phosphoinositides and deformed the plasma membrane and
liposomes into narrow tubes. FCHO2 localized to clathrin-coated pits at the
plasma membrane and bound to Eps15, an important adaptor protein in
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. FCHO2 knockdown reduced transferrin endocytosis.
These results suggest that FCHO2 regulates clathrin-mediated endocytosis through 
its interactions with membranes and Eps15. These properties of FCHO2 are similar 
to those of SGIP1a. FCHO2 is likely to be a ubiquitous homologue of SGIP1a. We
furthermore found that FCHO2 was subjected to monoubiquitination, and gel
filtration analysis showed that FCHO2 formed an oligomer. These new properties
might also contribute to the role of FCHO2 in clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21762413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Oct;39(18):8005-16. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr536. Epub 2011
Jul 4.

Zinc-finger transcription factors are associated with guanine quadruplex motifs
in human, chimpanzee, mouse and rat promoters genome-wide.

Kumar P(1), Yadav VK, Baral A, Kumar P, Saha D, Chowdhury S.

Author information: 
(1)GNR Knowledge Centre for Genome Informatics, Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology, CSIR, Mall Road, Delhi 110 007, India.

Function of non-B DNA structures are poorly understood though several
bioinformatics studies predict role of the G-quadruplex DNA structure in
transcription. Earlier, using transcriptome profiling we found evidence of
widespread G-quadruplex-mediated gene regulation. Herein, we asked whether
potential G-quadruplex (PG4) motifs associate with transcription factors (TF).
This was analyzed using 220 position weight matrices [designated as transcription
factor binding sites (TFBS)], representing 187 unique TF, in >75,000 genes in
human, chimpanzee, mouse and rat. Results show binding sites of nine TFs,
including that of AP-2, SP1, MAZ and VDR, occurred significantly within 100 bases
of the PG4 motif (P < 1.24E-10). PG4-TFBS combinations were conserved in
'orthologously' related promoters across all four organisms and were associated
with >850 genes in each genome. Remarkably, seven of the nine TFs were
zinc-finger binding proteins indicating a novel characteristic of PG4 motifs. To 
test these findings, transcriptome profiles from human cell lines treated with
G-quadruplex-specific molecules were used; 66 genes were significantly
differentially expressed across both cell-types, which also harbored conserved
PG4 motifs along with one/more of the nine TFBS. In addition, genes regulated by 
PG4-TFBS combinations were found to be co-regulated in human tissues, further
emphasizing the regulatory significance of the associations.

PMCID: PMC3185432
PMID: 21729868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Ophthalmic Genet. 2011 Nov;32(4):250-5. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2011.592176. Epub
2011 Jul 5.

A novel TFAP2A mutation in familial Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome with
predominant ocular phenotype.

Aliferis K(1), Stoetzel C, Pelletier V, Hellé S, Angioï-Duprez K, Vigneron J,
Leheup B, Marion V, Dollfus H.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Référence pour les Affections Rares en Génétique Ophtalmologique,
Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France. k.aliferis@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome (BOFS) is a rare autosomal dominant 
congenital disorder defined by branchial defects, ocular anomalies and
craniofacial malformations, including variable degrees of cleft lip with or
without cleft palate. In addition, temporal bone anomalies, renal and ectodermal 
manifestations can be present. Mutations in the TFAP2A gene have been reported in
patients with BOFS, prompting phenotype-genotype studies because of the variable 
clinical spectrum.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report on a family (a mother, her daughter and son)
with BOFS and significant variability in clinical expression. The daughter
presents predominantly with an ocular phenotype of unilateral microphthalmia and 
bilateral chorioretinal colobomas, whereas her brother is more severely affected 
contrasting with the paucisymptomatic mother. TFAP2A molecular analysis revealed 
a novel frameshift mutation.
DISCUSSION: We confirm the wide clinical spectrum of BOFS. The importance of
upper lip examination in mild and paucisymptomatic cases is underlined. TFAP2A
mutation spectrum is discussed and broadened by the report of the second
frameshift mutation in this gene.
CONCLUSION: Patients with BOFS and predominant ocular phenotypes can be
underdiagnosed. In such cases, upper lip examination can be of important
diagnostic value. TFAP2A analysis provides diagnostic confirmation and improves
genetic counselling.

PMID: 21728810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 15;410(4):732-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.006. Epub 2011 Jun 7.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the IRF6 and TFAP2A in non-syndromic
cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCLP) in a northern Chinese population.

Shi J(1), Song T, Jiao X, Qin C, Zhou J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, People's Republic of China. kqkjk@yahoo.com.cn

Non-syndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCLP) is a common birth
defect that is presumably caused by genetic factors alone or gene alterations in 
combination with environmental changes. A number of studies have shown an
association between NSCLP and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) gene in several populations. The
transcription factor AP-2a (TFAP2A), which is involved in regulating mid-face
development and upper lip fusion, has also be considered a candidate gene
contributing to the etiology of NSCLP. The potential importance of IRF6 and
TFAP2A in the NSCLP is further highlighted by a study showing that the two
molecules are in the same developmental pathway. To further assess the roles of
the IRF6 and TFAP2A in NSCLP, we investigated two identified IRF6 SNPs
(rs2235371, rs642961) and three TFAP2A tag SNPs (rs3798691, rs1675414, rs303050) 
selected from HapMap data in a northern Chinese population, a group with a high
prevalence of NSCLP. These SNPs were examined for association with NSCLP in 175
patients and 160 healthy controls. We observed a significant correlation between 
IRF6 rs642961 and NSCLP, and a lack of association between IRF6 rs2235371
polymorphisms and NSCLP in this population. This investigation indicated that
there is no association between the three SNPs in the TFAP2A and NSCLP,
suggesting that TFAP2A may not be involved in the development of NSCLP in the
northern Chinese population. Our study provides further evidence regarding the
role of IRF6 variations in NSCLP development and finds no significant association
between TFAP2A and NSCLP in this northern Chinese population.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Hepatol Res. 2011 Aug;41(8):776-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1872-034X.2011.00827.x. Epub
2011 Jun 17.

Activator protein-2a functions as a master regulator of multiple transcription
factors in the mouse liver.

Li Q(1), Luo C, Löhr CV, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Texas Medical Branch at
Galveston, Galveston, Texas College of Veterinary Medicine Linus Pauling
Institute Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State
University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA College of Food Science and Technology, Hunan 
Agricultural University Hunan Institute for Drug Control, Changsha, Hunan, China.

AIM:   Activator protein 2a (AP-2a) belongs to the AP-2 family of transcription
factors that are involved in the regulation of cell proliferation,
differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis and has been suggested to function 
as a tumor suppressor in many cancers. However, the physiological role of AP-2a
in hepatocytes is unknown. The present study is to characterize the expression
and function of AP-2a in the liver of conscience mouse.
METHODS:   Exogenous AP-2a was overexpressed in the mouse liver by in vivo gene
delivery and changes in transcription factor expression were identified by using 
protein-DNA arrays and immunoblotting.
RESULTS:   Western blotting and protein/DNA arrays showed that AP-2a is expressed
in the nuclei of mouse hepatocytes. Overexpression of AP-2ain vivo significantly 
suppressed transcription factors AP-1, CREB and c-Myc, and markedly increased
CBF, c-Myb, NF-1, Pax-5, RXR, Smad3/4, TR(DR-4), USF-1 and GATA. Among all GATA
proteins, only GATA-4 level was dramatically elevated and there was a concomitant
loss of phospho-GATA-4. Corresponding changes were detected in upstream kinases
Akt, GSK-3ß and PKA, which regulates the phosphorylation status and stability of 
GATA-4 protein.
CONCLUSIONS:   AP-2a is expressed in mouse hepatocytes and it acts as a master
regulator of numerous transcription factors in the liver.

© 2011 The Japan Society of Hepatology.

PMCID: PMC4139281
PMID: 21682828  [PubMed]


273. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20640. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020640. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Implications of central obesity-related variants in LYPLAL1, NRXN3, MSRA, and
TFAP2B on quantitative metabolic traits in adult Danes.

Bille DS(1), Banasik K, Justesen JM, Sandholt CH, Sandbæk A, Lauritzen T,
Jørgensen T, Witte DR, Holm JC, Hansen T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of
Metabolic Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Two meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
suggested that four variants: rs2605100 in lysophospholipase-like 1 (LYPLAL1),
rs10146997 in neuroxin 3 (NRXN3), rs545854 in methionine sulfoxide reductase A
(MSRA), and rs987237 in transcription factor activating enhancer-binding protein 
2 beta (TFAP2B) associate with measures of central obesity. To elucidate
potential underlying phenotypes we aimed to investigate whether these variants
associated with: 1) quantitative metabolic traits, 2) anthropometric measures
(waist circumference (WC), waist-hip ratio, and BMI), or 3) type 2 diabetes, and 
central and general overweight and obesity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The four variants were genotyped in Danish
individuals using KASPar®. Quantitative metabolic traits were examined in a
population-based sample (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>6,038) and WC and BMI were furthermore analyzed in a
combined study sample (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>13,507). Case-control studies of diabetes and
adiposity included 15,326 individuals. The major G-allele of LYPLAL1 rs2605100
associated with increased fasting serum triglyceride concentrations (per allele
effect (ß)<U+200A>=<U+200A>3%(1;5(95%CI)), p(additive)<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.7×10(-3)), an association driven by 
the male gender (p(interaction)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02). The same allele associated with
increased fasting serum insulin concentrations (ß<U+200A>=<U+200A>3%(1;5),
p(additive)<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.5×10(-3)) and increased insulin resistance (HOMA-IR)
(ß<U+200A>=<U+200A>4%(1;6), p(additive)<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.5×10(-3)). The minor G-allele of rs10146997 in
NRXN3 associated with increased WC among women (ß<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.55cm (0.20;0.89),
p(additive)<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.7×10(-3), p(interaction)<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.0×10(-3)), but showed no
associations with obesity related metabolic traits. The MSRA rs545854 and TFAP2B 
rs987237 showed nominal associations with central obesity; however, no underlying
metabolic phenotypes became obvious, when investigating quantitative metabolic
traits. None of the variants influenced the prevalence of type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: We demonstrate that several of the central
obesity-associated variants in LYPLAL1, NRXN3, MSRA, and TFAP2B associate with
metabolic and anthropometric traits in Danish adults. However, analyses were made
without adjusting for multiple testing, and further studies are needed to confirm
the putative role of LYPLAL1, NRXN3, MSRA, and TFAP2B in the pathophysiology of
obesity.

PMCID: PMC3107232
PMID: 21674055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jun 13;11:238. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-238.

COX-2 gene expression in colon cancer tissue related to regulating factors and
promoter methylation status.

Asting AG(1), Carén H, Andersson M, Lönnroth C, Lagerstedt K, Lundholm K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Increased cyclooxygenase activity promotes progression of colorectal 
cancer, but the mechanisms behind COX-2 induction remain elusive. This study was 
therefore aimed to define external cell signaling and transcription factors
relating to high COX-2 expression in colon cancer tissue.
METHOD: Tumor and normal colon tissue were collected at primary curative
operation in 48 unselected patients. COX-2 expression in tumor and normal colon
tissue was quantified including microarray analyses on tumor mRNA accounting for 
high and low tumor COX-2 expression. Cross hybridization was performed between
tumor and normal colon tissue. Methylation status of up-stream COX-2 promoter
region was evaluated.
RESULTS: Tumors with high COX-2 expression displayed large differences in gene
expression compared to normal colon. Numerous genes with altered expression
appeared in tumors of high COX-2 expression compared to tumors of low COX-2.
COX-2 expression in normal colon was increased in patients with tumors of high
COX-2 compared to normal colon from patients with tumors of low COX-2. IL1ß, IL6 
and iNOS transcripts were up-regulated among external cell signaling factors;
nine transcription factors (ATF3, C/EBP, c-Fos, Fos-B, JDP2, JunB, c-Maf, NF-<U+03BA>B, 
TCF4) showed increased expression and 5 (AP-2, CBP, Elk-1, p53, PEA3) were
decreased in tumors with high COX-2. The promoter region of COX-2 gene did not
show consistent methylation in tumor or normal colon tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcription and external cell signaling factors are altered as
covariates to COX-2 expression in colon cancer tissue, but DNA methylation of the
COX-2 promoter region was not a significant factor behind COX-2 expression in
tumor and normal colon tissue.

PMCID: PMC3130705
PMID: 21668942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Nov;17(11):702-9. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar045. Epub 2011 Jun 
9.

Transcription factor AP2 regulates human inhibin a subunit gene expression during
in vitro trophoblast differentiation.

Debiève F(1), Depoix Ch, Hubinont C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche d'Obstétrique, Université Catholique de Louvain, Avenue
Mounier 53, boite 5330, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium. frederic.debieve@uclouvain.be

During human trophoblast differentiation, inhibin a subunit mRNA expression and
protein secretion are increased. To understand how inhibin a subunit gene was
regulated during syncytialization, we firstly cloned the inhibin a promoter and
found a region with transcriptional activity related to the differentiation
state. In this paper, we identified this protein and defined its DNA-binding
site. Protein purification and identification were done by DNA affinity
chromatography followed by mass spectrometry and western blotting. In order to
confirm the identity of the protein, characterize its DNA-binding properties and 
to measure its expression during in vitro trophoblast differentiation, gel
retardation assays and real-time polymerase chain reaction were done. We found
that the cytotrophoblastic protein interacting with the inhibin a promoter was
the transcription factor activating protein 2 (AP2). Western blotting using
specific antibodies against AP2a and AP2<U+03B3> confirmed that AP2a was the main
subtype present in trophoblast cells, while AP2<U+03B3> was barely detectable.
Supershift experiments indicated that these two factors were able to bind to the 
sequence 5'-GCCtcaAGC-3'. We also observed an increase in AP2a mRNA and protein
during in vitro trophoblast differentiation correlated with an increase in
inhibin a subunit gene expression. Furthermore, AP2a and AP2<U+03B3> overexpression in
these cells was responsible for an increase in inhibin a subunit mRNA expression.
We conclude that AP2 regulates the inhibin a subunit gene expression during
trophoblast differentiation and may be a key regulator of syncytialization.

PMID: 21659426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Pancreas. 2011 Jul;40(5):695-700. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31821f2715.

Aberrant expressions of AP-2a splice variants in pancreatic cancer.

Carrière C(1), Mirocha S, Deharvengt S, Gunn JR, Korc M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The present study was conducted to evaluate the expression and
function of AP-2a isoforms in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: The expression of AP-2a was evaluated at the RNA level by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and at the protein level by Western
blotting and immunofluorescence. Its function as a transcription factor was
evaluated in transient transfection experiments: DNA binding properties by
electromobility shift assay and transactivation capabilities by luciferase assay.
RESULTS: Multiple alternative splicing events of AP-2a messenger occurred in all 
human pancreatic cancer cell lines, including a novel isoform, termed variant 6, 
which was not present in HeLa cells. At the protein level, except for 1 cell
line, all pancreatic cancer cell lines expressed high nuclear levels of AP-2a. We
also showed that AP-2a expressed by the pancreatic cancer cell lines could bind
its cognate recognition site and activate transcription. However, variant 6,
although not able to activate transcription, did not act in a dominant negative
manner when cotransfected with the full-length protein.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple isoforms of AP-2a are highly expressed in pancreatic cancer
cell lines including a new isoform, AP-2a variant 6, which seems to be pancreatic
cancer specific and is deprived of transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC3116516
PMID: 21654541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Sex Dev. 2011;5(4):188-96. doi: 10.1159/000328822. Epub 2011 Jun 8.

Ontogenesis of Ap-2<U+03B3> expression in rat testes.

Hou M(1), Stukenborg JB, Nurmio M, Andersson M, Toppari J, Söder O, Jahnukainen
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Astrid Lindgren Children's
Hospital, Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Q2:08, Stockholm, Sweden. Mi.Hou @ ki.se

Searching for useful markers of spermatogonial stem cells and their
differentiation, we used rat testes from ages representing different stages of
testicular maturation to investigate the expression profile of transcription
factor activation protein-2<U+03B3> (Ap-2<U+03B3>). The immunohistochemical and
immunocytochemical evaluation using Ap-2<U+03B3> and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger 
in combination with sorting of CD9 and CD90 positive cells (undifferentiated
spermatogonia) by fluorescence-activated cell sorting was performed. Our
experiments revealed that Ap-2<U+03B3> is detectable in testes of late fetal age and up 
to 60 days postnatally and is expressed in gonocytes and spermatogonia from late 
fetal age throughout all maturational stages. Restricted nuclear expression of
Ap-2<U+03B3> to undifferentiated male germ cells was verified by coexpression of Ap-2<U+03B3>
with promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger in sections of paraffin-embedded testes
as well as in cells sorted positive for CD9 and CD90 expression. Our study
demonstrated clearly that nuclear expression of Ap-2<U+03B3> is a useful marker for
identifying undifferentiated male germ cells, although its functional role is yet
to be fully explored.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21654158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Pediatr Cardiol. 2011 Oct;32(7):958-65. doi: 10.1007/s00246-011-0024-7. Epub 2011
Jun 4.

Familial nonsyndromic patent ductus arteriosus caused by mutations in TFAP2B.

Chen YW(1), Zhao W, Zhang ZF, Fu Q, Shen J, Zhang Z, Ji W, Wang J, Li F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Children's Medical Center Affiliated With
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, People's
Republic of China.

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a common congenital heart disease that develops
soon after birth when the arterial duct does not remodel. Mutations in TFAP2B,
which encodes a neural crest-derived transcription factor, can cause Char
syndrome, characterized by PDA, facial dysmorphism, and skeletal abnormalities of
the hand. The TFAP2B mutations result in a great amount of phenotypic
variability, and a novel TFAP2B mutation has been found in patients with
nonsyndromic PDA. Therefore, this study investigated whether TFAP2B mutations can
cause familial nonsyndromic PDA. Clinical data and peripheral blood specimens
were collected from two kindreds (A and B) and from a cohort of 100 unrelated
subjects with PDA. Kindred A spanned three generations, in which 5 of the 16
individuals had PDA, and kindred B spanned three generations, in which 2 of the
13 individuals had PDA. The study enrolled 100 unrelated healthy individuals as
control subjects. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to amplify seven exons
and flanking introns of the TFAP2B gene. A few exons of the TFAP2B gene were
amplified using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), and
direct forward and reverse sequencing of the PCR products was performed. The
acquired sequences were aligned with those in GenBank by using a basic local
alignment search tool (BLAST). The following two types of mutations were
identified in TFAP2B: c.601+5G>A and c.435_438delCCGG. The mutation c.601+5G>A
was detected in the affected members of kindred A. Nested PCR showed a splice
junction in intron 3 and a 61-bp deletion in exon 3. The mutation
c.435_438delCCGG, found in the affected members of kindred B, was caused by a
four-base deletion in exon 2, which in turn caused a frame shift that resulted in
the formation of a premature stop codon, p.Arg145Argfsx45. None of these
mutations was detected in the unaffected members of the kindred or in the control
group. Furthermore, two novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), c.1-34G>A
and c.539+62G>C, were detected in the introns. The variant c.1-34G>A was
identified 34 bp upstream of the transcription initiation site in the TFAP2B
gene. Significant differences in the prevalence of the alleles G and A were
observed in the control subjects and PDA patients (Z = -2.513, P = 0.012). The
study identified that another variant was c.539+62G>C but that the frequency of
this variant was similar between the control subjects and the PDA patients
(Z = -0.332, P = 0.74). The TFAP2B mutations may be associated with isolated
nonsyndromic, hereditary PDA in Chinese families. The authors propose that a
TFAP2B mutation should be considered a risk factor for isolated PDA. However, the
detailed genetic mechanism underlying nonsyndromic the PDA-causing TFAP2B
mutation is yet to be elucidated.

PMID: 21643846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Branchiooculofacial Syndrome.

Lin AE, Milunsky JM.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2011 May 31.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The branchiooculofacial syndrome (BOFS) is
characterized by: branchial (cervical [90%] or infra- or supra-auricular [60%])
skin defects that range from barely perceptible thin skin or hair patch to
erythematous hemangiomatous lesions to large weeping erosions; ocular anomalies
that can include microphthalmia, anophthalmia, coloboma, and nasolacrimal duct
stenosis/atresia; and facial anomalies that can include ocular hypertelorism or
telecanthus, broad nasal tip, upslanted palpebral fissures, cleft lip or
prominent philtral pillars that give the appearance of a repaired cleft lip
(formerly called "pseudocleft lip") with or without cleft palate, upper lip pits 
and lower facial weakness (asymmetric crying face or partial 7(th) cranial nerve 
weakness). Malformed and prominent pinnae and hearing loss from inner ear and/or 
petrous bone anomalies are common. Intellect is usually normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is based on clinical findings. TFAP2A is the
only gene in which pathogenic variants are currently known to cause BOFS.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: In general, children with BOFS should be
managed by a multispecialty team including, for example, craniofacial
specialists, plastic surgeons, otolaryngologists, and speech therapists. Small,
linear or superficial branchial skin defects may heal spontaneously; however,
some require surgical intervention. Anophthalmia or severe microphthalmia may
require a conformer (a structure, usually plastic, inserted into the eye socket
to encourage its growth); nasolacrimal duct stenosis or atresia often requires
surgery. It is recommended that cleft lip be repaired by an experienced pediatric
plastic surgeon. Lesser forms of cleft lip (pseudocleft) may need surgical
correction. Surveillance: Monitor for changes related to the major findings over 
time.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BOFS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. De novo
pathogenic variants are observed in 50%-60% of affected individuals. Each child
of an individual with BOFS has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant.
Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member.

PMID: 21634087  [PubMed]


280. EMBO J. 2011 May 18;30(10):1880-1. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.132.

Searching for the 'melano-miRs': miR-214 drives melanoma metastasis.

Bar-Eli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
mbareli@mdanderson.org

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2011 May 18;30(10):1990-2007.

PMCID: PMC3098491
PMID: 21593728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 15;355(2):336-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.032. Epub 2011 
May 7.

Segment-specific regulation of the Drosophila AP-2 gene during leg and antennal
development.

Ahn Y(1), Zou J, Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Eberly College of Science,
Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, PA 16802, USA. yoa@stowers.org

Segmentation involves subdivision of a developing body part into multiple
repetitive units during embryogenesis. In Drosophila and other insects, embryonic
segmentation is regulated by genes expressed in the same domain of every segment.
Less is known about the molecular basis for segmentation of individual body parts
occurring at later developmental stages. The Drosophila transcription factor AP-2
gene, dAP-2, is required for outgrowth of leg and antennal segments and is
expressed in every segment boundary within the larval imaginal discs. To
investigate the molecular mechanisms generating the segmentally repetitive
pattern of dAP-2 expression, we performed transgenic reporter analyses and
isolated multiple cis-regulatory elements that can individually or cooperatively 
recapitulate endogenous dAP-2 expression in different segments of the appendages.
We further analyzed an enhancer specific for the proximal femur region which
corresponds to the distal-most expression domain of homothorax (hth) in the leg
imaginal discs. Hth is known to be responsible for the nuclear localization and, 
hence, function of the Hox cofactor, Extradenticle (Exd). We show that both Hth
and Exd are required for dAP-2 expression in the femur and that a conserved
Exd/Hox binding site is essential for enhancer activity. Our loss- and
gain-of-function studies further support direct regulation of dAP-2 by Hox
proteins and suggest that Hox proteins function redundantly in dAP-2 regulation. 
Our study reveals that discrete segment-specific enhancers underlie the seemingly
simple repetitive expression of dAP-2 and provides evidence for direct regulation
of leg segmentation by regional combinations of the proximodistal patterning
genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3118927
PMID: 21575621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. EMBO J. 2011 May 13;30(13):2569-81. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.151.

AP-2<U+03B3> regulates oestrogen receptor-mediated long-range chromatin interaction and 
gene transcription.

Tan SK(1), Lin ZH, Chang CW, Varang V, Chng KR, Pan YF, Yong EL, Sung WK, Cheung 
E.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, Genome Institute of Singapore, A STAR (Agency
for Science, Technology and Research), Singapore.

Erratum in
    EMBO J. 2011;30(13):2750. Sung, Win King [corrected to Sung, Wing Kin].

Oestrogen receptor a (ERa) is key player in the progression of breast cancer.
Recently, the cistrome and interactome of ERa were mapped in breast cancer cells,
revealing the importance of spatial organization in oestrogen-mediated
transcription. However, the underlying mechanism of this process is unclear.
Here, we show that ERa binding sites (ERBS) identified from the Chromatin
Interaction Analysis-Paired End DiTag of ERa are enriched for AP-2 motifs. We
demonstrate the transcription factor, AP-2<U+03B3>, which has been implicated in breast 
cancer oncogenesis, binds to ERBS in a ligand-independent manner. Furthermore,
perturbation of AP-2<U+03B3> expression impaired ERa DNA binding, long-range chromatin
interactions, and gene transcription. In genome-wide analyses, we show that a
large number of AP-2<U+03B3> and ERa binding events converge together across the genome.
The majority of these shared regions are also occupied by the pioneer factor,
FoxA1. Molecular studies indicate there is functional interplay between AP-2<U+03B3> and
FoxA1. Finally, we show that most ERBS associated with long-range chromatin
interactions are colocalized with AP-2<U+03B3> and FoxA1. Together, our results suggest 
AP-2<U+03B3> is a novel collaborative factor in ERa-mediated transcription.

PMCID: PMC3155293
PMID: 21572391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Int J Androl. 2011 Aug;34(4 Pt 2):e152-8; discussion e158-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2605.2011.01167.x. Epub 2011 May 12.

The role of BLIMP1 and its putative downstream target TFAP2C in germ cell
development and germ cell tumours.

Schäfer S(1), Anschlag J, Nettersheim D, Haas N, Pawig L, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

During the past years, much information has been gathered regarding the genetic
and epigenetic programmes leading to the specification and maintenance of
primordial germ cells. Expression of the transcriptional regulator BLIMP1 (PRDM1)
is regarded as the main event in germ cell specification. BLIMP1 induces a set of
target genes, one of them being transcription factor TFAP2C (AP-2<U+03B3>, Tcfap2c). In 
murine loss of function models Blimp1 and Tcfap2c share an identical phenotype,
strengthening the assumption that they act in the same pathway. One major role of
this pathway is the inhibition of somatic differentiation in germ cells. BLIMP1
and TFAP2C are also expressed in carcinoma in situ (CIS, IGCNU, TIN) and in
seminoma. As pointed out herein, the presence of both proteins helps to explain
the undifferentiated nature of these germ cell tumours. In addition, we performed
a meta-analysis of high-throughput datasets searching for TFAP2C/Tcfap2c target
genes. This analysis leads us to suggest Nanos3, Dmrt1 and Dnmt3b as potential
TFAP2C/Tcfap2c target genes with relevance to germ cell development and germ cell
tumours.

© 2011 The Authors. International Journal of Andrology © 2011 European Academy of
Andrology.

PMID: 21564135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jan;39(1):209-14. doi: 10.1007/s11033-011-0727-0. Epub 2011
May 10.

AP-2ß enhances p53-mediated transcription of the aB-crystallin gene through
stabilizing p53.

Hu X(1), Wang L, Sun W, Xiao L, Wu Y, Zhuo Y, Nie D, Zhou J, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of MOE, College 
of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, 410081, China.

The aB-crystallin (CRYAB) is a member of the small heat shock protein family that
can be induced by various stresses and pathological conditions. Aberrant
expression of CRYAB has been shown to be associated with several neurological
diseases and malignant neoplasms. To identify transcriptional regulators of CRYAB
expression, we examined its promoter for binding sites of transcription factors
and identified four potential AP-2 binding sites in addition to a p53 binding
site reported previously. Although the CRYAB promoter contains four consensus
binding sequences of AP-2 and can be activated by AP-2a either in the presence or
absence of p53, the luciferase assay showed that AP-2ß alone does not regulate
the activity of the CRYAB promoter in the absence of p53. However, in the
presence of p53, AP-2ß can significantly increase the luciferase activities of
both the CRYAB promoter and reporter vector pp53-TA-luc, which contains a
p53-responsive element, but no AP-2 binding sites. These data suggest that AP-2ß 
enhances transactivation of p53 and regulates CRYAB transcription via p53.
Further study demonstrated that AP-2ß interacts with p53 and augments its protein
stability. Taken together, our results indicate that AP-2ß up-regulates the
transcription of the CRYAB gene through stabilizing p53.

PMID: 21556774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. BMC Syst Biol. 2011 May 9;5:67. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-67.

A modulated empirical Bayes model for identifying topological and temporal
estrogen receptor a regulatory networks in breast cancer.

Shen C(1), Huang Y, Liu Y, Wang G, Zhao Y, Wang Z, Teng M, Wang Y, Flockhart DA, 
Skaar TC, Yan P, Nephew KP, Huang TH, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Estrogens regulate diverse physiological processes in various tissues
through genomic and non-genomic mechanisms that result in activation or
repression of gene expression. Transcription regulation upon estrogen stimulation
is a critical biological process underlying the onset and progress of the
majority of breast cancer. Dynamic gene expression changes have been shown to
characterize the breast cancer cell response to estrogens, the every molecular
mechanism of which is still not well understood.
RESULTS: We developed a modulated empirical Bayes model, and constructed a novel 
topological and temporal transcription factor (TF) regulatory network in MCF7
breast cancer cell line upon stimulation by 17ß-estradiol stimulation. In the
network, significant TF genomic hubs were identified including ER-alpha and AP-1;
significant non-genomic hubs include ZFP161, TFDP1, NRF1, TFAP2A, EGR1, E2F1, and
PITX2. Although the early and late networks were distinct (<5% overlap of ERa
target genes between the 4 and 24 h time points), all nine hubs were
significantly represented in both networks. In MCF7 cells with acquired
resistance to tamoxifen, the ERa regulatory network was unresponsive to
17ß-estradiol stimulation. The significant loss of hormone responsiveness was
associated with marked epigenomic changes, including hyper- or hypo-methylation
of promoter CpG islands and repressive histone methylations.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a number of estrogen regulated target genes and
established estrogen-regulated network that distinguishes the genomic and
non-genomic actions of estrogen receptor. Many gene targets of this network were 
not active anymore in anti-estrogen resistant cell lines, possibly because their 
DNA methylation and histone acetylation patterns have changed.

PMCID: PMC3117732
PMID: 21554733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Dev Biol. 2011 Jul 1;355(1):89-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.04.011. Epub 2011
Apr 22.

The transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a are required for survival of
sympathetic progenitors and differentiated sympathetic neurons.

Schmidt M(1), Huber L, Majdazari A, Schütz G, Williams T, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Developmental Neurobiology, Max-Planck-Institute for Brain
Research, Deutschordenstrasse 46, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

Differentiation of sympathetic neurons is controlled by a group of transcription 
factors, including Phox2b, Ascl1, Hand2 and Gata3, induced by bone morphogenetic 
proteins (BMPs) in progenitors located in ganglion primordia at the dorsal aorta.
Here, we address the function of the transcription factors AP-2ß and AP-2a,
expressed in migrating neural crest cells (NCC) and maintained in sympathetic
progenitors and differentiated neurons. The elimination of both AP-2a and AP-2ß
results in the virtually complete absence of sympathetic and sensory ganglia due 
to apoptotic cell death of migrating NCC. In the AP-2ß knockout only sympathetic 
ganglia (SG) are targeted, leading to a reduction in ganglion size by about 40%, 
which is also caused by apoptotic death of neural crest progenitors. The
conditional double knockout of AP-2a and AP-2ß in sympathetic progenitors and
differentiated noradrenergic neurons results in a further decrease in neuron
number, leading eventually to small sympathetic ganglion rudiments postnatally.
The elimination of AP-2ß also leads to the complete absence of noradrenergic
neurons of the Locus coeruleus (LC). Whereas AP-2a/ß transcription factors are in
vivo not required for the onset or maintenance of noradrenergic differentiation, 
their essential survival functions are demonstrated for sympathetic progenitors
and noradrenergic neurons.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21539825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2012 May;49(3):357-64. doi: 10.1597/10-203. Epub 2011
May 3.

Craniofacial phenotype in the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: four case reports.

Galliani E(1), Burglen L, Kadlub N, Just W, Sznajer Y, de Villemeur TB, Soupre V,
Picard A, Vazquez MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Maxillo-Facial and Plastic Surgery, Hôpital d'Enfant
Armand-Trousseau, AP-HP, 26 Avenue du Dr. Arnold Netter, 75571, Paris, France.
eva.galliani@trs.aphp.fr

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome represents a craniofacial disorder in which
affected patients may develop a wide range of distinctive features that include
cleft lip and/or palate, cervical aplastic skin defect, malformed pinna, and
ocular anomalies. This study reports four new cases confirmed by the
identification of mutations in the TFAP2A gene and describes in detail the
findings in the craniofacial region. The four cases included two familial and two
sporadic, and three have been followed since the birth. Two out of the four cases
showed atypical features. One patient presented brainstem immaturity with
dysregulation of sympathetic and parasympathetic systems, which have so far not
been described in the literature and were associated with anxiety, panic attacks,
and tiredness. Another patient had as an additional feature a hypoplastic thumb
with distal implantation.

PMID: 21539471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Genes Brain Behav. 2011 Jul;10(5):570-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2011.00696.x.
Epub 2011 May 31.

Association between neonatal temperament, SLC6A4, DRD4 and a functional
polymorphism located in TFAP2B.

Ivorra JL(1), D'Souza UM, Jover M, Arranz MJ, Williams BP, Henry SE, Sanjuan J,
Molto MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Valencia, C/ Doctor 
Moliner 50, Burjassot, Spain. joluisi@uv.es

Genetic studies on human personality have provided little satisfactory results to
date mainly because of the complexity of this trait. Neonatal temperament using
observational measures is an alternative phenotype to approach genetics to human 
behavior. An association study was conducted on 117 Caucasian newborns. Their
temperament was evaluated using the Neonatal Behavior Assessment Scale 48 h after
birth. Thirteen polymorphisms in the SLC6A4, DRD4 and TFAP2B genes were
genotyped. Linear regression was performed to analyze data, and Bonferroni
correction was applied. To check the functional effect of the TFAP2B Indel Intron
2 polymorphism, reporter gene luciferase assays using a mouse cortical neural
progenitor cell line and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) studies in
human post-mortem brain samples were performed. A significant association was
found between 5-HTTLPR, 5-HTTLPR + rs25531 and TFAP2B Indel Intron 2 with Range
of State cluster as well as an interaction between rs25531 and TFAP2B Indel
Intron 2 with Range of State. DRD4 variable number tandem repeat exon 3 was
associated with orientation. A 30% increase in the luciferase levels of the
TFAP2B 5-repeat alleles compared with the 6-repeat alleles (P-value = 0.03) was
found using the pGL3 promoter vector. The qPCR experiments showed the same trend 
as the in vitro studies, although no significant results were obtained. This
study supports a role of the SLC6A4, DRD4 and TFAP2B genes in the temperament,
including a gene-gene interaction between SLC6A4 and TFAP2B. It also provides
evidence about an effect of the TFAP2B polymorphism in TFAP2B gene transcription.

© 2011 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMID: 21504541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 May;13(5):559-67. doi: 10.1038/ncb2221. Epub 2011 Apr 17.

ARFGAP1 promotes AP-2-dependent endocytosis.

Bai M(1), Gad H, Turacchio G, Cocucci E, Yang JS, Li J, Beznoussenko GV, Nie Z,
Luo R, Fu L, Collawn JF, Kirchhausen T, Luini A, Hsu VW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, and Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

COPI (coat protein I) and the clathrin-AP-2 (adaptor protein 2) complex are
well-characterized coat proteins, but a component that is common to these two
coats has not been identified. The GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for
ADP-ribosylation factor 1 (ARF1), ARFGAP1, is a known component of the COPI
complex. Here, we show that distinct regions of ARFGAP1 interact with AP-2 and
coatomer (components of the COPI complex). Selectively disrupting the interaction
of ARFGAP1 with either of these two coat proteins leads to selective inhibition
in the corresponding transport pathway. The role of ARFGAP1 in AP-2-regulated
endocytosis has mechanistic parallels with its roles in COPI transport, as both
its GAP activity and coat function contribute to promoting AP-2 transport.

PMCID: PMC3087831
PMID: 21499258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Immunother. 2011 May;34(4):372-81. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e31821b724a.

EGFR inhibitors enhanced the susceptibility to NK cell-mediated lysis of lung
cancer cells.

Kim H(1), Kim SH, Kim MJ, Kim SJ, Park SJ, Chung JS, Bae JH, Kang CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Pusan National University School of Medicine,
Yangsan, South Korea.

As quercetin, which can inhibit phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase, nuclear
factor-kappa B, and protein kinase C (PKC) pathways, induced expression of
natural killer group 2, member D (NKG2D) ligands on cancer cells and made the
cells sensitive to NK -cell-mediated killing; inhibition of epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR) pathway might lead to induction of NKG2D ligands. In this 
study, it was investigated whether EGFR inhibitors, including erlotinib or
gefitinib, could regulate expression of NKG2D ligands in various lung cancer
cells including A549, NCI-H23, and SW-900. The EGFR inhibitors predominantly
increased transcription and surface expression of ULBP1, and subsequently
increased susceptibility of the cancer cells to NK-92 cells. When the selective
inhibitors of nuclear factor-kappa B, phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase,
mitogen-activated protein kinases, and PKC were treated to discriminate
downstream signaling of EGFR pathway, expression of ULBP1 in the cancer cells was
induced by inhibition of PKC. Treatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
restored the EGFR inhibitor-induced ULBP1 transcription. Binding activity to
ULBP1 promoter region of AP-2a, which suggested as suppressor of expression of
ULBP1, was decreased by treatment with EGFR inhibitors, and restored by
pretreatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate in A549 and SW-900. Rottlerin, 
a PKCd inhibitor, also decreased the binding activity of AP-2a in dose-dependent 
manner. This study suggests that EGFR inhibitors enhanced the susceptibility to
NK cell-mediated lysis of lung cancer cells by induction of ULBP1 by inhibition
of PKC pathway and therapeutic efficacy of EGFR inhibitors in lung cancer may be 
mediated in part by increased susceptibility to NK cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

PMID: 21499124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. BMC Cancer. 2011 Apr 14;11:135. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-135.

Increased expression of transcription factor TFAP2a correlates with
chemosensitivity in advanced bladder cancer.

Nordentoft I(1), Dyrskjøt L, Bødker JS, Wild PJ, Hartmann A, Bertz S, Lehmann J, 
Orntoft TF, Birkenkamp-Demtroder K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. iver.nordentoft@ki.au.dk

BACKGROUND: The standard treatment for patients with advanced transitional cell
carcinoma of the bladder is platin based chemotherapy. Only approximately 50% of 
the patients respond to chemotherapy. Therefore, molecular predictive markers for
identification of chemotherapy sensitive subgroups of patients are highly needed.
We selected the transcription factor TFAP2a from a previously identified gene
expression signature for chemotherapy response.
METHODS: TFAP2a expression and localization was assessed by immunohistochemistry 
using a tissue microarray (TMA) containing 282 bladder cancer tumors from
patients with locally advanced (pT2-T4(b) and N(1-3)) or metastatic (M(1))
disease. All patients had received cisplatin containing chemotherapy.
Furthermore, QPCR analysis of three TFAP2a isoforms was performed on tumor
specimens of advanced muscle invasive bladder cancers (T2-4). Using the bladder
cell lines T24 and SW780 the relation of TFAP2a and cisplatin and gemcitabine
sensitivity as well as cell proliferation was examined using siRNA directed
TFAP2a knockdown.
RESULTS: TFAP2a protein expression was analyzed on a TMA with cores from 282
advanced bladder cancer tumors from patients treated with cisplatin based
combinational chemotherapy. TFAP2a was identified as a strong independent
predictive marker for a good response and survival after cisplatin-containing
chemotherapy in patients with advanced bladder cancer. Strong TFAP2a nuclear and 
cytoplasmic staining predicted good response to chemotherapy in patients with
lymph node metastasis, whereas weak TFAP2a nuclear staining predicted good
response in patients without lymph node metastasis. In vitro studies showed that 
siRNA mediated knockdown of TFAP2a increased the proliferation of SW780 cells and
rendered the cells less sensitive to cisplatin and gemcitabine. In contrast to
that T24 bladder cells with mutated p53 showed to be more drug sensitive upon
TFAP2a depletion.
CONCLUSIONS: High levels of nuclear and cytoplasmic TFAP2a protein were a
predictor of increased overall survival and progression free survival in patients
with advanced bladder cancer treated with cisplatin based chemotherapy. TFAP2a
knockdown increased the proliferation of the SW780 bladder cells and reduced
cisplatin and gemcitabine induced cell death. The inverse effect was observed in 
the TP53 mutated T24 cell line where TFAP2a silencing augmented cisplatin and
gemcitabine sensitivity and did not stimulate proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3103475
PMID: 21489314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Andrologia. 2012 Apr;44(2):78-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0272.2010.01108.x. Epub
2011 Feb 16.

A novel double staining strategy for improved detection of testicular carcinoma
in situ cells in human semen samples.

Nielsen JE(1), Kristensen DM, Almstrup K, Jørgensen A, Olesen IA, Jacobsen GK,
Horn T, Skakkebaek NE, Leffers H, Rajpert-De Meyts E.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. john.erik.nielsen@rh.regionh.dk

Prompted by the recently reported expression of POU5F1 (OCT3/4) in epididymis, a 
panel of markers for carcinoma in situ (CIS) testis and testicular germ cell
tumours (TGCT), including AP-2<U+03B3>(TFAP2C), NANOG, OCT3/4, KIT, placental-like
alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), M2A/PDPN and MAGE-A4 were examined by
immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridisation in urogenital epithelia, which may 
interfere with detection of CIS cells in semen. In addition to OCT3/4, the
expression of AP-2<U+03B3> and NANOG or their variants was detected in urogenital
epithelia, while other CIS markers, including PLAP/alkaline phosphatase were
absent. A combination of immunocytological staining for AP-2<U+03B3> or OCT3/4 and rapid
cytochemical alkaline phosphatase reaction was subsequently developed. This
approach was tested in 22 patients with TGCT. In 14 patients (63.6%), double
stained cells were found and thus the method was proven suitable for the
detection of CIS cells in semen. In conclusion, transcription factors related to 
pluripotency and undifferentiated state of cells, which most likely have several 
variants or modifications, are unexpectedly detected using currently available
antibodies in urogenital epithelial cells which may be shed into semen. Combining
the immunohistochemical nuclear markers with a rapid cytochemical alkaline
phosphatase reaction for detection of CIS cells in ejaculates may provide a more 
reliable diagnostic method.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 21486421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. EMBO J. 2011 May 18;30(10):1990-2007. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.102. Epub 2011 Apr 
5.

microRNA-214 contributes to melanoma tumour progression through suppression of
TFAP2C.

Penna E(1), Orso F, Cimino D, Tenaglia E, Lembo A, Quaglino E, Poliseno L,
Haimovic A, Osella-Abate S, De Pittà C, Pinatel E, Stadler MB, Provero P,
Bernengo MG, Osman I, Taverna D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC), University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 May 18;30(10):1880-1.

Malignant melanoma is fatal in its metastatic stage. It is therefore essential to
unravel the molecular mechanisms that govern disease progression to metastasis.
MicroRNAs (miRs) are endogenous non-coding RNAs involved in tumourigenesis. Using
a melanoma progression model, we identified a novel pathway controlled by miR-214
that coordinates metastatic capability. Pathway components include TFAP2C,
homologue of a well-established melanoma tumour suppressor, the adhesion receptor
ITGA3 and multiple surface molecules. Modulation of miR-214 influences in vitro
tumour cell movement and survival to anoikis as well as extravasation from blood 
vessels and lung metastasis formation in vivo. Considering that miR-214 is known 
to be highly expressed in human melanomas, our data suggest a critical role for
this miRNA in disease progression and the establishment of distant metastases.

PMCID: PMC3098476
PMID: 21468029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Chin J Integr Med. 2011 Oct;17(10):758-63. doi: 10.1007/s11655-011-0636-z. Epub
2011 Mar 30.

Effects of Herba epimedii and Fructus ligustri lucidi on the transcription
factors in hypothalamus of aged rats.

Cai J(1), Zheng T, Zhang L, Tian Y, Yang MH, Du J.

Author information: 
(1)Fujian Institute of Integrative Chinese and Western Medicine, Fujian
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Fuzhou, China. caij1@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To comparatively analyze the difference in the expression of 54
transcription factors in the hypothalamus using protein chips following the
medication of Chinese drugs for Shen-tonification, Herba Epimedii, and Fructus
Ligustri lucidi (FL) to aged rats.
METHODS: Wistar rats, aged 15 months of SPF grade, were randomized into three
groups, three males and three females in each group. They were medicated with
Herba Epimedii decoction (HED, 0.14 g/kg), Fructus Ligustri lucidi decoction
(FLD, 0.12 g/kg), and distilled water, respectively, twice a day for 15 days. The
rats were sacrificed at the morning of the 16th day 1 h after medication, and
their hypothalamus was taken and made into homogenate under an ice-bath for
detecting the expression of transcription factors with chip technique.
RESULTS: The expressions of signal transduction and transcription activation
factor-6 (Stat-6) and androgen receptor (AR) were up-regulated, and those of
pre-B transcription factor1 (Pbx-1), stat-1 and AP-2 were down-regulated in both 
HED and FLD treated groups, but these changes occurred mainly in female rats in
the former while mainly in males in the latter.
CONCLUSIONS: Chinese drugs for Shen-tonification could impact the expression of
transcription factors in the hypothalamus of aged rats, dominantly on the
neuro-endocrine factors responsible for the growth and development. The effects
of drugs for tonifying Shen-yang and for tonifying Shen-yin are different, which 
is probably one of the pharmacological mechanisms of the Shen-tonifying drugs.

PMID: 21465296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Int J Mol Med. 2011 Jul;28(1):95-100. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.651. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Postprandial activation of protein kinase Cµ regulates the expression of
adipocytokines via the transcription factor AP-2ß.

Kondo M(1), Ugi S, Morino K, Fuke T, Obata T, Yoshizaki T, Nishio Y, Maeda S,
Kashiwagi A, Maegawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Seta, Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192, Japan. 
dorch@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

Abnormal secretion of adipocytokines promotes atherosclerosis, diabetes and
insulin resistance, and is mainly induced by adipocyte hypertrophy. Recently, the
circulating adipocytokine concentrations were reported to change in the
postprandial period, as the levels of TNFa, IL-6 IL-8 and MCP-1 increased after a
meal, whereas that of adiponectin decreased. These data suggest that prandial
modulation of cytokines may be involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in
type 2 diabetes. However, the regulatory mechanism of such change is still
unclear. In the present study, we identified this mechanism with a special focus 
on the functions of protein kinase C (PKC) and of the transcription factor AP-2ß,
both of which are associated with the pathophysiology of adipocytokine
regulation. PKCµ was highly phosphorylated in the re-feeding condition compared
to the fasting condition in mouse adipose tissue, while other PKC isoforms
remained unchanged. Furthermore, overexpression of PKCµ in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, but
not other PKC isoforms, positively regulated the mRNA expression and promoter
activity of MCP-1 and IL-6, and negatively regulated those of adiponectin. AP-2ß 
had similar effects on the expression and promoter activity of these
adipocytokines. Interestingly, overexpression of PKCµ enhanced the stimulatory
and inhibitory effects of AP-2ß on the expression of these adipocytokines.
Finally, PKCµ could not activate a mutant MCP-1 promoter lacking the AP-2ß
binding domain. Our results suggest that postprandial activation of PKCµ plays a 
role in disordered postprandial adipocytokine expression through AP-2ß.

PMID: 21424113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Dev Biol. 2011 May 1;353(1):38-49. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.027. Epub 2011
Mar 4.

Grainyhead-like 2 regulates neural tube closure and adhesion molecule expression 
during neural fold fusion.

Pyrgaki C(1), Liu A, Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)HHMI, Department of Pediatrics, Molecular Biology Graduate Program, University
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus and The Children's Hospital, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Defects in closure of embryonic tissues such as the neural tube, body wall, face 
and eye lead to severe birth defects. Cell adhesion is hypothesized to contribute
to closure of the neural tube and body wall; however, potential molecular
regulators of this process have not been identified. Here we identify an
ENU-induced mutation in mice that reveals a molecular pathway of embryonic
closure. Line2F homozygous mutant embryos fail to close the neural tube, body
wall, face, and optic fissure, and they also display defects in lung and heart
development. Using a new technology of genomic sequence capture and
high-throughput sequencing of a 2.5Mb region of the mouse genome, we discovered a
mutation in the grainyhead-like 2 gene (Grhl2). Microarray analysis revealed
Grhl2 affects the expression of a battery of genes involved in cell adhesion and 
E-cadherin protein is drastically reduced in tissues that require Grhl2 function.
The tissue closure defects in Grhl2 mutants are similar to that of AP-2a null
mutants and AP-2a has been shown to bind to the promoter of E-cadherin.
Therefore, we tested for a possible interaction between these genes. However, we 
find that Grhl2 and AP-2a do not regulate each other's expression, E-cadherin
expression is normal in AP-2a mutants during neural tube closure, and Grhl2;AP-2a
trans-heterozygous embryos are morphologically normal. Taken together, our
studies point to a complex regulation of neural tube fusion and highlight the
importance of comparisons between these two models to understand more fully the
molecular pathways of embryonic tissue closure.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3114429
PMID: 21377456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Mar 4;13(2):R23. doi: 10.1186/bcr2838.

Alternative TFAP2A isoforms have distinct activities in breast cancer.

Berlato C(1), Chan KV, Price AM, Canosa M, Scibetta AG, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour Biology, Bart's Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of
London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.

INTRODUCTION: AP-2a is a transcription factor implicated in the regulation of
differentiation and proliferation in certain tissues, including the mammary
gland. In breast tumours, continued expression of AP-2a has been correlated with 
a better prognosis, but this is hard to reconcile with a reported role in the
upregulation of the ERBB2 oncogene. The existence of TFAP2A isoforms, deriving
from alternative first exons and differing in their N-terminal sequence, has been
described in some mammals, but their relative abundance and activity has not been
investigated in the human breast.
METHODS: Expression levels of four TFAP2A isoforms were assayed at the level of
RNA and protein (via the generation of isoform-specific antibodies) in a panel of
breast tumour cell lines and in tissue from normal breast and primary tumour
samples. Expression constructs for each isoform were used in reporter assays with
synthetic and natural promoters (cyclin D3 and ERBB2) to compare the activation
and repression activity of the isoforms.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that the two isoforms AP-2a 1b and AP-2a 1c, in addition 
to the originally cloned, AP-2a 1a, are conserved throughout evolution in
vertebrates. Moreover, we show that isoform 1c in particular is expressed at
levels at least on a par with the 1a isoform in breast epithelial lines and
tissues and may be more highly expressed in tamoxifen resistant tumours. The
isoforms share a similar transactivation mechanism involving the recruitment of
the adaptors CITED2 or 4 and the transactivators p300 or CBP. However, isoform 1b
and 1c are stronger transactivators of the ERBB2 promoter than isoform 1a. In
contrast, AP-2a 1a is the only isoform able to act as a repressor, an activity
that requires an intact sumoylation motif present within the N-terminus of the
protein, and which the other two isoforms lack.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that TFAP2A isoforms may be differentially
regulated during breast tumourigenesis and this, coupled with differences in
their transcriptional activity, may impact on tumour responses to tamoxifen
therapy. These data also have implications for the interpretation of tumour
studies that seek to correlate outcomes with TFAP2A expression level.

PMCID: PMC3219183
PMID: 21375726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 25;6(2):e17158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017158.

Endocytosis-independent function of clathrin heavy chain in the control of basal 
NF-<U+03BA>B activation.

Kim ML(1), Sorg I, Arrieumerlou C.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) is a transcription factor that regulates
the transcription of genes involved in a variety of biological processes,
including innate and adaptive immunity, stress responses and cell proliferation. 
Constitutive or excessive NF-<U+03BA>B activity has been associated with inflammatory
disorders and higher risk of cancer. In contrast to the mechanisms controlling
inducible activation, the regulation of basal NF-<U+03BA>B activation is not well
understood. Here we test whether clathrin heavy chain (CHC) contributes to the
regulation of basal NF-<U+03BA>B activity in epithelial cells.
METHODOLOGY: Using RNA interference to reduce endogenous CHC expression, we found
that CHC is required to prevent constitutive activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and gene
expression. Immunofluorescence staining showed constitutive nuclear localization 
of the NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65 in absence of stimulation after CHC knockdown. Elevated 
basal p65 nuclear localization is caused by constitutive phosphorylation and
degradation of inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B alpha (I<U+03BA>Ba) through an I<U+03BA>B kinase a
(IKKa)-dependent mechanism. The role of CHC in NF-<U+03BA>B signaling is functionally
relevant as constitutive expression of the proinflammatory chemokine
interleukin-8 (IL-8), whose expression is regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B, was found after CHC
knockdown. Disruption of clathrin-mediated endocytosis by chemical inhibition or 
depletion of the µ2-subunit of the endocytosis adaptor protein AP-2, and
knockdown of clathrin light chain a (CHLa), failed to induce constitutive NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and IL-8 expression, showing that CHC acts on NF-<U+03BA>B independently of
endocytosis and CLCa.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that CHC functions as a built-in molecular brake that
ensures a tight control of basal NF-<U+03BA>B activation and gene expression in
unstimulated cells. Furthermore, our data suggest a potential link between a
defect in CHC expression and chronic inflammation disorder and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3045402
PMID: 21364927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Atherosclerosis. 2011 May;216(1):90-6. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.01.043. Epub 2011 Feb 2.

Protein kinase D regulates the adiponectin gene expression through
phosphorylation of AP-2: a common pathway to the ABCA1 gene regulation.

Iwamoto N(1), Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kawasumi 1,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467 8601, Japan.

Expression of the activator protein (AP) 2ß is closely associated with type-2
diabetes and negatively regulates expression of the adiponectin gene. We
previously demonstrated that AP-2a negatively regulates the ATP-binding cassette 
A1 (ABCA1) gene through its Ser-phosphorylation by protein kinase (PK) D. The
phosphorylation site of AP-2a located in the basic domain, a critical site for
its DNA binding, is conserved among species and five subtypes of AP-2. We
therefore investigated the involvement of PKD in regulation of the adiponectin
gene expression. Knockdown of PKD by its siRNA led to the increase in the mRNA
and the promoter activity of adiponectin, and resulted in increase of adiponectin
secretion and decrease of fat accumulation in cultured cells. PKD activators
decreased expression of the adiponectin gene, and its inhibition by PKD siRNA and
by a selective inhibitor Gö6983 canceled this effect. ChIP analysis demonstrated 
that inhibition of PKD activity decreased the DNA binding of AP-2ß to the
adiponectin promoter. Finally, Gö6983 increased adiponectin expression in mice.
PKD is thus a common modulator of the DNA binding activity of AP-2a and AP-2ß
through their phosphorylation for negative regulation of the ABCA1 and
adiponectin genes expression, respectively.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21345437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Development. 2011 Mar;138(6):1099-109. doi: 10.1242/dev.055731.

The female-specific doublesex isoform regulates pleiotropic transcription factors
to pattern genital development in Drosophila.

Chatterjee SS(1), Uppendahl LD, Chowdhury MA, Ip PL, Siegal ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York
University, New York, NY 10003, USA.

Regulatory networks driving morphogenesis of animal genitalia must integrate
sexual identity and positional information. Although the genetic hierarchy that
controls somatic sexual identity in the fly Drosophila melanogaster is well
understood, there are very few cases in which the mechanism by which it controls 
tissue-specific gene activity is known. In flies, the sex-determination hierarchy
terminates in the doublesex (dsx) gene, which produces sex-specific transcription
factors via alternative splicing of its transcripts. To identify sex-specifically
expressed genes downstream of dsx that drive the sexually dimorphic development
of the genitalia, we performed genome-wide transcriptional profiling of dissected
genital imaginal discs of each sex at three time points during early
morphogenesis. Using a stringent statistical threshold, we identified 23 genes
that have sex-differential transcript levels at all three time points, of which
13 encode transcription factors, a significant enrichment. We focus here on three
sex-specifically expressed transcription factors encoded by lozenge (lz), Drop
(Dr) and AP-2. We show that, in female genital discs, Dsx activates lz and
represses Dr and AP-2. We further show that the regulation of Dr by Dsx mediates 
the previously identified expression of the fibroblast growth factor Branchless
in male genital discs. The phenotypes we observe upon loss of lz or Dr function
in genital discs explain the presence or absence of particular structures in dsx 
mutant flies and thereby clarify previously puzzling observations. Our time
course of expression data also lays the foundation for elucidating the regulatory
networks downstream of the sex-specifically deployed transcription factors.

PMID: 21343364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Planta. 2011 Jun;233(6):1265-76. doi: 10.1007/s00425-011-1382-3. Epub 2011 Feb
22.

Overexpression of HARDY, an AP2/ERF gene from Arabidopsis, improves drought and
salt tolerance by reducing transpiration and sodium uptake in transgenic
Trifolium alexandrinum L.

Abogadallah GM(1), Nada RM, Malinowski R, Quick P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, Mansoura University, Damietta
Branch, New Damietta 34517, Egypt. gabogadallah@mans.edu.eg

Trifolium alexandrinum L. was transformed with the Arabidopsis HARDY gene that
belongs to the stress-related AP2/ERF (APETALA2/ethylene responsive element
binding factors) superfamily of transcription factors. The fresh weights of the
transgenic lines L2 and L3 were improved by 42 and 55% under drought stress and
by 38 and 95% under salt stress compared to the wild type, respectively. The dry 
weights were similarly improved. Overexpression of HARDY improved the
instantaneous water use efficiency (WUE) under drought stress by reducing
transpiration (E) and under salt stress by improving photosynthesis (A), through 
reducing Na+ accumulation in leaves, and reducing E. However, HARDY improved the 
growth of drought-stressed transgenic plants as compared to the wild type by
delaying water depletion from soil and preventing rapid decline in A. L2 and L3
had thicker stems and in case of L3, more xylem rows per vascular bundle, which
may have made L3 more resistant to lodging in the field. Field performance of L2 
and L3 under combined drought and salt stress was significantly better than that 
of the wild type in terms of fresh and dry weights (40%, 46% and 31%, 40%,
respectively). The results provide further evidence for the efficiency of
overexpression of a single gene in improving tolerance to abiotic stress under
field conditions.

PMID: 21340699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Endocrinology. 2011 Apr;152(4):1458-69. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0936. Epub 2011 Feb 
8.

Transcription factor AP-2a promotes EGF-dependent invasion of human trophoblast.

Biadasiewicz K(1), Sonderegger S, Haslinger P, Haider S, Saleh L, Fiala C,
Pollheimer J, Knöfler M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine, Reproductive Biology
Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Waehringer Guertel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna,
Austria.

The basic helix-span-helix transcription factor activating protein (AP)-2a is
critically involved in cell-specific hormone expression of syncytializing human
trophoblasts. Its role in invasive trophoblast differentiation, however, remains 
largely elusive. Using RT-PCR, Western blotting, and immunofluorescence of
first-trimester placentae, we here show that AP-2a is expressed in extravillous
trophoblasts (EVTs) both in situ and in vitro as well as in invasive trophoblast 
cell lines. Its protein expression was increased upon supplementation of
epidermal growth factor (EGF) both in primary EVTs and trophoblastic SGHPL-5
cells. Gene silencing of AP-2a using small hairpin microRNA (shRNAmir) did not
affect basal invasion of SGHPL-5 cells through Matrigel-coated filters but
reduced EGF-stimulated invasion. Similarly, treatment of primary EVTs with AP-2a 
small interfering RNA decreased EGF-dependent invasion. Proliferation of SGHPL-5 
cells and primary EVTs, measured by cumulative cell numbers and
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine labeling, respectively, were not affected on loss of
AP-2a. EGF-dependent induction of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, pro- and
active form of urokinase plasminogen activator, and chorionic gonadotropin (CG)-ß
was noticed in shRNAmir-control cells, whereas these genes were suppressed in
EGF-treated shRNAmir-AP-2a cells. Similarly, EGF-stimulated MMP-2 and CGß protein
expression was reduced in AP-2a small interfering RNA-treated primary EVTs.
Knockdown of AP-2a also decreased luciferase activity of the CGß5 promoter in
SGHPL-5 cells, which was compensated upon transient overexpression of AP-2a cDNA.
In conclusion, we show that AP-2a expression positively affects human trophoblast
invasion under EGF-stimulated conditions, likely by inducing critical
invasion-promoting genes such MMP-2, urokinase plasminogen activator, and CG.

PMID: 21303946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Fitoterapia. 2011 Jun;82(4):595-600. doi: 10.1016/j.fitote.2011.01.010. Epub 2011
Jan 31.

Inhibitory effects of flavonoids from Abelmoschus manihot flowers on triglyceride
accumulation in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

An Y(1), Zhang Y, Li C, Qian Q, He W, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin University of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, 312 Anshanxi Road, Nankai District, Tianjin 300193, China.

The 95% EtOH extract from the flowers of Abelmoschus manihot (L.) Medic showed
inhibitory activity on TG accumulation in 3T3-L1 preadipocyte. Chemical studies
on the active fraction led to the isolation of 14 flavonoids (1-14). To clarify
the multi-mechanism of the isolates on preadipocyte differentiation, the levels
of TG and FFA and the related role transcription factors (PPAR<U+03B3>, CEBP/a, and ap2)
expression were evaluated. At the concentration of 30 µM, compounds 1-6 and 10-14
showed inhibitory activity on TG accumulation significantly in mature 3T3-L1
cells. 1, 2, 4-7, 9, 10, 13, and 14 reduced the level of FFA. At the molecular
level, the mRNA expressions of PPAR<U+03B3>, CEBP/a, and ap2 were down-regulated by
compounds 1, 5, 9, 12, 13; 1-8, 10-14; and 1-4, 6, 8-12, 14, respectively. The
structure-activity relationships of the 14 flavonoids were also discussed.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21281705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2010 Dec;119(12):806-14.

Clinical presentation and the presence of hearing impairment in
branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: a new mutation in the TFAP2A gene.

Thomeer HG(1), Crins TT, Kamsteeg EJ, Buijsman W, Cruysberg JR, Knoers NV,
Cremers CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Center for Clinical Neuroscience, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

We report on the clinical presentation of branchio-oculo-facial (BOF) syndrome in
2 patients with mutations in the TFAP2A gene (OMIM 107580). This TFAP2A gene was 
recently shown to be involved in the causation of BOF syndrome. An overview of
the literature on BOF syndrome is given based on clinical reports written in the 
period during which mutation analysis was not yet available for BOF syndrome. We 
also give descriptions of the mutations in the TFAP2A gene in our 2 new patients 
with BOF syndrome. Congenital conductive hearing impairments are described,
including hearing rehabilitation and the results of ear surgery.

PMID: 21250552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Dec;48(12):900-4.

[Mutation of TFAP-2B gene in patients with patent ductus arteriosus].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YW(1), Zhao W, Li F, Ji W, Fu QH, Zhang ZF, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200127, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel genetic mutations in Chinese patients with
congenital patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
METHOD: Clinical data and peripheral blood specimens from a kindred spanning 3
generations in which 5 of 16 individuals had PDA and a cohort of 95 unrelated
subjects with PDA were collected, and 100 unrelated healthy individuals were
included as controls. The coding exons and flanking introns of TFAP-2B gene were 
amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with specific primers. We aligned
the acquired sequences with which publicized in GenBank by the aid of program
BLAST. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to
amplify the parts of TFAP-2B and sequencing was performed on PCR products forward
and reversely directly.
RESULT: Sequencing of TFAP-2B identified that there was a splice-junction in
intron 3 [intron 3(+5)G > A] and a 60 bp deletion was found in exon 3 by nested
PCR. Additionally, a novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) where a
transition of guanine (G) to adenine (A) was identified at 34 bp front of
transcription initiation site in TFAP-2B gene. There were significant differences
in the prevalence of alleles G and A between controls and PDA patients (Z =
-2.513, P = 0.012).
CONCLUSION: We identified a novel splice-junction in TFAP-2B gene which might
lead to hereditary PDA in a Chinese family. However, the mechanism by which this 
mutation results in PDA is still to be ascertained.

PMID: 21215182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):22-32. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33783.

Genotype-phenotype analysis of the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

Milunsky JM(1), Maher TM, Zhao G, Wang Z, Mulliken JB, Chitayat D, Clemens M,
Stalker HJ, Bauer M, Burch M, Chénier S, Cunningham ML, Drack AV, Janssens S,
Karlea A, Klatt R, Kini U, Klein O, Lachmeijer AM, Megarbane A, Mendelsohn NJ,
Meschino WS, Mortier GR, Parkash S, Ray CR, Roberts A, Roberts A, Reardon W,
Schnur RE, Smith R, Splitt M, Tezcan K, Whiteford ML, Wong DA, Zori R, Lin AE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine, Massachusetts
02118, USA. jmilunsk@bu.edu

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS; OMIM#113620) is a rare autosomal dominant
craniofacial disorder with variable expression. Major features include cutaneous 
and ocular abnormalities, characteristic facies, renal, ectodermal, and temporal 
bone anomalies. Having determined that mutations involving TFAP2A result in BOFS,
we studied a total of 30 families (41 affected individuals); 26/30 (87%)
fulfilled our cardinal diagnostic criteria. The original family with the 3.2<U+2009>Mb
deletion including the TFAP2A gene remains the only BOFS family without the
typical CL/P and the only family with a deletion. We have identified a hotspot
region in the highly conserved exons 4 and 5 of TFAP2A that harbors missense
mutations in 27/30 (90%) families. Several of these mutations are recurrent.
Mosaicism was detected in one family. To date, genetic heterogeneity has not been
observed. Although the cardinal criteria for BOFS have been based on the presence
of each of the core defects, an affected family member or thymic remnant, we
documented TFAP2A mutations in three (10%) probands in our series without a
classic cervical cutaneous defect or ectopic thymus. Temporal bone anomalies were
identified in 3/5 patients investigated. The occurrence of CL/P, premature
graying, coloboma, heterochromia irides, and ectopic thymus, are evidence for
BOFS as a neurocristopathy. Intrafamilial clinical variability can be marked.
Although there does not appear to be mutation-specific genotype-phenotype
correlations at this time, more patients need to be studied. Clinical testing for
TFAP2A mutations is now available and will assist geneticists in confirming the
typical cases or excluding the diagnosis in atypical cases.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21204207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Brain Res. 2011 Mar 10;1378:119-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.072. Epub
2010 Dec 31.

Association study of calcitonin gene-related polypeptide-alpha (CALCA) gene
polymorphism with migraine.

Menon S(1), Buteri J, Roy B, Murrell M, Quinlan S, Macmillan JC, Lea RA, Haupt
LM, Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre and Griffith Health Institute, Griffith University
Gold Coast, Parklands Drive, Southport, Queensland, Australia.

Migraine is a neurological disorder that is associated with increased levels of
calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) in plasma. CGRP, being one of the
mediators of neurogenic inflammation and a phenomenon implicated in the
pathogenesis of migraine headache, is thus suggested to have an important role in
migraine pathophysiology. Polymorphisms of the CALCA gene have been linked to
Parkinson's disease, ovarian cancer and essential hypertension, suggesting a
functional role for these polymorphisms. Given the strong evidence linking CGRP
and migraine, it is hypothesised that polymorphisms in the CALCA gene may play a 
role in migraine pathogenesis. Seemingly non functional intronic polymorphisms
are capable of disrupting normal RNA processing or introducing a splice site in
the transcript. A 16bp deletion in the first intron of the CALCA gene has been
reported to be a good match for the binding site for a transcription factor
expressed strongly in neural crest derived cells, AP-2. This deletion also
eliminates an intron splicing enhancer (ISE) that may potentially cause exon
skipping. This study investigated the role of the 16bp intronic deletion in the
CALCA gene in migraineurs and matched control individuals. Six hundred
individuals were genotyped for the deletion by polymerase chain reaction followed
by fragment analysis on the 3130 Genetic Analyser. The results of this study
showed no significant association between the intronic 16bp deletion in the CALCA
gene and migraine in the tested Australian Caucasian population. However, given
the evidence linking CGRP and migraine, further investigation of variants with
this gene may be warranted.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2011 Apr 10;336(1-2):80-4. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.12.017.
Epub 2010 Dec 30.

Regulation of steroid production: analysis of Cyp11a1 promoter.

Shih MC(1), Chiu YN, Hu MC, Guo IC, Chung BC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan.

CYP11A1 is a key enzyme in steroid synthesis abundantly expressed in the adrenal,
testis, ovary, and placenta. This article reviews recent studies on
cis-regulatory elements and trans-regulators of the CYP11A1 promoter, with
special focus on their tissue-specific regulation. Trans-regulators include
tissue-specific factors such as SF-1, DAX-1, TReP-132, LBP, and GATA that
regulate tissue-specific expression of CYP11A1. These tissue-specific factors
interact with factors commonly present in most cells like AP-1, Sp1, and AP-2 to 
bring CYP11A1 transcription to full potential. These transcription factors
stimulate CYP11A1 transcriptional activity through interaction with their
specific cis-elements or through protein-protein interaction. The cis-element on 
the Cyp11a1 promoter was further characterized in vitro and in vivo. Mutation of 
the proximal SF-1-binding site results in down regulation of CYP11A1 in the
adrenal and testis but not in the ovary and placenta, leading to attenuated
corticosterone circadian rhythms and blunted stress response.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Nutr. 2011 Feb;141(2):189-94. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.126680. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Dietary manganese modulates expression of the manganese-containing superoxide
dismutase gene in chickens.

Li S(1), Lu L, Hao S, Wang Y, Zhang L, Liu S, Liu B, Li K, Luo X.

Author information: 
(1)Mineral Nutrition Research Division, State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition,
Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing, P
R China.

To investigate the possible mechanism(s) by which dietary manganese (Mn) levels
and sources modulate the expression of the manganese-containing superoxide
dismutase (MnSOD) gene at both the transcriptional and translational levels, we
used 432 8-d-old male broiler chicks in a 1 plus 4 × 2 design. Chickens were
given either a diet without Mn supplementation [control (C)] or diets
supplemented with 100 (optimal) or 200 (high) mg Mn/kg diet from inorganic Mn
sulfate (I) or 3 organic complexes of Mn and amino acids with weak (W), moderate 
(M), or strong (S) chelation strength up to 21 d of age. Compared with C chicks, 
chicks fed Mn-supplemented diets had higher (P < 0.01) Mn concentrations,
specificity protein 1 (Sp1) DNA-binding activities, MnSOD mRNA levels, MnSOD
mRNA-binding protein (MnSOD-BP) RNA-binding activities, MnSOD protein
concentrations, and MnSOD activities within heart tissue, but lower (P < 0.01)
heart activating protein-2 (AP-2) DNA-binding activities. Chicks fed M diets had 
higher (P < 0.05) heart Mn concentrations, MnSOD mRNA levels, and MnSOD-BP
RNA-binding activities compared with those fed the I and W diets and lower (P <
0.01) AP-2 DNA-binding activities than those fed other treatment diets. These
results suggest that dietary Mn could modulate the expression of the MnSOD gene
in broilers by altering Sp1 and AP-2 DNA-binding activities at the
transcriptional level and enhancing MnSOD-BP RNA-binding activity at the
translational level. Additionally, an organic Mn source with moderate chelation
strength could be more effective than other Mn sources in activating MnSOD gene
expression at both the transcriptional and translational levels.

PMID: 21169227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 4;108(1):155-60. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1010740107.
Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Reiterative AP2a activity controls sequential steps in the neural crest gene
regulatory network.

de Crozé N(1), Maczkowiak F, Monsoro-Burq AH.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
U1021, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche
3347, F-91405 Orsay, France.

The neural crest (NC) emerges from combinatorial inductive events occurring
within its progenitor domain, the neural border (NB). Several transcription
factors act early at the NB, but the initiating molecular events remain elusive. 
Recent data from basal vertebrates suggest that ap2 might have been critical for 
NC emergence; however, the role of AP2 factors at the NB remains unclear. We show
here that AP2a initiates NB patterning and is sufficient to elicit a NB-like
pattern in neuralized ectoderm. In contrast, the other early regulators do not
participate in ap2a initiation at the NB, but cooperate to further establish a
robust NB pattern. The NC regulatory network uses a multistep cascade of secreted
inducers and transcription factors, first at the NB and then within the NC
progenitors. Here we report that AP2a acts at two distinct steps of this cascade.
As the earliest known NB specifier, AP2a mediates Wnt signals to initiate the NB 
and activate pax3; as a NC specifier, AP2a regulates further NC development
independent of and downstream of NB patterning. Our findings reconcile
conflicting observations from various vertebrate organisms. AP2a provides a
paradigm for the reiterated use of multifunctional molecules, thereby
facilitating emergence of the NC in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3017139
PMID: 21169220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Semin Cancer Biol. 2011 Apr;21(2):83-8. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2010.12.007.
Epub 2010 Dec 13.

Transcriptional control of melanoma metastasis: the importance of the tumor
microenvironment.

Braeuer RR(1), Zigler M, Villares GJ, Dobroff AS, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The molecular changes associated with the transition of melanoma cells from
radial growth phase (RGP) to vertical growth phase (VGP) and the metastatic
phenotype are not very well defined. However, some of the genes involved in this 
process and their transcriptional regulation are beginning to be elucidated. For 
example, the switch from RGP to VGP and the metastatic phenotype is associated
with loss of the AP-2a transcription factor. AP-2a regulates the expression of
c-KIT, MMP-2, VEGF, and the adhesion molecule MCAM/MUC18. Recently, we reported
that AP-2a also regulates two G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) PAR-1 and PAFR.
In turn, the thrombin receptor, PAR-1, regulates the expression of the gap
junction protein Connexin-43 and the tumor suppressor gene Maspin. Activation of 
PAR-1 also leads to overexpression and secretion of proangiogenic factors such as
IL-8, uPA, VEGF, PDGF, as well certain integrins. PAR-1 also cooperates with PAFR
to regulate the expression of the MCAM/MUC18 via phosphorylation of CREB. The
ligands for these GPCRs, thrombin and PAF, are secreted by stromal cells,
emphasizing the importance of the tumor microenvironment in melanoma metastasis. 
The metastatic phenotype of melanoma is also associated with overexpression and
function of CREB/ATF-1. Loss of AP-2a and overexpression of CREB/ATF-1 results in
the overexpression of MCAM/MUC18 which by itself contributes to melanoma
metastasis by regulating the inhibitor of DNA binding-1 (Id-1). CREB/ATF-1 also
regulates the angiogenic factor CYR-61. Our recent data indicate that CREB/ATF-1 
regulates the expression of AP-2a, thus, supporting the notion that CREB is an
important "master switch" in melanoma progression.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3049824
PMID: 21147226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2011 Feb;19(2):206-12. doi: 10.1016/j.joca.2010.11.011.
Epub 2010 Dec 4.

The transcription factor AP-2<U+025B> regulates CXCL1 during cartilage development and
in osteoarthritis.

Wenke AK(1), Niebler S, Grässel S, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Regensburg, Regensburg 93053, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, the transcription factor AP-2<U+025B> was shown to be a regulator
of hypertrophy in cartilage and to be differentially expressed in osteoarthritis 
(OA). However, the only known target gene of AP-2<U+025B> up to date is integrin
alpha10. To better characterize the function of AP-2<U+025B> in cartilage we screened
for additional target genes.
DESIGN: Promoter analysis, ChIP-assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
were used to characterize the regulation of a new AP-2<U+025B> target gene in detail.
RESULTS: In this study, we determined the chemokine CXCL1, already known to be
important in osteoarthritis (OA), as a new target gene of AP-2<U+025B>. We could confirm
that CXCL1 is expressed in chondrocytes and significantly over-expressed in
OA-chondrocytes. Transient transfection of chondrocytes with an AP-2<U+025B> expression 
construct led to a significant increase of the CXCL1 mRNA level in these cells.
We identified three potential AP-2 binding sites within the CXCL1 promoter and
performed luciferase assays, indicating that an AP-2 binding motif (AP-2.2)
ranging from position -135 to -144 bp relative to the translation start is
responsive to AP-2<U+025B>. This result was further addressed by site-directed
mutagenesis demonstrating that activation of the CXCL1 promoter by AP-2<U+025B> is
exclusively dependent on AP-2.2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and
electromobility shift assays confirmed the direct binding of AP-2<U+025B> to the CXCL1
promoter in OA-chondrocytes at this site.
CONCLUSION: These findings revealed CXCL1 as a novel target gene of AP-2<U+025B> in
chondrocytes and support the important role of AP-2<U+025B> in cartilage.

Copyright © 2010 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21134476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2011 Mar;176(1):1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2010.11.014. Epub 2010 Nov 30.

The Apicomplexan AP2 family: integral factors regulating Plasmodium development.

Painter HJ(1), Campbell TL, Llinás M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology & Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative
Genomics, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544,, USA.

Malaria is caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium and involves
infection of multiple hosts and cell types during the course of an infection. To 
complete its complex life cycle the parasite requires strict control of gene
regulation for survival and successful propagation. Thus far, the Apicomplexan
AP2 (ApiAP2) family of DNA-binding proteins is the sole family of proteins to
have surfaced as candidate transcription factors in all apicomplexan species.
Work from several laboratories is beginning to shed light on how the ApiAP2
proteins from Plasmodium spp. contribute to the regulation of gene expression at 
various stages of parasite development. Here we highlight recent progress toward 
understanding the role of Plasmodium ApiAP2 proteins in DNA related regulatory
processes including transcriptional regulation and gene silencing.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3026892
PMID: 21126543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Aug;38(6):3921-8. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0508-1. Epub 2010
Nov 30.

Isolation and characterization of an AP2/ERF-RAV transcription factor
BnaRAV-1-HY15 in Brassica napus L. HuYou15.

Zhuang J(1), Sun CC, Zhou XR, Xiong AS, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Crop Breeding and Cultivation Research Institute, Shanghai Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, 201106, China.

Transcriptional regulation is thought to be important for stress tolerance and
response of transcription factors. RAV subfamily transcription factor contains an
AP2- and B3-DNA binding domain, which belongs to the AP2/ERF family. It encodes
transcriptional regulators with a variety of functions involved in the
developmental and physiological processes in plants. Here, a RAV-like gene,
BnaRAV-1-HY15, was isolated from Brassica napus L. cv HuYou15. Sequence homology 
analysis revealed that the BnaRAV-1-HY15 factor belongs to the RAV subfamily of
the AP2/ERF family, and it shares high identity with the AtRAV2 of Arabidopsis.
Sequence and three-dimensional structural analyses revealed that BnaRAV-1-HY15
contains two distinct DNA-binding domains, one AP2 domain together with one B3
domain. The AP2 domain composed of 54 amino acids and present in N-terminal
region. In addition to AP2 domain, 117 amino acids show significant sequence
similarity to the B3 domain present in C-terminal region. Semi-quantitative
RT-PCR analysis indicated that the BnaRAV-1-HY15 gene is induced by cold, NaCl
and PEG treatments. Under ABA stress, the expression of BnaRAV-1-HY15 gene was
not detected. The gene expression was also not traceable from the tissues of pod,
bud, petal, leaf, stem and root of normally grown B. napus L. HuYou15 plant at
the period of flowering and seed development.

PMID: 21116861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 15;9(22):4525-32.

Dual association by TFAP2A during activation of the p21cip/CDKN1A promoter.

Scibetta AG(1), Wong PP, Chan KV, Canosa M, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Tumour iology, Institute of Cancer, London, UK.

The cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21cip/CDKN1A is induced to promote growth 
arrest in response to a variety of stimuli in normal cells and loss of correct
regulation of this gene is frequently observed in cancer. In particular, the
upregulation of CDKN1A by p53 is considered to be a central mechanism of tumour
suppression. Other transcription factors with tumour suppressor activity can also
regulate CDKN1A, including the developmentally regulated factor, TFAP2A. Here we 
identify a novel AP-2 binding site within the proximal promoter of the CDKN1A
gene and show this is required for optimal, p53-independent expression of
p21cip/CDKN1A. We further describe a non-tumourgenic breast epithelial cell line 
model to study the role of endogenous TFAP2A and p53 in the control of
drug-induced p21cip expression using ChIP. Maximal expression of CDKN1A requires 
TFAP2A which binds to two regions of the promoter: the proximal region where the 
AP-2 site lies and upstream near the major p53 binding site. The pattern of
binding alters with time post-induction, with the proximal, p53-independent site 
becoming more important at later stages of p21cip induction. This pattern of
promoter interaction by TFAP2A is distinct from that seen for the TFAP2C family
member which represses CDKN1A expression.

PMCID: PMC3048049
PMID: 21084835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Sep;129(2):421-32. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1248-6. 
Epub 2010 Nov 11.

Aberrant expression of DNA damage response proteins is associated with breast
cancer subtype and clinical features.

Guler G(1), Himmetoglu C, Jimenez RE, Geyer SM, Wang WP, Costinean S, Pilarski
RT, Morrison C, Suren D, Liu J, Chen J, Kamal J, Shapiro CL, Huebner K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.

Landmark studies of the status of DNA damage checkpoints and associated repair
functions in preneoplastic and neoplastic cells has focused attention on
importance of these pathways in cancer development, and inhibitors of repair
pathways are in clinical trials for treatment of triple negative breast cancer.
Cancer heterogeneity suggests that specific cancer subtypes will have distinct
mechanisms of DNA damage survival, dependent on biological context. In this
study, status of DNA damage response (DDR)-associated proteins was examined in
breast cancer subtypes in association with clinical features; 479 breast cancers 
were examined for expression of DDR proteins <U+03B3>H2AX, BRCA1, pChk2, and p53, DNA
damage-sensitive tumor suppressors Fhit and Wwox, and Wwox-interacting proteins
Ap2a, Ap2<U+03B3>, ErbB4, and correlations among proteins, tumor subtypes, and clinical 
features were assessed. In a multivariable model, triple negative cancers showed 
significantly reduced Fhit and Wwox, increased p53 and Ap2<U+03B3> protein expression,
and were significantly more likely than other subtype tumors to exhibit aberrant 
expression of two or more DDR-associated proteins. Disease-free survival was
associated with subtype, Fhit and membrane ErbB4 expression level and aberrant
expression of multiple DDR-associated proteins. These results suggest that
definition of specific DNA repair and checkpoint defects in subgroups of triple
negative cancer might identify new treatment targets. Expression of Wwox and its 
interactor, ErbB4, was highly significantly reduced in metastatic tissues vs.
matched primary tissues, suggesting that Wwox signal pathway loss contributes to 
lymph node metastasis, perhaps by allowing survival of tumor cells that have
detached from basement membranes, as proposed for the role of Wwox in ovarian
cancer spread.

PMCID: PMC3677189
PMID: 21069451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Development. 2010 Dec;137(23):4073-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.053405.

Prohibitin1 acts as a neural crest specifier in Xenopus development by repressing
the transcription factor E2F1.

Schneider M(1), Schambony A, Wedlich D.

Author information: 
(1)KIT, Campus South, Zoologicak Institute, Cell and Developmental Biology,
Kaiserstrasse 12, Karlsruhe, Germany.

Prohibitin 1 (phb1), which was initially described as an inhibitor of cell
proliferation, is a highly conserved protein found in multiple cellular
compartments. In the nucleus it interacts with the transcriptional regulators Rb 
and E2F1 and controls cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here we unravel an
unexpected novel function for phb1 in Xenopus cranial neural crest (CNC)
development. Xphb1 is maternally expressed; zygotically expressed neurula stage
transcripts accumulate in the CNC and the neural tube. Knockdown of Xphb1 by
antisense morpholino injection results in the loss of foxD3, snail2 and twist
expression, whereas expression of c-myc, AP-2 and snail1 remains unaffected.
Xphb2, its closest relative, cannot substitute for Xphb1, underlining the
specificity of Xphb1 function. Epistatic analyses place Xphb1 downstream of c-myc
and upstream of foxD3, snail2 and twist. To elucidate which subdomain in Xphb1 is
required for neural crest gene regulation we generated deletion mutants and
tested their rescue ability in Xphb1 morphants. The E2F1-binding domain was found
to be necessary for Xphb1 function in neural crest development. Gain- and
loss-of-function experiments reveal that Xphb1 represses E2F1 activity;
suppression of E2F1 through Xphb1 is required for twist, snail2 and foxD3
expression in the CNC. With the Xphb1 dependency of a subset of CNC specifiers
downstream of c-myc, we have identified a new branching point in the neural crest
gene regulatory network.

PMID: 21062864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Neurochem. 2010 Dec;115(5):1195-205. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.07005.x.
Epub 2010 Oct 12.

PACAP-regulated phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene expression.

Tai TC(1), Wong-Faull DC, Claycomb R, Aborn JL, Wong DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School and Laboratory of Molecular
and Developmental Neurobiology, McLean Hospital, Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.

Pituitary adenylate cyclase activating polypeptide (PACAP) induces the proximal
-893 bp of rat phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) gene promoter in
PC12 cells via PACAP type I receptors. Deletion mutation analysis suggested that 
the initial -392 bp of promoter, containing early growth response protein
(Egr-1), specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and activator protein 2 (AP-2) binding sites
(-165, -168 and -103 bp, respectively), was sufficient for PACAP activation.
Egr-1 and AP-2 involvement was supported by PACAP induction of their mRNA and
protein. Mutation of the Egr-1, Sp1 and AP-2 elements showed that the Egr-1 site 
was essential for PACAP stimulation. Mutation of the -103 bp AP-2 site partially 
reduced PACAP activation of the promoter. Mutation of two upstream AP-2 sites at 
-573 and -650 bp, separately or in tandem, also prevented promoter induction by
PACAP. siRNA knock-down of Egr-1 and AP-2 suppressed promoter activation for the 
-893 bp construct. Egr-1 siRNA knock-down also eliminated the residual activation
observed for the -103 bp AP-2 mutant construct, suggesting that Egr-1 and AP-2
through respective -165 and -650/-573/-103 bp sites cooperatively stimulate the
promoter. PACAP responses appear orchestrated through cAMP-protein kinase A and
phospholipase C signaling as MDL12,330A, H89 and U73122, respectively, inhibited 
promoter induction by PACAP and reduced PACAP-stimulation of Egr-1, AP-2 and PNMT
mRNA and protein and Egr-1 and AP-2 protein/DNA complex formation. Findings are
the first to show that PACAP stimulates PNMT promoter-driven gene expression via 
PACAP type I receptors and cAMP-protein kinase A and phospholipase C signaling,
recruiting Egr-1 and AP-2 as cooperative regulators, and the first to associate
the transcription factor AP-2 to PACAP-mediated gene induction.

©2010 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2010 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21039521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2010 Nov;47(6):574-7. doi: 10.1597/09-153.

Ethnic heterogeneity of IRF6 AP-2a binding site promoter SNP association with
nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate.

Blanton SH(1), Burt A, Garcia E, Mulliken JB, Stal S, Hecht JT.

Author information: 
(1)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to confirm the reported association between
a noncoding SNP (rs642961) in IRF6 and nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Two SNPs in IRF6 (rs2235371 and rs64296) were 
genotyped in Hispanic and non-Hispanic white multiplex (122) and simplex (308)
nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate families. Linkage and family-based association 
analyses were performed on the individual SNPs as well as the 2-SNP haplotype.
RESULTS: Only modest evidence was found for an association with rs642961 and the 
2-SNP haplotype. In contrast, strong evidence was found for the association with 
rs2235371; this was most evident in the non-Hispanic white simplex families.
CONCLUSIONS: Although it is confirmed that variation in IRF6 is associated with
nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate, the results do not support the reported
association with SNP rs64296. Importantly, the association varies between ethnic 
groups. This finding underscores the need for evaluating additional variations in
IRF6 across multiple populations to better determine its role in nonsyndromic
cleft lip and palate.

PMCID: PMC3039881
PMID: 21039277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 Dec;21(23):4275-86. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-04-0332. Epub 2010
Oct 13.

Cell death or survival promoted by alternative isoforms of ErbB4.

Sundvall M(1), Veikkolainen V, Kurppa K, Salah Z, Tvorogov D, van Zoelen EJ,
Aqeilan R, Elenius K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, and Medicity Research
Laboratory, University of Turku, Turku, Finland; Department of Oncology, Turku
University Hospital, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland.

The significance of ErbB4 in tumor biology is poorly understood. The ERBB4 gene
is alternatively spliced producing juxtamembrane (JM-a and JM-b) and cytoplasmic 
(CYT-1 and CYT-2) isoforms. Here, signaling via the two alternative ErbB4 JM
isoforms (JM-a CYT-2 and JM-b CYT-2) was compared. Fibroblasts expressing ErbB4
JM-a demonstrated enhanced ErbB4 autophosphorylation, growth, and survival. In
contrast, cells overexpressing ErbB4 JM-b underwent starvation-induced death.
Both pro- and antisurvival responses to the two ErbB4 isoforms were sensitive to 
an ErbB kinase inhibitor. Platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (PDGFRA) 
was identified as an ErbB4 target gene that was differentially regulated by the
two ErbB4 isoforms. The soluble intracellular domain of ErbB4, released from the 
JM-a but not from the JM-b isoform, associated with the transcription factor AP-2
and promoted its potential to enhance PDGFRA transcription. Survival of cells
expressing JM-a was suppressed by targeting either PDGFR-a or AP-2, whereas cells
expressing JM-b were rescued from cell death by the PDGFR-a agonist, PDGF-BB.
These findings indicate that two alternative ErbB4 isoforms may promote
antagonistic cellular responses and suggest that pharmacological inhibition of
ErbB4 kinase activity may lead to either suppression or promotion of cellular
growth.

PMCID: PMC2993754
PMID: 20943952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Dec;24(12):2392-405. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0226. Epub 2010
Oct 13.

Research resource: Genome-wide mapping of in vivo androgen receptor binding sites
in mouse epididymis.

Hu S(1), Yao G, Guan X, Ni Z, Ma W, Wilson EM, French FS, Liu Q, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory for Molecular Andrology, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, The Graduate
School, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Epididymal function depends on androgen signaling through the androgen receptor
(AR), although most of the direct AR target genes in epididymis remain unknown.
Here we globally mapped the AR binding regions in mouse caput epididymis in which
AR is highly expressed. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing indicated that
AR bound selectively to 19,377 DNA regions, the majority of which were intergenic
and intronic. Motif analysis showed that 94% of the AR binding regions harbored
consensus androgen response elements enriched with multiple binding motifs that
included nuclear factor 1 and activator protein 2 sites consistent with
combinatorial regulation. Unexpectedly, AR binding regions showed limited
conservation across species, regardless of whether the metric for conservation
was based on local sequence similarity or the presence of consensus androgen
response elements. Further analysis suggested the AR target genes are involved in
diverse biological themes that include lipid metabolism and sperm maturation.
Potential novel mechanisms of AR regulation were revealed at individual genes
such as cysteine-rich secretory protein 1. The composite studies provide new
insights into AR regulation under physiological conditions and a global resource 
of AR binding sites in a normal androgen-responsive tissue.

PMCID: PMC2999474
PMID: 20943813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Oct 8;11:141. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-141.

Genes encoding critical transcriptional activators for murine neural tube
development and human spina bifida: a case-control study.

Lu W(1), Guzman AR, Yang W, Chapa CJ, Shaw GM, Greene RM, Pisano MM, Lammer EJ,
Finnell RH, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Dell Pediatric Research Institute, UT Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Spina bifida is a malformation of the neural tube and is the most
common of neural tube defects (NTDs). The etiology of spina bifida is largely
unknown, although it is thought to be multi-factorial, involving multiple
interacting genes and environmental factors. Mutations in transcriptional
co-activator genes-Cited2, p300, Cbp, Tfap2a, Carm1 and Cart1 result in NTDs in
murine models, thus prompt us to investigate whether homologues of these genes
are associated with NTDs in humans.
METHODS: Data and biological samples from 297 spina bifida cases and 300 controls
were derived from a population-based case-control study conducted in California. 
37 SNPs within CITED2, EP300, CREBBP, TFAP2A, CARM1 and ALX1 were genotyped using
an ABI SNPlex assay. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were calculated for
alleles, genotypes and haplotypes to evaluate the risk for spina bifida.
RESULTS: Several SNPs showed increased or decreased risk, including CITED2
rs1131431 (OR = 5.32, 1.04~27.30), EP300 rs4820428 (OR = 1.30, 1.01~1.67), EP300 
rs4820429 (OR = 0.50, 0.26~0.50, in whites, OR = 0.7, 0.49~0.99 in all subjects),
EP300 rs17002284 (OR = 0.43, 0.22~0.84), TFAP2A rs3798691 (OR = 1.78, 1.13~2.87
in Hispanics), CREBBP rs129986 (OR = 0.27, 0.11~0.69), CARM1 rs17616105 (OR =
0.41, 0.22~0.72 in whites). In addition, one haplotype block in EP300 and one in 
TFAP2A appeared to be associated with increased risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Modest associations were observed in CITED2, EP300, CREBBP, TFAP2A
and CARM1 but not ALX1. However, these modest associations were not statistically
significant after correction for multiple comparisons. Searching for potential
functional variants and rare causal mutations is warranted in these genes.

PMCID: PMC2964532
PMID: 20932315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 23;6(9):e1001133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001133.

Identification of early requirements for preplacodal ectoderm and sensory organ
development.

Kwon HJ(1), Bhat N, Sweet EM, Cornell RA, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America.

Preplacodal ectoderm arises near the end of gastrulation as a narrow band of
cells surrounding the anterior neural plate. This domain later resolves into
discrete cranial placodes that, together with neural crest, produce paired
sensory structures of the head. Unlike the better-characterized neural crest,
little is known about early regulation of preplacodal development. Classical
models of ectodermal patterning posit that preplacodal identity is specified by
readout of a discrete level of Bmp signaling along a DV gradient. More recent
studies indicate that Bmp-antagonists are critical for promoting preplacodal
development. However, it is unclear whether Bmp-antagonists establish the proper 
level of Bmp signaling within a morphogen gradient or, alternatively, block Bmp
altogether. To begin addressing these issues, we treated zebrafish embryos with a
pharmacological inhibitor of Bmp, sometimes combined with heat shock-induction of
Chordin and dominant-negative Bmp receptor, to fully block Bmp signaling at
various developmental stages. We find that preplacodal development occurs in two 
phases with opposing Bmp requirements. Initially, Bmp is required before
gastrulation to co-induce four transcription factors, Tfap2a, Tfap2c, Foxi1, and 
Gata3, which establish preplacodal competence throughout the nonneural ectoderm. 
Subsequently, Bmp must be fully blocked in late gastrulation by dorsally
expressed Bmp-antagonists, together with dorsally expressed Fgf and Pdgf, to
specify preplacodal identity within competent cells abutting the neural plate.
Localized ventral misexpression of Fgf8 and Chordin can activate ectopic
preplacodal development anywhere within the zone of competence, whereas dorsal
misexpression of one or more competence factors can activate ectopic preplacodal 
development in the neural plate. Conversely, morpholino-knockdown of competence
factors specifically ablates preplacodal development. Our work supports a
relatively simple two-step model that traces regulation of preplacodal
development to late blastula stage, resolves two distinct phases of Bmp
dependence, and identifies the main factors required for preplacodal competence
and specification.

PMCID: PMC2944784
PMID: 20885782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Jan;46(1):245-51. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.09.007. Epub
2010 Sep 27.

Transcription factor AP-2ß regulates the neurotransmitter phenotype and
maturation of chromaffin cells.

Hong SJ(1), Huh YH, Leung A, Choi HJ, Ding Y, Kang UJ, Yoo SH, Buettner R, Kim
KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA. seok-hong@northwestern.edu

During development, sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells originate from
bipotential sympathoadrenal (SA) progenitors arising from neural crests (NC) in
the trunk regions. Recently, we showed that AP-2ß, a member of the AP2 family,
plays a critical role in the development of sympathetic neurons and locus
coeruleus and their norepinephrine (NE) neurotransmitter phenotype. In the
present study, we investigated the potential role of AP-2ß in the development of 
NC-derived neuroendocrine chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla and the
epinephrine (EPI) phenotype determination. In support of its role in chromaffin
cell development, AP-2ß is prominently expressed in both embryonic and adult
adrenal medulla. In adrenal chromaffin cells of the AP-2ß(-/-) mouse, the
expression levels of catecholamine biosynthesizing enzymes, dopamine
ß-hydroxylase (DBH) and phenylethanolamine-N-methyl-transferase (PNMT), as well
as the SA-specific transcription factor, Phox2b, are significantly reduced
compared to wild type. In addition, ultrastructural analysis demonstrated that
the formation of large secretory vesicles, a hallmark of differentiated
chromaffin cells, is defective in AP-2ß(-/-) mice. Furthermore, the level of EPI 
content is largely diminished (>80%) in the adrenal gland of AP-2ß(-/-) mice.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays of rat adrenal gland showed that
AP-2ß binds to the upstream promoter of the PNMT gene in vivo; strongly
suggesting that it is a direct target gene. Overall, our data suggest that AP-2ß 
plays critical roles in the epinephrine phenotype and maturation of adrenal
chromaffin cells.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3139976
PMID: 20875861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 16;6(9):e1001122. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001122.

Differentiation of zebrafish melanophores depends on transcription factors AP2
alpha and AP2 epsilon.

Van Otterloo E(1), Li W, Bonde G, Day KM, Hsu MY, Cornell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa,
USA.

A model of the gene-regulatory-network (GRN), governing growth, survival, and
differentiation of melanocytes, has emerged from studies of mouse coat color
mutants and melanoma cell lines. In this model, Transcription Factor Activator
Protein 2 alpha (TFAP2A) contributes to melanocyte development by activating
expression of the gene encoding the receptor tyrosine kinase Kit. Next,
ligand-bound Kit stimulates a pathway activating transcription factor
Microphthalmia (Mitf), which promotes differentiation and survival of melanocytes
by activating expression of Tyrosinase family members, Bcl2, and other genes. The
model predicts that in both Tfap2a and Kit null mutants there will be a phenotype
of reduced melanocytes and that, because Tfap2a acts upstream of Kit, this
phenotype will be more severe, or at least as severe as, in Tfap2a null mutants
in comparison to Kit null mutants. Unexpectedly, this is not the case in
zebrafish or mouse. Because many Tfap2 family members have identical DNA-binding 
specificity, we reasoned that another Tfap2 family member may work redundantly
with Tfap2a in promoting Kit expression. We report that tfap2e is expressed in
melanoblasts and melanophores in zebrafish embryos and that its orthologue,
TFAP2E, is expressed in human melanocytes. We provide evidence that Tfap2e
functions redundantly with Tfap2a to maintain kita expression in zebrafish
embryonic melanophores. Further, we show that, in contrast to in kita mutants
where embryonic melanophores appear to differentiate normally, in tfap2a/e
doubly-deficient embryonic melanophores are small and under-melanized, although
they retain expression of mitfa. Interestingly, forcing expression of mitfa in
tfap2a/e doubly-deficient embryos partially restores melanophore differentiation.
These findings reveal that Tfap2 activity, mediated redundantly by Tfap2a and
Tfap2e, promotes melanophore differentiation in parallel with Mitf by an effector
other than Kit. This work illustrates how analysis of single-gene mutants may
fail to identify steps in a GRN that are affected by the redundant activity of
related proteins.

PMCID: PMC2940735
PMID: 20862309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mech Ageing Dev. 2010 Oct;131(10):636-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2010.08.009. Epub
2010 Sep 15.

A functional single nucleotide polymorphism in promoter of ATM is associated with
longevity.

Chen T(1), Dong B, Lu Z, Tian B, Zhang J, Zhou J, Wu H, Zhang Y, Wu J, Lin P,
Zhang J, Xu H, Mo X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology and Department of Geriatrics, State Key
Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China Hospital, West China Medical School, Sichuan
University, Chengdu, China.

Although the 'ataxia telangiectasia mutated' (ATM) gene plays an important role
in physiological processes, such as sensing DNA damage, reducing oxidative stress
and protecting telomeres length, little information about ATM and longevity is
available. Therefore, we aim to examine the association between genetic variants 
in promoter of ATM and longevity in Chinese Nonagenarians/Centenarians.
Genotyping was performed in 789 long-lived individuals (LLIs) and 886 ethnically 
matched control subjects. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs189037) in the
promoter region of ATM gene was identified, and significant association between
CT genotype and longevity was observed. Meanwhile, the SNP was able to affect
expression of ATM mRNA by differentially binding to AP-2a. The CC genotype
strongly bound to AP-2a, and the TT genotype showed less binding affinity to
AP-2a. The AP-2a strongly repressed the reporter expression in the CC genotype
and showed less repression of the TT genotype driving expression in vitro assay. 
Accordingly, TT genotype individuals had highest ATM mRNA expression, CT genotype
individuals had moderate ATM mRNA expression, and the CC genotype individuals had
the lowest ATM mRNA.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20816691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2011 Jul;48(4):363-70. doi: 10.1597/09-227. Epub 2010
Jul 1.

CRISPLD2 variants including a C471T silent mutation may contribute to
nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate.

Letra A, Menezes R, Cooper ME, Fonseca RF, Tropp S, Govil M, Granjeiro JM, Imoehl
SR, Mansilla MA, Murray JC, Castilla EE, Orioli IM, Czeizel AE, Ma L, Chiquet BT,
Hecht JT, Vieira AR, Marazita ML.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the association between nonsyndromic (NS) cleft lip with or 
without cleft palate (CL(P)) and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within
the CRISPLD2 gene (cysteine-rich secretory protein LCCL domain containing 2).
DESIGN: Four SNPs within the CRISPLD2 gene domain (rs1546124, rs8061351,
rs2326398, rs4783099) were genotyped to test for association via family-based
association methods.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 5826 individuals from 1331 families in which one or more
family member is affected with CL(P).
RESULTS: Evidence of association was seen for SNP rs1546124 in U.S. (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .02)
and Brazilian (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .04) Caucasian cohorts. We also found association of SNP
rs1546124 with cleft palate alone (CP) in South Americans (Guatemala and ECLAMC) 
and combined Hispanics (Guatemala, ECLAMC, and Texas Hispanics; p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .03 for
both comparisons) and with both cleft lip with cleft palate (CLP; p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .04) and 
CL(P) (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .02) in North Americans. Strong evidence of association was found
for SNP rs2326398 with CP in Asian populations (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .003) and with CL(P) in
Hispanics (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .03) and also with bilateral CL(P) in Brazilians (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .004).
In Brazilians, SNP rs8061351 showed association with cleft subgroups incomplete
CL(P) (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .004) and unilateral incomplete CL(P) (p <U+200A>=<U+200A> .003). Prediction of
SNP functionality revealed that the C allele in the C471T silent mutation
(overrepresented in cases with CL(P) presents two putative exonic splicing
enhancer motifs and creates a binding site AP-2 alpha, a transcription factor
involved in craniofacial development.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis that variants in the CRISPLD2
gene may be involved in the etiology of NS CL(P).

PMCID: PMC3000893
PMID: 20815724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 20;5(8):e12286. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012286.

Expression of human frataxin is regulated by transcription factors SRF and TFAP2.

Li K(1), Singh A, Crooks DR, Dai X, Cong Z, Pan L, Ha D, Rouault TA.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Medical School of Nanjing
University, Nanjing, China. likuanyu@nju.edu.cn

BACKGROUND: Friedreich ataxia is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease
caused by reduced expression levels of the frataxin gene (FXN) due to expansion
of triplet nucleotide GAA repeats in the first intron of FXN. Augmentation of
frataxin expression levels in affected Friedreich ataxia patient tissues might
substantially slow disease progression.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We utilized bioinformatic tools in conjunction
with chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility shift assays to
identify transcription factors that influence transcription of the FXN gene. We
found that the transcription factors SRF and TFAP2 bind directly to FXN promoter 
sequences. SRF and TFAP2 binding sequences in the FXN promoter enhanced
transcription from luciferase constructs, while mutagenesis of the predicted SRF 
or TFAP2 binding sites significantly decreased FXN promoter activity. Further
analysis demonstrated that robust SRF- and TFAP2-mediated transcriptional
activity was dependent on a regulatory element, located immediately downstream of
the first FXN exon. Finally, over-expression of either SRF or TFAP2 significantly
increased frataxin mRNA and protein levels in HEK293 cells, and frataxin mRNA
levels were also elevated in SH-SY5Y cells and in Friedreich ataxia patient
lymphoblasts transfected with SRF or TFAP2.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We identified two transcription factors, SRF and TFAP2,
as well as an intronic element encompassing EGR3-like sequence, that work
together to regulate expression of the FXN gene. By providing new mechanistic
insights into the molecular factors influencing frataxin expression, our results 
should aid in the discovery of new therapeutic targets for the treatment of
Friedreich ataxia.

PMCID: PMC2924884
PMID: 20808827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 27;5(8):e12452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012452.

CREB inhibits AP-2alpha expression to regulate the malignant phenotype of
melanoma.

Melnikova VO(1), Dobroff AS, Zigler M, Villares GJ, Braeuer RR, Wang H, Huang L, 
Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The loss of AP-2alpha and increased activity of cAMP-responsive
element binding (CREB) protein are two hallmarks of malignant progression of
cutaneous melanoma. However, the molecular mechanism responsible for the loss of 
AP-2alpha during melanoma progression remains unknown.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Herein, we demonstrate that both inhibition of
PKA-dependent CREB phosphorylation, as well as silencing of CREB expression by
shRNA, restored AP-2alpha protein expression in two metastatic melanoma cell
lines. Moreover, rescue of CREB expression in CREB-silenced cell lines
downregulates expression of AP-2alpha. Loss of AP-2alpha expression in metastatic
melanoma occurs via a dual mechanism involving binding of CREB to the AP-2alpha
promoter and CREB-induced overexpression of another oncogenic transcription
factor, E2F-1. Upregulation of AP-2alpha expression following CREB silencing
increases endogenous p21(Waf1) and decreases MCAM/MUC18, both known to be
downstream target genes of AP-2alpha involved in melanoma progression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Since AP-2alpha regulates several genes associated with
the metastatic potential of melanoma including c-KIT, VEGF, PAR-1, MCAM/MUC18,
and p21(Waf1), our data identified CREB as a major regulator of the malignant
melanoma phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2929203
PMID: 20805990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Plant Mol Biol. 2010 Nov;74(4-5):313-26. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9674-8. Epub
2010 Aug 27.

Control of somatic embryogenesis and embryo development by AP2 transcription
factors.

El Ouakfaoui S(1), Schnell J, Abdeen A, Colville A, Labbé H, Han S, Baum B,
Laberge S, Miki B.

Author information: 
(1)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 960 Carling Ave, Ottawa, ON, K1A 0C6,
Canada. Souad.ElOuakfaoui@ec.gc.ca

Members of the AP2 family of transcription factors, such as BABY BOOM (BBM), play
important roles in cell proliferation and embryogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana
(AtBBM) and Brassica napus (BnBBM) but how this occurs is not understood. We have
isolated three AP2 genes (GmBBM1, GmAIL5, GmPLT2) from somatic embryo cultures of
soybean, Glycine max (L.) Merr, and discovered GmBBM1 to be homologous to AtBBM
and BnBBM. GmAIL5 and GmPLT2 were homologous to Arabidopsis AINTEGUMENTA-like5
(AIL5) and PLETHORA2 (PLT2), respectively. Constitutive expression of GmBBM1 in
Arabidopsis induced somatic embryos on vegetative organs and other pleiotropic
effects on post-germinative vegetative organ development. Sequence comparisons of
BBM orthologues revealed the presence of ten sequence motifs outside of the AP2
DNA-binding domains. One of the motifs, bbm-1, was specific to the BBM-like
genes. Deletion and domain swap analyses revealed that bbm-1 was important for
somatic embryogenesis and acted cooperatively with at least one other motif,
euANT2, in the regulation of somatic embryogenesis and embryo development in
transgenic Arabidopsis. The results provide new insights into the mechanisms by
which BBM governs embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2952763
PMID: 20798978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. BMB Rep. 2010 Aug;43(8):567-72.

Optimizing the binding activity of the AP2/ERF transcription factor with the GCC 
box element from Brassica napus by directed evolution.

Jin XF(1), Zhu B, Peng RH, Jiang HH, Chen JM, Zhuang J, Zhang J, Yao QH, Xiong
AS.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Research Institute, Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Shanghai 201106, China.

In this study, we cloned the ERF-B3 subfamily transcription factor gene
BnaERF-B3-hy15 from Brassica napus L. Huyou15. This 600 bp gene encodes a 199
amino acid classic ethylene responsive factor (ERF), which shown no binding or
very weak binding GCC box-binding activity by the yeast one-hybrid assay. We used
gene shuffling and the yeast one-hybrid system to obtain three mutated sequences 
that can bind to the GCC box. Sequence analysis indicated that two residues,
Gly156 in the AP2 domain and Phe62 at the N-terminal domain were mutated to
arginine and serine, respectively. Changes of Gly156 to arginine and Phe62 to
serine increased the GCCbinding activity of BnaERF-B3-hy15 and the alter of
Gly156 to arginine changed the AP2-domain structure of BnaERF-B3- hy15.

PMID: 20797320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Aug;15(8):1695-702. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01161.x.

Cross-talk between angiotensin II and IGF-1-induced connexin 43 expression in
human saphenous vein smooth muscle cells.

Jia G(1), Aggarwal A, Yohannes A, Gangahar DM, Agrawal DK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical and Translational Science, Creighton University School of 
Medicine, Omaha, NE, USA.

Vascular restenosis following coronary artery bypass graft can cause major
clinical complications due to intimal hyperplasia in venous conduits. However,
the precise underlying mechanisms of intimal hyperplasia are still unclear. We
have recently reported that increased expression of connexin43 (Cx43) is involved
in the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) in human saphenous
vein (SV). In this study, we investigated the signalling transduction pathway
involved in Cx43 expression and SV SMC proliferation. Angiotensin-II (AT-II, 100 
ng/ml) increased AT-II receptor 1 (AT-1R) protein expression and insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1) (100 ng/ml) up-regulated IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) protein 
expression in SV SMCs. Interestingly, AT-1R expression was also increased by
IGF-1 treatment, and IGF-1R expression was increased by AT-II treatment, which
was blocked by siRNA-IGF-1R and siRNA-AT-1R, respectively. Furthermore, the
effect of AT-II and IGF-1 signal cross-talk i nducing up-regulation of their
reciprocal receptors was blocked by siRNA against extracellular signal-regulated 
kinases 1/2 (Erk 1/2) in SMCs of SV. Moreover, AT-II and IGF-1-induced Cx43
expression via phosphorylation of Erk 1/2 and activation of transcription factor 
activator protein 1 (AP-1) through their reciprocal receptors in SV SMCs. These
data demonstrate a cross-talk between IGF-1R and AT-1R in AT-II and IGF-1-induced
Cx43 expression in SV SMCs involving Erk 1/2 and downstream activation of the
AP-1 transcription factor.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 Foundation for Cellular and
Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3000445
PMID: 20731749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2010 Jul;39(4):430-5.

[Dual role of transcription factor AP-2 in carcinogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Liang S(1), Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China.

Activating protein-2 (AP-2) is a cell type-specific DNA binding transcription
factor family with the ability to regulate the expression of specific target
genes. Five isoforms of AP-2 have been discovered, they are AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, 
AP-2gamma, AP-2delta and AP-2epsilon. AP-2s are involved in the regulation of
cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis as well as embryogenesis of
mammary animals. Recently, the function of AP-2 in neoplasm has attracted
increasing attention. Researches reveal that the modulation of AP-2 in
tumorigenesis may be dual, either inhibitory or promoting, which depends on the
specific tissues,stages of cancer progression and difference between five family 
members. This review summarizes recent research progress on the role of AP-2 in
the oncogenesis and their potential applications in clinical practice.

PMID: 20731046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov;55(11):738-42. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.99. Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Polymorphisms in NRXN3, TFAP2B, MSRA, LYPLAL1, FTO and MC4R and their effect on
visceral fat area in the Japanese population.

Hotta K(1), Nakamura M, Nakamura T, Matsuo T, Nakata Y, Kamohara S, Miyatake N,
Kotani K, Komatsu R, Itoh N, Mineo I, Wada J, Yoneda M, Nakajima A, Funahashi T, 
Miyazaki S, Tokunaga K, Kawamoto M, Masuzaki H, Ueno T, Hamaguchi K, Tanaka K,
Yamada K, Hanafusa T, Oikawa S, Yoshimatsu H, Nakao K, Sakata T, Matsuzawa Y,
Nakamura Y, Kamatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center for Genomic Medicine,
RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan. kikuko@src.riken.jp

The predominant risk factor of metabolic syndrome is intra-abdominal fat
accumulation, which is determined by waist circumference and waist-hip ratio
measurements and visceral fat area (VFA) that is measured by computed tomography 
(CT). There is evidence that waist circumference and waist-hip ratio in the
Caucasian population are associated with variations in several genes, including
neurexin 3 (NRXN3), transcription factor AP-2ß (TFAP2B), methionine sulfoxide
reductase A (MSRA), lysophospholipase-like-1 (LYPLAL1), fat mass and obesity
associated (FTO) and melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) genes. To investigate the
relationship between VFA and subcutaneous fat area (SFA) and these genes in the
recruited Japanese population, we genotyped 8 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in these 6 genes from 1228 subjects. Multiple regression analysis revealed
that gender, age, and rs1558902 and rs1421085 genotypes (additive model) in FTO
were significantly associated with body mass index (BMI; P=0.0039 and 0.0039,
respectively), SFA (P=0.0027 and 0.0023, respectively) and VFA (P=0.045 and
0.040, respectively). However, SNPs in other genes, namely, NRXN3, TFAP2B, MSRA, 
LYPLAL1 and MC4R were not significantly associated with BMI, SFA or VFA. Our data
suggest that some SNPs, which were identified in genome-wide studies in the
Caucasians, also confer susceptibility to fat distribution in the Japanese
subjects.

PMID: 20703240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2010 Sep;117(9):1077-81. doi:
10.1007/s00702-010-0448-x. Epub 2010 Aug 6.

Does the transcription factor AP-2beta have an impact on the genetic and early
environmental influence on ethanol consumption?

Oreland S(1), Daoura L, Gustafsson-Ericson L, Damberg M, Hyytiä P, Oreland L,
Nylander I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala
University, P.O. Box 591, 751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.

Genes involved in alcoholism have consensus sites for the transcription factor
activator protein (TFAP) 2beta. In the present study, we investigated TFAP-2beta 
protein levels in the ethanol-preferring alko, alcohol (AA) and the
ethanol-avoiding alko, non-alcohol (ANA) rat lines. Furthermore, basal and
ethanol-induced TFAP-2beta levels were examined in Wistar rats exposed to
different early postnatal environments that are known to affect later ethanol
consumption. Taken together, we found differences in brainstem TFAP-2beta protein
between the AA and ANA rats.

PMCID: PMC2929433
PMID: 20690033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. FEBS Lett. 2010 Aug 20;584(16):3615-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2010.07.034. Epub
2010 Jul 24.

Transcription factor activator protein-2beta accelerates lipid accumulation in
macrophages via enhancing the transcription of CD36.

Gan L(1), Zhu D, Ding Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China.
gan_lu@yahoo.com.cn

Retraction in
    FEBS Lett. 2011 Jan 3;585(1):267.

The role of transcription factor activator protein-2beta (AP-2beta) in foam cell 
formation was investigated. Uptake assay of DiI-labeled oxidized low density
lipoprotein and the lipid quantitative analysis by high performance liquid
chromatography showed AP-2beta promoted the lipid accumulation. The quantitative 
real-time RT-PCR and Western blot indicated that AP-2beta upregulated the
expression of CD36. Luciferase assay, electrophoretic mobility shift assay and
chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that AP-2beta bound to AP-2 binding sites
in CD36 promoter region and enhanced the promoter activity of CD36 gene. We
conclude that AP-2beta may function in foam cell formation through enhancing the 
transcription and expression of CD36 followed by increased lipid uptake.

Copyright 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20659467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Aug;152A(8):2143. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33512.

Additional clinical and molecular analyses of TFAP2A in patients with the
Branchio-Oculo-Facial syndrome: Previously reported patient.

Reiber J, Sznajer Y, Posteguillo EG, Müller D, Lyonnet S, Baumann C, Just W.

PMID: 20635357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Oct;49(10):948-62. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20807.

Identification of primary gene targets of TFAP2C in hormone responsive breast
carcinoma cells.

Woodfield GW(1), Chen Y, Bair TB, Domann FE, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

The TFAP2C transcription factor is involved in mammary development,
differentiation, and oncogenesis. Previous studies established a role for TFAP2C 
in the regulation of ESR1 (ERalpha) and ERBB2 (Her2) in breast carcinomas.
However, the role of TFAP2C in different breast cancer phenotypes has not been
examined in detail. To develop a more complete characterization of TFAP2C target 
genes, ChIP-seq with anti-TFAP2C antibody and expression arrays with TFAP2C knock
down were analyzed in MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells. Genomic sequences common to
the ChIP-seq data set defined the consensus sequence for TFAP2C chromatin binding
as the nine base sequence SCCTSRGGS (S = G/C, r = A/G), which closely matches the
previously defined optimal in vitro binding site. Comparing expression arrays
before and after knock down of TFAP2C with ChIP-seq data demonstrated a
conservative estimate that 8% of genes altered by TFAP2C expression are primary
target genes and includes genes that are both induced and repressed by TFAP2C. A 
set of 447 primary target genes of TFAP2C was identified, which included ESR1
(ERalpha), FREM2, RET, FOXA1, WWOX, GREB1, MYC, and members of the retinoic acid 
response pathway. The identification of ESR1, WWOX, GREB1, and FOXA1 as primary
targets confirmed the role of TFAP2C in hormone response. TFAP2C plays a critical
role in gene regulation in hormone responsive breast cancer and its target genes 
are different than for the Her2 breast cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2928401
PMID: 20629094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2010 Sep;49(9):819-30. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20790.

AP2 transcription factor induces apoptosis in retinoblastoma cells.

Li X(1), Glubrecht DD, Godbout R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 1Z2 Canada.

The underlying cause of human retinoblastoma is complete inactivation of both
copies of the RB1 gene. Other chromosome abnormalities, with the most common
being extra copies of chromosome arm 6p, are also observed in retinoblastoma. The
RB protein has previously been shown to interact with TFAP2 transcription
factors. Here, we show that TFAP2A and TFAP2B, which map to chromosome arm 6p,
are expressed in the amacrine and horizontal cells of human retina. TFAP2A RNA
can readily be detected in retinoblastoma cell lines and tumors; however, the
great majority of retinoblastoma cell lines and tumors are completely devoid of
TFAP2A protein and TFAP2B RNA/protein. Transfection of TFAP2A and TFAP2B
expression constructs into retinoblastoma cells induces apoptosis and inhibits
proliferation. Our results suggest that a consequence of loss of RB1 gene
function in retinoblastoma cells is inactivation of TFAP2A and TFAP2B function.
We propose that inability to differentiate along the amacrine/horizontal cell
lineages may underlie retinoblastoma tumor formation.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3726383
PMID: 20607706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Aug 15;110(6):1386-98. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22655.

AP2alpha is essential for MUC8 gene expression in human airway epithelial cells.

Moon UY(1), Kim CH, Choi JY, Kim YJ, Choi YH, Yoon HG, Kim H, Yoon JH.

Author information: 
(1)The Airway Mucus Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.

Mucins are high molecular weight proteins that make up the major components of
mucus. Hypersecretion of mucus is a feature of several chronic inflammatory
airway diseases. MUC8 is an important component of airway mucus, and its gene
expression is upregulated in nasal polyp epithelium. Little is known about the
molecular mechanisms of MUC8 gene expression. We first observed overexpression of
activator protein-2 alpha (AP2 alpha) in human nasal polyp epithelium. We
hypothesized that AP2 alpha overexpression in nasal polyp epithelium correlates
closely with MUC8 gene expression. We demonstrated that phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) treatment of the airway epithelial cell line NCI-H292 increases 
MUC8 gene and AP2 alpha expression. In this study, we sought to determine which
signal pathway is involved in PMA-induced MUC8 gene expression. The results show 
that the protein kinase C and mitogen-activating protein/ERK kinase (MAPK)
pathways modulate MUC8 gene expression. PD98059 or ERK1/2 siRNA and RO-31-8220 or
PKC siRNA significantly suppress AP2 alpha as well as MUC8 gene expression in
PMA-treated cells. To verify the role of AP2 alpha, we specifically knocked down 
AP2 alpha expression with siRNA. A significant AP2 alpha knock-down inhibited
PMA-induced MUC8 gene expression. While dominant negative AP2 alpha decreased
PMA-induced MUC8 gene expression, overexpressing wildtype AP2 alpha increased
MUC8 gene expression. Furthermore, using lentiviral vectors for RNA interference 
in human nasal polyp epithelial cells, we confirmed an essential role for AP2
alpha in MUC8 gene expression. From these results, we concluded that PMA induces 
MUC8 gene expression through a mechanism involving PKC, ERK1/2, and AP2 alpha
activation in human airway epithelial cells.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20564234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 29;107(26):12046-51. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1000672107. Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Auxin regulates distal stem cell differentiation in Arabidopsis roots.

Ding Z(1), Friml J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Systems Biology, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology,
9052 Ghent, Belgium.

The stem cell niche in the root meristem is critical for the development of the
plant root system. The plant hormone auxin acts as a versatile trigger in many
developmental processes, including the regulation of root growth, but its role in
the control of the stem cell activity remains largely unclear. Here we show that 
local auxin levels, determined by biosynthesis and intercellular transport,
mediate maintenance or differentiation of distal stem cells in the Arabidopsis
thaliana roots. Genetic analysis shows that auxin acts upstream of the major
regulators of the stem cell activity, the homeodomain transcription factor WOX5, 
and the AP-2 transcription factor PLETHORA. Auxin signaling for differentiation
of distal stem cells requires the transcriptional repressor IAA17/AXR3 as well as
the ARF10 and ARF16 auxin response factors. ARF10 and ARF16 activities repress
the WOX5 transcription and restrict it to the quiescent center, where WOX5, in
turn, is needed for the activity of PLETHORA. Our investigations reveal that
long-distance auxin signals act upstream of the short-range network of
transcriptional factors to mediate the differentiation of distal stem cells in
roots.

PMCID: PMC2900669
PMID: 20543136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jun 3;11:355. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-355.

Identification of functional TFAP2A and SP1 binding sites in new TFAP2A-modulated
genes.

Orso F(1), Corà D, Ubezio B, Provero P, Caselle M, Taverna D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center (MBC), Department of Oncological Sciences,
University of Torino, Torino, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Different approaches have been developed to dissect the interplay
between transcription factors (TFs) and their cis-acting sequences on DNA in
order to identify TF target genes. Here we used a combination of computational
and experimental approaches to identify novel direct targets of TFAP2A, a key TF 
for a variety of physiological and pathological cellular processes. Gene
expression profiles of HeLa cells either silenced for TFAP2A by RNA interference 
or not were previously compared and a set of differentially expressed genes was
revealed.
RESULTS: The regulatory regions of 494 TFAP2A-modulated genes were analyzed for
the presence of TFAP2A binding sites, employing the canonical TFAP2A Positional
Weight Matrix (PWM) reported in Jaspar http://jaspar.genereg.net/. 264 genes
containing at least 2 high score TFAP2A binding sites were identified, showing a 
central role in "Cellular Movement" and "Cellular Development". In an attempt to 
identify TFs that could cooperate with TFAP2A, a statistically significant
enrichment for SP1 binding sites was found for TFAP2A-activated but not repressed
genes. The direct binding of TFAP2A or SP1 to a random subset of TFAP2A-modulated
genes was demonstrated by Chromatin ImmunoPrecipitation (ChIP) assay and the
TFAP2A-driven regulation of DCBLD2/ESDN/CLCP1 gene studied in details.
CONCLUSIONS: We proved that our computational approaches applied to microarray
selected genes are valid tools to identify functional TF binding sites in gene
regulatory regions as confirmed by experimental validations. In addition, we
demonstrated a fine-tuned regulation of DCBLD2/ESDN transcription by TFAP2A.

PMCID: PMC2890567
PMID: 20525283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Br J Dermatol. 2010 Sep;163(3):466-75. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.09864.x.
Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Molecular mechanism of kallikrein-related peptidase 8/neuropsin-induced
hyperkeratosis in inflamed skin.

Shingaki K(1), Matsuzaki S, Taniguchi M, Kubo T, Fujiwara T, Kanazawa S, Yamamoto
A, Tamura H, Maeda T, Ooi K, Matsumoto K, Shiosaka S, Tohyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.
kensngk@anat2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Hyperkeratosis and acanthosis occur in inflamed skin. Proliferation
and differentiation of keratinocytes are important processes during epidermal
repair after inflammation. Neuropsin and its human homologue kallikrein-related
peptidase 8 (KLK8) have been reported to be involved in epidermal proliferation
and differentiation, but the involved molecular mechanisms are obscure.
OBJECTIVES: To explore the molecular mechanism of KLK8/neuropsin-induced
hyperkeratosis and acanthosis in inflamed skin.
METHODS: The molecular mechanism involved in KLK8/neuropsin-induced
hyperkeratosis and acanthosis in inflamed skin was investigated both in vivo and 
in vitro using neuropsin knockout mice and KLK8 knockdown human keratinocytes.
Neuropsin-related genes were identified by differential gene display. The
localization and functional relationship of the molecules affected downstream of 
KLK8/neuropsin in normal and inflamed skin were analysed by in situ hybridization
and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS:   Hyperkeratosis and acanthosis in sodium lauryl sulphate-stimulated
skin were markedly inhibited in neuropsin knockout mice. Knockdown of
KLK8/neuropsin increased transcription factor activator protein-2a (AP-2a)
expression and decreased keratin 10 expression in human keratinocytes and mouse
skin, respectively. AP-2a has been reported to inhibit epidermal proliferation
and keratin 10 expression. Distributional analysis showed that KLK8/neuropsin was
expressed in the stratum spinosum, AP-2a was expressed in the stratum basale and 
the lower part of the stratum spinosum, and keratin 10 was expressed throughout
the stratum spinosum.
CONCLUSIONS: The above findings suggest the following mechanism of events
underlying KLK8/neuropsin-induced hyperkeratosis: (i) skin inflammation increases
KLK8/neuropsin expression in the stratum spinosum; (ii) the released
KLK8/neuropsin inhibits AP-2a expression in the cells of the stratum basale and
stratum spinosum; (iii) the decrease in AP-2a results in cell proliferation in
the stratum basale and cell differentiation in the stratum spinosum, with an
increase in keratin 10 expression.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal Compilation © 2010 British Association of
Dermatologists.

PMID: 20500798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Cleft Palate Craniofac J. 2010 Nov;47(6):566-73. doi: 10.1597/09-145. Epub 2010
Mar 2.

Disruption of the murine Ap2ß1 gene causes nonsyndromic cleft palate.

Li W(1), Puertollano R, Bonifacino JS, Overbeek PA, Everett ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Facial Development, Indiana University School of Dentistry,
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Development of the secondary palate in mammals is a complex process that can be
easily perturbed, leading to the common and distressing birth defect cleft
palate. Animal models are particularly useful tools for dissecting underlying
genetic components of cleft palate. We describe a new cleft palate model
resulting from a transgene insertion mutation. Transgene insertional mutagenesis 
disrupts the genomic organization and expression of the Ap2ß1 gene located on
chromosome 11. This gene encodes the ß2-adaptin subunit of the heterotetrameric
adaptor protein 2 complex involved in clathrin-dependent endocytosis. Homozygous 
cleft palate mutant mice express no Ap2ß1 messenger RNA or ß2-adaptin protein and
die during the perinatal period. Heterozygous mice are phenotypically normal
despite expressing diminished ß2-adaptin messenger RNA and protein compared with 
wildtype. Remarkably, the paralogous ß1-adaptin subunit of the adaptor protein 1 
complex partially substitutes for the missing ß2-adaptin in embryonic fibroblasts
from homozygous mutant mice, resulting in assembly of reduced levels of an
adaptor protein 2 complex bearing ß1-adaptin. This variant adaptor protein 2
complex is, therefore, apparently capable of maintaining viability of the
homozygous mutant embryos until birth but insufficient to support palatogenesis. 
Nonsyndromic cleft palate in an animal model is associated with disruption of the
Ap2ß1 gene.

PMCID: PMC3691559
PMID: 20500056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Vis. 2010 May 8;16:813-8.

Ocular manifestations of branchio-oculo-facial syndrome: report of a novel
mutation and review of the literature.

Al-Dosari MS(1), Almazyad M, Al-Ebdi L, Mohamed JY, Al-Dahmash S, Al-Dhibi H,
Al-Kahtani E, Al-Turkmani S, Alkuraya H, Hall BD, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: To report unusual ocular manifestations of branchio-oculo-facial
syndrome (BOFS) caused by a novel mutation in activating enhancer binding protein
2 alpha (TFAP2A).
METHODS: Full ophthalmological evaluation and direct sequencing of TFAP2A.
RESULTS: A 10-year-old girl with unusual ocular manifestations of BOFS such as
elliptical shaped microcornea and a novel de novo TFAP2A mutation was identified.
CONCLUSIONS: This report expands the ocular phenotypic spectrum of BOFS and adds 
to the small number of reported TFAP2A mutations.

PMCID: PMC2866573
PMID: 20461149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. BMC Cancer. 2010 May 11;10:192. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-192.

Interference with activator protein-2 transcription factors leads to induction of
apoptosis and an increase in chemo- and radiation-sensitivity in breast cancer
cells.

Thewes V(1), Orso F, Jäger R, Eckert D, Schäfer S, Kirfel G, Garbe S, Taverna D, 
Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn, Medical School, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Activator protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factors are critically
involved in a variety of fundamental cellular processes such as proliferation,
differentiation and apoptosis and have also been implicated in carcinogenesis.
Expression of the family members AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma is particularly well
documented in malignancies of the female breast. Despite increasing evaluation of
single AP-2 isoforms in mammary tumors the functional role of concerted
expression of multiple AP-2 isoforms in breast cancer remains to be elucidated.
AP-2 proteins can form homo- or heterodimers, and there is growing evidence that 
the net effect whether a cell will proliferate, undergo apoptosis or
differentiate is partly dependent on the balance between different AP-2 isoforms.
METHODS: We simultaneously interfered with all AP-2 isoforms expressed in
ErbB-2-positive murine N202.1A breast cancer cells by conditionally
over-expressing a dominant-negative AP-2 mutant.
RESULTS: We show that interference with AP-2 protein function lead to reduced
cell number, induced apoptosis and increased chemo- and radiation-sensitivity.
Analysis of global gene expression changes upon interference with AP-2 proteins
identified 139 modulated genes (90 up-regulated, 49 down-regulated) compared with
control cells. Gene Ontology (GO) investigations for these genes revealed Cell
Death and Cell Adhesion and Migration as the main functional categories including
25 and 12 genes, respectively. By using information obtained from Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis Systems we were able to present proven or potential connections 
between AP-2 regulated genes involved in cell death and response to chemo- and
radiation therapy, (i.e. Ctgf, Nrp1, Tnfaip3, Gsta3) and AP-2 and other main
apoptosis players and to create a unique network.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of AP-2 transcription factors in breast cancer cells
supports proliferation and contributes to chemo- and radiation-resistance of
tumor cells by impairing the ability to induce apoptosis. Therefore, interference
with AP-2 function could increase the sensitivity of tumor cells towards
therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2890516
PMID: 20459791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jun;2(3):152-63. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjq008. Epub 2010 May
10.

Wnt1-cre-mediated conditional loss of Dicer results in malformation of the
midbrain and cerebellum and failure of neural crest and dopaminergic
differentiation in mice.

Huang T(1), Liu Y, Huang M, Zhao X, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Institute of Neuroscience, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yue Yang
Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

The involvement of microRNAs (miRNAs) in the development of the neural crest (NC)
cells and other neuronal differentiation is still poorly understood. Here, we
investigated the global function of miRNAs in embryonic development by examining 
the Wnt1-cre-mediated Dicer knockout mice. Dicer ablation resulted in
malformation of the midbrain and cerebellum and failure of NC and dopaminergic
differentiation. First, the Dicer mutant fetuses exhibited dramatic malformation 
of the tectum and cerebellum and the eyelids were open. Second, the skeletal
structures that are derived from the cranial NC were lost or mostly ablated in
Dicer mutant mice. Third, deletion of Dicer in the NC cells resulted in the
malformation of the dorsal root ganglia, enteric nervous system and sympathetic
ganglia. Interestingly, the expression of neuropeptide Y and its potential
regulators TrkA, AP-2alpha and AP-2beta was largely abolished in sympathetic
neurons of Dicer mutant mice. Fourth, in situ hybridization data revealed that
the expression of miR-9, miR-124 and miR-218 in the midbrain and rostral
hindbrain area was mostly eliminated in the Dicer mutant mice. We then
demonstrated that the development of dopaminergic neurons was impaired in
Dicer-deleted mice. Our studies therefore suggest that miRNAs contribute to the
embryonic development in multiple locations.

PMID: 20457670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Sep;38(16):5396-408. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq184. Epub 2010
Apr 30.

Genome-wide assessment of differential roles for p300 and CBP in transcription
regulation.

Ramos YF(1), Hestand MS, Verlaan M, Krabbendam E, Ariyurek Y, van Galen M, van
Dam H, van Ommen GJ, den Dunnen JT, Zantema A, 't Hoen PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Postzone S4-0P, PO Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. y.f.m.ramos@lumc.nl

Despite high levels of homology, transcription coactivators p300 and CREB binding
protein (CBP) are both indispensable during embryogenesis. They are largely known
to regulate the same genes. To identify genes preferentially regulated by p300 or
CBP, we performed an extensive genome-wide survey using the ChIP-seq on
cell-cycle synchronized cells. We found that 57% of the tags were within genes or
proximal promoters, with an overall preference for binding to transcription start
and end sites. The heterogeneous binding patterns possibly reflect the divergent 
roles of CBP and p300 in transcriptional regulation. Most of the 16 103 genes
were bound by both CBP and p300. However, after stimulation 89 and 1944 genes
were preferentially bound by CBP or p300, respectively. Target genes were found
to be primarily involved in the regulation of metabolic and developmental
processes, and transcription, with CBP showing a stronger preference than p300
for genes active in negative regulation of transcription. Analysis of
transcription factor binding sites suggest that CBP and p300 have many partners
in common, but AP-1 and Serum Response Factor (SRF) appear to be more prominent
in CBP-specific sequences, whereas AP-2 and SP1 are enriched in p300-specific
targets. Taken together, our findings further elucidate the distinct roles of
coactivators p300 and CBP in transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC2938195
PMID: 20435671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Aug;1803(8):919-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.04.009.
Epub 2010 May 5.

Advanced glycation end products inhibit Na+ K+ ATPase in proximal tubule
epithelial cells: role of cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha and
phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase gamma.

Gallicchio MA(1), Bach LA.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University, Department of Medicine, Alfred Hospital, Commercial Rd.,
Prahran, 3004, Australia.

Chronic hyperglycaemia during diabetes leads to non-enzymatic glycation of
proteins to form advanced glycation end products (AGEs) that contribute to
nephropathy. In diabetes, renal Na+ K+ ATPase (NKA) activity is downregulated and
phosphoinositide metabolism is upregulated. We examined the effects of AGEs on
NKA activity in porcine LLC-PK1 and human HK2 proximal tubule epithelial cells.
AGE-BSA increased cellular phosphoinositol 4,5 bisphosphate (PIP2) production as 
determined by immunofluorescence microscopy and thin layer chromatography.
AGE-BSA (40 microM) induced 3H-arachidonic acid release and reactive oxygen
species (ROS) production via cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) activation.
Within minutes, AGE-BSA significantly inhibited NKA surface expression and
activity in a dose- and time-dependent manner as determined by immunofluorescence
staining and [86Rb+] uptake, respectively, suggesting AGEs inhibit NKA by
stimulating its endocytosis. The AGE-BSA-induced decrease in cell surface NKA was
reversed by a cPLA2alpha inhibitor, neomycin, a PIP2 inhibitor, and PP2, a Src
inhibitor. AGE-BSA increased binding of NKA to the alpha-adaptin but not beta2-
or mu2-adaptin subunits of the AP-2 clathrin pit adaptor complex. Transfection of
HK2 cells with PIP5Kgamma siRNA prevented AGE-BSA inhibition of NKA activity.
AGEs may stimulate PIP5Kgamma to increase PIP2 production, which may enhance AP-2
localisation to clathrin pits, increase clathrin pit formation, enhance NKA cargo
recognition by AP-2 and/or stimulate cPLA2alpha activity. These results suggest
AGEs modulate arachidonic acid and phosphoinositide metabolism to inhibit NKA via
clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Elucidation of new intracellular AGE signaling
pathways may lead to improved therapies for diabetic nephropathy.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20435073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Protoplasma. 2010 Sep;245(1-4):3-14. doi: 10.1007/s00709-010-0142-8. Epub 2010
Apr 22.

AP2/EREBP transcription factors are part of gene regulatory networks and
integrate metabolic, hormonal and environmental signals in stress acclimation and
retrograde signalling.

Dietz KJ(1), Vogel MO, Viehhauser A.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Physiology of Plants-W5, Bielefeld University, 33501,
Bielefeld, Germany. karl-josef.dietz@uni-bielefeld.de

To optimize acclimation responses to environmental growth conditions, plants
integrate and weigh a diversity of input signals. Signal integration within the
signalling networks occurs at different sites including the level of
transcription factor activation. Accumulating evidence assigns a major and
diversified role in environmental signal integration to the family of APETALA
2/ethylene response element binding protein (AP2/EREBP) transcription factors.
Presently, the Plant Transcription Factor Database 3.0 assigns 147 gene loci to
this family in Arabidopsis thaliana, 200 in Populus trichocarpa and 163 in Oryza 
sativa subsp. japonica as compared to 13 to 14 in unicellular algae (
http://plntfdb.bio.uni-potsdam.de/v3.0/ ). AP2/EREBP transcription factors have
been implicated in hormone, sugar and redox signalling in context of abiotic
stresses such as cold and drought. This review exemplarily addresses present-day 
knowledge of selected AP2/EREBP with focus on a function in stress signal
integration and retrograde signalling and defines AP2/EREBP-linked gene networks 
from transcriptional profiling-based graphical Gaussian models. The latter
approach suggests highly interlinked functions of AP2/EREBPs in retrograde and
stress signalling.

PMID: 20411284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Feb;38(2):745-53. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0162-7. Epub 2010
Apr 21.

Discovery and expression profile analysis of AP2/ERF family genes from Triticum
aestivum.

Zhuang J(1), Chen JM, Yao QH, Xiong F, Sun CC, Zhou XR, Zhang J, Xiong AS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shanghai, 201106, China.

Throughout its development, common wheat, Triticum aestivum responds to different
kinds of adverse abiotic and biotic stress by expressing specific genes that
allow it to adapt to these stresses. In this process, genes in the AP2/ERF family
encode transcriptional regulators involved in diverse developmental and
physiological processes play critical roles. Here, we established an extensive
picture of the AP2/ERF family genes in wheat. From 960, 174 ESTs of T. aestivum, 
117 putative AP2/ERF family genes were identified by in silico analysis based on 
the presence of the conserved AP2/ERF domain amino acid sequence of Arabidopsis
thaliana. Based on the model species A. thaliana, the AP2/ERF TFs from T.
aestivum were classified into five subfamilies with the following number of
members: DREB (57), ERF (47), AP2 (9), RAV (3) and Soloist (1). Using the
available EST information as a source of expression data, the putative AP2/ERF
family genes from T. aestivum were detected in nine kinds of tissues. Transcripts
of the genes were shown to be most abundant in leaves, followed by roots and
seeds, and the least abundant in stem. Most of the T. aestivum AP2/ERF family
genes showed some tissue specificity.

PMID: 20407836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Plant Mol Biol. 2010 Jul;73(4-5):481-92. doi: 10.1007/s11103-010-9634-3. Epub
2010 Apr 20.

Arabidopsis EMBRYOMAKER encoding an AP2 domain transcription factor plays a key
role in developmental change from vegetative to embryonic phase.

Tsuwamoto R(1), Yokoi S, Takahata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Plant Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, Iwate University, 3-18-8
Ueda, Morioka 020-8550, Japan.

Although several types of plant cells retain the competence to enter into
embryonic development without fertilization, the molecular mechanism(s)
underlying ectopic embryogenesis is largely unknown. To gain insight into this
mechanism, in a previous study we identified 136 ESTs specifically expressed in
microspore embryogenesis of Brassica napus. Here, we describe the
characterization of the Arabidopsis EMBRYOMAKER (EMK) gene, which is homologous
to one of the identified Brassica ESTs (BnGemb-58) and encodes an AP2 domain
transcription factor. The AtEMK was expressed in developing and mature embryos,
but its rapid disappearance occurred during germination. After germination, the
expression of AtEMK was found in the root apical meristem and the distal parts of
cotyledons. Although a mutant lacking AtEMK exhibited no distinctive defects in
the embryo, ectopic expression of AtEMK induced embryo-like structures from
cotyledons. The embryo-like structures contained high concentration of lipids,
expressed several embryo-specific genes, and could convert into independent
plants, indicating that the structures are somatic embryos. In vitro culture,
AtEMK enhanced the efficiency of somatic embryogenesis. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of AtEMK caused the formation of trichomes on cotyledons,
dedifferentiated several tissues into calli, and retarded root development,
demonstrating that AtEMK is harmful for the normal development of plants after
germination. From these results, we conclude that the AtEMK is a key player to
maintain embryonic identity, and the rapid disappearance of AtEMK expression
during germination is essential for the developmental transition between the
embryonic and vegetative phases in plants.

PMID: 20405311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(13):3310-20. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01215-09. Epub 2010 Apr 
19.

The transcription factor TCFAP2C/AP-2gamma cooperates with CDX2 to maintain
trophectoderm formation.

Kuckenberg P(1), Buhl S, Woynecki T, van Fürden B, Tolkunova E, Seiffe F, Moser
M, Tomilin A, Winterhager E, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Bonn Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, Bonn D-53127, Germany.

In mammals, cell lineage specification is established at the blastocyst stage. At
this stage, transcription factor Cdx2 represses pluripotency genes, thus
promoting extraembryonic trophoblast fate. Recently, transcription factor Gata3
was shown to act in a parallel pathway in promoting trophoblast cell fate,
suggesting that there are more factors working in the trophoblast lineage. Here, 
we report that the transcription factor Tcfap2c is expressed at a high level in
the trophectoderm and is able to induce trophoblast fate in embryonic stem cells.
Trophoblast fate induced by Tcfap2c does not require Cdx2 and vice versa,
suggesting that the molecules act in alternative pathways. However, both Tcfap2c 
and Cdx2 are required for the upregulation of Elf5, a marker of trophoblast stem 
cell maintenance, suggesting that both factors are required for stable
trophoblast induction. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like cells are stable in
long-term culture, indicating that they are capable of self-renewal.
Tcfap2c-controlled trophoblast maintenance involves the induction of Cdx2 and the
repression of the pluripotency factor Nanog. Tcfap2c-induced trophoblast-like
cells differentiate to trophoblast derivatives in vitro and contribute to the
trophectoderm in blastocysts in vivo. Taken together, these observations suggest 
that Tcfap2c and Cdx2 cooperate to override the pluripotency program and
establish the extraembryonic trophoblast maintenance program in murine embryos.

PMCID: PMC2897582
PMID: 20404091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 28;396(2):219-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.04.067. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Role of AP-1 and RE-1 binding sites in matrix metalloproteinase-2 transcriptional
regulation in skeletal muscle atrophy.

Liu X(1), Manzano G, Lovett DH, Kim HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
4150 Clement St, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

Previous work has suggested that an extracellular matrix degrading enzyme-matrix 
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) plays an important role in the development of muscle 
atrophy. However, the transcriptional regulation mechanism of MMP-2 in skeletal
muscle atrophy remains largely unknown. Using transgenic MMP-2 promoter reporter 
mice, we have demonstrated that AP-1 and RE-1 binding sites in the MMP-2 promoter
region, coupled with increased binding of Fra-1, Fra-2 and AP-2, play a critical 
role in MMP-2 transcriptional regulation in muscle atrophy. Novel information
gained from this study has improved our understanding of in vivo transcriptional 
regulation of MMP-2 in skeletal muscle atrophy.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20398633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Int J Biol Sci. 2010 Mar 29;6(2):163-71.

The ulcerative colitis marker protein WAFL interacts with accessory proteins in
endocytosis.

Pan YF(1), Viklund IM, Tsai HH, Pettersson S, Maruyama IN.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is one of the major forms of inflammatory bowel disease
with unknown cause. A molecular marker, WAFL, has recently been found to be
up-regulated in the inflamed colonic mucosa of UC patients. Towards understanding
biological function of WAFL, we analyzed proteins interacting with WAFL in
HEK-293 cells by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry. Among four proteins
found to specifically interact with WAFL, both KIAA0196 and KIAA1033 bind to
alpha-appendage of the adaptor protein complex 2 (AP2), which acts as an
interaction hub for accessory proteins in endocytosis mediated by clathrin-coated
vesicle (CCV). The specific interaction between WAFL and KIAA0196 was also
confirmed in human colorectal carcinoma HCT-116 cells by co-immunoprecipitation
with specific antibodies. Meta-analyses of the databases of expressed genes
suggest that the three genes are co-expressed in many tissues and cell types, and
that their molecular function may be classified in the category of 'membrane
traffic protein'. Therefore, these results suggest that WAFL may play an
important role in endocytosis and subsequent membrane trafficking by interacting 
with AP2 through KIAA0196 and KIAA1033.

PMCID: PMC2850539
PMID: 20376207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Hum Immunol. 2010 Jul;71(7):702-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.03.006. Epub 2010
May 4.

CD209 (DC-SIGN) -336A>G promoter polymorphism and severe acute respiratory
syndrome in Hong Kong Chinese.

Chan KY(1), Xu MS, Ching JC, So TM, Lai ST, Chu CM, Yam LY, Wong AT, Chung PH,
Chan VS, Lin CL, Sham PC, Leung GM, Peiris JS, Khoo US.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

CD209 (DC-SIGN) is an important C-type lectin which acts a receptor of many
pathogens. The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) -336A>G in the CD209 promoter
has been demonstrated to regulate promoter activity and to be associated with
several important infectious diseases, such as human immunodeficiency virus-1
(HIV-1), Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Dengue fever. CD209 facilitates severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-coronavirus spike protein-bearing pseudotype
driven infection of permissive cells in vitro. In keeping with previously
published findings, our in vitro studies confirmed that this SNP modulates gene
promoter activity. Genetic association analysis of this SNP with
clinico-pathologic outcomes in 824 serologic confirmed SARS patients showed that 
the -336AG/GG genotype SARS patients was associated with lower standardized
lactate-dehydrogenase (LDH) levels compared with the -336AA patients (p = 0.014, 
odds ratio = 0.40). High LDH levels are known to be an independent predictor for 
poor clinical outcome, probably related to tissue destruction from immune
hyperactivity. Hence, SARS patients with the CD209 -336 AA genotype carry a 60%
chance of having a poorer prognosis. This association is in keeping with the role
of CD209 in modulating immune response to viral infection. The relevance of these
findings for other infectious diseases and inflammatory conditions would be worth
investigating.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20359516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Apr;152A(4):994-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33331.

Additional clinical and molecular analyses of TFAP2A in patients with the
branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

Reiber J(1), Sznajer Y, Posteguillo EG, Müller D, Lyonnet S, Baumann C, Just W.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare disorder with approximately
50 sporadic and familial cases in the literature. We report on the clinical and
molecular analyses of five additional patients with BOFS (two familial and three 
sporadic). DNA analysis of the TFAP2A gene associated with BOFS using DNA
sequencing detected a mutation [c.763A>G (p.Arg255Gly)] in two unrelated
patients. This mutation had been reported in another patient and indicates a
probable mutational hotspot in the TFAP2A gene. We also detected three new
mutations which are restricted to exons 4-6. These gene regions are almost free
of any single nucleotide polymorphisms. An evolutionary sequence comparison
showed a high degree of sequence conservation from humans to the honey bee (Apis 
mellifera) in exon 6 showing that this part of the protein is probably essential.
Our study represents the second group of BOFS patients with molecular
confirmation, expanding the phenotype and spectrum of mutations and limiting it
to a restricted part of the gene.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20358615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):17177-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.127613. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

Alpha-AP-2 directs myosin VI-dependent endocytosis of cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator chloride channels in the intestine.

Collaco A(1), Jakab R, Hegan P, Mooseker M, Ameen N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cell Biology University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15206, USA.

The actin motor myosin VI regulates endocytosis of cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) in the intestine, but the endocytic adaptor linking 
CFTR to myosin VI is unknown. Dab2 (Disabled 2) is the binding partner for myosin
VI, clathrin, and alpha-AP-2 and directs endocytosis of low density lipoprotein
receptor family members by recognizing a phosphotyrosine-binding domain. However,
CFTR does not possess a phosphotyrosine-binding domain. We examined whether
alpha-AP-2 and/or Dab2 were binding partners for CFTR and the role of myosin VI
in localizing endocytic adaptors in the intestine. CFTR co-localized with
alpha-AP-2, Dab2, and myosin VI and was identified in a complex with all three
endocytic proteins in the intestine. Apical CFTR was increased in the intestines 
of Dab-2 KO mice, suggesting its involvement in regulating surface CFTR.
Glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays revealed binding of CFTR to alpha-AP-2 
(but not Dab2) in the intestine, whereas Dab-2 interacted with alpha-AP-2. siRNA 
silencing of alpha-AP-2 in cells significantly reduced CFTR endocytosis, further 
supporting alpha-AP-2 as the direct binding partner for CFTR. alpha-AP-2 and Dab2
localized to the terminal web regions of enterocytes, but Dab2 accumulated in
this location in Snell's Waltzer myosin VI((sv/sv)) intestine. Ultrastructural
examination revealed that the accumulation of Dab2 correlated with prominent
involution and the loss of normal positioning of the intermicrovillar membranes
that resulted in expansion of the terminal web region in myosin VI((sv/sv))
enterocytes. The findings support alpha-AP-2 in directing myosin VI-dependent
endocytosis of CFTR and a requirement for myosin VI in membrane invagination and 
coated pit formation in enterocytes.

PMCID: PMC2878018
PMID: 20351096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Sep;17(9):1463-73. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2010.24. Epub 2010
Mar 12.

The antiapoptotic protein, FLIP, is regulated by heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein K and correlates with poor overall survival of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma patients.

Chen LC(1), Chung IC, Hsueh C, Tsang NM, Chi LM, Liang Y, Chen CC, Wang LJ, Chang
YS.

Author information: 
(1)Chang Gung Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan,
Taiwan.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (hnRNP K) mediates antiapoptotic
activity in part by inducing downstream antiapoptotic genes. To systematically
identify hnRNP K targets in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), affymetrix chips were
used to identify genes that were both overexpressed in primary NPC and
downregulated by hnRNP K knockdown in NPC-TW02 cells. The resulting gene set
included the antiapoptotic gene, FLIP, which was selected for further study. In
cells treated with hnRNP K siRNA, TRAIL-induced apoptosis was enhanced and the
FLIP protein level was reduced. Promoter, DNA pull-down and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays revealed that hnRNP K directly interacts
with the poly(C) element on the FLIP promoter, resulting in transcriptional
activation. Through iTRAQ-mass spectrometric identification of proteins
differentially associated with the poly(C) element or its mutant, nucleolin was
determined to be a cofactor of hnRNP K for FLIP activation. Furthermore, FLIP was
highly expressed in tumor cells, and this high-level expression was significantly
correlated with high-level hnRNP K expression (P=0.002) and poor overall survival
(P=0.015) as examined in 67 NPC tissues. A multivariate analysis confirmed that
FLIP was an independent prognostic factor for NPC. Taken together, these findings
indicate that FLIP expression is transcriptionally regulated by hnRNP K and
nucleolin, and may be a potential prognostic and therapeutic marker for NPC.

PMID: 20224598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Traffic. 2010 Jun;11(6):843-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2010.01056.x. Epub 2010 
Mar 4.

A screen for endocytic motifs.

Kozik P(1), Francis RW, Seaman MN, Robinson MS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Wellcome
Trust/MRC Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.

Sorting signals for cargo selection into coated vesicles are usually in the form 
of short linear motifs. Three motifs for clathrin-mediated endocytosis have been 
identified: YXXPhi, [D/E]XXXL[L/I] and FXNPXY. To search for new endocytic
motifs, we made a library of CD8 chimeras with random sequences in their
cytoplasmic tails, and used a novel fluorescence-activated cell sorting
(FACS)-based assay to select for endocytosed constructs. Out of the five tails
that were most efficiently internalized, only one was found to contain a
conventional motif. Two contain dileucine-like sequences that appear to be
variations on the [D/E]XXXL[L/I] motif. Another contains a novel internalization 
signal, YXXXPhiN, which is able to function in cells expressing a mutant mu2 that
cannot bind YXXPhi, indicating that it is not a variation on the YXXPhi motif.
Similar sequences are present in endogenous proteins, including a functional
YXXXPhiN (in addition to a classical YXXPhi) in cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated
protein 4 (CTLA-4). Thus, the repertoire of endocytic motifs is more extensive
than the three well-characterized sorting signals.

PMCID: PMC2882754
PMID: 20214754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 25;5(2):e9417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009417.

Involvement of transcription factor NR2F2 in human trophoblast differentiation.

Hubert MA(1), Sherritt SL, Bachurski CJ, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: During the in vitro differentiation of human villous cytotrophoblast 
(CTB) cells to a syncytiotrophoblast (STB) phenotype, mRNA levels for the nuclear
hormone receptor NR2F2 (ARP-1, COUP-TFII) increase rapidly, reaching a peak at
day 1 of differentiation that is 8.8-fold greater than that in undifferentiated
CTB cells. To examine whether NR2F2 is involved in the regulation of villous CTB 
cell differentiation, studies were performed to determine whether NR2F2 regulates
the expression of TFAP2A (AP-2alpha), a transcription factor that is critical for
the terminal differentiation of these cells to a STB phenotype.
METHODOLOGY/PRIMARY FINDINGS: Overexpression of NR2F2 in primary cultures of
human CTB cells and JEG-3 human choriocarcinoma cells induced dose-dependent
increases in TFAP2A promoter activity. Conversely, siRNA mediated silencing of
the NR2F2 gene in villous CTB undergoing spontaneous differentiation blocked the 
induction of the mRNAs for TFAP2A and several STB cell specific marker genes,
including human placental lactogen (hPL), pregnancy specific glycoprotein 1
(PSG1) and corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) by 51-59%. The induction of
TFAP2A promoter activity by NR2F2 was potentiated by the nuclear hormone
receptors retinoic acid receptor alpha (RARA) and retinoid X receptor alpha
(RXRA).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, these results strongly suggest that
NR2F2 is involved in villous CTB cell differentiation and that NR2F2 acts, at
least in part, by directly activating TFAP2A gene expression and by potentiating 
the transactivation of TFAP2A by RARA and RXRA.

PMCID: PMC2828470
PMID: 20195529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Cancer. 2010 Feb 25;9:44. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-44.

A genome-wide screen identifies frequently methylated genes in haematological and
epithelial cancers.

Dunwell T(1), Hesson L, Rauch TA, Wang L, Clark RE, Dallol A, Gentle D,
Catchpoole D, Maher ER, Pfeifer GP, Latif F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham B152TT, UK.

BACKGROUND: Genetic as well as epigenetic alterations are a hallmark of both
epithelial and haematological malignancies. High throughput screens are required 
to identify epigenetic markers that can be useful for diagnostic and prognostic
purposes across malignancies.
RESULTS: Here we report for the first time the use of the MIRA assay (methylated 
CpG island recovery assay) in combination with genome-wide CpG island arrays to
identify epigenetic molecular markers in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) on a genome-wide scale. We identified 30 genes demonstrating methylation
frequencies of > or =25% in childhood ALL, nine genes showed significantly
different methylation frequencies in B vs T-ALL. For majority of the genes
expression could be restored in methylated leukemia lines after treatment with
5-azaDC. Forty-four percent of the genes represent targets of the polycomb
complex. In chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) two of the genes, (TFAP2A and EBF2),
demonstrated increased methylation in blast crisis compared to chronic phase (P <
0.05). Furthermore hypermethylation of an autophagy related gene ATG16L2 was
associated with poorer prognosis in terms of molecular response to Imatinib
treatment. Lastly we demonstrated that ten of these genes were also frequently
methylated in common epithelial cancers.
CONCLUSION: In summary we have identified a large number of genes showing
frequent methylation in childhood ALL, methylation status of two of these genes
is associated with advanced disease in CML and methylation status of another gene
is associated with prognosis. In addition a subset of these genes may act as
epigenetic markers across hematological malignancies as well as common epithelial
cancers.

PMCID: PMC2838813
PMID: 20184741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genome Res. 2010 Apr;20(4):458-72. doi: 10.1101/gr.101469.109. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Examination of transcriptional networks reveals an important role for TCFAP2C,
SMARCA4, and EOMES in trophoblast stem cell maintenance.

Kidder BL(1), Palmer S.

Author information: 
(1)EMD Serono Research Institute, Inc., Rockland, MA 02370, USA.
benjamin.kidder@emdserono.com

Trophoblast stem cells (TS cells), derived from the trophectoderm (TE) of
blastocysts, require transcription factors (TFs) and external signals (FGF4,
INHBA/NODAL/TGFB1) for self-renewal. While many reports have focused on TF
networks that regulate embryonic stem cell (ES cell) self-renewal and
pluripotency, little is know about TF networks that regulate self-renewal in TS
cells. To further understand transcriptional networks in TS cells, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNA microarray hybridization (ChIP-chip)
analysis to investigate targets of the TFs-TCFAP2C, EOMES, ETS2, and GATA3-and a 
chromatin remodeling factor, SMARCA4. We then evaluated the transcriptional
states of target genes using transcriptome analysis and genome-wide analysis of
histone H3 acetylation (AcH3). Our results describe previously unknown
transcriptional networks in TS cells, including TF occupancy of genes involved in
ES cell self-renewal and pluripotency, co-occupancy of TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES at a significant number of genes, and transcriptional regulatory circuitry 
within the five factors. Moreover, RNAi depletion of Tcfap2c, Smarca4, and Eomes 
transcripts resulted in a loss of normal colony morphology and down-regulation of
TS cell-specific genes, suggesting an important role for TCFAP2C, SMARCA4, and
EOMES in TS cell self-renewal. Through genome-wide mapping and global expression 
analysis of five TF target genes, our data provide a comprehensive analysis of
transcriptional networks that regulate TS cell self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC2847749
PMID: 20176728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):324-31. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.12.015.

Rapid inactivation of proteins by rapamycin-induced rerouting to mitochondria.

Robinson MS(1), Sahlender DA, Foster SD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge
CB2 0XY, UK. msr12@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

We have developed a method for rapidly inactivating proteins with
rapamycin-induced heterodimerization. Cells were stably transfected with
siRNA-resistant, FKBP-tagged subunits of the adaptor protein (AP) complexes of
clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs), together with an FKBP and rapamycin-binding
domain-containing construct with a mitochondrial targeting signal. Knocking down 
the endogenous subunit with siRNA, and then adding rapamycin, caused the APs to
be rerouted to mitochondria within seconds. Rerouting AP-2 to mitochondria
effectively abolished clathrin-mediated endocytosis of transferrin. In cells with
rerouted AP-1, endocytosed cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor
(CIMPR) accumulated in a peripheral compartment, and isolated CCVs had reduced
levels of CIMPR, but normal levels of the lysosomal hydrolase DNase II. Both
observations support a role for AP-1 in retrograde trafficking. This type of
approach, which we call a "knocksideways," should be widely applicable as a means
of inactivating proteins with a time scale of seconds or minutes rather than
days.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2845799
PMID: 20159602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 May 1;19(9):1791-804. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq060. Epub 2010 Feb 
11.

AP-2alpha knockout mice exhibit optic cup patterning defects and failure of optic
stalk morphogenesis.

Bassett EA(1), Williams T, Zacharias AL, Gage PJ, Fuhrmann S, West-Mays JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON, Canada.

Appropriate development of the retina and optic nerve requires that the
forebrain-derived optic neuroepithelium undergoes a precisely coordinated
sequence of patterning and morphogenetic events, processes which are highly
influenced by signals from adjacent tissues. Our previous work has suggested that
transcription factor activating protein-2 alpha (AP-2alpha; Tcfap2a) has a
non-cell autonomous role in optic cup (OC) development; however, it remained
unclear how OC abnormalities in AP-2alpha knockout (KO) mice arise at the
morphological and molecular level. In this study, we show that patterning and
morphogenetic defects in the AP-2alpha KO optic neuroepithelium begin at the
optic vesicle stage. During subsequent OC formation, ectopic neural retina and
optic stalk-like tissue replaced regions of retinal pigment epithelium. AP-2alpha
KO eyes also displayed coloboma in the ventral retina, and a rare phenotype in
which the optic stalk completely failed to extend, causing the OCs to be drawn
inward to the midline. We detected evidence of increased sonic hedgehog signaling
in the AP-2alpha KO forebrain neuroepithelium, which likely contributed to
multiple aspects of the ocular phenotype, including expansion of PAX2-positive
optic stalk-like tissue into the OC. Our data suggest that loss of AP-2alpha in
multiple tissues in the craniofacial region leads to severe OC and optic stalk
abnormalities by disturbing the tissue-tissue interactions required for ocular
development. In view of recent data showing that mutations in human TFAP2A result
in similar eye defects, the current findings demonstrate that AP-2alpha KO mice
provide a valuable model for human ocular disease.

PMCID: PMC2850623
PMID: 20150232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1656-67. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2453. Epub
2010 Feb 9.

Tumor suppressor HLJ1 binds and functionally alters nucleophosmin via activating 
enhancer binding protein 2alpha complex formation.

Chang TP(1), Yu SL, Lin SY, Hsiao YJ, Chang GC, Yang PC, Chen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences and Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing 
University, Taiwan 40227,ROC.

HLJ1, a member of the heat shock protein 40 chaperone family, is a newly
identified tumor suppressor that has been implicated in tumorigenesis and
metastasis in non-small cell lung cancer. However, the mechanism of HLJ1 action
is presently obscure. In this study, we report that HLJ1 specifically interacts
with the nuclear protein nucleophosmin (NPM1), forming a multiprotein complex
that alters the nucleolar distribution and oligomerization state of NPM1.
Enforced accumulation of NPM1 oligomers by overexpression in weakly invasive but 
high HLJ1-expressing cells induced the activity of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and increased cellular migration,
invasiveness, and colony formation. Furthermore, silencing HLJ1 accelerated NPM1 
oligomerization, inhibited the activity of transcription corepressor activating
enhancer binding protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha), and increased the activities of
matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and STAT3. Our findings suggest that HLJ1
switches the role of NPM1, which can act as tumor suppressor or oncogene, by
modulating the oligomerization of NPM1 via HLJ1-NPM1 heterodimer formation and
recruiting AP-2alpha to the MMP-2 promoter.

PMID: 20145123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Dyn. 2010 Mar;239(3):1027-33. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22239.

Loss of transcription factor AP-2gamma/TFAP2C impairs branching morphogenesis of 
the murine mammary gland.

Jäger R(1), Schäfer S, Hau-Liersch M, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of 
Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.

Extensive development of the mammary gland occurs during puberty, when rising
levels of ovarian hormones induce the formation of highly proliferative terminal 
end buds (TEBs) at the tips of mammary ducts. TEBs consist of an outer layer of
cap cells and of inner body cells. TEBs invade the adipose stroma and bifurcate
while extending the ducts to generate an arborized ductal network. We show that
in murine mammary glands transcription factor AP-2gamma is strongly expressed in 
the cap cell layer and in a subset of body cells of TEBs. To decipher AP-2gamma
functions during mammary development we generated AP-2gamma-deficient mice. Their
mammary glands displayed impaired ductal branching and elongation. Cellular
proliferation within TEBs was reduced. Although estrogen receptor was expressed, 
exogenously administered ovarian hormones could not restore normal development.
Therefore, AP-2gamma is functionally involved in branching morphogenesis of the
mammary epithelium, possibly by controlling genetic processes downstream of
ovarian hormones.

Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20131354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):11983-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.092049. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Mechanism of aldolase control of sorting nexin 9 function in endocytosis.

Rangarajan ES(1), Park H, Fortin E, Sygusch J, Izard T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, Jupiter, Florida
33458, USA.

Sorting nexin 9 (SNX9) functions in a complex with the GTPase dynamin-2 at
clathrin-coated pits, where it provokes fission of vesicles to complete
endocytosis. Here the SNX9.dynamin-2 complex binds to clathrin and adapter
protein complex 2 (AP-2) that line these pits, and this occurs through
interactions of the low complexity domain (LC4) of SNX9 with AP-2. Intriguingly, 
localization of the SNX9.dynamin-2 complex to clathrin-coated pits is blocked by 
interactions with the abundant glycolytic enzyme aldolase, which also binds to
the LC4 domain of SNX9. The crystal structure of the LC4 motif of human SNX9 in
complex with aldolase explains the biochemistry and biology of this interaction, 
where SNX9 binds near the active site of aldolase via residues 165-171 that are
also required for the interactions of SNX9 with AP-2. Accordingly, SNX9 binding
to aldolase is structurally precluded by the binding of substrate to the active
site. Interactions of SNX9 with aldolase are far more extensive and differ from
those of the actin-nucleating factor WASP with aldolase, indicating considerable 
plasticity in mechanisms that direct the functions of the aldolase as a scaffold 
protein.

PMCID: PMC2852936
PMID: 20129922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Carcinogenesis. 2010 May;31(5):918-26. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq027. Epub 2010 Feb 
1.

Epigenetic repression of E-cadherin by human papillomavirus 16 E7 protein.

Laurson J(1), Khan S, Chung R, Cross K, Raj K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, The National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

A common feature shared between several human cancer-associated viruses, such as 
Epstein-Barr virus, Hepatitis B virus and Hepatitis C virus, and Human
papillomavirus (HPV) is the ability to reduce the expression of cellular
E-cadherin. Since E-cadherin is used by Langerhans cells to move through the
stratified epithelium, its reduction may affect the efficiency by which the
immune system responds to HPV infection and the length of persistent HPV
infections. We observed that the E7 protein of this virus (HPV16) is most
efficient at reducing E-cadherin levels. This E7 activity is independent of
retinoblastoma protein or AP-2alpha degradation. Instead it is associated with
augmentation of cellular DNA methyltransferase I (Dnmt1) activity. Significantly,
inhibition of Dnmt activity re-established E-cadherin levels of the cells,
presenting the possibility that similar epigenetic intervention clinically may be
a way to re-establish the influx of Langerhans cells into infected epithelium to 
counteract HPV persistence.

PMCID: PMC2864410
PMID: 20123756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Feb 19;392(4):526-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.01.056. Epub 2010 Jan 25.

Transcription factor AP-2beta: a negative regulator of IRS-1 gene expression.

Meng X(1), Kondo M, Morino K, Fuke T, Obata T, Yoshizaki T, Ugi S, Nishio Y,
Maeda S, Araki E, Kashiwagi A, Maegawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Department of Biology, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150086, China.

Down-regulation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) expression could modify
the ability of IRS-1 to fulfill its functions. It has been proposed that the
phosphorylation of IRS-1 on serine residues could promote its degradation.
However, few studies have investigated the transcriptional regulation of IRS-1 in
the pathogenesis of insulin resistance. Genotyping for genome-wide single
nucleotide polymorphisms revealed that the transcription factor activating
enhancer-binding protein-2beta (AP-2beta) is a novel candidate gene for
conferring susceptibility to obesity and type 2 diabetes. AP-2beta is expressed
in adipose tissue and its expression is increased during the maturation of
adipocytes. Overexpression of AP-2beta leads to adipocyte hypertrophy, directly
inhibits adiponectin expression, and enhanced the expression of inflammatory
adipokines such as IL-6 and MCP-1. In this study, we found that overexpression of
AP-2beta in 3T3-L1 adipocytes impaired the promoter activity of IRS-1, and
subsequently decreased mRNA and protein expression. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that AP-2beta bound specifically to the IRS-1 promoter
region. Furthermore, site-directed mutagenesis of the AP-2 binding site located
at -362 to -351, relative to the transcription start site, markedly decreased
AP-2-induced suppression of IRS-1 promoter activity, whereas other putative AP-2 
binding sites did not. Our results clearly showed that AP-2beta directly
decreased IRS-1 expression by binding to its promoter. Based on these findings,
we speculate that the AP-2beta transcriptional factor is a unique regulator of
IRS-1 and a candidate gene for insulin resistance.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20097161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Int J Obes (Lond). 2010 Apr;34(4):670-8. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2009.295. Epub 2010 Jan
12.

Transcription factor AP-2beta inhibits expression and secretion of leptin, an
insulin-sensitizing hormone, in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Fuke T(1), Yoshizaki T, Kondo M, Morino K, Obata T, Ugi S, Nishio Y, Maeda S,
Kashiwagi A, Maegawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We have previously reported an association between the activator
protein-2beta (AP-2beta) transcription factor gene and type 2 diabetes. This gene
is preferentially expressed in adipose tissue, and subjects with a
disease-susceptible allele of AP-2beta showed stronger AP-2beta expression in
adipose tissue than those without the susceptible allele. Furthermore,
overexpression of AP-2beta led to lipid accumulation and induced insulin
resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.
RESULT: We found that overexpression of AP-2beta in 3T3-L1 adipocytes decreased
the promoter activity of leptin, and subsequently decreased both messenger RNA
(mRNA) and protein expression and secretion. Furthermore, knockdown of endogenous
AP-2beta by RNA-interference increased mRNA and protein expression of leptin.
Electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed 
specific binding of AP-2beta to leptin promoter regions in vitro and in vivo. In 
addition, site-directed mutagenesis of the AP-2-binding site located between
position +34 and +42 relative to the transcription start site abolished the
inhibitory effect of AP-2beta. Our results clearly showed that AP-2beta directly 
inhibited insulin-sensitizing hormone leptin expression by binding to its
promoter.
CONCLUSION: AP-2beta modulated the expression of leptin through direct
interaction with its promoter region.

PMID: 20065963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. FEBS J. 2010 Feb;277(4):894-902. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07509.x. Epub 2009
Dec 29.

Roles of AP-2 transcription factors in the regulation of cartilage and skeletal
development.

Wenke AK(1), Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, Germany.

During embryogenesis, most of the mammalian skeletal system is preformed as
cartilaginous structures that ossify later. The different stages of cartilage and
skeletal development are well described, and several molecular factors are known 
to influence the events of this enchondral ossification, especially transcription
factors. Members of the AP-2 family of transcription factors play important roles
in several cellular processes, such as apoptosis, migration and differentiation. 
Studies with knockout mice demonstrate that a main function of AP-2s is the
suppression of terminal differentiation during embryonic development.
Additionally, the specific role of these molecules as regulators during
chondrogenesis has been characterized. This review gives an overview of AP-2s,
and discusses the recent findings on the AP-2 family, in particular AP-2alpha,
AP-2beta, and AP-2epsilon, as regulators of cartilage and skeletal development.

PMID: 20050923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 31;4(12):e8535. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008535.

Fgfr3 is a transcriptional target of Ap2delta and Ash2l-containing histone
methyltransferase complexes.

Tan CC(1), Walsh MJ, Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California Los Angeles
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Polycomb (PcG) and trithorax (trxG) proteins play important roles in establishing
lineage-specific genetic programs through induction of chromatin modifications
that lead to gene silencing or activation. Previously, we described an
association between the MLL/SET1 complexes and a highly restricted, gene-specific
DNA-binding protein Ap2delta that is required for recruitment of the MLL/SET1
complex to target Hoxc8 specifically. Here, we reduced levels of Ap2delta and
Ash2l in the neuroblastoma cell line, Neuro2A, and analyzed their gene expression
profiles using whole-genome mouse cDNA microarrays. This analysis yielded 42
genes that are potentially co-regulated by Ap2delta and Ash2l, and we have
identified evolutionarily conserved Ap2-binding sites in 20 of them. To determine
whether some of these were direct targets of the Ap2delta-Ash2l complex, we
analyzed several promoters for the presence of Ap2delta and Ash2l by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Among the targets we screened, we identified Fgfr3 as
a direct transcriptional target of the Ap2delta-Ash2l complex. Additionally, we
found that Ap2delta is necessary for the recruitment of Ash2l-containing
complexes to this promoter and that this recruitment leads to trimethylation of
lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4me3). Thus, we have identified several candidate
targets of complexes containing Ap2delta and Ash2l that can be used to further
elucidate their roles during development and showed that Fgfr3 is a novel direct 
target of these complexes.

PMCID: PMC2795170
PMID: 20046871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Syndromol. 2010;1(5):255-261. Epub 2011 May 18.

FOXD1 Duplication Causes Branchial Defects and Interacts with the TFAP2A Gene
Implicated in the Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome in Causing Eye Effects in
Zebrafish.

Balikova I(1), Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Vermeesch JR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare disorder characterized by
maldevelopment of the first and second branchial arches, skin defects, facial
dysmorphism, auricular, ophthalmological and oral abnormalities. A high clinical 
variability has been reported. Recently, mutations in TFAP2A were found to
underlie this condition. A small duplication on 5q13 was detected in 2 family
members with mild BOFS features. Molecular cytogenetic delineation of the
duplication demonstrated that only 7 genes are affected: LOC100289045, RGNEF,
UTP15, ANKRA2, FUNDC2P1, BTF3 and FOXD1. The latter is expressed in the
developing branchial arches and involved in cranio-facial development. Zebrafish 
embryos with combined inhibition of the expression of foxd1l and tfap2a show
optic axis defects. We identified a novel locus associated with a mild BOFS-like 
phenotype. The functional in vivo experiments suggest an interaction between
FOXD1 and TFAP2A.

PMCID: PMC3214949
PMID: 22140378  [PubMed]


375. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2010 Jan 1;2:456-77.

New advances in clinical biomarkers in testis cancer.

Favilla V(1), Cimino S, Madonia M, Morgia G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Messina, Italy.

Diagnostic work-up when a testicular cancer is suspected includes a clinical
examination, determination of risk factors, imaging and serum tumours markers.
Tumour markers are useful in the diagnosis and staging of disease, for monitor
the therapeutic response and to detect tumour recurrence. The alpha- fetoprotein 
(AFP) and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) are well established as
serum markers for GCTs of the testis, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and
placental-like alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) may be alternative serological markers
with less specifity. However, these markers are increased in only about 60 per
cent of patients with testicular cancer. Therefore, additional tumour markers
would facilitate clinical diagnosis and treatment in these patients. In this
review we have evaluated the clinical application of several markers of testis
cancers in serum, semen and tissue samples. Immunohistochemistry detection of
some of these being solid new markers in addition to the routinely used but none 
have been shown to be superior to the classical markers in serum and semen
samples. Further research is need in this context for the detection of new
markers.

PMID: 20036893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Jul 8;323(1):94-104. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.12.015.
Epub 2009 Dec 28.

New insights into the regulation of human cytotrophoblast cell differentiation.

Handwerger S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, United
States. stuart.handwerger@cchmc.org <stuart.handwerger@cchmc.org>

PMCID: PMC2874088
PMID: 20036312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(6):R90. doi: 10.1186/bcr2461. Epub 2009 Dec 21.

Investigating AP-2 and YY1 protein expression as a cause of high HER2 gene
transcription in breast cancers with discordant HER2 gene amplification.

Powe DG(1), Akhtar G, Habashy HO, Abdel-Fatah T, Rakha EA, Green AR, Ellis IO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Pathology, Queen's Medical Centre, Nottingham
University Hospitals NHS Trust, Derby Road, Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.
des.powe@nottingham.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: Candidacy for anti-HER2 adjuvant therapy in breast cancer is
assessed using tumour HER2 status but recently it has been proposed that the
transcription factors AP-2alpha and YY1 may cause Her2 protein overexpression
independently of gene amplification.
METHODS: We characterised AP-2alpha/beta, AP-2alpha and YY1 with HER2 gene and
protein expression, other relevant biomarkers, and clinical outcome using tissue 
microarrays (TMAs) and immunohistochemistry in a large (n = 1,176) clinically
annotated series of early stage operable breast cancer. The associations and
prognostic independence of AP-2 and YY1 was assessed in all patients and an
oestrogen receptor negative subgroup.
RESULTS: Nuclear expression of AP-2alpha/beta, AP-2alpha and YY1 was detected in 
23%, 44% and 33% of cases respectively. AP-2alpha/beta significantly correlated
with YY1 and both markers were increased in luminal oestrogen receptor (ER)
positive tumours of small size and low grade but only AP-2alpha/beta correlated
with good prognosis breast cancer specific survival and disease free interval
(BCSS and DFI). These characteristics were lost in oestrogen receptor negative
patients. AP-2alpha also correlated with luminal-type tumours but not with YY1
expression or good prognosis. AP-2alpha and YY1 showed a significant correlation 
with Her2 protein expression and in addition, YY1 correlated with HER2 gene
expression. Discordant HER2 gene and protein expression was identified in six
cases (0.71% of the study group) with four of these showing AP-2alpha but absence
of AP-2alpha/beta and YY1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2alpha/beta and YY1 are markers of good prognosis principally due
to their association with oestrogen receptor but are not independent predictors. 
Discordant HER2 protein/gene expression is a rare event that is not always
explained by the actions of AP-2 and YY1.

PMCID: PMC2815554
PMID: 20025767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Microbiol. 2010 Feb;75(4):854-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2009.07005.x. Epub
2009 Dec 16.

Transcription factor AP2-Sp and its target genes in malarial sporozoites.

Yuda M(1), Iwanaga S, Shigenobu S, Kato T, Kaneko I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Mie, Tsu,
514-0001, Japan. m-yuda@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

The malarial sporozoite is the stage that infects the liver, and genes expressed 
in this stage are potential targets for vaccine development. Here, we demonstrate
that specific gene expression in this stage is regulated by an AP2-related
transcription factor, designated AP2-Sp (APETALA2 in sporozoites), that is
expressed from the late oocyst to the salivary gland sporozoite. Disruption of
the AP2-Sp gene did not affect parasite replication in the erythrocyte but
resulted in loss of sporozoite formation. The electrophoretic mobility-shift
assay showed that the DNA-binding domain of AP2-Sp recognizes specific eight-base
sequences, beginning with TGCATG, which are present in the proximal promoter
region of all known sporozoite-specific genes. Promoter assays demonstrated that 
these sequences act as cis-acting elements and are critical for the expression of
sporozoite-specific genes with different expression profiles. In transgenic
parasites that express endogenous AP2-O (APETALA2 in ookinetes), but whose AP2
domain had been swapped with that of AP2-Sp, several target genes of AP2-Sp were 
induced in the ookinete stage. These results indicate that AP2-Sp is a major
transcription factor that regulates gene expression in the sporozoite stage.

PMID: 20025671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Curr Mol Pharmacol. 2009 Jun;2(2):207-14.

Mood-stabilizers target the brain arachidonic acid cascade.

Rao JS(1), Rapoport SI.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. jrao@mail.nih.gov

Bipolar disorder (BD) is a severe psychiatric illness characterized by recurrent 
manic and depressive episodes, without a characteristic neuropathology or clear
etiology. Drugs effective in BD target many key signaling pathways in animal and 
cell studies. However, their mode of action in the BD brain remains elusive. In
the rat brain, some of the mood stabilizers effective in treating mania (lithium,
carbamazepine, valproate) or depression (lamotrigine) in BD are reported to
decrease transcription of cytosolic phospholipase A(2) and cyclooxygenase-2 and
to reduce levels of AP-2 and NF-kappaB, transcription factors of the two enzymes.
The anti-manic drugs also decrease arachidonic acid (AA) turnover in brain
phospholipids when given chronically to rats. Thus, drugs effective in BD
commonly target AA cascade kinetics as well as AA cascade enzymes and their
transcription factors in the rat brain. These studies suggest that of BD is
associated with increased AA signaling in the brain. Developing therapeutic
agents that suppress brain AA signaling could lead to additional treatments for
BD. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of action of mood stabilizers and
the effects of docosahexaenoic acid on AA cascade enzymes in relation to BD.

PMCID: PMC2825027
PMID: 20021459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 Jul;18(7):1277-82. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.442. Epub 
2009 Dec 17.

Relation of the expression of transcriptional factor TFAP2B to that of adipokines
in subcutaneous and omental adipose tissues.

Ugi S(1), Nishio Y, Yamamoto H, Ikeda K, Kobayashi M, Tsukada S, Kondo M, Morino 
K, Obata T, Yoshizaki T, Uzu T, Naitoh H, Tani T, Maeda S, Kashiwagi A, Maegawa
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.
sugi@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp

To determine the potential role of the transcriptional factor-activating
enhancer-binding protein-2beta (TFAP2B) in the regulation of expression of
adipokines, adiponectin, leptin, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in vivo, we quantified 
the mRNA expression levels of these adipokines and TFAP2B in visceral (omental)
and abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissues of 66 individuals with variable degree
of adiposity and studied their correlations with BMI and their plasma
concentrations. We found that BMI correlated negatively with plasma adiponectin
levels and positively with those of leptin. Adiponection mRNA expression in
subcutaneous fat correlated negatively with BMI, whereas leptin mRNA levels in
the omentum correlated with plasma leptin levels and BMI. In contrast, IL-6 mRNA 
levels in subcutaneous and omental fat did not correlate with BMI. IL-6 mRNA
levels in the omental fat correlated with plasma IL-6 levels. Whereas TFAP2B mRNA
expression did not correlate with BMI, it correlated negatively with adiponectin 
expression in the subcutaneous adipose tissue. Furthermore, TFAP2B mRNA
expression correlated negatively with leptin and positively with IL-6 expression 
in both subcutaneous and omental adipose tissues. These relationships are
consistent with our in vitro observations and indicate that TFAP2B seems to
regulate the expression of various adipokines in vivo.

PMID: 20019683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Feb 15;518(4):439-58. doi: 10.1002/cne.22214.

Genetic dissection of dopaminergic and noradrenergic contributions to
catecholaminergic tracts in early larval zebrafish.

Kastenhuber E(1), Kratochwil CF, Ryu S, Schweitzer J, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute of Biology I, University of Freiburg, D-79104
Freiburg, Germany.

The catecholamines dopamine and noradrenaline provide some of the major
neuromodulatory systems with far-ranging projections in the brain and spinal cord
of vertebrates. However, development of these complex systems is only partially
understood. Zebrafish provide an excellent model for genetic analysis of neuronal
specification and axonal projections in vertebrates. Here, we analyze the
ontogeny of the catecholaminergic projections in zebrafish embryos and larvae up 
to the fifth day of development and establish the basic scaffold of
catecholaminergic connectivity. The earliest dopaminergic diencephalospinal
projections do not navigate along the zebrafish primary neuron axonal scaffold
but establish their own tracts at defined ventrolateral positions. By using
genetic tools, we study quantitative and qualitative contributions of
noradrenergic and defined dopaminergic groups to the catecholaminergic scaffold. 
Suppression of Tfap2a activity allows us to eliminate noradrenergic
contributions, and depletion of Otp activity deletes mammalian A11-like
Otp-dependent ventral diencephalic dopaminergic groups. This analysis reveals a
predominant contribution of Otp-dependent dopaminergic neurons to
diencephalospinal as well as hypothalamic catecholaminergic tracts. In contrast, 
noradrenergic projections make only a minor contribution to hindbrain and spinal 
catecholaminergic tracts. Furthermore, we can demonstrate that, in zebrafish
larvae, ascending catecholaminergic projections to the telencephalon are
generated exclusively by Otp-dependent diencephalic dopaminergic neurons as well 
as by hindbrain noradrenergic groups. Our data reveal the Otp-dependent A11-type 
dopaminergic neurons as the by far most prominent dopaminergic system in larval
zebrafish. These findings are consistent with a hypothesis that Otp-dependent
dopaminergic neurons establish the major modulatory system for somatomotor and
somatosensory circuits in larval fish.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2841826
PMID: 20017210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2009 Dec 10;9:56. doi: 10.1186/1471-2393-9-56.

Early pregnancy peripheral blood gene expression and risk of preterm delivery: a 
nested case control study.

Enquobahrie DA(1), Williams MA, Qiu C, Muhie SY, Slentz-Kesler K, Ge Z, Sorenson 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
danenq@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Preterm delivery (PTD) is a significant public health problem
associated with greater risk of mortality and morbidity in infants and mothers.
Pathophysiologic processes that may lead to PTD start early in pregnancy. We
investigated early pregnancy peripheral blood global gene expression and PTD
risk.
METHODS: As part of a prospective study, ribonucleic acid was extracted from
blood samples (collected at 16 weeks gestational age) from 14 women who had PTD
(cases) and 16 women who delivered at term (controls). Gene expressions were
measured using the GeneChip(R) Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array. Student's T-test
and fold change analysis were used to identify differentially expressed genes. We
used hierarchical clustering and principle components analysis to characterize
signature gene expression patterns among cases and controls. Pathway and promoter
sequence analyses were used to investigate functions and functional relationships
as well as regulatory regions of differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: A total of 209 genes, including potential candidate genes (e.g. PTGDS,
prostaglandin D2 synthase 21 kDa), were differentially expressed. A set of these 
genes achieved accurate pre-diagnostic separation of cases and controls. These
genes participate in functions related to immune system and inflammation, organ
development, metabolism (lipid, carbohydrate and amino acid) and cell signaling. 
Binding sites of putative transcription factors such as EGR1 (early growth
response 1), TFAP2A (transcription factor AP2A), Sp1 (specificity protein 1) and 
Sp3 (specificity protein 3) were over represented in promoter regions of
differentially expressed genes. Real-time PCR confirmed microarray expression
measurements of selected genes.
CONCLUSIONS: PTD is associated with maternal early pregnancy peripheral blood
gene expression changes. Maternal early pregnancy peripheral blood gene
expression patterns may be useful for better understanding of PTD pathophysiology
and PTD risk prediction.

PMCID: PMC2799378
PMID: 20003277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Neonatology. 2010 Jun;98(1):6-17. doi: 10.1159/000262481. Epub 2009 Dec 2.

Insights into the pathogenesis and genetic background of patency of the ductus
arteriosus.

Bökenkamp R(1), DeRuiter MC, van Munsteren C, Gittenberger-de Groot AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology , Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.

The unique differentiation program of the ductus arteriosus (DA) is essential for
its specific task during fetal life and for the adapting circulation after birth.
Phenotypic changes occur in the DA during the normal maturation and definitive
closure. Morphological abnormalities of the vessel wall characterize the
persistent DA (PDA) in older children. Here, we give an overview of the animal
models of DA regulation and remodeling. Genetic research has identified the cause
of syndromic forms of PDA, such as the TFAP2B mutations in Char syndrome. Genes
that interfere with the remodeling of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) of the
ductal media are affected in virtually all of these anomalies. Therefore, the
pivotal regulatory role of VSMCs is emphasized. A better understanding of the
genetic background of this developmental process may help develop new strategies 
to manipulate the DA in premature infants, neonates with duct-dependent
anomalies, and patients with syndromic and non-syndromic PDA.

PMID: 19955832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Arch Dermatol Res. 2010 May;302(4):283-94. doi: 10.1007/s00403-009-1007-x. Epub
2009 Nov 24.

A single UVB exposure increases the expression of functional KIT in human
melanocytes by up-regulating MITF expression through the phosphorylation of
p38/CREB.

Mizutani Y(1), Hayashi N, Kawashima M, Imokawa G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawadacho,
Shinjyuku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan.

KIT is an essential receptor that modulates melanocyte function and whose
function is disrupted in several pigmentary disorders. However, little is known
about the effects of a single UVB exposure on the expression of KIT and two
important regulatory transcription factors, MITF and AP-2 alpha, in human
melanocytes. We found that a single UVB exposure of human melanocytes induces an 
early decrease and a subsequent increase in functional KIT expression in concert 
with up-regulated MITF expression. The increased MITF expression was accompanied 
by a markedly stimulated and prolonged phosphorylation of p38/CREB. The
UVB-stimulated expression of KIT could be completely abolished by a p38
inhibitor, concomitant with a reduced phosphorylation of CREB and a
down-regulation of MITF expression. Interestingly, in non-UVB exposed human
melanocytes, a MEK inhibitor stimulated the phosphorylation of p38/CREB which was
associated with an increased production of MITF and KIT in a pattern similar to
that induced by UVB. These findings indicate that UVB stimulates functional KIT
expression in human melanocytes via the up-regulation of MITF which is, in turn, 
due to the activation of p38 and CREB.

PMID: 19937254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Feb 25;628(1-3):220-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.11.014.
Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Inhibition of protein kinase Cdelta reduces tristetraprolin expression by
destabilizing its mRNA in activated macrophages.

Leppänen T(1), Jalonen U, Korhonen R, Tuominen RK, Moilanen E.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, University of Tampere Medical School
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Tristetraprolin (TTP) binds to AU-rich elements within the mRNAs of several
inflammatory genes and causes destabilization of the target mRNAs. The protein
kinase C (PKC) pathway represents a major signalling system in inflammation and
PKCdelta is one of the key isoenzymes in the regulation of inflammatory
processes. In the present study, we investigated the role of PKCdelta in the
regulation of the expression of tristetraprolin in activated macrophages by using
the PKCdelta inhibitor, rottlerin, and by downregulating PKCdelta expression by
using PKCdelta siRNA. TTP protein and mRNA expression were measured by Western
blotting and quantitative RT-PCR, respectively. TTP and TNFalpha mRNA decays were
studied by the actinomycin D assay. In addition, we measured nuclear
translocation of transcription factors believed to be important for TTP
transcription, i.e. NF-kappaB, AP-2, SP1 and EGR1. Downregulation of PKCdelta by 
siRNA decreased significantly TTP expression in activated macrophages. Rottlerin 
also decreased TTP expression in wild type cells but not in cells in which
PKCdelta had been downregulated by siRNA. Rottlerin decreased TTP mRNA half-life 
as measured by actinomycin D assay but it did not affect the nuclear
translocation of transcription factors NF-kappaB, Sp1, AP-2 or EGR1 (which have
been shown to be involved in TTP transcription). In addition, rottlerin reduced
the decay of TNFalpha mRNA, which is an important target of TTP. The results
suggest that PKCdelta up-regulates the expression of TTP by stabilizing its mRNA 
which may serve as a feed-back loop to regulate the inflammatory response.

PMID: 19925787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(6):R83. doi: 10.1186/bcr2450. Epub 2009 Nov 11.

Ku proteins interact with activator protein-2 transcription factors and
contribute to ERBB2 overexpression in breast cancer cell lines.

Nolens G(1), Pignon JC, Koopmansch B, Elmoualij B, Zorzi W, De Pauw E, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, GIGA Cancer, University of Liège, B34,
avenue de l'hopital, Liege, 4000, Belgium. gnolens@gmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Activator protein-2 (AP-2) alpha and AP-2gamma transcription
factors contribute to ERBB2 gene overexpression in breast cancer. In order to
understand the mechanism by which the ERBB2 gene is overexpressed we searched for
novel AP-2 interacting factors that contribute to its activity.
METHODS: Ku proteins were identified as AP-2alpha interacting proteins by
glutathione serine transferase (GST)-pull down followed by mass spectrometry.
Transfection of the cells with siRNA, expression vectors and reporter vectors as 
well as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay were used to ascertain the
implication of Ku proteins on ERBB2 expression.
RESULTS: Nuclear proteins from BT-474 cells overexpressing AP-2alpha and
AP-2gamma were incubated with GST-AP2 or GST coated beads. Among the proteins
retained specifically on GST-AP2 coated beads Ku70 and Ku80 proteins were
identified by mass spectrometry. The contribution of Ku proteins to ERBB2 gene
expression in BT-474 and SKBR3 cell lines was investigated by downregulating Ku
proteins through the use of specific siRNAs. Depletion of Ku proteins led to
downregulation of ERBB2 mRNA and protein levels. Furthermore, reduction of Ku80
in HCT116 cell line decreased the AP-2alpha activity on a reporter vector
containing an AP-2 binding site linked to the ERBB2 core promoter, and
transfection of Ku80 increased the activity of AP-2alpha on this promoter. Ku
siRNAs also inhibited the activity of this reporter vector in BT-474 and SKBR3
cell lines and the activity of the ERBB2 promoter was further reduced by
combining Ku siRNAs with AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma siRNAs. ChIP experiments with
chromatin extracted from wild type or AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma or Ku70 siRNA
transfected BT-474 cells demonstrated Ku70 recruitment to the ERBB2 proximal
promoter in association with AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma. Moreover, Ku70 siRNA like
AP-2 siRNAs, greatly reduced PolII recruitment to the ERBB2 proximal promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Ku proteins in interaction with AP-2 (alpha and gamma) contribute to
increased ERBB2 mRNA and protein levels in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2815545
PMID: 19906305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Nov 6;5(5):554-66. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.10.004.

A robust and highly efficient immune cell reprogramming system.

Bussmann LH(1), Schubert A, Vu Manh TP, De Andres L, Desbordes SC, Parra M,
Zimmermann T, Rapino F, Rodriguez-Ubreva J, Ballestar E, Graf T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Regulation and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain.

Here we describe a lineage reprogramming system consisting of a B cell line with 
an estradiol-inducible form of C/EBPalpha where cells can be converted into
macrophage-like cells at 100% efficiency within 2 to 3 days. The reprogrammed
cells are larger, contain altered organelle and cytoskeletal structures, are
phagocytic, and exhibit an inflammatory response. Time-lapse experiments showed
that the cells acquire a macrophage morphology and increased migratory activity
as early as 10 hr. During induction, thousands of genes become up- or
downregulated, including several dozen transcription and chromatin-remodeling
factors. Time-limited exposure of cells to the inducer showed that the
reprogrammed cells become transgene independent within 1 to 2 days. The
reprogramming can be inhibited, at least partially, by perturbation experiments
with B cell and macrophage transcription factors. The tightness, robustness, and 
speed of the system described make it a versatile tool to study biochemical and
biological aspects of lineage reprogramming.

PMID: 19896445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Genes Dev. 2009 Nov 1;23(21):2507-20. doi: 10.1101/gad.1831909.

Eset partners with Oct4 to restrict extraembryonic trophoblast lineage potential 
in embryonic stem cells.

Yuan P(1), Han J, Guo G, Orlov YL, Huss M, Loh YH, Yaw LP, Robson P, Lim B, Ng
HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672.

The histone H3 Lys 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase Eset is an epigenetic regulator
critical for the development of the inner cell mass (ICM). Although ICM-derived
embryonic stem (ES) cells are normally unable to contribute to the trophectoderm 
(TE) in blastocysts, we find that depletion of Eset by shRNAs leads to
differentiation with the formation of trophoblast-like cells and induction of
trophoblast-associated gene expression. Using chromatin immmunoprecipitation
(ChIP) and sequencing (ChIP-seq) analyses, we identified Eset target genes with
Eset-dependent H3K9 trimethylation. We confirmed that genes that are
preferentially expressed in the TE (Tcfap2a and Cdx2) are bound and repressed by 
Eset. Single-cell PCR analysis shows that the expression of Cdx2 and Tcfap2a is
also induced in Eset-depleted morula cells. Importantly, Eset-depleted cells can 
incorporate into the TE of a blastocyst and, subsequently, placental tissues.
Coimmunoprecipitation and ChIP assays further demonstrate that Eset interacts
with Oct4, which in turn recruits Eset to silence these trophoblast-associated
genes. Our results suggest that Eset restricts the extraembryonic trophoblast
lineage potential of pluripotent cells and links an epigenetic regulator to key
cell fate decision through a pluripotency factor.

PMCID: PMC2779752
PMID: 19884257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2010 Apr 15;134(3-4):279-83. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2009.09.002. Epub 2009 Sep 23.

Molecular cloning, promoter analysis and SNP identification of Italian Nicastrese
and Saanen lactoferrin gene.

Pauciullo A(1), Cosenza G, Nicodemo D, Gallo D, Mancusi A, Crepaldi P, Di
Berardino D, Ramunno L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Soil, Plant, Environment and Animal Production Science,
University of Naples Federico II, Napoli, Italy.

Lactoferrin (Lf) is an iron-binding glycoprotein found in exocrine secretions
including milk. High levels of lactoferrin may have a role in the prevention of
microbial infection of the mammary gland. In this report we sequenced and
characterized goat lactoferrin cDNA and its promoter region in two different
breeds of goat. The complete cDNA comprised 2356 nucleotides, including 38 bp at 
the 5'-UTR and 194 bp at the 3'-UTR. The open reading frame is 2127 bp long and
it encodes a mature protein of 689 aminoacids. A total of 19 nucleotide
differences, 11 of them being responsible for 8 aminoacid changes, were
identified through the comparison with French, Korean and Tibetan goat
lactoferrin cDNAs. About 1700 bp of the lactoferrin gene promoter were sequenced.
Sequence analysis revealed a non-canonical TATA box, multiple SP1/GC elements,
and other putative binding sites for transcription factors, such as NF-kappaB,
STAT3 and AP2. Two SNPs were identified, one of which would seem to create a new 
putative AP2 consensus sequence. The presence of an additional AP2 binding site
could be associated with quantitative differences of such protein fraction, which
could enhance all the activities related to such protein, and improve mammary
gland defence against bacterial infections.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19853309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Placenta. 2009 Dec;30(12):1029-36. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2009.09.010. Epub 2009
Oct 22.

p53 Mediates epidermal growth factor (EGF) induction of MMP-2 transcription and
trophoblast invasion.

Staun-Ram E(1), Goldman S, Shalev E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Research in Reproductive Sciences, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Afula, Israel.

Trophoblast invasion is a highly restricted process, regulated by growth factors,
hormones and cytokines. Trophoblast invasion is attainable due to proteolytic
degradation of the epithelial basement membrane and the extracellular matrix by
proteolytic enzymes like the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) particularly MMP-2.
Epidermal growth factor (EGF), a major mediator of implantation, has been
documented to induce MMP-2 and trophoblast invasion. The aim of this study was to
investigate the transcriptional regulation of MMP-2 in EGF- stimulated invasive
trophoblast cells, using JAR choriocarcinoma cell line and 6-8w 1st trimester
trophoblasts. MMP-2 expression was induced by EGF within 1 hour. Gelshift and
supershift assay were used to explore transcription factors involved in MMP-2
regulation. EGF induced binding activity and expression of phophorylated p53,
AP-2alpha and -gamma, C/EBPepsilon and -lambda to their responding sequences,
found in the MMP-2 promoter. Additionally EGF induced binding activity to SP-1,
but reduced the expression of SP-1 and SP-4. Inhibition of p53 by antisense
reduced both basic and EGF- induced MMP-2 expression. In summary: MMP-2
transcriptional regulation by EGF in invasive trophoblasts is mediated through
several binding sites and transcription factors including p53, AP-2alpha and
-gamma, C/EBPepsilon and -lambda and SP-1. p53 mediates both basic and
EGF-induced MMP-2 transcription.

PMID: 19853299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Mol Neurosci. 2010 Jun;41(2):267-77. doi: 10.1007/s12031-009-9299-z. Epub 2009 
Oct 20.

Role of AP-2alpha transcription factor in the regulation of synapsin II gene
expression by dopamine D1 and D2 receptors.

Skoblenick KJ(1), Argintaru N, Xu Y, Dyck BA, Basu D, Tan ML, Mazurek MF, Mishra 
RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurosciences, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada. skoblek@mcmaster.ca

Synapsins are a family of neuron-specific phosphoproteins involved in synaptic
vesicle docking, synaptogenesis, and synaptic plasticity. Previous studies have
reported an increase in synapsin II protein by dopaminergic agents in the
striatum, medial prefrontal cortex, and nucleus accumbens. This study
investigated the mechanistic pathway involved in synapsin II regulation by
dopaminergic drugs using primary midbrain neurons to determine which of several
transcription factors regulates synapsin II expression. Protein kinase A (PKA)
participation in the signaling pathway was examined using selective PKA
inhibitors, which reduced synapsin II expression in cell cultures while
dopaminergic agents were unable to increase synapsin II in the presence of the
PKA inhibitor. Transcription factor involvement was further investigated using
separate cultures treated with antisense deoxyoligonucleotides (ADONs) against
the following transcription factors: activating protein 2 alpha (AP-2alpha),
early growth response factor 1 (EGR-1), or polyoma enhancer activator-3 (PEA-3). 
Selective knockdown of AP-2alpha by ADONs reduced synapsin II levels, whereas
treatment with EGR-1 and PEA-3 ADONs did not affect synapsin II expression.
Furthermore, dopaminergic agents were no longer able to influence synapsin II
concentrations following AP-2alpha knockdown. Collectively, these results
indicate that a cyclic adenosine-3',5'-monophosphate/PKA-dependent mechanism
involving the AP-2alpha transcription factor is likely responsible for the
increase in neuronal synapsin II following dopamine D1 receptor stimulation or
dopamine D2 receptor inhibition.

PMID: 19842069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jan;101(1):259-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01359.x. Epub
2009 Sep 10.

Molecular markers associated with lymph node metastasis in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma by genome-wide expression profiling.

Hirono S(1), Yamaue H, Hoshikawa Y, Ina S, Tani M, Kawai M, Ushijima M, Matsuura 
M, Saiki Y, Saiura A, Yamamoto J, Miki Y, Noda T.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, Wakayama Medical University,
Wakayama, Japan.

Lymph node metastasis (LNM) is the most important prognostic factor in patients
undergoing surgical resection of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC). In this
study, we aimed to identify molecular markers associated with LNM in PDAC using
genome-wide expression profiling. In this study, laser microdissection and
genome-wide transcriptional profiling were used to identify genes that were
differentially expressed between PDAC cells with and without LNM obtained from 20
patients with PDAC. Immunohistochemical staining was used to confirm the clinical
significance of these markers in an additional validation set of 43 patients. In 
the results, microarray profiling identified 46 genes that were differently
expressed between PDAC with and without LNM with certain significance. Four of
these biomarkers were validated by immunohistochemical staining for association
with LNM in PDAC in an additional validation set of patients. In 63 patients with
PDAC, significant LNM predictors in PDAC elucidated from multivariate analysis
were low expression of activating enhancer binding protein 2 (AP2alpha) (P =
0.012) and high expression of mucin 17 (MUC17) (P = 0.0192). Furthermore,
multivariate analysis revealed that AP2alpha-low expression and MUC17-high
expression are independent prognostic factors for poor overall survival (P =
0.0012, 0.0001, respectively). In conclusion, AP2alpha and MUC17 were independent
markers associated with LNM of PDAC. These two markers were also associated with 
survival in patients with resected PDAC. We demonstrate that AP2alpha and MUC17
may serve as potential prognostic molecular markers for LNM in patients with
PDAC.

PMID: 19817750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. EMBO J. 2009 Nov 18;28(22):3591-601. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.290. Epub 2009 Oct
1.

AP-2gamma promotes proliferation in breast tumour cells by direct repression of
the CDKN1A gene.

Williams CM(1), Scibetta AG, Friedrich JK, Canosa M, Berlato C, Moss CH, Hurst
HC.

Author information: 
(1)Barts & The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of 
London, Centre for Tumour Biology, Institute of Cancer, Charterhouse Square,
London, UK.

Overexpression of the activator protein (AP)-2gamma transcription factor in
breast tumours has been identified as an independent predictor of poor outcome
and failure of hormone therapy. To understand further the function of AP-2gamma
in breast carcinoma, we have used an RNA interference and gene expression
profiling strategy with the MCF-7 cell line as a model. Gene expression changes
between control and silenced cells implicate AP-2gamma in the control of cell
cycle progression and developmental signalling. A function for AP-2gamma in cell 
cycle control was verified using flow cytometry: AP-2gamma silencing led to a
partial G1/S arrest and induction of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor,
p21cip/CDKN1A. Reporter and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated a
direct, functional interaction by AP-2gamma at the CDKN1A proximal promoter.
AP-2gamma silencing coincided with acquisition of an active chromatin
conformation at the CDKN1A locus and increased gene expression. These data
provide a mechanism whereby AP-2gamma overexpression can promote breast
epithelial proliferation and, coupled with previously published data, suggest how
loss of oestrogen regulation of AP-2gamma may contribute to the failure of
hormone therapy in patients.

PMCID: PMC2782101
PMID: 19798054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Craniofac Surg. 2009 Mar;20 Suppl 1:608-11.

Lesser forms of cleft lip associated with the branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

Lin AE(1), Yuzuriha S, McLean S, Mulliken JB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Unit, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, USA.
lin.angela@mgh.harvard.edu

Erratum in
    J Craniofac Surg. 2009 Sep;20(5):1629-30.

Lesser forms of incomplete cleft lip (CL) have been called microform, occult,
forme fruste, and congenitally healed. The association of a minimal bilateral CL 
in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is well described and commonly referred 
to as a "pseudocleft." We conducted a systematic analysis of CL types in BOFS,
including a retrospective cross-sectional chart and photographic review with
variable longitudinal follow-up of our patients and those described in the
literature. We compared data on the type of CL and palate (CL/P) and craniofacial
and extracranial anomalies in patients with BOFS and classified the lesser forms 
CL as either minor-form, microform, or mini-microform as defined by the extent of
disruption at the vermilion-cutaneous junction. The study comprised 62 patients
with BOFS (1 new and 61 in literature, 4 treated by J.B.M). Forty-four patients
(71%) had CL only; 16 (26%) had CL/P; and 2 patients had neither CL nor isolated 
CP. Thirty-five patients with CL had adequate information for analysis (defined
as either seen by J.B.M., having a published photograph, or having a detailed
description). The most common type was bilateral symmetrical, lesser form CL (n =
20): minor-form (n = 2), microform (n = 6), or mini-microform (n = 12). Among 17 
asymmetrical forms, the left side was more severely affected side than the right 
(12 vs 5). Of 9 patients with CL/P and adequate clinical description, 4 were
bilaterally symmetrically complete. Other anomalies, in addition to the familiar 
cardinal features of BOFS, included facial nerve weakness (n = 6), chin dimple or
cleft of the lower lip (n = 4), upper labial pits (n = 6), minor digital
anomalies (n = 12), renal anomalies (n = 14), and ectopic thymus (n = 18). This
analysis reaffirms the high frequency of CL or CL/P in BOFS and the rarity of
isolated cleft palate and underscores that the term "pseudocleft" lip is
incorrect. The more precise lesser form designations used in this study may prove
useful for future clinical studies because the causative gene, TFAP2A, is known. 
Lesser forms of CL may be the most subtle expression of BOFS and assist in
identifying patients. Unlike major forms of CL/P, either, syndromic or non
syndromic, lesser forms suggest that the developmental insult occurs later in
labial formation when fusion of the medial nasal process and maxillary process is
nearly complete. The deficient vermilion-mucosa and hypoplastic orbicularis oris 
may be the result of incomplete or deficient mesodermal penetration of the
ectodermal envelope. Another possible pathogenic explanation is that failure of
labial closure occurs earlier than in a major cleft when the primitive cells of
ectoderm and mesoderm retain the capacity to "heal" the defect.

PMID: 19795528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1211-2. doi: 10.1038/nn1009-1211.

Regional control of cortical lamination.

Waclaw RR(1), Campbell K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1229-37.

PMID: 19783976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Brain Res. 2009 Dec 11;1305 Suppl:S20-6. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.09.054.
Epub 2009 Sep 22.

Transcription factor AP2 beta involved in severe female alcoholism.

Nordquist N(1), Göktürk C, Comasco E, Nilsson KW, Oreland L, Hallman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section for Pharmacology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. niklas.nordquist@neuro.uu.se

Susceptibility to alcoholism and antisocial behavior exhibits an evident link to 
monoaminergic neurotransmission. The serotonin system in particular, which is
associated with regulation of mood and behavior, has an influence on personality 
characters that are firmly connected to risk of developing alcoholism and
antisocial behavior, such as impulsiveness, and aggression. The transcription
factor TFAP2b has repeatedly been shown to be involved in monoaminergic
transmission, likely due to a regulatory effect on genes that are fundamental to 
this system, e.g. monoamine oxidase type A, and the serotonin transporter. Recent
research has identified a functional polymorphism in the gene encoding TFAP2B
that regulates its level of expression. In the present study we have compared a
sample of female alcoholics (n=107), sentenced to institutional care for their
severe addiction, contrasted against a control sample of adolescent females
(n=875). The results showed that parental alcohol misuse was significantly more
common among the alcoholic females, and also that parental alcohol misuse was
associated with a reduction in age of alcohol debut. We also addressed the
question of whether a functional TFAP2b polymorphism was associated with
alcoholism. Results showed that the high-functioning allele was significantly
more common among the female alcoholics, compared to the non-alcoholic controls. 
Furthermore, the results also indicated that psychosocial factors, in terms of
parental alcohol misuse, depression or psychiatric disorder, had an influence on 
the association. It was observed that the genetic association was restricted to
the subset of cases that had not experienced these negative psychosocial factors.

PMID: 19778525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):214-23. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078717. Epub 2009
Sep 23.

Critical function of AP-2 gamma/TCFAP2C in mouse embryonic germ cell maintenance.

Weber S(1), Eckert D, Nettersheim D, Gillis AJ, Schäfer S, Kuckenberg P,
Ehlermann J, Werling U, Biermann K, Looijenga LH, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Formation of the germ cell lineage involves multiple processes, including
repression of somatic differentiation and reacquisition of pluripotency as well
as a unique epigenetic constitution. The transcriptional regulator Prdm1 has been
identified as a main coordinator of this process, controlling epigenetic
modification and gene expression. Here we report on the expression pattern of the
transcription factor Tcfap2c, a putative downstream target of Prdm1, during
normal mouse embryogenesis and the consequences of its specific loss in
primordial germ cells (PGCs) and their derivatives. Tcfap2c is expressed in PGCs 
from Embryonic Day 7.25 (E 7.25) up to E 12.5, and targeted disruption resulted
in sterile animals, both male and female. In the mutant animals, PGCs were
specified but were lost around E 8.0. PGCs generated in vitro from embryonic stem
cells lacking TCFAP2C displayed induction of Prdm1 and Dppa3. Upregulation of
Hoxa1, Hoxb1, and T together with lack of expression of germ cell markers such
Nanos3, Dazl, and Mutyh suggested that the somatic gene program is induced in
TCFAP2C-deficient PGCs. Repression of TCFAP2C in TCam-2, a human PGC-resembling
seminoma cell line, resulted in specific upregulation of HOXA1, HOXB1, MYOD1, and
HAND1, indicative of mesodermal differentiation. Expression of genes indicative
of ectodermal, endodermal, or extraembryonic differentiation, as well as the
finding of no change to epigenetic modifications, suggested control by other
factors. Our results implicate Tcfap2c as an important effector of Prdm1 activity
that is required for PGC maintenance, most likely mediating Prdm1-induced
suppression of mesodermal differentiation.

PMID: 19776388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Oct;149A(10):2141-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33015.

Confirmation of TFAP2A gene involvement in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) 
and report of temporal bone anomalies.

Stoetzel C(1), Riehm S, Bennouna Greene V, Pelletier V, Vigneron J, Leheup B,
Marion V, Hellé S, Danse JM, Thibault C, Moulinier L, Veillon F, Dollfus H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale EA 3949, Equipe Avenir-Inserm, Faculté de
Médecine de Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is an autosomal-dominant condition
characterized by three main features, respectively: branchial defects, ocular
anomalies, and craniofacial defects including cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P). We 
report on one family with three affected, and two sporadic cases that have been
found to carry missense mutations in the newly reported BOFS gene: TFAP2A. This
report confirms the involvement of this transcription factor in this
developmental syndrome with clinical variability. Moreover, we present CT scan
temporal bone anomalies in the familial cases, related to branchial arch defects,
highlighting the importance of radiological investigations for differential
diagnosis.

PMID: 19764023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 14;4(9):e7019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007019.

Transcriptional regulation of PP2A-A alpha is mediated by multiple factors
including AP-2alpha, CREB, ETS-1, and SP-1.

Chen HG(1), Han WJ, Deng M, Qin J, Yuan D, Liu JP, Xiao L, Gong L, Liang S, Zhang
J, Liu Y, Li DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, United States of America.

Protein phosphatases-2A (PP-2A) is a major serine/threonine phosphatase and
accounts for more than 50% serine/threonine phosphatase activity in eukaryotes.
The holoenzyme of PP-2A consists of the scaffold A subunit, the catalytic C
subunit and the regulatory B subunit. The scaffold subunits, PP2A-A alpha/beta,
provide a platform for both C and B subunits to bind, thus playing a crucial role
in providing specific PP-2A activity. Mutation of the two genes encoding PP2A-A
alpha/beta leads to carcinogenesis and likely other human diseases. Regulation of
these genes by various factors, both extracellular and intracellular, remains
largely unknown. In the present study, we have conducted functional dissection of
the promoter of the mouse PP2A-A alpha gene. Our results demonstrate that the
proximal promoter of the mouse PP2A-A alpha gene contains numerous cis-elements
for the binding of CREB, ETS-1, AP-2 alpha, SP-1 besides the putative TFIIB
binding site (BRE) and the downstream promoter element (DPE). Gel mobility
shifting assays revealed that CREB, ETS-1, AP-2 alpha, and SP-1 all bind to
PP2A-A alpha gene promoter. In vitro mutagenesis and reporter gene activity
assays reveal that while SP-1 displays negative regulation, CREB, ETS-1 and AP-2A
alpha all positively regulate the promoter of the PP2A-A alpha gene. ChIP assays 
further confirm that all the above transcription factors participate the
regulation of PP2A-A alpha gene promoter. Together, our results reveal that
multiple transcription factors regulate the PP2A-A alpha gene.

PMCID: PMC2736573
PMID: 19750005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1229-37. doi: 10.1038/nn.2399. Epub 2009 Sep 13.

AP2gamma regulates basal progenitor fate in a region- and layer-specific manner
in the developing cortex.

Pinto L(1), Drechsel D, Schmid MT, Ninkovic J, Irmler M, Brill MS, Restani L,
Gianfranceschi L, Cerri C, Weber SN, Tarabykin V, Baer K, Guillemot F, Beckers J,
Zecevic N, Dehay C, Caleo M, Schorle H, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Institute for Stem Cell Research, Neuherberg/Munich, Germany.
luisapinto@ecsaude.uminho.pt [corrected]

Erratum in
    Nat Neurosci. 2010 May;13(5):649.
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1237.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1211-2.

An important feature of the cerebral cortex is its layered organization, which is
modulated in an area-specific manner. We found that the transcription factor
AP2gamma regulates laminar fate in a region-specific manner. Deletion of AP2gamma
(also known as Tcfap2c) during development resulted in a specific reduction of
upper layer neurons in the occipital cortex, leading to impaired function and
enhanced plasticity of the adult visual cortex. AP2gamma functions in apical
progenitors, and its absence resulted in mis-specification of basal progenitors
in the occipital cortex at the time at which upper layer neurons were generated. 
AP2gamma directly regulated the basal progenitor fate determinants Math3 (also
known as Neurod4) and Tbr2, and its overexpression promoted the generation of
layer II/III neurons in a time- and region-specific manner. Thus, AP2gamma acts
as a regulator of basal progenitor fate, linking regional and laminar
specification in the mouse developing cerebral cortex.

PMID: 19749747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 9;4(9):e6931. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006931.

AP-2alpha induces epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressive genes and
microsatellite instability in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Bennett KL(1), Romigh T, Eng C.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Medicine Institute, Lerner Research Institute and Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Activator protein 2 alpha (AP-2alpha) is involved in a variety of
physiological processes. Increased AP-2alpha expression correlates with
progression in various squamous cell carcinomas, and a recent publication found
AP-2alpha to be overexpressed in approximately 70% of Head and Neck Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (HNSCC) patient samples. It was found to repress transcription of the
tumor suppressor gene C/CAAT Enhancer Binding Protein alpha (C/EBPalpha), and its
binding site correlated with upstream methylation of the C/EBPalpha promoter.
Therefore, we investigated the potential for AP-2alpha to target methylation to
additional genes that would be relevant to HNSCC pathogenesis.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Stable downregulation of AP-2alpha stable by shRNA in HNSCC
cell lines correlated with decreased methylation of its target genes' regulatory 
regions. Furthermore, methylation of MLH1 in HNSCC with and without AP-2alpha
downregulation revealed a correlation with microsatellite instability (MSI). ChIP
analysis was used to confirm binding of AP-2alpha and HDAC1/2 to the targets. The
effects of HDAC inhibition was assessed using Trichostatin A in a HNSCC cell
line, which revealed that AP-2alpha targets methylation through HDAC recruitment.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are significant because they suggest AP-2alpha plays 
a role not only in epigenetic silencing, but also in genomic instability. This
intensifies the potential level of regulation AP-2alpha has through
transcriptional regulation. Furthermore, these findings have the potential to
revolutionize the field of HNSCC therapy, and more generally the field of
epigenetic therapy, by targeting a single gene that is involved in the malignant 
transformation via disrupting DNA repair and cell cycle control.

PMCID: PMC2734430
PMID: 19742317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2009 Sep;30(9):1297-306. doi: 10.1038/aps.2009.124. Epub 2009
Aug 24.

n-Butylidenephthalide induced apoptosis in the A549 human lung adenocarcinoma
cell line by coupled down-regulation of AP-2alpha and telomerase activity.

Wei CW(1), Lin CC, Yu YL, Lin CY, Lin PC, Wu MT, Chen CJ, Chang W, Lin SZ, Chen
YL, Harn HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Nutrition, College of Medicines and Nursings,
Hungkuang University, Taichung, Taiwan, China;

AIM: To investigate the role of hTERT gene expression and AP-2alpha in
n-butylidenephthalide (n-BP)-induced apoptosis in A549 lung cancer cells.
METHODS: Viability of A549 cells was measured by MTT assay. Protein expression
was determined by Western blot. Telomerase activity was measured using the
modified telomere repeat amplification protocol (TRAP) assay. Xenograft mice were
used as a model system to study the cytotoxic effect of n-BP in vivo. The
morphology of tumor was examined by immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: The growth of A549 lung cancer cells treated with n-BP was significantly
inhibited. Telomerase activity and hTERT mRNA expression were determined by
telomeric repeat amplification protocol and reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction, respectively. n-BP inhibited telomerase activity and hTERT mRNA
expression in A549 cells while overexpression of hTERT could abolish BP-induced
growth inhibition in the A549 cells. We also showed that hTERT promoter activity 
in the presence of n-BP was mediated via AP-2alpha. We saw an inhibition of tumor
growth when nude mice carrying A549 subcutaneous xenograft tumors were treated
with n-BP. Immunohistochemistry of this tumor tissue also showed a decrease in
the expression of hTERT.
CONCLUSION: The antiproliferative effects of n-BP on A549 cells in vitro and in
vivo suggest a novel clinical application of this compound in the treatment of
lung cancers.

PMCID: PMC4007174
PMID: 19701232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Jan 15;316(2):194-202. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.08.008. Epub 
2009 Aug 21.

AP-2 alpha suppresses skeletal myoblast proliferation and represses fibroblast
growth factor receptor 1 promoter activity.

Mitchell DL(1), DiMario JX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind
Franklin University of Medicine and Science, 3333 Green Bay Road, North Chicago, 
IL 60064, USA.

Skeletal muscle development is partly characterized by myoblast proliferation and
subsequent differentiation into postmitotic muscle fibers. Developmental
regulation of expression of the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) gene 
is required for normal myoblast proliferation and muscle formation. As a result, 
FGFR1 promoter activity is controlled by multiple transcriptional regulatory
proteins during both proliferation and differentiation of myogenic cells. The
transcription factor AP-2 alpha is present in nuclei of skeletal muscle cells and
suppresses myoblast proliferation in vitro. Since FGFR1 gene expression is
tightly linked to myoblast proliferation versus differentiation, the FGFR1
promoter was examined for candidate AP-2 alpha binding sites. Mutagenesis studies
indicated that a candidate binding site located at -1035 bp functioned as a
repressor cis-regulatory element. Furthermore, mutation of this site alleviated
AP-2 alpha-mediated repression of FGFR1 promoter activity. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated that AP-2 alpha interacted with the
FGFR1 promoter in both proliferating myoblasts and differentiated myotubes. In
total, these results indicate that AP-2 alpha is a transcriptional repressor of
FGFR1 gene expression during skeletal myogenesis.

PMID: 19699737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Folia Biol (Praha). 2009;55(4):137-44.

Cloning, characterization, chromosomal mapping and tissue transcription analysis 
of porcine CREB2 and CREB3 genes.

Qi M(1), Lei T, Zhou L, Chen XD, Long H, Long QQ, Zhang RR, Yang ZQ, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)College of Plant Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan, China.

CREB2 and CREB3 are two important members of the ATF/CREB family, which
negatively and positively regulates CRE-dependent transcription in vitro. Here we
report the cloning, chromosome mapping and tissue transcription analysis of CREB2
and CREB3 in pigs. The full-length coding sequence of CREB2 and CREB3 is 1047 bp 
and 1098 bp, encoding 348 and 365 amino acids, respectively. Porcine CREB3
comprises nine exons and eight introns, whereas CREB2 consists of three exons and
two introns. CREB2 and CREB3 were cytogenetically assigned to porcine chromosome 
5p and 1q28, respectively. Tissue transcription analysis revealed that both
porcine CREB2 and CREB3 mRNA were ubiquitously detected in all examined tissues. 
Additionally, we cloned the 5' flank genomic sequence of porcine CREB3 and
characterized several putative transcription factor recognition sites including
SP1, NF-kappaB, AP-1 and AP-2 in its promoter region. Our studies provide basic
molecular information helpful for further investigation of the function of the
two genes in pig models.

PMID: 19691921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;126(6):791-803. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0730-x.

Reduced TFAP2A function causes variable optic fissure closure and retinal defects
and sensitizes eye development to mutations in other morphogenetic regulators.

Gestri G(1), Osborne RJ, Wyatt AW, Gerrelli D, Gribble S, Stewart H, Fryer A,
Bunyan DJ, Prescott K, Collin JR, Fitzgerald T, Robinson D, Carter NP, Wilson SW,
Ragge NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, UCL, London, UK.

Mutations in the transcription factor encoding TFAP2A gene underlie
branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS), a rare dominant disorder characterized by 
distinctive craniofacial, ocular, ectodermal and renal anomalies. To elucidate
the range of ocular phenotypes caused by mutations in TFAP2A, we took three
approaches. First, we screened a cohort of 37 highly selected individuals with
severe ocular anomalies plus variable defects associated with BOFS for mutations 
or deletions in TFAP2A. We identified one individual with a de novo TFAP2A four
amino acid deletion, a second individual with two non-synonymous variations in an
alternative splice isoform TFAP2A2, and a sibling-pair with a paternally
inherited whole gene deletion with variable phenotypic expression. Second, we
determined that TFAP2A is expressed in the lens, neural retina, nasal process,
and epithelial lining of the oral cavity and palatal shelves of human and mouse
embryos--sites consistent with the phenotype observed in patients with BOFS.
Third, we used zebrafish to examine how partial abrogation of the fish ortholog
of TFAP2A affects the penetrance and expressivity of ocular phenotypes due to
mutations in genes encoding bmp4 or tcf7l1a. In both cases, we observed
synthetic, enhanced ocular phenotypes including coloboma and anophthalmia when
tfap2a is knocked down in embryos with bmp4 or tcf7l1a mutations. These results
reveal that mutations in TFAP2A are associated with a wide range of eye
phenotypes and that hypomorphic tfap2a mutations can increase the risk of
developmental defects arising from mutations at other loci.

PMCID: PMC3083835
PMID: 19685247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Jun;37(5):2227-34. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9709-x. Epub 2009
Aug 12.

Molecular characterization, expression profile and association analysis with
carcass traits of porcine LCAT gene.

Qiao M(1), Wu HY, Li FE, Jiang SW, Xiong YZ, Deng CY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Pig Genetics and Breeding of Ministry of Agriculture & Key
Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of Ministry
of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, 430070, Wuhan, People's Republic 
of China.

The lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase gene (LCAT) plays an important role in
lipoprotein metabolism, especially in the process termed 'reverse cholesterol
transport'. In this study, we obtained the 1,434 bp mRNA sequence of porcine LCAT
including the full coding region and encoding a protein of 472 amino acids. The
sequence was deposited into the GenBank under the accession no. EU717835. The
genomic sequence of this gene which contains six exons and five introns, is 3,712
bp in length (GQ379050). Bioinformatic analysis of the 5' regulatory region has
revealed that some transcription factor Sp1, AP-1, AP-2 and NF-kappaB were
represented in this region. Tissue expression analysis showed that the porcine
LCAT gene is ubiquitously expressed in all examined tissues. Phylogenetic tree
was constructed by aligning the amino acid sequences of different species.
Moreover, we found a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, C/G266) in intron 1 of 
the LCAT gene and association analysis showed that it was significantly
associated with ratio of lean to fat (P < 0.05), caul fat weight (P < 0.01), leaf
fat weight (P < 0.05), carcass length (P < 0.05) and bone percentage (P < 0.05). 
Our study will lay the groundwork for the further investigations on the detailed 
physiological function of LCAT in pig models.

PMID: 19672691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Br J Cancer. 2009 Aug 18;101(4):637-44. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605190.

Tumour growth and resistance to gemcitabine of pancreatic cancer cells are
decreased by AP-2alpha overexpression.

Jonckheere N(1), Fauquette V, Stechly L, Saint-Laurent N, Aubert S, Susini C,
Huet G, Porchet N, Van Seuningen I, Pigny P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U837, Université de Lille 2, Centre de Recherche Jean-Pierre Aubert,
Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Activator protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) is a transcription factor that
belongs to the family of AP-2 proteins that have essential roles in
tumorigenesis. Indeed, AP-2alpha is considered as a tumour-suppressor gene in
different tissues such as colonic, prostatic or breast epithelial cells.
Moreover, AP-2alpha also participates in the control of colon and breast cancer
cells sensitivity towards chemotherapeutic drugs. Despite its potential interest,
very few data are available regarding the roles of AP-2alpha in pancreatic
cancer.
METHODS: We have developed a stable pancreatic CAPAN-1 cell line overexpressing
AP-2alpha. Consequences of overexpression were studied in terms of in vivo cell
growth, gene expression, migration capacity and chemosensitivity.
RESULTS: In vivo tumour growth of CAPAN-1 cells overexpressing AP-2alpha was
significantly decreased by comparison to control cells. An altered expression
pattern of cell cycle-controlling factors (CDK-4, CDK-6, cyclin-G1, p27(kip1) and
p57(kip2)) was observed in AP-2alpha-overexpressing clones by microarrays and
western blot analysis. Promoter activity and ChIP analysis indicated that
AP-2alpha induces p27(kip1) protein levels by direct binding to and
transactivation of its promoter. Moreover, AP-2alpha overexpression increased the
chemosensitivity of CAPAN-1 cells to low doses of gemcitabine and reduced their
in vitro migration capacity.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggested that AP-2alpha overexpression could be exploited
to decrease in vivo tumour growth of pancreatic cancer cells and to increase
their sensitivity to gemcitabine.

PMCID: PMC2736821
PMID: 19672266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. BMC Cancer. 2009 Aug 11;9:279. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-279.

Identification of target genes of transcription factor activator protein 2 gamma 
in breast cancer cells.

Ailan H(1), Xiangwen X, Daolong R, Lu G, Xiaofeng D, Xi Q, Xingwang H, Rushi L,
Jian Z, Shuanglin X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of State
Education Ministry of China, PR China. pdheailan@126.com

BACKGROUND: Activator protein 2 gamma (AP-2gamma) is a member of the
transcription factor activator protein-2 (AP-2) family, which is developmentally 
regulated and plays a role in human neoplasia. AP-2gamma has been found to be
overexpressed in most breast cancers, and have a dual role to inhibit tumor
initiation and promote tumor progression afterwards during mammary tumorigensis.
METHODS: To identify the gene targets that mediate its effects, we performed
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) to isolate AP-2gamma binding sites on
genomic DNA from human breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-453.
RESULTS: 20 novel DNA fragments proximal to potential AP-2gamma targets were
obtained. They are categorized into functional groups of carcinogenesis,
metabolism and others. A combination of sequence analysis, reporter gene assays, 
quantitative real-time PCR, electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays and
immunoblot analysis further confirmed the four AP-2gamma target genes in
carcinogenesis group: ErbB2, CDH2, HPSE and IGSF11. Our results were consistent
with the previous reports that ErbB2 was the target gene of AP-2gamma. Decreased 
expression and overexpression of AP-2gamma in human breast cancer cells
significantly altered the expression of these four genes, indicating that
AP-2gamma directly regulates them.
CONCLUSION: This suggested that AP-2gamma can coordinate the expression of a
network of genes, involving in carcinogenesis, especially in breast cancer. They 
could serve as therapeutic targets against breast cancers in the future.

PMCID: PMC3224728
PMID: 19671168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cancer Res. 2009 Aug 15;69(16):6445-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1001. Epub 
2009 Aug 4.

Nicotine stimulates PPARbeta/delta expression in human lung carcinoma cells
through activation of PI3K/mTOR and suppression of AP-2alpha.

Sun X(1), Ritzenthaler JD, Zhong X, Zheng Y, Roman J, Han S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

We previously showed that nicotine stimulates non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC) cell proliferation through nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR)-mediated signals. Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor beta/delta (PPARbeta/delta) has also been shown to induce NSCLC cell
growth. Here, we explore the potential link between nicotine and PPARbeta/delta
and report that nicotine increases the expression of PPARbeta/delta protein; this
effect was blocked by an alpha7 nAChR antagonist (alpha-bungarotoxin), by alpha7 
nAChR short interfering RNA, and by inhibitors of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3K; wortmannin and LY294002) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR;
rapamycin). In contrast, this effect was enhanced by PUN282987, an alpha7 nAChR
agonist. Silencing of PPARbeta/delta attenuated the stimulatory effect of
nicotine on cell growth, which was overcome by transfection of an exogenous
PPARbeta/delta expression vector. Of note, nicotine induced complex formation
between alpha7 nAChR and PPARbeta/delta protein and increased PPARbeta/delta gene
promoter activity through inhibition of AP-2alpha as shown by reduced AP-2alpha
binding using electrophoretic gel mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. In addition, silencing of Sp1 attenuated the effect
of nicotine on PPARbeta/delta. Collectively, our results show that nicotine
increases PPARbeta/delta gene expression through alpha7 nAChR-mediated activation
of PI3K/mTOR signals that inhibit AP-2alpha protein expression and DNA binding
activity to the PPARbeta/delta gene promoter. Sp1 seems to modulate this process.
This study unveils a novel mechanism by which nicotine promotes human lung
carcinoma cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2745317
PMID: 19654299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Sep;85(3):279-85. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2009.06.018. Epub 2009 Jul 10.

Transcription factor AP-2beta inhibits glucose-induced insulin secretion in
cultured insulin-secreting cell-line.

Tsukada S(1), Kobayashi MA, Omori S, Unoki H, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology and Metabolism, RIKEN Center for Genomic
Medicine, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

AIM: We previously identified the transcription factor activating
enhancer-binding protein-2beta (AP-2beta) gene as a new candidate for conferring 
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. To ascertain the possible involvement of
AP-2beta in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes we examined the effects of
AP-2beta on glucose-induced insulin secretion.
METHODS: We measured the insulin secretion stimulated by glucose, tolbutamide, or
KCl in the HIT-T15 cells infected with adenovirus vectors encoding AP-2beta or
LacZ (control).
RESULTS: We identified clear expression of AP-2beta in isolated rat pancreatic
islets and in HIT-T15 cells. Glucose-induced increase in insulin secretion was
significantly inhibited in AP-2beta-overexpressing cells (LacZ, 5.0+/-0.8 ng
h(-1)mg(-1) protein; AP-2beta, 1.7+/-0.2 ng h(-1)mg(-1) protein; P=0.0015),
whereas insulin expression was the same in both types of cells.
Tolbutamide-induced insulin secretion was also suppressed in the
AP-2beta-overexpressing cells, but KCl-induced insulin secretion was not affected
by AP-2beta overexpression. In addition, Kir6.2 and glucokinase expression was
significantly decreased in the AP-2beta-overexpressing cells.
CONCLUSION: We identified for the first time that AP-2beta expressed and
functioned in insulin-secreting cell-line HIT-T15. These results suggest that
AP-2beta contributes to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes by inhibiting
glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic beta cells.

PMID: 19596470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2009 Nov;42(3):161-71. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2009.06.010. Epub
2009 Jul 4.

Disorganized olfactory bulb lamination in mice deficient for transcription factor
AP-2epsilon.

Feng W(1), Simoes-de-Souza F, Finger TE, Restrepo D, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Denver, Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Within the olfactory bulb, neurons and their axonal connections are organized
into distinct layers corresponding to different functionalities. Here we
demonstrate that transcription factor AP-2epsilon is required for olfactory bulb 
development, specifically the establishment of appropriate neuronal lamination.
During normal mouse embryogenesis, AP-2epsilon transcripts are one of the
earliest markers of olfactory bulb formation, and expression eventually becomes
refined to the projection neurons, the mitral and tufted cells. To assess the
function of AP-2epsilon in olfaction, we generated a null allele (the "AK"
allele) by inserting a Cre recombinase transgene into the endogenous AP-2epsilon 
genomic locus. AP-2epsilon-null mice exhibited defective olfactory bulb
architecture. The mitral cell layer was disorganized, typified by misoriented and
aberrantly positioned projection neurons, and the adjacent internal plexiform
layer was absent. Despite the significant disruption of olfactory bulb
organization, AP-2epsilon null mice were viable and could discriminate a variety 
of odors. AP-2epsilon-null mice thus provide compelling evidence for the robust
nature of the mouse olfactory system, and serve as a model system to probe both
the regulation of neuronal lamination and the functional circuitry of the
olfactory bulb. We also show that Cre recombinase expression directed by the
AP-2epsilon locus can specifically target floxed genes within the olfactory bulb,
extending the utility of this AK allele.

PMCID: PMC2745980
PMID: 19580868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nat Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;11(8):1002-9. doi: 10.1038/ncb1913. Epub 2009 Jul 5.

BCOR regulates mesenchymal stem cell function by epigenetic mechanisms.

Fan Z(1), Yamaza T, Lee JS, Yu J, Wang S, Fan G, Shi S, Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Signaling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, UCLA School
of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The BCL-6 co-repressor (BCOR) represses gene transcription by interacting with
BCL-6 (Refs 1, 2). BCOR mutation is responsible for oculo-facio-cardio-dental
(OFCD) syndrome, which is characterized by canine teeth with extremely long
roots, congenital cataracts, craniofacial defects and congenital heart disease.
Here we show that BCOR mutation increased the osteo-dentinogenic potential of
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) isolated from a patient with OFCD, providing a
molecular explanation for abnormal root growth. AP-2alpha was identified as a
repressive target of BCOR, and BCOR mutation resulted in abnormal activation of
AP-2alpha. Gain- and loss-of-function assays suggest that AP-2alpha is a key
factor that mediates the increased osteo-dentinogenic capacity of MSCs. Moreover,
we found that BCOR maintained tissue homeostasis and gene silencing through
epigenetic mechanisms. BCOR mutation increased histone H3K4 and H3K36 methylation
in MSCs, thereby reactivating transcription of silenced target genes. By studying
a rare human genetic disease, we have unravelled an epigenetic mechanism for
control of human adult stem cell function.

PMCID: PMC2752141
PMID: 19578371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Biol Chem. 2009 Sep;390(9):883-92. doi: 10.1515/BC.2009.095.

A dual role of the N-terminal FQQI motif in GLUT4 trafficking.

Bernhardt U(1), Carlotti F, Hoeben RC, Joost HG, Al-Hasani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, German Institute of Human Nutrition
(Potsdam-Rehbrücke), Nuthetal, Germany. ulrike.bernhardt@charite.de

In adipocytes, the glucose transporter GLUT4 recycles between intracellular
storage vesicles and the plasma membrane. GLUT4 is internalized by a clathrin-
and dynamin-dependent mechanism, and sorted into an insulin-sensitive storage
compartment. Insulin stimulation leads to GLUT4 accumulation on the cell surface.
The N-terminal F5QQI motif in GLUT4 has been shown previously to be required for 
sorting of the protein in the basal state. Here, we show that the FQQI motif is a
binding site for the medium chain adaptin micro1, a subunit of the AP-1 adaptor
complex that plays a role in post-Golgi/endosomal trafficking events. In order to
investigate the role of AP-1 and AP-2 in GLUT4 trafficking, we generated 3T3-L1
adipocytes expressing HA-GLUT4-GFP and knocked down the AP-1 and AP-2 complex by 
RNAi, respectively. In AP-1 and AP-2 knockdown adipocytes, GLUT4 accumulates at
the cell surface in the basal state, consistent with a role of AP-1 in
post-endosomal sorting of GLUT4 to the insulin-sensitive storage compartment, and
of AP-2 in clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Our data demonstrate a dual role of the
F5QQI motif and support the conclusion that the AP complexes direct GLUT4
trafficking and endocytosis.

PMID: 19558319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000508. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000508. Epub 2009 
Jun 26.

Genome-wide association scan meta-analysis identifies three Loci influencing
adiposity and fat distribution.

Lindgren CM, Heid IM, Randall JC, Lamina C, Steinthorsdottir V, Qi L, Speliotes
EK, Thorleifsson G, Willer CJ, Herrera BM, Jackson AU, Lim N, Scheet P, Soranzo
N, Amin N, Aulchenko YS, Chambers JC, Drong A, Luan J, Lyon HN, Rivadeneira F,
Sanna S, Timpson NJ, Zillikens MC, Zhao JH, Almgren P, Bandinelli S, Bennett AJ, 
Bergman RN, Bonnycastle LL, Bumpstead SJ, Chanock SJ, Cherkas L, Chines P, Coin
L, Cooper C, Crawford G, Doering A, Dominiczak A, Doney AS, Ebrahim S, Elliott P,
Erdos MR, Estrada K, Ferrucci L, Fischer G, Forouhi NG, Gieger C, Grallert H,
Groves CJ, Grundy S, Guiducci C, Hadley D, Hamsten A, Havulinna AS, Hofman A,
Holle R, Holloway JW, Illig T, Isomaa B, Jacobs LC, Jameson K, Jousilahti P,
Karpe F, Kuusisto J, Laitinen J, Lathrop GM, Lawlor DA, Mangino M, McArdle WL,
Meitinger T, Morken MA, Morris AP, Munroe P, Narisu N, Nordström A, Nordström P, 
Oostra BA, Palmer CN, Payne F, Peden JF, Prokopenko I, Renström F, Ruokonen A,
Salomaa V, Sandhu MS, Scott LJ, Scuteri A, Silander K, Song K, Yuan X, Stringham 
HM, Swift AJ, Tuomi T, Uda M, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Wallace C, Walters GB,
Weedon MN; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, Witteman JC, Zhang C, Zhang W,
Caulfield MJ, Collins FS, Davey Smith G, Day IN, Franks PW, Hattersley AT, Hu FB,
Jarvelin MR, Kong A, Kooner JS, Laakso M, Lakatta E, Mooser V, Morris AD,
Peltonen L, Samani NJ, Spector TD, Strachan DP, Tanaka T, Tuomilehto J,
Uitterlinden AG, van Duijn CM, Wareham NJ, Hugh Watkins; Procardis Consortia,
Waterworth DM, Boehnke M, Deloukas P, Groop L, Hunter DJ, Thorsteinsdottir U,
Schlessinger D, Wichmann HE, Frayling TM, Abecasis GR, Hirschhorn JN, Loos RJ,
Stefansson K, Mohlke KL, Barroso I, McCarthy MI; Giant Consortium.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2009 Jul;5(7). doi:
10.1371/annotation/b6e8f9f6-2496-4a40-b0e3-e1d1390c1928.

To identify genetic loci influencing central obesity and fat distribution, we
performed a meta-analysis of 16 genome-wide association studies (GWAS, N =
38,580) informative for adult waist circumference (WC) and waist-hip ratio (WHR).
We selected 26 SNPs for follow-up, for which the evidence of association with
measures of central adiposity (WC and/or WHR) was strong and disproportionate to 
that for overall adiposity or height. Follow-up studies in a maximum of 70,689
individuals identified two loci strongly associated with measures of central
adiposity; these map near TFAP2B (WC, P = 1.9x10(-11)) and MSRA (WC, P =
8.9x10(-9)). A third locus, near LYPLAL1, was associated with WHR in women only
(P = 2.6x10(-8)). The variants near TFAP2B appear to influence central adiposity 
through an effect on overall obesity/fat-mass, whereas LYPLAL1 displays a strong 
female-only association with fat distribution. By focusing on anthropometric
measures of central obesity and fat distribution, we have identified three loci
implicated in the regulation of human adiposity.

PMCID: PMC2695778
PMID: 19557161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Sep 25;461(3):280-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.06.022. Epub 
2009 Jun 17.

Regulation of the phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene in the adrenal
gland of the spontaneous hypertensive rat.

Nguyen P(1), Peltsch H, de Wit J, Crispo J, Ubriaco G, Eibl J, Tai TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Laurentian University, Sudbury, ON, Canada.

The catecholamine epinephrine is physiologically important in cardiac function
and blood pressure regulation. Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT) is
the terminal enzyme in the catecholamine biosynthetic pathway, responsible for
epinephrine biosynthesis, and is primarily localized in the adrenal gland. In
hypertensive rats, adrenal PNMT mRNA, protein and enzyme activity are elevated
along with elevated levels of epinephrine, suggesting that increased expression
of PNMT in the adrenal gland results in the increased adrenergic function
associated with hypertension. Genetic mapping studies performed in hypertensive
rats and humans have investigated the possibility that the PNMT gene may be a
candidate gene for hypertension; their findings suggest that differences in
expression in PNMT in hypertension are not attributed to polymorphisms within the
PNMT gene. It is proposed that increased PNMT in hypertension is likely due to
altered transcriptional regulation of the gene. The PNMT gene is highly regulated
by key transcription factors including: Egr-1, Sp1, AP-2 and the glucocorticoid
receptor. The aim of this study was to investigate the molecular mechanisms
involved in the dysregulation of adrenal PNMT in a genetic model of hypertension,
by examining expression of transcriptional regulators in the spontaneous
hypertensive rat (SHR) in comparison to Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) normotensive controls.
Results demonstrate changes in key transcription factors regulating PNMT
expression within the SHR adrenal gland, coincident with elevated adrenal PNMT
expression. This study suggests altered transcriptional regulation of PNMT is a
contributing factor to altered adrenergic function in hypertension.

PMID: 19539715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Gene. 2009 Sep 1;444(1-2):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.05.010. Epub 2009 May 27.

Functional characterization of the murine Tnk1 promoter.

Hoare S(1), Hoare K, Reinhard MK, Flagg TO, May WS Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Florida Shands Cancer Center,
P.O. Box No: 103633, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Tnk1/Kos1 is a non-receptor protein tyrosine kinase found to be a tumor
suppressor. It negatively regulates cell growth by indirectly suppressing Ras
activity. We identified and characterized the critical cis-elements required for 
Tnk1/Kos1's promoter activity. Results indicate that the murine Tnk1 promoter
lacks a conventional TATA, CAAT or initiator element (Inr) but contains multiple 
transcription start sites. Transcription is initiated by a TATA-like element
composed of an AT rich sequence at -30 (30 bp upstream) from the major
transcription start site and an Inr-like element that overlaps the multiple start
sites. Deletion analysis of the m-Tnk1 promoter reveals the presence of both
positive (-25 to -151) and negative (-151 to -1201) regulatory regions. The three
GC boxes which bind Sp1 and Sp3 with high affinity, an AP2 site (that overlaps
with an AML1 site) and a MED1 site comprise the necessary cis-elements of the
proximal promoter required for both constitutive and inducible Tnk1/Kos1
expression. Importantly, results reveal that cellular stress reverses the
repression of Tnk1/Kos1 and induces its expression through increased high
affinity interactions between nuclear proteins Sp1, Sp3, AP2 and MED1 for the
m-Tnk1 promoter. These findings provide a mechanism by which the m-Tnk1 promoter 
can be dynamically regulated during normal growth.

PMCID: PMC2732567
PMID: 19481140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. FEBS J. 2009 May;276(9):2494-504. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06973.x. Epub
2009 Mar 16.

The cartilage-specific transcription factor Sox9 regulates AP-2epsilon expression
in chondrocytes.

Wenke AK(1), Grässel S, Moser M, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Regensburg, Germany.

Activating enhancer-binding protein (AP)-2epsilon was previously described as a
new regulator of integrin alpha(10) expression in cartilage. In this study, we
analyzed the expression of AP-2epsilon in differentiated chondrocytes and in
human mesenchymal stem cells (HMSCs), which have been differentiated into
chondrocytes in vitro. AP-2epsilon is predominantly expressed during the late
stages of chondrocyte differentiation, mainly in early hypertrophic cartilage,
consistent with immunohistochemical stainings of mouse embryo sections.
Furthermore, osteoarthritic chondrocytes, resembling a hypertrophic phenotype,
have high AP-2epsilon levels. The AP-2epsilon promoter harbors binding sites for 
the transcription factors AP-2alpha and Sox9. Both transcription factors strongly
activate AP-2epsilon expression in a cooperative manner in the chondrosarcoma
cell line SW1353. The inhibition of Sox9 expression by small interfering RNA
resulted in decreased AP-2epsilon expression. In addition, direct interaction of 
Sox9 with the AP-2epsilon promoter could be confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation and electromobility shift assays. This is the first study to 
prove the direct regulation of AP-2epsilon by the transcription factor Sox9, and 
to indicate that AP-2epsilon potentially has an important role as a modulator of 
hypertrophic cartilage.

PMID: 19476490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. BMC Biol. 2009 May 22;7:25. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-7-25.

AP-2alpha regulates migration of GN-11 neurons via a specific genetic programme
involving the Axl receptor tyrosine kinase.

Orso F(1), Jäger R, Calogero RA, Schorle H, Sismondi P, De Bortoli M, Taverna D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biotechnology Center, University of Torino, via Nizza, 52, 10126,
Torino, Italy. francesca.orso@unito.it

BACKGROUND: Neuronal migration is a crucial process that allows neurons to reach 
their correct target location to allow the nervous system to function properly.
AP-2alpha is a transcription factor essential for neural crest cell migration and
its mutation results in apoptosis within this cell population, as demonstrated by
genetic models.
RESULTS: We down-modulated AP-2alpha expression in GN-11 neurons by RNA
interference and observe reduced neuron migration following the activation of a
specific genetic programme including the Adhesion Related Kinase (Axl) gene. We
prove that Axl is able to coordinate migration per se and by ChIP and promoter
analysis we observe that its transcription is directly driven by AP-2alpha via
the binding to one or more functional AP-2alpha binding sites present in its
regulatory region. Analysis of migration in AP-2alpha null mouse embryo
fibroblasts also reveals an essential role for AP-2alpha in cell movement via the
activation of a distinct genetic programme.
CONCLUSION: We show that AP-2alpha plays an essential role in cell movement via
the activation of cell-specific genetic programmes. Moreover, we demonstrate that
the AP-2alpha regulated gene Axl is an essential player in GN-11 neuron
migration.

PMCID: PMC2700071
PMID: 19463168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Prostate. 2009 Sep 1;69(12):1257-69. doi: 10.1002/pros.20967.

DNA methylation biomarkers of prostate cancer: confirmation of candidates and
evidence urine is the most sensitive body fluid for non-invasive detection.

Payne SR(1), Serth J, Schostak M, Kamradt J, Strauss A, Thelen P, Model F, Day
JK, Liebenberg V, Morotti A, Yamamura S, Lograsso J, Sledziewski A, Semjonow A.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenomics, Inc., Seattle, Washington 98101, USA.
shannon.payne@epigenomics.com

BACKGROUND: A prostate cancer (PCa) biomarker with improved specificity relative 
to PSA is a public health priority. Hypermethylated DNA can be detected in body
fluids from PCa patients and may be a useful biomarker, although clinical
performance varies between studies. We investigated the performance of candidate 
PCa DNA methylation biomarkers identified through a genome-wide search.
METHODS: Real-time PCR was used to measure four DNA methylation biomarkers: GSTP1
and three previously unreported candidates associated with the genes RASSF2,
HIST1H4K, and TFAP2E in sodium bisulfite-modified DNA. Matched plasma and urine
collected prospectively from 142 patients referred for prostate biopsy and 50
young asymptomatic males were analyzed.
RESULTS: Analysis of all biomarkers in urine DNA significantly discriminated PCa 
from biopsy negative patients. The biomarkers discriminated PCa from biopsy
negative patients with AUCs ranging from 0.64 for HIST1H4K (95% CI 0.55-0.72, P <
0.00001) to 0.69 for GSTP1 (95% CI 0.60-0.77, P < 0.00001). All biomarkers showed
minimal correlation with PSA. Multivariate analysis did not yield a panel that
significantly improved performance over that of single biomarkers. All biomarkers
showed greater sensitivity for PCa in urine than in plasma DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of the biomarkers in urine DNA significantly discriminated 
PCa from biopsy negative patients. The biomarkers provided information
independent of PSA and may warrant inclusion in nomograms for predicting prostate
biopsy outcome. The biomarkers' PCa sensitivity was greater for urine than plasma
DNA. The biomarker performances in urine DNA should next be validated in formal
training and test studies.

PMID: 19459176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;15(11):3672-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2343.
Epub 2009 May 19.

Interaction of TFAP2C with the estrogen receptor-alpha promoter is controlled by 
chromatin structure.

Woodfield GW(1), Hitchler MJ, Chen Y, Domann FE, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, Radiation Oncology, and Biochemistry, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

PURPOSE: Transcriptional regulation of estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) involves
both epigenetic mechanisms and trans-active factors, such as TFAP2C, which
induces ERalpha transcription through an AP-2 regulatory region in the ERalpha
promoter. Attempts to induce endogenous ERalpha expression in ERalpha-negative
breast carcinomas by forced overexpression of TFAP2C have not been successful. We
hypothesize that epigenetic chromatin structure alters the activity of TFAP2C at 
the ERalpha promoter.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: DNA methylation, histone acetylation, and chromatin
accessibility were examined at the ERalpha promoter in a panel of breast
carcinoma cell lines. TFAP2C and polymerase II binding were analyzed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Epigenetic chromatin structure was altered using drug
treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (AZA) and trichostatin A (TSA).
RESULTS: The ERalpha promoter in the ERalpha-negative lines MDA-MB-231, MCF10A,
and MCF7-5C show CpG island methylation, histone 3 lysine 9 deacetylation, and
decreased chromatin accessibility compared with ERalpha-positive cell lines MCF7 
and T47-D. Treatment with AZA/TSA increased chromatin accessibility at the
ERalpha promoter and allowed TFAP2C to induce ERalpha expression in
ERalpha-negative cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
binding of TFAP2C to the ERalpha promoter is blocked in ERalpha-negative cells
but that treatment with AZA/TSA enabled TFAP2C and polymerase II binding.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the activity of TFAP2C at specific target genes
depends upon epigenetic chromatin structure. Furthermore, the combination of
increasing chromatin accessibility and inducing TFAP2C provides a more robust
activation of the ERalpha gene in ERalpha-negative breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2776721
PMID: 19458056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2009 Jun;62(6):339-41. doi: 10.1038/ja.2009.35. Epub 2009 May
15.

Development of a molecule-recognized promoter DNA sequence for inhibition of HER2
expression.

Suzuki T(1), Asami Y, Takahashi T, Wang X, Watanabe T, Bando T, Sugiyama H,
Fukuda N, Nagase H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genetics, Department of Advanced Medical Science, Nihon
University School of Medicine, Ooyaguchi-kamimachi, Tokyo, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Antibiot (Tokyo). 2009 Jun;62(6):345.

PMID: 19444299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Endocrinology. 2009 Sep;150(9):4376-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1645. Epub 2009 May 
14.

Activator protein-2 impairs the invasion of a human extravillous trophoblast cell
line.

Kotani T(1), Iwase A, Ino K, Sumigama S, Yamamoto E, Hayakawa H, Nagasaka T,
Itakura A, Nomura S, Kikkawa F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maternal and Perinatal Medicine, Nagoya Graduate University
School of Medicine, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan. itoto@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

The reduced migration/invasion of extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) is a key
feature of the genesis of preeclampsia. We and others previously reported that
transcriptional factors activator protein-2 (AP-2) alpha and AP-2gamma act as
suppressors of tumor invasion. The present study examined the expressions of
AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma in preeclamptic placenta vs. control placenta and
investigated their effect on the function of EVTs. The expressions of AP-2alpha
and AP-2gamma were elevated in the preeclamptic placentas in comparison with the 
gestational age-matched control placentas. Their expressions also increased in
EVTs of the preeclamptic placentas. Thereafter, we transfected AP-2alpha or
AP-2gamma into human EVT cell line, HTR-8/SVneo. The overexpression of AP-2alpha 
or AP-2gamma decreased the migratory and invasive abilities in HTR-8/SVneo cells.
This was followed by the reduction of protease activated receptor-1 and matrix
metalloproteinases and a significant induction of plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 and the tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1. AP-2alpha and
AP-2gamma were weakly expressed in the cultured EVTs and HTR-8/SVneo cells,
whereas they were induced by TNF-alpha, which increases in preeclamptic placenta 
and impairs trophoblast invasion. In the presence of TNF-alpha, the invasion of
the HTR-8/SVneo cells was partially restored by a blocking of AP-2 induction
using small interfering RNA of AP-2. The present data suggest that AP-2 may
suppress trophoblast migration and invasion, thus leading to a shallow
placentation in preeclampsia.

PMID: 19443578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Development. 2009 Jun;136(12):1987-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.033209. Epub 2009 May 13.

Genetic ablation of neural crest cell diversification.

Arduini BL(1), Bosse KM, Henion PD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA.

The neural crest generates multiple cell types during embryogenesis but the
mechanisms regulating neural crest cell diversification are incompletely
understood. Previous studies using mutant zebrafish indicated that foxd3 and
tfap2a function early and differentially in the development of neural crest
sublineages. Here, we show that the simultaneous loss of foxd3 and tfap2a
function in zebrafish foxd3(zdf10);tfap2a(low) double mutant embryos globally
prevents the specification of developmentally distinct neural crest sublineages. 
By contrast, neural crest induction occurs independently of foxd3 and tfap2a
function. We show that the failure of neural crest cell diversification in double
mutants is accompanied by the absence of neural crest sox10 and sox9a/b gene
expression, and that forced expression of sox10 and sox9a/b differentially
rescues neural crest sublineage specification and derivative differentiation.
These results demonstrate the functional necessity for foxd3 and tfap2a for
neural crest sublineage specification and that this requirement is mediated by
the synergistic regulation of the expression of SoxE family genes. Our results
identify a genetic regulatory pathway functionally discrete from the process of
neural crest induction that is required for the initiation of neural crest cell
diversification during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2685722
PMID: 19439494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. DNA Repair (Amst). 2009 Jul 4;8(7):822-33. doi: 10.1016/j.dnarep.2009.03.008.
Epub 2009 May 2.

Overexpression of transcription factor AP-2 stimulates the PA promoter of the
human uracil-DNA glycosylase (UNG) gene through a mechanism involving
derepression.

Aas PA(1), Peña-Diaz J, Liabakk NB, Krokan HE, Skorpen F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Children's and Women's
Health, Faculty of Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
N-7489 Trondheim, Norway.

The PA promoter in the human uracil-DNA glycosylase gene (UNG) directs expression
of the nuclear form (UNG2) of UNG proteins. Using a combination of promoter
deletion and mutation analyses, and transient transfection of HeLa cells, we show
that repressor and derepressor activities are contained within the region of DNA 
marked by PA. Footprinting analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays of 
PA and putative AP-2 binding regions with HeLa cell nuclear extract and
recombinant AP-2alpha protein indicate that AP-2 transcription factors are
central in the regulated expression of UNG2 mRNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
with AP-2 antibody demonstrated that endogenous AP-2 binds to the PA promoter in 
vivo. Overexpression of AP-2alpha, -beta or -gamma all stimulated expression from
a PA-luciferase reporter gene construct approximately 3- to 4-fold.
Interestingly, an N-terminally truncated AP-2alpha, lacking the activation domain
but retaining the DNA binding and dimerization domains, stimulated PA to a level 
approaching that of full-length AP-2, suggesting that AP-2 overexpression
stimulates PA activity by a mechanism involving derepression rather than
activation, possibly by neutralizing an inhibitory effect of endogenous AP-2 or
AP-2-like factors.

PMID: 19411194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Mol Cells. 2009 Apr 30;27(4):409-16. doi: 10.1007/s10059-009-0058-3. Epub 2009
Apr 13.

An ARIA-interacting AP2 domain protein is a novel component of ABA signaling.

Lee SJ(1), Cho DI, Kang JY, Kim SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Kumho Life Science Laboratory,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Chonnam National University, Gwangju,
Korea.

ADAP is an AP2-domain protein that interacts with ARIA, which, in turn, interacts
with ABF2, a bZIP class transcription factor. ABF2 regulates various aspects of
the abscisic acid (ABA) response by controlling the expression of a subset of
ABA-responsive genes. Our expression analyses indicate that ADAP is expressed in 
roots, emerging young leaves, and flowers. We found that adap knockout mutant
lines germinate more efficiently than wild-type plants and that the mutant
seedlings grow faster. This suggests that ADAP is involved in the regulation of
germination and seedling growth. Both germination and post-germination growth of 
the knockout mutants were partially insensitive to ABA, which indicates that ADAP
is required for a full ABA response. The survival rates for mutants from which
water was withheld were low compared with those for wild-type plants. The result 
shows that ADAP is necessary for the response to stress induced by water
deprivation. Together, our data indicate that ADAP is a positive regulator of the
ABA response and is also involved in regulating seedling growth. The role of ADAP
is similar to that of ARIA, which is also a positive regulator of the ABA
response. It appears that ADAP acts through the same ABA response pathway as
ARIA.

PMID: 19390821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Biosyst. 2009 May;5(5):483-96. doi: 10.1039/b813787k. Epub 2009 Mar 19.

Systems biology evaluation of immune responses induced by human host defence
peptide LL-37 in mononuclear cells.

Mookherjee N(1), Hamill P, Gardy J, Blimkie D, Falsafi R, Chikatamarla A,
Arenillas DJ, Doria S, Kollmann TR, Hancock RE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Microbial Diseases and Immunity Research, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The immune system is very complex, it involves the integrated regulation and
expression of hundreds of proteins. To understand in greater detail how the human
host defence immunomodulatory peptide LL-37 interacts with innate immunity, a
systems approach was pursued. Polychromatic flow cytometry was employed to
demonstrate that within human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, CD14+
monocytes, myeloid and plasmocytoid dendritic cells and T- and B-lymphocytes, all
responded to LL-37, with the differential production of intracellular cytokines. 
Microarray analyses with CD14+ monocytes indicated the differential expression of
475 genes in response to stimulation with LL-37. To understand this complex
response, bioinformatic interrogation, using InnateDB, of the gene ontology,
signalling pathways and transcription factor binding sites was undertaken.
Activation of the IkappaBalpha/NFkappaB, mitogen-activated protein kinases p38,
ERK1/2 and JNK, and PI3K signalling pathways in response to LL-37 was
demonstrated by pathway and ontology over-representation analyses, and confirmed 
experimentally by inhibitor studies. Computational analysis of the predicted
transcription factor binding sites upstream of the genes that were regulated by
LL-37 predicted the involvement of several transcription factors including
NFkappaB and five novel factors, AP-1, AP-2, SP-1, E2F1, and EGR, which were
experimentally confirmed to respond to LL-37 by performing transcription factor
array studies on nuclear extracts from LL-37 treated mononuclear cells. These
data are discussed as reflecting the integration of several responsive signalling
pathways through the involvement of transcription factor complexes in gene
expression activated by LL-37 in human mononuclear cells.

PMID: 19381363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Dermatol Online J. 2009 Mar 15;15(3):1.

The cutaneous epidermal growth factor network: Can it be translated clinically to
stimulate hair growth?

Alexandrescu DT(1), Kauffman CL, Dasanu CA.

Author information: 
(1)Georgetown Dermatology, Washington, DC, USA. mddoru@hotmail.com

The influences exerted by the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) on the skin
act at multiple levels, which involve compartments that normally express EGFR.
These include the basal and suprabasal layers of the epidermis, sebaceous glands,
and the outer root sheath of the hair follicles. The physiological roles of EGFR 
ensure epidermal renewal and integrity, along with a gatekeeping and function and
hair growth stimulation functions. Important cellular functions that are altered 
during EGF receptor blocking therapy consist of epidermal differentiation,
proliferation, apoptosis, and migration, with an overall dominating effect of
inducing growth arrest and terminal differentiation of the keratinocytes in the
basal layers. The effects of EGFR blockage on the hair cycle include terminal
differentiation of the hair follicle, which in certain cases may be associated
with trichomegaly. Trichomegaly of the eyelashes may occur as an isolated
occurrence or, frequently, as part of a generalized phenomenon that may be
associated with the use of the EGFR inhibitors. Molecular changes associated with
EGFR blockage are discussed, relevant to their association with hair growth.
Modulation of Akt, AP2alpha, CDK4, Notch-1, p27KIP1, and Hedgehog expression are 
involved in the initiation of the hair cycle and inducement of the anagen phase, 
followed by proliferation and differentiation of the hair follicles. Epidermal
growth factor receptor inhibitors have been developed as therapeutic molecules
directed against cancer; in these regimens the knowledge of EGF receptor
signaling functions has been translated into significant clinical results.
However, among their various collateral effects on the skin, hair growth is
observed to occur in certain patients. A particular "wavy" hair phenotype is
observed during the pharmacological EGFR receptor blockade, just as in murine
transgenic models that carry loss of function of TGF-alpha or EGFR genes. A
better characterization of the individual roles pertaining to the EGF family
ligands and receptors, has the potential provide new strategies for the
management of hair loss.

PMID: 19379645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cancer Lett. 2009 Sep 28;283(1):36-42. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.03.026. Epub
2009 Apr 18.

Activator protein 2alpha suppresses intestinal tumorigenesis in the Apc(min)
mouse.

Li Q(1), Löhr CV, Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331-6512,
USA.

Activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) is a putative tumor suppressor, and various 
reports have described the loss or reduction of AP-2alpha expression in cutaneous
malignant melanomas, as well as in cancers of the prostate, breast and colon.
Previously, AP-2alpha was shown to attenuate beta-catenin/T-cell factor-4 (TCF-4)
nuclear interactions and beta-catenin/TCF-4-dependent transcriptional activity in
human colorectal cancer cells [Q. Li, R.H. Dashwood, Activator protein 2alpha
associates with adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin and Inhibits
beta-catenin/T-cell factor transcriptional activity in colorectal cancer cells,
J. Biol. Chem. 279 (2004) 45669-45675]. Here, we show that in vivo gene delivery 
of AP-2alpha suppressed intestinal polyp formation in the Apc(min) mouse, and
protected against the development of anemia and splenomegaly. Immunoblot analyses
and immunohistochemistry following gene delivery revealed an increase in
AP-2alpha expression in the mouse intestinal mucosa and liver.
Co-immunoprecipitation experiments provided evidence for interactions between
AP-2alpha, beta-catenin, and adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) proteins in mouse
intestinal mucosa, as well as in a primary human colorectal cancer. Collectively,
these studies support a tumor suppressor role for AP-2alpha in the
gastrointestinal tract, and suggest that AP-2alpha represents a novel target for 
therapeutic intervention in human cancers characterized by dysregulated Wnt
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2713803
PMID: 19376641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Cell Biochem. 2009 Oct;330(1-2):23-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-009-0096-3. Epub
2009 Apr 11.

c-FLIPL regulates PKC via AP-2 to inhibit Bax-mediated apoptosis induced by HIV-1
gp120 in Jurkat cells.

Wang X(1), Zhao J, Tang S, Lee S, Glazer RI, Hewlett I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Division of Emerging and Transfusion
Transmitted Diseases, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug
Administration, Building 29B, Rm 4NN16, 8800 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD, 20892,
USA. xue.wang@fda.hhs.gov

c-FLIPL, an inhibitor of caspase 8, is known to inhibit the Fas/caspase 8
apoptotic pathway; however, its involvement of Bax/mitochondrial apoptosis is not
well understood. Using human cells, Jurkat cell line, induced with HIV-1 gp120,
we studied the effects of c-FLIPL on Bax/mitochondrial apoptosis. We found that
the induction of apoptosis by HIV-1 envelope protein, gp120, involved the
activation of both Bax-dependent and death receptor-mediated pathways, and HIV-1 
infection deceased c-FLIPL expression. Interestingly, c-FLIPL expression
downregulated protein kinase C (PKC) expression at the transcript level involving
activated protein-2 (AP-2). c-FLIPL expression reduced AP-2 protein levels
required to promote PKC protein expression and PKC-associated inactive form of
Bax, and inhibited Bax activation, suggesting that c-FLIPL inhibits Bax
activation via modulating PKC expression at the transcriptional level involving
AP-2 during gp120 treatment. Collectively, these findings further corroborate the
concept that gp120 plays an important role, via involvement of molecules such as 
c-FLIPL, in apoptotic cell death due to HIV-1 infection.

PMID: 19363595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Cell Sci. 2009 May 1;122(Pt 9):1301-5. doi: 10.1242/jcs.040030. Epub 2009 Apr
7.

Endocytic trafficking of activated EGFR is AP-2 dependent and occurs through
preformed clathrin spots.

Rappoport JZ(1), Simon SM.

Author information: 
(1)The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The removal of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) from the cell surface 
by endocytosis is triggered by receptor activation, but many facets of EGFR
trafficking remain unresolved. We employed total internal fluorescence microscopy
to elucidate the dynamics of activated EGFR at the cell surface through live-cell
imaging. The results of these studies demonstrate that: (1) EGFR does not
localize to caveolae in live cells either before or after activation; (2) EGFR
does localize to clathrin-coated pits, but only after activation; (3) activation 
does not result in the formation of new clathrin-coated pits; (4) activated EGFR 
clusters at sites of preformed clathrin lattices; (5) The AP-2 complex is
involved in the internalization of activated EGFR. Using imaging techniques to
show the endocytic sorting of activated EGFR for the first time in live cells,
these studies suggest a refinement of the model for EGFR entry.

PMCID: PMC2721002
PMID: 19351721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Pediatrics. 2009 Apr;123(4):1116-23. doi: 10.1542/peds.2008-0313.

Determination of genetic predisposition to patent ductus arteriosus in preterm
infants.

Dagle JM(1), Lepp NT, Cooper ME, Schaa KL, Kelsey KJ, Orr KL, Caprau D, Zimmerman
CR, Steffen KM, Johnson KJ, Marazita ML, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
john-dagle@uiowa.edu

OBJECTIVE: Patent ductus arteriosus is a common morbidity associated with preterm
birth. The incidence of patent ductus arteriosus increases with decreasing
gestational age to approximately 70% in infants born at 25 weeks' gestation. Our 
major goal was to determine if genetic risk factors play a role in patent ductus 
arteriosus seen in preterm infants.
METHODOLOGY: We investigated whether single-nucleotide polymorphisms in genes
that regulate smooth muscle contraction, xenobiotic detoxification, inflammation,
and other processes are markers for persistent patency of ductus arteriosus.
Initially, 377 single-nucleotide polymorphisms from 130 genes of interest were
evaluated in DNA samples collected from 204 infants with a gestational age of <32
weeks. A family-based association test was performed on genotyping data to
evaluate overtransmission of alleles.
RESULTS: P values of <.01 were detected for genetic variations found in 7 genes. 
This prompted additional analysis with an additional set of 162 infants, focusing
on the 7 markers with initial P values of <.01, and 1 genetic variant in the
angiotensin II type I receptor previously shown to be related to patent ductus
arteriosus. Of the initial positive signals, single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
the transcription factor AP-2 beta and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated 
factor 1 genes remained significant. Additional haplotype analysis revealed
genetic variations in prostacyclin synthase to be associated with patent ductus
arteriosus. An angiotensin II type I receptor polymorphism previously reported to
be associated with patent ductus arteriosus after prophylactic indomethacin
administration was not associated with the presence of a patent ductus arteriosus
in our population.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our data support a role for genetic variations in
transcription factor AP-2 beta, tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 
1, and prostacyclin synthase in the persistent patency of the ductus arteriosus
seen in preterm infants.

PMCID: PMC2734952
PMID: 19336370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2009 Sep;17(9):1762-7. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.83. Epub
2009 Mar 26.

The transcription factor TFAP2B is associated with insulin resistance and
adiposity in healthy adolescents.

Nordquist N(1), Göktürk C, Comasco E, Eensoo D, Merenäkk L, Veidebaum T, Oreland 
L, Harro J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. niklas.nordquist@neuro.uu.se

Insulin resistance and central adiposity are strong risk indicators for type 2
diabetes and coronary heart disease. An important role for adipose tissue in the 
etiology and progression of these conditions has recently become more evident. A 
transcription factor, TFAP2B, has been shown to participate in the regulation of 
adipocyte metabolism, by facilitating glucose uptake and lipid accumulation,
while simultaneously reducing insulin sensitivity, and recently a direct function
for TFAP2B as an inhibitor of adiponectin expression was observed. In this study,
we have investigated how insulin resistance, plasma adiponectin, and central
adiposity, in a normal population of adolescents, are affected by genetic
variability in TFAP2B. Our results show that both insulin sensitivity, as
measured from levels of fasting glucose and insulin, and central adiposity,
estimated by subscapular skinfold thickness, were significantly associated to
genetic variability in TFAP2B. This association was restricted to males only,
where carriers of the 4-repeat allele of intron 2 had higher insulin sensitivity 
and lower subscapular skinfold thickness. Levels of adiponectin did not show any 
association to the TFAP2B polymorphism, but was negatively correlated to central 
adiposity in females. These results suggest that reduction of TFAP2B expression
could have a protective effect against future risk of complications associated
with decreased insulin sensitivity and central adiposity, such as type 2 diabetes
and coronary heart disease.

PMID: 19325541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004882. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

Regulation of clock-controlled genes in mammals.

Bozek K(1), Relógio A, Kielbasa SM, Heine M, Dame C, Kramer A, Herzel H.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany.

The complexity of tissue- and day time-specific regulation of thousands of
clock-controlled genes (CCGs) suggests that many regulatory mechanisms contribute
to the transcriptional output of the circadian clock. We aim to predict these
mechanisms using a large scale promoter analysis of CCGs.Our study is based on a 
meta-analysis of DNA-array data from rodent tissues. We searched in the promoter 
regions of 2065 CCGs for highly overrepresented transcription factor binding
sites. In order to compensate the relatively high GC-content of CCG promoters, a 
novel background model to avoid a bias towards GC-rich motifs was employed. We
found that many of the transcription factors with overrepresented binding sites
in CCG promoters exhibit themselves circadian rhythms. Among the predicted
factors are known regulators such as CLOCKratioBMAL1, DBP, HLF, E4BP4, CREB,
RORalpha and the recently described regulators HSF1, STAT3, SP1 and HNF-4alpha.
As additional promising candidates of circadian transcriptional regulators PAX-4,
C/EBP, EVI-1, IRF, E2F, AP-1, HIF-1 and NF-Y were identified. Moreover, GC-rich
motifs (SP1, EGR, ZF5, AP-2, WT1, NRF-1) and AT-rich motifs (MEF-2, HMGIY, HNF-1,
OCT-1) are significantly overrepresented in promoter regions of CCGs. Putative
tissue-specific binding sites such as HNF-3 for liver, NKX2.5 for heart or
Myogenin for skeletal muscle were found. The regulation of the erythropoietin
(Epo) gene was analysed, which exhibits many binding sites for circadian
regulators. We provide experimental evidence for its circadian regulated
expression in the adult murine kidney. Basing on a comprehensive literature
search we integrate our predictions into a regulatory network of core clock and
clock-controlled genes. Our large scale analysis of the CCG promoters reveals the
complexity and extensiveness of the circadian regulation in mammals. Results of
this study point to connections of the circadian clock to other functional
systems including metabolism, endocrine regulation and pharmacokinetics.

PMCID: PMC2654074
PMID: 19287494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 1;284(18):12306-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807108200. Epub 2009 
Mar 6.

Structure and regulation of the versican promoter: the versican promoter is
regulated by AP-1 and TCF transcription factors in invasive human melanoma cells.

Domenzain-Reyna C(1), Hernández D, Miquel-Serra L, Docampo MJ, Badenas C, Fabra
A, Bassols A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Veterinària,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Barcelona, Spain.

Versican is a large chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan of the extracellular matrix 
that is involved in a variety of cellular processes. We showed previously that
versican, which is overexpressed in cutaneous melanomas as well as in
premalignant lesions, contributes to melanoma progression, favoring the
detachment of cells and the metastatic dissemination. Here, we investigated the
transcriptional regulation of the versican promoter in melanoma cell lines with
different levels of biological aggressiveness and stages of differentiation. We
show that versican promoter up-regulation accounts for the differential
expression levels of mRNA and protein detected in the invasive SK-mel-131 human
melanoma cells. The activity of the versican promoter increased 5-fold in these
cells in comparison with that measured in non-invasive MeWo melanoma cells.
Several transcriptional regulatory elements were identified in the proximal
promoter, including AP-1, Sp1, AP-2, and two TCF-4 sites. We show that promoter
activation is mediated by the ERK/MAPK and JNK signaling pathways acting on the
AP-1 site, suggesting that BRAF mutation present in SK-mel-131 cells impinge upon
the up-regulation of the versican gene through signaling elicited by the ERK/MAPK
pathway. This is the first time the AP-1 transcription factor family has been
shown to be related to the regulation of versican expression. Furthermore,
deletion of the TCF-4 binding sites caused a 60% decrease in the promoter
activity in SK-mel-131 cells. These results showing that AP-1 and TCF-4 binding
sites are the main regulatory regions directing versican production provide new
insights into versican promoter regulation during melanoma progression.

PMCID: PMC2673299
PMID: 19269971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Endocrinology. 2009 Jun;150(6):2627-36. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1370. Epub 2009 Feb 
19.

Up-regulating the hemeoxygenase system enhances insulin sensitivity and improves 
glucose metabolism in insulin-resistant diabetes in Goto-Kakizaki rats.

Ndisang JF(1), Jadhav A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada. joseph.ndisang@l.usask.ca

Insulin-mediated signal transduction is positively correlated to adiponectin,
adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase (AMPK), and
glucose-transporter-4 (GLUT4) but negatively to oxidative/inflammatory mediators 
such as nuclear factor-kappaB, activating-protein (AP)-1, AP-2, and
c-Jun-N-terminal-kinase. Although hemeoxygenase (HO) suppresses oxidative
insults, its effects on insulin-sensitizing agents like AMPK and GLUT4 remains
unclear and were investigated using Goto-Kakizaki rats (GK), a nonobese
insulin-resistant type-2 diabetic model. HO was induced with hemin or inhibited
with chromium mesoporphyrin (CrMP). The application of hemin to GK rats evoked a 
3-month antidiabetic effect, whereas the HO-inhibitor, CrMP, exacerbated
hyperglycemia and nullified insulin-signaling/glucose metabolism. Interestingly, 
the antidiabetic was accompanied by a paradoxical increase of insulin alongside
the potentiation of insulin-sensitizing agents such as adiponectin, AMPK, and
GLUT4 in the gastrocnemius muscle. Furthermore, hemin enhanced
mediators/regulators of insulin signaling like cGMP and cAMP and suppressed
oxidative insults by up-regulating HO-1, HO activity, superoxide dismutase,
catalase, and the total antioxidant capacity in the gastrocnemius muscle.
Accordingly, oxidative markers/mediators including nuclear factor-kappaB, AP-1,
AP-2, c-Jun-N-terminal-kinase, and 8-isoprostane were abated, whereas CrMP
annulled the cytoprotective and antidiabetic effects of hemin. Correspondingly,
ip glucose tolerance, insulin tolerance, and homeostasis model assessment insulin
resistance analyses revealed improved glucose tolerance, reduced insulin
intolerance, enhanced insulin sensitivity, and reduced insulin resistance in
hemin-treated GK rats. In contrast, CrMP, abolished the insulin-sensitizing
effects and restored and/or exacerbated insulin resistance. Our study unveils a
3-month enduring antidiabetic effect of hemin and unmasks the synergistic
interaction among the HO system, adiponectin, AMPK, and GLUT4 that could be
explored to enhance insulin signaling and improve glucose metabolism in
insulin-resistant diabetes.

PMID: 19228889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. FASEB J. 2009 Jul;23(7):2274-87. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-124073. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

A functional polymorphism in the promoter region of GSTM1 implies a complex role 
for GSTM1 in breast cancer.

Yu KD(1), Di GH, Fan L, Wu J, Hu Z, Shen ZZ, Huang W, Shao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Institute, Cancer Hospital, Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Although a number of studies have been conducted to address the relation between 
a gene deletion polymorphism of glutathione S-transferase M1 (GSTM1) and breast
cancer, no definite conclusion has been reached and no clear risk pattern has yet
to emerge for GSTM1. We first conducted case-control studies that included 1920
subjects using a genotyping method allowing the definition of GSTM1-null (-/-),
homozygous wild-type (+/+), and heterozygous (+/-) genotypes. The results show
that GSTM1(-/-) confers an increased risk for breast cancer development compared 
with that in GSTM1-present individuals (+/+ and +/-), which was subsequently
confirmed by a meta-analysis of all of the 41 relevant studies (odds ratio: 1.10,
P<0.001). Unexpectedly, we found that GSTM1(+/+) is also a risk genotype compared
with GSTM1(+/-). Furthermore, we identified a functional polymorphism in the
GSTM1 promoter region associated with breast cancer. The variant allele modifies 
DNA binding to the AP-2alpha transcription factor, resulting in reduced promoter 
activity and mRNA expression. However, this low-activity allele is associated
with reduced breast cancer risk. It seems that approximately 60-70% expression
from one allele of GSTM1 could suffice for protection against breast cancer; null
activity and overactivity of GSTM1 are both disadvantageous. These results
indicate a U-shaped association of GSTM1 with breast cancer, which challenges the
linear gene-dosage effect of GSTM1 that was previously proposed. We recommend
that a more complicated role for GSTM1 should be considered in breast cancer risk
prediction.

PMID: 19228880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cloning Stem Cells. 2009 Mar;11(1):177-86. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0055.

Genetic reprogramming of transcription factor ap-2gamma in bovine somatic cell
nuclear transfer preimplantation embryos and placentomes.

Aston KI(1), Li GP, Hicks BA, Winger QA, White KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences and Center for Integrated
Biosystems, Utah State University, Logan, 84322-4815, USA.

Bovine somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) efficiency remains very low despite a
tremendous amount of research devoted to its improvement over the past decade.
Frequent early and mid-gestational losses are commonly accompanied by placental
abnormalities. A transcription factor, activating protein AP-2gamma, has been
shown to be necessary for proper placental development in the mouse. We first
evaluated the expression of the gene coding for AP-2gamma (Tfap2c) in several
bovine fibroblast donor cell lines and found it was not expressed. Subsequently
we determined the expression profile of Tfap2c in oocytes and various stages of
preimplantation in vitro fertilized (IVF) embryos. Tfap2c was undetectable in
oocytes and early embryos, and was detectable at relatively high levels in morula
and blastocyst IVF embryos. The lack of expression in oocytes and donor cells
means Tfap2c must be induced in the zygote at the morula stage in properly
reprogrammed embryos. SCNT embryos expressed Tfap2c at the eight-cell stage, 2
days earlier than control embryos. Control embryos first expressed Tfap2c at the 
morula stage, and at this stage Tfap2c was significantly lower in the SCNT
embryos. No differences in expression were detected at the blastocyst stage. To
determine whether Tfap2c was properly reprogrammed in the placenta of SCNT
pregnancies, we evaluated its expression in cotyledons and caruncles of SCNT and 
control pregnancies between days 55 and 90 gestation. Expression of Tfap2c in
caruncles significantly increased between days 55 and 90, while expression in
cotyledons was relatively consistent over that same period. Expression levels in 
SCNT tissues were not different from controls. This data indicates Tfap2c
expression is altered in early preimplantation SCNT embryos, which may have
developmental consequences resulting from genes influenced by Tfap2c, but
expression was not different at the blastocyst stage and in placentomes.

PMID: 19226219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Microbiol. 2009 Mar;71(6):1402-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2009.06609.x.
Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Identification of a transcription factor in the mosquito-invasive stage of
malaria parasites.

Yuda M(1), Iwanaga S, Shigenobu S, Mair GR, Janse CJ, Waters AP, Kato T, Kaneko
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Zoology, Mie University School of Medicine, Mie, Tsu,
514-0001, Japan. m-yuda@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

Gene expression in Plasmodium parasites undergoes significant changes in each
developmental stage, but the transcription factors (TFs) regulating these changes
have not been identified. We report here a Plasmodium TF (AP2-O) that activates
gene expression in ookinetes, the mosquito-invasive form, and has a DNA-binding
domain structurally related to that of a plant TF, Apetala2 (AP2). AP2-O mRNA is 
pre-synthesized by intraerythrocytic female gametocytes and translated later
during ookinete development in the mosquito. The Plasmodium TF activates a set of
genes, including all genes reported to be required for midgut invasion, by
binding to specific six-base sequences on the proximal promoter. These results
indicate that AP2 family TFs have important roles in stage-specific gene
regulation in Plasmodium parasites.

PMID: 19220746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Mar;149A(3):427-30. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32619.

A complex TFAP2A allele is associated with branchio-oculo-facial syndrome and
inner ear malformation in a deaf child.

Tekin M(1), Sirmaci A, Yüksel-Konuk B, Fitoz S, Sennaroglu L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Molecular Pathology and Genetics, Department of
Pediatrics, Ankara University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
mtekin@medicine.ankara.edu.tr

We present a 4-year-old girl with congenital profound sensorineural deafness
associated with inner ear malformation (incomplete partition type II, enlarged
vestibule, and enlarged vestibular aqueduct). The proposita also had pseudocleft 
lips, skin defects, auricle abnormalities, and unilateral multicystic dysplastic 
kidney, leading to the diagnosis of branchio-oculo-facial (BOF) syndrome.
Mutation analysis of the TFAP2A gene showed a de novo deletion of 18 and
insertion of 6 nucleotides, resulting in deletion of amino acids LPGARR and
insertion of RI between amino acids 276 and 281. Altered amino acids are located 
within the basic DNA binding and dimerization domains of TFAP2A. Previously
reported amino acid substitutions in TFAP2A involved only DNA binding domain in
four patients with BOF syndrome who were not reported to have profound
sensorineural deafness. Our report implies that the localization of mutations in 
TFAP2A might be responsible with the phenotypic findings in BOF syndrome.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19206157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Apr;296(4):E829-41. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90783.2008. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Heme oxygenase system enhances insulin sensitivity and glucose metabolism in
streptozotocin-induced diabetes.

Ndisang JF(1), Jadhav A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Saskatchewan College of Medicine, 107 
Wiggins Rd., Saskatoon, SK, Canada S7N 5E5. joseph.ndisang@usask.ca

Hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress is a common phenomenon in diabetes. Since 
oxidative stress depletes adiponectin and insulin levels, we investigated whether
an upregulated heme oxygenase (HO) system would attenuate the oxidative
destruction of adiponectin/insulin and improve insulin sensitivity and glucose
metabolism in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced type 1 diabetes. HO was upregulated
with hemin (15 mg/kg ip) or inhibited with chromium mesoporphyrin (CrMP, 4
micromol/kg ip). Administering hemin to STZ-diabetic rats reduced hyperglycemia
and improved glucose metabolism, whereas the HO inhibitor CrMP annulled the
antidiabetic effects and/or exacerbated fasting/postprandial hyperglycemia.
Interestingly, the antidiabetic effects of hemin lasted for 2 mo after
termination of therapy and were accompanied by enhanced HO-1 and HO activity of
the soleus muscle, along with potentiation of plasma antioxidants like bilirubin,
ferritin, and superoxide dismutase, with corresponding elevation of the total
antioxidant capacity. Importantly, hemin abated c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK), 
a substance known to inhibit insulin biosynthesis, and suppressed
markers/mediators of oxidative stress including 8-isoprostane, nuclear-factor
(NF)-kappaB, activating protein (AP)-1, and AP-2 of the soleus muscle.
Furthermore, hemin therapy significantly attenuated pancreatic histopathological 
lesions including acinar cell necrosis, interstitial edema, vacuolization,
fibrosis, and mononuclear cell infiltration. Correspondingly, hemin increased
plasma insulin and potentiated agents implicated in insulin sensitization and
insulin signaling such as adiponectin, adenosine monophosphate-activated protein 
kinase (AMPK), cAMP, cGMP, and glucose transporter (GLUT)4, a protein required
for glucose uptake. These were accompanied by improved glucose tolerance
[intraperitoneal glucose tolerance text (IPGTT)], decreased insulin intolerance
[intraperitoneal insulin tolerance test (IPITT)], and reduced insulin resistance 
[homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) index], whereas
CrMP nullified the hemin-dependent antidiabetic and insulin-sensitizing effects. 
In conclusion, by concomitantly enhancing insulin and paradoxically potentiating 
insulin sensitivity, this study unveils a novel, unique, and long-lasting
antidiabetic characteristic of upregulating HO with hemin that could be exploited
against insulin-resistant and insulin-dependent diabetes.

PMID: 19190261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2009 Mar;116(3):363-70. doi: 10.1007/s00702-009-0183-3.
Epub 2009 Jan 28.

Transcription factor AP-2 beta genotype and psychosocial adversity in relation to
adolescent depressive symptomatology.

Nilsson KW(1), Sjöberg RL, Leppert J, Oreland L, Damberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Research, Central Hospital, Uppsala University, 721 89,
Västerås, Sweden. kent.nilsson@ltv.se

The aim of this study was to investigate possible interactions between the gene
coding for activating protein-2 beta (AP-2 beta) and psychosocial factors to
predict depressive symptoms in adolescents. Two-hundred 16- and 19-year-old
adolescents from the county of Västmanland, Sweden, were asked to complete a
questionnaire, interviewed about psychosocial risk factors, and genotyped with
regard to the transcription factor AP-2 beta intron 2 polymorphism. AP-2 beta
genotype interacted significantly both with type of housing and parental
separation to predict depressive symptoms. Individuals who were homozygous for
the short AP-2 beta allele displayed higher depression scores when psychosocial
adversity was taken into account. Amongst carriers of one or two copies of the
long allele, there was no difference in depressive symptoms despite differences
in psychosocial environments.

PMID: 19184334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;69(3):896-904. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-2677. Epub
2009 Jan 27.

Prostaglandin E2 stimulates human lung carcinoma cell growth through induction of
integrin-linked kinase: the involvement of EP4 and Sp1.

Zheng Y(1), Ritzenthaler JD, Sun X, Roman J, Han S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2-derived prostaglandin E(2) (PGE(2)) stimulates tumor cell growth
and progression. However, the mechanisms by which PGE(2) increases tumor growth
remain incompletely understood. In studies performed in non-small cell lung
carcinoma (NSCLC) cells, we found that PGE(2) stimulates the expression of
integrin-linked kinase (ILK). ILK small interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibited the
mitogenic effects of PGE(2). In view of its perceived importance, we turned our
attention to the mechanisms involved in PGE(2)-induced ILK expression and found
that this effect was blocked by an antagonist of the PGE(2) receptor subtype EP4 
and by EP4 siRNA. Furthermore, we showed that PGE(2) induction of ILK was
associated with phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt, which were abrogated by ILK siRNA. Transient
transfection, gel mobility shift assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that PGE(2) induced ILK promoter activity and increased Sp1,
although it had no effect on nuclear factor-kappaB and AP-2 DNA-binding activity.
Blockade of Sp1 abrogated the effect of PGE(2) on expression of ILK and promoter 
activity and on cell growth. In summary, our observations show that PGE(2)
increases NSCLC cell growth through increased ILK expression, which is dependent 
on EP4 signaling and on induction of Sp1 protein and Sp1 DNA-binding activity in 
the ILK promoter. These studies suggest a novel molecular mechanism by which
PGE(2) stimulates NSCLC cell growth and unveils a new molecular target for the
development of therapies against NSCLC.

PMID: 19176380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Placenta. 2009 Mar;30(3):226-35. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2008.12.011. Epub 2009
Jan 24.

Differential placental hormone gene expression during pregnancy in a transgenic
mouse containing the human growth hormone/chorionic somatomammotropin locus.

Jin Y(1), Lu SY, Fresnoza A, Detillieux KA, Duckworth ML, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, 745 Bannatyne Avenue,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada R3E 0J9.

The human (h) growth hormone/chorionic somatomammotropin (GH/CS) gene locus
presents a unique model to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms that have
allowed a closely related family of genes to be expressed in two distinct cell
lineages/tissues: pituitary somatotrophs and placental syncytiotrophoblasts.
However, studies of external factors that regulate gene expression have been
somewhat limited by (i) a lack of human cell lines expressing endogenous GH or CS
appropriately; and (ii) the fact that the GH/CS locus is unique to primates and
thus does not exist in rodents. In the current study, a transgenic (171 h
GH/CS-TG) mouse was generated containing the intact hGH/CS gene cluster and hGH
locus control region (LCR) in a 171-kilobase DNA fragment. Pituitary and
placental-specific expression of hGH/CS RNA was detected at embryonic day (E)
18.5. Immunostaining of hGH was seen in somatotrophs of the anterior pituitary
beginning in late gestation. The presence of hCS protein was detected in the
placental labyrinth in trophoblasts functionally analogous to the
syncytiotrophoblast of the chorionic villi. This pattern of gene expression is
consistent with the presence of essential components of the hGH/CS LCR.
Transcript levels for hCS-A, hCS-B and placental hGH-variant increased in 171
hGH/CS-TG placenta during gestation (E11.5-E18.5), as previously observed in
human placental development. Throughout gestation, hCS-A RNA levels were
proportionately higher, accounting for 91% of total CS RNA by E18.5, comparable
to term human placenta. Finally, the previous correlation between the
transcription factor AP-2alpha and hCS RNA expression observed in developing
primary human cytotrophoblast cultures, was extended to pregnancy in the 171
hGH/CS-TG mouse. The 171 hGH/CS-TG mouse thus provides a model to investigate
hGH/CS gene expression, including in pregnancy.

PMID: 19168217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. FEBS J. 2009 Feb;276(4):1114-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06855.x. Epub 2009
Jan 16.

Transcription factor specificity protein 1 (SP1) and activating protein 2alpha
(AP-2alpha) regulate expression of human KCTD10 gene by binding to proximal
region of promoter.

Liu R(1), Zhou A, Ren D, He A, Hu X, Zhang W, Yang L, Liu M, Li H, Zhou J, Xiang 
S, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry and Development Biology of State
Education Ministry of China, Hunan Normal University, China.

Potassium channel tetramerization domain-containing 10 gene (KCTD10) belongs to
the polymerase delta-interacting protein 1 (PDIP1) gene family. Mouse KCTD10 was 
thought to interact with proliferating cell nuclear antigen and the small subunit
of polymerase delta, and to have roles in DNA repair, DNA replication and
cell-cycle control. To better understand the regulatory mechanism of KCTD10
expression, we characterized the promoter of human KCTD10 containing a 639 bp
fragment of the 5'-flanking region (-609/+30). A primer extension assay
identified the transcription start site as an A, 63 bp upstream of the start
codon. The promoter region contains neither a TATA box nor a CCAAT box, but a CpG
island was found near to the transcription start site. Deletion mutagenesis
showed that the region from -108 to +30 was indispensable to the promoter
activity, and site-directed mutation analysis in this proximal promoter region of
KCTD10 revealed two important transcription regulatory elements of specificity
protein 1 (SP1) and activating protein-2 (AP-2). An in vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay further demonstrated that SP1 and AP-2alpha could bind 
to this proximal promoter region. Moreover, using a luciferase reporter assay,
quantitative real-time RT-PCR and western blot analysis, both overexpression and 
RNA interference of SP1 and AP-2alpha indicated that the binding of SP1 to the
proximal promoter region stimulated the promoter activity and endogenous KCTD10
expression, whereas binding of AP-2alpha to this region showed opposite effects.

PMID: 19154347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Am J Pathol. 2009 Feb;174(2):550-64. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080631. Epub 2009
Jan 15.

Molecular classification of rhabdomyosarcoma--genotypic and phenotypic
determinants of diagnosis: a report from the Children's Oncology Group.

Davicioni E(1), Anderson MJ, Finckenstein FG, Lynch JC, Qualman SJ, Shimada H,
Schofield DE, Buckley JD, Meyer WH, Sorensen PH, Triche TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) in children occurs as two major histological subtypes,
embryonal (ERMS) and alveolar (ARMS). ERMS is associated with an 11p15.5 loss of 
heterozygosity (LOH) and may be confused with nonmyogenic, non-RMS soft tissue
sarcomas. ARMS expresses the product of a genomic translocation that fuses FOXO1 
(FKHR) with either PAX3 or PAX7 (P-F); however, at least 25% of cases lack these 
translocations. Here, we describe a genomic-based classification scheme that is
derived from the combined gene expression profiling and LOH analysis of 160 cases
of RMS and non-RMS soft tissue sarcomas that is at variance with conventional
histopathological schemes. We found that gene expression profiles and patterns of
LOH of ARMS cases lacking P-F translocations are indistinguishable from
conventional ERMS cases. A subset of tumors that has been histologically
classified as RMS lack myogenic gene expression. However, classification based on
gene expression is possible using as few as five genes with an estimated error
rate of less than 5%. Using immunohistochemistry, we characterized two markers,
HMGA2 and TFAP2ss, which facilitate the differential diagnoses of ERMS and P-F
RMS, respectively, using clinical material. These objectively derived molecular
classes are based solely on genomic analysis at the time of diagnosis and are
highly reproducible. Adoption of these molecular criteria may offer a more
clinically relevant diagnostic scheme, thus potentially improving patient
management and therapeutic RMS outcomes.

PMCID: PMC2630563
PMID: 19147825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Mar 1;106(4):580-8. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22029.

Transcriptional regulation of fibrillin-2 gene by E2F family members in
chondrocyte differentiation.

Yanagino T(1), Yuasa K, Nagahama M, Matsuda Y, Tsuji A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, the University of Tokushima
Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Mutation in fibrillin-2, a major structural component of extracellular
microfibrils in connective tissue, results in the autosomal dominant disease
congenital contractural arachnodactyly. This genetic disease is characterized by 
dolichostenomelia and arachnodactyly, in addition to contractures of the large
joints and abnormal pinnae formation, thus indicating the significance of
fibrillin-2 in chondrogenesis. In this study, we investigated the transcriptional
regulation of fibrillin-2 in chondrogenic differentiation. Although mRNA
expression of fibrillin-1, a highly homologous protein to fibrillin-2, remained
almost unchanged during chondrogenesis of mouse ATDC5 cells, fibrillin-2 mRNA
expression varied. Fibrillin-2 was highly expressed at the early stage and
declined progressively during differentiation. The 5'-flanking region of the
fibrillin-2 gene contains potential binding sites for E2F, Runx, AP-2, and Sox
transcription factors. The promoter activity of fibrillin-2 decreased markedly
following deletion and mutagenesis of the E2F binding site between -143 and -136 
bp. Overexpression of E2F1 resulted in a marked increase in its promoter
activity, whereas expression of other transcription factors including AP-2alpha
and Runx2 had no effect. The increase in promoter activity by E2F1 was completely
suppressed by the coexpression of E2F4. E2F2 and E2F3 had positive effects on the
promoter activity. Although ATDC5 cells expressed transcripts for the E2F family 
genes at all stages of differentiation, the expression profiles differed. E2F1
expression remained almost unchanged, whereas E2F4 expression increased markedly 
at the late stage of differentiation. These results indicated that coordinated
expression of the E2F family is critical for the transcriptional regulation of
fibrillin-2 during chondrogenesis.

PMID: 19142862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2009 Jan;85(1):42-51. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20571.

Identification of microdeletions in candidate genes for cleft lip and/or palate.

Shi M(1), Mostowska A, Jugessur A, Johnson MK, Mansilla MA, Christensen K, Lie
RT, Wilcox AJ, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies are now used routinely to identify
genes implicated in complex traits. The panels used for such analyses can detect 
single nucleotide polymorphisms and copy number variants, both of which may help 
to identify small deleted regions of the genome that may contribute to a
particular disease.
METHODS: We performed a candidate gene analysis involving 1,221 SNPs in 333
candidate genes for orofacial clefting, using 2,823 samples from 725 two- and
three-generation families with a proband having cleft lip with or without cleft
palate. We used SNP genotyping, DNA sequencing, high-resolution DNA microarray
analysis, and long-range PCR to confirm and characterize the deletion events.
RESULTS: This dataset had a high duplicate reproducibility rate (99.98%), high
Mendelian consistency rate (99.93%), and low missing data rate (0.55%), which
provided a powerful opportunity for deletion detection. Apparent Mendelian
inconsistencies between parents and children suggested deletion events in 15
individuals in 11 genomic regions. We confirmed deletions involving CYP1B1,
FGF10, SP8, SUMO1, TBX1, TFAP2A, and UGT7A1, including both de novo and familial 
cases. Deletions of SUMO1, TBX1, and TFAP2A are likely to be etiologic.
CONCLUSIONS: These deletions suggest the potential roles of genes or regulatory
elements contained within deleted regions in the etiology of clefting. Our
analysis took advantage of genotypes from a candidate-gene-based SNP survey and
proved to be an efficient analytical approach to interrogate genes potentially
involved in clefting. This can serve as a model to find genes playing a role in
complex traits in general.

PMCID: PMC3682790
PMID: 19137569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Aug;41(2):226-36. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0317OC. 
Epub 2009 Jan 8.

Surfactant-associated protein B is critical to survival in nickel-induced injury 
in mice.

Bein K(1), Wesselkamper SC, Liu X, Dietsch M, Majumder N, Concel VJ, Medvedovic
M, Sartor MA, Henning LN, Venditto C, Borchers MT, Barchowsky A, Weaver TE,
Tichelaar JW, Prows DR, Korfhagen TR, Hardie WD, Bachurski CJ, Leikauf GD.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of Public Health,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219-3130, USA.

The etiology of acute lung injury is complex and associated with numerous,
chemically diverse precipitating factors. During acute lung injury in mice, one
key event is epithelial cell injury that leads to reduced surfactant
biosynthesis. We have previously reported that transgenic mice that express
transforming growth factor alpha (TGFA) in the lung were protected during
nickel-induced lung injury. Here, we find that the mechanism by which TGFA
imparts protection includes maintenance of surfactant-associated protein B
(SFTPB) transcript levels and epidermal growth factor receptor-dependent
signaling in distal pulmonary epithelial cells. This protection is complex and
not accompanied by a diminution in inflammatory mediator transcripts or
additional stimulation of antioxidant transcripts. In mouse lung epithelial
(MLE-15) cells, microarray analysis demonstrated that nickel increased
transcripts of genes enriched in MTF1, E2F-1, and AP-2 transcription
factor-binding sites and decreased transcripts of genes enriched in AP-1-binding 
sites. Nickel also increased Jun transcript and DNA-binding activity, but
decreased SFTPB transcript. Expression of SFTPB under the control of a
doxycycline-sensitive promoter increased survival during nickel-induced injury as
compared with control mice. Together, these findings support the idea that
maintenance of SFTPB expression is critical to survival during acute lung injury.

PMCID: PMC2715910
PMID: 19131640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Cancer. 2009 Feb 15;115(4):899-908. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24103.

Fragile histidine triad protein, WW domain-containing oxidoreductase protein
Wwox, and activator protein 2gamma expression levels correlate with basal
phenotype in breast cancer.

Guler G(1), Huebner K, Himmetoglu C, Jimenez RE, Costinean S, Volinia S, Pilarski
RT, Hayran M, Shapiro CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The expression of fragile histidine triad protein (Fhit) and WW
domain-containing oxidoreductase protein (Wwox), tumor suppressors that are
encoded by fragile (FRA) loci FRA3B and FRA16D, are lost concordantly in breast
cancers. In the current study, the authors examined correlations among Fhit,
Wwox, the activator protein 2 transcription factors AP2alpha and AP2gamma,
cytokeratins 5 and 6 (CK5/6), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), estrogen
receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2 (HER-2) and their associations with breast cancer phenotypes.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays constructed from 837 breast cancer blocks were
immunostained. Expression in >10% of tumor cells was considered positive for
cytoplasmic CK5/6, membranous EGFR, and nuclear AP2alpha and AP2gamma.
Cytoplasmic Fhit and Wwox staining was scored according to staining intensity.
ER, PR, and HER-2 status of tumors was derived from records. Correlations among
immunohistochemical markers and tumor subtypes were assessed by univariate and
multivariate statistical methods.
RESULTS: Triple-negative tumors had more frequent expression of EGFR, CK5/6 (P < 
.001), and AP2gamma (P = .003) and more frequent loss of Fhit and Wwox (P <
.001), and an inverse correlation was observed between Fhit, Wwox expression and 
EGFR, ER, and PR expression (P < .001). Reduced Fhit expression was more common
in HER-2-positive and AP2gamma-positive cases (P < .001 and P = .002,
respectively). There was a direct correlation noted between Fhit and Wwox (P <
.001) and a borderline positive relation between AP2alpha and AP2gamma (P =
.054).
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this investigation suggested that reduced
expression levels of Fhit, Wwox, and nuclear AP2gamma have roles in the
pathogenesis of basal-like differentiation in breast cancer. Alteration in the
expression of fragile site genes occurs in most of these cancers and may
contribute to defects in DNA repair, as observed in breast cancer 1
(BRCA1)-deficient cancers. Thus, DNA damage response checkpoint proteins may be
targets for treatment.

(c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC2640223
PMID: 19130459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Feb 13;379(3):790-4. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.12.152. Epub 2009 Jan 4.

MicroRNA-dependent regulation of cKit in cutaneous melanoma.

Igoucheva O(1), Alexeev V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S. 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Loss of cKit receptor in cutaneous melanomas was attributed to the
down-regulation of AP2 transcription factor. Our analysis of 27 melanoma cell
lines showed no correlation between AP2 and c-kit expression. Suggesting a
post-transcriptional mechanism of cKit down-modulation, we performed genome-wide 
microRNA (miRNA) expression profiling and found that several miRNA species are
commonly up-regulated in melanomas. Among them was mir-221, which can directly
interact with c-kit 3'UTR and inhibit cKit protein translation. Observed inverse 
correlation of the c-kit and mir-221 expression in various melanocytic cells
pointed to its involvement in regulation of cKit in melanoma. Moreover, a series 
of functional assays demonstrated that mir-221 could directly inhibit cKit,
p27(Kip1) and, possibly, other pivotal proteins in melanoma. Collectively, the
studies presented here indicate that mir-221 could be a novel therapeutic target 
for the treatment of cutaneous melanoma. They also suggest that regulation of
expression and functional activity of identified up-regulated miRNAs should be
further studied in the context of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 19126397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. FASEB J. 2009 May;23(5):1366-75. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-115576. Epub 2009 Jan 5.

Keratin 7 promoter selectively targets transgene expression to normal and
neoplastic pancreatic ductal cells in vitro and in vivo.

Pujal J(1), Huch M, José A, Abasolo I, Rodolosse A, Duch A, Sánchez-Palazón L,
Smith FJ, McLean WH, Fillat C, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Keratin 7 is expressed in simple epithelia but is expressed at low or
undetectable levels in gastrointestinal epithelial cells. In the pancreas, it is 
present in ductal but not in acinar cells. K7 mRNA is overexpressed in pancreatic
cancers. Here we use luciferase reporter assays to analyze the tissue-specific
regulatory elements of murine keratin 7 (Krt7) promoter in vitro and in vivo. All
elements required for appropriate cell and tissue specificity in reporter assays 
are present within the Krt7 -234 bp sequence. This fragment appears more
selective to pancreatic ductal cells than the Krt19 promoter. GC-rich sequences
corresponding to putative Sp1, AP-2 binding sites are essential for in vitro
activity. Krt7-LacZ transgenic mice were generated to analyze in vivo activity.
Sequences located 1.5 or 0.25 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site
drive reporter expression to ductal, but not acinar, cells in transgenic mice.
LacZ mRNA was detected in the pancreas as well as in additional epithelial
tissues--such as the intestine and the lung--using both promoter constructs. An
AdK7Luc adenovirus was generated to assess targeting selectivity in vivo by
intravenous injection to immunocompetent mice and in a xenograft model of
pancreatic cancer. The -0.25 kb region showed pancreatic selectivity, high
activity in pancreatic cancers, and sustained transgene expression in xenografts.
In conclusion, the krt7 promoter is useful to target pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma cells in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 19124560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 1;106(2):285-95. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22002.

The interaction of KCTD1 with transcription factor AP-2alpha inhibits its
transactivation.

Ding X(1), Luo C, Zhou J, Zhong Y, Hu X, Zhou F, Ren K, Gan L, He A, Zhu J, Gao
X, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210089, PR China.

AP-2 is a transcription factor implicated in mammalian development, cell
proliferation, apoptosis, and carcinogenesis. To identify potential
AP-2alpha-interacting partners, a yeast two-hybrid screen was performed in human 
brain cDNA library. One of the identified clones encodes potassium channel
tetramerization domain-containing 1 (KCTD1). We demonstrated the novel
KCTD1-AP-2alpha interaction in vitro by GST pull-down assays and in vivo by
co-immunoprecipitation assays and mapped the interaction domains to the N-termini
of both proteins. In addition, we observed that the two proteins were completely 
co-localized in the nuclei of mammalian cells. Transient transfection assays
using four promoters containing AP-2-binding sites confirmed that KCTD1
significantly repressed AP-2alpha-mediated transactivation through the BTB
domain, whereas KCTD1 siRNA strongly relieved KCTD1-mediated repression of
AP-2alpha transcriptional activity, and other BTB domain proteins such as PDIP1, 
KCTD10, and TNFAIP1 did not markedly inhibit the transcriptional activity of
AP-2alpha, suggesting that KCTD1 specifically acts as a negative regulator of
AP-2alpha. Finally, we found that KCTD1 interacted with three major members of
the AP-2 family and inhibited their transcriptional activities. Taken together,
our results indicate the novel function of KCTD1 as the transcriptional repressor
for AP-2 family, especially for AP-2alpha.

PMID: 19115315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20083-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806009105. Epub 2008 Dec 22.

Dissecting early regulatory relationships in the lamprey neural crest gene
network.

Nikitina N(1), Sauka-Spengler T, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 81125,
USA.

The neural crest, a multipotent embryonic cell type, originates at the border
between neural and nonneural ectoderm. After neural tube closure, these cells
undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition, migrate to precise, often distant
locations, and differentiate into diverse derivatives. Analyses of expression and
function of signaling and transcription factors in higher vertebrates has led to 
the proposal that a neural crest gene regulatory network (NC-GRN) orchestrates
neural crest formation. Here, we interrogate the NC-GRN in the lamprey, taking
advantage of its slow development and basal phylogenetic position to resolve
early inductive events, 1 regulatory step at the time. To establish regulatory
relationships at the neural plate border, we assess relative expression of 6
neural crest network genes and effects of individually perturbing each on the
remaining 5. The results refine an upstream portion of the NC-GRN and reveal
unexpected order and linkages therein; e.g., lamprey AP-2 appears to function
early as a neural plate border rather than a neural crest specifier and in a
pathway linked to MsxA but independent of ZicA. These findings provide an
ancestral framework for performing comparative tests in higher vertebrates in
which network linkages may be more difficult to resolve because of their rapid
development.

PMCID: PMC2629288
PMID: 19104059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 Dec;6(12):1881-93. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-08-0253.

Mutations in the SOD2 promoter reveal a molecular basis for an activating protein
2-dependent dysregulation of manganese superoxide dismutase expression in cancer 
cells.

Xu Y(1), Fang F, Dhar SK, Bosch A, St Clair WH, Kasarskis EJ, St Clair DK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536,
USA.

A primary antioxidant enzyme in mitochondria, manganese superoxide dismutase
(MnSOD), plays a critical role in the survival of aerobic life. It is well
documented that, compared with normal cell counterparts, MnSOD level is decreased
in neoplastic transformed cells but is increased in aggressive cancers. However, 
the underlying mechanism for the observed dysregulation of MnSOD in cancer is
unknown. We have identified previously a unique set of mutations located in the
promoter region of the SOD2 gene in several types of cancer cells. We found that 
a C-to-T transition at -102 and an insertion of A at -93 down-regulate MnSOD
transcription by interrupting the formation of a single-stranded loop that is
essential for a high level of promoter activity. Here, we show that the
additional downstream mutation, C-to-G transversion at -38, creates a binding
site for the transcription factors specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and activating
protein 2 (AP-2). The promoter function is regulated by the relative levels of
Sp1 and AP-2. In cytokine-induced expression of the SOD2 gene, Sp1 cooperates
with a transcriptional complex containing nuclear factor-kappaB and
nucleophosmin. The presence of AP-2 attenuates this induction. Our results
suggest that the high level of MnSOD observed in aggressive cancer cells may be
due, in part, to the absence of AP-2 transcriptional repression.

PMCID: PMC2605667
PMID: 19074833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Feb;296(2):G275-83. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90503.2008. Epub 2008 Nov 25.

PKC-dependent stimulation of the human MCT1 promoter involves transcription
factor AP2.

Saksena S(1), Dwivedi A, Gill RK, Singla A, Alrefai WA, Malakooti J, Ramaswamy K,
Dudeja PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA. saksena@uic.edu

Monocarboxylate transporter (MCT1) plays an important role in the absorption of
short-chain fatty acids (SCFA) such as butyrate in the human colon. Previous
studies from our laboratory have demonstrated that phorbol ester, PMA (1 microM, 
24 h), upregulates butyrate transport and MCT1 protein expression in human
intestinal Caco-2 cells. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in the
transcriptional regulation of MCT1 gene expression by PMA in the intestine are
not known. In the present study, we showed that PMA (0.1 microM, 24 h) increased 
the MCT1 promoter activity (-871/+91) by approximately fourfold. A corresponding 
increase in MCT1 mRNA abundance in response to PMA was also observed. PMA-induced
stimulation of MCT1 promoter activity was observed as early as 1 h and persisted 
until 24 h, suggesting that the effects of PMA are attributable to initial PKC
activation. Kinase inhibitor and phosphorylation studies indicated that these
effects may be mediated through activation of the atypical PKC-zeta isoform.
5'-deletion studies demonstrated that the MCT1 core promoter region (-229/+91) is
the PMA-responsive region. Site-directed mutagenesis studies showed the
predominant involvement of potential activator protein 2 (AP2) binding site in
the activation of MCT1 promoter activity by PMA. In addition, overexpression of
AP2 in Caco-2 cells significantly increased MCT1 promoter activity in a
dose-dependent manner. These findings showing the regulation of MCT1 promoter by 
PKC and AP2 are of significant importance for an understanding of the molecular
regulation of SCFA absorption in the human intestine.

PMCID: PMC2643915
PMID: 19033536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Endocrinology. 2009 Apr;150(4):1654-61. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1361. Epub 2008 Nov 
20.

Transcription factor activating protein-2beta: a positive regulator of monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 gene expression.

Kondo M(1), Maegawa H, Obata T, Ugi S, Ikeda K, Morino K, Nakai Y, Nishio Y,
Maeda S, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga,
Japan.

We previously reported an association between the activating protein (AP)-2beta
transcription factor gene and type 2 diabetes. This gene is preferentially
expressed in adipose tissue, and subjects with a disease-susceptible allele of
AP-2beta showed stronger AP-2beta expression in adipose tissue than those without
the susceptible allele. Furthermore, overexpression of AP-2beta leads to lipid
accumulation by enhancing glucose transport and inducing insulin resistance in
3T3-L1 adipocytes. In this study, we found that overexpression of AP-2beta in
3T3-L1 adipocytes accelerated the promoter activity of monocyte chemoattractant
protein-1 (MCP-1) and subsequently increased both mRNA and protein expression and
protein secretion. Furthermore, knockdown of endogenous AP-2beta by RNA
interference reduced the mRNA and the protein expression of MCP-1. EMSAs and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed specific binding of AP-2beta to
MCP-1 promoter regions, in vitro and in vivo. Additionally, site-directed
mutagenesis of the AP-2 binding site located at -137 to -129 relative to the
transcription start site markedly diminished MCP-1 promoter activity, whereas
other putative AP-2 binding sites did not. Our results clearly show that AP-2beta
directly enhanced MCP-1 secretion by binding to its promoter. Thus, we propose
that AP-2beta positively regulates MCP-1 expression; subsequently contributes to 
the infiltration of macrophages to adipose tissue; and leads to insulin
resistance, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases.

PMID: 19022887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. BMC Genomics. 2008 Nov 6;9:527. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-527.

Temporal and functional profile of the transcriptional regulatory network in the 
early regenerative response to partial hepatectomy in the rat.

Juskeviciute E(1), Vadigepalli R, Hoek JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. egle.juskeviciute@jefferson.edu

BACKGROUND: The goal of these studies was to characterize the transcriptional
network regulating changes in gene expression in the remnant liver of the rat
after 70% partial hepatectomy (PHx) during the early phase response including the
transition of hepatocytes from the quiescent (G0) state and the onset of the G1
phase of the cell cycle.
RESULTS: The transcriptome of remnant livers was monitored at 1, 2, 4, and 6
hours after PHx using cDNA microarrays. Differentially regulated genes were
grouped into six clusters according their temporal expression profiles. Promoter 
regions of genes in these clusters were examined for shared transcription factor 
binding sites (TFBS) by comparing enrichment of each TFBS relative to a reference
set using the Promoter Analysis and Interaction Network Toolset (PAINT).Analysis 
of the gene expression time series data using ANOVA resulted in a total of 309
genes significantly up- or down-regulated at any of the four time points at a 20%
FDR threshold. Sham-operated animals showed no significant differential
expression. A subset of the differentially expressed genes was validated using
quantitative RT-PCR. Distinct sets of TFBS could be identified that were
significantly enriched in each one of the different temporal gene expression
clusters. These included binding sites for transcription factors that had
previously been recognized as contributing to the onset of regeneration,
including NF-kappaB, C/EBP, HNF-1, CREB, as well as factors, such as ATF, AP-2,
LEF-1, GATA and PAX-6, that had not yet been recognized to be involved in this
process. A subset of these candidate TFBS was validated by measuring activation
of corresponding transcription factors (HNF-1, NK-kappaB, CREB, C/EBP-alpha and
C/EBP-beta, GATA-1, AP-2, PAX-6) in nuclear extracts from the remnant livers.
CONCLUSION: This analysis revealed multiple candidate transcription factors
activated in the remnant livers, some known to be involved in the early phase of 
liver regeneration, and several not previously identified. The study describes
the predominant temporal and functional elements to which these factors
contribute and demonstrates the potential of this novel approach to define the
functional correlates of the transcriptional regulatory network driving the early
response to partial hepatectomy.

PMCID: PMC2613928
PMID: 18990226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Psychiatry. 2010 Jun;15(6):602-14. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.117. Epub 2008 Nov 4.

Chronic imipramine but not bupropion increases arachidonic acid signaling in rat 
brain: is this related to 'switching' in bipolar disorder?

Lee HJ(1), Rao JS, Chang L, Rapoport SI, Kim HW.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Agents effective against mania in bipolar disorder are reported to decrease
turnover of arachidonic acid (AA) in phospholipids and expression of
calcium-dependent AA-selective cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) in rat
brain. In contrast, fluoxetine, an antidepressant that is reported to switch
bipolar depressed patients to mania, increases cPLA(2) expression and AA turnover
in rat brain. We therefore hypothesized that antidepressants that increase
switching to mania generally increase cPLA(2) and AA turnover in brain. To test
this hypothesis, adult male CDF-344 rats were administered imipramine and
bupropion, with reported high and low switching rates, respectively, at daily
doses of 10 and 30 mg kg(-1) i.p., respectively, or i.p. saline (control) for 21 
days. Frontal cortex expression of different PLA(2) enzymes and AA turnover rates
in brain when the rats were unanesthetized were measured. Compared with chronic
saline, chronic imipramine but not bupropion significantly increased cortex
cPLA(2) mRNA activity, protein and phosphorylation, expression of the cPLA(2)
transcription factor, activator protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) and AA turnover in
phospholipids. Protein levels of secretory phospholipase A(2),
calcium-independent phospholipase A(2), cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and COX-2 were
unchanged, and prostaglandin E(2) was unaffected. These results, taken with prior
data on chronic fluoxetine in rats, suggest that antidepressants that increase
the switching tendency of bipolar depressed patients to mania do so by increasing
AA recycling and metabolism in brain. Mania in bipolar disorder thus may involve 
upregulated brain AA metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2874651
PMID: 18982003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;14(21):6780-9. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0719.

SCCRO (DCUN1D1) induces extracellular matrix invasion by activating matrix
metalloproteinase 2.

O-charoenrat P(1), Sarkaria I, Talbot SG, Reddy P, Dao S, Ngai I, Shaha A, Kraus 
D, Shah J, Rusch V, Ramanathan Y, Singh B.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Epithelial Cancer Biology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York 10065, USA.

PURPOSE: Ectopic expression of squamous cell carcinoma-related oncogene (SCCRO or
DCUN1D1) in NIH-3T3 cells induces invasion in vitro and produces highly invasive 
xenografts in nude mice with a propensity for regional lymphatical metastasis.
The aim of this study was to identify the molecular mechanism underlying
SCCRO-induced invasion and metastasis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The molecular mechanism of SCCRO-mediated effects on matrix 
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2) levels and activity were assessed using a combination 
of cell biological and molecular methods, including real-time PCR, reporter
assay, RNA interference, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Tumor specimens
from primary upper aerodigestive tract carcinomas (n = 89) were examined for
levels of SCCRO, MMP2, MMP9, MT1-MMP, TIMP1, and TIMP2 mRNA by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Overexpression of SCCRO increases MMP2 levels and activity, which is
required for SCCRO-induced invasion. Modified McKay assays reveal that SCCRO does
not bind to the MMP2 promoter, suggesting that its transcriptional effects are
indirect. Deletion or mutation of the activator protein-2 (AP2) and p53 binding
element within the MMP2 promoter abrogates SCCRO-driven activation. Ectopic
expression of SCCRO increases AP2 levels and promotes the binding of p53 to the
MMP2 promoter. Consistent with these findings, SCCRO and MMP2 are coexpressed
(P<0.0001; r(2)=0.58; 95% confidence interval, 0.46-0.69) in primary (upper
aerodigestive tract) carcinomas (n=89), and this coexpression is associated with 
an increased prevalence of regional nodal metastasis (P=0.04; relative risk,
1.53).
CONCLUSIONS: SCCRO-induced invasion involves activation of MMP2 transcription in 
an AP2- and p53-dependent manner. SCCRO is a potential marker for metastatic
progression in affected cancers.

PMID: 18980971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jan;29(1):172-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01038-08. Epub 2008 Oct
27.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation on microarray analysis of Smad2/3 binding sites
reveals roles of ETS1 and TFAP2A in transforming growth factor beta signaling.

Koinuma D(1), Tsutsumi S, Kamimura N, Taniguchi H, Miyazawa K, Sunamura M,
Imamura T, Miyazono K, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

The Smad2 and Smad3 (Smad2/3) proteins are principally involved in the
transmission of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) signaling from the
plasma membrane to the nucleus. Many transcription factors have been shown to
cooperate with the Smad2/3 proteins in regulating the transcription of target
genes, enabling appropriate gene expression by cells. Here we identified 1,787
Smad2/3 binding sites in the promoter regions of over 25,500 genes by chromatin
immunoprecipitation on microarray in HaCaT keratinocytes. Binding elements for
the v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homolog (ETS) and transcription
factor AP-2 (TFAP2) were significantly enriched in Smad2/3 binding sites, and
knockdown of either ETS1 or TFAP2A resulted in overall alteration of
TGF-beta-induced transcription, suggesting general roles for ETS1 and TFAP2A in
the transcription induced by TGF-beta-Smad pathways. We identified novel Smad
binding sites in the CDKN1A gene where Smad2/3 binding was regulated by ETS1 and 
TFAP2A. Moreover, we showed that small interfering RNAs for ETS1 and TFAP2A
affected TGF-beta-induced cytostasis. We also analyzed Smad2- or Smad3-specific
target genes regulated by TGF-beta and found that their specificity did not
appear to be solely determined by the amounts of the Smad2/3 proteins bound to
the promoters. These findings reveal novel regulatory mechanisms of
Smad2/3-induced transcription and provide an essential resource for understanding
their roles.

PMCID: PMC2612478
PMID: 18955504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2008 Sep-Nov;79(3-5):85-91. doi:
10.1016/j.plefa.2008.09.003. Epub 2008 Oct 19.

Regulation of brain polyunsaturated fatty acid uptake and turnover.

Chen CT(1), Green JT, Orr SK, Bazinet RP.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of
Toronto, FitzGerald Building, 150 College Street, Room 306, Toronto, ON, Canada
M5S 3E2.

The brain is particularly enriched in glycerophospholipids with either
arachidonic or docosahexaenoic acid esterified in the stereospecifically
numbered-2 position. In this paper, we review how combining a kinetic approach to
study the uptake and turnover of arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acids within
brain phospholipids of unanesthetized rats, along with chronic administration of 
antimanic drugs (lithium, valproate and carbamazepine), have advanced our
understanding of how polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) enter the brain, and the 
mechanisms that regulate their turnover within brain phospholipids. The
incorporation rates of arachidonic and docosahexaenoic acid from the plasma
unesterified pool into brain phospholipids closely approximate independent
measures of their consumption rates by the brain, suggesting this is
quantitatively the major pool for uptake of these PUFA. Antimanic drugs (lithium 
and carbamazepine) that downregulate the activity of the calcium-dependent
cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)) transcription factor AP-2, and in turn the
expression and activity of cPLA(2,) lead to a selective downregulation in brain
arachidonic acid turnover. Furthermore, targeting arachidonoyl-CoA formation via 
ordered, non-competitive inhibition of an acyl-CoA synthetase with valproate also
selectively decreases brain arachidonic acid turnover. Drugs that increase brain 
cPLA(2) activity (N-methyl-d-aspartic acid and fluoxetine) are correlated with
increased turnover of arachidonic acid in brain phospholipids. Altered PUFA
metabolism has been implicated in several neurological disorders, including
bipolar disorder and Alzheimer's disease. Identifying the enzymes that regulated 
brain PUFA metabolism could lead to new therapeutic approaches for these
disorders.

PMID: 18938067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Neurobiol Dis. 2008 Dec;32(3):521-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.09.010. Epub 2008
Sep 30.

Different methylation of the TNF-alpha promoter in cortex and substantia nigra:
Implications for selective neuronal vulnerability.

Pieper HC(1), Evert BO, Kaut O, Riederer PF, Waha A, Wüllner U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, 53105 Bonn, Germany.

Increasing evidence has linked inflammatory processes to neurodegenerative
disorders, including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease (PD). Tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is a key inflammatory cytokine and several studies
linked increased TNF-alpha to dopaminergic cell death in PD. The TNF-alpha
promoter sequence contains several CpG dinucleotides located within or next to
transcription factor binding sites. To test the hypothesis whether the
methylation state of the TNF-alpha promoter contributes to increased expression
of TNF-alpha in PD we compared DNA from different brain regions (substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNpc) and cortex) of PD patients and neurologically healthy, age
and sex matched controls by bisulfite sequencing of the TNF-alpha promoter
region. The TNF-alpha promoter DNA from SNpc was significantly less methylated in
comparison to DNA from cortex; however both in PD patients and controls. Although
there was a tendency for hypomethylation in PD, our analysis of the 10 CpGs in
the TNF-alpha core promoter region (-258 to -35 relative to the TSS) revealed no 
particular pattern in PD patients compared to control and identified no
particular hypomethylated position in cortex or SNpc DNA. Electrophoretic
mobility shift and luciferase reporter assays showed that methylation of specific
solitary CpG in the TNF-alpha promoter resulted in reduced binding of the
transcription factors AP-2 and Sp1, respectively, and suppressed TNF-alpha
promoter activity. The brain region specific methylation state of solitary CpG in
the TNF-alpha promoter thus determines transcription factor binding efficacy and 
TNF-alpha expression. A lesser degree of methylation of the TNF-alpha promoter in
SNpc cells could underlie the increased susceptibility of dopaminergic neurons to
TNF-alpha mediated inflammatory reactions.

PMID: 18930140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Dev Dyn. 2008 Nov;237(11):3210-21. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21744.

Expression of AP-2delta in the developing chick retina.

Li X(1), Glubrecht DD, Mita R, Godbout R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

AP-2 is a family of transcription factors that play important roles during
embryonic development. Two AP-2 genes, AP-2alpha and AP-2beta, have previously
been characterized in chick retina. Here, we demonstrate that a third member of
the chicken AP-2 family, AP-2delta, is primarily expressed in the retina and
brain, with highest levels at embryonic days 7 to 11. By in situ hybridization
and immunohistochemical analysis, we show that AP-2delta RNA and protein are
found in a subset of ganglion cells in embryonic chick retina. Co-immunostaining 
with anti-Brn3a and anti-AP-2delta antibodies indicates that approximately
one-third of Brn3a-positive ganglion cells express AP-2delta. AP-2delta RNA but
not AP-2delta protein is also found in cells located in the outer half of the
inner nuclear layer. The spatial and temporal distribution of AP-2delta protein
in the retina suggests a transient role in a subset of late-born ganglion cells
likely involving axonal trafficking or pathfinding.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18924234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Dec;28(12):2282-7. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.174714. Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Involvement of protein kinase D in phosphorylation and increase of DNA binding of
activator protein 2 alpha to downregulate ATP-binding cassette transporter A1.

Iwamoto N(1), Abe-Dohmae S, Lu R, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Activator protein (AP) 2alpha negatively regulates expression of
ABCA1 gene through Ser-phosphorylation of AP2alpha (Circ Res. 2007;101:156-165). 
Potential specific Ser-phosphorylation sites for this reaction were investigated 
in human AP2alpha.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The phosphorylation was shown mediated by PKD, and Ser258
and Ser326 were found in its specific phosphorylation sequence segment in
AP2alpha. PKD phosphorylated Ser258 more than Ser326 and induced its binding to
the ABCA1 promoter. These reactions and AP2alpha-induced suppression of the ABCA1
promoter activity were reversed by mutation of Ser258 more than Ser326 mutation. 
Knockdown of PKD by siRNA reduced the AP2alpha Ser-phosphorylation, and increased
ABCA1 expression and HDL biogenesis. Gö6983 inhibited PKD more selectively than
PKC in THP-1 and HEK 293 cells and in mice, and increased ABCA1 expression, HDL
biogenesis, and plasma HDL level.
CONCLUSIONS: PKD phosphorylates AP2alpha to negatively regulate expression of
ABCA1 gene to increase HDL biogenesis. The major functional phosphorylation of
AP2alpha was identified at Ser258 by PKD, in the AP2alpha basic domain highly
conserved among species and all 5 subtypes of AP2. PKD/AP2 system can be a potent
pharmacological target for prevention of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 18845787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Dec;19(12):5309-26. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-07-0712. Epub 2008
Oct 8.

The AP-2 adaptor beta2 appendage scaffolds alternate cargo endocytosis.

Keyel PA(1), Thieman JR, Roth R, Erkan E, Everett ET, Watkins SC, Heuser JE,
Traub LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

The independently folded appendages of the large alpha and beta2 subunits of the 
endocytic adaptor protein (AP)-2 complex coordinate proper assembly and operation
of endocytic components during clathrin-mediated endocytosis. The beta2 subunit
appendage contains a common binding site for beta-arrestin or the autosomal
recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) protein. To determine the importance of this
interaction surface in living cells, we used small interfering RNA-based gene
silencing. The effect of extinguishing beta2 subunit expression on the
internalization of transferrin is considerably weaker than an AP-2 alpha subunit 
knockdown. We show the mild sorting defect is due to fortuitous substitution of
the beta2 chain with the closely related endogenous beta1 subunit of the AP-1
adaptor complex. Simultaneous silencing of both beta1 and beta2 subunit
transcripts recapitulates the strong alpha subunit RNA interference (RNAi)
phenotype and results in loss of ARH from endocytic clathrin coats. An
RNAi-insensitive beta2-yellow fluorescent protein (YFP) expressed in the beta1 + 
beta2-silenced background restores cellular AP-2 levels, robust transferrin
internalization, and ARH colocalization with cell surface clathrin. The
importance of the beta appendage platform subdomain over clathrin for precise
deposition of ARH at clathrin assembly zones is revealed by a beta2-YFP with a
disrupted ARH binding interface, which does not restore ARH colocalization with
clathrin. We also show a beta-arrestin 1 mutant, which engages coated structures 
in the absence of any G protein-coupled receptor stimulation, colocalizes with
beta2-YFP and clathrin even in the absence of an operational clathrin binding
sequence. These findings argue against ARH and beta-arrestin binding to a site
upon the beta2 appendage platform that is later obstructed by polymerized
clathrin. We conclude that ARH and beta-arrestin depend on a privileged beta2
appendage site for proper cargo recruitment to clathrin bud sites.

PMCID: PMC2592659
PMID: 18843039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Nat Genet. 2008 Nov;40(11):1341-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.242. Epub 2008 Oct 5.

Disruption of an AP-2alpha binding site in an IRF6 enhancer is associated with
cleft lip.

Rahimov F(1), Marazita ML, Visel A, Cooper ME, Hitchler MJ, Rubini M, Domann FE, 
Govil M, Christensen K, Bille C, Melbye M, Jugessur A, Lie RT, Wilcox AJ,
Fitzpatrick DR, Green ED, Mossey PA, Little J, Steegers-Theunissen RP, Pennacchio
LA, Schutte BC, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, 2182 ML, S Grand Ave, Iowa City,
Iowa 52242, USA.

Previously we have shown that nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate
(NSCL/P) is strongly associated with SNPs in IRF6 (interferon regulatory factor
6). Here, we use multispecies sequence comparisons to identify a common SNP
(rs642961, G>A) in a newly identified IRF6 enhancer. The A allele is
significantly overtransmitted (P = 1 x 10(-11)) in families with NSCL/P, in
particular those with cleft lip but not cleft palate. Further, there is a dosage 
effect of the A allele, with a relative risk for cleft lip of 1.68 for the AG
genotype and 2.40 for the AA genotype. EMSA and ChIP assays demonstrate that the 
risk allele disrupts the binding site of transcription factor AP-2alpha and
expression analysis in the mouse localizes the enhancer activity to craniofacial 
and limb structures. Our findings place IRF6 and AP-2alpha in the same
developmental pathway and identify a high-frequency variant in a regulatory
element contributing substantially to a common, complex disorder.

PMCID: PMC2691688
PMID: 18836445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Pathol. 2009 Jan;217(1):32-41. doi: 10.1002/path.2430.

Overexpression of TFAP2C in invasive breast cancer correlates with a poorer
response to anti-hormone therapy and reduced patient survival.

Gee JM(1), Eloranta JJ, Ibbitt JC, Robertson JF, Ellis IO, Williams T, Nicholson 
RI, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Tenovus Centre for Cancer Research, Welsh School of Pharmacy, Cardiff
University, Redwood Building, King Edward VII Avenue, Cardiff CF10 3NB, UK.

The AP-2gamma transcription factor encoded by the TFAP2C gene is a member of a
family of homologous DNA binding proteins that play essential roles during
vertebrate embryogenesis but show a restricted pattern of expression in the
adult. Elevated expression of the AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma family members has been
associated with a number of neoplasms, particularly breast cancer. Here we
present an exploratory immunohistochemical study of an archival primary breast
tumour series (n = 75) with parallel clinicopathological data using a new,
well-characterized antibody to AP-2gamma. Heterogeneous, exclusively nuclear
expression of AP-2gamma was found in the epithelial and myoepithelial
compartments of normal breast and within tumour epithelial cells. In the breast
cancer series, the most notable association was a correlation between elevated
levels of AP-2gamma and shortened patient survival (p = 0.0009*). This
relationship was also conserved in ER-positive and ErbB2-negative patients;
sub-groups generally considered to have a relatively good prognosis. When patient
data for survival and duration of treatment response on anti-hormone therapy were
examined by multivariate analysis, AP-2gamma was revealed in this study to be an 
independent predictor of outcome for both survival (p = 0.005) and response to
anti-hormone therapy (p = 0.046). Studies using in vitro models confirmed that
while tamoxifen response is associated with lower levels of AP-2gamma,
acquisition of resistance to this and other anti-hormone measures (eg faslodex or
oestrogen deprivation) is associated with high levels of nuclear AP-2gamma.
Together these data suggest that elevated tumour AP-2gamma expression can
contribute to the failure of cells to growth arrest following anti-hormone
treatment and lead to sustained growth and poorer patient outcome.

PMID: 18825690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Hypertension. 2008 Nov;52(5):910-7. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.108.114801. Epub
2008 Sep 29.

Interaction among heme oxygenase, nuclear factor-kappaB, and transcription
activating factors in cardiac hypertrophy in hypertension.

Jadhav A(1), Torlakovic E, Ndisang JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan,
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Deoxycorticosterone acetate-induced hypertension is a volume overload and human
primary aldosteronism model characterized by severe cardiac lesions attributed to
elevated inflammation, oxidative stress, fibrosis, and hypertrophy. An important 
cytoprotective pathway that counteracts tissue insults is the heme oxygenase (HO)
system. Although the HO-1 gene promoter contains consensus binding sites for
proinflammatory/oxidative transcription factors like nuclear factor-kappaB,
activating protein (AP)-1, and AP-2, the effects of HO inducers on these
transcription factors in cardiac lesions of deoxycorticosterone acetate
hypertension are not fully understood. Hemin therapy normalized systolic blood
pressure and markedly reduced the left:right ventricular ratio, left ventricular 
wall thickness, and left ventricle:body weight ratio, whereas the HO blocker,
chromium mesoporphyrin, exacerbated cardiac fibrosis/hypertrophy in
deoxycorticosterone acetate-hypertensive rats. The cardioprotection by hemin was 
accompanied by increased HO-1, HO activity, cGMP, superoxide dismutase, catalase,
the total antioxidant capacity alongside the reduction of 8-isoprostane, AP-1,
AP-2, nuclear factor-kappaB, and c-Jun-NH(2)-terminal kinase, whereas chromium
mesoporphyrin abolished the hemin effects. Furthermore, hemin therapy attenuated 
transforming growth factor-beta(1) and extracellular matrix proteins like
fibronectin and collagen, with a corresponding reduction of histopathologic
lesions, including longitudinal/cross-sectional muscle fiber thickness, scarring,
muscular hypertrophy, coronary arteriolar thickening, and collagen deposition.
The suppression of AP-1, AP-2, nuclear factor-kappaB, and c-Jun-NH(2)-terminal
kinase proinflammatory/oxidative mediators in the left ventricle of hemin-treated
animals is a novel observation that may account for cardioprotection in
deoxycorticosterone acetate hypertension. By concomitantly upregulating HO
activity and cGMP and potentiating the total antioxidant status, hemin therapy
reduced hypertension, suppressed oxidative stress, and attenuated extracellular
matrix and remodeling proteins, with a reduction of histopathologic lesions that 
characterize cardiac fibrosis, hypertrophy, and end-stage organ damage.

PMID: 18824663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Cell Biol. 2008 Oct 6;183(1):37-48. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200804030. Epub 2008 Sep
29.

AP-2 factors act in concert with Notch to orchestrate terminal differentiation in
skin epidermis.

Wang X(1), Pasolli HA, Williams T, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology
and Development, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The mechanisms by which mammalian epidermal stem cells cease to proliferate and
embark upon terminal differentiation are still poorly understood. By
conditionally ablating two highly expressed transcription factors, AP-2alpha and 
AP-2gamma, we unmasked functional redundancies and discovered an essential role
for AP-2s in the process. In vivo and in vitro, AP-2 deficiency is accompanied by
surprisingly minimal changes in basal gene expression but severely perturbed
terminal differentiation and suppression of additional transcription factors and 
structural genes involved. In dissecting the underlying molecular pathways, we
uncover parallel pathways involving AP-2 and Notch signaling, which converge to
govern CCAAT/enhancer binding protein genes and orchestrate the transition from
basal proliferation to suprabasal differentiation. Finally, we extend the
striking similarities in compromising either Notch signaling or
AP-2alpha/AP-2gamma in developing skin to that in postnatal skin, where all hair 
follicles and sebaceous gland differentiation are also repressed and overt signs 
of premalignant conversion emerge.

PMCID: PMC2557040
PMID: 18824566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Feb;1789(2):78-87. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.08.013. 
Epub 2008 Sep 10.

Nuclear factor I transcription factors regulate IGF binding protein 5 gene
transcription in human osteoblasts.

Pérez-Casellas LA(1), Wang X, Howard KD, Rehage MW, Strong DD, Linkhart TA.

Author information: 
(1)Jerry L Pettis Memorial Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA 92357,
USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 5 (IGFBP5) is expressed in many cell
types including osteoblasts and modulates IGF activities. IGFBP5 may affect
osteoblasts and bone formation, in part by mechanisms independent of binding
IGFs. The highly conserved IGFBP5 proximal promoter within 100 nucleotides of the
start of transcription contains functional cis regulatory elements for C/EBP, Myb
and AP-2. We report evidence for a functional Nuclear Factor I (NFI) cis element 
that mediates activation or repression of IGFBP5 transcription by the NFI gene
family. All four NFI genes were expressed in human osteoblast cultures and
osteosarcoma cell lines. Co-transfection with human IGFBP5 promoter luciferase
reporter and murine Nfi expression vectors showed that Nfib was the most active
in stimulating transcription. Nfix was less active and Nfia and Nfic were
inhibitory. Knockdown of NFIB and NFIC expression using siRNA decreased and
increased IGFBP5 expression, respectively. Analysis of IGFBP5 promoter deletion
and mutation reporter constructs identified a functional NFI cis element. All
four NFI proteins bound the NFI site in electrophoretic mobility shift
experiments and NFIB bound in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Results
suggest that NFI proteins are important regulators of IGFBP5 expression in human 
osteoblasts and thus in modulating IGFBP5 functions in bone.

PMCID: PMC2707257
PMID: 18809517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Yi Chuan. 2008 Jul;30(7):831-7.

[Advances in the expression and regulation of MnSOD gene].

[Article in Chinese]

Wei ZB(1), Miao XY, Yang MQ, Luo XG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Beijing
100094, China.

MnSOD, which is an important oxygen free radical scavenger in organisms, has an
effect to resist oxidative stress and tumor. The expression and regulation of
MnSOD gene is a complicated process, which includes many kinds of transcription
factors, cell signal molecules and cell signal pathways. It refers to three
aspects including transcription regulation, post-transcription regulation and
translation regulation. Transcription regulation is the primary step for MnSOD
gene expression and plays a key role during the expression of MnSOD gene. The
activity of transcription factors, which controls MnSOD gene expression, such as 
SP-1, AP-2, AP-1, NF-kB and so on, can be changed in the course of transcription 
regulation. Drugs and metalions can also affect those transcription factors'
activity. Furthermore some genes mutation and depletion also have an influence on
the activity of those transcription factors. Post-transcription regulation is in 
a way of changing the stability of mRNA and its translation. Translation
regulation is a process to regulate edition, modification, binding to metalion
and site-specific of MnSOD polypeptide. Recently a kind of manganese trafficking 
factor for mitochondrial MnSOD called MTMl which is very important for activation
of MnSOD has been discovered. Here, we review the advances in this field with an 
emphasis on transcription regulation and translation regulation of MnSOD gene.
And at last, we discussed the prospect of MnSOD gene expression and regulation.

PMID: 18779124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Genet Test. 2008 Sep;12(3):457-9. doi: 10.1089/gte.2008.0015.

Novel TFAP2B mutation in nonsyndromic patent ductus arteriosus.

Khetyar M(1), Syrris P, Tinworth L, Abushaban L, Carter N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Developmental Sciences, St. George's University of
London, London, United Kingdom. mkhetyar@sgul.ac.uk

Mutations in the gene encoding the TFAP2B transcription factor can cause Char
syndrome with cardiac, craniofacial, and hand abnormalities. However, TFAP2B
mutations result in great phenotypic variability, which is believed to reflect
different expression patterns of tissue-specific TFAP2 coactivators. We
investigated a consanguineous family with isolated patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
for mutations in TFAP2B. Our study suggests that a novel splicing mutation in
TFAP2B can cause isolated PDA without other clinical features.

PMID: 18752453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. BMC Res Notes. 2008 Jun 23;1:29. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-1-29.

Lactogenic differentiation of HC11 cells is not accompanied by downregulation of 
AP-2 transcription factor genes.

Jäger R(1), Pappas L, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of 
Bonn Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
richard.jaeger@ukb.uni-bonn.de

BACKGROUND: During pregnancy the mammary epithelium undergoes a complex
developmental process which culminates in the generation of the milk-secreting
epithelium. Secretory epithelial cells display lactogenic differentiation which
is characterized by the expression of milk protein genes, such as beta-casein or 
whey acidic protein (WAP). Transcription factors AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma are
downregulated during lactation, and their overexpression in transgenic mice
impaired the secretory differentiation of the mammary epithelium, resulting in
lactation failure. To explore whether the downregulation of AP-2alpha and
AP-2gamma is of functional significance for lactogenic differentiation, we
analyzed the expression of the AP-2 family members during the lactogenic
differentiation of HC11 mammary epithelial cells in vitro. Differentiation of
HC11 cells was induced following established protocols by applying the lactogenic
hormones prolactin, dexamethasone and insulin.
FINDINGS: HC11 cells express all AP-2 family members except AP-2delta. Using
RT-PCR we could not detect a downregulation of any of these genes during the
lactogenic differentiation of HC11 cells in vitro. This finding was confirmed for
AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma using Northern analysis. Differentiating HC11 cells
displayed lower expression levels of milk protein genes than mammary glands of
mid-pregnant or lactating mice.
CONCLUSION: The extent of lactogenic differentiation of HC11 cells in vitro is
limited compared to mammary epithelium undergoing secretory differentiation in
vivo. Downregulation of AP-2 transcription factor genes is not required for
lactogenic differentiation of HC11 cells but may functionally be involved in
aspects of lactogenic differentiation in vivo that are not reflected by the HC11 
system.

PMCID: PMC2518283
PMID: 18710545  [PubMed]


474. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):997-1003. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

Transcriptional control of the melanoma malignant phenotype.

Melnikova VO(1), Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Malignant progression and tumor metastasis is a complex process enabled by the
intrinsic genomic instability of the tumor cells and supported by a plethora of
recruited cell types within the tumor microenvironment. Propelled by a selective 
pressure to overcome tissue homeostatic mechanisms, a metastatic "super-cell"
emerges whose phenotype is associated with the cellular capacity for uncontrolled
growth, resistance to apoptosis, high invasive potential, and effective
neoangiogenesis. While genetic alterations arise early in the course of melanoma 
development, the progression toward metastatic disease is accompanied by
deregulated expression of a number of transcription factors. In melanoma,
acquisition of the metastatic phenotype involves the loss of Activator
Protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) and gain in expression of cAMP-responsive element
(CRE)-binding protein/Activating Transcription Factor-1 (CREB/ATF-1) family
transcription factors. Together with the upregulation of ATF-2, SNAIL/SLUG,
Nuclear Factor kappaB, STAT3 and 5, and other transcription factors, these
changes result in the aberrant expression of cellular adhesion molecules,
matrix-degrading enzymes as well as other factors that enable a complex
interaction of metastatic cells with the extracellular milieu. Similar to the
case of oncogene addiction, the tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of
melanoma can be greatly inhibited by altering the activity of the above-named
transcription factors, therefore indicating new treatment prospects.

PMID: 18698165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Int J Cancer. 2008 Nov 1;123(9):2031-40. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23732.

Chemotherapeutic drugs and human tumor cells cytokine network.

Levina V(1), Su Y, Nolen B, Liu X, Gordin Y, Lee M, Lokshin A, Gorelik E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

The ability of human tumor cell lines to produce various cytokines, chemokines,
angiogenic and growth factors was investigated using Luminex multiplex
technology. Media conditioned by tumor cells protected tumor cells from
drug-induced apoptosis and stimulated tumor cell proliferation. Antibodies
neutralizing IL-6, CXCL8, CCL2 and CCL5 blocked this stimulation. Treatment of
tumor cells with doxorubicin and cisplatin resulted in a substantial increase in 
the production of IL-6, CXCL8, CCL2, CCL5, BFGF, G-CSF and VEGF. This stimulation
was associated with drug-induced activation of NF-kappaB, AP-1, AP-2, CREB,
HIF-1, STAT-1, STAT-3, STAT-5 and ATF-2 transcription factors and upregulation of
IL-6, CXCL8, FGF-2, CSF-3 and CCL5 gene expression. Treatment of tumor cells with
doxorubicin and antibodies neutralizing G-CSF, CCL2 or CCL5 had higher inhibitory
effects than each modality used alone. These results indicate that chemokines and
growth factors produced by tumor by binding to the cognate receptors on tumor and
stroma cells could provide proliferative and antiapoptotic signals helping tumor 
to escape drug-mediated destruction. Clinical studies showed that antibodies
neutralizing VEGF (Avastin/Bevacizumab) or blocking HER2/neu signaling
(Herceptin/Trastuzumab) could increase the efficacy of chemotherapy, although
these beneficial effects have been limited. It is possible that drug-stimulated
production of growth and proangiogenic factors could counterbalance the effects
of antibody therapy. In addition, numerous growth factors and chemokines share
angiogenic and growth-stimulating properties, and thus reduction of a single
factor is insufficient to completely block tumor growth. Thus, a broad disruption
of tumor cytokine network is needed to further increase the efficacy of cancer
therapy.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2574811
PMID: 18697197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Hum Reprod. 2008 Dec;23(12):2755-65. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den295. Epub 2008 Aug
11.

Germ cell differentiation in the marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) during fetal and
neonatal life closely parallels that in the human.

Mitchell RT(1), Cowan G, Morris KD, Anderson RA, Fraser HM, Mckenzie KJ, Wallace 
WH, Kelnar CJ, Saunders PT, Sharpe RM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Reproductive Sciences Unit, Centre for Reproductive Biology, The
Queen's Medical Research Institute, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
r.mitchell@hrsu.mrc.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCT) are thought to originate from
fetal germ cells that fail to differentiate normally, but no animal model for
these events has been described. We evaluated the marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)
as a model by comparing perinatal germ cell differentiation with that in humans.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical profiling was used to investigate germ cell
differentiation (OCT4, NANOG, AP-2gamma, MAGE-A4, VASA, NANOS-1) and
proliferation (Ki67) in fetal and neonatal marmoset testes in comparison with the
human and, to a lesser extent, the rat.
RESULTS: In marmosets and humans, differentiation of gonocytes into spermatogonia
is associated with the gradual loss of pluripotency markers such as OCT4 and
NANOG, and the expression of germ cell-specific proteins such as VASA. This
differentiation occurs asynchronously within individual cords during fetal and
early postnatal life. This contrasts with rapid and synchronous germ cell
differentiation within and between cords in the rat. Similarly, germ cell
proliferation in the marmoset and human occurs throughout perinatal life, in
contrast to rats in which proliferation ceases during this period.
CONCLUSIONS: The marmoset provides a good model for normal human germ cell
differentiation and proliferation. The perinatal marmoset may be a useful model
in which to establish factors that lead to failure of normal germ cell
differentiation and the origins of TGCT.

PMCID: PMC2583943
PMID: 18694875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Urol. 2008 Sep;180(3):1126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2008.04.137. Epub 2008 Jul
18.

Identification of novel epigenetic markers for clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Dalgin GS(1), Drever M, Williams T, King T, DeLisi C, Liou LS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology and Biochemistry Program, Boston University,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: We identified significantly hypermethylated genes in clear cell renal
cell carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We previously identified a set of under expressed genes in
renal cell carcinoma tissue through transcriptional profiling and a robust
computational screen. We selected 19 of these genes for hypermethylation analysis
using a rigorous search for the best candidate regions, considering CpG islands
and transcription factor binding sites. The genes were analyzed for
hypermethylation in the DNA of 38 matched clear cell renal cell carcinoma and
normal samples using matrix assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight
mass spectrometry. The significance of hypermethylation was assessed using 3
statistical tests. We validated the down-regulation of significantly
hypermethylated genes at the RNA and protein levels in a separate set of patients
using reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry and
Western blots.
RESULTS: We found 7 significantly hypermethylated regions from 6 down-regulated
genes, including SFRP1, which was previously shown to be hypermethylated in renal
cell carcinoma and other cancer types.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge we report for the first time that another 5 genes
(SCNN1B, SYT6, DACH1, and the tumor suppressors TFAP2A and MT1G) are
hypermethylated in renal cell carcinoma. Robust computational screens and the
high throughput methylation assay resulted in an enriched set of novel genes that
are epigenetically altered in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. Overall the
detection of hypermethylation in these highly down-regulated genes suggests that 
assaying for their methylation using cells from urine or blood could provide the 
basis for a viable diagnostic test.

PMID: 18639284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Circ Res. 2008 Aug 15;103(4):388-95. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.180661. Epub
2008 Jul 17.

Transcriptional regulation during development of the ductus arteriosus.

Ivey KN(1), Sutcliffe D, Richardson J, Clyman RI, Garcia JA, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, USA.

The ductus arteriosus is a specialized blood vessel containing highly
differentiated and contractile vascular smooth muscle, derived largely from
neural crest cells, that is essential for fetal life but typically closes after
birth. Impaired development of the ductus arteriosus or disruption of signaling
pathways that initiate postnatal closure can result in persistent patency of the 
ductus arteriosus, the third most common congenital heart defect. We found that
Tfap2beta, a transcription factor associated with patent ductus arteriosus in
humans, was uniquely expressed in mouse ductal smooth muscle. Endothelin-1 and
the hypoxia-induced transcription factor, Hif2alpha were also highly enriched in 
ductal smooth muscle at embryonic day 13.5 and were dependent on Tfap2beta for
their expression in this domain. Hif2alpha functioned as a negative regulator of 
Tfap2beta-induced transcription by disrupting protein-DNA interactions,
suggesting a negative feedback loop regulating Tfap2beta activity. Our data
indicate that Tfap2beta, Et-1, and Hif2alpha act in a transcriptional network
during ductal smooth muscle development and that disruption of this pathway may
contribute to patent ductus arteriosus by affecting the development of smooth
muscle within the ductus arteriosus.

PMCID: PMC2645272
PMID: 18635823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Fen Zi Xi Bao Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2008 Jun;41(3):192-206.

[Cloning and bioinformatic analyzing of transcription factor AP2/ERF-B3 subfamily
genes from Brassica napus L. Huyou 15].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhuang J(1), Zhou XR, Sun CC, Guan BC, Peng RH, Qiao YS, Zhang Z, Xiong AS, Yao
QH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Horticulture, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing 210095,
China.

AP2/ERF is a large family of transcription factors in plant. Genes in the AP2/ERF
family encode transcriptional regulators with a variety of functions involved in 
the developmental and physiological processes in plants. Two AP2/ERF family
transcriptional regulators (BnaERFB3-1 and BnaERFB3-2) were isolated from B.
napus by in silico cloning method using the conserved domain amino acid sequence 
of A. thaliana AP2/ERF-B3 subfamily as probe. Based on the sequences of
BnaERFB3-1 and BnaERFB3-2, we isolated the BnaERFB3-1-Hy15 gene and
BnaERFB3-2-Hy15 gene from winter and spring type B. napus L. cv Huyou15 by RT-PCR
and PCR using cDNA and DNA as template. DNA sequencing and analyzing indicated
that there was only one amino acid residue difference between BnaERFB3-1 and
BnaERFB3-1-Hy15, BnaERFB3-2 and BnaERFB3-2-Hy15, respectively. No intron
localized on the two genes from Huyou15. Then, deduced amino acid sequence,
composition, hydrophobicty and hydrophilicity, physical and chemical
characterization, phylogenetic tree, conserved domain sequences, function domain,
molecular modeling, and folding state were predicted and analyzed.
BnaERFB3-1-Hy15 and BnaERFB3-2-Hy15 were hydrophilic protein. The two proteins
and AtERF5 have similar three-dimension structure. The disordered residues of
protein BnaERFB3-1-Hy15 and BnaERFB3-2-Hy15 were higher than that of AtERF5.
BnaERFB3-1 was mainly expressed in seed, while BnaERFB3-2 was mainly expressed in
root. Moreover, those genes were successfully constructed into the recombinant
plasmids of plant expression vector and yeast expression vector, which
established a base for transformation of oilseed and studies of those genes
function in abiotic stresses of B. napus.

PMID: 18630598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Lett. 2008 Nov 18;271(1):56-63. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2008.05.039. Epub
2008 Jul 11.

Transcription factor AP2alpha (TFAP2a) regulates differentiation and
proliferation of neuroblastoma cells.

Schulte JH(1), Kirfel J, Lim S, Schramm A, Friedrichs N, Deubzer HE, Witt O,
Eggert A, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology, University Children's
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany. johannes.schulte@uni-due.de

Neuroblastoma, the most common extracranial solid tumour of childhood, is derived
from neural crest progenitor cells. The TFAP2a transcription factor regulates
neural crest patterning. We analysed TFAP2a protein expression in 97 primary
neuroblastic tumors and report that TFAP2a was strongly expressed in poorly
differentiated neuroblastomas. TFAP2a expression in tumor cells of differentiated
neuroblastic tumors was below detection. TFAP2a was strongly expressed in 4 of 6 
neuroblastoma cell lines tested, and TFAP2a siRNA mediated knock down in SH-EP
cells reduced proliferation and induced a more differentiated phenotype
associated with an increase in the expression of the differentiation marker
neurotensin.

PMID: 18620802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8373-82. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00670-08. Epub 2008 Jul 2.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 nef expression prevents AP-2-mediated
internalization of the major histocompatibility complex class II-associated
invariant chain.

Toussaint H(1), Gobert FX, Schindler M, Banning C, Kozik P, Jouve M, Kirchhoff F,
Benaroch P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Paris F-75248, France.

The lentiviral Nef protein has been studied extensively for its ability to induce
the downregulation of several immunoreceptors on the surfaces of infected cells. 
However, Nef expression is unique in inducing highly effective upregulation of
the major histocompatibility complex class II-associated chaperone invariant (Ii)
chain complexes in different cell types. Under normal conditions, endocytosis of 
the Ii chain and other molecules, like the transferrin receptor and CD4, is rapid
and AP-2 dependent. Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) Nef expression
strongly reduces the internalization of the Ii chain, enhances that of CD4, and
does not modify transferrin uptake. The mutation of AP-2 binding motifs LL164 and
DD174 in Nef leads to the inhibition of Ii chain upregulation. In AP-2-depleted
cells, surface levels of the Ii chain are high and remain unmodified by Nef
expression, further indicating that Nef regulates Ii chain internalization via
the AP-2 pathway. Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the Ii chain can 
interact with Nef in a dileucine-dependent manner. Importantly, we have shown
that Nef-induced CD4 downregulation and Ii chain upregulation are genetically
distinguishable. We have identified natural nef alleles that have lost one of the
two functions but not the other one. Moreover, we have characterized Nef mutant
forms possessing a similar phenotype in the context of HIV-1 infection.
Therefore, the Nef-induced accumulation of Ii chain complexes at the cell surface
probably results from a complex mechanism leading to the impairment of
AP-2-mediated endocytosis rather than from direct competition between Nef and the
Ii chain for binding AP-2.

PMCID: PMC2519681
PMID: 18596106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Inflamm Res. 2008 May;57(5):230-40. doi: 10.1007/s00011-007-7122-2.

Inhibition of protein kinase C beta II downregulates tristetraprolin expression
in activated macrophages.

Leppänen T(1), Jalonen U, Kankaanranta H, Tuominen R, Moilanen E.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

OBJECTIVE AND DESIGN: Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a 3'-UTR-binding protein known to 
destabilize mRNAs of TNFalpha and some other cytokines and to act as an
anti-inflammatory factor. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of
classical protein kinase C isoenzymes (cPKC) in the regulation of TTP expression 
in activated macrophages.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of TTP in J774 macrophages was induced by a
combination of LPS and phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). The effects of cPKC
inhibitors and the effects of cPKC activation and downregulation by PMA on TTP
protein and mRNA expression were determined by Western blotting and quantitative 
RT-PCR, respectively. Also, the effect of PKC beta II inhibitor CGP53353 on the
activation of transcription factors AP-2, NF-kappaB, EGR1 and Sp1 was assessed.
RESULTS: cPKC inhibitors RO318220, GO6976, LY333531 and CGP53353 inhibited LPS
and PMA-induced expression of TTP protein and mRNA. Similar effects were obtained
when cPKC isoenzymes were downregulated by PMA. In addition, CGP53353 decreased
the activation of transcription factor AP-2.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that cPKCs, most likely PKC beta II, upregulate 
TTP expression in activated macrophages. This regulation is possibly mediated
through the activation of transcription factor AP-2, and serves as an additional 
mechanism how PKC beta regulates the inflammatory process.

PMID: 18594783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2008 Oct;19(10):1919-28. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2007111216. Epub 2008
Jun 25.

Activator protein 2alpha mediates parathyroid TGF-alpha self-induction in
secondary hyperparathyroidism.

Arcidiacono MV(1), Cozzolino M, Spiegel N, Tokumoto M, Yang J, Lu Y, Sato T,
Lomonte C, Basile C, Slatopolsky E, Dusso AS.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School 
of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

In secondary hyperparathyroidism, enhanced expression of TGF-alpha in the
parathyroid leads to its own upregulation, generating a feed-forward loop for
TGF-alpha activation of its receptor, EGFR receptor (EGFR), which promotes
parathyroid hyperplasia. These studies examined the role of activator protein
2alpha (AP2), an inducer of TGF-alpha gene transcription, in the upregulation of 
parathyroid TGF-alpha in secondary hyperparathyroidism. In rat and human
secondary hyperparathyroidism, parathyroid AP2 expression strongly correlated
with TGF-alpha levels and with the rate of parathyroid growth, as expected.
Furthermore, the increases in rat parathyroid content of AP2 and its binding to a
consensus AP2 DNA sequence preceded the increase in TGF-alpha induced by high
dietary phosphate. More significant, in A431 cells, which provide a model of
enhanced TGF-alpha and TGF-alpha self-induction, mutating the core AP2 site of
the human TGF-alpha promoter markedly impaired promoter activity induced by
endogenous or exogenous TGF-alpha. Important for therapy, in five-sixths
nephrectomized rats fed high-phosphate diets, inhibition of parathyroid TGF-alpha
self-induction using erlotinib, a highly specific inhibitor of
TGF-alpha/EGFR-driven signals, reduced AP2 expression dosage dependently. This
suggests that the increases in parathyroid AP2 occur downstream of EGFR
activation by TGF-alpha and are required for TGF-alpha self-induction. Indeed, in
A431 cells, erlotinib inhibition of TGF-alpha self-induction caused parallel
reductions in AP2 expression and nuclear localization, as well as TGF-alpha mRNA 
and protein levels. In summary, increased AP2 expression and transcriptional
activity at the TGF-alpha promoter determine the severity of the hyperplasia
driven by parathyroid TGF-alpha self-upregulation in secondary
hyperparathyroidism.

PMCID: PMC2551566
PMID: 18579641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jul;29(7):1441-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn145. Epub 2008 Jun 
19.

Silencing of E7 oncogene restores functional E-cadherin expression in human
papillomavirus 16-transformed keratinocytes.

Caberg JH(1), Hubert PM, Begon DY, Herfs MF, Roncarati PJ, Boniver JJ, Delvenne
PO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de Génoprotéomique
Appliquée-Cancer, B23, University of Liege, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sart
Tilman, 4000 Liege, Belgium. jhcaberg@student.ulg.ac.be

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection, particularly type 16, is causally
associated with cancer of the uterine cervix. The persistence or progression of
cervical lesions suggests that viral antigens are not adequately presented to the
immune system. This hypothesis is reinforced by the observation that most
squamous intra-epithelial lesions show quantitative and functional alterations of
Langerhans cells (LCs). Moreover, E-cadherin-dependent adhesion of LC to
keratinocytes (KCs) is defective in cervical HPV16-associated (pre)neoplastic
lesions. The possible role of viral oncoprotein E7 in the reduced levels of cell 
surface E-cadherin was investigated by silencing HPV16 E7 by RNA interference
(siRNA). This treatment induced an increased cell surface E-cadherin expression
in HPV16-positive KC and a significant adhesion of LC to these squamous cells.
The E-cadherin re-expression following HPV16 E7 silencing was associated with
increased detection levels of retinoblastoma protein and the activating protein
(AP)-2alpha transcription factor. These data suggest that HPV16 E7-induced
alterations of LC/KC adhesion may play a role in the defective immune response
during cervical carcinogenesis.

PMID: 18566017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jun 17;105(24):8393-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801993105. Epub 2008 Jun 9.

Specific DNA-binding by apicomplexan AP2 transcription factors.

De Silva EK(1), Gehrke AR, Olszewski K, León I, Chahal JS, Bulyk ML, Llinás M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative
Genomics, Princeton University, 246 Carl Icahn Laboratory, Princeton, NJ 08544,
USA.

Malaria remains one of the most prevalent infectious diseases worldwide,
affecting more than half a billion people annually. Despite many years of
research, the mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation in the
malaria-causing Plasmodium spp., and in Apicomplexan parasites generally, remain 
poorly understood. In Plasmodium, few regulatory elements sufficient to drive
gene expression have been characterized, and their cognate DNA-binding proteins
remain unknown. This study characterizes the DNA-binding specificities of two
members of the recently identified Apicomplexan AP2 (ApiAP2) family of putative
transcriptional regulators from Plasmodium falciparum. The ApiAP2 proteins
contain AP2 domains homologous to the well characterized plant AP2 family of
transcriptional regulators, which play key roles in development and environmental
stress response pathways. We assayed ApiAP2 protein-DNA interactions using
protein-binding microarrays and combined these results with computational
predictions of coexpressed target genes to couple these putative trans factors to
corresponding cis-regulatory motifs in Plasmodium. Furthermore, we show that
protein-DNA sequence specificity is conserved in orthologous proteins between
phylogenetically distant Apicomplexan species. The identification of the
DNA-binding specificities for ApiAP2 proteins lays the foundation for the
exploration of their role as transcriptional regulators during all stages of
parasite development. Because of their origin in the plant lineage, ApiAP2
proteins have no homologues in the human host and may prove to be ideal
antimalarial targets.

PMCID: PMC2423414
PMID: 18541913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Aug;19(8):3564-75. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E07-10-0997. Epub 2008
Jun 4.

Eps15 mediates vesicle trafficking from the trans-Golgi network via an
interaction with the clathrin adaptor AP-1.

Chi S(1), Cao H, Chen J, McNiven MA.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, and the Miles and Shirley Fiterman Center for Digestive Diseases,
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Eps15 (EGFR pathway substrate clone 15) is well known for its role in
clathrin-coated vesicle formation at the plasma membrane through interactions
with other clathrin adaptor proteins such as AP-2. Interestingly, we observed
that in addition to its plasma membrane localization, Eps15 is also present at
the trans-Golgi network (TGN). Therefore, we predicted that Eps15 might associate
with clathrin adaptor proteins at the TGN and thereby mediate the formation of
Golgi-derived vesicles. Indeed, we have found that Eps15 and the TGN clathrin
adaptor AP-1 coimmunoprecipitate from rat liver Golgi fractions. Furthermore, we 
have identified a 14-amino acid motif near the AP-2-binding domain of Eps15 that 
is required for binding to AP-1, but not AP-2. Disruption of the Eps15-AP-1
interaction via siRNA knockdown of AP-1 or expression of mutant Eps15 protein,
which lacks a 14-amino acid motif representing the AP-1 binding site of Eps15,
significantly reduced the exit of secretory proteins from the TGN. Together,
these findings indicate that Eps15 plays an important role in clathrin-coated
vesicle formation not only at the plasma membrane but also at the TGN during the 
secretory process.

PMCID: PMC2488291
PMID: 18524853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Circ Res. 2008 Jun 20;102(12):1558-65. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.176990. Epub
2008 May 30.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor is activated by glucose and regulates the
thrombospondin-1 gene promoter in endothelial cells.

Dabir P(1), Marinic TE, Krukovets I, Stenina OI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic, Ohio, USA.

Hyperglycemia is an independent risk factor for development of diabetic vascular 
complications. The molecular mechanisms that are activated by glucose in vascular
cells and could explain the development of vascular complications are still
poorly understood. A putative binding site for the transcription factor aryl
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) was identified in the glucose-responsive fragment of
the promoter of thrombospondin-1, a potent antiangiogenic and proatherogenic
protein involved in development of diabetic vascular complications. AhR was
expressed in aortic endothelial cells (ECs), activated, and bound to the promoter
in response to high glucose stimulation of ECs. The constitutively active form of
AhR induced activation of the thrombospondin-1 gene promoter. In response to high
glucose stimulation, AhR was found in complex with Egr-1 and activator protein-2,
which are 2 other nuclear transcription factors activated by glucose in ECs that 
have not been previously detected in complex with AhR. The activity of the
DNA-binding complex was regulated by glucose through the activation of hexosamine
pathway and intracellular glycosylation. This is the first report of activation
of AhR (a receptor for xenobiotic compounds) by a physiological stimulus. This
report links the activation of AhR to the pathological effects of hyperglycemia
in the vasculature.

PMCID: PMC2740473
PMID: 18515748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Tumour Biol. 2008;29(1):50-6. doi: 10.1159/000132571. Epub 2008 May 23.

Tissue AP-2gamma and Oct-3/4, and serum CA 125 as diagnostic and prognostic
markers of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors.

Salonen J(1), Leminen A, Stenman UH, Butzow R, Heikinheimo M, Heikinheimo O.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital and Program for Women's Health, Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Histology, clinical stage and treatment response are used to define the prognosis
of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors (MOGCTs). However, additional biological
tools to guide treatment in MOGCTs would be desirable. We evaluated the
prognostic value of several serum and tissue markers in MOGCTs. Medical charts of
30 women were reviewed as regards preoperative and treatment-related factors,
with a mean follow-up time of 92 months (range 2-205). Serum levels of
alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin and CA 125 were determined, and
immunohistochemistry for CA 125 as well as the pluripotent stem cell markers
AP-2gamma and Oct-3/4 was performed in tumor specimens and the NCC-IT human
germinoma cell line. Overall survival was 73%. Elevated preoperative levels of
serum CA 125 were prognostic of progressive disease (p<0.05). Immunohistochemical
evaluation revealed that in most cases the elevated CA 125 levels originated from
the tumor tissue. Most dysgerminomas as well as the germinoma cell line were
positive for AP-2gamma and Oct-3/4, whereas the majority of yolk sac tumors and
immature teratomas were negative. Taken together, increased preoperative serum CA
125 levels indicate poor prognosis of MOGCTs. Tissue AP-2gamma and Oct-3/4 are
associated with dysgerminomas and can thus be used as additional differential
diagnostic tools in MOGCTs.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18497549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 27;105(21):7472-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0711896105. Epub 2008 May 21.

Transcription factor Ap2delta associates with Ash2l and ALR, a trithorax family
histone methyltransferase, to activate Hoxc8 transcription.

Tan CC(1), Sindhu KV, Li S, Nishio H, Stoller JZ, Oishi K, Puttreddy S, Lee TJ,
Epstein JA, Walsh MJ, Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Center for Molecular Cardiology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The family of Ap2 transcription factors comprises five members with highly
conserved DNA-binding domains. Among the family members, Ap2delta is the most
divergent, because it lacks highly conserved residues within the transactivation 
domain (TAD) and has weak affinity for known Ap2 binding sites. To identify
specific Ap2delta coactivators/regulators during development, we performed a
yeast two-hybrid screen, using Ap2delta's TAD. We identified the trithorax
superfamily member, Ash2l, as a binding partner that interacts exclusively with
Ap2delta. We showed that Ash2l positively mediates Ap2delta transactivation in a 
dose-dependent manner. Given the known role of Ash2l in histone modification, we 
determined whether Ap2delta was able to form a complex with that activity. Our
results showed that Ap2delta associates with endogenous ASH2L and a member of the
MLL family of histone lysine methyltransferases (HKMTs), MLL2 (ALR), forming a
complex that methylates lysine 4 of histone H3 (H3K4). Additionally, we showed
that Ap2delta is necessary for recruitment of Ash2l and Alr to the Hoxc8 locus
and that recruitment of this complex leads to H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) and
subsequent gene activation. Altogether, we provide evidence of an association
between a highly restricted gene-specific transcription factor and a Su(var),
Enhancer of Zeste, Trithorax (SET)1/trithorax-like complex with H3K4
methyltransferase activity. Our studies also document a functional role for
Ap2delta in recruiting histone methyltransferases (HMTs) to specific gene
targets, such as Hoxc8. This role provides a mechanism through which these
transcription factors can have diverse effects despite nearly identical
DNA-binding motifs.

PMCID: PMC2396708
PMID: 18495928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jul 16;289(1-2):23-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.03.011.
Epub 2008 Apr 4.

Transcriptional auto-regulation of the dopamine receptor regulating factor (DRRF)
gene.

Lee SH(1), Jang MK, Lee OH, Kim OS, Kim YM, Yajima S, Lee YC, Mouradian MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Silla University, San 1-1,
Kwaebop-dong, Sasang-gu, Busan 617-736, Republic of Korea. slee@silla.ac.kr

The murine dopamine receptor regulating factor (DRRF) gene is transcribed from a 
TATA-less promoter that has several putative Sp1 binding sites. The present
investigation identifies functional transcription factors that modulate the
expression of this gene. In the D2-dopamine receptor expressing NB41A3 cells, Sp1
potently activates transcription from the DRRF promoter in pCAT-DRRF-1153/+17,
while DRRF itself effectively inhibits it. Sp1 also activates this promoter in
pCAT-DRRF-310/+17. In competitive co-transfection experiments, DRRF represses the
transcriptional activation induced by Sp1, while Sp1 de-represses the inhibitory 
effect of DRRF. Deletion of the 31 bp fragment between -1153 and -1122 decreased 
basal transcription down to about 60%. This fragment contains a functional AP1
binding site. In addition, deletion of the 129 bp region between -901 and -772
further decreased transcription. The latter region has a functional AP2 binding
site. The present observations suggest that DRRF auto-regulates its own promoter 
by competing with Sp1 and that both AP1 and AP2 modulate expression of this gene.

PMID: 18472212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. FASEB J. 2008 Aug;22(8):2702-14. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-106492. Epub 2008 Apr 28.

AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma regulate tumor progression via specific genetic programs.

Orso F(1), Penna E, Cimino D, Astanina E, Maione F, Valdembri D, Giraudo E,
Serini G, Sismondi P, De Bortoli M, Taverna D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment, University of Torino, Via Nizza, 
52, 10126 Torino, Italy.

The events occurring during tumor formation and progression display similarities 
to some of the steps in embryonic morphogenesis. The family of AP-2 proteins
consists of five different transcription factors (alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and 
epsilon) that play relevant roles in embryonic development, as demonstrated by
the phenotypes of the corresponding knockout mice. Here, we show that AP-2alpha
and AP-2gamma proteins play an essential role in tumorigenesis. Down-modulation
of AP-2 expression in tumor cells by RNA interference (RNAi) led to enhanced
tumor growth and reduced chemotherapy-induced cell death, as well as migration
and invasion. Most of these biological modulations were rescued by AP-2
overexpression. We observed that increased xenotransplant growth was mostly due
to highly enhanced proliferation of the tumor cells together with reduced innate 
immune cell recruitment. Moreover, we showed that migration impairment was
mediated, at least in part, by secreted factors. To identify the genetic programs
involved in tumorigenesis, we performed whole genome microarray analysis of
AP-2alpha knockdown cells and observed that AP-2alpha regulates specific genes
involved in cell cycle, cell death, adhesion, and migration. In particular, we
showed that ESDN, EREG, and CXCL2 play a major role in AP-2 controlled migration,
as ablation of any of these genes severely altered migration.

PMID: 18443366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16860-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709106200. Epub 2008 
Apr 18.

Regulation of the noradrenaline neurotransmitter phenotype by the transcription
factor AP-2beta.

Hong SJ(1), Lardaro T, Oh MS, Huh Y, Ding Y, Kang UJ, Kirfel J, Buettner R, Kim
KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Belmont, Massachusetts 02478, USA.

AP-2 family transcription factors are essential for development and morphogenesis
of diverse tissues and organs, but their precise roles in specification of neural
crest stem cell (NCSC)-derived cell types have not been determined. Among three
members known to be expressed in the NCSC (i.e. AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and
AP-2gamma), we found that only AP-2beta is predominantly expressed in the
sympathetic ganglia of developing mouse embryos, supporting its role in
sympathetic development. Indeed, AP-2beta null mice expressed significantly
reduced levels of both noradrenaline (NA) and NA-synthesizing dopamine
beta-hydroxylase in the peripheral nervous system. Strikingly, we also found that
NA neuron development was significantly compromised in the locus coeruleus as
well. Pharmacological treatment with an NA intermediate during pregnancy
significantly rescues the neonatal lethality of AP-2beta(-/-) mice, indicating
that NA deficiency is one of the main causes for lethality found in AP-2beta(-/-)
mice. We also showed that forced expression of AP-2beta, but not other AP-2
factors, in NCSC favors their differentiation into NA neurons. In summary, we
propose that AP-2beta plays critical and distinctive roles in the NA phenotype
specification in both the peripheral and central nervous system during
development.

PMCID: PMC2423267
PMID: 18424435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 May;82(5):1171-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.005.

TFAP2A mutations result in branchio-oculo-facial syndrome.

Milunsky JM(1), Maher TA, Zhao G, Roberts AE, Stalker HJ, Zori RT, Burch MN,
Clemens M, Mulliken JB, Smith R, Lin AE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA
02118-2526, USA. jmilunsk@bu.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2009 Feb;84(2):301..

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare autosomal-dominant cleft
palate-craniofacial disorder with variable expressivity. The major features
include cutaneous anomalies (cervical, infra- and/or supra-auricular defects,
often with dermal thymus), ocular anomalies, characteristic facial appearance
(malformed pinnae, oral clefts), and, less commonly, renal and ectodermal (dental
and hair) anomalies. The molecular basis for this disorder is heretofore unknown.
We detected a 3.2 Mb deletion by 500K SNP microarray in an affected mother and
son with BOFS at chromosome 6p24.3. Candidate genes in this region were selected 
for sequencing on the basis of their expression patterns and involvement in
developmental pathways associated with the clinical findings of BOFS. Four
additional BOFS patients were found to have de novo missense mutations in the
highly conserved exons 4 and 5 (basic region of the DNA binding domain) of the
TFAP2A gene in the candidate deleted region. We conclude BOFS is caused by
mutations involving TFAP2A. More patients need to be studied to determine
possible genetic heterogeneity and to establish whether there are
genotype-phenotype correlations.

PMCID: PMC2427243
PMID: 18423521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Arch Pharm Res. 2008 Mar;31(3):350-6. doi: 10.1007/s12272-001-1163-z. Epub 2008
Apr 13.

Differential regulation of ErbB2 expression by cAMP-dependent protein kinase in
tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells.

Yang JW(1), Kim MR, Kim HG, Kim SK, Jeong HG, Kang KW.

Author information: 
(1)BK21 Project Team, College of Pharmacy, Chosun University, 375 Seosuk-dong,
Dong-gu, Gwangju 501-759, Korea.

Acquired resistance to tamoxifen (TAM) is a serious therapeutic problem in breast
cancer patients, and Her-2/ErbB2 expression is associated with decreased
sensitivity to TAM. We previously reported that cAMP-dependent protein kinase
(PKA)-mediated activator protein-2 (AP-2) activation was responsible for the
expression of Her-2/ErbB2 in p53-inactivated mammary epithelial cells (Yang et
al., 2006). In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that PKA plays a role 
in the expression of ErbB2 in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer cells. Treatment 
with H-89, a specific PKA inhibitor, suppressed 4-hydroxytamoxifen-induced ErbB2 
expression in control MCF-7 cells. In contrast, PKA inhibition by H-89 or
cAMP-dependent protein kinase inhibitor l gamma overexpression increased the
expression levels of ErbB2 in TAM-resistant MCF-7 (TAMR-MCF-7) cells.
Transcriptional regulation of the erbB2 gene depends on two transcription
factors, AP-2 and polyomavirus enhancer activator3 (PEA3). H-89 decreased nuclear
or total levels of PEA3 in TAMR-MCF-7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay 
results revealed that H-89 treatment reduced PEA3 binding to the proximal Ets
binding site of the erbB2 gene promoter. Reporter gene analyses using human erbB2
gene promoter supported the critical role of PEA3 in the overexpression of ErbB2 
in TAMR-MCF-7 cells treated with H-89. This deregulated PKA signaling cascades
required for the ErbB2 expression may be important for the differential response 
of TAM-resistant breast cancer cells to EGF/ErbB2 stimuli.

PMID: 18409049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Sci China C Life Sci. 2008 Apr;51(4):336-45. doi: 10.1007/s11427-008-0044-6. Epub
2008 Mar 27.

A seed-specific AP2-domain transcription factor from soybean plays a certain role
in regulation of seed germination.

Wang C(1), Wang H, Zhang J, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Plant Genomics, Institute of Genetics and
Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Plant seed development and germination are under strict temporal and spatial
regulation, and transcription factors play important roles in this regulation. In
the present study we identified an EST expressed specifically in the developing
soybean seeds. The full length of the gene was obtained through further RACE
analysis and the gene was named GmSGR. Sequence analysis revealed that this gene 
belonged to the AP2/ERF transcription factor family. Its AP2 domain had the
highest similarity with that of the A-3 member AtABI4 of DREB subgroup in the
AP2/ERF family in Arabidopsis. GmSGR did not exhibit transcriptional activation
activity in the yeast assay system. GmSGR was overexpressed in Arabidopsis and
the germination rates of the transgenic seeds were significantly higher than that
of the wild type seeds under higher concentrations of ABA and glucose
respectively. However, the germination rates of the transgenic seeds were lower
than that of control under salt stress. The expression of AtEm6 and AtRD29B was
higher in the seedlings of the transgenic plants than that in the wild-type
seedlings. These results suggest that GmSGR may confer reduced ABA sensitivity
and enhanced salt sensitivity to the transgenic seeds through regulating the
expression of AtEm6 and AtRD29B genes.

PMID: 18368311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Neurosci Lett. 2008 May 2;436(1):67-71. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.02.062. Epub
2008 Mar 5.

Electrophysiological and behavioral correlates of polymorphisms in the
transcription factor AP-2beta coding gene.

Hensch T(1), Wargelius HL, Herold U, Strobel A, Oreland L, Brocke B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden 01062,
Germany. tilman.hensch@tu-dresden.de

Transcription factor AP-2beta may influence brain monoaminergic systems by
regulating target genes. Several monoaminergic genes, including the serotonin
transporter gene, have AP-2beta binding sites. Late auditory-evoked potentials
(P1, N1/P2) and impulsiveness-related personality traits are correlated, and both
are modulated by monoaminergic neurotransmission. The present study assesses the 
impact of two AP-2beta polymorphisms (VNTRs within intron 1 and 2) together with 
the serotonin transporter polymorphism 5-HTTLPR on late auditory-evoked
potentials and personality for the first time. EEG was recorded from 91 male
subjects at central electrode positions while tones of six intensity levels were 
presented. Additionally, subjects completed personality questionnaires. Both
AP-2beta polymorphisms revealed significant main effects on P1, and haplotype
analysis confirmed the contribution of both AP-2beta-polymorphisms. Additionally,
AP-2beta and 5-HTTLPR showed interactions with respect to P1. 5-HTTLPR revealed a
main effect on N1/P2 but not P1. Impulsiveness showed an association with intron 
1 VNTR. The results are discussed with respect to differential impact of AP-2beta
polymorphisms and 5-HTTLPR on the monoaminergic systems. The findings promote
replication in a larger sample and suggest a potential usefulness of AP-2beta
polymorphisms in explaining or predicting central nervous diseases, drug effects 
and side effects.

PMID: 18358611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):95-105. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.019. Epub 2008
Feb 26.

Cited2 is required for fetal lung maturation.

Xu B(1), Qu X, Gu S, Doughman YQ, Watanabe M, Dunwoodie SL, Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Lung maturation at the terminal sac stage of lung development is characterized by
a coordinated increase in terminal sac formation and vascular development in
conjunction with the differentiation of alveolar type I and type II epithelial
cells. The Cited2-Tcfap2a/c complex has been shown to activate transcription of
Erbb3 and Pitx2c during mouse development. In this study, we show that E17.5 to
E18.5 Cited2-null lungs had significantly reduced terminal sac space due to an
altered differentiation of type I and type II alveolar epithelial cells. In
addition, E17 Cited2-null lungs exhibited a decrease in the number of apoptotic
cells, contributing to the loss in airspace. Consistent with the phenotype, genes
associated with alveolar cell differentiation and survival were differentially
expressed in Cited2-null fetal lungs compared to those of wild-type littermates. 
Moreover, expression of Cebpa, a key regulator of airway epithelial maturation,
was significantly decreased in Cited2-null fetal lungs. Cited2 and Tcfap2c were
present on the Cebpa promoter in E18.5 lungs to activate Cebpa transcription. We 
propose that the Cited2-Tcfap2c complex controls lung maturation by regulating
Cebpa expression. Understanding the function of this complex may provide novel
therapeutic strategies for patients with respiratory distress syndromes.

PMCID: PMC2467387
PMID: 18358466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2008 Apr;29(4):465-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2008.00780.x.

Involvement of transcription factor activator protein-2alpha in doxazosin-induced
HeLa cell apoptosis.

Gan L(1), Zhu DX, Yang LP, Liu RS, Yan F, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology, Ministry of
Education of China, College of Life Sciences, Hu-nan Normal University, Changsha 
410081, China.

AIM: To investigate the pro-apoptotic effects of alpha1-adrenergic inhibitor
doxazosin in HeLa cells and the potential involvement of transcription factor
activator protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) in doxazosin-induced apoptosis.
METHODS: The HeLa cells were exposed to various concentrations of doxazosin for
16 h. Apoptosis was detected using a DNA fragmentation assay, Hoechst 33258
staining, and flow cytometric analysis. The expression of AP-2alpha and caspase-3
was detected by relative quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot assays,
respectively. After the respective transfections of the HeLa cells with AP-2alpha
overexpressing constructs and an antisense oligonucleotide against AP-2alpha,
apoptosis was assessed by flow cytometric analysis, and the expression of
AP-2alpha and caspase-3 was detected by relative quantitative RT-PCR and Western 
blot assays. The colorimetric assay was performed to detect the caspase-3
activity.
RESULTS: Treatment with various concentrations of doxazosin for 16 h increased
the apoptotic rate and total cell death rate of the HeLa cells in a
dose-dependent manner and upregulated the expression of AP-2alpha and caspase-3
in a dose-dependent manner. A dose-dependent increase was observed in the
caspase-3 activity. Overexpressing AP-2alpha led to the increased rate of
doxazosin-induced apoptosis and the total cell death, whereas doxazosin-induced
apoptosis and the total cell death in HeLa cells decreased by antisense
AP-2alpha. Furthermore, overexpressing AP-2alpha increased the expression and
activity of caspase-3, whereas antisense AP-2alpha in part abolished the
increased effects of doxazosin on caspase-3 expression and activity.
CONCLUSION: Doxazosin induces apoptosis in HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner,
and transcription factor AP-2alpha is functionally involved in doxazosin-induced 
HeLa cell apoptosis.

PMID: 18358093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):187-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.017. Epub 2008
Feb 21.

Disruption of epidermal specific gene expression and delayed skin development in 
AP-2 gamma mutant mice.

Guttormsen J(1), Koster MI, Stevens JR, Roop DR, Williams T, Winger QA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal, Dairy and Veterinary Sciences, Utah State University,
Logan, UT, USA.

Summary Sentence: Conditional ablation of AP-2 gamma results in a delay in skin
development and abnormal expression of p63, K14, K1, filaggrin, repetin and
secreted Ly6/Plaur domain containing 1, key genes required for epidermal
development and differentiation. The development of the epidermis, a stratified
squamous epithelium, is dependent on the regulated differentiation of
keratinocytes. Differentiation begins with the initiation of stratification, a
process tightly controlled through proper gene expression. AP-2 gamma is
expressed in skin and previous research suggested a pathway where p63 gene
induction results in increased expression of AP-2 gamma, which in turn is
responsible for induction of K14. This study uses a conditional gene ablation
model to further explore the role of AP-2 gamma in skin development. Mice
deficient for AP-2 gamma exhibited delayed expression of p63, K14, and K1, key
genes required for development and differentiation of the epidermis. In addition,
microarray analysis of E16.5 skin revealed delayed expression of additional late 
epidermal differentiation genes: filaggrin, repetin and secreted Ly6/Plaur domain
containing 1, in mutant mice. The genetic delay in skin development was further
confirmed by a functional delay in the formation of an epidermal barrier. These
results document an important role for AP-2 gamma in skin development, and reveal
the existence of regulatory factors that can compensate for AP-2 gamma in its
absence.

PMCID: PMC2435508
PMID: 18353300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Glycobiology. 2008 May;18(5):395-407. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwn016. Epub 2008 Mar
3.

The AP-2alpha transcription factor is required for the ganglioside GM3-stimulated
transcriptional regulation of a PTEN gene.

Choi HJ(1), Chung TW, Kim SJ, Cho SY, Lee YS, Lee YC, Ko JH, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Molecular and Cellular Glycobiology Unit,
SungKyunKwan University, 300 Chunchun-Dong, Jangan-Gu, Suwon City, Kyunggi-Do
440-746, Korea.

Ganglioside GM3 inhibits the growth of several cancer cells and induces cell
cycle arrest by regulating cellular signal pathways. Our previous results have
shown that GM3 suppresses tumor suppressor PTEN-mediated cancer cell
proliferation. However, the precise molecular mechanism(s) for the
transcriptional regulation of a PTEN gene induced by GM3 remains unclear. Here,
we show, for the first time, that GM3 induces transcription factor
AP-2alpha-mediated PTEN expression in colon cancer cells. The enhanced expression
of PTEN by GM3 in both HCT116 and p53-null HCT116 cells has been shown to be not 
associated with p53 function. Thus, to further determine the mechanism underlying
the regulation of PTEN gene expression by GM3, we characterized the promoter
region of the PTEN gene. Promoter analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the PTEN 
gene showed that the region between -1175 and -1077 from the translational
initiation site, which contains the AP-2alpha binding site, functions as the
GM3-inducible promoter in colon cancer cells. Furthermore, gel shift assays,
site-directed mutagenesis, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay obviously
indicated that the AP-2alpha is essential for the expression of PTEN in
GM3-stimulated colon cancer cells. Moreover, siRNA against AP-2alpha diminished
the enhancement of AP-2alpha and PTEN expressions in GM3-induced colon cancer
cells. The transient expression of AP-2alpha also results in the induction of
PTEN transcription in AP-2alpha-negative colon cancer cells. Additionally, GM3
induced AP-2alpha-mediated PTEN expression through the inhibition of
autocrine-ligand-mediated EGFR activation. These results suggest that the
AP-2alpha transcription factor is required for the ganglioside GM3-stimulated
transcriptional regulation of the PTEN gene.

PMID: 18316341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 2007;91:91-7.

[On the role of transcription factor family AP-2 for development and
disease--lessons from mouse models].

[Article in German]

Schorle H(1).

Author information: 
(1)H. Schorle Institut für Pathologie, Abteilung für Entwicklungspathologie,
Universitäitsklinikum Bonn.

To analyze the consequence of ,gain of function' and ,loss of function' of
transcription factor AP-2gamma in mice Using pronuclear injection, mice
harbouring a mammary gland specific transgene were established and analyzed.
Constitutive and conditional knockout mice complement the analysis, showing the
consequences of loss of function for specific tissues. Gain of AP-2 expression on
it's own in mammary gland results in enhanced proliferation which is compensated 
by accelerated apoptosis. Only after mating with a second transgenic mouseline,
the MMTV-ErbB2 oncomouse model, an effect on tumor progression was observed.
Hence, AP-2 might influence progression, but not initiation of mammary tumors.
Knockout mouse models reveal that AP-2gamma is essential for the extraembryonic
cells indicating a role for trophoblast cell lineage These and other studies
indicate that AP-2gamma might be a molecule which enables proliferation of
undifferentiated precursors or transient amplifying cells. Reexpression in tumors
correlates with dedifferentiation and progression.

PMID: 18314601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Mar;15(1):325-35. doi: 10.1677/ERC-07-0226.

The insulin receptor: a new anticancer target for peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) and thiazolidinedione-PPARgamma
agonists.

Costa V(1), Foti D, Paonessa F, Chiefari E, Palaia L, Brunetti G, Gulletta E,
Fusco A, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G Salvatore, Università di
Catanzaro Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.

The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) is a member of
the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily. Ligand activation of PPARgamma is
associated with differentiation and inhibition of proliferation in the normal and
malignant cells. Herein, we studied the effects of PPARgamma and the PPARgamma
agonists thiazolidinediones (TZDs) on the insulin receptor (IR), a cell membrane 
tyrosine kinase receptor protein, whose role is of paramount importance in
mediating the metabolic and growth-promoting effects of the peptide hormone
insulin. Overexpression of the PPARgamma1 in human hepatocellular (HepG2) cells
was associated with decreased IR gene transcription and protein expression
levels, and these reductions were more evident in the presence of TZDs. Since no 
PPARgamma response elements were identified on the IR promoter, we postulated
that PPARgamma adversely affects the IR gene transcription by perturbing the
assembly and stability of the transcriptionally active multiprotein-DNA complex
identified previously, which includes the high-mobility group A1 protein, the
ubiquitously expressed transcription factor (Sp1), the CAAT enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBPbeta), and, in some cell lines, the developmentally regulated
activator protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factor. Using glutathione S-transferase 
pull-down assays combined with electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated that by interacting with Sp1, C/EBPbeta, and
AP-2, PPARgamma can prevent Sp1/AP-2 protein-protein association and inhibit
binding of Sp1 and C/EBPbeta to DNA, thus reducing IR gene transcription. Our
results demonstrate that IR is a new target gene of PPARgamma, and support a
potential use of TZDs as anti-proliferative agents in selected neoplastic tissues
overexpressing IRs.

PMID: 18310298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Leukemia. 2008 May;22(5):1035-43. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.18. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

DNA methylation profiles in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and their relationship 
to gene expression status.

Pike BL(1), Greiner TC, Wang X, Weisenburger DD, Hsu YH, Renaud G, Wolfsberg TG, 
Kim M, Weisenberger DJ, Siegmund KD, Ye W, Groshen S, Mehrian-Shai R, Delabie J, 
Chan WC, Laird PW, Hacia JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

In an initial epigenetic characterization of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), we evaluated the DNA methylation levels of over 500 CpG islands. Twelve 
CpG islands (AR, CDKN1C, DLC1, DRD2, GATA4, GDNF, GRIN2B, MTHFR, MYOD1, NEUROD1, 
ONECUT2 and TFAP2A) showed significant methylation in over 85% of tumors.
Interestingly, the methylation levels of a CpG island proximal to FLJ21062
differed between the activated B-cell-like (ABC-DLBCL) and germinal center
B-cell-like (GCB-DLBCL) subtypes. In addition, we compared the methylation and
expression status of 67 genes proximal (within 500 bp) to the methylation assays.
We frequently observed that hypermethylated CpG islands are proximal to genes
that are expressed at low or undetectable levels in tumors. However, many of
these same genes were also poorly expressed in DLBCL tumors where their cognate
CpG islands were hypomethylated. Nevertheless, the proportional reductions in
BNIP3, MGMT, RBP1, GATA4, IGSF4, CRABP1 and FLJ21062 expression with increasing
methylation suggest that epigenetic processes strongly influence these genes.
Lastly, the moderate expression of several genes proximal to hypermethylated CpG 
tracts suggests that DNA methylation assays are not always accurate predictors of
gene silencing. Overall, further investigation of the highlighted CpG islands as 
potential clinical biomarkers is warranted.

PMCID: PMC2654231
PMID: 18288132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun 1;104(3):1022-33. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21686.

Characterization of TBX20 in human hearts and its regulation by TFAP2.

Hammer S(1), Toenjes M, Lange M, Fischer JJ, Dunkel I, Mebus S, Grimm CH, Hetzer 
R, Berger F, Sperling S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular
Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The T-box family of transcription factors has been shown to have major impact on 
human development and disease. In animal studies Tbx20 is essential for the
development of the atrioventricular channel, the outflow tract and valves,
suggesting its potential causative role for the development of Tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF) in humans. In the presented study, we analyzed TBX20 in cardiac
biopsies derived from patients with TOF, ventricular septal defects (VSDs) and
normal hearts. Mutation analysis did not reveal any disease causing sequence
variation, however, TBX20 is significantly upregulated in tissue samples of
patients with TOF, but not VSD. In depth analysis of TBX20 transcripts lead to
the identification of two new exons 3' to the known TBX20 message resembling the 
mouse variant Tbx20a, as well as an extended 5'UTR. Functional analysis of the
human TBX20 promoter revealed a 100 bp region that contains strong activating
elements. Within this core promoter region we recognized functional binding sites
for TFAP2 transcription factors and identified TFAP2 as repressors of the TBX20
gene in vitro and in vivo. Moreover, decreased TFAP2C levels in cardiac biopsies 
of TOF patients underline the biological significance of the pathway described.
In summary, we provide first insights into the regulation of TBX20 and show its
potential for human congenital heart diseases.

PMID: 18275040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Dev Dyn. 2008 Mar;237(3):602-17. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21445.

Cell autonomous roles for AP-2alpha in lens vesicle separation and maintenance of
the lens epithelial cell phenotype.

Pontoriero GF(1), Deschamps P, Ashery-Padan R, Wong R, Yang Y, Zavadil J, Cvekl
A, Sullivan S, Williams T, West-Mays JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

In this study, we have created a conditional deletion of AP-2alpha in the
developing mouse lens (Le-AP-2alpha mutants) to determine the cell-autonomous
requirement(s) for AP-2alpha in lens development. Embryonic and adult
Le-AP-2alpha mutants exhibited defects confined to lens placode derivatives,
including a persistent adhesion of the lens to the overlying corneal epithelium
(or lens stalk). Expression of known regulators of lens vesicle separation,
including Pax6, Pitx3, and Foxe3 was observed in the Le-AP-2alpha mutant lens
demonstrating that these genes do not lie directly downstream of AP-2alpha.
Unlike germ-line mutants, Le-AP-2alpha mutants did not exhibit defects in the
optic cup, further defining the tissue specific role(s) for AP-2alpha in eye
development. Finally, comparative microarray analysis of lenses from the
Le-AP-2alpha mutants vs. wild-type littermates revealed differential expression
of 415 mRNAs, including reduced expression of genes important for maintaining the
lens epithelial cell phenotype, such as E-cadherin.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2517426
PMID: 18224708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(1):R9. doi: 10.1186/bcr1851. Epub 2008 Jan 24.

The combined immunodetection of AP-2alpha and YY1 transcription factors is
associated with ERBB2 gene overexpression in primary breast tumors.

Allouche A(1), Nolens G, Tancredi A, Delacroix L, Mardaga J, Fridman V, Winkler
R, Boniver J, Delvenne P, Begon DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, GIGA-Research, CRCE, University of Liege and CHU of
Liege, B23, Avenue de l'Hopital, 3, 4000 Liege, Belgium.

INTRODUCTION: Overexpression of the ERBB2 oncogene is observed in about 20% of
human breast tumors and is the consequence of increased transcription rates
frequently associated with gene amplification. Several studies have shown a link 
between activator protein 2 (AP-2) transcription factors and ERBB2 gene
expression in breast cancer cell lines. Moreover, the Yin Yang 1 (YY1)
transcription factor has been shown to stimulate AP-2 transcriptional activity on
the ERBB2 promoter in vitro. In this report, we examined the relationships
between ERBB2, AP-2alpha, and YY1 both in breast cancer tissue specimens and in a
mammary cancer cell line.
METHODS: ERBB2, AP-2alpha, and YY1 protein levels were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry in a panel of 55 primary breast tumors. ERBB2 gene
amplification status was determined by fluorescent in situ hybridization.
Correlations were evaluated by a chi2 test at a p value of less than 0.05. The
functional role of AP-2alpha and YY1 on ERBB2 gene expression was analyzed by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection in the BT-474 mammary cancer cell line
followed by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western
blotting.
RESULTS: We observed a statistically significant correlation between ERBB2 and
AP-2alpha levels in the tumors (p < 0.01). Moreover, associations were found
between ERBB2 protein level and the combined high expression of AP-2alpha and YY1
(p < 0.02) as well as between the expression of AP-2alpha and YY1 (p < 0.001).
Furthermore, the levels of both AP-2alpha and YY1 proteins were inversely
correlated to ERBB2 gene amplification status in the tumors (p < 0.01).
Transfection of siRNAs targeting AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma mRNAs in the BT-474
breast cancer cell line repressed the expression of the endogenous ERBB2 gene at 
both the mRNA and protein levels. Moreover, the additional transfection of an
siRNA directed against the YY1 transcript further reduced the ERBB2 protein
level, suggesting that AP-2 and YY1 transcription factors cooperate to stimulate 
the transcription of the ERBB2 gene.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the role of both AP-2alpha and YY1
transcription factors in ERBB2 oncogene overexpression in breast tumors. Our
results also suggest that high ERBB2 expression may result either from gene
amplification or from increased transcription factor levels.

PMCID: PMC2374961
PMID: 18218085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Feb;82(2):63-77. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20430.

Mouse genetic models of cleft lip with or without cleft palate.

Juriloff DM(1), Harris MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. juriloff@interchange.ubc.ca

Nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate (CLP) is among the most common human birth
defects. Transmission patterns suggest that the causes are "multifactorial"
combinations of genetic and nongenetic factors, mostly distinct from those
causing cleft secondary palate (CP). The major etiological factors are largely
unknown, and the embryological mechanisms are not well understood. In contrast to
CP or neural tube defects (NTD), CLP is uncommon in mouse mutants. Fourteen known
mutants or strains express CLP, often as part of a severe syndrome, whereas
nonsyndromic CLP is found in two conditional mutants and in two multifactorial
models based on a hypomorphic variant with an epigenetic factor. This pattern
suggests that human nonsyndromic CLP is likely caused by regulatory and
hypomorphic gene variants, and may also involve epigenetics. The developmental
pathogenic mechanism varies among mutants and includes deficiencies of growth of 
the medial, lateral or maxillary facial prominences, defects in the fusion
process itself, and shifted midline position of the medial prominences. Several
CLP mutants also have NTD, suggesting potential genetic overlap of the traits in 
humans. The mutants may reflect two interacting sets of genetic signaling
pathways: Bmp4, Bmpr1a, Sp8, and Wnt9b may be in one set, and Tcfap2a and Sox11
may be in another. Combining the results of chromosomal linkage studies of
unidentified human CLP genes with insights from the mouse models, the following
previously unexamined genes are identified as strong candidate genes for
causative roles in human nonsyndromic CLP: BMP4, BMPR1B, TFAP2A, SOX4, WNT9B,
WNT3, and SP8.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18181213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Sci. 2008 Mar;99(3):502-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2007.00718.x. Epub
2008 Jan 2.

Induction of ErbB2 by ultraviolet A irradiation: potential role in malignant
transformation of keratinocytes.

Han CY(1), Lim SC, Choi HS, Kang KW.

Author information: 
(1)BK21 Project Team, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, South Korea.

Ultraviolet (UV) A (320-400 nm), which constitutes more than 90% of UV radiation 
in the sunlight that reaches the earth's surface, is considered a major cause of 
human skin photo-aging and skin cancer. Exposure of keratinocytes to UVA has
previously been reported to lead to the activation of a variety of epidermal
growth factor receptors (EGFR), including ErbB2, and ErbB2 activation is involved
in skin tumor development. Here, we demonstrate that ErbB2 expression is enhanced
by low-energy UVA (300-3000 mJ/cm(2)) irradiation in the skin tissues of both
hairless mice and HaCaT keratinocytes. Luciferase reporter-gene activity using
the 756-bp flanking region of the human erbB2 gene was increased by UVA
irradiation. UVA irradiation also selectively increased the levels of activator
protein (AP)-2 alpha, but not AP-2 beta and AP-2 gamma. The increase in the
reporter gene activity of HaCaT cells exposed to UVA was abolished by mutation of
the two AP-2 binding sites in the promoter region of the erbB2 gene. Inhibition
of cAMP-dependent protein kinase caused complete blockage of ErbB2 induction and 
AP-2 alpha activation by UVA irradiation. Finally, we reveal that pre-exposure of
HaCaT cells to UVA potentiates EGF-inducible anchorage-independent growth of the 
keratinocytes, which is significantly suppressed by ErbB2 inhibition. These
results support the hypothesis that UVA enhances the expression of ErbB2 via
cAMP- and protein kinase-dependent AP-2 alpha activation in keratinocytes, which 
may serve as a key mechanistic basis for the malignant transformation of
keratinocytes exposed to UVA irradiation.

PMID: 18177484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Diabetes. 2008 Mar;57(3):563-76. Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Forkhead transcription factor FoxO1 in adipose tissue regulates energy storage
and expenditure.

Nakae J(1), Cao Y, Oki M, Orba Y, Sawa H, Kiyonari H, Iskandar K, Suga K, Lombes 
M, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017,
Japan. nakaej@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Adipose tissue serves as an integrator of various physiological
pathways, energy balance, and glucose homeostasis. Forkhead box-containing
protein O subfamily (FoxO) 1 mediates insulin action at the transcriptional
level. However, physiological roles of FoxO1 in adipose tissue remain unclear.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In the present study, we generated adipose
tissue-specific FoxO1 transgenic mice (adipocyte protein 2 [aP(2)]-FLAG-Delta
256) using an aP(2) promoter/enhancer and a mutant FoxO1 (FLAG Delta 256) in
which the carboxyl terminal transactivation domain was deleted. Using these mice,
we analyzed the effects of the overexpression of FLAG Delta 256 on glucose
metabolism and energy homeostasis.
RESULTS: The aP(2)-FLAG-Delta 256 mice showed improved glucose tolerance and
insulin sensitivity accompanied with smaller-sized adipocytes and increased
adiponectin (adipoq) and Glut 4 (Slc2a4) and decreased tumor necrosis factor
alpha (Tnf) and chemokine (C-C motif) receptor 2 (Ccr2) gene expression levels in
white adipose tissue (WAT) under a high-fat diet. Furthermore, the
aP(2)-FLAG-Delta 256 mice had increased oxygen consumption accompanied with
increased expression of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator (PGC)-1 alpha protein and uncoupling protein (UCP)-1 (Ucp1), UCP-2
(Ucp2), and beta 3-AR (Adrb3) in brown adipose tissue (BAT). Overexpression of
FLAG Delta 256 in T37i cells, which are derived from the hibernoma of SV40 large 
T antigen transgenic mice, increased expression of PGC-1 alpha protein and Ucp1. 
Furthermore, knockdown of endogenous FoxO1 in T37i cells increased Pgc1 alpha
(Ppargc1a), Pgc1 beta (Ppargc1b), Ucp1, and Adrb3 gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that FoxO1 modulates energy homeostasis in WAT
and BAT through regulation of adipocyte size and adipose tissue-specific gene
expression in response to excessive calorie intake.

PMID: 18162510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Dev Cell. 2008 Jan;14(1):132-9. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

C. elegans AP-2 and retromer control Wnt signaling by regulating mig-14/Wntless.

Pan CL(1), Baum PD, Gu M, Jorgensen EM, Clark SG, Garriga G.

Author information: 
(1)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720-3204, USA.

While endocytosis can regulate morphogen distribution, its precise role in
shaping these gradients is unclear. Even more enigmatic is the role of retromer, 
a complex that shuttles proteins between endosomes and the Golgi apparatus, in
Wnt gradient formation. Here we report that DPY-23, the C. elegans mu subunit of 
the clathrin adaptor AP-2 that mediates the endocytosis of membrane proteins,
regulates Wnt function. dpy-23 mutants display Wnt phenotypes, including defects 
in neuronal migration, neuronal polarity, and asymmetric cell division. DPY-23
acts in Wnt-expressing cells to promote these processes. MIG-14, the C. elegans
homolog of the Wnt-secretion factor Wntless, also acts in these cells to control 
Wnt function. In dpy-23 mutants, MIG-14 accumulates at or near the plasma
membrane. By contrast, MIG-14 accumulates in intracellular compartments in
retromer mutants. Based on our observations, we propose that intracellular
trafficking of MIG-14 by AP-2 and retromer plays an important role in Wnt
secretion.

PMCID: PMC2709403
PMID: 18160346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Hum Pathol. 2008 Feb;39(2):275-81. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Trials of new germ cell immunohistochemical stains in 93 extragonadal and
metastatic germ cell tumors.

Iczkowski KA(1), Butler SL, Shanks JH, Hossain D, Schall A, Meiers I, Zhou M,
Torkko KC, Kim SJ, MacLennan GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, FL 32608, USA. kenneth.iczkowski@uchsc.edu

Erratum in
    Hum Pathol. 2013 Dec;44(12):2873.

Organic cation transporter 3/4 (OCT3/4) is a transcription factor of embryonic
stem cells; c-kit (CD117) is a tyrosine kinase receptor implicated in seminoma
carcinogenesis. Their reactivity is well characterized in testicular, but not
extragonadal and metastatic, germ cell tumors. A total of 93 germ cell tumors (41
seminoma, 22 embryonal carcinoma, 18 teratoma, and 12 yolk sac tumor) were
obtained from the central nervous system (30), mediastinum (23),
retroperitoneum/abdomen (31), and other locations (9). Immunohistochemical
staining for c-kit, placental-like alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), OCT3/4, and new
markers D2-40 and AP-2gamma was performed on seminomas; CD30 and epithelial
membrane antigen were added for nonseminomas. In embryonal carcinoma, c-kit
reacted in 17 of 22 cases, OCT3/4 in 18 of 22, and PLAP in 13 of 22. OCT3/4 was
superior to PLAP in intensity and percent cells staining. In seminoma, OCT3/4 and
D2-40 were superior to PLAP in intensity and percent cells; c-kit and AP-2gamma
were superior in percent cells. D2-40 stained 23 of 24 seminomas strongly but had
only weak focal reactivity in 6 of 17 embryonal carcinomas. Sensitivity and
specificity were high for OCT3/4 discriminating seminoma and embryonal carcinoma,
and c-kit discriminating seminoma, from other germ cell tumors. For embryonal
carcinoma, OCT3/4 had higher specificity (0.94) than CD30 (0.786) owing to CD30
reactivity in 3 of 10 teratomas. Epithelial membrane antigen discriminated
teratoma from other nonseminomas with a sensitivity of 1 but reacted occasionally
in embryonal carcinoma (3/15) and yolk sac tumor (2/7). In conclusion, for
extragonadal seminoma, OCT3/4, AP-2gamma, D2-40, and c-kit were equivalently
superior to PLAP. For embryonal carcinoma, OCT3/4 was superior to PLAP and more
specific than CD30. D2-40 is recommended to discriminate between seminoma and
embryonal carcinoma.

PMID: 18045648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Histopathology. 2007 Dec;51(6):814-23.

Immunohistochemical expression patterns of AP2alpha and AP2gamma in the
developing fetal human breast.

Friedrichs N(1), Steiner S, Buettner R, Knoepfle G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.
nicolaus.friedrichs@ukb.uni-bonn.de

AIMS: AP2alpha (TFAP2A) and AP2gamma (TFAP2G) transcription factors have been
implicated in the control of proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis of
normal breast epithelium and in breast cancer. The aim of this study was to
provide a comprehensive analysis of the expression patterns of TFAP2A and TFAP2G 
in the developing fetal breast anlage with other relevant markers.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixty fetal and one infant human breast specimens from 14
weeks of gestational age to 5 months old were examined. The primary breast
outgrowth/nipple showed TFAP2A expression by the basal cells (week 14), followed 
later by cytokeratin (CK) 5 co-expression (week 17). Sprouting of the secondary
outgrowths was characterized by HER-2+ invading cells. Preliminary ductal buds
were lined by TFAP2G/HER-1-expressing myoepithelial precursors (week 19).
Maturation of TFAP2A/CK18+ epithelia and TFAP2G/smooth muscle actin-positive
myoepithelia proceeded in a distal-to-proximal manner beginning in the terminal
end buds (week 22). CK5+ progenitor cells and CK5/TFAP2A or CK5/TFAP2G
co-expressing intermediary glandular or myoepithelial cells were found in the
terminal end buds of neonatal fetal breast tissue.
CONCLUSIONS: AP2 transcription factors may play decisive pacemaker roles in
initiating and coordinating budding and branching processes during formation of
the fetal breast anlage, possibly via modulation of an epidermal growth factor
receptor.

PMID: 18042070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2008 Jul;69(1):36-44. Epub 2008 Jul 1.

The G/G genotype of a single nucleotide polymorphism at -1066 of c-Jun N-terminal
kinase 1 gene (MAPK8) does not affect type 2 diabetes susceptibility despite the 
specific binding of AP2alpha.

Osawa H(1), Yamada K, Tabara Y, Ochi M, Onuma H, Nishida W, Shimizu I, Kawamoto
R, Fujii Y, Miki T, Ohashi J, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Ehime University Graduate School
of Medicine, Ehime Japan. harosawa@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: The c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1 (JNK1, mitogen-activated kinase 8;
MAPK8) phosphorylates insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1) at serine 307, which
induces insulin resistance. MAPK8 activity is increased in obese
insulin-resistant mice, whereas mapk8 (-/-) mice show decreased adiposity and
improved insulin sensitivity. The aim of this study was to determine the
relationship between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of MAPK8 and type 2
diabetes (T2DM).
DESIGN, PATIENTS AND MEASUREMENTS: Approximately 2 kb of 5' flanking and the
coding regions were initially sequenced in 24 Japanese T2DM subjects. Identified 
SNPs were genotyped in 204 T2DM cases and 201 nondiabetic controls. The function 
of promoter SNP-1066 (g.-1066G > A, rs10857561) was analysed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) and luciferase assay. SNP-1066 was further genotyped 
in a total of 498 cases and 407 controls, and in 2075 subjects in the general
population.
RESULTS: In 204 cases and 201 controls, 11 identified SNPs were not associated
with T2DM. These SNPs were in the same linkage disequilibrium (LD) block. The tag
SNP-1066 was not associated with T2DM in a total of 498 cases and 407 controls
with the power > 80% when the relative risk is > 1.31. Functionally,
transcription factor AP2alpha specifically recognized G but not A at -1066. MAPK8
promoter activity was unchanged between G and A. In 2075 subjects, neither body
mass index (BMI), fasting plasma glucose (FPG), homeostasis model assessment
insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR), nor beta cell function index (HOMA-beta) was 
associated with SNP-1066.
CONCLUSIONS: The G/G genotype of MAPK8 SNP-1066 did not affect T2DM
susceptibility despite specific binding of AP2alpha.

PMID: 18036196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;28(1):315-25. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Identification and analysis of a conserved Tcfap2a intronic enhancer element
required for expression in facial and limb bud mesenchyme.

Feng W(1), Huang J, Zhang J, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology and Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, UCHSC at Fitzsimons, Mailstop 8120, P.O. Box 6511, Aurora, CD 80045,
USA.

Tcfap2a, the gene encoding the mouse AP-2alpha transcription factor, is required 
for normal development of multiple structures during embryogenesis, including the
face and limbs. Using comparative sequence analysis and transgenic-mouse
experiments we have identified an intronic enhancer within this gene that directs
expression to the face and limb mesenchyme. There are two conserved sequence
blocks within this intron, and the larger of these directs tissue-specific
activity and is found in all vertebrate Tcfap2a genes analyzed. To assess the
role of the enhancer in regulating endogenous mouse Tcfap2a expression, we have
deleted this cis-regulatory sequence from the genome. Loss of this element
severely impairs Tcfap2a expression in the limb bud mesenchyme but generates only
a modest reduction in the facial mesenchyme. The reduction in Tcfap2a
transcription is accompanied by altered patterning of the forelimb, resulting in 
postaxial polydactyly. These results indicate that the major role for this
enhancer resides within the limb bud, and it serves to maintain a level of
Tcfap2a expression that limits the size of the hand plate and the associated
number of digit primordia. The potential role of this cis-acting sequence in
modeling the size and shape of the face and limbs during evolution is discussed.

PMCID: PMC2223317
PMID: 17984226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Life Sci. 2007 Dec 14;81(25-26):1651-8. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Salbutamol increases tristetraprolin expression in macrophages.

Jalonen U(1), Leppänen T, Kankaanranta H, Moilanen E.

Author information: 
(1)The Immunopharmacology Research Group, Medical School, University of Tampere, 
and Research Unit, Tampere University Hospital, 33014, Tampere, Finland.

Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a tandem zinc finger protein that can bind to AU-rich
elements (AREs) in the 3'-untranslated regions (3'-UTR) in mRNAs of transiently
expressed genes, e.g. tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). TTP increases the turnover rate of
the target mRNAs, thereby reducing, for example, the expression of TNF-alpha and 
GM-CSF. We examined the role of beta(2)-agonists, cAMP analogs, and forskolin (an
activator of adenylate cyclase) on TTP mRNA and protein expression by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting in J774 murine macrophages and
THP-1 human macrophages. All of these agents increased TTP expression. A
nonspecific inhibitor of phosphodiesterases (PDEs) 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine
(IBMX) and type IV PDE-inhibitor rolipram further enhanced the increase in TTP
expression levels, suggesting a cAMP-mediated effect. A possible mediator of
these effects is transcription factor activator protein 2 (AP-2), whereas nuclear
factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) seemed not to play any role. This mechanism may, at
least in part, explain the anti-inflammatory effects which beta(2)-agonists have 
been reported to have in macrophages.

PMID: 17964608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Dermatol Sci. 2008 Jan;49(1):73-84. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Development of an inducible gene expression system for primary murine
keratinocytes.

Nagarajan P(1), Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, State 
University of New York at Buffalo, NY 14214, USA. pn7@buffalo.edu

BACKGROUND: The tetracycline (Tet) responsive system is a valuable tool that is
routinely used in a wide variety of mammalian cells for regulatable expression of
gene products. However, technical difficulties such as harsh selection conditions
and extensive screening processes to identify suitably responsive clones limit
the generation of stable cell lines. Hence, application of this system in
mammalian cells with relatively slow growth rates and/or the capacity to undergo 
terminal differentiation such as primary mouse keratinocytes is particularly
challenging.
OBJECTIVE: To our knowledge, no Tet-responsive stable cell lines have been
generated from mouse keratinocytes, presumably due to their sensitivity to
selection conditions. Our goal was to utilize a modified and robust
Tet-expression system to generate a stable primary mouse keratinocyte cell line. 
These cells could be then utilized for conditional expression of potentially
toxic proteins in an inducible fashion.
METHODS: We utilized a eukaryotic promoter instead of a viral promoter to express
a modified reverse tetracycline transactivator in mouse keratinocytes and
optimized the selection process for generating stable cell lines.
RESULTS: Here, we report the generation of a stable mouse keratinocyte cell line 
for Tet-regulated gene expression with minimal leakiness and high degree of Tet
responsivity. This mouse keratinocyte cell line was further engineered for
generation of a double stable cell line, which expresses the transcription factor
AP-2alpha in an inducible manner. Importantly, the selected cells retain their
inherent keratinocyte morphology, respond to differentiation signals and exhibit 
a persistent and highly tunable Tet-inducibility upon continuous culturing.
CONCLUSION: We have generated a tetracycline inducible gene expression model
system in mouse epidermal keratinocytes. Such inducible cell lines will serve as 
valuable in vitro models for future gain-of-function and loss-of-function
studies.

PMCID: PMC2246047
PMID: 17964120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Oct 15;13(20):6115-21.

Wwox and Ap2gamma expression levels predict tamoxifen response.

Guler G(1), Iliopoulos D, Guler N, Himmetoglu C, Hayran M, Huebner K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
gguler@hacettepe.edu.tr

PURPOSE: Assessment of expression levels of Wwox, Wwox-interacting proteins
Ap2alpha, Ap2gamma, and ErbB4, the Ap2gamma transcriptional target protein Her2, 
and the possible Ap2alpha transcriptional target PrkaRIalpha, in breast cancers, 
to determine their roles in tamoxifen resistance. The hypothesis was that
sequestration of Wwox interactors in the cytoplasm might control tamoxifen
response.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tissue sections from 51 tamoxifen-sensitive and 38
tamoxifen-resistant, estrogen receptor alpha-positive breast cancers were stained
for the above proteins, as well as progesterone receptor (PR). The relation of
tamoxifen resistance and other clinical features, with level of expression of
these proteins, and pairwise correlations among various immunohistochemical
markers were determined.
RESULTS: Menopausal status, tumor, node, and stage, loss of PR, lost or reduced
expression of Wwox, and high level of expression of PrkaRIalpha, Ap2gamma, and
Her2 were significantly correlated with tamoxifen resistance. In multivariate
analysis, Wwox, PrkaRIalpha, Ap2gamma, and ErbB4 were found to be independent
markers of tamoxifen resistance. Reduced Wwox expression was better than PR in
prediction of resistance, especially in high-risk patients, and nuclear Ap2gamma 
expression was better than Her2, especially in low-risk patients.
CONCLUSION: The results illustrate the complex relationships among the marker
proteins assessed in this in vivo study and suggest new markers for prediction of
response to tamoxifen treatment as well as possible new targets for treatment of 
breast cancer. Wwox and Ap2gamma emerge as new biomarkers that may be superior to
PR and Her2 in predicting tamoxifen response.

PMID: 17947476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Pathol. 2007 Dec;213(4):441-52.

Immune-compromised state in the rat pancreas after chronic alcohol exposure: the 
role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma.

Fortunato F(1), Berger I, Gross ML, Rieger P, Buechler MW, Werner J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University
Hospital Heidelberg, Germany. Franco.Fortunato@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Alcohol exposure is known to sensitize acinar cells to various insults but the
pathophysiological mechanisms of alcoholic pancreatitis remain unknown. Alcohol
abuse has been shown to mediate an anti-inflammatory response and periods of
immune suppression seem to be associated with organ injury and mortality. The
purpose of this study was to determine the mechanisms by which alcohol exerts
transcriptional activities in the rat pancreas and how alcohol alters the
inflammatory response. Using the Lieber-DeCarli alcohol/control diet, rats that
were fed with alcohol over 14 weeks demonstrated a decrease of inflammatory cells
in pancreatic tissue compared to controls. The anti-inflammatory effects of
alcohol were confirmed by decreased expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines
including TNFalpha, IL-1beta, IL-18, TGFbeta, and MCP-1. In addition, alcohol
significantly increased the activity of PPARgamma, which is a known
anti-inflammatory transcription factor, while pro-inflammatory factors including 
AP-2 and EGR-1 were significantly suppressed. NFkappaB binding showed a tendency 
towards a reduction. Electron microscopy studies revealed enlarged and injured
mitochondria and lysosomes, accompanied by peri-cellular fibrosis. Furthermore,
alcohol exposure increased the activities of trypsin and cathepsin B, both known 
to be critical in initiating acinar cell injury and pancreatitis. Despite the
known alcohol-mediated acinar cell and mitochondrial injury, the
mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic pathway was attenuated. These data demonstrate
that the pancreas exposed to alcohol maintains an anti-inflammatory state by
activating PPARgamma. Intracellular mitochondrial and lysosomal damage after
chronic alcohol exposure induces premature activation of digestive enzymes and
establishment of peri-cellular fibrosis in the absence of inflammation.

(c) 2007 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland

PMID: 17935147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Dec;18(12):4921-31. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

AP-1 and ARF1 control endosomal dynamics at sites of FcR mediated phagocytosis.

Braun V(1), Deschamps C, Raposo G, Benaroch P, Benmerah A, Chavrier P, Niedergang
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Curie, Centre de Recherche, Paris, F-75248 France.

Phagocytosis, the mechanism of ingestion of large material and microorganisms,
relies on actin polymerization and on the focal delivery of intracellular
endocytic compartments. The molecular mechanisms involved in the formation and
delivery of the endocytic vesicles that are recruited at sites of phagocytosis
are not well characterized. Here we show that adaptor protein (AP)-1 but not AP-2
clathrin adaptor complexes are recruited early below the sites of particle
attachment and are required for efficient receptor-mediated phagocytosis in
murine macrophages. Clathrin, however, is not recruited with the AP complexes. We
further show that the recruitment of AP-1-positive structures at sites of
phagocytosis is regulated by the GTP-binding protein ARF1 but is not sensitive to
brefeldin A. Furthermore, AP-1 depletion leads to increased surface levels of
TNF-alpha, a cargo known to traffic through the endosomes to the plasma membrane 
upon stimulation of the macrophages. Together, our results support a
clathrin-independent role for AP complexes in endosomal dynamics in macrophages
by retaining some cargo proteins, a process important for membrane remodeling
during phagocytosis.

PMCID: PMC2096587
PMID: 17914058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Dec;8(1):19-26. Epub 2007 Sep 2.

Identification of genes expressed in the mouse limb using a novel ZPA microarray 
approach.

Rock JR(1), Lopez MC, Baker HV, Harfe BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Cancer and Genetics Research Complex, 1376 Mowry Road,
Gainesville, FL 32610, United States.

One well-studied signaling center in the developing vertebrate limb, the zone of 
polarizing activity (ZPA), produces the morphogen sonic hedgehog that is
necessary for normal growth and pattern formation. To identify additional factors
expressed in the ZPA of the mouse limb bud, the Shhgfpcre allele was used to
purify ZPA cells using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. Microarray technology
was then used to identify genes whose expression was elevated in the ZPA compared
to the rest of the limb. In situ hybridization confirmed the expression of two
known transcription factors, Hlxb9 and Tcfap2b, an uncharacterized EST, and a
transmembrane protein of unknown function in domains overlapping the ZPA. The
expression of two other genes was confirmed by rtPCR. The methods described in
this report will be applicable for identifying genes enriched in Shh-expressing
cells throughout development.

PMID: 17911046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Proteomics Clin Appl. 2007 Oct;1(10):1316-23. doi: 10.1002/prca.200700150. Epub
2007 Sep 11.

Disease proteomics reveals altered basic gene expression regulation in leukocytes
of Normal-Tension and Primary Open-Angle glaucoma patients.

Golubnitschaja O(1), Yeghiazaryan K, Wunderlich K, Schild HH, Flammer J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
Olga.Golubnitschaja@ukb.uni-bonn.de.

Glaucomatous damage is a neurodegenerative eye disease and one of the leading
causes of blindness with 67 million patients worldwide. Major currently
challenging questions include early diagnosis, risk evaluation, and follow-up.
Circulating leukocytes have been demonstrated as potentially important source of 
disease specific markers. The relevance of expression alterations in leukocytes
for glaucomatous damage needs to be clarified. Noteworthy, gene expression
patterns of trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal, which are anatomically and
functionally highly relevant for glaucoma pathology, were shown to be similar to 
those of circulating leukocytes. Here, we report extensive alterations in
characteristic protein expression patterns of circulating leukocytes for
Normal-Tension and Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma, as revealed by analysis of 2-D
PAGE images. Among most conservative alterations we found the protein spot
identified by MALDI-TOF as basic transcription factor activating protein-2beta
(AP-2ß). Western-blot analysis demonstrated significantly increased protein
expression rates of AP-2ß in both Normal-Tension and Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma 
versus controls. AP proteins are essential factors of the basic transcription
regulation; AP-2 proteins play a decisive role, particularly, in morphogenesis of
eye. Conservative AP-2 up-regulation is of special importance in terms of basic
transcriptional dysregulation that might be specific for glaucoma disease.

Copyright © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21136628  [PubMed]


22. Traffic. 2007 Dec;8(12):1736-49. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Neurotrophins Redirect p75NTR from a clathrin-independent to a clathrin-dependent
endocytic pathway coupled to axonal transport.

Deinhardt K(1), Reversi A, Berninghausen O, Hopkins CR, Schiavo G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropathobiology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, WC2A 3PX, London, UK.

The p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75(NTR)) plays multiple roles in neuronal
physiology through interactions with many ligands and coreceptors. However, its
intracellular neuronal trafficking prior to and after neurotrophin activation is 
still poorly characterized. We have previously shown that in response to nerve
growth factor (NGF), p75(NTR) is retrogradely transported along the axons of
motor neurons (MNs) in carriers shared with NGF, brain-derived neurotrophic
factor and the tyrosine kinase receptor TrkB. Here, we report that NGF does not
enhance the internalization or degradation of p75(NTR), which undergoes a rapid
dynamin-dependent and clathrin-independent recycling process in MNs. Instead,
incubation of cells with NGF leads to the redirection of a pool of plasma
membrane p75(NTR) into clathrin-coated pits. The subsequent internalization of
p75(NTR) via clathrin-mediated endocytosis, as well as the activity of Rab5, are 
essential for the sorting of the p75(NTR)-containing endosomes to the axonal
retrograde transport pathway and for the delivery of p75(NTR) to the soma. Our
findings suggest that the spatial regulation of p75(NTR) signalling is controlled
by these ligand-driven routes of endocytosis.

PMID: 17897318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genome. 2007 Aug;50(8):693-705.

dAP-2 and defective proventriculus regulate Serrate and Delta expression in the
tarsus of Drosophila melanogaster.

Ciechanska E(1), Dansereau DA, Svendsen PC, Heslip TR, Brook WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Research Group, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

The segmentation of the proximal-distal axis of the Drosophila melanogaster leg
depends on the localized activation of the Notch receptor. The expression of the 
Notch ligand genes Serrate and Delta in concentric, segmental rings results in
the localized activation of Notch, which induces joint formation and is required 
for the growth of leg segments. We report here that the expression of Serrate and
Delta in the leg is regulated by the transcription factor genes dAP-2 and
defective proventriculus. Previous studies have shown that Notch activation
induces dAP-2 in cells distal and adjacent to the Serrate/Delta domain of
expression. We find that Serrate and Delta are ectopically expressed in dAP-2
mutant legs and that Serrate and Delta are repressed by ectopic expression of
dAP-2. Furthermore, Serrate is induced cell-autonomously in dAP-2 mutant clones
in many regions of the leg. We also find that the expression of a defective
proventriculus reporter overlaps with dAP-2 expression and is complementary to
Serrate expression in the tarsal segments. Ectopic expression of defective
proventriculus is sufficient to block joint formation and Serrate and Delta
expression. Loss of defective proventriculus results in localized, ectopic
Serrate expression and the formation of ectopic joints with reversed polarity.
Thus, in tarsal segments, dAP-2 and defective proventriculus are necessary for
the correct proximal and distal boundaries of Serrate expression and repression
of Serrate by defective proventriculus contributes to tarsal segment asymmetry.
The repression of the Notch ligand genes Serrate and Delta by the Notch target
gene dAP-2 may be a pattern-refining mechanism similar to those acting in
embryonic segmentation and compartment boundary formation.

PMID: 17893729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 25;104(39):15270-5. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Improvement of water use efficiency in rice by expression of HARDY, an
Arabidopsis drought and salt tolerance gene.

Karaba A(1), Dixit S, Greco R, Aharoni A, Trijatmiko KR, Marsch-Martinez N,
Krishnan A, Nataraja KN, Udayakumar M, Pereira A.

Author information: 
(1)Plant Research International, Wageningen University and Research Centre, P.O. 
Box 16, 6700AA Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Freshwater is a limited and dwindling global resource; therefore, efficient water
use is required for food crops that have high water demands, such as rice, or for
the production of sustainable energy biomass. We show here that expression of the
Arabidopsis HARDY (HRD) gene in rice improves water use efficiency, the ratio of 
biomass produced to the water used, by enhancing photosynthetic assimilation and 
reducing transpiration. These drought-tolerant, low-water-consuming rice plants
exhibit increased shoot biomass under well irrigated conditions and an adaptive
increase in root biomass under drought stress. The HRD gene, an AP2/ERF-like
transcription factor, identified by a gain-of-function Arabidopsis mutant hrd-D
having roots with enhanced strength, branching, and cortical cells, exhibits
drought resistance and salt tolerance, accompanied by an enhancement in the
expression of abiotic stress associated genes. HRD overexpression in Arabidopsis 
produces thicker leaves with more chloroplast-bearing mesophyll cells, and in
rice, there is an increase in leaf biomass and bundle sheath cells that probably 
contributes to the enhanced photosynthesis assimilation and efficiency. The
results exemplify application of a gene identified from the model plant
Arabidopsis for the improvement of water use efficiency coincident with drought
resistance in the crop plant rice.

PMCID: PMC1986572
PMID: 17881564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 15;67(18):8439-43.

TFAP2C controls hormone response in breast cancer cells through multiple pathways
of estrogen signaling.

Woodfield GW(1), Horan AD, Chen Y, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242-1086, USA.

Breast cancers expressing estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) are associated with a
favorable biology and are more likely to respond to hormonal therapy. In addition
to ERalpha, other pathways of estrogen response have been identified including
ERbeta and GPR30, a membrane receptor for estrogen, and the key mechanisms
regulating expression of ERs and hormone response remain controversial. Herein,
we show that TFAP2C is the key regulator of hormone responsiveness in breast
carcinoma cells through the control of multiple pathways of estrogen signaling.
TFAP2C regulates the expression of ERalpha directly by binding to the ERalpha
promoter and indirectly via regulation of FoxM1. In so doing, TFAP2C controls the
expression of ERalpha target genes, including pS2, MYB, and RERG. Furthermore,
TFAP2C controlled the expression of GPR30. In distinct contrast, TFAP2A, a
related factor expressed in breast cancer, was not involved in estrogen-mediated 
pathways but regulated expression of genes controlling cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis including p21(CIP1) and IGFBP-3. Knockdown of TFAP2C abrogated the
mitogenic response to estrogen exposure and decreased hormone-responsive tumor
growth of breast cancer xenografts. We conclude that TFAP2C is a central control 
gene of hormone response and is a novel therapeutic target in the design of new
drug treatments for breast cancer.

PMID: 17875680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2007 Sep 15;308(5):679-91.

Tfap2 transcription factors in zebrafish neural crest development and ectodermal 
evolution.

Hoffman TL(1), Javier AL, Campeau SA, Knight RD, Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California 92697-2305, USA.

Transcription factor AP2 (Tfap2) genes play essential roles in development of the
epidermis and migratory cells of the neural crest (NC) in vertebrate embryos.
These transcriptional activators are among the earliest genes expressed in the
ectoderm and specify fates within the epidermis/crest through both direct and
indirect mechanisms. The Tfap2 family arose from a single ancestral gene in a
chordate ancestor that underwent gene duplication to give up to five family
members in living vertebrates. This coincided with the acquisition of important
roles in NC development by Tfap2 genes suggesting that this gene family was
important in ectodermal evolution and possibly in the origin of NC. Here, we show
that a zebrafish tfap2c is expressed in the nonneural ectoderm during early
development and functions redundantly with tfap2a in NC specification. In
zebrafish embryos depleted of both tfap2a and tfap2c, NC cells are virtually
eliminated. Cell transplantation experiments indicate that tfap2c functions
cell-autonomously in NC specification. Cells of the enveloping layer, which forms
a temporary skin layer surrounding the ectoderm, also fail to differentiate or to
express appropriate keratins in tfap2c deficient embryos. The role of Tfap2 genes
in epidermal and NC development is considered here in the broader context of
ectodermal evolution. Distinct, tissue-specific functions for Tfap2 genes in
different vertebrates may reflect subfunctionalisation of an ancestral gene that 
consequently led to the gain of novel roles for different subfamily members in
patterning the epidermis and NC.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17724731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(21):7497-510. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Conditional deletion of activating protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) in the developing
retina demonstrates non-cell-autonomous roles for AP-2alpha in optic cup
development.

Bassett EA(1), Pontoriero GF, Feng W, Marquardt T, Fini ME, Williams T, West-Mays
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario L8N 3Z5, Canada.

Activating protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) is known to be expressed in the retina, and
AP-2alpha-null mice exhibit defects in the developing optic cup, including
patterning of the neural retina (NR) and a replacement of the dorsal retinal
pigmented epithelium (RPE) with NR. In this study, we analyzed the temporal and
spatial retinal expression patterns of AP-2alpha and created a conditional
deletion of AP-2alpha in the developing retina. AP-2alpha exhibited a distinct
expression pattern in the developing inner nuclear layer of the retina, and
colocalization studies indicated that AP-2alpha was exclusively expressed in
postmitotic amacrine cell populations. Targeted deletion of AP-2alpha in the
developing retina did not result in observable retinal defects. Further
examination of AP-2alpha-null mutants revealed that the severity of the RPE
defect was variable and, although defects in retinal lamination occur at later
embryonic stages, earlier stages showed normal lamination and expression of
markers for amacrine and ganglion cells. Together, these data demonstrate that,
whereas AP-2alpha alone does not play an intrinsic role in retinogenesis, it has 
non-cell-autonomous effects on optic cup development. Additional expression
analyses showed that multiple AP-2 proteins are present in the developing retina,
which will be important to future studies.

PMCID: PMC2169054
PMID: 17724084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Peptides. 2008 Mar;29(3):465-72. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Synergistic activation of the human adrenomedullin gene promoter by Sp1 and
AP-2alpha.

Zhang Y(1), Li Y, Shibahara S, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Adrenomedullin (AM) is a potent vasodilator peptide, which is ubiquitously
expressed and has various biological actions, such as proliferative action and
anti-oxidative stress action. AM expression is induced by various stresses, such 
as hypoxia and inflammatory cytokines, and during cell differentiation. The human
AM gene promoter region (-70/-29) contains binding sites for stimulatory protein 
1 (Sp1) and activator protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha), and has been shown to be
important for the AM gene expression during cell differentiation to macrophages
or adipocytes. We here show that Sp1 and AP-2alpha synergistically activate the
AM gene promoter. Co-transfection of the reporter plasmid containing the AM
promoter region (-103/-29) with Sp1 and AP-2alpha expression plasmids showed that
Sp1 and AP-2alpha synergistically increased the promoter activity in HeLa cells. 
Sp1 or AP-2alpha alone caused only small increases in the promoter activity. EMSA
showed that Sp1 bound to the promoter region (-70/-29), whereas AP-2alpha bound
to a more upstream promoter region (-103/-71). Thus, the synergistic activation
of the human AM gene promoter by Sp1 and AP-2alpha may be mediated by the binding
of Sp1 to the promoter region (-70/-29) and the interaction with AP-2alpha, which
binds to the promoter region (-103/-71).

PMID: 17719138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2007;604:87-95.

The AP-2alpha transcription factor regulates tumor cell migration and apoptosis.

Orso F(1), Fassetta M, Penna E, Solero A, De Filippo K, Sismondi P, De Bortoli M,
Taverna D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment (IRCC), Department of Oncology
Science, University of Torino, Str. Prov. 142-Km 3.95, 10060 Candiolo (To),
Italy.

AP-2 proteins are a family of developmentally-regulated transcription factors.
They are encoded by five different genes (alpha, beta, gamma, delta, and epsilon)
but they share a common structure. AP-2 plays relevant roles in growth,
differentiation, and adhesion by controlling the transcription of specific genes.
Evidence shows that the AP-2 genes are involved in tumorigenesis and for
instance, they act as tumor suppressors in melanomas and mammary carcinomas. Here
we investigated the function of the AP-2alpha protein in cancer formation and
progression focusing on apoptosis and migration. We introduced AP-2alpha-specific
siRNA (as oligos or in retroviruses) in HeLa or MCF-7 human tumor cells and
obtained a pronounced down-modulation of AP-2a mRNA and protein levels. In these 
cells, we observed a significant reduction of chemotherapy-induced apoptosis,
migration, and motility and an increase in adhesion suggesting a major role of
AP-2a during cancer treatment and progression (migration and invasion). We have
data suggesting that migration is, at least in part, regulated by secreted
factors. By performing a whole genome microarray analysis of the tumor cells
expressing AP-2alpha siRNA, we identified several AP-2alpha-regulated genes
involved in apoptosis and migration such as FAST kinase, osteopontin, caspase 9, 
members of the TNF family, laminin alpha 1, collagen type XII, alpha 1, and adam.

PMID: 17695722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Vis. 2007 Jul 19;13:1215-25.

Genetic analysis indicates that transcription factors AP-2alpha and Pax6
cooperate in the normal patterning and morphogenesis of the lens.

Makhani LF(1), Williams T, West-Mays JA.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

PURPOSE: The similar lens phenotypes observed in mice with mutations in the genes
encoding either Pax6 or AP-2alpha suggested that these transcription factors work
together to regulate specific signaling cascades during lens development. In this
study we examined the overlapping expression patterns of Pax6 and AP-2alpha in
the developing mouse lens and further investigated their potential cooperative
roles through the creation of double heterozygote mice.
METHODS: Colocalization of Pax6 and AP-2alpha expression patterns were performed 
on sections of mouse embryos at embryonic days 9.5, 10.5, 13.5, and 16 as well as
on adult sections using immunofluorescence. To test the potential cooperation
between these two transcription factors, two mouse strains heterozygous for the
genes encoding either Pax6 or AP-2alpha were bred together to produce double
heterozygous Pax6(+/lacZ)/AP-2alpha(+/-) mice. Histological examination was then 
performed on both embryonic and post-natal sections in order to compare double
heterozygous Pax6(+/lacZ)/AP-2alpha(+/-) eyes to single heterozygote and wildtype
eyes.
RESULTS: Examination of the developmental stages showed distinct colocalization
of Pax6 and AP-2alpha protein in the anterior lens epithelium. However, Pax6
expression continued further into the transitional zone of the lens whereas
AP-2alpha expression ceased just prior to the region where epithelial cells
differentiate into fiber cells. Histological investigation of embryonic and
post-natal mutant mouse eyes showed that while single Pax6 heterozygote mice
exhibited remnants of a corneal-lenticular adhesion, the lens and cornea were
physically separated. In contrast, the Pax6(+/lacZ)/AP-2alpha(+/-) double
heterozygotes displayed a distinct lens stalk, which protruded towards the
surface of the cornea, creating a direct corneal-lenticular attachment.
CONCLUSIONS: Colocalization of Pax6 and AP-2alpha was mainly observed in the
proliferating central lens epithelium, the same region in which the lens stalk
phenotype was observed in the double heterozygous Pax6(+/lacZ)/AP-2alpha(+/-)
eyes. The more severe phenotype observed in these double heterozygous mice, as
compared to the single heterozygotes, suggests that Pax6 and AP-2alpha may work
synergistically to control lens development.

PMID: 17679940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 5;282(40):29089-100. Epub 2007 Aug 3.

Unraveling G protein-coupled receptor endocytosis pathways using real-time
monitoring of agonist-promoted interaction between beta-arrestins and AP-2.

Hamdan FF(1), Rochdi MD, Breton B, Fessart D, Michaud DE, Charest PG, Laporte SA,
Bouvier M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Groupe de Recherche Universitaire sur le
Médicament, Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de
Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The most widely studied pathway underlying agonist-promoted internalization of G 
protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) involves beta-arrestin and clathrin-coated
pits. However, both beta-arrestin- and clathrin-independent processes have also
been reported. Classically, the endocytic routes are characterized using
pharmacological inhibitors and various dominant negative mutants, resulting
sometimes in conflicting results and interpretational difficulties. Here, taking 
advantage of the fact that beta-arrestin binding to the beta2 subunit of the
clathrin adaptor AP-2 (beta2-adaptin) is needed for the beta-arrestin-mediated
targeting of GPCRs to clathrin-coated pits, we developed a bioluminescence
resonance energy transfer-based approach directly assessing the molecular steps
involved in the endocytosis of GPCRs in living cells. For 10 of the 12 receptors 
tested, including some that were previously suggested to internalize via
clathrin-independent pathways, agonist stimulation promoted beta-arrestin 1 and 2
interaction with beta2-adaptin, indicating a beta-arrestin- and
clathrin-dependent endocytic process. Detailed analyses of beta-arrestin
interactions with both the receptor and beta2-adaptin also allowed us to
demonstrate that recruitment of beta-arrestins to the receptor and the ensuing
conformational changes are the leading events preceding AP-2 engagement and
subsequent clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Among the receptors tested, only the
endothelin A and B receptors failed to promote interaction between beta-arrestins
and beta2-adaptin. However, both receptors recruited beta-arrestins upon agonist 
stimulation, suggesting a beta-arrestin-dependent but clathrin-independent route 
of internalization for these two receptors. In addition to providing a new tool
to dissect the molecular events involved in GPCR endocytosis, the bioluminescence
resonance energy transfer-based beta-arrestin/beta2-adaptin interaction assay
represents a novel biosensor to assess receptor activation.

PMID: 17675294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 19;282(42):30485-96. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

Nerve growth factor induces endothelial cell invasion and cord formation by
promoting matrix metalloproteinase-2 expression through the phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase/Akt signaling pathway and AP-2 transcription factor.

Park MJ(1), Kwak HJ, Lee HC, Yoo DH, Park IC, Kim MS, Lee SH, Rhee CH, Hong SI.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Functional Genomics, Korea Institute of Radiological and Medical
Sciences, 215-4 Gongneung-dong, Nowon-gu, Seoul 139-706, Korea.

Nerve growth factor (NGF) is a well characterized neurotrophic agonist in the
nervous system that triggers angiogenesis. In this study, we investigated the
signaling mechanisms involved in NGF-induced angiogenesis. NGF stimulated
endothelial cell invasion and cord formation on Matrigel in vitro but had
marginal effect on proliferation and migration of these cells. NGF stimulated
matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 mRNA expression and protein secretion in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells. Using synthetic and endogenous inhibitors of
MMP-2 and MMP-2 small interfering RNA suppressed NGF-induced invasion and cord
formation. We demonstrated that NGF-induced MMP-2 secretion, invasion, and cord
formation are regulated via activation of the NGF receptor, TrkA,
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), and Akt using various pharmacological
inhibitors. Specifically, NGF enhanced TrkA phosphorylation, PI3K activity, and
Akt phosphorylation. Introduction of NGF-neutralizing antibodies,
dominant-negative Akt, or wild-type PTEN effectively inhibited NGF-induced MMP-2 
secretion and cord formation. Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis analysis of 
the MMP-2 promoter demonstrated that the AP-2-binding site is critical for
NGF-induced MMP-2 promoter activity. NGF increased the DNA binding activity of
AP-2, which was suppressed by inhibitors of TrkA and PI3K. Furthermore,
transfection of AP-2 small interfering RNA effectively blocked NGF-induced MMP-2 
secretion and cord formation. Finally, NGF promoted neovessel formation in
Matrigel plugs in vivo, which was significantly inhibited by K252a and LY294002, 
but it failed to promote angiogenesis using MMP-2 knock-out mice. Our data
collectively suggest that NGF stimulates endothelial cell invasion and cord
formation by augmenting MMP-2 via the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and AP-2
transcription factor, which may be responsible for triggering angiogenesis.

PMID: 17666398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Exp Mol Pathol. 2007 Oct;83(2):277-82. Epub 2007 Jun 26.

AP-2 participates in the transcriptional control of the amyloid precursor protein
(APP) gene in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Provenzano MJ(1), Yu L, Hitchler MJ, Fitzgerald MP, Robinson RA, Wayne S, Ver
Meer M, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA 52242-1181, USA.

Amyloid precursor protein (APP) has been implicated in squamous cell carcinoma.
In this study we show that forced expression of the transcription factor
activating protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) results in significantly increased steady
state levels of APP mRNA in human keratinocytes. Sequence analysis of the 5' end 
of the human APP gene revealed five putative binding sites for AP-2, suggesting
that APP is a direct target for transactivation by AP-2. AP-2 protein bound at
least 3 of these putative promoter elements in vitro as determined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analysis showed that these binding sites were occupied by AP-2 in cells, thus
indicating the relevance to AP-2 binding in vivo. We then analyzed APP and AP-2
mRNA and protein expression in squamous cell carcinoma tumor samples. Analysis of
RNA extracted from human tissue showed a significant positive correlation between
AP-2alpha and APP mRNA expression. Immunohistochemical staining of tumor samples 
also demonstrated a positive correlation which was substantiated through western 
blot studies. Taken together, these findings demonstrate a role for the
transcription factor AP-2alpha in the regulation of APP gene expression in human 
keratinocytes.

PMCID: PMC2981165
PMID: 17651731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Circ Res. 2007 Jul 20;101(2):116-8.

Old drug, new tricks: the unexpected effect of doxazosin on high-density
lipoprotein.

Remaley AT.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2007 Jul 20;101(2):156-65.

PMID: 17641233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 7;282(36):26460-70. Epub 2007 Jul 15.

Tumor-specific activation of human telomerase reverses transcriptase promoter
activity by activating enhancer-binding protein-2beta in human lung cancer cells.

Deng WG(1), Jayachandran G, Wu G, Xu K, Roth JA, Ji L.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Thoracic Molecular Oncology, Department of Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The up-regulated expression and telomerase activity of human telomerase reverse
transcriptase (hTERT) are hallmarks of tumorigenesis. The hTERT promoter has been
shown to promote hTERT gene expression selectively in tumor cells but not in
normal cells. However, little is known about how tumor cells differentially
activate hTERT transcription and induce telomerase activity. In this study, we
identified activating enhancer-binding protein-2beta (AP-2beta) as a novel
transcription factor that specifically binds to and activates the hTERT promoter 
in human lung cancer cells. AP-2beta was detected in hTERT promoter DNA-protein
complexes formed in nuclear extracts prepared only from lung cancer cells but not
from normal cells. We verified the tumor-specific binding activity of AP-2beta
for the hTERT promoter in vitro and in vivo and detected high expression levels
of AP-2beta in lung cancer cells. We found that ectopic expression of AP-2beta
reactivated hTERT promoter-driven reporter green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene
and endogenous hTERT gene expression in normal cells, enhanced GFP gene
expression in lung cancer cells, and prolonged the life span of primary lung
bronchial epithelial cells. Furthermore, we found that inhibition of endogenous
AP-2beta expression by AP-2beta gene-specific small interfering RNAs effectively 
attenuated hTERT promoter-driven GFP expression, suppressed telomerase activity, 
accelerated telomere shortening, and inhibited tumor cell growth by induction of 
apoptosis in lung cancer cells. Our results demonstrate the tumor-specific
activation of the hTERT promoter by AP-2beta and imply the potential of AP-2beta 
as a novel tumor marker or a cancer therapeutic target.

PMID: 17630431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2007 Sep 7;282(36):26481-9. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

SGIP1alpha is an endocytic protein that directly interacts with phospholipids and
Eps15.

Uezu A(1), Horiuchi A, Kanda K, Kikuchi N, Umeda K, Tsujita K, Suetsugu S, Araki 
N, Yamamoto H, Takenawa T, Nakanishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

SGIP1 has been shown to be an endophilin-interacting protein that regulates
energy balance, but its function is not fully understood. Here, we identified its
splicing variant of SGIP1 and named it SGIP1alpha. SGIP1alpha bound to
phosphatidylserine and phosphoinositides and deformed the plasma membrane and
liposomes into narrow tubules, suggesting the involvement in vesicle formation
during endocytosis. SGIP1alpha furthermore bound to Eps15, an important adaptor
protein of clathrin-mediated endocytic machinery. SGIP1alpha was colocalized with
Eps15 and the AP-2 complex. Upon epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation,
SGIP1alpha was colocalized with EGF at the plasma membrane, indicating the
localization of SGIP1alpha at clathrin-coated pits/vesicles. SGIP1alpha
overexpression reduced transferrin and EGF endocytosis. SGIP1alpha knockdown
reduced transferrin endocytosis but not EGF endocytosis; this difference may be
due to the presence of redundant pathways in EGF endocytosis. These results
suggest that SGIP1alpha plays an essential role in clathrin-mediated endocytosis 
by interacting with phospholipids and Eps15.

PMID: 17626015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Nov;28(11):2305-12. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Transcription factor AP-2alpha represses both the mucin MUC4 expression and
pancreatic cancer cell proliferation.

Fauquette V(1), Aubert S, Groux-Degroote S, Hemon B, Porchet N, Van Seuningen I, 
Pigny P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U837, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille cedex, France.

MUC4 is a transmembrane mucin expressed in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (DAC)
in contrast to normal pancreas, and is an independent predictor of poor prognosis
in patients with invasive DAC. Our aim was therefore to investigate the
mechanisms that control MUC4 expression in pancreatic cancer cells. We focused
our study on activator protein (AP)-2alpha transcription factor that acts as a
tumour suppressor gene in several cancers. In a series of 18 human DAC, using
immunohistochemistry, we confirmed that MUC4 was exclusively expressed in
cancerous or preneoplastic lesions in 83% of the samples. On the contrary, AP-2
was mainly expressed by non-tumoural ductal cells (61%) or endocrine cells (67%).
Moreover, MUC4 and AP-2 were never found co-expressed suggesting an inhibitory
role of AP-2alpha in normal ductal cells. In CAPAN-1 and CAPAN-2 cells, transient
AP-2alpha over-expression decreased both MUC4 mRNA and apomucin levels by 20-40% 
by a mechanism involving inhibition of MUC4 promoter. By chromatin
immunoprecipitation and gel-shift assays, we demonstrated that this inhibition
involved two AP-2 cis-elements located in the -475/-238 region of the promoter.
CAPAN-1 clones, which stably over-expressed AP-2alpha, displayed a strong MUC4
down-regulation (-38 to -100%), a significant decrease of both cell proliferation
and invasion concomitant to the up-regulation of p27 cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor. In conclusion, our data provide evidence that AP-2alpha is an
important in vivo negative regulator of MUC4 expression in human pancreatic
tissue and that AP-2alpha may play a tumour-suppressive role in pancreatic DAC.

PMID: 17621592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Sep;35(9):1649-56. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

Functional analysis of the human N-acetyltransferase 1 major promoter:
quantitation of tissue expression and identification of critical sequence
elements.

Husain A(1), Zhang X, Doll MA, States JC, Barker DF, Hein DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, James Graham Brown Cancer Center,
University of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Arylamine N-acetyltransferase 1 (NAT1) plays an important role in the
biotransformation of xenobiotics, and genetic variants have been implicated in
susceptibility to cancer and birth defects. A specific and quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay for transcription from the major
NAT1 promoter detected high expression with limited variability in human tissues.
A 213-base pair (bp) minimal promoter was identified by transfection of
luciferase reporter constructs into MCF-7 and HepG2 cell lines. Alignment of the 
213-bp region with paralogous and orthologous promoters revealed two conserved
region segments, one of which overlaps a 16-bp perfect palindrome. Transfection
of luciferase constructs with artificial mutations in the minimal promoter
defined two sites important for promoter function. One of these sites included a 
close match to the Sp1 transcription factor binding consensus sequence.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs), followed by competitive and
supershift analyses, confirmed the Sp1 binding. Mutation of the highly conserved 
portion of the 16-bp palindrome reduced promoter activity more than 3-fold, and
an EMSA shift was detected with an oligonucleotide, 200L29, which spans this
segment. The 200L29 EMSA shift could not be competed by consensus Sp1 or AP-2
oligonucleotides, and may represent binding of a transcription factor that is
common to N-acetyltransferase genes in humans and other species.

PMCID: PMC2085369
PMID: 17591675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jul 10;581(17):3204-10. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Activation of the CRF(1) receptor causes ERK1/2 mediated increase in GRK3
expression in CATH.a cells.

Salim S(1), Hite B, Eikenburg DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of
Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204-5037, USA.

G-protein coupled receptor kinase 3 (GRK3) mediates desensitization of
alpha(2)-adrenergic (alpha(2)-AR) and CRF(1) receptors. CRF(1) receptors,
alpha(2)-AR and GRK3, are localized to the primary source of noradrenergic inputs
to higher brain centers critical in both the response to stress and the
development of depression, namely, locus coeruleus (LC). This study utilizing
CATH.a cells (derived from the LC), demonstrates for the first time, that the
stress hormone, CRF selectively up-regulates GRK3 expression via an
ERK1/2-mediated mechanism accompanied by the activation of Sp-1 and Ap-2
transcription factors. This observation has important implications for the
regulation of stress signaling in the brain.

PMID: 17583697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Gene. 2007 Aug 1;397(1-2):143-52. Epub 2007 May 3.

Cooperative activation of lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase gene expression
by activator protein-2beta in proximal promoter and upstream stimulatory factor 1
within intron 4 in human brain-derived TE671 cells.

Fujimori K(1), Urade Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 
Furuedai, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

We investigated the activation mechanism of gene expression of lipocalin-type
prostaglandin D synthase (L-PGDS) in human brain-derived TE671 cells. Reporter
analyses of constructs carrying various lengths of the promoter region and intron
1 to 6, or 3'-untranslated region of the human L-PGDS gene demonstrated that one 
atypical E-box (aE-box) at +2569 in intron 4 was critical for transactivation of 
the gene. The aE-box inside the intron 4 functioned as an enhancer element in
both directions and in a cell-type specific manner in TE671 cells. Yeast
one-hybrid screening revealed that upstream stimulatory factor (USF) 1 bound to
the aE-box. Expression of exogenous USF1 induced the endogenous L-PGDS expression
in TE671 cells, whereas administration of USF1 siRNA suppressed L-PGDS
expression. Binding of USF1 to the aE-box was confirmed by performing
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
Furthermore, USF1-mediated transcriptional activation was dependent upon
activator protein (AP)-2beta binding to the AP-2 element at position -98 in the
proximal promoter region of human L-PGDS gene. These results indicate that L-PGDS
gene expression in TE671 cells was activated by USF1 through the aE-box within
intron 4 and cooperatively by AP-2beta in the promoter in a cell-type-specific
manner.

PMID: 17574780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Circ Res. 2007 Jul 20;101(2):156-65. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 gene transcription is downregulated by
activator protein 2alpha. Doxazosin inhibits activator protein 2alpha and
increases high-density lipoprotein biogenesis independent of alpha1-adrenoceptor 
blockade.

Iwamoto N(1), Abe-Dohmae S, Ayaori M, Tanaka N, Kusuhara M, Ohsuzu F, Yokoyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Department, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2007 Jul 20;101(2):116-8.

ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) is a rate-limiting factor for
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) biogenesis. The ABCA1 gene expression is known to 
be upregulated by various transcriptional factors. However, negative regulation
factors would be better targets for pharmacological modulation of HDL biogenesis.
Doxazosin, an alpha(1)-adrenoceptor blocker, increased ABCA1 mRNA, its protein,
and apolipoprotein A-I-mediated HDL biogenesis in THP-1 macrophages and CHO-K1
cells, independent of alpha(1)-adrenoceptor blockade. Analysis of the human ABCA1
promoter indicated that the region between the positions -368 and -147 that
contains an activator protein (AP)2-binding site responsible for the effects of
doxazosin. Overexpression of AP2alpha inhibited ABCA1 transcription in a
dose-dependent fashion. Mutation in the AP2-binding site caused increase of the
basal promoter activity and cancelling both the transactivation by doxazosin and 
the trans-repression by AP2alpha. Doxazosin had no effect on ABCA1 mRNA level in 
HepG2 cells, which lack endogenous AP2alpha, and it reversed the inhibitory
effect of AP2alpha expression in this type of cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays revealed that doxazosin reduced specific
binding of AP2alpha to the ABCA1 promoter, as it suppressed phosphorylation of
AP2alpha. Finally, doxazosin increased ABCA1 expression and plasma HDL in mice.
We thus concluded that AP2alpha negatively regulates the ABCA1 gene
transcription. Doxazosin inhibits AP2alpha activity independent of
alpha(1)-adrenoceptor blockade and increases the ABCA1 expression and HDL
biogenesis. AP2alpha is a potent pharmacological target for the increase of HDL.

PMID: 17556657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Neurochem. 2007 Sep;102(6):1918-27. Epub 2007 May 10.

Chronic NMDA administration to rats up-regulates frontal cortex cytosolic
phospholipase A2 and its transcription factor, activator protein-2.

Rao JS(1), Ertley RN, Rapoport SI, Bazinet RP, Lee HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. jrao@mail.nih.gov

Excessive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) signaling is thought to contribute to
bipolar disorder symptoms. Lithium and carbamazepine, effective against bipolar
mania, are reported in rats to reduce brain transcription of an arachidonic acid 
selective calcium-dependent cytosolic phospholipase A(2) (cPLA(2)), as well as
expression of one of its transcription factors, activator protein (AP)-2. In this
study, we determined if chronic administration of NMDA (25 mg/kg i.p.) to rats
would increase brain cPLA(2) and AP-2 expression, as these antimanic drugs are
known to down-regulate excessive NMDA signaling. Administration of a daily
subconvulsive dose of NMDA to rats for 21 days decreased frontal cortex NMDA
receptor (NR)-1 and NR-3A subunits and increased cPLA(2) activity,
phosphorylation, protein, and mRNA levels. The activity and protein levels of
secretory phospholipase A(2) or calcium-independent phospholipase A(2) were not
changed significantly. Chronic NMDA also increased the DNA-binding activity of
AP-2 and the protein levels of its alpha and beta subunits. These changes were
absent following acute (3 h earlier) NMDA administration. The changes, opposite
to those found following chronic lithium or carbamazepine, are consistent with
up-regulated arachidonic acid release due to excessive NR signaling and may be a 
contributing factor to bipolar mania.

PMID: 17550430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Virus Genes. 2007 Oct;35(2):203-14. Epub 2007 Jun 2.

Role of a consensus AP-2 regulatory sequence within the Epstein-Barr virus LMP1
promoter in EBNA2 mediated transactivation.

Jansson A(1), Johansson P, Yang W, Palmqvist L, Sjöblom-Hallén A, Rymo L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, The Sahlgrenska
Academy at Göteborg University, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 413 45
Gothenburg, Sweden.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) tumor-associated latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1)
gene expression is transactivated by EBV nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) in human B
cells. We previously reported that an E-box element at the LMP1 regulatory
sequence (LRS) represses transcription of the LMP1 gene through the recruitment
of a Max-Mad1-mSin3A complex. In the present study, using deletion/mutation
analysis, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we show that the promoter
region adjacent to the E-box (-59/-67) is required for the full repression
conferred by E-box binding proteins. The repressive effect of these factors was
overcome by an inhibitor of histone deacetylation, Trichostatin A (TSA),
concurring with the reports that histone deacetylation plays an important role in
repression mediated by Max-Mad1-mSin3A complex. Furthermore, ChIP analyses showed
that histones at the transcriptionally active LMP1 promoter were hyperacetylated,
whereas in the absence of transcription they were hypoacetylated. EBNA2
activation of the promoter required a consensus AP-2 sequence in the -103/-95 LRS
region. While EMSA results and the low level of AP-2 factors expression in B
cells argue against known AP-2 factors binding to this site, several pieces of
evidence point to a similar mechanism of promoter activation as seen by AP-2
factors. We conclude that an AP-2 site-binding factor and EBNA2 act in concert to
overcome the repression of the LMP1 promoter via the consensus AP-2 site. This
activation showed strong correlation with histone hyperacetylation at the
promoter, indicating this to be a major mechanism for the EBNA2 mediated LMP1
transactivation.

PMID: 17546492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007 Jun;300(1-2):61-7. Epub 2006 Nov 25.

Nitric oxide suppresses preadipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 culture.

Kawachi H(1), Moriya NH, Korai T, Tanaka SY, Watanabe M, Matsui T, Kawada T, Yano
H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Science, Division of Applied Biosciences, Graduate
School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.
hkawachi@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Nitric oxide (NO) is an important chemical messenger controlling many
physiological functions, involving cell proliferation, and differentiation. The
purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of NO on adipocyte
differentiation using a murine preadipocyte cell line, 3T3-L1. The treatment with
a NO donor, 1-hydroxy-2-oxo-3,3-bis(2-aminoethyl)-1-triazene (NOC18), reduced
some markers of adipocyte differentiation such as glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase activity, and intracellular lipid accumulation. To examine whether 
these effects of NOC18 on adipocyte differentiation markers are due to its
cytotoxity, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release from the cells were measured.
NOC18 did not affect LDH release into the culture medium. Thus, the suppressive
actions of NO donor were unlikely to result from its cytotoxicity. Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) gamma is a critical transcription factor
for adipocyte differentiation and adipocyte fatty acid binding protein (aP2) gene
is one of its targets. Protein expression of PPARgamma was not diminished by
NOC18 treatment, although mRNA expression of aP2 was reduced. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay showed that NOC18 interfered with the DNA binding activity
of PPARgamma. Therefore, the present experiment suggest that NO suppresses
adipocyte differentiation through suppressing the transcriptional activity of
PPARgamma, without suppressing its expression level.

PMID: 17541509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 8;26(51):7267-81. Epub 2007 May 21.

Comparative expression profiling identifies an in vivo target gene signature with
TFAP2B as a mediator of the survival function of PAX3/FKHR.

Ebauer M(1), Wachtel M, Niggli FK, Schäfer BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.

The chromosomal translocation t(2;13), characteristic for the aggressive
childhood cancer alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS), generates the chimeric
transcription factor PAX3/FKHR with a well known oncogenic role. However, the
molecular mechanisms mediating essential pathophysiological functions remain
poorly defined. Here, we used comparative expression profiling of PAX3/FKHR
silencing in vitro and PAX3/FKHR-specific gene signatures in vivo to identify
physiologically important target genes. Hereby, 51 activated genes, both novel
and known, were identified. We also found repression of skeletal muscle-specific 
genes suggesting that PAX3/FKHR blocks further differentiation of aRMS cells.
Importantly, TFAP2B was validated as direct target gene mediating the
anti-apoptotic function of PAX3/FKHR. Hence, we developed a pathophysiologically 
relevant transcriptional profile of PAX3/FKHR and identified a critical target
gene for aRMS development.

PMID: 17525748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncogene. 2007 Nov 15;26(52):7346-54. Epub 2007 May 21.

AP-2 regulates the transcription of estrogen receptor (ER)-beta by acting through
a methylation hotspot of the 0N promoter in prostate cancer cells.

Zhang X(1), Leung YK, Ho SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0056, USA.

We reported previously that the loss of expression of estrogen receptor (ER)-beta
during the development of prostate cancer (PCa) is associated with methylation of
a CpG island located in the 5'-flanking sequence of the 0N promoter. Three
methylation hotspots, referred to as centers 1, 2 and 3, were identified in the
CpG island. In this study, we demonstrated that a 581-bp region with these three 
centers within it is sufficient for the promoter activity in PCa cells. Deletion 
analyses indicated that center 1 (16 bp), with a putative activator protein-2
(AP-2) binding site, is essential for gene transactivation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that AP-2alpha occupies a short sequence
containing center 1. Forced expression of AP-2alpha or -2gamma, but not -2beta,
increased activity of the ERbeta 0N promoter and the accumulation of mRNA.
Conversely, siRNA-mediated AP-2alpha and -2gamma knockdown reduced levels of
ERbeta transcript and promoter activity. Quantitative reverse transcription-PCR
showed that AP-2alpha and -2gamma are the predominant transcripts expressed in
PCa cells, and levels of ERbeta transcript correlate with levels of these AP-2
transcripts among different PCa cell lines. These results provide the first
evidence that ERbeta is an AP-2-regulated gene. They also support the hypothesis 
that certain cis-acting elements are methylation hotspots susceptible to
epigenetic modifications during cancer progression.

PMID: 17525739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Cancer Ther. 2007 May;6(5):1650-60.

Rad51 overexpression contributes to chemoresistance in human soft tissue sarcoma 
cells: a role for p53/activator protein 2 transcriptional regulation.

Hannay JA(1), Liu J, Zhu QS, Bolshakov SV, Li L, Pisters PW, Lazar AJ, Yu D,
Pollock RE, Lev D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We investigated whether Rad51 overexpression plays a role in soft tissue sarcoma 
(STS) chemoresistance as well as the regulatory mechanisms underlying its
expression. The studies reported here show that Rad51 protein is overexpressed in
a large panel of human STS specimens. Human STS cell lines showed increased Rad51
protein expression, as was also observed in nude rat STS xenografts. STS cells
treated with doxorubicin exhibited up-regulation of Rad51 protein while arrested 
in the S-G(2) phase of the cell cycle. Treatment with anti-Rad51 small
interfering RNA decreased Rad51 protein expression and increased chemosensitivity
to doxorubicin. Because we previously showed that reintroduction of wild-type p53
(wtp53) into STS cells harboring a p53 mutation led to increased doxorubicin
chemosensitivity, we hypothesized that p53 participates in regulating Rad51
expression in STS. Reintroduction of wtp53 into STS cell lines resulted in
decreased Rad51 protein and mRNA expression. Using luciferase reporter assays, we
showed that reconstitution of wtp53 function decreased Rad51 promoter activity.
Deletion constructs identified a specific Rad51 promoter region containing a
p53-responsive element but no p53 consensus binding site. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays verified activator protein 2 (AP2) binding to this region
and increased AP2 binding to the promoter in the presence of wtp53. Mutating this
AP2 binding site eliminated the wtp53 repressive effect. Furthermore, AP2
knockdown resulted in increased Rad51 expression. In light of the importance of
Rad51 in modulating STS chemoresistance, these findings point to a potential
novel strategy for molecular-based treatments that may be of relevance to
patients burdened by STS.

PMID: 17513613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cancer Res. 2007 May;5(5):485-96.

Src induces urokinase receptor gene expression and invasion/intravasation via
activator protein-1/p-c-Jun in colorectal cancer.

Leupold JH(1), Asangani I, Maurer GD, Lengyel E, Post S, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery Mannheim Faculty, University of Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The urokinase receptor [urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (u-PAR)]
promotes invasion and metastasis and is associated with poor patient survival.
Recently, it was shown that Src induces u-PAR gene expression via Sp1 bound to
the u-PAR promoter region -152/-135. However, u-PAR is regulated by diverse
promoter motifs, among them being an essential activator protein-1 (AP-1) motif
at -190/-171. Moreover, an in vivo relevance of Src-induced transcriptional
regulators of u-PAR-mediated invasion, in particular intravasation, and a
relevance in resected patient tumors have not sufficiently been shown. The
present study was conducted (a) to investigate if, in particular, AP-1-related
transcriptional mediators are required for Src-induced u-PAR-gene expression, (b)
to show in vivo relevance of AP-1-mediated Src-induced u-PAR gene expression for 
invasion/intravasation and for resected tissues from colorectal cancer patients. 
Src stimulation of the u-PAR promoter deleted for AP-1 region -190/-171 was
reduced as compared with the wild-type promoter in cultured colon cancer cells.
In gelshifts/chromatin immunoprecipitation, Src-transfected SW480 cells showed an
increase of phospho-c-Jun, in addition to JunD and Fra-1, bound to region
-190/-171. Src-transfected cells showed a significant increase in c-Jun
phosphorylated at Ser(73) and also Ser(63), which was paralleled by increased
phospho-c-jun-NH(2)-kinase. Significant decreases of invasion/in vivo
intravasation (chorionallantoic membrane model) were observed in
Src-overexpressing cells treated with Src inhibitors, u-PAR-small interfering
RNA, and dominant negative c-Jun (TAM67). In resected tissues of 20 colorectal
cancer patients, a significant correlation between Src activity, AP-1 complexes
bound to u-PAR region -190/-171, and advanced pN stage were observed. These data 
suggest that Src-induced u-PAR gene expression and invasion/intravasation in vivo
is also mediated via AP-1 region -190/-171, especially bound with c-Jun
phosphorylated at Ser(73/63), and that this pathway is biologically relevant for 
colorectal cancer patients, suggesting therapeutic potential.

PMID: 17510314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 4;26(45):6560-5. Epub 2007 May 7.

Hypomethylation of WNT5A, CRIP1 and S100P in prostate cancer.

Wang Q(1), Williamson M, Bott S, Brookman-Amissah N, Freeman A, Nariculam J,
Hubank MJ, Ahmed A, Masters JR.

Author information: 
(1)Prostate Cancer Research Centre, Institute of Urology and Nephrology,
University College London, and Department of Histopathology, University College
London Hospitals Trust, UK.

Oligoarray analysis of a matched pair of prostate cancer and normal cell lines
derived from the same radical prostatectomy specimen identified 113 candidate
hypomethylated genes that were overexpressed in the cancer cells and contained
CpG islands. Hypomethylation of wingless-related MMTV integration site 5A
(WNT5A), S100 calcium-binding protein P (S100P) and cysteine-rich protein
1(CRIP1) was confirmed in the cancer cells by bisulfite sequencing. Treatment of 
the corresponding normal prostate epithelial cells 1542-NPTX with the DNA
methyltransferase inhibitor 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) induced higher
levels of mRNA expression and partial loss of methylation on these genes. Primary
prostate cancers were tested using methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction. WNT5A was hypomethylated in 11/17 (65%) tumors, S100P in 8/16 (50%) and
CRIP1 in 13/20 (65%). Bisulfite sequencing of a section of the 5' untranslated
region (UTR) of WNT5A revealed that three CpG sites (15, 24 and 35) were
consistently methylated (93%) in the normal cell line and normal tissues, but not
in the prostate cancer cell line and eight primary prostate cancers. Multiple
putative binding sites for the transcription factors SP1 and AP-2 were found
adjacent to CpG sites 15 and 24. A putative c-Myb binding site was located within
the CpG site 35. Anti-c-Myb antibody co-precipitation with WNT5A was
methylation-sensitive in 1542-NPTX cells. It is likely that an epigenetic
mechanism regulates WNT5A expression in prostate cancer.

PMID: 17486081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Mar;6(3):413-8. Epub 2007 Mar 28.

Shift in AP-2alpha localization characterizes astrocytoma progression.

Britto R(1), Umesh S, Hegde AS, Hegde S, Santosh V, Chandramouli BA, Somasundaram
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India.

Activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) has been shown to be lost in the advanced
stages of many cancers, including gliomas. In this study, we wanted to analyze
the expression of AP-2alpha in astrocytoma samples of different grades both at
the RNA level, by real-time qPCR and at the protein level, by
immunohistochemistry, and to examine its correlation, if any, with patient
outcome. Five Grade I, 14 Grade II, 18 Grade III, 72 Grade IV samples and 13
normal brain controls were included. We did not find any clear pattern of
regulation at the RNA level with tumor grade. The RNA expression levels however, 
correlated to a large extent with the nuclear AP-2alpha staining in these samples
(72.09%; 31/43). Further, we did not find a complete loss of nuclear AP-2alpha
expression in the higher grades, in contrast to previous reports. Interestingly, 
we found cytoplasmic AP-2alpha expression in a majority of higher grade
astrocytomas (Grade IV-85%; 33/39 and Grade III-74%; 14/19) in comparison to
lower grades (Grade I-0%; 0/5 and Grade II-37.5%; 3/8) suggesting that the
translocation of this protein from the nucleus to the cytoplasm may be
responsible for the increased malignancy. The nuclear expression in these grades 
was found to be concomitantly reduced. Within GBMs, we found that decreased
nuclear expression was indicative of a better prognosis. The striking observation
was the shift in localization of this protein from the nucleus to the cytoplasm
with increasing tumor grade, pointing to a crucial role for this transcription
factor in the progression of astrocytomas.

PMID: 17471019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr 27;5:17.

Global gene expression analysis and regulation of the principal genes expressed
in bovine placenta in relation to the transcription factor AP-2 family.

Ushizawa K(1), Takahashi T, Hosoe M, Ishiwata H, Kaneyama K, Kizaki K, Hashizume 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology Research Unit, Division of Animal Sciences, National
Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 2 Ikenodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
ushizawa@affrc.go.jp

BACKGROUND: Cell-cell communication is an important factor in feto-maternal units
during placentogenesis. The placenta produces pivotal hormones and cytokines for 
communication between cotyledonary villi and the maternal caruncle. Gene
expression in bovine placenta throughout pregnancy was comprehensively screened
by a cDNA microarray, and we searched for a common transcription factor in a gene
cluster that showed increasing expression throughout gestation in cotyledonary
villi and caruncle.
METHODS: Placentomal tissues (villi and caruncle) were collected from Day 25 to
Day 250 of gestation for microarray analysis. Global gene expression profiles
were analyzed using the k-means clustering method. A consensus sequence
cis-element that may control up-regulated genes in a characteristic cluster was
examined in silico. The quantitative expression and localization of a specific
transcription factor were investigated in each tissue using quantitative
real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: The microarray expression profiles were classified into ten clusters.
The genes with most markedly increased expression became concentrated in cluster 
2 as gestation proceeded. Cluster 2 included placental lactogen (CSH1),
pregnancy-associated glycoprotein-1 (PAG1), and sulfotransferase family 1E
estrogen-preferring member 1 (SULT1E1), which were mainly detected in giant
trophoblast binucleate cells (BNC). Consensus sequence analysis identified
transcription factor AP-2 binding sites in some genes in this cluster.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis confirmed that high level expression of
transcription factor AP-2 alpha (TFAP2A) was common to cluster 2 genes during
gestation. In contrast, the expression level of another AP-2 family gene,
transcription factor AP-2 beta (TFAP2B), was extremely low over the same period. 
Another gene of the family, transcription factor AP-2 gamma (TFAP2C), was
expressed at medium level compared with TFAP2A and TFAP2B. In situ hybridization 
showed that TFAP2A, TFAP2B and TFAP2C mRNAs were localized in trophoblast cells
but were expressed by different cells. TFAP2A was expressed in cotyledonary
epithelial cells including BNC, TFAP2B was specifically expressed in BNC, and
TFAP2C in mononucleate cells.
CONCLUSION: We detected gestational-stage-specific gene expression profiles in
bovine placentomes using a combination of microarray and in silico analysis. In
silico analysis indicated that the AP-2 family may be a consensus regulator for
the gene cluster that characteristically appears in bovine placenta as gestation 
progresses. In particular, TFAP2A and TFAP2B may be involved in regulating
binucleate cell-specific genes such as CSH1, some PAG or SULT1E1. These results
suggest that the AP-2 family is a specific transcription factor for clusters of
crucial placental genes. This is the first evidence that TFAP2A may regulate the 
differentiation and specific functions of BNC in bovine placenta.

PMCID: PMC1867817
PMID: 17462098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Dec 28;64 Suppl 9:244-8.

[Role of TFAP2B and Wnt5B in adipose tissue].

[Article in Japanese]

Maegawa H(1), Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science.

PMID: 17458225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Jun 20;502(6):1047-65.

Molecular heterogeneity of developing retinal ganglion and amacrine cells
revealed through single cell gene expression profiling.

Trimarchi JM(1), Stadler MB, Roska B, Billings N, Sun B, Bartch B, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

During development of the central nervous system (CNS), cycling uncommitted
progenitor cells give rise to a variety of distinct neuronal and glial cell
types. As these different cell types are born they progress from newly specified 
cells to fully differentiated neurons and glia. In order to define the
developmental processes of individual cell types, single cell expression
profiling was carried out on developing ganglion and amacrine cells of the murine
retina. Individual cells from multiple developmental stages were isolated and
profiled on Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays. Two-color fluorescent in situ
hybridization on dissociated retinas was used to verify and extend the microarray
results by allowing quantitative measurements of a large number of cells
coexpressing two genes. Together, these experiments have yielded an expanded view
of the processes underway in developing retinal ganglion and amacrine cells, as
well as several hundred new marker genes for these cell types. In addition, this 
study has allowed for the definition of some of the molecular heterogeneity both 
between developing ganglion and amacrine cells and among subclasses of each cell 
type.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17444492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Urol. 2007 May;177(5):1900-6.

Adenoviral mediated interferon-alpha 2b gene therapy suppresses the
pro-angiogenic effect of vascular endothelial growth factor in superficial
bladder cancer.

Adam L(1), Black PC, Kassouf W, Eve B, McConkey D, Munsell MF, Benedict WF,
Dinney CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. ladam@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: Intravesical adenovirus mediated interferon-alpha gene transfer has a
potent therapeutic effect against superficial human bladder carcinoma xenografts 
growing in the bladder of athymic nude mice. We determined whether the inhibition
of angiogenesis might contribute to the antitumor effect.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We treated several human urothelial carcinoma cells with
adenovirus mediated interferon-alpha 2b and monitored its effects on the
production of angiogenic factors using real-time reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction, Western blotting, and immunohistochemical analysis and a gel
shift based transcription factor array. To assess the role of adenovirus mediated
interferon 2b in angiogenic activity we used in vitro invasion assays and
evaluated the anti-angiogenic effects of adenovirus mediated interferon gene
therapy in an orthotopic murine model of human superficial bladder cancer.
RESULTS: In adenovirus mediated interferon-alpha infected 253J B-V cells vascular
endothelial growth factor was decreased and anti-angiogenic interferon-gamma
inducible protein 10 was up-regulated. In contrast, the addition of as much as
100,000 IU recombinant interferon had no apparent effect on vascular endothelial 
growth factor production. Conditioned medium derived from adenovirus mediated
interferon 2b infected 253J B-V cells greatly decreased the invasive potential of
human endothelial cells and down-regulated their matrix metalloproteinase 2
expression compared to controls. Furthermore, adenovirus mediated interferon 2b
blocked pro-angiogenic nuclear signals, such as the transcription factors
activating protein-1 and 2, stimulating protein-1, nuclear factor kappaB and
c-myb. In vivo experiments revealed significant vascular endothelial growth
factor down-regulation and decreased tumor vessel density in the adenovirus
mediated interferon 2b treated group compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment with adenovirus mediated interferon 2b increases the
angiostatic activity of the bladder cancer microenvironment. This inhibition may 
prove beneficial for treating superficial bladder cancer with adenovirus mediated
interferon-alpha and hopefully contribute to a decreased recurrence rate of this 
neoplasm.

PMID: 17437845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mod Pathol. 2007 Apr;20(4):416-26.

Mcl-1, Bcl-XL and Stat3 expression are associated with progression of melanoma
whereas Bcl-2, AP-2 and MITF levels decrease during progression of melanoma.

Zhuang L(1), Lee CS, Scolyer RA, McCarthy SW, Zhang XD, Thompson JF, Hersey P.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Sydney,
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Members of the Bcl-2 family of antiapoptotic proteins (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL and Mcl-1)
are key regulators of apoptosis. The purpose of the present study was to examine 
and better define the role of Bcl-2, Bcl-XL and Mcl-1 in the progression of
melanoma. Immunohistochemical staining for Bcl-2, Bcl-XL and Mcl-1 was performed 
on paraffin sections of 100 cases of benign nevi, primary melanoma and metastatic
melanoma. Expression was correlated with histopathologic features, clinical
progress and expression of transcription factors (AP-2, MITF and p-Stat3). Bcl-2 
was expressed in 100% of benign nevi and thin melanoma (<or=1.0 mm) but was less 
in thick melanoma (>1.0 mm) (88%), subcutaneous (62%) and lymph node metastases
(35%). In contrast, Bcl-XL and Mcl-1 were expressed at lower levels in nevi and
thin melanoma compared to Bcl-2 but their expression was much higher in thick
melanoma and in subcutaneous and lymph node metastases (P<0.0001). Bcl-2
expression was negatively associated with tumor thickness (P<0.05) but Bcl-XL
expression increased with increasing tumor thickness (P<0.05) and dermal tumor
mitotic rate (P<0.05). Similarly Mcl-1 expression increased with increasing tumor
thickness (P<0.09) and dermal tumor mitotic rate (P<0.17). Bcl-2 expression was
positively correlated with expression of the transcription factors microphthalmia
transcription factor (MITF) and nuclear AP-2 whereas Bcl-XL (and Mcl-1)
expression were positively correlated with p-Stat3. This study is the first to
show a clear dissociation between changes in Bcl-2 expression (downregulation)
and Bcl-XL, Mcl-1 expression (upregulation) during progression of melanoma. The
results were also consistent with a role for AP-2 and MITF in regulation of Bcl-2
and pStat3 in regulation of Bcl-XL. These findings have important implications
for the development of treatments targeting antiapoptotic proteins in patients
with melanoma.

PMID: 17384650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 May 30;270(1-2):17-22. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Tigogenin inhibits adipocytic differentiation and induces osteoblastic
differentiation in mouse bone marrow stromal cells.

Zhou H(1), Yang X, Wang N, Zhang Y, Cai G.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Division, Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University,
Shenzhen 518055, PR China.

We investigated the effect of tigogenin on adipocytic and osteoblastic
differentiation in mouse bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs). Tigogenin enhanced
the proliferation of BMSCs significantly. Tigogenin treatment reduced the
adipogenic induction of lipid accumulation, visfatin secretion, and the
expressions of peroxisome proliferation-activated receptor (PPAR)gamma2 and
adipocyte fatty acid-binding protein (ap)2. Moreover, tigogenin had no effect on 
the mitotic clonal expansion. On the other hand, tigogenin significantly elevated
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity and the expressions of Cbfa1, collagen type I
(COL I) and osteocalcin (OCN), as well as the content of matrix calcium in BMSCs.
Further, SB-203580 antagonized the tigogenin-promoted osteogenesis. These
observations suggested that tigogenin may modulate differentiation of BMSCs to
cause a lineage shift away from the adipocytes and toward the osteoblasts, which 
is at least mediated by inhibition of PPARgamma and via p38 MAPK pathway, and is 
a potential drug preventing the development of osteoporosis and the related
disorders.

PMID: 17363141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biochem J. 2007 Jul 1;405(1):131-7.

PPARalpha and AP-2alpha regulate bombesin receptor subtype 3 expression in
ozone-stressed bronchial epithelial cells.

Tan YR(1), Qin XQ, Xiang Y, Yang T, Qu F, Wang Y, Liu HJ, Weber HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha 410078, Hunan, China.

Previously, we found that bombesin receptor subtype 3 (BRS-3) significantly
increased in an ozone-stressed airway hyperresponsiveness animal model and
resulted in induced wound repair and protection from acute lung injury. In the
present study, we determined molecular mechanisms of BRS-3 regulation in human
BECs (bronchial epithelial cells) in response to ozone stress. Ten
oligonucleotide probes corresponding to various regions of the BRS-3 promoter
were used in EMSA (electrophoretic mobilityshift assays). Four were found to have
an enhanced mobility shift with extracts from ozone-stressed cells. On the basis 
of the assay of mutated probes binding with extracts and antibody supershift,
they were verified as MTF-1 (metal-regulatory-element-binding transcription
factor-1), PPARalpha (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor alpha),
AP-2alpha (activator protein 2alpha) and HSF-1 (heat-shock factor 1). Next, ChIP 
(chromatin immunoprecipitation) assay, site-directed mutagenesis technology and
antisense oligonucleotide technology were used to observe these transcription
factors associated with the BRS-3 promoter. Only AP-2alpha and PPARalpha
increased ozone-inducible DNA binding on the BRS-3 promoter and BRS-3 expression.
The time courses of AP-2alpha and PPARalpha activation, followed by BRS-3
expression, were also examined. It was shown that ozone-inducible BRS-3
expression and AP-2alpha- and PPARalpha-binding activity correlated over a 48 h
period. The translocation of PPARalpha was observed by immunofluorescence assay, 
which showed that PPARalpha nuclear translocation increased after ozone exposure.
Our data suggest that AP-2alpha and PPARalpha may be especially involved in this 
ozone-inducible up-regulation mechanism of BRS-3 expression.

PMCID: PMC1925247
PMID: 17355223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Int J Cancer. 2007 May 15;120(10):2061-7.

Activator protein-2 in carcinogenesis with a special reference to breast
cancer--a mini review.

Pellikainen JM(1), Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Forensic Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Kuopio, FIN-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

Activator protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factors are involved in the regulation
of cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and carcinogenesis. AP-2alpha
has been suggested to function as a tumor suppressor in many cancers and
AP-2gamma to be a marker of testicular and germ cell malignancies. At least 3 of 
the 5 AP-2 family members identified to date, AP-2alpha, AP-2beta and AP-2gamma, 
are known to be expressed in breast tissue and thought to coordinate the growth
and development of the breast via regulation of several breast-related genes such
as human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) and estrogen receptor (ER).
The function of AP-2alpha seems to be tumor suppressive in breast tissue, whereas
the role of the other AP-2 family members is less well known. In this review, we 
summarize the current knowledge of AP-2 in carcinogenesis, especially in breast
cancer.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17330235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biochem Genet. 2007 Apr;45(3-4):245-53.

Polymorphism of the porcine leptin gene promoter and analysis of its association 
with gene expression and fatness traits.

Stachowiak M(1), Mackowski M, Madeja Z, Szydlowski M, Buszka A, Kaczmarek P,
Rubis B, Mackowiak P, Nowak KW, Switonski M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Agricultural University of Poznan,
Poznan, Poland.

We describe for the first time a 245 bp fragment of the porcine leptin gene
promoter in the proximity of the transcription start site. Altogether, 720 pigs
were screened with the PCR-SSCP technique for polymorphism in this region. Four
SNPs, segregating as two haplotypes, have been identified, one of them (C113G) in
the putative consensus site for the AP-2 transcription factor. This polymorphism 
was evenly distributed in the Duroc breed (n=21) and was absent in the Polish
Landrace (n=248) and Pietrain breed (n=12). In the Polish Large White (n=191) and
synthetic line 990 (n=243), allele G occurred with a very low frequency. The
investigation was performed to test if the C113G SNP affects leptin mRNA level in
subcutaneous fat and leptin protein concentration in serum. Additionally, the
effect of this polymorphism on fatness traits was statistically analyzed.
Although there was a trend toward decreased expression in GG animals, the
differences were not significant between genotypes. We also found no evidence for
an association of the LEP promoter genotype with the analyzed fatness traits.

PMID: 17318373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. EMBO Rep. 2007 Apr;8(4):394-400. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

Nucleophosmin acts as a novel AP2alpha-binding transcriptional corepressor during
cell differentiation.

Liu H(1), Tan BC, Tseng KH, Chuang CP, Yeh CW, Chen KD, Lee SC, Yung BY.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biochemistry Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology, Chang Gung
University, 259 Wen-Hwa 1st Road, Kwei-San, Tao-Yuan 333, Taiwan, Republic of
China.

Nucleophosmin (NPM) is an important nucleolar phosphoprotein with pleiotropic
functions in various cellular processes. In this study, we have further examined 
the largely uncharacterized role of NPM in transcriptional regulation by
uncovering novel NPM-binding transcriptional factors. Among potential
interactors, we found that activating protein transcription factor 2 (AP2)alpha
forms a complex with NPM during retinoic-acid-induced cell differentiation. We
show that this complex is recruited to the promoters of certain
retinoic-acid-responsive genes, including NPM itself. Such binding of AP2alpha,
and consequent recruitment of NPM, is selective and dependent on a consensus
AP2alpha-binding sequence. Remarkably, suppression of NPM by RNA interference
alleviates the repression of gene expression mediated by retinoic acid and
AP2alpha. Our findings further show that, on promoter binding, NPM probably
exerts its repressive effect by inducing a change in local chromatin structure
that also engages histone deacetylases. This study unveils a hitherto
unrecognized transcriptional corepressor function of the NPM protein, and
highlights a novel mechanism by which NPM regulates cell growth and
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1852768
PMID: 17318229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Feb 15;13(4):1123-32.

Analysis of specific transcriptional regulators as early predictors of
independent prognostic relevance in resected colorectal cancer.

Maurer GD(1), Leupold JH, Schewe DM, Biller T, Kates RE, Hornung HM, Lau-Werner
U, Post S, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular Oncology of Solid Tumors
(German Cancer Research Center), Mannheim Faculty University Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE: Prognostic studies on transcription factors acting at specific promoter 
elements have never been done so far. However, in tumors with long necessary
follow-up, such as colorectal cancer, early-risk predictors would be needed. The 
invasion-related gene u-PAR is regulated via an activator protein 2 (AP-2)/Sp1
(-152/-135) and an AP-1 binding promoter motif (-190/-171), mediating u-PAR
induction by K-Ras and Src. The present study was done to give first evidence for
early prognostic relevance of transcription factors differentially bound to the
u-PAR promoter, and their molecular inducers, in colorectal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Tumor/normal tissues of 92 prospectively followed (median = 
26.3 months) patients were analyzed for Src activity/protein, K-ras mutations,
and transcription factor binding to both u-PAR promoter motifs (in vivo gel
shift, kinase assay, and PCR).
RESULTS: Kaplan-Meier/Mantel-Cox analysis showed a significant correlation among 
elevated Sp1/Sp3 binding to region -152/-135 (P = 0.002 and P = 0.006), the
combinations of Sp1/AP-2 and Sp1/AP-1 binding to both motifs (P = 0.010 and P =
0.005), and Sp1 binding/high Src protein in tumors (P < 0.001), with poor
survival. Survival decreased with the number of bound transcription factors to
both motifs, with binding of three factors defining a high-risk group (P =
0.021). In multivariate analysis, elevated Sp1 binding, combinations of Sp1/AP-2 
binding and Sp1/AP-1 binding, or Sp1 binding/high Src were independent prognostic
variables; u-PAR expression itself being not yet prognostic. A first molecular
staging model (CART) was defined, providing novel early high-risk groups (mean
survival time as low as for non-curatively resected patients) from these
variables.
CONCLUSIONS: This study defines transcription factors acting at specific promoter
elements of an invasion-related gene, mediating specific signaling, as novel,
independent, early predictors of prognosis in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17317820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2007 Apr;134(7):1279-89. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Inca: a novel p21-activated kinase-associated protein required for cranial neural
crest development.

Luo T(1), Xu Y, Hoffman TL, Zhang T, Schilling T, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Inca (induced in neural crest by AP2) is a novel protein discovered in a
microarray screen for genes that are upregulated in Xenopus embryos by the
transcriptional activator protein Tfap2a. It has no significant similarity to any
known protein, but is conserved among vertebrates. In Xenopus, zebrafish and
mouse embryos, Inca is expressed predominantly in the premigratory and migrating 
neural crest (NC). Knockdown experiments in frog and fish using antisense
morpholinos reveal essential functions for Inca in a subset of NC cells that form
craniofacial cartilage. Cells lacking Inca migrate successfully but fail to
condense into skeletal primordia. Overexpression of Inca disrupts cortical actin 
and prevents formation of actin "purse strings", which are required for wound
healing in Xenopus embryos. We show that Inca physically interacts with
p21-activated kinase 5 (PAK5), a known regulator of the actin cytoskeleton that
is co-expressed with Inca in embryonic ectoderm, including in the NC. These
results suggest that Inca and PAK5 cooperate in restructuring cytoskeletal
organization and in the regulation of cell adhesion in the early embryo and in NC
cells during craniofacial development.

PMID: 17314132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Cancer. 2007 Feb 2;6:12.

Ovarian dysgerminomas are characterised by frequent KIT mutations and abundant
expression of pluripotency markers.

Hoei-Hansen CE(1), Kraggerud SM, Abeler VM, Kaern J, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Lothe
RA.

Author information: 
(1)University Dept. of Growth & Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen,
Denmark. chh@dadlnet.dk

BACKGROUND: Ovarian germ cell tumours (OGCTs) typically arise in young females
and their pathogenesis remains poorly understood. We investigated the origin of
malignant OGCTs and underlying molecular events in the development of the various
histological subtypes of this neoplasia.
RESULTS: We examined in situ expression of stem cell-related (NANOG, OCT-3/4,
KIT, AP-2gamma) and germ cell-specific proteins (MAGE-A4, NY-ESO-1, TSPY) using a
tissue microarray consisting of 60 OGCT tissue samples and eight ovarian small
cell carcinoma samples. Developmental pattern of expression of NANOG, TSPY,
NY-ESO-1 and MAGE-A4 was determined in foetal ovaries (gestational weeks 13-40). 
The molecular genetic part of our study included search for the presence of
Y-chromosome material by fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH), and
mutational analysis of the KIT oncogene (exon 17, codon 816), which is often
mutated in testicular GCTs, in a subset of tumour DNA samples. We detected a high
expression of transcription factors related to the embryonic stem cell-like
pluripotency and undifferentiated state in OGCTs, but not in small cell
carcinomas, supporting the view that the latter do not arise from a germ cell
progenitor. Bilateral OGCTs expressed more stem cell markers than unilateral
cases. However, KIT was mutated in 5/13 unilateral dysgerminomas, whereas all
bilateral dysgerminomas (n = 4) and all other histological types (n = 22) showed 
a wild type sequence. Furthermore, tissue from five phenotypic female patients
harbouring combined dysgerminoma/gonadoblastoma expressed TSPY and contained
Y-chromosome material as confirmed by FISH.
CONCLUSION: This study provides new data supporting two distinct but overlapping 
pathways in OGCT development; one involving spontaneous KIT mutation(s) leading
to increased survival and proliferation of undifferentiated oogonia, the other
related to presence of Y chromosome material and ensuing gonadal dysgenesis in
phenotypic females.

PMCID: PMC1797189
PMID: 17274819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Hum Reprod. 2007 Mar;13(3):141-8. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Histone acetylation and subcellular localization of chromosomal protein BRD4
during mouse oocyte meiosis and mitosis.

Nagashima T(1), Maruyama T, Furuya M, Kajitani T, Uchida H, Masuda H, Ono M,
Arase T, Ozato K, Yoshimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

Most specific and general transcription factors (TFs) become dissociated from
hypoacetylated mitotic chromosomes, which may contribute to transcriptional
silencing during mitosis. Only some chromosomal proteins, such as bromodomain
containing protein 4 (BRD4), have a potential to associate with mitotic
chromosomes in a histone acetylation-dependent manner. It remains to be fully
demonstrated whether similar displacement of nuclear factors takes place in
meiotic oocytes whose chromosomes become globally deacetylated. To address this, 
we here examined the subcellular localization of BRD4 in conjunction with the
acetylation status of histones in mouse oocytes. Immunofluorescence studies
revealed that BRD4 preferentially localized to mitotic chromosomes in early
embryos. In contrast, not only endogenous BRD4 but also exogenous BRD4
overexpressed by mRNA microinjection were displaced from meiotic chromosomes
whose histones H3 and H4 were deacetylated. Treatment with trichostatin A (TSA), 
an inhibitor of histone deacetylases, induced histone hyperacetylation of meiotic
chromosomes from which endogenous BRD4, however, remained dissociated. Finally,
meiotic chromosomal localization of BRD4 could be achieved by BRD4 overexpression
together with TSA-induced histone hyperacetylation. These results indicate that, 
unlike mitosis, histone acetylation is necessary but not sufficient for
chromosomal localization of BRD4 during meiosis, suggesting that meiotic oocytes 
may have additional mechanism(s) for displacement of chromosomal proteins and
TFs.

PMID: 17267518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):338-54. Epub 2006 Dec 23.

Redundant activities of Tfap2a and Tfap2c are required for neural crest induction
and development of other non-neural ectoderm derivatives in zebrafish embryos.

Li W(1), Cornell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Genetics, Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

A knockdown study suggested that transcription factor AP-2 alpha (Tfap2a) is
required for neural crest induction in frog embryos. However, because Tfap2a is
expressed in neural crest and in presumptive epidermis, a source of signals that 
induce neural crest, it was unclear whether this requirement is cell autonomous. 
Moreover, neural crest induction occurs normally in zebrafish tfap2a and mouse
Tcfap2a mutant embryos, so it was unclear if a requirement for Tfap2a in this
process has been evolutionarily conserved. Here we show that zebrafish tfap2c,
encoding AP-2 gamma (Tfap2c), is expressed in non-neural ectoderm including
transiently in neural crest. Inhibition of tfap2c with antisense oligonucleotides
does not visibly perturb development. However, simultaneous inhibition of tfap2a 
and tfap2c utterly prevents neural crest induction, supporting a conserved role
for Tfap2-type activity in neural crest induction. Transplant studies suggest
that this role is cell-autonomous. In addition, in tfap2a/tfap2c doubly deficient
embryos cranial placode derivatives are reduced, although gene expression
characteristic of pre-placodal domain is normal. Unexpectedly, Rohon-Beard
sensory neurons, which previous studies indicated are derived from the same
precursor population as neural crest, are reduced by less than half in such
embryos, implying a non-neural crest origin for a subset of them.

PMCID: PMC1904501
PMID: 17258188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 16;282(11):7961-72. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

Extracellular matrix fibronectin increases prostaglandin E2 receptor subtype EP4 
in lung carcinoma cells through multiple signaling pathways: the role of AP-2.

Han S(1), Ritzenthaler JD, Wingerd B, Rivera HN, Roman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.
shan2@emory.edu

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 15;286(28):25416.

We have previously demonstrated that fibronectin (Fn) stimulates the
proliferation of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell growth through the
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and prostaglandin E2 secretion. Here, we
demonstrate that NSCLC cells express mRNA and protein for the prostaglandin E2
receptor EP4 and that Fn enhances its stimulatory effect by inducing the
expression of EP4, but not of EP1, EP2, and EP3 receptor subtypes. The effect of 
Fn on EP4 was inhibited by an antibody against alpha5beta1 integrin and by
inhibitors of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (wortmannin) and extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (PD98095), but not by inhibitors of protein kinase C
(calphostin C), of protein kinase A (H-89), or of mammalian target of rapamycin
(rapamycin). A COX-2 small interfering RNA was also inhibitory. Fn significantly 
increased AP-2 binding activity in the promoter of the EP4 gene, and AP-2
antisense oligonucleotides blocked Fn-induced EP4 expression. Using full-length
and mutated EP4 promoter constructs, we found that Fn stimulation of EP4 gene
expression was inhibited when one AP-2 site (-1000 bp) was mutated. Fn induced
nuclear AP-2alpha protein expression through multiple signaling pathways. Our
results indicate that Fn-induced NSCLC cell proliferation is mediated through
EP4. Furthermore, they show that Fn induces EP4 expression through the activation
of alpha5beta1-dependent signals that include induction of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase and phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathways as well as
expression of COX-2. These events lead to activation of the transcription factor 
AP-2alpha, which interacts with specific regions in the EP4 gene promoter,
leading to transcription of the EP4 gene.

PMID: 17237224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. FEBS J. 2007 Jan;274(2):498-511.

All-trans-retinoic acid inhibits collapsin response mediator protein-2
transcriptional activity during SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell differentiation.

Fontán-Gabás L(1), Oliemuller E, Martínez-Irujo JJ, de Miguel C, Rouzaut A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Neurons are highly polarized cells composed of two structurally and functionally 
distinct parts, the axon and the dendrite. The establishment of this asymmetric
structure is a tightly regulated process. In fact, alterations in the proteins
involved in the configuration of the microtubule lattice are frequent in
neuro-oncologic diseases. One of these cytoplasmic mediators is the protein known
as collapsin response mediator protein-2, which interacts with and promotes
tubulin polymerization. In this study, we investigated collapsin response
mediator protein-2 transcriptional regulation during all-trans-retinoic
acid-induced differentiation of SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. All-trans-retinoic
acid is considered to be a potential preventive and therapeutic agent, and has
been extensively used to differentiate neuroblastoma cells in vitro. Therefore,
we first demonstrated that collapsin response mediator protein-2 mRNA levels are 
downregulated during the differentiation process. After completion of deletion
construct analysis and mutagenesis and mobility shift assays, we concluded that
collapsin response mediator protein-2 basal promoter activity is regulated by the
transcription factors AP-2 and Pax-3, whereas E2F, Sp1 and NeuroD1 seem not to
participate in its regulation. Furthermore, we finally established that reduced
expression of collapsin response mediator protein-2 after all-trans-retinoic acid
exposure is associated with impaired Pax-3 and AP-2 binding to their consensus
sequences in the collapsin response mediator protein-2 promoter. Decreased
attachment of AP-2 is a consequence of its accumulation in the cytoplasm. On the 
other hand, Pax-3 shows lower binding due to all-trans-retinoic acid-mediated
transcriptional repression. Unraveling the molecular mechanisms behind the action
of all-trans-retinoic acid on neuroblastoma cells may well offer new perspectives
for its clinical application.

PMID: 17229153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 14;26(28):4049-58. Epub 2007 Jan 15.

Loss of AP-2alpha results in deregulation of E-cadherin and MMP-9 and an increase
in tumorigenicity of colon cancer cells in vivo.

Schwartz B(1), Melnikova VO, Tellez C, Mourad-Zeidan A, Blehm K, Zhao YJ, McCarty
M, Adam L, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Activator protein-2 (AP-2) is a transcription factor that regulates proliferation
and differentiation in mammalian cells and has been implicated in the acquisition
of the metastatic phenotype in several types of cancer. Herein, we examine the
role of AP-2alpha in colon cancer progression. We provide evidence for the lack
of AP-2alpha expression in the late stages of colon cancer cells. Re-expression
of the AP-2alpha gene in the AP-2alpha-negative SW480 colon cancer cells
suppressed their tumorigenicity following orthotopic injection into the cecal
wall of nude mice. The inhibition of tumor growth could be attributed to the
increased expression of E-cadherin and decreased expression and activity of
matrix-metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) in the transfected cells, as well as a
substantial loss of their in vitro invasive properties. Conversely, targeting
constitutive expression of AP-2alpha in AP-2-positive KM12C colon cancer cells
with small interfering RNA resulted in an increase in their invasive potential,
downregulation of E-cadherin and increased expression of MMP-9. In SW480 cells,
re-expression of AP-2alpha resulted in a fourfold increase in the activity of
E-cadherin promoter, and a 5-14-fold decrease in the activity of MMP-9 promoter, 
indicating transcriptional regulation of these genes by AP-2alpha. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay showed that re-expressed AP-2alpha directly binds to
the promoter of E-cadherin, where it has been previously reported to act as a
transcriptional activator. Furthermore, chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
revealed AP-2alpha binding to the MMP-9 promoter, which ensued by decreased
binding of transcription factor Sp-1 and changes in the recruitment of
transcription factors to a distal AP-1 element, thus, contributing to the overall
downregulation of MMP-9 promoter activity. Collectively, our data provide
evidence that AP-2alpha acts as a tumor suppressor gene in colon cancer..

PMID: 17224907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Apr;21(4):948-62. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Transcriptional regulation of the cholesterol side chain cleavage cytochrome P450
gene (CYP11A1) revisited: binding of GATA, cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate
response element-binding protein and activating protein (AP)-1 proteins to a
distal novel cluster of cis-regulatory elements potentiates AP-2 and
steroidogenic factor-1-dependent gene expression in the rodent placenta and
ovary.

Sher N(1), Yivgi-Ohana N, Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Alexander Silberman Institute of Life 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

The first and key enzyme controlling the synthesis of steroid hormones is
cholesterol side chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (P450scc, CYP11A1). This study
sought to elucidate overlooked modes of regulation of P450scc transcription in
the rodent placenta and ovary. Transcription of P450scc requires two clusters of 
cis-regulatory elements: a proximal element (-40) known to bind either activating
protein 2 (AP-2) in the placenta, or steroidogenic factor 1 in the ovary, and a
distal region of the promoter (-475/-447) necessary for potentiation of the
AP-2/steroidogenic factor 1-dependent activity up to 7-fold. In primary cultures 
of mouse trophoblast giant cells and rat ovarian granulosa cells, binding of
trans-factors to the distal regulatory sequences generated transcriptional
activity in a tissue-specific pattern: in the placenta, cAMP response element
(CRE)-binding protein 1 (CREB-1) and GATA-2 binding generates promoter activity
in a cAMP-independent manner, whereas in ovarian cells, CREB-1 and GATA-4 are
required for FSH responsiveness. However, as ovarian follicles advance toward
ovulation, elevated Fra-2 expression replaces CREB-1 function by binding the same
CRE(1/2) motif. Our findings suggest that upon onset of follicular recruitment,
CREB-1 mediates FSH/cAMP signaling, which switches to cAMP-independent expression
of P450scc in luteinizing granulosa cells expressing Fra-2. In the placenta, the 
indispensable role of CREB-1 was demonstrated by use of dominant-negative CREB-1 
mutant, but neither cAMP nor Ser133 phosphorylation of CREB-1 is required for
P450scc transcription. These observations suggest that placental regulation of
P450scc expression is subjected to alternative signaling pathway(s) yet to be
found.

PMID: 17213386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Inform. 2007 Feb 9;3:65-92.

Identification and characterization of renal cell carcinoma gene markers.

Dalgin GS(1), Holloway DT, Liou LS, DeLisi C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology, Cell Biology and Biochemistry Program, Boston University,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Microarray gene expression profiling has been used to distinguish histological
subtypes of renal cell carcinoma (RCC), and consequently to identify specific
tumor markers. The analytical procedures currently in use find sets of genes
whose average differential expression across the two categories differ
significantly. In general each of the markers thus identified does not
distinguish tumor from normal with 100% accuracy, although the group as a whole
might be able to do so. For the purpose of developing a widely used economically 
viable diagnostic signature, however, large groups of genes are not likely to be 
useful. Here we use two different methods, one a support vector machine variant, 
and the other an exhaustive search, to reanalyze data previously generated in our
Lab (Lenburg et al. 2003). We identify 158 genes, each having an expression level
that is higher (lower) in every tumor sample than in any normal sample, and each 
having a minimum differential expression across the two categories at a
significance of 0.01. The set is highly enriched in cancer related genes (p = 1.6
x 10<U+207B>¹²), containing 43 genes previously associated with either RCC or other
types of cancer. Many of the biomarkers appear to be associated with the central 
alterations known to be required for cancer transformation. These include the
oncogenes JAZF1, AXL, ABL2; tumor suppressors RASD1, PTPRO, TFAP2A, CDKN1C; and
genes involved in proteolysis or cell-adhesion such as WASF2, and PAPPA.

PMCID: PMC2675843
PMID: 19455236  [PubMed]


71. J Surg Res. 2007 Mar;138(1):71-8. Epub 2006 Dec 20.

AP2 transcription factors regulate expression of CRABPII in hormone responsive
breast carcinoma.

McPherson LA(1), Woodfield GW, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: The AP2 transcription factor family is a set of developmentally
regulated, retinoic acid (RA) inducible genes, which regulate expression of
estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) in breast carcinoma. We hypothesized that AP2
factors regulate a set of genes characteristic of the hormone responsive breast
cancer phenotype. To better understand the role of AP2 factors in hormone
responsive breast cancer, we sought to identify AP2-target genes in breast
epithelial cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Overexpression of AP2 factors was achieved in human
mammary epithelial cells (HMECs) using adenoviral vectors. AP2 target genes were 
identified by comparative hybridization to cDNA microarrays containing 30,000
human genes. Expression patterns were confirmed by Northern and Western blot and 
by elimination of AP2 using siRNA. Potential regulatory elements in promoters of 
target genes were identified by DNase I hypersensitive site mapping.
RESULTS: Comparative cDNA microarray hybridization identified a set of genes
induced by overexpression of AP2alpha and AP2gamma in HMECs. The up-regulation of
cellular retinoic acid-binding protein 2 (CRABPII), EST-1, and ECM1 was induced
by overexpression of AP2alpha, AP2gamma, or a chimeric AP2 factor in which the
activation domain of AP2alpha was replaced by the activation domain of
herpesvirus VP16. Interestingly, hormone unresponsive MDA-MB-231 cells were
resistant to CRABPII induction by any of the AP2 factors. Elimination of AP2gamma
in MCF7 cells resulted in a significant reduction in CRABPII expression. AP2alpha
induced DNase I hypersensitive sites in the promoter of the CRABPII gene at -5000
bp, which corresponds to the site of action of RAR/RXR factors.
CONCLUSIONS: AP2 factors regulate CRABPII expression in HMECs and breast cancer
cells and accounts for the associated expression of ERalpha and CRABPII in
hormone responsive breast cancer. Because CRABPII mediates growth suppressive
effects of RA in breast cancer, the data suggest that AP2 factors have the
ability to mediate RA responsiveness through the regulation of CRABP II
expression.

PMID: 17187826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Eur J Med Genet. 2007 Mar-Apr;50(2):103-11. Epub 2006 Nov 23.

Pure partial trisomy of 6p12.1-p22.1 secondary to a familial 12/6 insertion in
two malformed babies.

Fogu G(1), Bandiera P, Cambosu F, Carta AR, Pilo L, Serra G, Soro G, Tondi M,
Tusacciu G, Montella A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetics, Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari,
Viale S. Pietro 43/C, 07100 Sassari, Italy. gfogu@uniss.it

We describe two malformed infants with trisomy 6p12.1-p22.1 due to 12/6
interchromosomal insertion. The phenotypic data observed in these patients are
compared chiefly with a case cytogenetically similar described by Villa et al.
[A. Villa, E.G. Gomez, L. Rodriguez, R.H. Rastrollo, M.E. Martinez Tallo, M.L.
Martinez-Frias, Interstitial tandem duplication of 6p: a case with partial
trisomy (6)(p12p21.3), Am. J. Med. Genet. 90 (2000) 369-375]. All three infants
are trisomic for a genomic segment which largely overlaps that reported as
duplicated in previous cases, but with the addition of a more proximal segment,
extending from 6p12 to 6p21. We suggest that some of their phenotypic anomalies
are due to the trisomy of this chromosomal region. We also speculate on the
possible role played by the TFAP2B (Transcription Factor AP2-beta) gene, which is
one of the genes mapped on the duplicated segment.

PMID: 17185054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Apr;292(4):C1305-12. Epub 2006 Nov 29.

Regulation of the human biotin transporter hSMVT promoter by KLF-4 and AP-2:
confirmation of promoter activity in vivo.

Reidling JC(1), Said HM.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Long Beach, CA 90822, USA.

The mechanism of biotin uptake in human intestine has been well characterized and
involves the human sodium-dependent multivitamin transporter (hSMVT), yet little 
is known about the molecular/transcriptional regulation of the system. Previous
investigations cloned the 5' regulatory region of the hSMVT gene and identified
the minimal promoter. To expand these investigations, we compared activity of the
hSMVT promoter in three human intestinal epithelial cell lines (NCM460, Caco-2,
and HuTu-80) and contrasted a renal epithelial cell line (HEK-293). We analyzed
the role of putative cis-elements in regulating promoter activity and confirmed
activity of the cloned hSMVT promoter in vivo. In vitro studies demonstrated that
all cell lines utilized the same minimal promoter region, and mutation of
specific cis-regulatory elements [Kruppel-like factor 4 (KLF-4) and activator
protein-2 (AP-2)] led to a decrease in promoter activity in all intestinal cell
types but not in renal cells. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we
identified two specific DNA/protein complexes. Using oligonucleotide competition 
and antibody supershift analysis, we determined that KLF-4 and AP-2 were involved
in forming the complexes. In HEK-293 cells, overexpressing KLF-4 increased the
endogenous hSMVT message levels threefold and activated a cotransfected hSMVT
promoter-reporter construct. In vivo studies using hSMVT promoter-luciferase
transgenic mice established physiological relevance and showed the pattern of
hSMVT promoter expression to be similar to endogenous mouse SMVT mRNA expression.
The results demonstrate, for the first time, the importance of KLF-4 and AP-2 in 
regulating the activity of the hSMVT promoter in the intestine and provide direct
in vivo confirmation of hSMVT promoter activity.

PMID: 17135299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Front Biosci. 2007 Jan 1;12:1699-706.

Identification of genes differentially regulated by transcription factor,
AP-2delta.

Sun L(1), Huang S, Wu Q, Gu S, Fu X, Yu K, Lu F, Ji C, Feng C, Sun R, Xie Y, Mao 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China.

In an effort to better understand the transcriptional program regulated by
transcription factor, AP-2delta, we used cDNA microarray to evaluate the relative
expression of human genes in AD293 cells by exogenous expression of AP-2delta.
Microarray showed 29 genes that were up-regulated and 39 genes with a
down-regulated expression pattern. Among the identified genes were those encoding
transcription factors, signal transduction molecules, kinases, as well as genes
regulating cell growth, differentiation, and cell adhesion, a set of genes
suggested to be regulated by AP-2. The results of microarray was validated for
some regulated genes by real-time PCR analysis. These observations shed novel
insight into the mechanism of AP-2delta action and provide a range of target
genes for further investigation.

PMID: 17127415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Jan 16;411(3):233-7. Epub 2006 Nov 22.

Genes encoding for AP-2beta and the Serotonin Transporter are associated with the
Personality Character Spiritual Acceptance.

Nilsson KW(1), Damberg M, Ohrvik J, Leppert J, Lindström L, Anckarsäter H,
Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical Research, Uppsala University, Central Hospital Västerås
(1), SE-721 89 Västerås, Sweden. kent.nilsson@ltv.se

In several twin studies the relative contribution of genetic factors for
personality traits has amounted to figures between 40 and 60%. In the present
study we investigated to which degree polymorphisms in the 5-HTT and AP-2beta
genes are implicated in the neural processes involved in the formation of
Temperament and Character traits, as estimated by Cloninger's TCI. Considering
the background of previous reports, associations with the character
Self-Transcendence and its sub-scale Spiritual Acceptance in particular, were of 
interest. A stratified random sample of 200 individuals (total population=5173), 
matched for age, gender and risk behaviors, from volunteering 16- and 19-year-old
adolescents students in Sweden was investigated. Cloninger's TCI inventory was
used for investigation of temperament and character traits. Blood samples were
used for analyses of a promoter serotonin transporter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and
an intron 2 polymorphism in the transcription factor AP-2beta gene. Among boys
individuals with presence of the short 5-HTTLPR genotype showed lower scores,
whereas individuals with presence of the short AP-2beta genotype showed higher
scores of personality character Self-Transcendence and its sub-scale Spiritual
Acceptance. Among girls no effect of either genotype was found. Both among boys
and girls, significant interactive effects were found between 5-HTTLPR and
AP-2beta genotypes, with regard to Self-Transcendence and Spiritual acceptance.
Boys and girls with the combination of presence of the short 5-HTTLPR, and
homozygosity for the long AP-2beta genotype scored significantly lower on
Self-Transcendence and Spiritual Acceptance.

PMID: 17123722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Dec;47(12):5197-203.

Biological effects of thyrotropin receptor activation on human orbital
preadipocytes.

Zhang L(1), Baker G, Janus D, Paddon CA, Fuhrer D, Ludgate M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrine and Diabetes Sciences, School of Medicine, Cardiff
University, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: Thyrotropin receptor (TSHR) expression is upregulated in the orbits of
patients with Graves ophthalmopathy (GO), most of whom have TSHR-stimulating
antibodies. The authors investigated the biological effects of TSHR activation in
vitro in adipose tissue, the site of orbital TSHR expression.
METHODS: Activating mutant TSHR (TSHR*) or wild-type (WT) was introduced into
human orbital preadipocytes using retroviral vectors. Their proliferation
(Coulter counting), basal cAMP accumulation (radioimmunoassay), and spontaneous
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPARgamma)-induced adipogenesis
(quantitative oil red O staining) were assessed and compared with those of
nonmodified cells. QRT-PCR was used to measure transcripts of CCAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP)beta, PPARgamma, and lipoprotein lipase (LPL; early,
intermediate, and late markers of adipogenesis) and for uncoupling protein
(UCP)-1 (brown adipose tissue [BAT]).
RESULTS: Expression of TSHR* significantly inhibited the proliferation of
preadipocytes and produced an increase in unstimulated cAMP of 200% to 600%.
Basal lipid levels were significantly increased in TSHR* (127%-275%) compared
with nonmodified (100%) or WT-expressing (104%-187%) cells. This was accompanied 
by 2- to 10-fold increases in early-intermediate markers and UCP-1 transcripts
(2- to 8-fold); LPL was at the limit of detection. In nonmodified cells,
adipogenesis produced significant increases in transcripts of all markers,
including LPL (approximately 30-fold). This was not the case in TSHR*-expressing 
cells, which also displayed 67% to 84% reductions in lipid levels.
CONCLUSIONS: TSHR activation stimulates early differentiation (favoring BAT
formation?) but renders preadipocytes refractory to PPARgamma-induced
adipogenesis. In neither case did lipid-containing vacuoles accumulate,
suggesting that terminal stages of differentiation were inhibited.

PMCID: PMC1892592
PMID: 17122103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Plant Mol Biol. 2007 Feb;63(3):419-28. Epub 2006 Nov 11.

Isolation and functional characterization of the JcERF gene, a putative AP2/EREBP
domain-containing transcription factor, in the woody oil plant Jatropha curcas.

Tang M(1), Sun J, Liu Y, Chen F, Shen S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Photosynthesis & Environmental Molecular Physiology,
Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100093, P.R. China.

A cDNA clone, named JcERF, was isolated from Jatropha curcas seedlings (a woody
oil plant). It was classified as an ERF subfamily member based on multiple
sequence alignment and phylogenetic characterization. The deduced amino acid
sequences of the JcERF clone showed no significant sequence similarity with other
known ERF proteins except for the conserved AP2/EREBP DNA-binding domain.
Expression of the JcERF gene was rapidly induced upon salinity, drought, ethylene
and mechanical wounding treatments. No significant changes in the JcERF
expression were observed under ABA stress. Gel retardation assay revealed that
the JcERF protein could bind specifically to the GCC box as well as to the C/DRE 
motif. Also it can be inferred from the gel-shift that there is a possibility
that the near sequence of the GCC box has an important effect on the DNA-binding 
activity. In yeast, the JcERF protein specifically bound to the DRE sequence and 
activated the transcription of two reporter genes His3 and LacZ driven by the DRE
sequence. When fused to the LexA DNA-binding domain, the full-length JcERF
functioned effectively as a trans-activator in the yeast one-hybrid assay.
Overexpression of JcERF cDNA in transgenic Arabidopsis enhanced the salt and
freezing tolerance. Meanwhile the seed germination of JcERF transgenic plants was
not affected by various concentrations ABA in MS medium. Taken together, the
results showed that JcERF functioned as a novel transcription factor and it
exhibited a mechanism of plant response to environmental factors like the other
AP2/EREBP regulons that also exist in tropical woody plants.

PMID: 17103014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. FEBS Lett. 2006 Nov 27;580(27):6501-8. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

ErbB2 overexpression in p53-inactivated mammary epithelial cells.

Yang JW(1), Lee EY, Kang KW.

Author information: 
(1)BK21 Project Team, College of Pharmacy, Chosun University, 375 Seosuk-dong,
Dong-gu, Gwangju 501-759, South Korea.

Functional loss of p53 and ErbB2 overexpression are the frequent genetic
alterations in human breast carcinomas. Here, we found that ErbB2 expression was 
upregulated in primary cultured mammary epithelial cells (MECs) isolated from
mice with a defect in exons 5 and 6 of the p53 gene (p53(Delta5,6)). The reporter
gene activity in the p53(Delta5,6) MECs transfected with the -756bp flanking
region of the hErbB2 gene was higher than the wild type MECs. p53 inactivation
selectively increased the level of AP-2alpha, but not AP-2beta and AP-2gamma and 
a mutation of the two AP-2 binding sites completely inhibited the reporter
activity.

PMID: 17101136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 29;351(4):1066-71. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

Glutathione peroxidase-1 inhibits UVA-induced AP-2alpha expression in human
keratinocytes.

Yu L(1), Venkataraman S, Coleman MC, Spitz DR, Wertz PW, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radical and Radiation Biology Program, Department of Radiation Oncology, 
Carver College of Medicine, and Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

In this study, we found a role for H(2)O(2) in UVA-induced AP-2alpha expression
in the HaCaT human keratinocyte cell line. UVA irradiation not only increased
AP-2alpha, but also caused accumulation of H(2)O(2) in the cell culture media,
and H(2)O(2) by itself could induce the expression of AP-2alpha. By catalyzing
the removal of H(2)O(2) from cells through over-expression of GPx-1, induction of
AP-2alpha expression by UVA was abolished. Induction of transcription factor
AP-2alpha by UVA had been previously shown to be mediated through the second
messenger ceramide. We found that not only UVA irradiation, but also H(2)O(2) by 
itself caused increases of ceramide in HaCaT cells, and C2-ceramide added to
cells induced the AP-2alpha signaling pathway. Finally, forced expression of
GPx-1 eliminated UVA-induced ceramide accumulation as well as AP-2alpha
expression. Taken together, these findings suggest that GPx-1 inhibits
UVA-induced AP-2alpha expression by suppressing the accumulation of H(2)O(2).

PMCID: PMC1913288
PMID: 17097614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;589:32-44.

Transcriptional regulation at the neural plate border.

Sargent TD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
sargentt@mail.nih.gov

PMID: 17076274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Science. 2006 Nov 10;314(5801):989-92. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

HTRA1 promoter polymorphism in wet age-related macular degeneration.

Dewan A(1), Liu M, Hartman S, Zhang SS, Liu DT, Zhao C, Tam PO, Chan WM, Lam DS, 
Snyder M, Barnstable C, Pang CP, Hoh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University, 60 College
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the most common cause of irreversible
vision loss in individuals aged older than 50 years, is classified as either wet 
(neovascular) or dry (nonneovascular). Inherited variation in the complement
factor H gene is a major risk factor for drusen in dry AMD. Here we report that a
single-nucleotide polymorphism in the promoter region of HTRA1, a serine protease
gene on chromosome 10q26, is a major genetic risk factor for wet AMD. A
whole-genome association mapping strategy was applied to a Chinese population,
yielding a P value of <10(-11). Individuals with the risk-associated genotype
were estimated to have a likelihood of developing wet AMD 10 times that of
individuals with the wild-type genotype.

PMID: 17053108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Nov 15;312(19):3782-95. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

Unraveling androgen receptor interactomes by an array-based method: discovery of 
proto-oncoprotein c-Rel as a negative regulator of androgen receptor.

Mukhopadhyay NK(1), Ferdinand AS, Mukhopadhyay L, Cinar B, Lutchman M, Richie JP,
Freeman MR, Liu BC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Urology Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. nishit.mukhopadhyay@childrens.harvard.edu
<nishit.mukhopadhyay@childrens.harvard.edu>

The androgen receptor (AR) plays a key role in the development and function of
male reproductive organs. Using a high-throughput transcription
factor-transcription factor (TF-TF) interaction array method, we captured the AR 
interactomes in androgen-responsive LNCaP cells. Several known and unknown
partners of AR, including AP-2, Pax 3/5 (BSAP), c-Rel, RREB-1, LIII BP, and NPAS2
were identified. We investigated one unreported AR-associated transcription
factor, the proto-oncoprotein c-Rel, in detail. C-Rel belongs to the NF-kB/Rel
families and is persistently active in a number of diseases, including cancer.
The presence of c-Rel transcript, protein, and its in vitro and in vivo
association with AR was determined. Co-localization of c-Rel with AR both in
cytoplasm and nucleus was confirmed by indirect immunofluorescence analysis.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation data indicated that c-Rel, like AR, is a part of
the nucleoprotein complex regulating the androgen-responsive prostate-specific
antigen (PSA) promoter. Overexpression of c-Rel downregulated the promoter
activity of both PSA and GRE4-TATA-Luc plasmids in LNCaP and COS cells. Analysis 
of AR and c-Rel protein levels indicated that the promoter downregulation was not
due to reciprocal decrease in the amounts of AR or c-Rel. In summary, we have
identified several new partners of AR by using the TF-TF array method and have
provided the first evidence of a functional role for c-Rel in androgen-responsive
human prostate cancer cells.

PMID: 17011549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2006 Oct;133(20):4015-24.

The bHLH transcription factor hand2 is essential for noradrenergic
differentiation of sympathetic neurons.

Lucas ME(1), Müller F, Rüdiger R, Henion PD, Rohrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Molecular, Cellular and Developmental
Biology Program, Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, 105
Rightmire Hall, 1060 Carmack Road, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Hand2, together with Ascl1,
Phox2a, Phox2b and Gata2/Gata3, is induced by bone morphogenetic proteins in
neural crest-derived precursor cells during sympathetic neuron generation. Hand2 
overexpression experiments and the analysis of its function at the Dbh promotor
implicated Hand2 in the control of noradrenergic gene expression. Using the
zebrafish hand2 deletion mutant hands off, we have now investigated the
physiological role of hand2 in the development of sympathetic ganglia. In hands
off mutant embryos, sympathetic precursor cells aggregate to form normal
sympathetic ganglion primordia characterized by the expression of phox2b, phox2a 
and the achaete-scute family member zash1a/ascl1. The expression of the
noradrenergic marker genes th and dbh is strongly reduced, as well as the
transcription factors gata2 and tfap2a (Ap-2alpha). By contrast, generic neuronal
differentiation seems to be unaffected, as the expression of elavl3 (HuC) is not 
reduced in hands off sympathetic ganglia. These results demonstrate in vivo an
essential and selective function of hand2 for the noradrenergic differentiation
of sympathetic neurons, and implicates tfap2a and gata2 as downstream effectors.

PMID: 17008447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Thromb Haemost. 2006 Dec;4(12):2678-86. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Early growth response transcription factor EGR-1 regulates Galphaq gene in
megakaryocytic cells.

Jalagadugula G(1), Dhanasekaran DN, Kim S, Kunapuli SP, Rao AK.

Author information: 
(1)Sol Sherry Thrombosis Research Center, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

BACKGROUND: Galphaq (Gene GNAQ) plays a major role in platelet signal
transduction but little is known regarding its transcriptional regulation.
OBJECTIVES: We studied Galphaq promoter activity using luciferase reporter gene
assays in human erythroleukemia (HEL) cells treated with phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate (PMA) for 24 h to induce megakaryocytic transformation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: PMA-treated HEL cells showed enhanced Galphaq expression.
Reporter (luciferase) gene studies on 5' upstream construct (up to -116 bp from
ATG) revealed a negative regulatory site at -238/-202 and two positive sites at
-203/-138 and -1116/-731. The positive regulatory region -203/-138 contained
overlapping Sp1/AP-2/EGR-1 consensus sites. Gel shift studies on Galphaq
oligonucleotides 1 (-203/-175) and 2 (-174/-152) using HEL cell extracts
demonstrated protein binding that was due to early growth response factor EGR-1
at two sites. Mutations in either EGR-1 site markedly decreased the gene
activity, indicating functional relevance. Mutation of consensus E-Box motif
(-185/-180) had no effect. Reduction in the expression of endogenous EGR-1 with
antisense oligonucleotide to EGR-1 inhibited PMA-induced Galphaq transcription.
Correspondingly, Egr-1 deficient mouse platelets also showed approximately 50%
reduction in the Galphaq expression relative to wild-type platelets.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that Galphaq gene is regulated during
PMA-induced megakaryocytic differentiation by EGR-1, an early growth response
transcription factor that regulates a wide array of genes and plays a major role 
in diverse activities, including cell proliferation, differentiation and
apoptosis, and in vascular response to injury and atherosclerosis.

PMID: 16995904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Neurochem. 2006 Oct;99(1):119-33.

Molecular basis of neuroendocrine cell type-specific expression of the
chromogranin B gene: Crucial role of the transcription factors CREB, AP-2, Egr-1 
and Sp1.

Mahapatra NR(1), Mahata M, Ghosh S, Gayen JR, O'Connor DT, Mahata SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, California 92093-0838, USA.

The molecular basis of neuroendocrine-specific expression of chromogranin B gene 
(Chgb) has remained elusive. Utilizing wild-type and mutant Chgb
promoter/luciferase reporter constructs, this study established a crucial role
for the cAMP response element (CRE) box at -102/-95 bp in endocrine [rat
pheochromocytoma (chromaffin) cell line (PC12) and rat pituitary somatotrope cell
line (GC)] and neuronal [rat dorsal root ganglion/mouse neuroblastoma hybrid cell
line (F-11), cortical and hippocampal primary neurons] cells. Additionally,
G/C-rich domains at -134/-127, -125/-117 and -115/-110 bp played especially
important roles for endocrine-specific expression of the Chgb gene.
Co-transfection of expression plasmids for CREB, activator protein-2
(transcription factor) (AP-2), early growth response protein (transcription
factor) (Egr-1) or specificity protein 1 (transcription factor) (Sp1) with the
Chgb promoter constructs trans-activated expression of the Chgb gene. Nuclear
extracts from either PC12 or F-11 cells formed specific complexes with the Chgb
(-110/-87 bp) (CRE) oligonucleotide, which were either supershifted or disrupted 
by anti-CREB antibodies. In addition PC12 nuclear extracts also formed a specific
complex with a Chgb (-140/-104-bp) oligonucleotide containing three G/C-rich
regions, which was dose-dependently disrupted by anti-AP-2, anti-Egr-1 or
anti-Sp1 antibodies; indeed, any one of these three antibodies completely
abolished the complex, suggesting that all three factors bind the region
simultaneously, at least in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
documented the binding of the transcription factors CREB, AP-2, Egr-1 and Sp1 to 
the chromosomal Chgb gene promoter in vivo in PC12 cells within the context of
chromatin. We conclude that the neuroendocrine-specific expression of Chgb is
mediated by the CRE and G/C boxes in cis and the transcription factors CREB,
AP-2, Egr-1 and Sp1 in trans.

PMID: 16987240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Cell Sci. 2006 Oct 15;119(Pt 20):4235-46. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits independently of
AP-2 and ARH.

Maurer ME(1), Cooper JA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center, 1100 Fairview Avenue N, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis requires cargo-specific adaptor proteins that
recognize specific receptors and recruit them into coated pits. ARH [also called 
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) adaptor protein] serves as an adaptor for
LDLR endocytosis in liver. However, ARH is dispensable for LDL uptake by some
other cell types. Here, we show that the adaptor Dab2 plays a major role in LDLR 
internalization in HeLa cells and fibroblasts. Dab2 mediates internalization of
LDLRs but not transferrin receptors independently of ARH and the classic clathrin
adaptor AP-2. If Dab2 is absent, ARH can mediate LDLR endocytosis, but its action
requires AP-2. Furthermore, the rate of LDLR endocytosis is decreased when Dab2
is absent and Dab2, but not ARH, catalyzes the efficient clustering of LDLR into 
coated pits. Dab2 activity requires its binding to clathrin, LDLR and
phospholipids. Dab2 is also involved in moving LDLRs off filopodia. We suggest
that Dab2 is a cargo-specific endocytic adaptor protein, stably associating with 
phospholipids and clathrin to sort LDLR to nascent-coated pits, whereas ARH might
accelerate later steps in LDLR endocytosis in cooperation with AP-2.

PMID: 16984970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Histopathology. 2006 Oct;49(4):441-3.

Transcription factor AP-2 is expressed in human Schwann cell-derived tumours.

Harder A, Mautner VF, Friedrich RE, Harder T, Plagemann A, von Deimling A.

PMID: 16978215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 20;281(42):31245-53. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Transcription factor activating enhancer-binding protein-2beta. A negative
regulator of adiponectin gene expression.

Ikeda K(1), Maegawa H, Ugi S, Tao Y, Nishio Y, Tsukada S, Maeda S, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga, 520-2192 Japan.

We previously reported the association between the activating enhancer-binding
protein-2beta (AP-2beta) transcription factor gene and type 2 diabetes. This gene
is preferentially expressed in adipose tissue, and subjects with the
disease-susceptible allele of AP-2beta showed stronger expression in adipose
tissue than those without the susceptible allele. Furthermore, overexpression of 
AP-2beta leads to lipid accumulation by enhancing glucose transport and inducing 
insulin resistance in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. In this study we demonstrated that
overexpression of AP-2beta in 3T3-L1 adipocytes decreased the expression and
secretion of adiponectin and increased those of interleukin-6 (IL-6).
Interestingly, the effects of AP-2beta on the expressions of adiponectin and IL-6
and the mechanisms by which AP-2beta modulated their expressions were different. 
We found that the promoter activity of adiponectin gene was inhibited by AP-2beta
overexpression and enhanced by knockdown of endogenous AP-2beta, whereas IL-6 was
unaffected. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed the existence of
putative responsive elements for AP-2beta and NF-YA in human and mouse
adiponectin promoter regions, and mutation of this AP-2beta binding site
abolished the inhibitory effect of AP-2beta. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that AP-2beta and NF-YA competitively
bind to the same region of the adiponectin promoter. Our results clearly
demonstrated that AP-2beta directly inhibits adiponectin gene expression by
displacing NF-YA and binding to its promoter. We conclude that AP-2beta might
modulate the expression of adiponectin by directly inhibiting its transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 16954217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Feb;127(2):387-93. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

Quantitative analysis of melanocytic tissue array reveals inverse correlation
between activator protein-2alpha and protease-activated receptor-1 expression
during melanoma progression.

Tellez CS(1), Davis DW, Prieto VG, Gershenwald JE, Johnson MM, McCarty MF,
Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The identification of molecular markers of melanoma progression is needed to more
accurately stage and identify treatments for patients with malignant melanoma.
Previously, we demonstrated that loss of the activator protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha)
expression results in overexpression of the protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1)
in human melanoma cell lines. Here, we used a tissue microarray platform that
consisted of 64 melanocytic lesions, including dysplastic nevi (N=21), primary
melanoma (N=20), and metastatic melanoma (N=23). We analyzed the expression of
AP-2 and PAR-1 simultaneously by immunofluorescent microscopy with an automated
quantification laser scanning cytometer. AP-2 was highly expressed in normal
cutaneous melanocytes and dysplastic nevi but not in melanoma metastases. We
observed a significantly higher number of AP-2-positive cells in the dysplastic
nevi (P=0.0013) and primary melanoma (P=0.0023) compared to the metastatic
melanoma. In contrast, we observed a significantly higher percentage of
PAR-1-positive cells in the metastatic melanoma compared to dysplastic nevi
(P=0.0072) and primary melanoma (P=0.0138). Increased expression of PAR-1 in
metastatic melanomas contributes to tumor progression by modulating expression of
genes, such as IL-8, matrix metalloproteinase-2, vascular endothelial growth
factor, platelet-derived growth factor, and integrins. These findings support our
hypothesis that loss of AP-2 is a crucial event in the progression of human
melanoma and contributes to the acquisition of the metastatic phenotype via
upregulation of PAR-1.

PMID: 16946713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Circulation. 2006 Aug 29;114(9):912-20.

Short-term administration of a cell-permeable caveolin-1 peptide prevents the
development of monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular
hypertrophy.

Jasmin JF(1), Mercier I, Dupuis J, Tanowitz HB, Lisanti MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pa 19107, USA.

BACKGROUND: Caveolins (Cavs), the principal structural proteins of caveolar
microdomains, have been implicated in the development of pulmonary hypertension
(PH). Mice with homozygous deletion of the Cav-1 gene develop PH and right
ventricular hypertrophy (RVH). Reductions in pulmonary Cav-1 expression have been
shown in several animal models of PH and in patients with severe PH. Whether in
vivo modulation of Cav-1 expression could affect the development of PH and RVH
remains unknown. Therefore, we investigated the effect of in vivo administration 
of a Cav-1 mimetic peptide on the development of monocrotaline (MCT)-induced PH.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Thirty minutes after injection of saline or 60 mg/kg MCT,
rats were assigned to receive a daily injection of saline, a peptide
corresponding to the homeodomain of the Drosophila transcription factor
antennapedia (AP; 2.5 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1)), or a peptide consisting of the
Cav-1-scaffolding domain coupled to AP (AP-Cav; 2.5 mg x kg(-1) x d(-1)) for 2
weeks. MCT and MCT+AP rats developed PH with respective right ventricular
systolic pressures of 40.2 +/- 1.5 and 39.6 +/- 1.5 mm Hg. Administration of
AP-Cav to MCT rats significantly reduced the right ventricular systolic pressure 
to 30.1 +/- 1.3 mm Hg. MCT and MCT+AP rats also developed pulmonary artery medial
hypertrophy and RVH, which was normalized by administration of AP-Cav.
Mechanistically, the development of PH was associated with reduced expression of 
pulmonary Cav-1 and Cav-2, hyperactivation of the STAT3 signaling cascade, and
upregulation of cyclin D1 and D3 protein levels, all of which were prevented by
administration of AP-Cav.
CONCLUSIONS: Short-term administration of a Cav-based cell-permeable peptide to
MCT rats prevents the development of pulmonary artery medial hypertrophy, PH, and
RVH.

PMID: 16940204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Leukemia. 2006 Oct;20(10):1759-66. Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Jak3- and JNK-dependent vascular endothelial growth factor expression in
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Krejsgaard T(1), Vetter-Kauczok CS, Woetmann A, Lovato P, Labuda T, Eriksen KW,
Zhang Q, Becker JC, Ødum N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Molecular Biology and Physiology,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Biopsies from patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL) exhibit
stage-dependent increase in angiogenesis. However, the molecular mechanisms
responsible for the increased angiogenesis are unknown. Here we show that
malignant CTCL T cells spontaneously produce the potent angiogenic protein,
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Dermal infiltrates of CTCL lesions
show frequent and intense staining with anti-VEGF antibody, indicating a steady, 
high production of VEGF in vivo. Moreover, the VEGF production is associated with
constitutive activity of Janus kinase 3 (Jak3) and the c-Jun N-terminal kinases
(JNKs). Sp600125, an inhibitor of JNK activity and activator protein-1 (AP-1)
binding to the VEGF promoter, downregulates the VEGF production without affecting
Jak3 activity. Similarly, inhibitors of Jak3 inhibit the VEGF production without 
affecting JNK activity. Downregulation of Stat3 with small interfering RNA has no
effect, whereas curcumin, an inhibitor of both Jak3 and the JNKs, almost
completely blocks the VEGF production. In conclusion, we provide evidence of VEGF
production in CTCL, which is promoted by aberrant activation of Jak3 and the
JNKs. Inhibition of VEGF-inducing pathways or neutralization of VEGF itself could
represent novel therapeutic modalities in CTCL.

PMID: 16932349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Reprod. 2007 Jan;22(1):167-73. Epub 2006 Aug 18.

Towards a non-invasive method for early detection of testicular neoplasia in
semen samples by identification of fetal germ cell-specific markers.

Hoei-Hansen CE(1), Carlsen E, Jorgensen N, Leffers H, Skakkebaek NE, Rajpert-De
Meyts E.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. chh@dadlnet.dk

BACKGROUND: Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) originate from a common
precursor, carcinoma in situ (CIS). Diagnosis at the CIS stage is desirable as it
minimizes the necessary treatment. A detailed clinical evaluation of an approach 
to detect CIS cells in the ejaculate using primordial germ cell/gonocyte markers 
is presented.
METHODS: Immunocytological staining for AP-2gamma [and in some cases, OCT-3/4,
NANOG or placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP)] was performed in semen samples
from 294 infertile patients and 209 patients with TGCTs or other diseases.
RESULTS: Presence of AP-2gamma-stained cells was detected in 50% of participants 
with CIS and in 33.9% of TGCT patients before treatment (non-seminomas: 56.6%,
seminomas: 17.4%). OCT-3/4 results were similar to those of AP-2gamma, whereas
NANOG and PLAP stainings were unsuitable. Sensitivity was 54.5% for participants 
harbouring pre-invasive CIS but reduced in participants with overt TGCTs, perhaps
because of obstruction. Assay specificity was 93.6%, positive predictive value
(PPV) 83.3% and negative predictive value (NPV) 60.3%.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunocytological semen analysis based on expression of fetal germ
cell markers in exfoliated cells has auxiliary diagnostic value, as it detects
some patients with CIS/incipient tumour, but a negative result does not exclude
TGCT. Further effort is needed to improve this assay, for example, by employing a
more sensitive biochemical method of detection.

PMID: 16920726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Histopathology. 2006 Sep;49(3):290-7.

Diagnostic value of markers M2A, OCT3/4, AP-2gamma, PLAP and c-KIT in the
detection of extragonadal seminomas.

Biermann K(1), Klingmüller D, Koch A, Pietsch T, Schorle H, Büttner R, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of
Bonn, Germany. katharina.biermann@ukb.uni-bonn.de

AIMS: To compare the suitability of new seminoma markers including transcription 
factors AP-2gamma, OCT3/4 and M2A for detection of metastatic and extragonadal
seminomas with the two well-known markers c-KIT and PLAP.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The immunohistochemical distribution of PLAP, c-KIT, M2A, 
AP-2gamma and OCT3/4 was examined in two pineal germinomas, 28 metastatic
seminomas and 10 of their testicular primaries. Evaluation of specificity was
achieved by additional tissue array studies on 75 malignancies other than germ
cell tumours (GCT). Clinical data including serum PLAP were available in 18
patients.
RESULTS: Compared with other markers, significantly better staining results were 
observed with antibodies to M2A and AP-2gamma in all seminomatous GCT. In
contrast, the staining pattern with antibodies to c-KIT, PLAP and OCT3/4 was
variable or absent. The lowest specificity was obtained with c-KIT, which was
expressed in a variety of non-GCT. The only M2A+ mesothelioma expressed no other 
seminoma markers. No correlation between serum PLAP level and tissue PLAP
expression was found.
CONCLUSIONS: M2A and AP-2gamma are the most sensitive markers for seminoma
metastases or primary extragonadal seminomas. Combination of these markers
provides highly specific and clear results for detection of a seminomatous GCT.

PMID: 16918976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem J. 2006 Dec 1;400(2):327-35.

NF-Y, AP2, Nrf1 and Sp1 regulate the fragile X-related gene 2 (FXR2).

Mahishi L(1), Usdin K.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Structure and Disease Section, NIDDK (National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases), NIH (National Institutes of Health), Bethesda, MD
20892-0830, USA.

Fragile X syndrome, the most common heritable form of mental retardation, is
caused by silencing of the FMR1 (fragile X mental retardation-1 gene). The
protein product of this gene, FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein), is
thought to be involved in the translational regulation of mRNAs important for
learning and memory. In mammals, there are two homologues of FMRP, namely FXR1P
(fragile X-related protein 1) and FXR2P. Disruption of Fxr2 in mice produces
learning and memory deficits, and Fmr1 and Fxr2 double-knockout mice have
exaggerated impairments in certain neurobehavioral phenotypes relative to the
single gene knockouts. This has led to the suggestion that FMR1 and FXR2
functionally overlap and that increasing the expression of FXR2P may ameliorate
the symptoms of an FMRP deficiency. Interestingly, the region upstream of the
FXR2 translation start site acts as a bidirectional promoter in rodents, driving 
transcription of an alternative transcript encoding the ABP (androgen-binding
protein) [aABP (alternative ABP promoter)]. To understand the regulation of the
human FXR2 gene, we cloned the evolutionarily conserved region upstream of the
FXR2 translation start site and showed that it also has bidirectional promoter
activity in both neuronal and muscle cells as evidenced by luciferase reporter
assay studies. Alignment of the human, mouse, rat, rabbit and dog promoters
reveals several highly conserved transcription factor-binding sites. Gel
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation studies and 
co-transfection experiments with plasmids expressing these transcription factors 
or dominant-negative versions of these factors showed that NF-YA (nuclear
transcription factor Yalpha), AP2 (activator protein 2), Nrf1 (nuclear
respiratory factor/alpha-Pal) and Sp1 (specificity protein 1) all bind to the
FXR2 promoter both in vitro and in vivo and positively regulate the FXR2
promoter.

PMCID: PMC1652820
PMID: 16886907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 8;103(32):11934-9. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

Stimulation of phosphatidylinositol kinase type I-mediated phosphatidylinositol
(4,5)-bisphosphate synthesis by AP-2mu-cargo complexes.

Krauss M(1), Kukhtina V, Pechstein A, Haucke V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Department of Membrane Biochemistry, 
Freie Universität Berlin, Takustrasse 6, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Phosphatidylinositol (4,5)-bisphosphate [PI(4,5)P(2)] is an important factor for 
a variety of cellular functions ranging from cell signaling to actin cytoskeletal
dynamics and endocytic membrane traffic. Here, we have identified the clathrin
adaptor complex AP-2 as a regulator of phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase 
(PIPK)-mediated PI(4,5)P(2) synthesis. AP-2 directly interacts with the kinase
core domain of type I PIPK isozymes via its mu2-subunit in vitro and in native
protein extracts. Endocytic cargo protein binding to mu2 leads to a potent
stimulation of PIPK activity. These data thus identify a positive feedback loop
consisting of endocytic cargo proteins, AP-2mu, and PIPK type I which may provide
a specific pool of PI(4,5)P(2) dedicated to clathrin/AP-2-dependent receptor
internalization.

PMCID: PMC1567676
PMID: 16880396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Neoplasia. 2006 Jul;8(7):568-77.

AP-2gamma induces p21 expression, arrests cell cycle, and inhibits the tumor
growth of human carcinoma cells.

Li H(1), Goswami PC, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radical and Radiation Biology Program, Department of Radiation Oncology, 
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Activating enhancer-binding protein 2gamma (AP-2gamma) is a member of the
developmentally regulated AP-2 transcription factor family that regulates the
expression of many downstream genes. Whereas the effects of AP-2alpha
overexpression on cell growth are fairly well established, the cellular effects
of AP-2gamma overexpression are less well studied. Our new findings show that
AP-2gamma significantly upregulates p21 mRNA and proteins, inhibits cell growth, 
and decreases clonogenic survival. Cell cycle analysis revealed that forced
AP-2gamma expression induced G1-phase arrest, decreased DNA synthesis, and
decreased the fraction of cells in S phase. AP-2gamma expression also led to
cyclin D1 repression, decreased Rb phosphorylation, and decreased E2F activity in
breast carcinoma cells. AP-2gamma binding to the p21 promoter was observed in
vivo, and the absence of growth inhibition in response to AP-2gamma expression in
p21(-/-) cells demonstrated that p21 caused, at least in part, AP-2-induced cell 
cycle arrest. Finally, the tumor growth of human breast carcinoma cells in vivo
was inhibited by the expression of AP-2gamma relative to empty vector-infected
cells, suggesting that AP-2gamma acts as a tumor suppressor. In summary,
expression of either AP-2gamma or AP-2alpha inhibited breast carcinoma cell
growth; thus, these genes may be therapeutic targets for breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC1601932
PMID: 16867219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Eur J Histochem. 2006 Apr-Jun;50(2):147-54.

Early identification of retinal subtypes in the developing, pre-laminated chick
retina using the transcription factors Prox1, Lim1, Ap2alpha, Pax6, Isl1, Isl2,
Lim3 and Chx10.

Edqvist PH(1), Myers SM, Hallböök F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Developmental Neuroscience, Biomedical
Center, Uppsala University, Sweden.

In this study, antibodies toward the transcription factors Prox1, Lim1, Ap2alpha,
Pax6, Isl1, Isl2, Lim3 and Chx10 were used to identify and distinguish between
developing cell types in the pre-laminated chick retina. The spatio-temporal
expression patterns were analysed from embryonic day 3 (E3) to E9, thus covering 
a time-span from the onset of retinal cell-fate determination to when retinal
laminas can be distinguished. Most transcription factors were found at early
stages of development, enabling us to trace various precursor cell populations
throughout the lamination process. With time, each transcription factor
expression became restricted to distinct laminas or sub-laminas of the maturing
retina. These early emerging patterns were compared and found to be consistent
with those of the hatched chick retina, where the outer nuclear layer label for
Lim3, Isl1 and Isl2. In the inner nuclear layer, horizontal cells labeled for
Prox1, Lim1, Isl1, Ap2alpha and Pax6, bipolar cell labeled for Lim3, Isl1 and
Chx10 and amacrine cells labeled for Ap2alpha, Isl1 and Pax6. The ganglion cell
layer labeled for Isl1, Pax6 and Isl2. The immunolabeling patterns of Lim3 and
Isl2 have not previously been described in detail.

PMID: 16864127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Breast Cancer Res. 2006;8(4):R45.

Association between manganese superoxide dismutase promoter gene polymorphism and
breast cancer survival.

Martin RC(1), Ahn J, Nowell SA, Hein DW, Doll MA, Martini BD, Ambrosone CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, Department of Surgery, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. Robert.martin@louisville.edu

BACKGROUND: Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) plays a critical role in the
detoxification of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species, constituting a major
cellular defense mechanism against agents that induce oxidative stress. A genetic
polymorphism in the mitochondrial targeting sequence of this gene has been
associated with increased cancer risk and survival in breast cancer. This base
pair transition (-9 T > C) leads to a valine to alanine amino acid change in the 
mitochondrial targeting sequence. A polymorphism has also been identified in the 
proximal region of the promoter (-102 C>T) that alters the recognition sequence
of the AP-2 transcription factor, leading to a reduction in transcriptional
activity. The aim of our study was to investigate possible associations of the
-102 C>T polymorphism with overall and relapse-free breast cancer survival in a
hospital-based case-only study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The relationship between the MnSOD -102 C>T polymorphism
and survival was examined in a cohort of 291 women who received chemotherapy
and/or radiotherapy for incident breast cancer. The MnSOD -102 C>T genotype was
determined using a TaqMan allele discrimination assay. Patient survival was
evaluated according to the MnSOD genotype using Kaplan-Meier survival functions. 
Hazard ratios were calculated from adjusted Cox proportional hazards modeling.
All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: In an evaluation of all women, there was a borderline significant
reduction in recurrence-free survival with either one or both variant alleles (CT
+ TT) when compared with patients with wild-type alleles (CC) (odds ratio, 0.65; 
95% confidence interval, 0.42-1.01). When the analysis was restricted to patients
receiving radiation therapy, there was a significant reduction in relapse-free
survival in women who were heterozygous for the MnSOD -102 genotype (relative
risk, 0.40; 95% confidence interval, 0.18-0.86). Similarly, when the homozygous
and heterozygous variant genotypes were combined, there remained a significant
reduction in relapse-free survival in this group (hazard ratio, 0.42; 95%
confidence interval, 0.20-0.87).
CONCLUSION: The MnSOD -102 variant allele appears to be associated with an
improved recurrence-free survival in all patients, and more dramatically in
subjects who received adjuvant radiation therapy.

PMCID: PMC1779484
PMID: 16859522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Signal. 2007 Jan;19(1):42-51. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Signalling through phospholipase C interferes with clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

Carvou N(1), Norden AG, Unwin RJ, Cockcroft S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University College London, London WC1E 6JJ UK.

We investigated if phosphatidylinositol(4,5)bisphosphate (PtdIns(4,5)P2)
hydrolysis by phospholipase C activation through cell surface receptors would
interfere with clathrin-mediated endocytosis as recruitment of clathrin assembly 
proteins is PtdIns(4,5)P2-dependent. In the WKPT renal epithelial cell line,
endocytosed insulin and beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2gpI) were observed in separate
compartments, although endocytosis of both ligands was clathrin-dependent as
demonstrated by expression of the clathrin-binding C-terminal domain of AP180
(AP180-C). The two uptake mechanisms were different as only insulin uptake was
reduced when the mu2-subunit of the adaptor complex AP-2 was silenced by RNA
interference. ATP receptors are expressed at the apical surface of renal cells
and, thus, we examined the effect of extracellular ATP on insulin and beta2gpI
uptake. ATP stimulated phospholipase C activity, and also suppressed uptake of
insulin, but not beta2gpI. This effect was reversed by the PLC inhibitor U-73122.
In polarized cell cultures, insulin uptake was apical, whereas beta2gpI uptake
was through the basolateral membrane, thus providing an explanation for selective
inhibition of insulin endocytosis by ATP. Taken together, these results
demonstrate that stimulation of apical G-protein-coupled P2Y receptors, which are
coupled to phospholipase C activation diminishes clathrin-mediated endocytosis
without interfering with basolateral endocytic mechanisms.

PMID: 16843639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Cell Sci. 2006 Aug 1;119(Pt 15):3141-8. Epub 2006 Jul 11.

An essential role for endocytosis of rhodopsin through interaction of visual
arrestin with the AP-2 adaptor.

Orem NR(1), Xia L, Dolph PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Previously, we have identified a class of retinal degeneration mutants in
Drosophila in which the normally transient interaction between arrestin2 (Arr2)
and rhodopsin is stabilized and the complexes are rapidly internalized into the
cell body by receptor-mediated endocytosis. The accumulation of protein complexes
in the cytoplasm eventually results in photoreceptor cell death. We now show that
the endocytic adapter protein AP-2 is essential for rhodopsin endocytosis through
an Arr2-AP-2beta interaction, and mutations in Arr2 that disrupt its interaction 
with the beta subunit of AP-2 prevent endocytosis-induced retinal degeneration.
We further demonstrate that if the interaction between Arr2 and AP-2 is blocked, 
this also results in retinal degeneration in an otherwise wild-type background.
This indicates that the Arr2-AP-2 interaction is necessary for the pathology
observed in a number of Drosophila visual system mutants, and suggests that
regular rhodopsin turnover in wild-type photoreceptor cells by Arr2-mediated
endocytosis is essential for photoreceptor cell maintenance.

PMID: 16835270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jul 18;103(29):11081-5. Epub 2006 Jul 10.

A subset of Arabidopsis AP2 transcription factors mediates cytokinin responses in
concert with a two-component pathway.

Rashotte AM(1), Mason MG, Hutchison CE, Ferreira FJ, Schaller GE, Kieber JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3280, USA.

The plant hormone cytokinin regulates numerous growth and developmental
processes. A signal transduction pathway for cytokinin has been elucidated that
is similar to bacterial two-component phosphorelays. In Arabidopsis, this pathway
is comprised of receptors that are similar to sensor histidine kinases,
histidine-containing phosphotransfer proteins, and response regulators (ARRs).
There are two classes of response regulators, the type-A ARRs, which act as
negative regulators of cytokinin responses, and the type-B ARRs, which are
transcription factors that play a positive role in mediating cytokinin-regulated 
gene expression. Here we show that several closely related members of the
Arabidopsis AP2 gene family of unknown function are transcriptionally
up-regulated by cytokinin through this pathway, and we have designated these AP2 
genes CYTOKININ RESPONSE FACTORS (CRFs). In addition to their transcriptional
regulation by cytokinin, the CRF proteins rapidly accumulate in the nucleus in
response to cytokinin, and this relocalization depends on the histidine kinases
and the downstream histidine-containing phosphotransfer proteins, but is
independent of the ARRs. Analysis of loss-of-function mutations reveals that the 
CRFs function redundantly to regulate the development of embryos, cotyledons, and
leaves. Furthermore, the CRFs mediate a large fraction of the transcriptional
response to cytokinin, affecting a set of cytokinin-responsive genes that largely
overlaps with type-B ARR targets. These results indicate that the CRF proteins
function in tandem with the type-B ARRs to mediate the initial cytokinin
response. Thus, the evolutionarily ancient two-component system that is used by
cytokinin branches to incorporate a unique family of plant-specific transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC1544176
PMID: 16832061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Jan 15;61(2):154-61. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Chronic administration of carbamazepine down-regulates AP-2 DNA-binding activity 
and AP-2alpha protein expression in rat frontal cortex.

Rao JS(1), Bazinet RP, Rapoport SI, Lee HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. jrao@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Despite being approved for treating bipolar disorder, carbamazepine's
(CBZ) mechanism of action is not fully understood. Carbamazepine and lithium,
when administered chronically to rats, decrease brain messenger ribonucleic acid 
(mRNA), protein, and activity levels of the arachidonic acid-selective cytosolic 
phospholipase A2 (cPLA2). The ability of lithium to decrease cPLA2 mRNA was
ascribed to its ability to down-regulate the cPLA2 transcription factor, AP-2.
The present study was undertaken to see whether chronic CBZ treatment also would 
down-regulate the AP-2 transcription factor.
METHODS: Male CDF-344 rats received (intraperitoneally for 30 days) 25 mg/kg per 
day or vehicle. Transcription factors regulating cPLA2 were measured by gelshift 
assay in the frontal cortex.
RESULTS: Chronic CBZ decreased AP-2 transcription factor-binding activity, cyclic
adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)--dependent protein kinase A (PKA) activity,
nuclear phospho AP-2, and the protein but not mRNA level of AP-2alpha in rat
frontal cortex. There was no significant change in activator protein (AP) 1,
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB), glucocorticoid response element, or polyoma
enhancer activator 3 (PEA3).
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the hypothesis that, like lithium, CBZ's
down-regulation of AP-2 transcription factor activity may be responsible for
down-regulating cPLA2 gene transcription. Chronically administered CBZ appears to
decrease AP-2 DNA-binding activity by decreasing cAMP-dependent PKA activity,
phosphorylation of AP-2 protein, and the protein level of its AP-2alpha subunit
in rat frontal cortex.

PMID: 16806101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Endocrinology. 2006 Sep;147(9):4319-29. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Proteomic identification of AP2 gamma as a rat placental lactogen II trophoblast 
cell-specific enhancer binding protein.

Oztürk A(1), Donald LJ, Li L, Duckworth HW, Duckworth ML.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 
R3E 3J7.

The factors that regulate the developmental expression of the rodent prolactin
gene family in placenta remain poorly defined. We previously identified an
enhancer element in the 5' flanking region of one family member, rat placental
lactogen II (rPLII), which could target reporter gene expression to the placenta 
in transgenic mice; this enhancer functioned in the Rcho rat trophoblast cell
line but not in the rat pituitary GC cell line. In further experiments to
identify the factors that bind this element, we have selectively enriched for DNA
binding proteins in nuclear extract from Rcho cells using magnetic beads coupled 
to a 43-bp enhancer oligonucleotide. Tryptic peptides of bound proteins were
analyzed by HPLC coupled off-line to matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization 
time of flight mass spectrometry. Several peptides of AP2 gamma, a key
trophoblast cell-specific transcription factor, were identified. Gel mobility
shift assays using AP2 gamma-specific antiserum and mutant enhancer
oligonucleotides demonstrated binding specifically to the FP2 DNase I-protected
region of the element, identifying an atypical binding site for this factor. In
cotransfection assays in rat pituitary GC cells, AP2 gamma transactivated the
enhancer via this region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed AP2
gamma occupancy of the enhancer region in situ in the nuclei of Rcho giant cells.
These data support a role for AP2 gamma in the placental giant cell-specific
expression of the rPLII gene and provide the first direct evidence for the
involvement of a placental-specific transcription factor in the regulation of a
member of this gene family.

PMID: 16794002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24602-11. Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Transcriptional regulation of uterine vascular endothelial growth factor during
early gestation in a carnivore model, Mustela vison.

Lopes FL(1), Desmarais J, Ledoux S, Gévry NY, Lefevre P, Murphy BD.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Faculté de Médecine Vétérinaire, 
Université de Montréal, St-Hyacinthe, Québec J2S 7C6, Canada.
flavia.lopes@mail.mcgill.ca

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an essential angiogenic signaling
element that acts through its two tyrosine kinase receptors, inducing both
proliferation of endothelial cells and vascular permeability. Given the
importance of vasculogenesis and angiogenesis to early pregnancy, it is of
interest to understand the mechanisms regulating vascular development at this
stage. We previously demonstrated that VEGF and receptors are up-regulated during
embryo implantation in an unique animal model, the mink, a species displaying
obligate embryonic diapause. Herein we examined the role of prostaglandin E2
(PGE(2)) as a regulator of VEGF during early pregnancy and established the
mechanisms of this regulation. We demonstrate that activated embryos secrete
PGE(2) and that expression of PGE synthase protein in the uterus is dependent
upon direct contact with invading trophoblast cells during implantation. Using
mink uterine stromal cells transfected with mink VEGF promoter driving the
luciferase reporter gene, we show that PGE(2) induces promoter transactivation
and that this response can be eliminated by blockade of protein kinase A.
Treatment with antagonists to PGE(2) receptors EP2 and EP4 eliminated the
PGE(2)-induced response in transfected cells. Deletional studies of the promoter 
revealed that a region of 99 bp upstream of the transcription start site is
required for PGE(2)-induced transactivation. Mutation of an AP2/Sp1 cluster,
found within the 99 bp, completely eliminated the PGE(2) response. Furthermore,
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed binding of the AP2 and Sp1
transcription factors to the endogenous mink VEGF promoter in uterine cells.
PGE(2) stimulated acetylation of histone H3 associated with the promoter region
containing the AP2/Sp1 cluster. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
PGE(2) plays an important role in regulating uterine and thus placental vascular 
development, acting through its receptors EP2 and EP4, provoking protein kinase A
activation of AP2 and Sp1 as well as acetylation of histone H3 to transactivate
the VEGF promoter.

PMID: 16790435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Neurosci Lett. 2006 Aug 7;403(3):288-93. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

Association study of the INPP1, 5HTT, BDNF, AP-2beta and GSK-3beta GENE variants 
and restrospectively scored response to lithium prophylaxis in bipolar disorder.

Michelon L(1), Meira-Lima I, Cordeiro Q, Miguita K, Breen G, Collier D, Vallada
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Institute of Psychiatry (ProGene LIM-23), University of São
Paulo Medical School, Brazil.

In the present study we investigated the influence of a series variants in genes 
(the serotonin transporter, glycogen synthase kinase-3beta, inositol
polyphosphatase 1-phosphate, brain-derived neurotrophic factor and activator
protein 2beta) related to the action of lithium carbonate, a drug used for
prophylaxis in mood disorders. We used a sample of unrelated patients with
bipolar disorder type I on lithium therapy for at least 2 years who met the
proposed response criteria for prophylactic response. Of the 134 patients, 61
patients were considered full responders, 49 non-responders and 24 partial
responders. No significant differences were observed for the genotype or allele
frequencies for good, partial and poor responders for the five gene variants: for
BDNF G196A (genotype: chi2 = 3.67, 4 d.f., p = 0.45; allele: chi2 = 2.31, 2 d.f.,
p = 0.31); for INPP1 C973A (genotype: chi2 = 1.35, 4 d.f., p = 0.85; allele: chi2
= 0.04, 2 d.f., p = 0.98); for AP-2beta [CAAA](4/5) (genotype: chi2 = 3.18; 4
d.f., p = 0.52; allele: chi2 = 0.92, 2 d.f., p = 0.063); for 5HTTLPR (genotype:
chi2 = 0.67, 4 d.f., p = 0.96; allele: chi2 = 0.27, 2 d.f., p = 0.87); for
GSK-3beta A-1727T (genotype: chi2 = 3.55, 4 d.f., p = 0.47; allele: chi2 = 0.48, 
2 d.f., p = 0.78). These investigated variants are not predictive factors for
lithium prophylactic response in our sample of bipolar disorder type I patients. 
However, it is still possible that a subgroup of a diverse ethnic ancestry may be
predisposing to some of those variants for lithium response.

PMID: 16787706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2006;73:1-42.

The molecular origins of species-specific facial pattern.

Brugmann SA(1), Tapadia MD, Helms JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Stanford University,
California 94305, USA.

The prevailing approach within the field of craniofacial development is focused
on finding a balance between tissues (e.g., facial epithelia, neuroectoderm, and 
neural crest) and molecules (e.g., bone morphogenetic proteins, fibroblast growth
factors, Wnts) that play a role in sculpting the face. We are rapidly learning
that neither these tissues nor molecular signals are able to act in isolation; in
fact, molecular cues are constantly reciprocating signals between the epithelia
and the neural crest in order to pattern and mold facial structures. More
recently, it has been proposed that this crosstalk is often mediated and
organized by discrete organizing centers within the tissues that are able to act 
as a self-contained unit of developmental potential (e.g., the rhombomere and
perhaps the ectomere). Whatever the molecules are and however they are
interpreted by these tissues, it appears that there is a remarkably conserved
mechanism for setting up the initial organization of the facial prominences
between species. Regardless of species, all vertebrates appear to have the same
basic bauplan. However, sometime during mid-gestation, the vertebrate face begins
to exhibit species-specific variations, in large part due to differences in the
rates of growth and differentiation of cells comprising the facial prominences.
How do these differences arise? Are they due to late changes in molecular
signaling within the facial prominences themselves? Or are these late changes a
reflection of earlier, more subtle alterations in boundaries and fields that are 
established at the earliest stages of head formation? We do not have clear
answers to these questions yet, but in this chapter we present new studies that
shed light on this age-old question. This chapter aims to present the known
signals, both on a molecular and cellular level, responsible for craniofacial
development while bringing to light the events that may serve to create
difference in facial morphology seen from species to species.

PMID: 16782454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Schizophr Res. 2006 Oct;87(1-3):1-5. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Mutation analysis of DARPP-32 as a candidate gene for schizophrenia.

Li CH(1), Liao HM, Hung TW, Chen CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Tzu-Chi University and General Hospital, Hualien
City, 970 Taiwan, ROC.

Dopamine- and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein of relative molecular mass 32kDa
(DARPP-32) plays a pivotal role in the signal transduction of several
neurotransmitters and neuromodulators that are implicated in the pathophysiology 
of a variety of neuropsychiatric disorders. A postmortem study reported a
significantly reduced DARPP-32 expression in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) of patients with schizophrenia, suggesting possible involvement of
DARPP-32 in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia. Hence, DARPP-32 was considered 
as a candidate gene for schizophrenia in this study. We first systemically
searched for mutations in the DARPP-32 gene in 50 Han Chinese patients with
schizophrenia from Taiwan. Five molecular variants were identified, including a
C-to-G substitution (g.-2036C>G) in the putative core promoter that obliterated a
predictive AP-2 transcription factor binding site, a G deletion in the
untranslated exon 2 (g.1238delG), a G-to-A and an A-to-G substitutions in intron 
2 (IVS2+31G>A) and intron 6 (IVS6+32A>G), respectively, and a three-base pair
deletion of AGA in exon 6 that resulted in deletion of a glutamate at codon 135
(E135del). Further SNP- and haplotype-based association study in 249 patients and
273 control subjects, however, did not detect association of these markers with
schizophrenia. Hence, our results suggest that the reduced DARPP-32 protein in
patients with schizophrenia is unlikely caused by mutations in the DARPP-32 gene 
itself and the DARPP-32 gene is also unlikely a major susceptibility gene for
schizophrenia. Nevertheless, the identification of these molecular variants
should help the study of gene regulation and structure-function relationship of
DARPP-32, and the association study of DARPP-32 gene with other neuropsychiatric 
disorders.

PMID: 16750903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Bone. 2006 Oct;39(4):815-24. Epub 2006 May 30.

Identification and characterization of the Mustang promoter: regulation by AP-1
during myogenic differentiation.

Liu C(1), Hadjiargyrou M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Psychology A
Building, Room 338, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2580, USA.

We previously identified Mustang (musculoskeletal temporally activated novel
gene) with expression exclusively in the musculoskeletal system. Although its
expression is almost undetectable in intact bone, it is robustly upregulated
during bone regeneration. It is also abundantly expressed in adult skeletal
muscle and tendon. As such, Mustang represents a marker for these cells and thus 
identifying its promoter would enable us to characterize its transcriptional
regulation. To this end, we have isolated and characterized a 1512-bp mouse
genomic clone representing the Mustang 5'-flanking region and identified a
transcription start site, a TATA box, and multiple putative transcription factor 
binding sites (including AP-1 and AP-2). The activity of this promoter was
detected in musculoskeletal cells and embryonic fibroblasts, even exceeding
levels (145%) of the control SV40 promoter (in C2C12 cells). Further, the
contribution of specific AP-1 and AP-2 sites was determined with serially deleted
and mutated promoter constructs. Results indicate that one of the four AP-1 sites
is required for substantial transcriptional activation, as its specific deletion 
or mutation decreases promoter activity by 32% and 40%, respectively. In
contrast, deletion of both identified AP-2 sites results in only a 12% decrease
in promoter activity. We further characterized the key AP-1 site by EMSA and
determined that in both proliferating and differentiating C2C12 cells, only
c-Fos, Fra-2 and JunD were required for transcriptional activation. Mustang's
restricted tissue specificity and strong promoter makes this gene an ideal
candidate for utilization in cell lineage studies that could unveil
cellular/molecular mechanisms responsible for musculoskeletal development and
regeneration.

PMID: 16731063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncogene. 2006 Nov 9;25(53):7059-69. Epub 2006 May 22.

A ubiquitin ligase, skeletrophin, is a negative regulator of melanoma invasion.

Takeuchi T(1), Adachi Y, Sonobe H, Furihata M, Ohtsuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi, Japan.
takeutit@med.kochi-ms.ac.jp

Skeletrophin (mindbomb homolog 2 (MIB2)) is a RING (Really Interesting New Gene) 
finger-dependent ubiquitin ligase, which targets the intracellular region of
Notch ligands. A previous immunohistochemical study demonstrated that
skeletrophin was downregulated in many melanomas. In the present study, we have
identified a promoter region of skeletrophin on a CpG island and detected
aberrant methylation of this region in six of 31 invasive melanomas, but in none 
of 25 benign nevi or five non-invasive superficial spreading melanomas.
Subsequently, we found that a zinc-finger transcriptional factor Snail, which is 
overexpressed in many melanoma cells, repressed the skeletrophin promoter
activity via an E-box-related element and was involved in downregulation of
skeletrophin. An activator protein-2, which has a tumor suppressor-like role in
melanoma, increased skeletrophin expression. Interestingly, exogenously expressed
skeletrophin reduced melanoma cell invasion in vitro and in vivo. Colony
formation in soft agar was also reduced in a RING motif-dependent manner, without
affecting cell growth. We also found that skeletrophin downregulated
transcription of the Met oncogene, which encodes the hepatocyte growth factor
receptor and plays a role in the determination of the invasive phenotype of many 
malignant tumors. Finally, exogenously expressed skeletrophin, but not its RING
mutant, increased transcription of Hes1 gene, a downstream effector of Notch
pathway in melanoma cells. The present findings indicate that skeletrophin might 
be a novel suppressor factor for melanoma invasion.

PMID: 16715130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 21;281(29):20632-42. Epub 2006 May 17.

Type Igamma661 phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase directly interacts with AP2 
and regulates endocytosis.

Bairstow SF(1), Ling K, Su X, Firestone AJ, Carbonara C, Anderson RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Clathrin-coated vesicles mediate sorting and intracellular transport of
membrane-bound proteins. The formation of these coats is initiated by the
assembly of adaptor proteins (AP), which specifically bind to membrane cargo
proteins via recognition of endocytic sorting motifs. The lipid signaling
molecule phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PI(4,5)P(2)) is critical for this
process, as it serves as both a targeting and regulatory factor. PI(4,5)P(2) is
synthesized by type I phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinases (PIPKI). We have
discovered a direct interaction between the mu2-subunit of the AP2 complex and
PIPKIgamma661 via a yeast two-hybrid screen. This interaction was confirmed using
both the mu2-subunit in glutathione S-transferase pulldowns and via
coimmunoprecipitation of endogenous PIPKIgamma661 with the AP2 complex from
HEK293 cells. The interaction is mediated, in vivo, by a tyrosine-based motif in 
the 26-amino acid tail of PIPKIgamma661. Because AP2 regulates endocytosis of
transferrin receptor from the plasma membrane, we also examined a role for
PIPKIgamma661 using a flow cytometry endocytosis assay. We observed that stable
expression of wild type PIPKIgamma661 in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells enhanced
transferrin uptake, whereas stable expression of kinase-dead PIPKIgamma661 had an
inhibitory effect. Neither condition affected the overall cellular level of
PI(4,5)P(2). RNA interference-based knockdown of PIPKIgamma661 in HeLa cells also
had an inhibitory effect on transferrin endocytosis using the same assay system. 
Collectively, this evidence implies an important role for PIPKIgamma661 in the
AP2-mediated endocytosis of transferrin.

PMID: 16707488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;66(10):5085-93.

Activator protein-2 overexpression accounts for increased insulin receptor
expression in human breast cancer.

Paonessa F(1), Foti D, Costa V, Chiefari E, Brunetti G, Leone F, Luciano F, Wu F,
Lee AS, Gulletta E, Fusco A, Brunetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Clinica G. Salvatore, Università di
Catanzaro Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.

Various studies have shown that the insulin receptor (IR) is increased in most
human breast cancers, and both ligand-dependent malignant transformation and
increased cell growth occur in cultured breast cells overexpressing the IR.
However, although numerous in vivo and in vitro observations have indicated an
important contributory role for the IR in breast cancer cell biology, the
molecular mechanisms accounting for increased IR expression in breast tumors have
not previously been elucidated. Herein, we did immunoblot analyses of nuclear
protein from cultured breast cancer cells and normal and tumoral tissues from
breast cancer patients combined with promoter studies by using a series of human 
wild-type and mutant IR promoter constructs. We provide evidence that IR
overexpression in breast cancer is dependent on the assembly of a
transcriptionally active multiprotein-DNA complex, which includes the
high-mobility group A1 (HMGA1) protein, the developmentally regulated activator
protein-2 (AP-2) transcription factor and the ubiquitously expressed
transcription factor Sp1. In cultured breast cancer cells and human breast cancer
specimens, the expression of AP-2 was significantly higher than that observed in 
cells and tissues derived from normal breast, and this overexpression paralleled 
the increase in IR expression. However, AP-2 DNA-binding activity was
undetectable with the IR gene promoter, suggesting that transactivation of this
gene by AP-2 might occur indirectly through physical and functional cooperation
with HMGA1 and Sp1. Our findings support this hypothesis and suggest that in
affected individuals, hyperactivation of the AP-2 gene through the overexpression
of IR may play a key role in breast carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16707431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006 May 12;34(9):2570-8. Print 2006.

GAS41 interacts with transcription factor AP-2beta and stimulates
AP-2beta-mediated transactivation.

Ding X(1), Fan C, Zhou J, Zhong Y, Liu R, Ren K, Hu X, Luo C, Xiao S, Wang Y,
Feng D, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Developmental Biology of State
Education Ministry of China, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University,
Changsha, Hunan 410081, China.

Transcription factor AP-2 regulates transcription of a number of genes involving 
mammalian development, differentiation and carcinogenesis. Recent studies have
shown that interaction partners can modulate the transcriptional activity of AP-2
over the downstream targets. In this study, we reported the identification of
GAS41 as an interaction partner of AP-2beta. We documented the interaction both
in vivo by co-immunoprecipitation as well as in vitro through glutathione
S-transferase (GST) pull-down assays. We also showed that the two proteins are
co-localized in the nuclei of mammalian cells. We further mapped the interaction 
domains between the two proteins to the C-termini of both AP-2beta and GAS41,
respectively. Furthermore, we have identified three critical residues of GAS41
that are important for the interaction between the two proteins. In addition, by 
transient co-expression experiments using reporter containing three AP-2
consensus binding sites in the promoter region, we found that GAS41 stimulates
the transcriptional activity of AP-2beta over the reporter. Finally,
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) suggested that GAS41 enhances the
DNA-binding activity of AP-2beta. Our data provide evidence for a novel cellular 
function of GAS41 as a transcriptional co-activator for AP-2beta.

PMCID: PMC3303177
PMID: 16698963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jun;78(6):936-46. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Promoter mutations that increase amyloid precursor-protein expression are
associated with Alzheimer disease.

Theuns J(1), Brouwers N, Engelborghs S, Sleegers K, Bogaerts V, Corsmit E, De
Pooter T, van Duijn CM, De Deyn PP, Van Broeckhoven C.

Author information: 
(1)Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics,
University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium.

Genetic variations in promoter sequences that alter gene expression play a
prominent role in increasing susceptibility to complex diseases. Also, expression
levels of APP are essentially regulated by its core promoter and 5' upstream
regulatory region and correlate with amyloid beta levels in Alzheimer disease
(AD) brains. Here, we systematically sequenced the proximal promoter (-766/+204) 
and two functional distal regions (-2634/-2159 and -2096/-1563) of APP in two
independent AD series with onset ages < or =70 years (Belgian sample, n=180;
Dutch sample, n=111) and identified eight novel sequence variants. Three
mutations (-118C-->A, -369C-->G, and -534G-->A) identified only in patients with 
AD showed, in vitro, a nearly twofold neuron-specific increase in APP
transcriptional activity, similar to what is expected from triplication of APP in
Down syndrome. These mutations either abolished (AP-2 and HES-1) or created
(Oct1) transcription-factor binding sites involved in the development and
differentiation of neuronal systems. Also, two of these clustered in the 200-bp
region (-540/-340) of the APP promoter that showed the highest degree of species 
conservation. The present study provides evidence that APP-promoter mutations
that significantly increase APP expression levels are associated with AD.

PMCID: PMC1474091
PMID: 16685645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 23;345(1):495-501. Epub 2006 May 2.

Regulation of integrin alpha10 expression in chondrocytes by the transcription
factors AP-2epsilon and Ets-1.

Wenke AK(1), Rothhammer T, Moser M, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.

Expression of integrin alpha10 is initiated at the beginning of chondrogenesis
and continues throughout cartilage development in adult cartilage. In our study, 
we aim to identify regulatory sequences that control the cell-type specific
expression of the human integrin alpha10 gene. Therefore, promoter constructs
harboring 1139bp 5' of the transcriptional start site of the human integrin
alpha10 gene were analyzed. Our experiments localized a promoter region that
directs high levels of expression specifically in chondrocytes. A sequence
analysis detected three consensus AP-2 binding sites within this functional
domain. Functionality of these sites was tested and confirmed by cotransfection
of AP-2 in a luciferase reporter assay. Interestingly, EMSA identified
AP-2epsilon as the major AP-2 protein binding to the AP-2 consensus sequences.
Additionally, Ets-1 was shown to be a positive regulator of the integrin alpha10 
expression whereas Sox9 was irrelevant. Taken together, these results suggest
that AP-2epsilon and Ets-1 are involved in the regulation of integrin alpha10
transcription in chondrocytes.

PMID: 16684505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biol Reprod. 2006 Sep;75(3):324-33. Epub 2006 May 3.

Analysis of transcription factor AP-2 expression and function during mouse
preimplantation development.

Winger Q(1), Huang J, Auman HJ, Lewandoski M, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology and Cell, University of Colorado Health
Science Center at Fitzsimons, Auorora, Colorado 80045, USA.

The activating protein 2 (AP-2) transcription factor family is required for
multiple aspects of mouse postimplantation development, but much less is known
about the expression and possible function of these genes during the
preimplantation period. In the present study, we have examined the expression of 
all five members of the mouse AP-2 gene family in the unfertilized oocyte and
from zygote formation to the blastocyst stage of development. Four AP-2 genes are
differentially expressed during the preimplantation period,Tcfap2a, Tcfap2b,
Tcfap2c, and Tcfap2e. Furthermore, with the exception of Tcfap2a, these genes are
also expressed in unfertilized oocytes, indicating that they may be important for
oogenesis, maternal-effect functions, or both. Given these findings, we have
initiated studies to assess how various combinations of maternal and zygotic AP-2
gene expression might function together to regulate pre- and peri-implantation
development. The present study focuses on the interplay between the expression of
zygotic Tcfap2aand maternal and zygoticTcfap2c. These studies indicate that
zygotic, but not maternal, Tcfap2cexpression is required for normal
embryogenesis. In addition, the combined loss of both Tcfap2a and
Tcfap2caccelerates embryonic lethality compared to the loss of either gene alone,
demonstrating that genetic redundancy exists between these two AP-2 family
members during the peri-implantation period of embryogenesis.

PMID: 16672719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Traffic. 2006 Jun;7(6):673-85.

The high-affinity immunoglobulin-E receptor (FcepsilonRI) is endocytosed by an
AP-2/clathrin-independent, dynamin-dependent mechanism.

Fattakhova G(1), Masilamani M, Borrego F, Gilfillan AM, Metcalfe DD, Coligan JE.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Cell Biology Section, Laboratory of Allergic Diseases, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Aggregation of the high-affinity immunoglobulin E (IgE) receptor (FcepsilonRI),
expressed on mast cells and basophils, initiates the immediate hypersensitivity
reaction. Aggregated FcepsilonRI has been reported to rapidly migrate to lipid
rafts in RBL-2H3 cells. We confirmed that aggregated FcepsilonRI is found in the 
lipid raft fractions of cellular lysates. Furthermore, we show that the
cross-linked FcepsilonRI remains associated with detergent-resistant structures
upon internalization. Previous morphological studies have reported that
aggregated FepsiloncRI is endocytosed via clathrin-coated pits, which in general 
are not lipid raft associated. To address this apparent discrepancy, we employed 
siRNA to suppress expression of components of the clathrin-mediated
internalization machinery, namely, clathrin heavy chain, and the AP-2
(alpha-adaptin or mu2-subunit). Transferrin receptor (TfR) is endocytosed by a
clathrin-mediated process and, as expected, each transfected siRNA caused a two
to threefold elevation of TfR surface expression and almost completely inhibited 
its endocytosis. In contrast, there was no effect on surface expression levels of
FcepsilonRI nor on the endocytosis of the dinitrophenyl-human serum albumin
(DNP-HSA)/IgE/FcepsilonRI complex. On the contrary, internalization of
DNP-HSA/IgE/FcepsilonRI was inhibited by overexpression of a dominant-negative
dynamin mutant. We conclude that internalization of cross-linked FcRI does not
require the AP-2/clathrin complex but is dynamin-dependent and may be lipid raft 
mediated.

PMID: 16637889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 31;25(39):5405-15. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma are transcriptional targets of p53 in human breast
carcinoma cells.

Li H(1), Watts GS, Oshiro MM, Futscher BW, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Free Radical and Radiation Biology Program, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Activating enhancer-binding protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) and activating
enhancer-binding protein 2gamma (AP-2gamma) are transcription factors that bind
GC-rich consensus sequences and regulate the expression of many downstream genes.
AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma interact with p53 both physically and functionally.
Expression microarray results in human breast carcinoma cells with forced p53
expression revealed AP-2gamma as a putative transcriptional target of p53. To
confirm and extend these findings we measured the effects of forced p53
expression in human breast carcinoma cells by real-time reverse
transcription-PCR, Western blotting, electrophoretic gel mobility shift assays,
promoter reporter, chromatin immunoprecipitation and chromatin accessibility
assays. Wild-type p53 expression rapidly induced not only AP-2gamma but also
AP-2alpha mRNA. The subsequent increase in these proteins led to increased AP-2
DNA-binding and transactivating activity. Candidate p53-binding sites were
identified in the AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma promoters. p53 binding to these
cis-elements in vivo was also observed, together with a relaxation of chromatin
structure in these regions. Finally, expression of either AP-2alpha or gamma
inhibited growth of human breast carcinoma cells in vitro. Taken together, our
findings indicate that these AP-2 genes are targets for transcriptional
activation by p53 and suggest that AP-2 proteins may mediate some of the
downstream effects of p53 expression such as inhibition of proliferation.

PMID: 16636674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Pharmacol Ther. 2006 Sep;111(3):909-27. Epub 2006 Apr 17.

Pathophysiologic and therapeutic implications of adrenomedullin in cardiovascular
disorders.

Ishimitsu T(1), Ono H, Minami J, Matsuoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hypertension and Cardiorenal Medicine, Dokkyo University School 
of Medicine, Mibu, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan. isimitu@dokkyomed.ac.jp

Adrenomedullin (AM) is a vasodilator peptide that originally isolated from
pheochromocytoma tissue. However, the mRNA is expressed in the normal adrenal
gland, heart, kidney and blood vessels. The human AM gene is located in the short
arm of chromosome 11 and is composed of 4 exons. There are 2 single nucleotide
polymorphisms in introns 1 and 3, and the 3'-end of the AM gene is flanked by a
microsatellite marker of cytosine-adenine repeats that is associated with an
increased risk of developing hypertension and diabetic nephropathy. AM gene
expression is promoted by various stimuli, including inflammation, hypoxia,
oxidative stress, mechanical stress and activation of the renin-angiotensin and
sympathetic nervous systems. The AM gene promoter region possessed binding site
for several transcription factors, including nuclear factor for interleukin-6
expression (NF-IL6) and activator protein 2 (AP-2). Further, plasma AM levels are
increased in patients with various cardiovascular diseases, including
hypertension, heart failure and renal failure. These findings suggest that AM
plays a role in the development of or response to cardiovascular disease. Indeed,
experimental and clinical studies have demonstrated that systemic infusion of AM 
may have a therapeutic effect on myocardial infarction, heart failure and renal
failure. Further, vasopeptidase inhibitors which augment the bioactivity of
endogenous AM may benefit patients with hypertension and arteriosclerosis.
Finally, the angiogenic and cytoprotective properties of AM may have utility in
revascularization and infarcted myocardium and ischemic limbs. Because of the
potential clinical benefits of AM, indications for use and optimal dosing
strategies should be established.

PMID: 16616959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3308-18.

An autoregulatory loop directs the tissue-specific expression of p63 through a
long-range evolutionarily conserved enhancer.

Antonini D(1), Rossi B, Han R, Minichiello A, Di Palma T, Corrado M, Banfi S,
Zannini M, Brissette JL, Missero C.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131 
Naples, Italy.

p63, a p53 family member, is essential for the development of various stratified 
epithelia and is one of the earliest markers of many ectodermal structures,
including the epidermis, oral mucosa, apical ectodermal ridge, and mammary gland.
Genetic regulatory mechanisms controlling p63 spatial expression during
development have not yet been defined. Using a genomic approach, we identified an
evolutionarily conserved cis-regulatory element, located 160 kb downstream of the
first p63 exon, which functions as a keratinocyte-specific enhancer and is
sufficient to recapitulate expression of the endogenous gene during mouse
embryogenesis. Dissection of the p63 enhancer activity revealed a positive
autoregulatory loop in which the p63 proteins directly bind to and are essential 
regulators of the enhancer. Accordingly, transactivating p63 isoforms induce
endogenous p63 expression in cells that do not normally express this gene,
whereas dominant negative isoforms suppress p63 expression in keratinocytes. In
addition the transcription factor AP-2 also binds to the enhancer and cooperates 
with p63 to induce its activity. These results demonstrate that a long-range
autoregulatory loop is involved in the regulation of p63 expression during
embryonic development and in adult cells.

PMCID: PMC1446946
PMID: 16581802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 16;281(24):16207-19. Epub 2006 Mar 13.

Apoptosis induction by activator protein 2alpha involves transcriptional
repression of Bcl-2.

Wajapeyee N(1), Britto R, Ravishankar HM, Somasundaram K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560 012, India.

Activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) induces cytotoxicity by inducing cell cycle 
arrest and apoptosis. In this study we investigated the mechanism of apoptosis
induction by AP-2alpha. We found that AP-2alpha induced apoptosis efficiently in 
cells treated with benzyloxycar-bonyl-IETD-fluoromethyl ketone or FADD-silenced
cells but failed to do so in benzyloxycarbonyl-LEHD-fluoromethyl ketone-treated
or apoptosis protease activation factor-1 (Apaf1)-silenced cells, suggesting the 
central role of mitochondria in AP-2alpha-induced apoptosis. In good correlation,
cells overexpressing AP-2alpha showed a reduction in mitochondrial membrane
potential (Deltapsi(m)), cytochrome c and Smac/DIABLO release into cytosol, and
Bax translocation into mitochondria. We found that the pro-apoptotic protein Bax 
is important for AP-2alpha-induced apoptosis as adenovirus AP2 failed to induce
apoptosis in HCT116 Bax(-/-) cells. However, we found the IAP (inhibitor of
apoptosis) inhibitor Smac/DIABLO may have a limited role in AP-2alpha-induced
apoptosis as we found the IAP member Survivin down-regulated by AP-2alpha.
Although the total Bax level remains unaltered, we found a time-dependent
increase in the activated form of Bax in adenovirus AP2-infected cells. In
addition, we show that AP-2alpha transcriptionally represses Bcl-2 by binding to 
its promoter both in vitro and in vivo and that this is essential for
AP-2alpha-induced apoptosis as ectopic expression of Bcl-2 efficiently inhibited 
apoptosis induced by AP-2alpha. Furthermore, we show that chemotherapy-induced
endogenous AP-2alpha down-regulates Bcl-2 and induces apoptosis in an
AP-2alpha-dependent manner. Moreover, we demonstrate that inhibition of okadaic
acid or staurosporine-sensitive pathways in AP-2alpha overexpressing breast
cancer cells resulted in AP-2alpha-dependent apoptosis induction. These results
suggest that AP-2alpha induces apoptosis by down-regulating Bcl-2 and utilizing a
bax/cytochrome c/Apaf1/caspase 9-dependent mitochondrial pathway.

PMID: 16533807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Exp Med. 2006 Mar 20;203(3):711-7. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

A polymorphism in the EAAT2 promoter is associated with higher glutamate
concentrations and higher frequency of progressing stroke.

Mallolas J(1), Hurtado O, Castellanos M, Blanco M, Sobrino T, Serena J, Vivancos 
J, Castillo J, Lizasoain I, Moro MA, Dávalos A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Doctor Josep Trueta, 17007
Girona, Spain.

It remains unclear why some individuals are susceptible to excitotoxicity after
stroke. A possible explanation is impaired glutamate uptake. We have found a
highly prevalent polymorphism in the promoter of the glutamate transporter EAAT2 
gene that abolishes a putative regulatory site for activator protein-2 (AP-2) and
creates a new consensus binding site for the repressor transcription factor
GC-binding factor 2 (GCF2). The mutant genotype is associated with increased
plasma glutamate concentrations and with a higher frequency of early neurological
worsening in human stroke. After transfection into astrocytes, the mutant
promoter was not activated by AP-2 and was effectively repressed by GCF2, and its
activity in the presence of GCF2 was reduced when compared with the
AP-2-cotransfected wild-type promoter. We also show that GCF2 is expressed in
ischemic rat brain, suggesting that decreased glutamate uptake occurs in
individuals carrying the mutation after stroke. These findings may explain
individual susceptibility to excitotoxic damage after stroke as well as the
failure of glutamate antagonists in those patients without this polymorphism.

PMCID: PMC2118230
PMID: 16520390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 5;281(18):12751-9. Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Posttranslational cleavage and adaptor protein complex-dependent trafficking of
mucolipin-1.

Miedel MT(1), Weixel KM, Bruns JR, Traub LM, Weisz OA.

Author information: 
(1)Renal-Electrolyte Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Mucolipin-1 (ML1) is a member of the transient receptor potential ion channel
superfamily that is thought to function in the biogenesis of lysosomes. Mutations
in ML1 result in mucolipidosis type IV, a lysosomal storage disease characterized
by the intracellular accumulation of enlarged vacuolar structures containing
phospholipids, sphingolipids, and mucopolysaccharides. Little is known about how 
ML1 trafficking or activity is regulated. Here we have examined the processing
and trafficking of ML1 in a variety of cell types. We find that a significant
fraction of ML1 undergoes cell type-independent cleavage within the first
extracellular loop of the protein during a late step in its biosynthetic
delivery. To determine the trafficking route of ML1, we systematically examined
the effect of ablating adaptor protein complexes on the localization of this
protein. Whereas ML1 trafficking was not apparently affected in fibroblasts from 
mocha mice that lack functional adaptor protein complex (AP)-3, small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown revealed a requirement for AP-1 in Golgi export of ML1.
Knockdown of functional AP-2 had no effect on ML1 localization. Interestingly,
cleavage of ML1 was not compromised in AP-1-deficient cells, suggesting that
proteolysis occurs in a prelysosomal compartment, possibly the trans-Golgi
network. Our results suggest that posttranslational processing of ML1 is more
complex than previously described and that this protein is delivered to lysosomes
primarily via an AP-1-dependent route that does not involve passage via the cell 
surface.

PMID: 16517607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Cell. 2006 Mar;10(3):329-42.

Molecular switches involving the AP-2 beta2 appendage regulate endocytic cargo
selection and clathrin coat assembly.

Edeling MA(1), Mishra SK, Keyel PA, Steinhauser AL, Collins BM, Roth R, Heuser
JE, Owen DJ, Traub LM.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 2XY, United Kingdom.

Clathrin-associated sorting proteins (CLASPs) expand the repertoire of endocytic 
cargo sorted into clathrin-coated vesicles beyond the transmembrane proteins that
bind physically to the AP-2 adaptor. LDL and GPCRs are internalized by ARH and
beta-arrestin, respectively. We show that these two CLASPs bind selectively to
the AP-2 beta2 appendage platform via an alpha-helical [DE](n)X(1-2)FXX[FL]XXXR
motif, and that this motif also occurs and is functional in the epsins. In
beta-arrestin, this motif maintains the endocytosis-incompetent state by binding 
back on the folded core of the protein in a beta strand conformation. Triggered
via a beta-arrestin/GPCR interaction, the motif must be displaced and must
undergo a strand to helix transition to enable the beta2 appendage binding that
drives GPCR-beta-arrestin complexes into clathrin coats. Another interaction
surface on the beta2 appendage sandwich is identified for proteins such as eps15 
and clathrin, suggesting a mechanism by which clathrin displaces eps15 to lattice
edges during assembly.

PMID: 16516836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 28;281(17):12112-22. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Recycling of MUC1 is dependent on its palmitoylation.

Kinlough CL(1), McMahan RJ, Poland PA, Bruns JB, Harkleroad KL, Stremple RJ,
Kashlan OB, Weixel KM, Weisz OA, Hughey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epithelial Cell Biology, Department of Medicine,
Renal-Electrolyte Division, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
15261, USA.

MUC1 is a mucin-like transmembrane protein expressed on the apical surface of
epithelia, where it protects the cell surface. The cytoplasmic domain has
numerous sites for phosphorylation and docking of proteins involved in signal
transduction. In a previous study, we showed that the cytoplasmic YXXphi motif
Y20HPM and the tyrosine-phosphorylated Y60TNP motif are required for MUC1
clathrin-mediated endocytosis through binding AP-2 and Grb2, respectively
(Kinlough, C. L., Poland, P. A., Bruns, J. B., Harkleroad, K. L., and Hughey, R. 
P. (2004) J. Biol. Chem. 279, 53071-53077). Palmitoylation of transmembrane
proteins can affect their membrane trafficking, and the MUC1 sequence CQC3RRK at 
the boundary of the transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains mimics reported site(s)
of S-palmitoylation. [3H]Palmitate labeling of Chinese hamster ovary cells
expressing MUC1 with mutations in CQC3RRK revealed that MUC1 is dually
palmitoylated at the CQC motif independent of RRK. Lack of palmitoylation did not
affect the cold detergent solubility profile of a chimera (Tac ectodomain and
MUC1 transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains), the rate of chimera delivery to the 
cell surface, or its half-life. Calculation of rate constants for membrane
trafficking of wild-type and mutant Tac-MUC1 indicated that the lack of
palmitoylation blocked recycling, but not endocytosis, and caused the chimera to 
accumulate in a EGFP-Rab11-positive endosomal compartment. Mutations CQC/AQA and 
Y20N inhibited Tac-MUC1 co-immunoprecipitation with AP-1, although mutant Y20N
had reduced rates of both endocytosis and recycling, but a normal subcellular
distribution. The double mutant chimera AQA+Y20N had reduced endocytosis and
recycling rates and accumulated in EGFP-Rab11-positive endosomes, indicating that
palmitoylation is the dominant feature modulating MUC1 recycling from endosomes
back to the plasma membrane.

PMID: 16507569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dev Dyn. 2006 May;235(5):1358-70.

Frontal nasal prominence expression driven by Tcfap2a relies on a conserved
binding site for STAT proteins.

Donner AL(1), Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

The AP-2 transcription factor family is linked with development of the head and
limbs in both vertebrate and invertebrate species. Recent evidence has also
implicated this gene family in the evolution of the neural crest in chordates, a 
critical step that allowed the development and elaboration of the vertebrate
craniofacial skeleton. In mice, the inappropriate embryonic expression of one
particular AP-2 gene, Tcfap2a, encoding AP-2alpha, results in multiple
developmental abnormalities, including craniofacial and limb defects. Thus,
Tcfap2a provides a valuable genetic resource to analyze the regulatory hierarchy 
responsible for the evolution and development of the face and limbs. Previous
studies have identified a 2-kilobase intronic region of both the mouse and human 
AP-2alpha locus that directs expression of a linked LacZ transgene to the facial 
processes and the distal mesenchyme of the limb bud in transgenic mice. Further
analysis identified two highly conserved regions of approximately 200-400 bp
within this tissue-specific enhancer. We have now initiated a transgenic and
biochemical analysis of the most important of these highly conserved regions. Our
analysis indicates that although the sequences regulating face and limb
expression have been integrated into a single enhancer, different cis-acting
sequences ultimately control these two expression domains. Moreover, these
studies demonstrate that a conserved STAT binding site provides a major
contribution to the expression of Tcfap2a in the facial prominences.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2738421
PMID: 16502414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Lett. 2006 Oct 28;242(2):198-206. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

Bifunctional effect of resveratrol on the expression of ErbB2 in human breast
cancer cell.

Choi HK(1), Yang JW, Kang KW.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Resistant Cells, Chosun University, Gwangju 501-759, South
Korea.

This study evaluated the effect of resveratrol on the expression of ErbB2 in a
human breast cancer cell line, MCF-7. Low concentrations of resveratrol
(1-10microM) reduced the basal expression level of ErbB2 in MCF-7 cells cultured 
in an estrogen-free medium. When cells were cultured in a medium containing
estrogen, resveratrol increased the ErbB2 protein levels in a dose-dependent
manner. Resveratrol increased the luciferase reporter gene activity in cells
transfected with the -756bp flanking region of the human erbB2 gene. Resveratrol 
increased the nuclear levels of AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma, and the induction of the
luciferase reporter gene by resveratrol was inhibited by a mutation of two AP-2
binding sites in the promoter region of the human erbB2 gene. Blocking the ERK,
p38 kinase or PI3-kinase activity had no effect on the resveratrol-inducible
transactivation of the erbB2 gene and the ErbB2 expression level.

PMID: 16488535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Cell Biol. 2006 Jan 30;172(3):409-21.

AP-2alpha: a regulator of EGF receptor signaling and proliferation in skin
epidermis.

Wang X(1), Bolotin D, Chu DH, Polak L, Williams T, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

AP-2 transcription factors have been implicated in epidermal biology, but their
functional significance has remained elusive. Using conditional knockout
technology, we show that AP-2alpha is essential for governing the balance between
growth and differentiation in epidermis. In vivo, epidermis lacking AP-2alpha
exhibits elevated expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in
the differentiating layers, resulting in hyperproliferation when the receptors
are activated. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and promoter activity assays
identify EGFR as a direct target gene for AP-2alpha repression, and, in the
absence of AP-2alpha, this is manifested primarily in excessive EGF-dependent
phosphoinositol-3 kinase/Akt activity. Together, our findings unveil a hitherto
unrecognized repressive role for AP-2alpha in governing EGFR gene transcription
as cells exit the basal layer and withdraw from the cell cycle. These results
provide insights into why elevated AP-2alpha levels are often associated with
terminal differentiation and why tumor cells often display reduced AP-2alpha and 
elevated EGFR proteins.

PMCID: PMC2063650
PMID: 16449191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Life Sci. 2006 May 30;79(1):45-9. Epub 2006 Jan 19.

The lack of association between monoamine oxidase (MAO) intron 13 polymorphism
and platelet MAO-B activity among men.

Pivac N(1), Knezevic J, Mustapic M, Dezeljin M, Muck-Seler D, Kozaric-Kovacic D, 
Balija M, Matijevic T, Pavelic J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Rudjer Boskovic Institute, PO Box 180,
HR-10002 Zagreb, Croatia. npivac@irb.hr

Monoamine oxidase (MAO), a mitochondrial flavine containing enzyme, exists in two
isoenzymes, MAO-A and MAO-B. Platelets contain MAO-B subtype, proposed to be a
biomarker for different personality characteristics and vulnerability for
substance abuse. The most common polymorphism of MAO-B gene, a single base change
(A or G) occurs in intron 13. It has been proposed to be a functional
polymorphism, controlling the activity of MAO-B in platelets. The aim of the
study was to determine the association between platelet MAO-B activity and MAO-B 
intron 13 polymorphism in 225 racially and ethnically uniform healthy Caucasian
men of the Croatian origin. Our results showed that platelet MAO-B activity did
not differ between subjects subdivided into those with <<A-allele>> or
<<G-allele>>. This polymorphism of the MAO-B gene did not control the activity of
the MAO-B in platelets. Platelet MAO-B activity was associated only with the
smoking status, and it was significantly decreased in smokers when compared to
nonsmokers. No significant association was found between MAO-B polymorphism and
smoking status. In healthy individuals of the Croatian origin, the studied MAO-B 
polymorphism showed a lack of functional importance in regulating MAO-B activity 
in platelets. Since different populations may vary in the association between
functional polymorphism and the MAO-B activity, and the genotype of transcription
factor AP-2 beta was reported to be associated with altered platelet MAO-B
activity, and with specific personality traits, further studies on different
populations should be conducted to elucidate the molecular mechanism/s regulating
platelet MAO-B activity.

PMID: 16427095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Respirology. 2006 Jan;11(1):18-23.

Involvement of PKC, p38 MAPK and AP-2 in IL-1beta-induced expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 in human pulmonary epithelial cells.

Chen P(1), Cai Y, Yang ZG, Zhou R, Zhang GS, Domann F, Fang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Second Affilitated Hospital,
Central-South University, Xiangya Medical School, Changsha, Hunan, China.
chenping101@hotmaill.com

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify the signal molecules involved in
IL-1beta-induced expression of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 in human pulmonary
epithelial (A549) cells.
METHODS: A549 cells were stimulated with IL-1beta in the presence or absence of
H-7 (a protein kinase C inhibitor), SB203580 (a p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase inhibitor) and PD098059 (a mitogen-activated and extracellular regulated
kinase kinase (MEK1) inhibitor). The A549 cells were also transfected with
adenovirus vector encoding activator protein (AP)-2alpha, or a plasmid containing
a dominant-negative gene (AP-2Delta), in the presence or absence of IL-1beta.
RESULTS: IL-1beta induced expression of the COX-2 mRNA and protein in A549 cells 
in a time- and dose-dependent manner. SB203580 and H-7, but not PD098059,
inhibited IL-1beta-induced expression of COX-2 protein. Overexpression of
AP-2alpha increased expression of the COX-2 protein, whereas AP-2Delta decreased 
IL-1beta-induced COX-2 expression.
CONCLUSION: Protein kinase C, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase and
transcriptional factor AP-2alpha may play important roles in regulating
IL-1beta-induced COX-2 expression in human pulmonary epithelial cells.

PMID: 16423197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genome Biol. 2005;6(13):246. Epub 2005 Dec 28.

The AP-2 family of transcription factors.

Eckert D(1), Buhl S, Weber S, Jäger R, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, Sigmund-Freud
Strasse 25, 53125 Bonn, Germany.

The AP-2 family of transcription factors consists of five different proteins in
humans and mice: AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, AP-2gamma, AP-2delta and AP-2epsilon. Frogs
and fish have known orthologs of some but not all of these proteins, and homologs
of the family are also found in protochordates, insects and nematodes. The
proteins have a characteristic helix-span-helix motif at the carboxyl terminus,
which, together with a central basic region, mediates dimerization and DNA
binding. The amino terminus contains the transactivation domain. AP-2 proteins
are first expressed in primitive ectoderm of invertebrates and vertebrates; in
vertebrates, they are also expressed in the emerging neural-crest cells, and
AP-2alpha-/- animals have impairments in neural-crest-derived facial structures. 
AP-2beta is indispensable for kidney development and AP-2gamma is necessary for
the formation of trophectoderm cells shortly after implantation; AP-2alpha and
AP-2gamma levels are elevated in human mammary carcinoma and seminoma. The
general functions of the family appear to be the cell-type-specific stimulation
of proliferation and the suppression of terminal differentiation during embryonic
development.

PMCID: PMC1414101
PMID: 16420676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Am J Clin Pathol. 2005 Dec;124(6):873-7.

AP-2gamma protein expression in intratubular germ cell neoplasia of testis.

Hong SM(1), Frierson HF Jr, Moskaluk CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville
22908, USA.

Although activator protein 2gamma (AP-2gamma) has been reported to be a marker of
germ cell tumors of the testis, its relationship to placental alkaline
phosphatase (PLAP) and KIT (CD117) protein expression in intratubular germ cell
neoplasia (ITGCN) has not been directly compared. In this study, staining of
AP-2gamma in 30 cases of ITGCN was examined and compared with that of PLAP and
KIT. Both PLAP and KIT were positive in 29 (97%) of 30 cases, whereas AP-2gamma
was expressed in 100%. All 3 markers were negative in normal testis (0 of 11
cases). DNA binding sites in the promoter region forAP-2gamma in the PLAP and
c-kit genes might explain the concordance of protein expression.

PMID: 16416736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Aug;6(6):589-95. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Expression of TFAP2beta and TFAP2gamma genes in Xenopus laevis.

Zhang Y(1), Luo T, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bldg 6B, Room 412, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The embryonic expression patterns of two additional members of the transcription 
factor TFAP2 family in Xenopus laevis, TFAP2beta and TFAP2gamma, are described.
Both genes share overlapping expression domains with the previously characterized
TFAP2alpha in this species, although differences exist. All three genes are
expressed in the neural crest (NC) region at late gastrula to early neurula
stages. TFAP2alpha and TFAP2gamma are also expressed in outer, epidermal cells,
while TFAP2beta is essentially NC-specific. All three are induced by
Wnt/beta-catenin -- BMP signals and all bind to a consensus TFAP2 recognition
site from an epidermal keratin gene.

PMID: 16414310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(2):389-401.

Activation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor induces formation of EGF
receptor- and Grb2-containing clathrin-coated pits.

Johannessen LE(1), Pedersen NM, Pedersen KW, Madshus IH, Stang E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, The University of Oslo, Rikshospitalet, N-0027 Oslo,
Norway.

In HeLa cells depleted of adaptor protein 2 complex (AP2) by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) to the mu2 or alpha subunit or by transient overexpression of an AP2 
sequestering mutant of Eps15, endocytosis of the transferrin receptor (TfR) was
strongly inhibited. However, epidermal growth factor (EGF)-induced endocytosis of
the EGF receptor (EGFR) was inhibited only in cells where the alpha subunit had
been knocked down. By immunoelectron microscopy, we found that in AP2-depleted
cells, the number of clathrin-coated pits was strongly reduced. When such cells
were incubated with EGF, new coated pits were formed. These contained EGF, EGFR, 
clathrin, and Grb2 but not the TfR. The induced coated pits contained the alpha
subunit, but labeling density was reduced compared to control cells. Induction of
clathrin-coated pits required EGFR kinase activity. Overexpression of Grb2 with
inactivating point mutations in N- or C-terminal SH3 domains or in both SH3
domains inhibited EGF-induced formation of coated pits efficiently, even though
Grb2 SH3 mutations did not block activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). Our data demonstrate that
EGFR-induced signaling and Grb2 are essential for formation of clathrin-coated
pits accommodating the EGFR, while activation of MAPK and PI3K is not required.

PMCID: PMC1346888
PMID: 16382132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 1;290(1):13-31. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

PTHrP induces changes in cell cytoskeleton and E-cadherin and regulates
Eph/Ephrin kinases and RhoGTPases in murine secondary trophoblast cells.

El-Hashash AH(1), Kimber SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, 3.239 Stopford Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. El-HashashA@cardiff.ac.uk

The differentiation of murine trophoblast giant cells (TGCs) is well
characterised at the molecular level and, to some extent, the cellular level.
Currently, there is a rudimentary understanding about factors regulating the
cellular differentiation of secondary TGCs. Using day 8.5 p.c.-ectoplacental cone
(EPC) explant in serum-free culture, we have found parathyroid hormone-related
protein (PTHrP) to regulate cellular changes during TGC differentiation. PTHrP
greatly stimulated the formation and organisation of actin stress fibres and
actin expression in trophoblast outgrowth. This coincided with changing cell
shape into a flattened/fibroblastic morphology, suppression of E-cadherin
expression, and increased cell spreading in culture. PTHrP also increased the
nuclear staining of beta-catenin and, similar to activator protein-2gamma
(AP-2gamma), showed microtubule-dependent nuclear localisation in vitro. These
cellular and behavioural changes correlated with changes in the expression of
RhoGTPases and in both expression and phosphorylation of Eph/Ephrin kinases. The 
effects of PTHrP on trophoblast cellular differentiation were abolished after
blocking its action. In conclusion, PTHrP provides an excellent example of the
extrinsic factors that, through their network of activities, plays an important
role in cellular differentiation of secondary TGCs.

PMID: 16375886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Endocrinology. 2006 Apr;147(4):1685-96. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

The transcription factor AP-2beta causes cell enlargement and insulin resistance 
in 3T3-L1 adipocytes.

Tao Y(1), Maegawa H, Ugi S, Ikeda K, Nagai Y, Egawa K, Nakamura T, Tsukada S,
Nishio Y, Maeda S, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Seta, Otsu, Japan.

We have reported the association of variations in the activating protein-2beta
(AP-2beta) transcription factor gene with type 2 diabetes. This gene was
preferentially expressed in 3T3-L1 adipocytes in a differentiation
stage-dependent manner, and preliminary experiments showed that subjects with the
disease-susceptible allele showed stronger expression in adipose tissue than
those without the susceptible allele. Thus, we overexpressed the AP-2beta gene in
3T3-L1 adipocytes to clarify whether AP-2beta might play a crucial role in the
pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes through dysregulation of adipocyte function. In
cells overexpressing AP-2beta, cells increased in size by accumulation of
triglycerides accompanied by enhanced glucose uptake. On the contrary,
suppression of AP-2beta expression by small interfering RNA inhibited glucose
uptake. Enhancement of glucose uptake by AP-2beta overexpression was attenuated
by inhibitors of phospholipase C (PLC) and atypical protein kinase Czeta/lambda
(PKCzeta/lambda), but not by a phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-K) inhibitor.
Consistently, we found activation of PLC and atypical PKC, but not PI3-K, by
AP-2beta expression. Furthermore, overexpression of PLCgamma enhanced glucose
uptake, and this activation was inhibited by an atypical PKC inhibitor,
suggesting that the enhanced glucose uptake may be mediated through PLC and
atypical PKCzeta/lambda, but not PI3-K. Moreover, we observed the increased
tyrosine phosphorylation of Grb2-associated binder-1 (Gab1) and its association
with PLCgamma, indicating that Gab1 may be involved in AP-2beta-induced PLCgamma 
activation. Finally, AP-2beta overexpression was found to relate to the impaired 
insulin signaling. We propose that AP-2beta is a candidate gene for producing
adipocyte hypertrophy and may relate to the abnormal characteristics of
adipocytes observed in obesity.

PMID: 16373417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 May;20(5):1104-11. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Intronic polymorphisms within TFAP2B regulate transcriptional activity and affect
adipocytokine gene expression in differentiated adipocytes.

Tsukada S(1), Tanaka Y, Maegawa H, Kashiwagi A, Kawamori R, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Center, The Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

We have identified a gene encoding transcription factor activating enhancer
binding protein-2beta (TFAP2B) as a candidate for conferring susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes. Although we have also found that TFAP2B was preferentially
expressed in adipose cells in a differentiation-dependent manner, the mechanisms 
by which the gene and gene polymorphisms contribute to conferring susceptibility 
to the disease have not yet been elucidated. The aim of this study was to
evaluate the impact of the polymorphisms within the TFAP2B gene on conferring
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes. We identified that a 300-bp DNA fragment in
intron 1 of TFAP2B had significant enhancer activity, and the variations of this 
region affected this enhancer activity in differentiated adipocytes. In an
experiment using adenovirus vectors encoding TFAP2B, the expression of TNF-alpha 
gene was shown to be elevated in the TFAP2B overexpressing cells compared with
those in control cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that the expression of
TFAP2B was increased in the adipose tissues of subjects with the
disease-susceptibility allele, and the plasma levels of TNF-alpha and high
sensitivity C-reactive peptide were significantly elevated in the patients with
the disease-susceptibility allele. These results suggest that TFAP2B may
contribute to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes through regulation of
adipocytokine gene expression, and that TFAP2B may be a promising target for
treatment or prevention of this disease.

PMID: 16373396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 May;290(5):E916-24. Epub 2005 Dec 20.

Molecular mechanism of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 inhibition of adipogenesis in
3T3-L1 cells.

Kong J(1), Li YC.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medicine, Univ. of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Ave., Chicago, IL 60637,
USA.

We have investigated the molecular mechanism whereby 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
[1,25(OH)2D3] inhibits adipogenesis in vitro. 1,25(OH)2D3 blocks 3T3-L1 cell
differentiation into adipocytes in a dose-dependent manner; however, the
inhibition is ineffective 24-48 h after the differentiation is initiated,
suggesting that 1,25(OH)2D3 inhibits only the early events of the adipogenic
program. Treatment of 3T3-L1 cells with 1,25(OH)2D3 does not block the mitotic
clonal expansion or C/EBPbeta induction; rather, 1,25(OH)2D3 blocks the
expression of C/EBPalpha, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
(PPARgamma), sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1, and other downstream
adipocyte markers. The inhibition by 1,25(OH)2D3 is reversible, since removal of 
1,25(OH)2D3 from the medium restores the adipogenic process with only a temporal 
delay. Interestingly, although the vitamin D receptor (VDR) protein is barely
detectable in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes, its levels are dramatically increased during 
the early phase of adipogenesis, peaking at 4-8 h and subsiding afterward
throughout the rest of the differentiation program; 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment appears
to stabilize the VDR protein levels. Consistently, adenovirus-mediated
overexpression of human (h) VDR in 3T3-L1 cells completely blocks the adipogenic 
program, confirming that VDR is inhibitory. Inhibition of adipocyte
differentiation by 1,25(OH)2D3 is ameliorated by troglitazone, a specific
PPARgamma antagonist; conversely, hVDR partially suppresses the transacting
activity of PPARgamma but not of C/EBPbeta or C/EBPalpha. Moreover, 1,25(OH)2D3
markedly suppresses C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma mRNA levels in mouse epididymal fat 
tissue culture. Taken together, these data indicate that the blockade of 3T3-L1
cell differentiation by 1,25(OH)2D3 occurs at the postclonal expansion stages and
involves direct suppression of C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma upregulation,
antagonization of PPARgamma activity, and stabilization of the inhibitory VDR
protein.

PMID: 16368784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;11(24 Pt 1):8538-48.

Combination analysis of activator protein-1 family members, Sp1 and an activator 
protein-2alpha-related factor binding to different regions of the urokinase
receptor gene in resected colorectal cancers.

Schewe DM(1), Biller T, Maurer G, Asangani IA, Leupold JH, Lengyel ER, Post S,
Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Surgery and Molecular Oncology,
Universitaetsklinikum Mannheim and Department of Pediatrics, Dr. v. Haunersches
Kinderspital, Munich, Germany.

PURPOSE: Studies on the transactivation of genes via promoter elements have
mostly been done on cell lines rather than resected tissues. This, however, is
essential to address an in vivo or clinical relevance. We have previously shown
tumor-specific binding of Sp1 and an activator protein (AP)-2-related factor to
promoter region -152/-135 of the metastasis-related u-PAR gene in 60% of in
vivo-resected cancer tissues. Cell lines have implicated an additional role, and 
potential synergism, of an AP-1 region (-190/-171) in u-PAR regulation. This
study was done to (a) analyze AP-1 binding to this region in resected tumor and
normal tissues, and define subgroups in which it is tumor-specific, and (b) to
analyze transcription factor-binding patterns to both promoter motifs in resected
tissues, supporting synergism, and draw first prognostic conclusions.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In 103 patients with colorectal cancer, electrophoretic
mobility shift assay/supershift analysis for u-PAR promoter region -190/-171 was 
done in tumors and normal tissues. In 71 patients, region -152/-135 was also
analyzed. U-PAR protein was measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Tumor-specific AP-1 binding to region -190/-171 of the u-PAR promoter
was found in 40% of patients. Subgroup analysis showed tumor-specific binding for
c-Fos in 58%, for c-Jun in 50%, for JunD in 39%, and for Fra-1 in 4% of cases.
AP-1 binding correlated significantly with u-PAR protein amounts in both normal
and tumor tissues (P<0.001), in contrast to a tumor-specific correlation with
u-PAR of the AP-2/Sp1 region. In analyses for both promoter regions, 62% of
cancers showed simultaneous binding for AP-1, AP-2, and Sp1, 11% for AP-1 and
AP-2, 16% for AP-2 and Sp1, 4% for AP-2 only, 3% for AP-1 only, and 0% for Sp1
only. The binding of AP-1, AP-2, and Sp1 correlated significantly with each other
(P<0.001), the combination of AP-1 and AP-2 showing the highest correlation with 
u-PAR (P=0.008). Preliminary survival analysis indicated a trend for poorer
prognosis for binding of all three transcription factors.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study differentiating transcription factor-binding 
to two important u-PAR promoter regions in a large series of resected tumors and 
normal tissues. The AP-1 site seems to be a less tumor-specific regulator than
the Sp1/AP-2 motif. Nevertheless, data corroborate the hypothesis of synergism
between both elements in resected tumors.

PMID: 16361535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Feb 1;312(3):299-307. Epub 2005 Dec 5.

Endocytosis of beta1 integrins is an early event in migration promoted by the
cell adhesion molecule L1.

Panicker AK(1), Buhusi M, Erickson A, Maness PF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 505 Mary Ellen Jones Bldg, CB#7260,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7260, USA.

Directional cell motility is a complex process requiring orchestration of signals
from diverse cell adhesion receptors for proper organization of neuronal groups
in the brain. The L1 cell adhesion molecule potentiates integrin-dependent
migration of neuronal cells and stimulates integrin endocytosis but its mechanism
of action is unclear. The hypothesis was investigated that L1 stimulates cell
motility by modulating surface levels of integrins through intracellular
trafficking using a model cell system. Antibody-induced clustering of L1, which
mimics ligand binding, induced formation of cell surface complexes of L1 and
beta1 integrins in L1-expressing HEK293 cells. L1 formed cell surface complexes
with integrin beta1 and alpha3 subunits but not with integrin alpha1. Following
cell surface clustering, beta1 integrins and L1 became rapidly internalized into 
Rab5+ early endosomes. Internalization of L1 and beta1 integrins was prevented by
treatment with monodansyl cadaverine (MDC), an inhibitor of clathrin-dependent
endocytosis, and by deletion of the AP2/clathrin binding motif (RSLE) from the L1
cytoplasmic domain. MDC treatment coordinately inhibited L1-potentiated
haptotactic migration of HEK293 cells to fibronectin in Transwell assays. These
results suggested that downregulation of adhesive complexes of L1 and beta1
integrin at the plasma membrane by clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a potential
mechanism for enhancing cell motility.

PMID: 16330023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Craniofac Surg. 2005 Nov;16(6):1055-61; discussion 1062-3.

Gene expression changes of sonic hedgehog signaling cascade in a mouse embryonic 
model of fetal alcohol syndrome.

Yamada Y(1), Nagase T, Nagase M, Koshima I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University of Tokyo Graduate
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is a congenital anomaly attributable to prenatal
maternal excessive intake of ethanol. The authors made a mammalian model of FAS
by culturing mouse embryos with high ethanol for embryonic day 7.8 to 9.5 in the 
whole embryo culture system. The embryos exposed to high ethanol were smaller and
less advanced in development than were the embryos in the control group and
showed craniofacial abnormalities, such as a fusion defect of the neural tube.
The expression patterns of CRABP-I and AP-2 as markers of the neural crest cells 
were mostly unchanged in the in situ hybridization. However, the density and area
of the expression were decreased, possibly because of the death of the neural
crest cells. The expression patterns of the Sonic hedgehog signaling cascade
genes (Shh, Ptc-1 and Gli-1) were mostly unchanged in the in situ hybridization, 
but the quantitative expressions of Ptc-1 and Gli-1 were increased in real-time
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analyses, quite contrary to the
findings of a previous study using chick embryos. These findings suggest Shh
signaling also is involved in the pathogenesis of FAS in mammalian embryo, but in
a mode different from that in the chick embryo.

PMID: 16327553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 1;289(1):253-61. Epub 2005 Dec 1.

TAp63alpha induces AP-2gamma as an early event in epidermal morphogenesis.

Koster MI(1), Kim S, Huang J, Williams T, Roop DR.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Epidermal morphogenesis begins with the commitment of the single-layered surface 
ectoderm to initiate a stratification program, a process that requires the
expression of the transcription factor TAp63alpha. To determine the molecular
mechanism by which TAp63alpha induces genes associated with the commitment to
stratification, such as K14, we have used a combination of in vitro and in vivo
approaches. Our initial gene expression profiling studies suggested that
TAp63alpha could regulate one or more AP-2 genes, which have been implicated in
development and maintenance of the epidermis. We now demonstrate that TAp63alpha 
directly induces AP-2gamma expression in embryonic epidermis, when commitment to 
stratification occurs. Furthermore, we show that, in the absence of AP-2gamma,
TAp63alpha fails to induce K14 expression in vitro. Our data identify AP-2gamma
as the first in vivo target gene of TAp63alpha, and provide novel insights into
the molecular mechanisms associated with early events in epidermal morphogenesis.

PMID: 16324689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):11185-92.

Automated quantitative analysis of activator protein-2alpha subcellular
expression in melanoma tissue microarrays correlates with survival prediction.

Berger AJ(1), Davis DW, Tellez C, Prieto VG, Gershenwald JE, Johnson MM, Rimm DL,
Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, USA.

The activator protein-2alpha (AP-2) transcription factor plays a key role in
regulating expression of genes involved in tumor growth and metastasis of human
melanoma. We sought to assess the prognostic significance of AP-2 expression and 
its role in the transition of nevi to metastatic melanoma. Two cohorts were
analyzed. One was a "progression" microarray containing melanoma specimens from
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center representing 84 cases and the other was a
retrospective cohort from Yale University representing 214 primary melanomas and 
293 metastases. Analysis of total AP-2 expression using two quantitative systems 
[automated quantitative analysis (AQUA) and laser scanning cytometry (LSC)]
revealed no correlation with diagnosis group. LSC analysis of the M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center array showed that the number of cells expressing nuclear AP-2 was
highest in the benign nevi group (11.85%) and significantly decreased in each
phase of melanoma progression to 0.39% in the metastatic group. Both LSC and AQUA
showed decreased nuclear AP-2 levels and increased cytoplasmic AP-2 that is
directly proportional to progression. Neither nuclear nor cytoplasmic expression 
levels correlated with outcome. Intriguingly, the ratio of cytoplasmic to nuclear
AP-2 predicted outcome in the entire population and in the primary tumors alone, 
demonstrating the power of the ratio to normalize for variations. Furthermore,
the AP-2 ratio directly correlated with other clinicopathologic factors,
including Breslow depth (R = 0.334, P < 0.001). We show that a high level of AP-2
expression in the cytoplasm relative to the nucleus correlates with poor
prognosis and the loss of nuclear AP-2 expression is associated with malignant
transformation and progression of melanoma.

PMID: 16322269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Lipid Res. 2006 Feb;47(2):450-60. Epub 2005 Nov 30.

OP9 mouse stromal cells rapidly differentiate into adipocytes: characterization
of a useful new model of adipogenesis.

Wolins NE(1), Quaynor BK, Skinner JR, Tzekov A, Park C, Choi K, Bickel PE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Lipid Research, Department of
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Much knowledge of adipocyte biology has been learned from cell culture models,
most notably 3T3-L1 cells. The 3T3-L1 model has several limitations, including
the requirement of 2 weeks to generate adipocytes and the waning of adipogenic
potential in culture. We have investigated the capacity of OP9 cells, a line of
bone marrow-derived mouse stromal cells, to recapitulate adipogenesis. When OP9
cells are given any one of three adipogenic stimuli, they rapidly accumulate
triacylglycerol, assume adipocyte morphology, and express adipocyte late marker
proteins, including glucose transporter 4 and adiponectin. OP9 cells can
differentiate into adipocytes within 2 days. This rapid rate of differentiation
allows for the detection of transiently expressed proteins in mature OP9
adipocytes. Adipogenesis in OP9 cells involves the master transcriptional
regulator of adipocyte differentiation, peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma (PPARgamma). OP9 cells are late preadipocytes in that, before the 
addition of adipogenic stimuli, they express the adipocyte proteins
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins alpha and beta, PPARgamma, sterol-regulatory
element binding protein-1, S3-12, and perilipin. OP9 differentiation is not
diminished by maintenance in culture at high cell density or by long periods in
continuous culture, thereby facilitating the generation of stable cell lines that
retain adipogenic potential. Thus, the unique features of OP9 cells will expedite
the study of adipocyte biology.

PMID: 16319419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Oncogene. 2006 Apr 6;25(15):2148-59.

AP2alpha alters the transcriptional activity and stability of p53.

Stabach PR(1), Thiyagarajan MM, Woodfield GW, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

AP2alpha and p53 form nuclear complexes that establish a functional partnership, 
which regulates the expression of certain genes involved in cell growth and
metastasis. The growth effects of AP2alpha are mediated through p21WAF1/CIP1 and 
the ability for AP2alpha to coactivate p21 requires p53. Herein, we have
localized the AP2-binding region of p53 to amino acids 305-375. Analysis of 26
distinct p53 alleles established a correlation between AP2alpha binding and
transcriptional coactivation. The L350P point mutation was the only nonbinding
allele that retained normal transcriptional activity by reporter assay. Although 
both wild-type and L350P alleles facilitated binding of AP2alpha to the p21
promoter, the L350P allele was significantly reduced in its ability to induce the
endogenous p21 gene, demonstrating a striking difference in activity comparing
reporter assays with activation of endogenous p53 target genes. Interestingly,
expression of AP2 in the absence of radiation repressed p53-mediated induction of
p21 and this effect was explained by a reduction in p53 stability induced by
AP2alpha overexpression. We conclude that AP2alpha has competing effects on p53
activity through coactivation and decreased stability. These findings may provide
a mechanism to account for the discrepancies reported for the association between
AP2 and p21 expression in tumor tissue.

PMID: 16288208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Hum Mutat. 2005 Dec;26(6):575-82.

Identification and functional analysis of CITED2 mutations in patients with
congenital heart defects.

Sperling S(1), Grimm CH, Dunkel I, Mebus S, Sperling HP, Ebner A, Galli R,
Lehrach H, Fusch C, Berger F, Hammer S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
sperling@molgen.mpg.de

Recent reports have demonstrated that mice lacking the transcription factor
Cited2 die in utero showing various cardiac malformations. We present for the
first time functionally relevant mutations of CITED2 in patients with congenital 
heart defects (CHDs). CITED2 encodes a CREBBP/EP300 interacting transcriptional
modulator of HIF1A and TFAP2. To study the potential impact of sequence
variations in CITED2 for CHDs in humans, we screened a cohort of 392
well-characterized patients and 192 control individuals using DHPLC, sequencing, 
and Amplifluor genotyping techniques. We identified 15 CITED2 nucleotide
alterations. Seven of these alterations were found only in CHD patients and were 
not detected in controls, including three mutations leading to alterations of the
amino acid sequence (p.Ser170_Gly178del, p.Gly178_Ser179ins9, and
p.Ser198_Gly199del). All three of these amino acid changing mutations cluster in 
the serine-glycine-rich junction of the protein, to which no functionality had
heretofore been assigned. Here we show that these mutations significantly reduce 
the capacity of CITED2 to transrepress HIF1A, and that the p.Ser170_Gly178del
mutation significantly diminishes TFAP2C coactivation. This reveals a modifying
role for the serine-glycine-rich region in CITED2 function. In summary, the
observation of these mutations in patients with septal defects indicates that
CITED2 has a causative impact in the development of CHD in humans.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16287139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS Genet. 2005 Nov;1(5):e52. Epub 2005 Nov 4.

Elucidation of clathrin-mediated endocytosis in tetrahymena reveals an
evolutionarily convergent recruitment of dynamin.

Elde NC(1), Morgan G, Winey M, Sperling L, Turkewitz AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Ciliates, although single-celled organisms, contain numerous subcellular
structures and pathways usually associated with metazoans. How this cell
biological complexity relates to the evolution of molecular elements is unclear, 
because features in these cells have been defined mainly at the morphological
level. Among these ciliate features are structures resembling clathrin-coated,
endocytic pits associated with plasma membrane invaginations called parasomal
sacs. The combination of genome-wide sequencing in Tetrahymena thermophila with
tools for gene expression and replacement has allowed us to examine this pathway 
in detail. Here we demonstrate that parasomal sacs are sites of
clathrin-dependent endocytosis and that AP-2 localizes to these sites.
Unexpectedly, endocytosis in Tetrahymena also involves a protein in the dynamin
family, Drp1p (Dynamin-related protein 1). While phylogenetic analysis of AP
subunits indicates a primitive origin for clathrin-mediated endocytosis, similar 
analysis of dynamin-related proteins suggests, strikingly, that the recruitment
of dynamin-family proteins to the endocytic pathway occurred independently during
the course of the ciliate and metazoan radiations. Consistent with this, our
functional analysis suggests that the precise roles of dynamins in endocytosis,
as well as the mechanisms of targeting, differ in metazoans and ciliates.

PMCID: PMC1277907
PMID: 16276403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Traffic. 2005 Dec;6(12):1225-34.

Effect of clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia protein depletion on
clathrin coat formation.

Meyerholz A(1), Hinrichsen L, Groos S, Esk PC, Brandes G, Ungewickell EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Center of Anatomy, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg Str. 1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

The endocytic accessory clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid leukemia protein
(CALM) is the ubiquitously expressed homolog of the neuron-specific protein AP180
that has been implicated in the retrieval of synaptic vesicle. Here, we show that
CALM associates with the alpha-appendage domain of the AP2 adaptor via the three 
peptide motifs 420DPF, 375DIF and 489FESVF and to a lesser extent with the
amino-terminal domain of the clathrin heavy chain. Reducing clathrin levels by
RNA interference did not significantly affect CALM localization, but depletion of
AP2 weakens its association with the plasma membrane. In cells, where CALM levels
were reduced by RNA interference, AP2 and clathrin remained organized in somewhat
enlarged bright fluorescent puncta. Electron microscopy showed that the depletion
of CALM drastically affected the clathrin lattice structure. Round-coated buds,
which are the predominant features in control cells, were replaced by irregularly
shaped buds and long clathrin-coated tubules. Moreover, we noted an increase in
the number of very small cages that formed on flat lattices. Furthermore, we
noticed a redistribution of endosomal markers and AP1 in cells that were CALM
depleted. Taken together, our findings indicate a critical role for CALM in the
regulation and orderly progression of coated bud formation at the plasma
membrane.

PMID: 16262731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 6;281(1):51-8. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Regulation of KiSS-1 metastasis suppressor gene expression in breast cancer cells
by direct interaction of transcription factors activator protein-2alpha and
specificity protein-1.

Mitchell DC(1), Abdelrahim M, Weng J, Stafford LJ, Safe S, Bar-Eli M, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Genetics, Texas A&M University System Health Science Center, Houston 77030,
USA.

KiSS-1 has been shown to function as a tumor metastasis suppressor gene and
reduce the number of metastases in different cancers. The expression of KiSS-1 or
KiSS1, like other tumor suppressor, is commonly reduced or completely ablated in 
a variety of cancers via an unknown mechanism. Here we show that the loss of
KiSS-1 expression in highly metastatic breast cancer cell lines correlates
directly with the expression levels of two transcription factors, activator
protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) and specificity protein 1 (Sp1), which synergistically
activate the transcriptional regulation of KiSS-1 in breast cancer cells.
Although the KiSS-1 promoter contains multiple AP-2alpha binding elements,
AP-2alpha-mediated regulation occurs indirectly through Sp1 sites, as determined 
by deletion and mutation analysis. Overexpression of AP-2alpha into highly
metastatic breast cell lines did not alter KiSS-1 promoter-driven luciferase gene
activity. However, co-transfection of AP-2alpha wild-type or the dominant
negative form of AP-2 lacking its C-terminal DNA-binding domain, AP-2B, together 
with Sp1, increased KiSS-1 promoter activity dramatically, suggesting that
AP-2alpha regulation of KiSS-1 transcription does not require direct binding to
the KiSS-1 promoter. Furthermore, we demonstrated that AP-2alpha directly
interacted with Sp1 to form transcription complexes at two tandem Sp1-binding
sites of the promoter to activate KiSS-1 transcription. Together, our results
indicate that AP-2alpha and Sp1 are strong transcriptional regulators of KiSS-1
and that loss or decreased expression of AP-2alpha in breast cancer may account
for the loss of tumor metastasis suppressor KiSS-1 expression and thus increased 
cancer metastasis.

PMID: 16260418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Cell Physiol. 2006 Apr;207(1):144-57.

Nectin-2 expression in testicular cells is controlled via the functional
cooperation between transcription factors of the Sp1, CREB, and AP-1 families.

Lui WY(1), Sze KL, Lee WM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Nectin-2, a major protein component of the adherens junctions (AJs), is found
between Sertoli cells and germ cells in the seminiferous epithelium. Recent
studies have shown that the expression of nectin-2 gene in testis is crucial to
maintain normal spermatogenesis since male knockout mice lacking nectin-2 gene
are sterile and possess morphologically abnormal spermatozoa. However, the
molecular mechanisms governing its basal transcription remain poorly understood. 
By the use of Sertoli and germ cell-lines (TM4 and GC-2spd(ts) cells,
respectively) in transient transfection studies, we showed that the minimal mouse
nectin-2 promoter was located between nucleotides -316 and -211 (relative to the 
translation start site). Two putative Sp1 motifs and one each of the CRE, AP1,
and AP2 motifs were identified within this region. Mutational studies showed that
these two Sp1 motifs cooperated synergistically with the CRE motif, but not the
AP1 and AP2 motifs, to regulate nectin-2 gene transcription in both TM4 and
GC-2spd(ts) cells. By EMSAs, we found that an AP-1 consensus sequence was able to
inhibit DNA-protein complex formation with the CRE motif, suggesting an
interaction between the AP-1 transcription factor (c-Jun) and CREB within the CRE
motif. Overexpressions of CREB and c-Jun, but not c-Fos, also significantly
increased the promoter activity, which suggests that CREB and c-Jun are the
crucial transcription factors involved in regulating nectin-2 gene transcription.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay has shown that, in vivo, CREB, c-Jun, and Sp1
family proteins are bound to the mouse nectin-2 promoter. Analysis of the staged 
tubules has confirmed that the cyclic expressions of CREB and nectin-2 coincide
with the event of adherens junction restructuring between Sertoli cells and germ 
cells. The cross-talk between CREB, c-Jun, and Sp1 family protein is believed to 
be a major transcription machinery to drive nectin-2 expression in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 16250013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gynecol Oncol. 2006 Mar;100(3):462-8. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

The AP-2gamma transcription factor is upregulated in advanced-stage ovarian
carcinoma.

Ødegaard E(1), Staff AC, Kaern J, Flørenes VA, Kopolovic J, Tropé CG, Abeler VM, 
Reich R, Davidson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Ulleval University Hospital, N-0407 Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the expression of the AP-2gamma transcription factor in
ovarian borderline tumors, early-stage ovarian carcinoma and advanced-stage
ovarian carcinoma, and to evaluate its prognostic role in advanced-stage tumors.
METHODS: Sections from 14 normal ovaries, 75 borderline tumors, 22 FIGO stage I
invasive ovarian carcinomas, and 306 advanced-stage (FIGO stages II-IV) ovarian
carcinomas (42 primary tumors, 62 solid metastases, 202 effusions) were evaluated
for expression of the transcription factor AP-2gamma using immunohistochemistry. 
Sixty-three effusions and two cell lines (SKOV-3 and OVCAR-3) were additionally
studied using immunoblotting. The prognostic role of AP-2gamma in advanced-stage 
carcinomas was analyzed.
RESULTS: AP-2gamma was detected in the nucleus of tumor cells in 28/75 (37%)
borderline tumors, 13/22 (59%) FIGO stage I carcinomas, and 255/306 (83%)
advanced-stage carcinomas (P < 0.001, Chi-square test). Benign ovaries were
uniformly negative. Expression was largely limited to carcinoma cells in
effusions. Solid lesions and effusions from advanced-stage carcinomas showed
comparable expression. Immunoblotting showed AP-2gamma expression in 59/61
effusions and both cell lines. AP-2gamma expression did not correlate with
survival.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2gamma expression is upregulated in advanced-stage ovarian
carcinoma compared to early-stage carcinomas, borderline tumors, and the ovarian 
surface epithelium, and AP-2gamma is specifically localized to cancer cells in
effusions, suggesting a role in tumor progression. The lack of predictive value
for this transcription factor in advanced-stage disease may be related to its
frequent expression.

PMID: 16216317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hum Reprod. 2006 Feb;21(2):397-404. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Spatial expression of germ cell markers during maturation of human fetal male
gonads: an immunohistochemical study.

Pauls K(1), Schorle H, Jeske W, Brehm R, Steger K, Wernert N, Büttner R, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology and Department of Developmental Pathology, University
of Bonn, Germany. katrina.pauls@ukb.uni-bonn.de

BACKGROUND: The aim of the present study was to examine fetal male germ cells for
expression of proteins associated with differentiation and maturation and to
compare them with morphologically defined subpopulations.
METHODS: Testes of 61 fetuses from week 12 of gestation to the newborn period
were selected. Immunohistochemistry was performed using antibodies to proteins
associated with differentiation of germ cells (c-KIT, AP-2gamma) or pluripotency 
(OCT3/4), oncofetal protein M2A and spermatogonial marker MAGE-A4.
RESULTS: Two subtypes of fetal germ cells were detected by quantification and
immunohistochemistry. Nearly all germ cells with morphological criteria of
gonocytes and intermediate cells co-expressed OCT3/4, c-KIT, M2A and AP-2gamma.
Starting from week 12, their number increased up to week 18/19 and then declined 
continuously during further development. After week 25, pre-spermatogonia were
predominant and expressed MAGE-A4 selectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Fetal male germ cells are comprised of two major groups with
distinct immunohistochemical phenotypes. Germ cells that are predominantly found 
before week 25 of gestation co-express oncofetal proteins OCT3/4, c-KIT, M2A and 
AP-2gamma. After week 25, most germ cells have lost their pluripotent potential
and acquire a spermatogonial phenotype defined by expression of MAGE-A4.

PMID: 16210381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 1;65(19):8628-34.

Activator protein 2alpha status determines the chemosensitivity of cancer cells: 
implications in cancer chemotherapy.

Wajapeyee N(1), Raut CG, Somasundaram K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, India and National Institute of Virology, Pune, India.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 1;65(23):11228.

Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs induce apoptosis by several pathways. Inactivation 
of proapoptotic genes, or activation of survival signaling, leads to
chemoresistance. Activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha), a developmentally
regulated sequence-specific DNA-binding transcription factor, has been shown to
function like a tumor suppressor. Here, we show that controlled expression of
AP-2alpha, using tetracycline-inducible system, increased the chemosensitivity of
cancer cells by severalfold by sensitizing cells to undergo apoptosis upon
chemotherapy. Under these conditions, neither AP-2alpha expression nor drug
treatment resulted in apoptosis induction, whereas in combination the cancer
cells underwent massive apoptosis. We found that endogenous AP-2alpha protein is 
induced posttranscriptionally by various chemotherapeutic drugs. Blocking the
endogenous AP-2alpha by small interfering RNA in human cancer cells lead to
decreased apoptosis, increased colony formation, and chemoresistance irrespective
of their p53 status upon chemotherapy. We further show that
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine induced reexpression of AP-2alpha in MDA-MB-231 breast
cancer cells (wherein AP-2alpha expression is silenced by hypermethylation),
resulted in massive apoptosis induction, increased chemosensitivity, decreased
colony formation, and loss of tumorigenesis upon chemotherapy. However, in
MDA-MB-231 cells transfected with AP-2alpha small interfering RNA,
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment failed to increase apoptosis and
chemosensitivity. The treatment also resulted in increased colony formation and
efficient tumor formation upon chemotherapy. These results establish an important
role for AP-2alpha in cancer cell chemosensitivity and provide new insights for
modifying the chemosensitivity of cancer cells by activating apoptotic pathways.

PMID: 16204029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 25;280(47):39161-7. Epub 2005 Oct 3.

Regulation of epithelial Na+ channel activity by conserved serine/threonine
switches within sorting signals.

Staruschenko A(1), Pochynyuk O, Stockand JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, Texas 78229-3900, USA.

The PY and YXXphi motifs are canonical sorting signals involved in trafficking.
Nedd4-2 and the mu(2)-subunit of the AP-2 complex target these motifs to
facilitate internalization. Epithelial Na(+) channel (ENaC) subunits contain both
motifs in their cytosolic COOH termini where they overlap ((S/T)PPPXYX(S/T)phi). 
Just preceding the PY and embedded within the YXXphi motifs are conserved
serine/threonine. We test here whether these conserved Ser/Thr modulate ENaC
activity by influencing the function of the internalization domains. We find that
co-expression of dominant-negative dynamin (K44A) with ENaC increases channel
activity. Conversely, co-expression of Nedd4-2 and epsin with ENaC decrease
activity. Alanine substitution of the conserved Thr(628) preceding the PY motif
in gamma-mENaC had no effect on basal activity. Channels with this mutation,
however, responded to K44A and epsin but not Nedd4-2. Similarly, mutation of the 
proline repeat in the PY motif of gamma-mENaC disrupted only Nedd4-2 regulation
having no effect on regulation by K44A and epsin. Alanine substitution of the
conserved Thr within the YXX motif of gamma-mENaC (T635A) increased basal
activity. Channels containing this mutation responded to Nedd4-2 but not K44A and
epsin. Channels containing the T635(D/E) substitution in gamma-mENaC did not have
increased basal activity and responded to Nedd4-2 but not K44A. The double mutant
T628A,T635A did not respond to Nedd4-2 or K44A. Mutation of Thr(628) and Thr(635)
also disrupted ENaC precipitation with the mu(2)-subunit of the AP-2 complex.
Moreover, the YXXphi motif, independent of the PY motif, was sufficient to target
degradation with T635A disrupting this effect. These results demonstrate that the
overlapping PY and YXXphi motifs in ENaC are, in some instances, capable of
independent function and that the Ser/Thr just preceding and within these domains
impact this function.

PMID: 16203727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Genetics. 2006 Jan;172(1):547-55. Epub 2005 Sep 19.

Molecular characterization of the major wheat domestication gene Q.

Simons KJ(1), Fellers JP, Trick HN, Zhang Z, Tai YS, Gill BS, Faris JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Sciences, North Dakota State University, Fargo, North
Dakota 58105, USA.

The Q gene is largely responsible for the widespread cultivation of wheat because
it confers the free-threshing character. It also pleiotropically influences many 
other domestication-related traits such as glume shape and tenacity, rachis
fragility, spike length, plant height, and spike emergence time. We isolated the 
Q gene and verified its identity by analysis of knockout mutants and
transformation. The Q gene has a high degree of similarity to members of the AP2 
family of transcription factors. The Q allele is more abundantly transcribed than
q, and the two alleles differ for a single amino acid. An isoleucine at position 
329 in the Q protein leads to an abundance of homodimer formation in yeast cells,
whereas a valine in the q protein appears to limit homodimer formation. Ectopic
expression analysis allowed us to observe both silencing and overexpression
effects of Q. Rachis fragility, glume shape, and glume tenacity mimicked the q
phenotype in transgenic plants exhibiting post-transcriptional silencing of the
transgene and the endogenous Q gene. Variation in spike compactness and plant
height were associated with the level of transgene transcription due to the
dosage effects of Q. The q allele is the more primitive, and the mutation that
gave rise to Q occurred only once leading to the world's cultivated wheats.

PMCID: PMC1456182
PMID: 16172507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;24(9):582-94.

Distal ERBB2 promoter fragment displays specific transcriptional and nuclear
binding activities in ERBB2 overexpressing breast cancer cells.

Delacroix L(1), Begon D, Chatel G, Jackers P, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, GIGA/Experimental Cancer Research Centre,
University of Liege, Belgium.

Overexpression of the ERBB2 gene occurs in 30% of human breast cancers and is
correlated with poor prognosis. The deregulation is the consequence of an
increased transcription level and gene amplification. Several laboratories,
including our own, have identified, in the proximal promoter, enhancers
implicated in the gene overexpression. However, our previous studies of a 6-kb
ERBB2 promoter fragment revealed the presence of repressing fragments, which were
able to overcome the effect of the proximal enhancers. These repressing elements 
were functional in all cell lines, regardless of their endogenous ERBB2
expression level. Here, we show that a distal ERBB2 promoter region restores high
transcription rates specifically in ERBB2 overexpressing breast cancer cells.
This distal promoter region thus contains enhancers essential for the
overexpression of the gene. By EMSA, performed with nuclear extract of cells
overexpressing (BT-474) or not (MDA-MB-231) the ERBB2 gene, we show that at least
two sequences of the distal promoter region are bound exclusively by BT-474
extract. Further experiments reveal that AP-2 transcription factors contribute to
this differential binding activity, by binding recognition sequences located 4500
bp and 4000 bp upstream of the transcription start site. These sites are occupied
by AP2 in vivo, as demonstrated by ChIP assay. Inactivation of AP-2 proteins in
ERBB2 overexpressing cells reduces the distal promoter activity up to 70%,
indicating the AP-2 factors are implicated in the strong distal enhancing effect.
Moreover, we identified a 54-bp fragment that is bound specifically by BT-474
nuclear extract. Further experiments did not lead to the identification of the
protein responsible for this binding. Our results thus highlight the importance
of ERBB2 distal promoter region and further implicate AP-2 in ERBB2
overexpression in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 16153159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2004 Apr;29(2):195-7.

[AP-2 expression and significance in the lung cancer tissues].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou R(1), Chen P, Zhang GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410011, China. zhourui64@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the active protein-2 (AP-2) expression in non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC) and the relationship between the expression and tumor
biological characteristics.
METHODS: Fifty NSCLC tissues and 15 normal lung tissues were used to detect the
expression of AP-2 transcription factor with the immunohistochemical method.
RESULTS: The positive rate of AP-2 expression was zero in the normal lung
tissues, but 32% in the NSCLC tissues. The AP-2 expression in the NSCLC tissues
was significantly elevated (P < 0.05). The postive rate of AP-2 expression was
significantly higher in the NSCLC tissues of pathological grade III (57.89%) than
in those of grade I - II (16.13%) (P < 0.05), and higher in patients of clinical 
stage III - IV (44. 83%) than in those of stage I - II (14.29%) (P <0.01), and in
the NSCLC patients with lymph node metastasis (40.54%) than in those without
(7.7%) (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The up-regulation of AP-2 expression in the NSCLC tissues suggests
that AP-2 may be involved in the NSCLC carcinogenesis. AP-2 may play an important
role in the genesis and development of NSCLC.

PMID: 16145912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36055-64. Epub 2005 Aug 29.

APP1 transcription is regulated by inositol-phosphorylceramide synthase
1-diacylglycerol pathway and is controlled by ATF2 transcription factor in
Cryptococcus neoformans.

Mare L(1), Iatta R, Montagna MT, Luberto C, Del Poeta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.

Inositol-phosphorylceramide synthase 1 (Ipc1) is a fungal-specific enzyme that
regulates the level of two bioactive molecules, phytoceramide and diacylglycerol 
(DAG). In previous studies, we demonstrated that Ipc1 regulates the expression of
the antiphagocytic protein 1 (App1), a novel fungal factor involved in
pathogenicity of Cryptococcus neoformans. Here, we investigated the molecular
mechanism by which Ipc1 regulates App1. To this end, the APP1 promoter was fused 
to the firefly luciferase gene in the C. neofor-mans GAL7:IPC1 strain, in which
the Ipc1 expression can be modulated, and found that the luciferase activity was 
indeed regulated when Ipc1 was modulated. Next, using the luciferase reporter
assay in both C. neoformans wild-type and GAL7:IPC1 strains, we investigated the 
role of DAG and sphingolipids in the activation of the APP1 promoter and found
that treatment with 1,2-dioctanoylglycerol does increase APP1 transcription,
whereas treatment with phytosphingosine or ceramides does not. Two putative
consensus sequences were found in the APP1 promoter for ATF and AP-2
transcription factors. Mutagenesis analysis of these sequences revealed that they
play a key role in the regulation of APP1 transcription: ATF is an activator,
whereas AP-2 in a negative regulator. Finally, we identified a putative Atf2
transcription factor, which is required for APP1 transcription and under the
control of Ipc1-DAG pathway. These studies provide novel regulatory mechanisms of
the sphingolipid pathway involved in the regulation of gene transcription of C.
neoformans.

PMID: 16129666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Invest Dermatol. 2005 Sep;125(3):545-53.

Ultraviolet A-induced signaling involves a ceramide-mediated autocrine loop
leading to ceramide de novo synthesis.

Grether-Beck S(1), Timmer A, Felsner I, Brenden H, Brammertz D, Krutmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut fuer Umweltmedizinische Forschung at the Heinrich-Heine-University
Duesseldorf gGmbH, Duesseldorf, Germany.

Exposure of human keratinocytes to ultraviolet A (UVA) radiation at physiological
doses leads to a biphasic activation of transcription factor activator protein-2 
(AP-2) and subsequently to a biphasic increase in gene expression of, e.g.
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1). Both kinetics follow a pattern with a
first peak between 0.5 and 2 h and a second, more sustained activation between 16
and 48 h. We have previously reported on a non-enzymatic triggering of the
ceramide signaling cascade as the initiating step in UVA radiation-induced
signaling. In this study, we report that this early (0.5-1 h) peak in ceramide
content is followed by a second peak that (i) was associated with an increased
expression and activity of serine palmitoyltransferase, the key enzyme of
ceramide synthesis, (ii) could be prevented by inhibitors of this enzyme, and
(iii) was of functional relevance because its inhibition abrogated the second,
but not the first peak in UVA radiation-induced ICAM-1 gene expression. We
hypothesize that this second peak most likely resulted from a ceramide-mediated
autocrine loop, for (i) inhibition of the first ceramide peak resulted in
inhibition of the second peak and (ii) cell-permeable ceramides-induced serine
palmitoyltransferase expression, activity, and subsequently ceramide content.

PMID: 16117797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Growth Differ. 2005 Aug;47(6):403-13.

Regulatory targets for transcription factor AP2 in Xenopus embryos.

Luo T(1), Zhang Y, Khadka D, Rangarajan J, Cho KW, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2790, USA.

The transcription factor AP2 (TFAP2) has an important role in regulating gene
expression in both epidermis and neural crest cells. In order to further
characterize these functions we have used a hormone inducible TFAP2alpha fusion
protein in a Xenopus animal cap assay to identify downstream targets of this
factor. The most common pattern comprised genes predominantly expressed in the
epidermis. A second group was expressed at high levels in the neural crest, but
all of these were also expressed in the epidermis as well as in other tissues in 
which TFAP2alpha has not been detected, suggesting modular control involving both
TFAP2-dependent and TFAP2-independent components. In addition, a few strongly
induced genes did not overlap at all in expression pattern with that of
TFAP2alpha in the early embryo, and were also activated precociously in the
experimentally manipulated ectoderm, and thus likely represent inappropriate
regulatory interactions. A final group was identified that were repressed by
TFAP2alpha and were expressed in the neural plate. These results provide further 
support for the importance of TFAP2alpha in ectoderm development, and also
highlight the molecular linkage between the epidermis and neural crest in the
Xenopus embryo.

PMID: 16109038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Int J Cancer. 2006 Feb 15;118(4):802-11.

Inefficient proteasomal-degradation pathway stabilizes AP-2alpha and activates
HER-2/neu gene in breast cancer.

Li M(1), Wang Y, Hung MC, Kannan P.

Author information: 
(1)MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH,
USA.

HER-2/neu proto-oncogene is overexpressed in about one fourth of human breast
cancers. AP-2 transcription factors bind to the HER-2/neu gene promoter and
activate its expression. In a striking concurrence, anomalous abundance of
AP-2alpha protein or its homolog AP-2gamma is also detected with HER-2/neu
protein in mammary tumor-derived cell lines. This suggests that the deregulation 
of AP-2 is the preceding pathogenic event and probably the pivotal one in this
type of mammary carcinogenesis. We examined the process of AP-2alpha gene
expression in mammary carcinoma cell lines to identify where the aberration had
occurred. We found no amplification of the AP-2alpha gene. Its promoter was
marginally upregulated; however, it did not significantly increase the mRNA
levels. When the AP-2alpha protein was examined, a remarkable stability was seen 
in breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-453 and SK-BR-3, with a half-life of over 30
hr. This is sharply higher than the approximate 1 hr observed in mammary
epithelial cell line MCF-10A and murine cell line NIH 3T3. Treatment of MCF-10A
and NIH 3T3 cells with the proteasome inhibitor MG-132 showed that AP-2alpha was 
ubiquitinated and its level significantly increased. Moreover, this increase was 
accompanied by elevated levels HER-2/neu protein. In contrast, weaker
ubiquitination of AP-2alpha was seen in MDA-MB-453 and SK-BR-3 cancer cells, and 
MG-132 treatment did not raise the AP-2alpha level any further. These results
uncover that unusual stability is the main mechanism that raises the levels of
AP-2 proteins, and in addition, provide the first clue that defective
ubiquitin-dependent proteasomal-degradation pathway is possibly the prime cause
that affects the HER-2/neu gene and culminates in breast cancer.

PMID: 16108032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Oct 17;23(2):217-26. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Temporal gene expression profiling of liver from periparturient dairy cows
reveals complex adaptive mechanisms in hepatic function.

Loor JJ(1), Dann HM, Everts RE, Oliveira R, Green CA, Guretzky NA, Rodriguez-Zas 
SL, Lewin HA, Drackley JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
USA. jloor@uiuc.edu

Long-term molecular adaptations in liver from high-producing dairy cows are
virtually unknown. Liver from five Holstein cows was biopsied at -65, -30, -14,
+1, +14, +28, and +49 days relative to parturition for transcript profiling using
a microarray consisting of 7,872 annotated cattle cDNA inserts. More than 5,000
cDNA elements represented on the microarray were expressed in liver. From this
set we identified 62 differentially expressed genes related to physiological
state, with a false discovery rate threshold of P = 0.20. The dominant expression
pattern consisted of upregulation from day -30 through day +1, followed by
downregulation through day +28. There was a threefold decrease from day -65
through day +14 in expression of IGFBP3, GSTM5, and PDPK1. These genes mediate
IGF-I transport, oxidative stress, and glucose homeostasis, respectively. IGFBP3,
EIF4B, and GSTM5 mRNA levels were positively correlated with blood serum total
protein. Correlation analysis showed positive associations between serum
nonesterified fatty acids and mRNA expression for SAA1, CPT1A, ACADVL, and
TFAP2A. Transcript levels of ACSL1, PPARA, and TFAP2A were positively correlated 
with serum beta-hydroxybutyrate. Expression patterns for certain genes (e.g.,
IGFBP3, HNF4A, GPAM) revealed adaptations commencing well ahead of parturition,
suggesting they are regulated by factors other than periparturient hormonal
environment. Results provide evidence that hepatic inflammatory responses
occurring near parturition initiate or augment adipose catabolism. In this
context, cytokines, acute-phase proteins, and serum nonesterified fatty acids are
key players in periparturient cow metabolism. We propose a model for integrating 
gene expression, metabolite, and liver composition data to explain physiological 
events in placenta, adipose, and liver during the periparturient period.

PMID: 16091418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. EMBO J. 2005 Sep 7;24(17):3049-56. Epub 2005 Aug 4.

Fhl2 deficiency results in osteopenia due to decreased activity of osteoblasts.

Günther T(1), Poli C, Müller JM, Catala-Lehnen P, Schinke T, Yin N, Vomstein S,
Amling M, Schüle R.

Author information: 
(1)Universitäts-Frauenklinik und Zentrum für Klinische Forschung, Klinikum der
Universität Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Osteoporosis is one of the major health problems today, yet little is known about
the loss of bone mass caused by reduced activity of the bone-forming osteoblasts.
Here we show that mice deficient for the transcriptional cofactor four and a half
LIM domains 2 (Fhl2) exhibit a dramatic decrease of bone mass in both genders.
Osteopenia is caused by a reduced bone formation rate that is solely due to the
diminished activity of Fhl2-deficient osteoblasts, while their number remains
unchanged. The number and activity of the bone-resorbing cells, the osteoclasts, 
is not altered. Enforced expression of Fhl2 in differentiated osteoblasts boosts 
mineralization in cell culture and, importantly, enhances bone formation in
transgenic animals. Fhl2 increases the transcriptional activity of runt-related
transcription factor 2 (Runx2), a key regulator of osteoblast function, and both 
proteins interact in vitro and in vivo. In summary, we present Fhl2-deficient
mice as a unique model for osteopenia due to decreased osteoblast activity. Our
data offer a novel concept to fight osteoporosis by modulating the anabolic
activity of osteoblasts via Fhl2.

PMCID: PMC1201354
PMID: 16079911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul 26;33(13):4212-22. Print 2005.

Cooperative binding of DNA and CBFbeta to the Runt domain of the CBFalpha studied
via MD simulations.

Habtemariam B(1), Anisimov VM, MacKerell AD Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of
Maryland Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

The Runt domain (RD) is the DNA-binding region of the Runx genes. A related
protein, known as core binding factor beta (CBFbeta) also binds to the RD to
enhance RD-DNA interaction by 6- to 10-fold. Here, we report results from
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of RD alone, as a dimer in complexes with DNA
and CBFbeta and in a ternary complex with DNA and CBFbeta. Consistent with the
experimental findings, in the presence of CBFbeta the estimated free energy of
binding of RD to the DNA is more favorable, which is shown to be due to more
favorable intermolecular interactions and desolvation contributions. Also
contributing to the enhanced binding are favorable intramolecular interactions
between the 'wing' residues (RD residues 139-145) and the 'wing1' residues (RD
residues 104-116). The simulation studies also indicate that the RD-CBFbeta
binding is more favorable in the presence of DNA due to a more favorable
RD-CBFbeta interaction energy. In addition, it is predicted that long-range
interactions involving ionic residues contribute to binding cooperativity.
Results from the MD calculations are used to interpret a variety of experimental 
mutagenesis data. A novel role for RD Glu116 to the RD-CBFbeta interaction is
predicted.

PMCID: PMC1180745
PMID: 16049027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Neuroscience. 2005;134(3):907-19.

Cell type-specific and sexually dimorphic expression of transcription factor AP-2
in the adult mouse brain.

Coelho DJ(1), Sims DJ, Ruegg PJ, Minn I, Muench AR, Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 201 Life Sciences Building, 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Expression of transcription factor AP-2 family genes in adult mouse brain regions
was examined at RNA and protein levels and in tissue sections. AP-2 family RNA
transcripts, nuclear AP-2 DNA binding activity, and AP-2 immunoreactivity were
greatest in hindbrain and midbrain regions. Cells expressing AP-2 were
predominantly differentiated neurons and were abundant in the solitary tract
nucleus, hypoglossal nucleus, locus coeruleus, cerebellar molecular layer,
superior colliculus, mitral cell layers of the main and accessory olfactory
bulbs, and in some divisions of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Sexually
dimorphic expression of AP-2 was seen in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis,
a forebrain region required for regulation of gender-specific reproductive and
social behaviors. In males, AP-2 expressing neurons were present in
supracapsular, lateral ventral, and medial ventral divisions of the bed nucleus
of the stria terminalis. In contrast, females had AP-2 expressing neurons in the 
lateral ventral division, but not the supracapsular division, and AP-2 expression
in medial ventral division neurons oscillated during the estrus cycle. With the
exception of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, forebrain regions generally
lacked cells with high levels of AP-2. However, a small population of cells
co-expressing low levels of AP-2 and Notch1 was sparsely distributed in the
cerebral cortex and hippocampal dentate gyrus subgranular zone. Based on their
variable levels of NeuN, a marker for differentiated neurons, these cells may
include nascent neurons. A subset of cerebellar Purkinje cells also co-expressed 
low levels of AP-2 and Notch1. Together, the adult brain regions with AP-2
expressing neurons are notable for their importance in pathways that integrate
sensory and neuroendocrine information for regulation of reproductive, social,
and feeding behaviors. Our data suggest that AP-2 transcription factors
contribute at multiple levels to adult brain function including regulation of
gender-specific behavior.

PMID: 16009501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 2;280(35):30689-96. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

Cooperative interactions between activating transcription factor 4 and
Runx2/Cbfa1 stimulate osteoblast-specific osteocalcin gene expression.

Xiao G(1), Jiang D, Ge C, Zhao Z, Lai Y, Boules H, Phimphilai M, Yang X, Karsenty
G, Franceschi RT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics, Prevention, and Geriatrics, School of Dentistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-1078, USA. xiaogz@umich.edu

The role of ATF4 (activating transcription factor 4) in osteoblast
differentiation and bone formation was recently described using ATF4-deficient
mice (Yang, X., Matsuda, K., Bialek, P., Jacquot, S., Masuoka, H. C., Schinke,
T., Li, L., Brancorsini, S., Sassone-Corsi, P., Townes, T. M., Hanauer, A., and
Karsenty, G. (2004) Cell 117, 387-398). However, the mechanisms of ATF4 in bone
cells are still not clear. In this study, we determined the molecular mechanisms 
through which ATF4 activates the mouse osteocalcin (Ocn) gene 2 (mOG2) expression
and mOG2 promoter activity. ATF4 increased the levels of Ocn mRNA and mOG2
promoter activity in Runx2-containing osteoblasts but not in non-osteoblastic
cells that lack detectable Runx2 protein. However, ATF4 increased Ocn mRNA and
mOG2 promoter activity in non-osteoblastic cells when Runx2 was co-expressed.
Mutational analysis of the OSE1 (ATF4-binding site) and the two OSE2s
(Runx2-binding sites) in the 657-bp mOG2 promoter demonstrated that ATF4 and
Runx2 activate Ocn via cooperative interactions with these sites. Pull-down
assays using nuclear extracts from osteoblasts or COS-7 cells overexpressing ATF4
and Runx2 showed that both factors are present in either anti-ATF4 and anti-Runx2
immunoprecipitates. In contrast, pull-down assays using purified glutathione
S-transferase fusion proteins were unable to demonstrate a direct physical
interaction between ATF4 and Runx2. Thus, accessory factors are likely involved
in stabilizing interactions between these two molecules. Regions within Runx2
required for ATF4 complex formation and activation were identified. Deletion
analysis showed that the leucine zipper domain of ATF4 is critical for Runx2
activation. This study is the first demonstration that cooperative interactions
between ATF4 and Runx2/Cbfa1 stimulate osteoblast-specific Ocn expression and
suggests that this regulation may represent a novel intramolecular mechanism
regulating Runx2 activity and, thereby, osteoblast differentiation and bone
formation.

PMID: 16000305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 9;280(36):31353-9. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

BMP-2 and insulin-like growth factor-I mediate Osterix (Osx) expression in human 
mesenchymal stem cells via the MAPK and protein kinase D signaling pathways.

Celil AB(1), Campbell PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Genetic studies place the transcription factor Osterix (Osx) downstream of Runx2,
but limited information is available about Osx regulation during osteoblastic
differentiation. An important role for bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) and
insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) on Osx expression and the requirement for
p38 for the BMP-2-mediated effect was reported previously by our group. In this
study, we continued to investigate the molecular mechanisms by which BMP-2 and
IGF-1 regulate Osx expression during osteoblast lineage progression.
IGF-I-mediated Osx expression required all three MAPK components (Erk, p38, and
JNK), whereas BMP-2 required p38 and JNK signaling. As a common mediator of
growth factor signaling, we also investigated the involvement of protein kinase
C/D (PKC/D) signaling. BMP-2- and IGF-I-mediated Osx expression was blocked in
response to a PKD inhibitor. A selective inhibitor of conventional PKCs had no
effect on the BMP-2-mediated Osx expression. BMP-2 and IGF-I induced a selective 
phosphorylation of PKD, and PKD was required for mineralization. PKC/D and MAPK
signaling also mediate Runx2 activity. Therefore, to document the implication for
Runx2 in Osx regulation, we blocked Runx2 activity using a dominant negative
Runx2 construct and an ubiquitination mediator for Runx2 degradation. We showed
that blocking Runx2 activity inhibited the BMP-2-mediated induction of Osx. These
studies implicated that multiple signaling pathways mediate Osx, a critical gene 
for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. In addition to Runx2, other
signaling components may be necessary to regulate Osx during osteoblast lineage
progression.

PMID: 16000303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Plant Mol Biol. 2005 Mar;57(5):613-28.

AINTEGUMENTA-like (AIL) genes are expressed in young tissues and may specify
meristematic or division-competent states.

Nole-Wilson S(1), Tranby TL, Krizek BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA.

Although several members of the AP2/ERF family of transcription factors are
important developmental regulators in plants, many genes in this large protein
family remain uncharacterized. Here, we present a phylogenetic analysis of the 18
genes that make up the AP2 subgroup of this family. We report expression analyses
of seven Arabidopsis genes most closely related to the floral development gene
AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) and show that all AINTEGUMENTA-like (AIL) genes are
transcribed in multiple tissues during development. They are expressed primarily 
in young actively dividing tissues of a plant and not in mature leaves or stems. 
The spatial distribution of AIL5, AIL6, and AIL7 mRNA in inflorescences was
characterized by in situ hybridization. Each of these genes is expressed in a
spatially and temporally distinct pattern within inflorescence meristems and
flowers. Ectopic expression of AIL5 resulted in a larger floral organ phenotype, 
similar to that resulting from ectopic expression of ANT. Our results are
consistent with AIL genes having roles in specification of meristematic or
division-competent states.

PMID: 15988559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Histopathology. 2005 Jul;47(1):48-56.

Stem cell pluripotency factor NANOG is expressed in human fetal gonocytes,
testicular carcinoma in situ and germ cell tumours.

Hoei-Hansen CE(1), Almstrup K, Nielsen JE, Brask Sonne S, Graem N, Skakkebaek NE,
Leffers H, Rajpert-De Meyts E.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth & Reproduction and Department of Pathology,
Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. chh@dadlnet.dk

AIMS: NANOG is a key regulator of embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and
pluripotency. Our recent genome-wide gene expression profiling study of the
precursor of testicular germ cell tumours, carcinoma in situ testis (CIS), showed
close similarity between ESC and CIS, including high NANOG expression. In the
present study we analysed the protein expression of NANOG during normal
development of human testis and in a large series of neoplastic/dysgenetic
specimens.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We detected abundant expression of NANOG in CIS and in
CIS-derived testicular tumours with marked differences; seminoma and embryonal
carcinoma were strongly positive, differentiated somatic elements of teratoma
were negative. We provide evidence for the fetal origin of testicular cancer as
we detected strong expression of NANOG in fetal gonocytes up to gestational week 
20, with subsequent down-regulation occurring earlier than for OCT-4. We detected
no expression at the protein level in normal testis.
CONCLUSIONS: NANOG is a new marker for testicular CIS and germ cell tumours and
the high level of NANOG along with OCT-4 are determinants of the stem cell-like
pluripotency of the preinvasive CIS cell. Timing of NANOG down-regulation in
fetal gonocytes suggests that NANOG may act as a regulatory factor up-stream to
OCT-4.

PMID: 15982323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 19;280(33):29717-27. Epub 2005 Jun 24.

Differential regulation of dentin sialophosphoprotein expression by Runx2 during 
odontoblast cytodifferentiation.

Chen S(1), Rani S, Wu Y, Unterbrink A, Gu TT, Gluhak-Heinrich J, Chuang HH,
Macdougall M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, The University of Texas Health Science
Center, San Antonio, 78229-3900, USA. hyuan@emory.edu

Dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP) consists of dentin sialoprotein (DSP) and
dentin phosphoprotein (DPP). The spatial-temporal expression of DSPP is largely
restricted during differentiational stages of dental cells. DSPP plays a vital
role in tooth development. It is known that an osteoblast-specific transcription 
factor, Runx2, is essential for osteoblast differentiation. However, effects of
Runx2 on DSPP transcription remain unknown. Here, we studied different roles of
Runx2 in controlling DSPP expression in mouse preodontoblast (MD10-F2) and
odontoblast (MO6-G3) cells. Two Runx2 isoforms were expressed in preodontoblast
and odontoblast cells, and in situ hybridization assay showed that DSPP
expression increased, whereas Runx2 was down-regulated during odontoblast
differentiation and maturation. Three potential Runx2 sites are present in
promoters of mouse and rat DSPP genes. Runx2 binds to these sites as demonstrated
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and supershift experiments. Mutations of 
Runx2 sites in mouse DSPP promoter resulted in a decline of promoter activity in 
MD10-F2 cells compared with an increase of its activity in MO6-G3 cells. Multiple
Runx2 sites were more active than a single site in regulating the DSPP promoter. 
Furthermore, forced overexpression of Runx2 isoforms induced increases of
endogenous DSPP protein levels in MD10-F2 cells but reduced its expression in
MO6-G3 cells consistent with the DSPP promoter analysis. Thus, our results
suggest that differential positive and negative regulation of DSPP by Runx2 is
dependent on use of cytodifferentiation of dental ectomesenchymal-derived cells
that may contribute to the spatial-temporal expression of DSPP during tooth
development.

PMID: 15980071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Allergy. 2005 Aug;60(8):1046-52.

Gene expression and regulation of transcription factor activator protein-2 alpha 
in human mast cells.

Welker P(1), Wanner R, Zuberbier T, Groneberg DA, Henz BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Charité School of Medicine, Free
University and Humboldt-University, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor activator protein (AP)-2 regulates cell-type
specific gene expression during development and differentiation, but its role in 
mast cell development has so far not been explored.
METHODS: Gene expression and regulation of AP2 was assessed in normal skin,
diseases with increased mast cell numbers, and in vitro models of mast cell
differentiation.
RESULTS: AP-2alpha-protein was not detectable in normal skin but in mastocytoma
lesional mast cells. AP-2alpha-mRNA and -protein were also detected in leukemic
mast cells (HMC-1), in the adherent fraction of peripheral blood (PBMC) and
umbilical cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMC), and AP-2alpha-mRNA at low levels
in isolated-purified mast cells. During culture with fibroblast supernatants or
SCF, AP-2alpha-mRNA was de novo expressed in KU812-cells, maintained at about the
same level in PBMC and CBMC, and upregulated in HMC-1-cells. On extended culture,
a down-regulation was noted at mRNA and/or protein levels. In contrast, tryptase 
expression increased in all cells throughout culture, as did c-Kit in normal
cells, whereas in both leukemic cell lines, c-Kit was maintained unchanged at
about the same level.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest a continuous activation of AP-2alpha in
mastocytomas and mast cell leukemia and its transient upregulation during c-Kit
dependent early steps of normal mast cell differentiation.

PMID: 15969686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2005 Oct;112(10):1281-96. Epub 2005 Jun 15.

Transcription factor AP-2 and monoaminergic functions in the central nervous
system.

Damberg M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden. mattias.damberg@neuro.uu.se

In the central nervous system, transcription factor AP-2 family is one of the
critical regulatory factors for neural gene expression and neuronal development. 
Several genes in the monoaminergic systems display AP-2 binding sites in
regulatory regions. In addition, brainstem levels of transcription factor
AP-2alpha and AP-2beta are positively correlated to monoamine measures in rat
forebrain, suggesting a regulatory role of AP-2 also in the adult brain. Great
changes in psychiatric phenotypes due to genetic factors are seldom the result of
a single gene polymorphism. Recently, identification of combinations of candidate
genes that are all linked to one disease or psychiatric phenotype has been
discussed. The expression of these candidate genes might be regulated by the same
transcription factors, e.g. AP-2. Recent data on transcription factor AP-2 family
in relation to monoaminergic functions are described in this paper. Transcription
factor AP-2beta genotype has been studied in relation to personality, platelet
monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity, CSF-levels of monoamine metabolites,
binge-eating disorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, and schizophrenia.
Furthermore, the involvement of AP-2 in the molecular mechanism of antidepressant
drugs is discussed. Altogether, this paper discusses data supporting a notion
that the transcription factor AP-2 family is involved in the regulation of the
monoaminergic systems both pre- and postnatally, and, therefore, might be
involved in the pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMID: 15959839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jun;34(3):713-22.

Activation of the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 promoter by
parathyroid hormone in osteosarcoma cells requires activation of an activated
protein-2 element.

Erclik MS(1), Mitchell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, 1 King's College Circle,
Room 4342, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8, Canada.

We have previously shown that parathyroid hormone (PTH) stimulates the expression
of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5) transcript levels in
the osteosarcoma cell-line, UMR106-01 cells. In the present study we examined the
molecular basis for the PTH induction of IGFBP-5 mRNA in these cells. PTH had no 
effect on the half-life of the IGFBP-5 transcript but did stimulate the
transactivation of the proximal 889 base pairs of the rat IGFBP 5' flanking
region in a luciferase fusion construct, suggesting that PTH stimulates
transcript levels through transcriptional mechanisms. Progressive 5' deletions to
-59 base pairs of the proximal promoter region had no effect on PTH induction of 
transactivation, indicating that an element existed within the first -59 base
pairs upstream of the transcription start site that was responsive to PTH. Within
the -59 base pairs there are CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), E-box,
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) and activator protein-2 (AP-2) elements. Mutation of the 
C/EBP, E-box or NF-1 elements had no effect on the ability of PTH to induce the
transactivation of the IGFBP-5 promoter. Mutation of the AP-2 element resulted in
a 40% reduction of PTH-stimulated luciferase activity. When three tandem repeats 
of the AP-2 consensus sequence were fused to a luciferase reporter, PTH
stimulated a 25% increase in reporter activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using UMR106-01 cell nuclear extracts showed that PTH caused a prominent
shifted band in a probe spanning the region containing all four elements. The
shifted band was almost completely absent when the probe contained a mutated AP-2
element. These results suggest that the AP-2 element functions in the PTH
induction of IGFBP-5 gene expression.

PMID: 15956342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3127-38.

AP2-dependent signals from the ectoderm regulate craniofacial development in the 
zebrafish embryo.

Knight RD(1), Javidan Y, Zhang T, Nelson S, Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA. tschilli@uci.edu

AP2 transcription factors regulate many aspects of embryonic development. Studies
of AP2a (Tfap2a) function in mice and zebrafish have demonstrated a role in
patterning mesenchymal cells of neural crest origin that form the craniofacial
skeleton, while the mammalian Tfap2b is required in both the facial skeleton and 
kidney. Here, we show essential functions for zebrafish tfap2a and tfap2b in
development of the facial ectoderm, and for signals from this epithelium that
induce skeletogenesis in neural crest cells (NCCs). Zebrafish embryos deficient
for both tfap2a and tfap2b show defects in epidermal cell survival and lack
NCC-derived cartilages. We show that cartilage defects arise after NCC migration 
during skeletal differentiation, and that they can be rescued by transplantation 
of wild-type ectoderm. We propose a model in which AP2 proteins play two distinct
roles in cranial NCCs: an early cell-autonomous function in cell specification
and survival, and a later non-autonomous function regulating ectodermal signals
that induce skeletogenesis.

PMID: 15944192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Yeast. 2005 May;22(7):511-21.

Mammalian transcription activation domains of VP16, AP2 and CTF activate
transcription in a whole cell extract from Schizosaccharomyces pombe through the 
SRB/mediator.

Tamayo E(1), Bernal G, Maldonado E.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, Chile.

The acidic-rich activation domain of VP16 and the proline-rich activation domains
of human AP2 and human CTF are able to activate transcription in a whole cell
extract from Schizosaccharomyces pombe, whereas the glutamine-rich domains of Sp1
and Oct2 are unable to activate transcription in this system. Immunodepletion
experiments of the whole cell extracts using specific antibodies against pombe
TAF110, pombe TAF 72, pombe TBP and Srb4 shows that the activation of
transcription by VP16, AP2 and CTF is through the mediator, since depletion of
Srb4 inhibits activated transcription but does not inhibit basal transcription.
Immunodepletion of TBP causes inhibition of both activated and basal
transcription. On the other hand, immunodepletion of TAFs does not have an effect
on either activated or basal transcription. Purified RNA polymerase holoenzyme is
able to rescue the transcriptional activation activity of the anti-Srb4
immunodepleted extract. Moreover, we demonstrate that the mediator is needed for 
basal transcription of a TATA-less promoter.

PMID: 15942925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Traffic. 2005 Jul;6(7):539-47.

Analysis of the AP-2 adaptor complex and cargo during clathrin-mediated
endocytosis.

Rappoport JZ(1), Benmerah A, Simon SM.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Cellular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, PO Box 304, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Previously, we reported that the hetero-tetrameric adaptor complex AP-2
co-localizes with the static population of clathrin spots, whereas it is excluded
from clathrin spots that disappear from the plasma membrane (forming
clathrin-coated vesicles). More recently however, another group provided evidence
that AP-2 markers could be observed coincident with disappearing clathrin spots. 
Thus, we tested several possible explanations for the apparent discrepancies in
these two studies. We evaluated the potential contribution of nonred emission of 
clathrin-dsRed (used in both studies) in the simultaneous measurement of AP-2 and
clathrin at various times. Additionally, we directly compared two different green
fluorescent protein-tagged AP-2 constructs (similar to those used in the previous
reports). These studies demonstrated that the duration of expression time greatly
influences the subcellular localization of the AP-2 markers. Furthermore, we
quantitatively evaluated the AP-2 fluorescence at the sites of numerous static
and disappearing clathrin spots (at least 80 per group) and confirmed our initial
observation that while AP-2 is present in nearly all static clathrin spots, it is
excluded from the disappearing population of clathrin spots. Finally, in order to
verify that clathrin spot disappearance represents clathrin-coated vesicle
internalization, we simultaneously imaged clathrin and the cargo molecule
transferrin at the cell surface.

PMCID: PMC1360144
PMID: 15941406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Hum Genet. 2005;50(6):283-92. Epub 2005 Jun 7.

Genetic variations in the gene encoding TFAP2B are associated with type 2
diabetes mellitus.

Maeda S(1), Tsukada S, Kanazawa A, Sekine A, Tsunoda T, Koya D, Maegawa H,
Kashiwagi A, Babazono T, Matsuda M, Tanaka Y, Fujioka T, Hirose H, Eguchi T, Ohno
Y, Groves CJ, Hattersley AT, Hitman GA, Walker M, Kaku K, Iwamoto Y, Kawamori R, 
Kikkawa R, Kamatani N, McCarthy MI, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Diabetic Nephropathy, SNP Research Center, The Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama,
Kanagawa, 230-0045, Japan. smaeda@src.riken.jp

To search a gene(s) conferring susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus, we
genotyped nearly 60,000 gene-based SNPs for Japanese patients and found evidence 
that the gene at chromosome 6p12 encoding transcription-factor-activating protein
2beta (TFAP2B) was a likely candidate in view of significant association of
polymorphism in this gene with type 2 diabetes. Extensive analysis of this region
identified that several variations within TFAP2B were significantly associated
with type 2 diabetes [a variable number of tandem repeat locus: chi(2)=10.9,
P=0.0009; odds ratio=1.57, 95% CI 1.20-2.06, intron 1+774 (G/T); chi(2)=11.6,
P=0.0006; odds ratio=1.60, 95% CI 1.22-2.09, intron 1+2093 (A/C); chi(2)=12.2,
P=0.0004; odds ratio=1.61, 95% CI 1.23-2.11]. The association of TFAP2B with type
2 diabetes was also observed in the UK population. These results suggest that
TFAP2B might be a new candidate for conferring susceptibility to type 2 diabetes 
and contribute to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 15940393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 29;24(43):6545-54.

7q deletion mapping and expression profiling in uterine fibroids.

Vanharanta S(1), Wortham NC, Laiho P, Sjöberg J, Aittomäki K, Arola J, Tomlinson 
IP, Karhu A, Arango D, Aaltonen LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, PO Box 63
(Haartmaninkatu 8), Biomedicum Helsinki, FIN-00014, Finland.

Uterine fibroids are some of the most common tumours of females, but relatively
little is known about their molecular basis. Several studies have suggested that 
deletions on chromosome 7q could have a role in fibroid formation. We analysed
165 sporadic uterine fibroids to define a small 3.2 megabase (Mb) commonly
deleted region on 7q22.3-q31.1, flanked by clones AC005070 and AC007567. We also 
used oligonucleotide microarrays to compare the expression profiles of 10 samples
of normal myometrium and 15 fibroids, nine of which displayed 7q-deletions.
Activating transcription factor 3, patched homolog (Drosophila), homeo box A5,
death-associated protein kinase 1, and retinoic acid receptor responder 3 were
downregulated, and excision repair crosscomplementing 3, transcription factor
AP-2 gamma and protein kinase C beta 1 were upregulated in fibroids. New pathways
were discovered related to fibroid formation. The presence or absence of
7q-deletions did not dramatically affect the global expression pattern of the
tumours; changes, however, were observed in genes related to vesicular transport 
and nucleic acid binding.

PMID: 15940248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 15;283(2):345-56.

Selective Runx2-II deficiency leads to low-turnover osteopenia in adult mice.

Xiao Z(1), Awad HA, Liu S, Mahlios J, Zhang S, Guilak F, Mayo MS, Quarles LD.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine/The Kidney Institute, University of Kansas Medical Center,
6018 Wahl Hall East, Kansas City, 66160, USA.

Runx2 transcribes Runx2-II and Runx2-I isoforms with distinct N-termini. Deletion
of both isoforms results in complete arrest of bone development, whereas
selective loss of Runx2-II is sufficient to form a grossly intact skeleton with
impaired endochondral bone development. To elucidate the role of Runx2-II in
osteoblast function in adult mice, we examined heterozygous Runx2-II
(Runx2-II(+/-)) and homozygous Runx2-II (Runx2-II(-/-))-deficient mice, which,
respectively, lack one or both copies of Runx2-II but intact Runx2-I expression. 
Compared to wild-type mice, 6-week-old Runx2-II(+/-) had reduced trabecular bone 
volume (BV/TV%), cortical thickness (Ct.Th), and bone mineral density (BMD),
decreased osteoblastic and osteoclastic markers, lower bone formation rates,
impaired osteoblast maturation of BMSCs in vitro, and significant reductions in
mechanical properties. Homozygous Runx2-II(-/-) mice had a more severe reduction 
in BMD, BV/TV%, and Ct.Th, and greater suppression of osteoblastic and
osteoclastic markers than Runx2-II(+/-) mice. Non-selective Runx2(+/-) mice,
which have an equivalent reduction in Runx2 expression due to the lack one copy
of Runx2-I and II, however, had an intermediate reduction in BMD. Thus, selective
Runx2-II mutation causes diminished osteoblastic function in an adult mouse
leading to low-turnover osteopenia and suggest that Runx2-I and II have distinct 
functions imparted by their different N-termini.

PMCID: PMC1360182
PMID: 15936013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2005 Aug;4(8):1145-54. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Non-stoichiometric relationship between clathrin heavy and light chains revealed 
by quantitative comparative proteomics of clathrin-coated vesicles from brain and
liver.

Girard M(1), Allaire PD, McPherson PS, Blondeau F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Québec H3A 2B4, Canada.

We used tandem mass spectrometry with peptide counts to identify and to determine
the relative levels of expression of abundant protein components of highly
enriched clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) from rat liver. The stoichiometry of
stable protein complexes including clathrin heavy chain and clathrin light chain 
dimers and adaptor protein (AP) heterotetramers was assessed. We detected a
deficit of clathrin light chain compared with clathrin heavy chain in non-brain
tissues, suggesting a level of regulation of clathrin cage formation specific to 
brain. The high ratio of AP-1 to AP-2 in liver CCVs is reversed compared with
brain where there is more AP-2 than AP-1. Despite this, general endocytic cargo
proteins were readily detected in liver but not in brain CCVs, consistent with
the previous demonstration that a major function for brain CCVs is recycling
synaptic vesicles. Finally we identified 21 CCV-associated proteins in liver not 
yet characterized in mammals. Our results further validate the peptide accounting
approach, reveal new information on the properties of CCVs, and allow for the use
of quantitative proteomics to compare abundant components of organelles under
different experimental and pathological conditions.

PMID: 15933375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2005 May;50(6 Suppl):664-9.

[Molecular basis of bone formation and bone regeneration].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi A(1).

Author information: 
(1)akira.mpa@tmd.ac.jp

PMID: 15926497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Cell Sci. 2005 Jun 1;118(Pt 11):2405-13.

Exchange of clathrin, AP2 and epsin on clathrin-coated pits in permeabilized
tissue culture cells.

Yim YI(1), Scarselletta S, Zang F, Wu X, Lee DW, Kang YS, Eisenberg E, Greene LE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, NHLBI, National Institutes of Heath, Bethesda, MD 
20892-0301, USA.

Clathrin and clathrin adaptors on clathrin-coated pits exchange with cytosolic
clathrin and clathrin adaptors in vivo. This exchange might require the molecular
chaperone Hsc70 and J-domain-protein auxilin, which, with ATP, uncoat
clathrin-coated vesicles both in vivo and in vitro. We find that, although Hsc70 
and ATP alone could not uncoat clathrin-coated pits, further addition of auxilin 
caused rapid uncoating of clathrin but not AP2 and epsin. By contrast, cytosol
uncoats clathrin, AP2 and epsin from pits in permeabilized cells, and,
concomitantly, these proteins in the cytosol rebind to the same pits,
establishing that, like in vivo, these proteins exchange in permeabilized cells. 
Dissociation and exchange of clathrin in permeabilized cells can be prevented by 
inhibiting Hsc70 activity. The presence of clathrin-exchange in the permeabilized
system substantiates our in vivo observations, and is consistent with the view
that Hsc70 and auxilin are involved in the clathrin-exchange that occurs as
clathrin-coated pits invaginate in vivo.

PMID: 15923653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Obes Res. 2005 May;13(5):835-44.

Triglyceride-lowering effect of respiratory uncoupling in white adipose tissue.

Rossmeisl M(1), Kovar J, Syrovy I, Flachs P, Bobkova D, Kolar F, Poledne R,
Kopecky J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Adipose Tissue Biology, Institute of Physiology, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.

OBJECTIVE: Hypolipidemic drugs such as bezafibrate and thiazolidinediones are
known to induce the expression of mitochondrial uncoupling proteins (UCPs) in
white adipose tissue. To analyze the potential triglyceride (TG)-lowering effect 
of respiratory uncoupling in white fat, we evaluated systemic lipid metabolism in
aP2-Ucp1 transgenic mice with ectopic expression of UCP1 in adipose tissue.
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: Hemizygous and homozygous transgenic mice and
their nontransgenic littermates were fed chow or a high-fat diet for up to 3
months. Total TGs, nonesterified fatty acids, and the composition of plasma
lipoproteins were analyzed. Hepatic TG production was measured in mice injected
with Triton WR1339. Uptake and the use of fatty acids were estimated by measuring
adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase activity and fatty acid oxidation,
respectively. Adipose tissue gene expression was assessed by quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Transgene dosage and the high-fat diet interacted to markedly reduce
plasma TGs. This was reflected by decreased concentrations of very-low-density
lipoprotein particles in the transgenic mice. Despite normal hepatic TG
secretion, the activity of lipoprotein lipase in epididymal fat was enhanced by
the high-fat diet in the transgenic mice in a setting of decreased
re-esterification and increased in situ fatty acid oxidation.
DISCUSSION: Respiratory uncoupling in white fat may lower plasma lipids by
enhancing their in situ clearance and catabolism.

PMID: 15919836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Differentiation. 2005 Apr;73(4):154-74.

PTHrP promotes murine secondary trophoblast giant cell differentiation through
induction of endocycle, upregulation of giant-cell-promoting transcription
factors and suppression of other trophoblast cell types.

El-Hashash AH(1), Esbrit P, Kimber SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK.

The murine trophoblast cell lineage represents an intriguing experimental cell
model as it is composed of four trophoblast stem (TS)-derived cell types:
trophoblast giant cells (TGCs), spongiotrophoblast, syncytotrophoblast, and
glycogen trophoblast cells. To investigate the role of parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) in TGC differentiation, we analyzed the effect of
exogenous PTHrP on secondary TGCs of day 8.5 p.c. ectoplacental cone explant
culture. Secondary TGCs expressed PTHrP and PTHR1 receptor in vivo and in vitro. 
TGCs treated with PTHrP had reduced proliferation and decreased apoptosis
starting from day 2 in culture, and enhanced properties of giant cell
differentiation: increased DNA synthesis, number of cells with giant nuclei and
expression of placental lactogen-II (PL-II). The induction of TGC formation by
PTHrP correlated with downregulation of cyclin B1 and mSNA expression, but
upregulation of cyclin D1, thus allowing mitotic-endocycle transition. Moreover, 
PTHrP treatment influenced TGC differentiation by inducing the expression of
transcription factors known to stimulate giant cell formation: Stra13 and
AP-2gamma, and inhibiting the formation of other trophoblast cell types by
suppressing trophoblast progenitors and spongiotrophoblast-promoting factors,
Eomes, Mash-2, and mSNA. Taken together with the spatial and temporal patterns of
TGC formation and PTHrP synthesis in vivo, these findings indicate an important
role for PTHrP in the differentiation of secondary TGCs during placentation.

PMID: 15901283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Aug 1;1751(1):19-25.

Gene regulation and physiological function of placental leucine
aminopeptidase/oxytocinase during pregnancy.

Nomura S(1), Ito T, Yamamoto E, Sumigama S, Iwase A, Okada M, Shibata K, Ando H, 
Ino K, Kikkawa F, Mizutani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan. snomura@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Human pregnancy serum and placenta have the ability to degrade uterotonic peptide
oxytocin (OT). Placental leucine aminopeptidase (P-LAP), which is also called
cystine aminopeptidase, is the only membrane aminopeptidase known to functionally
degrade OT as oxytocinase (OTase). P-LAP/OTase hydrolyzes several peptides other 
than OT including vasopressin and angiotensin III. P-LAP/OTase predicted from
cDNA sequence is a type II integral membrane protein, which is converted to a
soluble form existing in maternal serum by metalloproteases, possibly ADAM (a
disintegrin and metalloproteinase) members. P-LAP/OTase activity increases with
normal gestation, while decreases in the patients with preterm delivery and
severe preeclampsia. In placenta, P-LAP/OTase is predominantly expressed in
differentiated trophoblasts, syncytiotrophoblasts. Activator protein-2 (AP-2) and
Ikaros transcription factors play significant roles in exerting high promoter
activity of P-LAP/OTase in the trophoblastic cells. Moreover, P-LAP/OTase is
transcriptionally regulated in a trophoblast-differentiation-dependent fashion
via up-regulation of AP-2, putatively AP-2alpha. P-LAP/OTase may be involved in
maintaining pregnancy homeostasis via metabolizing peptides such as OT and
vasopressin.

PMID: 15894523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 May 12;33(8):e79.

Proof of concept for microarray-based detection of DNA-binding oncogenes in cell 
extracts.

Egener T(1), Roulet E, Zehnder M, Bucher P, Mermod N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Lausanne 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.

The function of DNA-binding proteins is controlled not just by their abundance,
but mainly at the level of their activity in terms of their interactions with DNA
and protein targets. Moreover, the affinity of such transcription factors to
their target sequences is often controlled by co-factors and/or modifications
that are not easily assessed from biological samples. Here, we describe a
scalable method for monitoring protein-DNA interactions on a microarray surface. 
This approach was designed to determine the DNA-binding activity of proteins in
crude cell extracts, complementing conventional expression profiling arrays.
Enzymatic labeling of DNA enables direct normalization of the protein binding to 
the microarray, allowing the estimation of relative binding affinities. Using DNA
sequences covering a range of affinities, we show that the new microarray-based
method yields binding strength estimates similar to low-throughput gel
mobility-shift assays. The microarray is also of high sensitivity, as it allows
the detection of a rare DNA-binding protein from breast cancer cells, the human
tumor suppressor AP-2. This approach thus mediates precise and robust assessment 
of the activity of DNA-binding proteins and takes present DNA-binding assays to a
high throughput level.

PMCID: PMC1110745
PMID: 15891112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Gene. 2005 May 23;351:109-18.

Sp1 and AP2 enhance promoter activity of the mouse GM3-synthase gene.

Xia T(1), Zeng G, Gao L, Yu RK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, 30912, USA.

Promoters of the glycosyltransferase genes for ganglioside synthesis are
TATA-less and often have multiple binding sites for transcription factors Sp1 and
AP2 in their proximal regions. However, the function of Sp1 and AP2 in the
promoters has not yet been defined. Here, we cloned 5'-flanking fragments of the 
mouse GM3-synthase gene and assessed the promoter activity of these fragments in 
mouse Neuro-2a cells. This promoter is TATA-less and contains a number of
potential transcription factor-binding sites. Multiple putative transcriptional
initiation sites for this gene were identified, including several downstream
initiation sites. We then set out to dissect the regulatory elements important
for GM3-synthase promoter function. We found that a 5'-flanking 254-bp DNA
fragment of the gene contained regulatory elements including two Sp1-binding and 
six AP2-binding sites that were essential for the basal activity of the promoter 
in mouse Neuro-2a cells. The effects of the individual Sp1- and AP2-binding sites
on basal activity of the GM3-synthase gene were investigated. Mutations in the
juxtaposed Sp1/AP2-binding site and in an AP2-binding site decreased the activity
of the proximal promoter to approximately 50%. In vitro and in vivo interactions 
between transcription factors Sp1 and AP2 and these regulatory elements were
confirmed by EMSA and the chromatin immunoprecipitation approach, respectively.
Therefore, our results demonstrate that Sp1 and AP2 enhance the basal activity of
the TATA-less mouse GM3-synthase promoter.

PMID: 15890474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Pflugers Arch. 2005 Jul;450(4):262-8. Epub 2005 May 12.

The rat Na+-sulfate cotransporter rNaS2: functional characterization, tissue
distribution, and gene (slc13a4) structure.

Dawson PA(1), Pirlo KJ, Steane SE, Nguyen KA, Kunzelmann K, Chien YJ, Markovich
D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, 4072, 
Australia.

Inorganic sulfate is essential for numerous functions in mammalian physiology. In
the present study, we characterized the functional properties of the rat
Na+-sulfate cotransporter NaS2 (rNaS2), determined its tissue distribution, and
identified its gene (slc13a4) structure. Expression of rNaS2 protein in Xenopus
oocytes led to a Na+-dependent transport of sulfate that was inhibited by
phosphate, thiosulfate, tungstate, selenate, oxalate, and molybdate, but not by
citrate, succinate, or DIDS. Transport kinetics of rNaS2 determined a K(M) for
sulfate of 1.26 mM. Na+ kinetics determined a Hill coefficient of n=3.0+/-0.7,
suggesting a Na+:SO4 (2-) stoichiometry of 3:1. rNaS2 mRNA was highly expressed
in placenta, with lower levels found in the brain and liver. slc13a4 maps to rat 
chromosome 4 and contains 17 exons, spanning over 46 kb in length. This gene
produces two alternatively spliced transcripts, of which the transcript lacking
exon 2 is the most abundant form. Its 5' flanking region contains CAAT- and
GC-box motifs and a number of putative transcription factor binding sites,
including GATA-1, SP1, and AP-2 consensus sequences. This is the first study to
characterize rNaS2 transport kinetics, define its tissue distribution, and
resolve its gene (slc13a4) structure and 5' flanking region.

PMID: 15889308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24428-34. Epub 2005 May 3.

Yin Yang 1 cooperates with activator protein 2 to stimulate ERBB2 gene expression
in mammary cancer cells.

Begon DY(1), Delacroix L, Vernimmen D, Jackers P, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Centre of Biomedical Integrative
Genoproteomics, Experimental Cancer Research Centre, University of Liege,
Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liege, Belgium.

Overexpression of the ERBB2 oncogene is observed in about 30% of breast cancers
and is generally correlated with a poor prognosis. Previous results from our and 
other laboratories indicated that elevated transcriptional activity contributes
significantly to the overexpression of ERBB2 mRNA in mammary adenocarcinoma cell 
lines. Activator protein 2 (AP-2) transcription factors account for this
overexpression through two recognition sequences located 215 and 500 bp upstream 
from the transcription start site. Furthermore, AP-2 transcription factors are
highly expressed in cancer cell lines overexpressing ERBB2. In this report, we
examined the cooperative effect of Yin Yang 1 (YY1) on AP-2-induced activation of
ERBB2 promoter activity. We detected high levels of YY1 transcription factor in
mammary cancer cell lines. Notably, we showed that YY1 enhances AP-2alpha
transcriptional activation of the ERBB2 promoter through an AP-2 site both in
HepG2 and in HCT116 cells, whereas a carboxyl-terminal-truncated form of YY1
cannot. Moreover, we demonstrated the interaction between endogenous AP-2 and YY1
factors in the BT-474 mammary adenocarcinoma cell line. In addition, inhibition
of endogenous YY1 protein by an antisense decreased the transcription of an
AP-2-responsive ERBB2 reporter plasmid in BT-474 breast cancer cells. Finally, we
detected in vivo AP-2 and YY1 occupancy of the ERBB2 proximal promoter in
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Our data thus provide evidence that YY1
cooperates with AP-2 to stimulate ERBB2 promoter activity through the AP-2
binding sites.

PMID: 15870067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Dev Cell. 2005 May;8(5):727-38.

Canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling prevents osteoblasts from differentiating
into chondrocytes.

Hill TP(1), Später D, Taketo MM, Birchmeier W, Hartmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute for Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2005 May;8(5):626-7.

Osteoblasts and chondrocytes are involved in building up the vertebrate skeleton 
and are thought to differentiate from a common mesenchymal precursor, the
osteo-chondroprogenitor. Although numerous transcription factors involved in
chondrocyte and osteoblast differentiation have been identified, little is known 
about the signals controlling lineage decisions of the two cell types. Here, we
show by conditionally deleting beta-catenin in limb and head mesenchyme that
beta-catenin is required for osteoblast lineage differentiation. Osteoblast
precursors lacking beta-catenin are blocked in differentiation and develop into
chondrocytes instead. In vitro experiments demonstrate that this is a
cell-autonomous function of beta-catenin in an osteoblast precursor. Furthermore,
detailed in vivo and in vitro loss- and gain-of-function analyses reveal that
beta-catenin activity is necessary and sufficient to repress the differentiation 
of mesenchymal cells into Runx2- and Sox9-positive skeletal precursors. Thus,
canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is essential for skeletal lineage
differentiation, preventing transdifferentiation of osteoblastic cells into
chondrocytes.

PMID: 15866163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biomed Sci. 2005;12(1):65-77.

Down-regulation of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor in non-small cell lung
carcinoma: correlation with dysregulated expression of the transcription factors 
USF and AP2.

Khattar NH(1), Lele SM, Kaetzel CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kentucky
College of Medicine, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

The polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) mediates transport of IgA and IgM
antibodies across mucosal and glandular epithelia. Several studies have utilized 
immunohistochemistry to demonstrate that PIGR expression varies in different
types of lung carcinoma, and is down-regulated during tumor progression. We have 
previously shown in cultured tumor cell-lines that basal transcription of the
PIGR gene is regulated by the transcription factors USF1, USF2 and AP2. To
examine the mechanism by which PIGR expression is down-regulated in lung
carcinoma, RNA was microdissected from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded lung
carcinomas (14 adenocarcinomas and 8 squamous cell carcinomas). Levels of PIGR,
USF1, USF2 and AP2-alpha mRNA were quantified by real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and normalized to mRNA for the
housekeeping gene GAPDH. PIGR mRNA levels were decreased in adenocarcinomas and
squamous cell carcinomas relative to adjacent non-tumor tissue, and were
inversely correlated with stage of differentiation. USF1 and USF2 mRNA levels
were reduced in adenocarcinomas relative to non-tumor tissue, while AP2-alpha
levels were elevated. Multivariate regression analysis demonstrated that reduced 
USF2 mRNA and increased AP2-alpha mRNA levels were predictive of down-regulated
PIGR mRNA expression in the majority of adenocarcinomas and in moderately
differentiated squamous cell carcinomas.

PMID: 15864740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 May;46(5):1572-80.

The lacrimal gland transcriptome is an unusually rich source of rare and poorly
characterized gene transcripts.

Ozyildirim AM(1), Wistow GJ, Gao J, Wang J, Dickinson DP, Frierson HF Jr, Laurie 
GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, UVa Health System, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22908 USA.

PURPOSE: To sequence and comprehensively analyze human and mouse lacrimal gland
transcriptomes as part of the NEIBank project.
METHODS: cDNA libraries generated from normal human and mouse lacrimal glands
were sequenced and analyzed by PHRED, RepeatMasker, BLAST, and GRIST. Human
"lacrimal-preferred genes" and putative gene regulatory elements were
respectively identified in UniGene and ConSite, and gene clustering was analyzed 
by chromosomal mapping. "Hypothetical proteins," identified by keyword search,
were verified by genomic alignment and queried in the Conserved Domain database
and GEO Profiles.
RESULTS: The top six transcripts in human and mouse differed, revealing a
previously unappreciated molecular divergence. The human transcriptome is
enriched with transcripts from 29 lacrimal-preferred genes and a content of
poorly characterized hypothetical proteins, proportionally greater than in all
other tissues. Only 45% of lacrimal preferred, but 71% of hypotheticals, have
mouse orthologs. Many of the latter display apparently altered cancer expression 
in the CGAP SAGE library collection-often in keeping with predicted WD40, protein
kinase, Src homology 2 and 3, RhoGEF, and pleckstrin homology domains involved in
cell signaling. At the genomic level, lacrimal-expressed genes show some evidence
of clustering, particularly on human chromosomes 9 and 12. Binding sites for
TFAP2A, FOXC1, and other transcription factors are predicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Interspecies divergence cautions against use of mouse models of
human dry eye syndromes. Lacrimal preferred and hypothetical proteins, gene
clustering, and putative gene regulatory elements together provide new clues for 
a molecular understanding of lacrimal gland function and mechanisms of
coordinated tissue-specific transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 15851553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Apr;90(3):273-80.

Dual role of AP-2gamma in ErbB-2-induced mammary tumorigenesis.

Jäger R(1), Friedrichs N, Heim I, Büttner R, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pathology, Institute for Pathology, University of 
Bonn Medical School, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

A causative role of the membrane-bound tyrosine kinase ErbB-2 in breast
tumorigenesis has been well established. MMTV/neu transgenic mice which
overexpress ErbB-2 consistently develop mammary carcinomas with a high incidence.
In human breast cancer, ErbB-2 is overexpressed in 25-30 of all cases and is
representing a clinical marker of a poor prognosis. Besides to gene
amplification, ErbB-2 overexpression has been attributed to transcription factors
of the AP-2 family which were shown to control the ErbB-2 gene promoter in cell
culture studies. Particularly AP-2alpha and gamma are often coexpressed in
ErbB-2-positive breast carcinomas. However, LTRgamma transgenic mice which
overexpress AP-2gamma in their mammary epithelium display only a very weak
upregulation of the erbB-2 gene and do not develop mammary carcinoma. These
findings therefore raise the possibility of functional cooperativity between both
genes in breast cancer. To experimentally address the impact of AP-2gammaon
ErbB-2-induced breast carcinogenesis we crossed MMTV/neu transgenic mice with
LTRgamma transgenic mice and monitored tumor development in bitransgenic female
progeny. AP-2gamma overexpression negatively influenced tumor incidence, as
reflected by a reduced tumor number and a prolonged tumor latency. Histological
analysis revealed three major types of tumors corresponding to different stages
of tumor progression. Interestingly, an increased proportion of advanced stage
carcinomas was observed in bitransgenic mice. Moreover, the AP-2gamma transgene
differentially affected proliferation rates between the different progression
stages: proliferation was enhanced at early stages but reduced in advanced stages
in comparison to control tumors. Therefore, AP-2gamma while reducing the
incidence of mammary tumors is promoting tumor progression.

PMID: 15830141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005 Nov;30(11):2006-13.

Decrease in the AP-2 DNA-binding activity and in the protein expression of AP-2
alpha and AP-2 beta in frontal cortex of rats treated with lithium for 6 weeks.

Rao JS(1), Rapoport SI, Bosetti F.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. jrao@mail.nih.gov

Lithium chloride (LiCl), when fed to rats for 6 weeks, has been reported to
decrease brain mRNA, protein, and activity levels of arachidonic acid
(AA)-selective cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2), without affecting secretory
sPLA2 or Ca2+-independent iPLA2. We investigated whether transcription factors
known to regulate cPLA2 gene expression are modulated by chronic lithium
treatment. Male Fischer-344 rats were fed a LiCl-containing diet for 6 weeks to
produce a therapeutically relevant brain lithium concentration. Control animals
were fed a LiCl-free diet. Using a gelshift assay, we found that LiCl
significantly decreased activating protein 2 (AP-2)-binding activity, and protein
levels of the AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta but not of the AP-2 gamma subunits in the 
frontal cortex. Activating protein 1 (AP-1)-binding activity was increased,
whereas glucocorticoid response element, polyoma enhancer activator 3, and
nuclear factor kappa B DNA-binding activities were not changed significantly.
Since both cPLA2 and AP-2 can be activated by protein kinase C (PKC), we examined
the frontal cortex protein levels of PKC alpha and PKC epsilon, as well as
AA-dependent PKC activity. The protein levels of PKC alpha and PKC epsilon were
decreased significantly, as was AA-dependent PKC activity, in the lithium-treated
compared to control rats. Our results suggest that the reported decrease in brain
gene expression of cPLA2 by chronic lithium may be mediated by reduced AP-2
transcriptional activity, and that decreased expression of PKC alpha and PKC
epsilon contributes to lowering the AP-2 activity.

PMID: 15827566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21539-44. Epub 2005 Apr 4.

CVAK104 is a novel poly-L-lysine-stimulated kinase that targets the beta2-subunit
of AP2.

Conner SD(1), Schmid SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, The University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. sdconner@umn.edu

Isolated clathrin adaptor protein (AP) preparations are known to co-fractionate
with endogenous kinase activities, including poly-L-lysine-stimulated kinases
that target various constituents of the clathrin coat. We have identified CVAK104
(a coated vesicle-associated kinase of 104 kDa) using a mass spectroscopic
analysis of adaptor protein preparations. CVAK104 is a novel serine/threonine
kinase that belongs to the SCY1-like family of protein kinases, previously
thought to be catalytically inactive. We found that CVAK104 co-fractionates with 
adaptor protein preparations extracted from clathrin-coated vesicles and directly
binds to both clathrin and the plasma membrane adaptor, AP2. CVAK104 binds ATP,
and kinase assays indicate that it functions in vitro as a
poly-L-lysine-stimulated kinase that is capable of autophosphorylation and
phosphorylating the beta2-adaptin subunit of AP2.

PMID: 15809293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21661-6. Epub 2005 Mar 31.

The small G-protein Arf6GTP recruits the AP-2 adaptor complex to membranes.

Paleotti O(1), Macia E, Luton F, Klein S, Partisani M, Chardin P, Kirchhausen T, 
Franco M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS-Unité Mixte de
Recherche 6097, 660 Route des Lucioles, 06560 Valbonne Sophia-Antipolis, France.

The small GTP-binding protein ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6) is involved in
plasma membrane/endosomes trafficking. However, precisely how the activation of
Arf6 regulates vesicular transport is still unclear. Here, we show that, in
vitro, recombinant Arf6GTP recruits purified clathrin-adaptor complex AP-2 (but
not AP-1) onto phospholipid liposomes in the absence of phosphoinositides. We
also show that phosphoinositides and Arf6 tightly cooperate to translocate AP-2
to the membrane. In vivo, Arf6GTP (but not Arf6GDP) was found associated to AP-2.
The expression of the GTP-locked mutant of Arf6 leads to the plasma membrane
redistribution of AP-2 in Arf6GTP-enriched areas. Finally, we demonstrated that
the expression of the GTP-locked mutant of Arf6 inhibits transferrin receptor
internalization without affecting its recycling. Altogether, our results
demonstrated that Arf6GTP interacts specifically with AP-2 and promotes its
membrane recruitment. These findings strongly suggest that Arf6 plays a major
role in clathrin-mediated endocytosis by directly controlling the assembly of the
AP-2/clathrin coat.

PMID: 15802264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Jan;63 Suppl 1:676-9.

[Factors for bone and cartilage regeneration].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawaguchi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo.

PMID: 15799441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biomaterials. 2005 Sep;26(25):5153-7.

The effect of the surface modification of titanium using a recombinant fragment
of fibronectin and vitronectin on cell behavior.

Ku Y(1), Chung CP, Jang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Intellectual Biointerface Engineering Center and Department of Periodontology,
Seoul National University College of Dentistry, Seoul 110-768, Korea.

The surface of titanium implants is in direct contact with host tissue and plays 
a critical role in determining biocompatibility. Fibronectin (FN) and vitronectin
(VN) are major cell adhesive proteins found in the extracellular matrix (ECM) of 
various tissues, and in circulating blood. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the engineered biomimetic surface of titanium by using recombinant fragment of
FN(8-10) and VN(NTD) that contains the binding site for integrins. MC3T3-E1 cells
seeded upon the FN(8-10)-coated titanium showed a marked increase in cell
adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation over VN(NTD)-coated titanium. In
addition, we confirmed that the surface properties of titanium prefer for
FN(8-10) over VN(NTD) (p<0.05) in protein adhesion. These results suggest that
the FN(8-10)-modified titanium surface can be used to improve the
osseointegration of titanium implants by enhancing bone formation.

PMID: 15792542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 27;280(21):20274-85. Epub 2005 Mar 21.

The bone-specific expression of Runx2 oscillates during the cell cycle to support
a G1-related antiproliferative function in osteoblasts.

Galindo M(1), Pratap J, Young DW, Hovhannisyan H, Im HJ, Choi JY, Lian JB, Stein 
JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

The Runx2 (CBFA1/AML3/PEBP2alphaA) transcription factor promotes skeletal cell
differentiation, but it also has a novel cell growth regulatory activity in
osteoblasts. We addressed here whether Runx2 activity is functionally linked to
cell cycle-related mechanisms that control normal osteoblast proliferation and
differentiation. We found that the levels of Runx2 gene transcription, mRNA and
protein, are each up-regulated with cessation of cell growth (i.e. G(0)/G(1)
transition) in preconfluent MC3T3 osteoblastic cells that do not yet express
mature bone phenotypic gene expression. Cell growth regulation of Runx2 is also
observed in primary calvarial osteoblasts and other osteoblastic cells with
relatively normal cell growth characteristics, but not in osteosarcoma cells
(e.g. SAOS-2 and ROS17/2.8). Runx2 levels are cell cycle-regulated in MC3T3 cells
with respect to the G(1)/S and M/G(1) transitions: oscillates from maximal
expression levels during early G(1) to minimal levels during early S phase and
mitosis. However, in normal or immortalized (e.g. ATDC5) chondrocytic cells,
Runx2 expression is suppressed during quiescence, and Runx2 levels are not
regulated during G(1) and S phase in ATDC5 cells. Antisense or small interfering 
RNA-mediated reduction of the low physiological levels of Runx2 in proliferating 
MC3T3 cells does not accelerate cell cycle progression. However, forced
expression of Runx2 suppresses proliferation of MC3T3 preosteoblasts or C2C12
mesenchymal cells which have osteogenic potential. Forced elevation of Runx2 in
synchronized MC3T3 cells causes a delay in G(1). We propose that Runx2 levels and
function are biologically linked to a cell growth-related G(1) transition in
osteoblastic cells.

PMCID: PMC2895256
PMID: 15781466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Bone. 2005 Mar;36(3):418-32.

Extracellular nucleotides activate Runx2 in the osteoblast-like HOBIT cell line: 
a possible molecular link between mechanical stress and osteoblasts' response.

Costessi A(1), Pines A, D'Andrea P, Romanello M, Damante G, Cesaratto L,
Quadrifoglio F, Moro L, Tell G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technologies, University of Udine, 33100
Udine, Italy.

Dynamic mechanical loading increases bone density and strength and promotes
osteoblast proliferation, differentiation and matrix production, by acting at the
gene expression level. Molecular mechanisms through which mechanical forces are
conversed into biochemical signalling in bone are still poorly understood. A
growing body of evidence point to extracellular nucleotides (i.e., ATP and UTP)
as soluble factors released in response to mechanical stimulation in different
cell systems. Runx2, a fundamental transcription factor involved in controlling
osteoblasts differentiation, has been recently identified as a target of
mechanical signals in osteoblastic cells. We tested the hypothesis that these
extracellular nucleotides could be able to activate Runx2 in the human
osteoblastic HOBIT cell line. We found that ATP and UTP treatments, as well as
hypotonic stress, promote a significant stimulation of Runx2 DNA-binding activity
via a mechanism involving PKC and distinct mitogen-activated protein kinase
cascades. In fact, by using the specific inhibitors SB203580 (specific for p38
MAPK) and PD98059 (specific for ERK-1/2 MAPK), we found that ERK-1/2, but not
p38, play a major role in Runx2 activation. On the contrary, another important
transcription factor, i.e., Egr-1, that we previously demonstrated being
activated by extracellular released nucleotides in this osteoblastic cell line,
demonstrated to be susceptible to both ERK-1/2 and p38 kinases. These data
suggest a possible differential involvement of these two transcription factors in
response to extracellularly released nucleotides. The biological relevance of our
data is strengthened by the finding that a target gene of Runx2, i.e.,
Galectin-3, is up-regulated by ATP stimulation of HOBIT cells with a comparable
kinetic of that found for Runx2. Since it is known that osteocytes are the
primary mechanosensory cells of the bone, we hypothesize that they may signal
mechanical loading to osteoblasts through release of extracellular nucleotides.
Altogether, these data suggest a molecular mechanism explaining the
purinoreceptors-mediated activation of specific gene expression in osteoblasts
and could be of help in setting up new pharmacological strategies for the
intervention in bone loss pathologies.

PMID: 15777650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. FEBS Lett. 2005 Mar 14;579(7):1715-22.

Genomic organization, promoter characterization and roles of Sp1 and AP-2 in the 
basal transcription of mouse PDIP1 gene.

Zhou J(1), Fan C, Zhong Y, Liu Y, Liu M, Zhou A, Ren K, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Life Science,
Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410081, China.

The mouse polymerase delta-interacting protein 1 gene, PDIP1, is mapped to
chromosome 7F3 region, spans approximately 16.7kb, and is organized into six
exons. The transcription start site (TSS) was determined to be G, corresponding
to position of 162-bp upstream of the translation start codon. The promoter
region was found to lack TATA box or CCAAT box, instead, a CpG island was
detected surrounding TSS. The region from -162 to +114 is required for basal
transcriptional regulation of mouse PDIP1 gene, contains two AP-2 and two Sp1
binding sites. The Sp1 site upstream of TSS activates, while the other Sp1 site
and two AP-2 sites suppress the transcription activity of mouse PDIP1 gene.

PMID: 15757666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Cell Biol. 2005 Mar 14;168(6):899-910. Epub 2005 Mar 7.

The high mobility group transcription factor Sox8 is a negative regulator of
osteoblast differentiation.

Schmidt K(1), Schinke T, Haberland M, Priemel M, Schilling AF, Mueldner C, Rueger
JM, Sock E, Wegner M, Amling M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Erlangen 91054, Germany.

Bone remodeling is an important physiologic process that is required to maintain 
a constant bone mass. This is achieved through a balanced activity of
bone-resorbing osteoclasts and bone-forming osteoblasts. In this study, we
identify the high mobility group transcription factor Sox8 as a physiologic
regulator of bone formation. Sox8-deficient mice display a low bone mass
phenotype that is caused by a precocious osteoblast differentiation. Accordingly,
primary osteoblasts derived from these mice show an accelerated mineralization ex
vivo and a premature expression of osteoblast differentiation markers. To confirm
the function of Sox8 as a negative regulator of osteoblast differentiation we
generated transgenic mice that express Sox8 under the control of an
osteoblast-specific Col1a1 promoter fragment. These mice display a severely
impaired bone formation that can be explained by a strongly reduced expression of
runt-related transcription factor 2, a gene encoding a transcription factor
required for osteoblast differentiation. Together, these data demonstrate a novel
function of Sox8, whose tightly controlled expression is critical for bone
formation.

PMCID: PMC2171778
PMID: 15753123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Bone Miner Res. 2005 Mar;20(3):428-37. Epub 2004 Nov 29.

Expression of Runx2/Cbfa1/Pebp2alphaA during angiogenesis in postnatal rodent and
fetal human orofacial tissues.

Bronckers AL(1), Sasaguri K, Cavender AC, D'Souza RN, Engelse MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Cell Biology, ACTA, Vrije Universiteit and Universiteit van
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. A.Bronckers@vumc.nl

Transient expression of Runx2 is reported in endothelial cells and vascular
smooth muscle cells during vessel formation in skin, stroma of forming bones and 
developing periodontal ligament, developing skeletal muscle cells, and fat
tissue. The data suggest that Runx2 is expressed in a multipotential mesenchymal 
cell population that gives rise to various osseous and nonosseous cell
lineages.INTRODUCTION: Runx2/Cbfa1 is a transcription factor essential for cells 
of osteogenic and dentinogenic lineages. Here we examined expression of
Runx2/Cbfa1 (all isotypes) in several nonskeletal cell types present in
developing orofacial tissues of neonatal rodents and human fetuses with special
emphasis on vessel formation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sections obtained from heads or jaws of postnatal mice,
hamster, and human fetuses were immunostained with monoclonal anti-Pebp2aA
antibody. Mouse and human tissues were also examined by in situ hybridization.
Sections of Runx2 null mutant mice with a LacZ reporter construct inserted in the
Runx2 locus were stained for Runx2 promoter activity with anti-galactosidase.
RESULTS: We found transient mRNA and protein expression in endothelial cells and 
in vascular smooth muscle cells of forming vessels in skin, alveoli of forming
bone, and forming periodontal ligament. We also noticed weak and variable
expression in some fibroblasts of embryonic skin, early differentiating
cross-striated muscle cells, and differentiating fat cells.
CONCLUSION: Runx2 is not an exclusive marker for chondrogenic, osteogenic, and
dentinogenic tissues, but is much more widely present in an early multipotential 
mesenchymal cell population that gives rise to several other lineages.

PMID: 15746987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18452-61. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

Protein kinase C activates human lipocalin-type prostaglandin D synthase gene
expression through de-repression of notch-HES signaling and enhancement of AP-2
beta function in brain-derived TE671 cells.

Fujimori K(1), Kadoyama K, Urade Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 
Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

Here we investigated the regulatory mechanism of lipocalin-type prostaglandin D
synthase (L-PGDS) gene expression in human TE671 (medulloblastoma of cerebellum) 
cells. Reporter analysis of the promoter region from -730 to +75 of the human
L-PGDS gene demonstrated that deletion or mutation of the N-box at -337 increased
the promoter activity 220-300%. The N-box was bound by Hes-1, a mammalian
homologue of Drosophila Hairy and enhancer of split, as examined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
Functional expression of the Notch intracellular domain significantly increased
Hes-1 expression and decreased L-PGDS expression level in TE671 cells. Moreover, 
knock-down of Hes-1 mRNA by RNA interference significantly enhanced the L-PGDS
mRNA level, indicating that the L-PGDS gene expression is repressed by the
Notch-Hes signaling. When the AP-2 element at -98 of the promoter region was
deleted or mutated, the promoter activity was drastically decreased to
approximately 10% of normal. The AP-2 element was bound by AP-2beta dominantly
expressed in TE671 cells, according to the results of electrophoretic mobility
shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. L-PGDS expression was
induced by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in TE671 cells, and this
induction was inhibited by a protein kinase C inhibitor. Stimulation of TE671
cells with 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate or transfection with protein
kinase Calpha expression vector induced phosphorylation of Hes-1, inhibition of
DNA binding of Hes-1 to the N-box, and activation of the AP-2beta function to
up-regulate L-PGDS gene expression. These results reveal a novel transcriptional 
regulatory mechanism responsible for the high level expression of the human
L-PGDS gene in TE671 cells.

PMID: 15743775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Clin Pathol. 2005 Mar;58(3):328-30.

An immunohistochemical analysis to evaluate an inverse correlation between
Runx2/Cbfa1 and NF kappa B in human osteosarcoma.

Andela VB(1), Siddiqui F, Groman A, Rosier RN.

Author information: 
(1)The James P Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, 601 
Elmwood Avenue Box 665, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. v_andela@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Dominant negative inhibition of nuclear factor kappa B (NF kappa B)
signalling activity in a human osteosarcoma cell line (Saos2) results in
malignant reversion and the induction of the osteoblast differentiating
transcription factor, Runx2/Cbfa1. This observation suggests that there is an
inverse relation between a transcription factor associated with malignant
progression and chemoresistance (NF kappa B) and an osteoblast differentiating
transcription factor (Runx2/Cbfa1).
AIMS: To assess and correlate Runx2/Cbfa1 and NF kappa B (p65) immunoreactivity
in human osteosarcoma.
METHODS: Runx2/Cbfa1 and NFkappaB (p65) immunoreactivity was assessed on 11
paraffin wax embedded archival specimens of human primary osteosarcoma by
standard immunohistochemical methods and scored on a scale of 0-3. A Pearson
correlation analysis between Runx2/Cbfa1 and NF kappa B (p65) scores was
established.
RESULTS: Runx2/Cbfa1 was expressed constitutively in all pathology specimens of
human osteosarcoma. Of note, a chondroblastic osteosarcoma showed the highest
Runx2/Cbfa1 immunoreactivity. A Pearson correlation did not support an inverse
correlation between Runx2/Cbfa1 and NF kappa B (p65) scores (r = 0.57) in human
osteosarcoma.
CONCLUSION: Runx2/Cbfa1 immunoreactivity does not inversely correlate with NF
kappa B immunoreactivity, and thus cannot serve as an indirect measure of NF
kappa B activity or an independent predictive or prognostic indicator.

PMCID: PMC1770605
PMID: 15735172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19270-80. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

Functional dissection of an AP-2 beta2 appendage-binding sequence within the
autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia protein.

Mishra SK(1), Keyel PA, Edeling MA, Dupin AL, Owen DJ, Traub LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

The autosomal recessive hypercholesterolemia (ARH) protein plays a critical role 
in regulating plasma low density lipoprotein (LDL) levels. Inherited defects in
ARH lead to a hypercholesterolemia that closely phenocopies that caused by a
defective LDL receptor. The elevated serum LDL-cholesterol levels typical of ARH 
patients and the pronounced accumulation of the LDL receptor at the cell surface 
of hepatocytes in ARH-null mice argue that ARH operates by promoting the
internalization of the LDL receptor within clathrin-coated vesicles. ARH contains
an amino-terminal phosphotyrosine-binding domain that associates physically with 
the LDL receptor internalization sequence and with phosphoinositides. The
carboxyl-terminal half of ARH contains a clathrin-binding sequence and a separate
AP-2 adaptor binding region providing a plausible mechanism for how ARH can act
as an endocytic adaptor or CLASP (clathrin-associated sorting protein) to couple 
LDL receptors with the clathrin machinery. Because the interaction with AP-2 is
highly selective for the independently folded appendage domain of the beta2
subunit, we have characterized the ARH beta2 appendage-binding sequence in
detail. Unlike the known alpha appendage-binding motifs, ARH requires an
extensive sequence tract to bind the beta appendage with comparably high
affinity. A minimal 16-residue sequence functions autonomously and depends upon
ARH residues Asp253, Phe259, Leu262, and Arg266. We suggested that biased beta
subunit engagement by ARH and the only other beta2 appendage selective adaptor,
beta-arrestin, promotes efficient incorporation of this mechanistically distinct 
subset of CLASPs into clathrin-coated buds.

PMID: 15728179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Neurosci Lett. 2005 Mar 22;377(1):49-52. Epub 2004 Dec 19.

Investigation of transcription factor AP-2 beta genotype in women with
premenstrual dysphoric disorder.

Damberg M(1), Westberg L, Berggård C, Landen M, Sundblad C, Eriksson O, Naessén
T, Ekman A, Eriksson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden. mattias.damberg@neuro.uu.se

It has repeatedly been shown that the serotonergic system is involved in the
symptomatology of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). Women with PMDD are
reported to differ from symptom-free controls with regard to serotonin-related
biological markers. Evidence from family and twin studies suggests a genetic
contribution to the aetiology of PMDD. The expression of human transcription
factor AP-2beta in neural crest cell lineages and neuroectodermal cells suggests 
that this protein may be of importance for functional characteristics of neurons 
by regulating the expression of target genes. Within the monoaminergic systems,
several genes have binding sites for AP-2beta in regulatory regions, suggesting
an involvement of AP-2beta in these systems. The gene encoding AP-2beta is
located on chromosome 6p12-p21.1 and includes a polymorphic region consisting of 
a variable number of [CAAA] repeats located in the second intron. We have earlier
shown that AP-2beta genotype is associated with serotonergic phenotypes and that 
brainstem levels of AP-2beta correlate positively to serotonin metabolism in rat 
frontal cortex. The aim of this study was to investigate the relationship between
PMDD and transcription factor AP-2beta genotype. The participants included 176
women with PMDD and 91 healthy controls. Genotyping was performed by polymerase
chain reactions. We did not observe any differences in AP-2beta genotype
frequencies between PMDD subjects and controls. Our results suggest that AP-2beta
genotype is not a risk factor for PMDD. To our knowledge, this is the first study
investigating transcription factor AP-2beta genotype in women with PMDD. Hence,
these results should be considered preliminary until replicated.

PMID: 15722186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Arch Oral Biol. 2005 Feb;50(2):227-36. Epub 2005 Jan 4.

Altered gene expression in human cleidocranial dysplasia dental pulp cells.

Chen S(1), Santos L, Wu Y, Vuong R, Gay I, Schulze J, Chuang HH, MacDougall M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, The University of Texas Health Science
Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA.

Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterised by 
defects of bone and tooth development. The dental manifestations in CCD patients 
include supernumerary teeth, delayed tooth eruption, tooth hypoplasia and absence
of cellular cementum formation. This disorder is associated with mutations in the
osteoblast-specific transcription factor Runx2. To identify morphological and
molecular alterations associated with CCD dental tissues, human primary dental
pulp cell cultures were established from age- and sex-matched CCD and normal
patients. Dental pulp cells were compared for general morphology, proliferation
rates, and gene expression profiles using cDNA microarray technology. CCD pulp
cells were about four-fold larger than normal cells, however the normal pulp
proliferation rates were two- and three-fold greater at time points tested than
the CCD cells. Of the 226 genes analysed by blot microarray, 18.6% displayed
significant differences at least two-fold in expression levels. This includes 25 
genes (11.1%) that were up-regulated, while 17 (7.5%) that were down-regulated in
the CCD cells as compared to the normal cells. Expression of selected genes was
further verified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR).
Comparison between the CDD and normal cells revealed that gene expression of
cytokines and growth factors, such as leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF),
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and transforming growth factor beta receptor II
(TGF-betaRII) and vascular endothelial growth factor B (VEGFB) were higher while 
bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) was lower in the CCD cells. Furthermore,
potential Runx2 binding sites were found in all putative target gene promoters.
This study suggests that in addition to bone and tooth cell differentiation,
Runx2 may be involved in controlling cell growth during tooth development.

PMID: 15721154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Blood. 2005 Jun 1;105(11):4298-307. Epub 2005 Feb 15.

Shared and distinct roles mediated through C-terminal subdomains of acute myeloid
leukemia/Runt-related transcription factor molecules in murine development.

Fukushima-Nakase Y(1), Naoe Y, Taniuchi I, Hosoi H, Sugimoto T, Okuda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular-Targeting Cancer Prevention, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji,
Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

AML1/Runx1 is a frequent target of human leukemia-associated gene aberration and 
encodes a transcription factor with nonredundant biologic functions in initial
development of definitive hematopoiesis, T-cell development, and steady-state
platelet production. AML1/Runx1 and 2 closely related family genes, AML2/Runx3
and AML3/Runx2/Cbfa1, present in mammals, comprise the Runt-domain transcription 
factor family. Although they have similar structural and biochemical properties, 
gene-targeting experiments have identified distinct biologic roles. To directly
determine the presence of functional overlap among runt-related transcription
factor (Runx) family molecules, we replaced the C-terminal portion of acute
myeloid leukemia 1 (AML1) with that derived from its family members, which are
variable in contrast to conserved Runt domain, using the gene knock-in method. We
found that C-terminal portions of either AML2 or AML3 could functionally replace 
that of AML1 for myeloid development in culture and within the entire mouse.
However, while AML2 substituted for AML1 could effectively rescue lymphoid
lineages, AML3 could not, resulting in a smaller thymus and lymphoid deficiency
in peripheral blood. Substitution by the C-terminal portion of AML3 also led to
high infantile mortality and growth retardation, suggesting that AML1 has as yet 
unidentified effects on these phenotypes. Thus, the C-terminal portions of Runx
family members have both similar and distinct biologic functions.

PMID: 15713794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Circ Res. 2005 Mar 18;96(5):518-25. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Molecular basis of estrogen-induced cyclooxygenase type 1 upregulation in
endothelial cells.

Gibson LL(1), Hahner L, Osborne-Lawrence S, German Z, Wu KK, Chambliss KL, Shaul 
PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Estrogen upregulates cyclooxygenase-1 (COX-1) expression in endothelial cells. To
determine the basis of this process, studies were performed in ovine endothelial 
cells transfected with the human COX-1 promoter fused to luciferase. Estradiol
(E2) caused activation of the COX-1 promoter with maximal stimulation at 10(-8)
mol/L E2, and the response was mediated by either ERalpha or ERbeta. Mutagenesis 
revealed a primary role for a putative Sp1 binding motif at -89 (relative to the 
ATG codon) and lesser involvement of a consensus Sp1 site at -111.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays yielded a single complex with the site at
-89, and supershift analyses implicated AP-2alpha and ERalpha, and not Sp1, in
protein-DNA complex formation. In endothelial cells with minimal endogenous ER,
the transfection of ERalpha mutants lacking the DNA binding domain or primary
nuclear localization signals caused 4-fold greater stimulation of promoter
activity with E2 than wild-type ERalpha. In contrast, mutant ERalpha lacking the 
A-B domains was inactive. Thus, estrogen-mediated upregulation of COX-1 in
endothelium is uniquely independent of direct ERalpha-DNA binding and instead
entails protein-DNA interaction involving AP-2alpha and ERalpha at a proximal
regulatory element. In addition, the process may be initiated by cytoplasmic
ERalpha, and critical receptor elements reside within the amino terminus.

PMID: 15705965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Cancer. 2005 Jun 20;115(3):470-7.

Transcription factor AP-2gamma, a novel marker of gonocytes and seminomatous germ
cell tumors.

Pauls K(1), Jäger R, Weber S, Wardelmann E, Koch A, Büttner R, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
katharina.pauls@ukb.uni-bonn.de <katharina.pauls@ukb.uni-bonn.de>

Most germ cell tumors (GCTs) arise from intratubular germ cell neoplasias
(IGCNUs, also referred to as carcinoma in situ), which are thought to originate
from a transformed fetal germ cell, the gonocyte. However, the nature of the
molecular pathways involved in IGCNU formation remains elusive. Therefore,
identification of novel oncofetal markers is an important prerequisite to further
our understanding of the etiology of this tumor entity. In the present study, we 
show that in humans AP-2gamma is expressed in gonocytes at weeks 12-37 of
gestation, indicating a role of this transcription factor in fetal germ cell
development. AP-2gamma and c-KIT, a known target of AP-2 transcription factors,
were coexpressed in gonocytes, making a direct regulation possible. With
increasing differentiation of fetal testis, gradual downregulation of AP-2gamma
from the 12th to 37th week of gestation was observed. Furthermore, AP-2gamma was 
expressed abundantly in 25/25 IGCNUs, 52/53 testicular seminomas, 10/10
metastatic seminomas, 9/9 extragonadal seminomas and 5/5 dysgerminomas. In
embryonal carcinomas and choriocarcinomas, focal staining only was observed.
Spermatocytic seminomas, teratomas and yolk sac tumors as well as normal adult
testis and various control tissues were negative for AP-2gamma. The expression
pattern of AP-2gamma, like that of other oncofetal markers, supports the model of
a gonocytal origin of IGCNUs and germ cell tumors. Finally, our results provide
the basis for applying AP-2gamma immunohistochemistry to the detection of GCT, a 
tumor entity with a steadily growing incidence in the male population worldwide.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15700319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 15;65(2):448-56.

Bone morphogenic proteins are overexpressed in malignant melanoma and promote
cell invasion and migration.

Rothhammer T(1), Poser I, Soncin F, Bataille F, Moser M, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Regensburg Medical School, Regensburg, Germany.

Malignant melanoma cells are known to have altered expression of growth factors
compared with normal human melanocytes. These changes probably favor tumor growth
and progression and influence the tumor environment. The induction of
transforming growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1), TGF-beta2, and TGF-beta3 expression
in malignant melanoma has been reported before, whereas the expression of related
bone morphogenic protein (BMP) molecules has not been analyzed in melanomas until
now. Here, we show that BMP4 and BMP7 are up-regulated in nine melanoma cell
lines, whereas BMP2 is overexpressed in only two of the analyzed cell lines.
Immunohistochemistry of primary and metastatic melanoma also shows increased BMP4
and BMP7 expression compared with nevi. Promoter studies reveal that expression
is controlled at the transcriptional level. The transcription factor Ets-1 was
identified as a positive regulator for BMP4 expression. In order to determine the
functional relevance of BMP expression in malignant melanoma, chordin-expressing 
cell clones and antisense BMP4 cell clones were generated. The clones in which
BMP4 activity and expression are reduced show no changes in proliferation or in
attachment-independent growth when compared with controls. However, a strong
reduction of migratory and invasive properties was observed in these cells,
suggesting that BMP4 promotes melanoma cell invasion and migration and therefore 
has an important role in the progression of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 15695386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Jul;204(1):336-43.

Increased expression of G11alpha in osteoblastic cells enhances parathyroid
hormone activation of phospholipase C and AP-1 regulation of matrix
metalloproteinase-13 mRNA.

Cheung R(1), Erclik MS, Mitchell J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

In osteoblasts parathyroid hormone (PTH) stimulates the PTH/PTH-related peptide
(PTHrP) receptor (PTH1R) that couples via G(s) to adenylyl cyclase stimulation
and via G(11) to phospholipase C (PLC) stimulation. We have investigated the
effect of increasing G(11)alpha levels in UMR 106-01 osteoblastic cells by
transient transfection with cDNA encoding G(11)alpha on PTH stimulation of PLC
and protein kinase C (PKC) as well as PTH regulation of mRNA encoding matrix
metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13). Transfection with G(11)alpha cDNA resulted in a
5-fold increase in PTH-stimulated PLC activity with no change in PTH-stimulated
adenylyl cyclase. PTH-induced translocation of PKC-betaI, -delta, and -zeta to
the cell membrane and PKC-zeta to the nucleus was also increased. Increased
G(11)alpha protein resulted in increased stimulation of MMP-13 mRNA levels at all
doses of PTH. There was a 2.5 +/- 0.35 fold increase in maximal PTH-stimulation
of c-jun mRNA and smaller but significant increases in c-fos accompanied by
increased basal and PTH-stimulated AP-1 binding in cells expressing increased
G(11)alpha. Runx-2 mRNA and protein levels were not significantly increased by
increased G(11)alpha expression. The increase in PTH stimulation of c-jun, c-fos,
and MMP-13 in G(11)alpha-transfected cells were all blocked by
bisindolylmaleimide I, a selective inhibitor of PKC. These results demonstrate
that regulation of the PLC pathway through the PTH1R is significantly increased
by elevating expression of G(11)alpha in osteoblastic cells. This leads to
increased PTH stimulation of MMP-13 expression by increased stimulation of AP-1
factors c-jun and c-fos.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15693018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Development. 2005 Mar;132(5):1069-83. Epub 2005 Feb 2.

A pair of Sox: distinct and overlapping functions of zebrafish sox9 co-orthologs 
in craniofacial and pectoral fin development.

Yan YL(1), Willoughby J, Liu D, Crump JG, Wilson C, Miller CT, Singer A, Kimmel
C, Westerfield M, Postlethwait JH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Understanding how developmental systems evolve after genome amplification is
important for discerning the origins of vertebrate novelties, including neural
crest, placodes, cartilage and bone. Sox9 is important for the development of
these features, and zebrafish has two co-orthologs of tetrapod SOX9 stemming from
an ancient genome duplication event in the lineage of ray-fin fish. We have used 
a genotype-driven screen to isolate a mutation deleting sox9b function, and
investigated its phenotype and genetic interactions with a sox9a null mutation.
Analysis of mutant phenotypes strongly supports the interpretation that ancestral
gene functions partitioned spatially and temporally between Sox9 co-orthologs.
Distinct subsets of the craniofacial skeleton, otic placode and pectoral
appendage express each gene, and are defective in each single mutant. The double 
mutant phenotype is additive or synergistic. Ears are somewhat reduced in each
single mutant but are mostly absent in the double mutant. Loss-of-function
animals from mutations and morpholino injections, and gain-of-function animals
injected with sox9a and sox9b mRNAs showed that sox9 helps regulate other early
crest genes, including foxd3, sox10, snai1b and crestin, as well as the cartilage
gene col2a1 and the bone gene runx2a; however, tfap2a was nearly unchanged in
mutants. Chondrocytes failed to stack in sox9a mutants, failed to attain proper
numbers in sox9b mutants and failed in both morphogenetic processes in double
mutants. Pleiotropy can cause mutations in single copy tetrapod genes, such as
Sox9, to block development early and obscure later gene functions. By contrast,
subfunction partitioning between zebrafish co-orthologs of tetrapod genes, such
as sox9a and sox9b, can relax pleiotropy and reveal both early and late
developmental gene functions.

PMID: 15689370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 22;102(8):2975-9. Epub 2005 Jan 31.

Syndromic patent ductus arteriosus: evidence for haploinsufficient TFAP2B
mutations and identification of a linked sleep disorder.

Mani A(1), Radhakrishnan J, Farhi A, Carew KS, Warnes CA, Nelson-Williams C, Day 
RW, Pober B, State MW, Lifton RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a common congenital heart disease that results 
when the ductus arteriosus, a muscular artery, fails to remodel and close after
birth. A syndromic form of this disorder, Char syndrome, is caused by mutation in
TFAP2B, the gene encoding a neural crest-derived transcription factor.
Established features of the syndrome are PDA, facial dysmorphology, and
fifth-finger clinodactyly. Disease-causing mutations are missense and are
proposed to be dominant negative. Because only a small number of families have
been reported, there is limited information on the spectrum of mutations and
resulting phenotypes. We report the characterization of two kindreds (K144 and
K145) with Char syndrome containing 22 and 5 affected members, respectively.
Genotyping revealed linkage to TFAP2B in both families. Sequencing of TFAP2B
demonstrated mutations in both kindreds that were not found among control
chromosomes. Both mutations altered highly conserved bases in introns required
for normal splicing as demonstrated by biochemical studies in mammalian cells.
The abnormal splicing results in mRNAs containing frameshift mutations that are
expected to be degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, resulting in
haploinsufficiency; even if produced, the protein in K144 would lack DNA binding 
and dimerization motifs and would likely result in haploinsufficiency.
Examination of these two kindreds for phenotypes that segregate with TFAP2B
mutations identified several phenotypes not previously linked to Char syndrome.
These include parasomnia and dental and occipital-bone abnormalities. The
striking sleep disorder in these kindreds implicates TFAP2B-dependent functions
in the normal regulation of sleep.

PMCID: PMC549488
PMID: 15684060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Jan 1;11(1):267-72.

Loss of the AP-2alpha transcription factor is associated with the grade of human 
gliomas.

Heimberger AB(1), McGary EC, Suki D, Ruiz M, Wang H, Fuller GN, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. aheimber@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: The activator protein (AP)-2alpha transcription factor plays a crucial
role in the progression of several human tumors, including malignant melanoma,
prostate, and breast cancer. Loss of AP-2alpha results in deregulation of several
genes with AP-2alpha binding motifs such as E-cadherin, p21WAF1, MMP-2,
MCAM/MUC18, VEGF, and c-KIT. The purpose of our study was to determine AP-2alpha 
expression distribution among grades of gliomas and any possible effect on
prognosis.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A tissue microarray was assembled from all surgical glioma
cases with available tissue samples at M.D. Anderson Cancer Center since 1986 to 
include 72 glioblastomas, 49 anaplastic astrocytomas, 9 low-grade astrocytoma, 37
oligodendrogliomas, 37 anaplastic oligodendrogliomas, 15 mixed oligoastrocytomas,
20 anaplastic mixed oligoastrocytomas, and 7 gliosarcomas. The microarray
included normal brain tissue, and AP-2alpha expression was determined by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: AP-2alpha expression was lost on 99% (P < 0.001) and 98% (P < 0.001) of 
glioblastomas and anaplastic astrocytomas, respectively, compared with grade 2
astrocytomas and normal brain, all of which (100%) maintained expression of
AP-2alpha. The loss of AP-2alpha was a negative prognostic indicator within the
overall category of gliomas by univariate analysis (rate ratio, 4.30; 95%
confidence interval, 2.60-7.10; P < 0.001). However, there was no significant
effect of loss of AP-2alpha expression on survival observed after adjustment for 
patient age, Karnofsky Performance Scale score, tumor grade, and extent of
resection (rate ratio, 1.2; 95% confidence interval, 0.6-2.2; P = 0.6).
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2alpha expression correlates inversely with glioma grade,
suggesting a direct role in glioma tumorigenicity, possibly through subsequent
deregulation of target genes. Of all the previously characterized markers of
progression, the loss of AP-2alpha would be the most common (96.2%) molecular
marker as an astrocytic tumor evolves from grade 2 to 3.

PMID: 15671555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Mol Biol. 2005 Feb 18;346(2):411-22. Epub 2004 Dec 22.

Transcriptional regulator CTCF controls human interleukin 1 receptor-associated
kinase 2 promoter.

Kuzmin I(1), Geil L, Gibson L, Cavinato T, Loukinov D, Lobanenkov V, Lerman MI.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Research Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Immune responses to invading pathogens are mediated largely through a family of
transmembrane Toll-like receptors and modulated by a number of downstream
effectors. In particular, a family of four interleukin 1 receptor-associated
kinases (IRAK) regulates responsiveness to bacterial endotoxins. Pharmacological 
targeting of particular IRAK components may be beneficial for treatment of
bacterial infections. Here, we studied transcriptional regulation of the human
IRAK2 gene. Analysis of the IRAK2 promoter region reveals putative binding sites 
for several transcriptional factors, including ZIP (EGR1 and SP1), CTCF and
AP-2beta. Deletion of the ZIP or AP-2 sites did not significantly affect IRAK2
promoter activity in naive and endotoxin-treated mononuclear cells, in dormant
and activated Jurkat T-cells, in lung and kidney cells. In contrast, we found
that CTCF plays a major role in IRAK2 transcription. An electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay of the DNA fragments containing the IRAK2 CpG island, revealed a
single high-affinity binding site for the transcriptional regulator and a
chromatin insulator protein, CTCF. This assay revealed a CTCF-binding site within
the mouse Irak2 promoter. The presence of the CTCF protein in human IRAK2
promoter was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Specific residues 
that interacted with the CTCF protein, were identified by methylation
interference assay. In all cell lines analyzed, including cells of lung, renal,
monocytic and T-cell origin, the IRAK2 luciferase reporter construct, containing 
an intact CTCF-binding site, showed strong promoter activity. However, IRAK2
promoter activity was decreased dramatically for the constructs with a mutated
CTCF-binding site.

PMID: 15670593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2004 Dec;49(17 Suppl):2943-9.

[Gene regulation network in the skeletal system].

[Article in Japanese]

Takayanagi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)taka.cell@tmd.ac.jp

PMID: 15669281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Dent Res. 2005 Feb;84(2):166-71.

Runx2 regulates endochondral ossification in condyle during mandibular
advancement.

Tang GH(1), Rabie AB.

Author information: 
(1)Hard tissue biology and repair research group and Orthodontics, Faculty of
Dentistry, The University of Hong Kong, Prince Philip Dental Hospital, 34
Hospital Road, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Runx2 is a transcription factor prerequisite for chondrocyte maturation and
osteoblast differentiation. We tested the hypothesis that Runx2 is responsible
for signaling chondrocyte maturation and endochondral ossification in the condyle
during mandibular advancement. Fifty 35-day-old Sprague-Dawley rats were fitted
with functional appliances for 3, 7, 14, 21, and 30 days. Experimental animals
with 50 matched controls were labeled with bromodeoxyuridine for evaluation of
the invasion of chondroclasts and osteoblasts into condylar cartilage. Mandibular
advancement elicited Runx2 expression in condylar cartilage, and subsequently led
to an expansion of type X collagen domain in the hypertrophic layer. Stronger
Runx2 mRNA signals in subchondral bone corresponded with the increase in the
recruitment of osteoblasts and chondroclasts, which preceded the increase of new 
bone formation in the condyle. Thus, Runx2 mediates chondrocyte terminal
maturation and endochondral ossification in the mandibular condyle in response to
mandibular advancement.

PMID: 15668335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. BMC Pharmacol. 2005 Jan 21;5:1.

Brainstem levels of transcription factor AP-2 in rat are changed after treatment 
with phenelzine, but not with citalopram.

Berggard C(1), Damberg M, Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, PO Box
593 BMC, SE-751 24, Uppsala, Sweden. cecilia.berggard@neuro.uu.se

BACKGROUND: Before therapeutic effect is obtained after treatment with
antidepressant drugs, like serotonin selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO-Is) there 
is an initial lag-period of a few weeks. Neuronal adaptations on a molecular
level are supposed to be involved in the initiation of the antidepressant effect.
Transcription factor AP-2 is essential for neuronal development and many genes
involved in the brainstem monoaminergic systems have binding sites for AP-2 in
their regulatory regions. The genotype of the AP-2beta isoform has been
associated with e.g. anxiety-related personality traits and with platelet MAO
activity. In addition, previous studies have shown that the levels of AP-2alpha
and AP-2beta in rat whole brain were decreased after 10 days of treatment with
citalopram (SSRI) and imipramine (TCA), and were increased with phenelzine
(MAO-I).
RESULTS: In the present study, we report that treatment with citalopram for 1, 7 
or 21 days did not have effect on the AP-2 levels in rat brainstem. However,
after treatment with phenelzine for 1, 7 or 21 days the levels of AP-2alpha and
AP-2beta had increased after 7 days, but had returned to control levels at day
21.
CONCLUSION: The decrease in AP-2 levels in rat whole brain previously seen after 
treatment with citalopram does not seem to be localised to the brainstem, it may 
rather occur in the monoaminergic terminal projection areas. The present data
suggest that the increase in AP-2 levels previously seen in rat whole brain after
subchronic treatment with phenelzine is located in the brainstem. It cannot,
however, be excluded that other brain regions are involved.

PMCID: PMC547915
PMID: 15663788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(3):1003-12.

Filamin A-bound PEBP2beta/CBFbeta is retained in the cytoplasm and prevented from
functioning as a partner of the Runx1 transcription factor.

Yoshida N(1), Ogata T, Tanabe K, Li S, Nakazato M, Kohu K, Takafuta T, Shapiro S,
Ohta Y, Satake M, Watanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

The heterodimeric transcription factor PEBP2/CBF is composed of a DNA-binding
subunit, called Runx1, and a non-DNA-binding subunit, called PEBP2beta/CBFbeta.
The Runx1 protein is detected exclusively in the nuclei of most cells and
tissues, whereas PEBP2beta is located in the cytoplasm. We addressed the
mechanism by which PEBP2beta localizes to the cytoplasm and found that it is
associated with filamin A, an actin-binding protein. Filamin A retains PEBP2beta 
in the cytoplasm, thereby hindering its engagement as a Runx1 partner. The
interaction with filamin A is mediated by a region within PEBP2beta that includes
amino acid residues 68 to 93. The deletion of this region or the repression of
filamin A enables PEBP2beta to translocate to the nucleus. Based on these
observations, we propose that PEBP2beta has two distinct domains, a newly defined
regulatory domain that interacts with filamin A and the previously identified
Runx1-binding domain.

PMCID: PMC543995
PMID: 15657428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Hum Reprod. 2005 Mar;20(3):579-82. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

A subfertile patient diagnosed with testicular carcinoma in situ by
immunocytological staining for AP-2gamma in semen samples: case report.

Hoei-Hansen CE(1), Rajpert-De Meyts E, Carlsen E, Almstrup K, Leffers H,
Skakkebaek NE.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction (GR-5064), Rigshospitalet
Blegdamsvej 9, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. chh@dadlnet.dk

The incidence of testicular cancer is rising. Despite a high cure rate, efforts
should be made to obtain diagnosis at the pre-invasive intratubular carcinoma in 
situ (CIS) stage, as the disease is potentially lethal and treatment has severe
side-effects, especially regarding reproductive function. CIS diagnosis is
presently only possible by a surgical biopsy of the testis. Immunocytological
staining for transcription factor activator protein (AP-2gamma), previously
identified as a marker for neoplastic germ cells, was performed in centrifuged
samples of ejaculates obtained from 104 andrological patients, including patients
with testicular cancer and subfertility. Cells positive for AP-2gamma were found 
only in semen samples from patients diagnosed a priori with testicular neoplasms 
and, surprisingly, in a 23 year old control subject with oligozoospermia and no
symptoms of a germ cell tumour. Testicular biopsies performed during the
follow-up of this patient revealed widespread CIS in one testicle, thus proving a
potential diagnostic value of the new marker. For the first time, a patient
without clinical symptoms of testicular neoplasia was diagnosed at the
pre-invasive CIS stage using a new, simple method based on immunocytological
staining of a semen sample for AP-2gamma, a novel marker for CIS. The value of
this method for diagnostic use in the clinic requires further careful validation 
in a large series of patients and controls, but the preliminary results are
promising.

PMID: 15650041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 15;10(24):8521-30.

Transcription factor AP-2gamma is a developmentally regulated marker of
testicular carcinoma in situ and germ cell tumors.

Hoei-Hansen CE(1), Nielsen JE, Almstrup K, Sonne SB, Graem N, Skakkebaek NE,
Leffers H, Rajpert-De Meyts E.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Denmark.
cehh@biobase.dk

PURPOSE: Transcription factor activator protein-2gamma (TFAP2C, AP-2gamma) was
reported previously in extraembryonic ectoderm and breast carcinomas but not in
the testis. In our recent gene expression study we detected AP-2gamma in
carcinoma in situ testis (CIS, or intratubular germ cell neoplasia), precursor of
testicular germ cell tumors. In this study we aimed to investigate the expression
pattern of AP-2gamma and to shed light on this factor in germ cell
differentiation and the pathogenesis of germ cell neoplasia.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed expression pattern of AP-2gamma at the RNA and
protein level in normal human tissues and a panel of tumors and tumor-derived
cell lines. In the gonads, we established the ontogeny of expression of AP-2gamma
in normal and dysgenetic samples. We also investigated the regulation of
AP-2gamma by steroids and retinoic acid.
RESULTS: We detected abundant AP-2gamma in testicular CIS and in testicular germ 
cell tumors of young adults and confirmed differential expression of AP-2gamma in
somatic tumors. We found that AP-2gamma expression was regulated by retinoic acid
in an embryonal carcinoma cell line (NT2). The investigation of ontogeny of
AP-2gamma protein expression in fetal gonads revealed that it was confined to
oogonia/gonocytes and was down-regulated with germ cell differentiation. In some 
prepubertal intersex cases, AP-2gamma was detected outside of the normal window
of expression, probably marking neoplastic transformation of germ cells.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2gamma is developmentally regulated and associated with the
undifferentiated phenotype in germ cells. This transcription factor may be
involved in self-renewal and survival of immature germ cells and tissue-specific 
stem cells. AP-2gamma is a novel marker of testicular CIS and CIS-derived tumors.

PMID: 15623634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):7413-26. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

CD4 down-regulation by HIV-1 and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) Nef proteins
involves both internalization and intracellular retention mechanisms.

Rose JJ(1), Janvier K, Chandrasekhar S, Sekaly RP, Bonifacino JS, Venkatesan S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology, NIAID, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Among the pleiotropic effects of Nef proteins of HIV and simian immunodeficiency 
virus (SIV), down-modulation of cell surface expression of CD4 is a prominent
phenotype. It has been presumed that Nef proteins accelerate endocytosis of CD4
by linking the receptor to the AP-2 clathrin adaptor. However, the related AP-1
and AP-3 adaptors have also been shown to interact with Nef, hinting at role(s)
for these complexes in the intracellular retention of CD4. By using genetic
inhibitors of endocytosis and small interfering RNA-induced knockdown of AP-2, we
show that accelerated CD4 endocytosis is not a dominant mechanism of HIV-1 (NL4-3
strain) Nef in epithelial cells, T lymphocyte cell lines, or peripheral blood
lymphocytes. Furthermore, we show that both the CD4 recycling from the plasma
membrane and the nascent CD4 in transit to the plasma membrane are susceptible to
intracellular retention in HIV-1 Nef-expressing cells. In contrast, AP-2-mediated
enhanced endocytosis constitutes the predominant mechanism for SIV (MAC-239
strain) Nef-induced down-regulation of human CD4 in human cells.

PMID: 15611114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 25;280(12):11329-39. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Binding of hepatitis C virus envelope protein E2 to CD81 up-regulates matrix
metalloproteinase-2 in human hepatic stellate cells.

Mazzocca A(1), Sciammetta SC, Carloni V, Cosmi L, Annunziato F, Harada T,
Abrignani S, Pinzani M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Interna, Centro di Ricerca, Trasferimento e Alta
Formazione MCIDNENT Università di Firenze, I-50134 Firenze, Italy.
a.mazzocca@dmi.unifi.it

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) envelope E2 glycoprotein is a key molecule regulating
the interaction of HCV with cell surface proteins. E2 binds the major
extracellular loop of human CD81, a tetraspanin expressed on various cell types
including hepatocytes and B lymphocytes. Regardless, information on the
biological functions originating from this interaction are largely unknown. Since
human hepatic stellate cells (HSC) express high levels of CD81 at the cell
surface, we investigated the E2/CD81 interaction in human HSC and the possible
effects arising from this interaction. Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2;
gelatinase A), a major enzyme involved in the degradation of normal hepatic
extracellular matrix, was up-regulated following the interaction between E2 and
CD81. In particular, by employing zymography and Western blot, we observed that
E2 binding to CD81 induces a time-dependent increase in the synthesis and
activity of MMP-2. This effect was abolished by preincubating HSC with an
anti-CD81 neutralizing antibody. Similar effects were detected in NIH3T3 mouse
fibroblasts transfected with human CD81 with identical time course features. In
addition, E2/CD81 interaction in human HSC induced the up-regulation of MMP-2 by 
increasing activator protein-2/DNA binding activity via ERK/MAPK phosphorylation.
Finally, suppression of CD81 by RNA interference in human HSC abolished the
described effects of E2 on these cells, indicating that CD81 is essential for the
activation of the signaling pathway leading to the up-regulation of MMP-2. These 
results suggest that HSC may represent a potential target for HCV. The
interaction of HCV envelope with CD81 on the surface of human HSC induces an
increased expression of MMP-2. Increased degradation of the normal hepatic
extracellular matrix in areas where HCV is concentrated may favor inflammatory
infiltration and further parenchymal damage.

PMID: 15611113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jan 28;326(4):729-34.

Functional characterization and genomic organization of the human Na(+)-sulfate
cotransporter hNaS2 gene (SLC13A4).

Markovich D(1), Regeer RR, Kunzelmann K, Dawson PA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld 4072,
Australia. d.markovich@uq.edu.au

Sulfate plays an essential role in human growth and development. Here, we
characterized the functional properties of the human Na(+)-sulfate cotransporter 
(hNaS2), determined its tissue distribution, and identified its gene (SLC13A4)
structure. Expression of hNaS2 protein in Xenopus oocytes led to a
Na(+)-dependent transport of sulfate that was inhibited by thiosulfate,
phosphate, molybdate, selenate and tungstate, but not by oxalate, citrate,
succinate, phenol red or DIDS. Transport kinetics of hNaS2 determined a K(m) for 
sulfate of 0.38mM, suggestive of a high affinity sulfate transporter. Na(+)
kinetics determined a Hill coefficient of n=1.6+/-0.6, suggesting a Na:SO(4)(2-) 
stoichiometry of 2:1. hNaS2 mRNA was highly expressed in placenta and testis,
with intermediate levels in brain and lower levels found in the heart, thymus,
and liver. The SLC13A4 gene contains 16 exons, spanning over 47kb in length. Its 
5'-flanking region contains CAAT- and GC-box motifs, and a number of putative
transcription factor binding sites, including GATA-1, AP-1, and AP-2 consensus
sequences. This is the first study to characterize hNaS2 transport kinetics,
define its tissue distribution, and resolve its gene (SLC13A4) structure and 5'
flanking region.

PMID: 15607730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. BMC Genet. 2004 Dec 14;5:33.

Method for determination of (-102C>T) single nucleotide polymorphism in the human
manganese superoxide dismutase promoter.

Martin RC(1), Hughes K, Doll MA, Lan Q, Martini BD, Lissowska J, Rothman N, Hein 
DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, KY, USA. robert.martin@louisville.edu

BACKGROUND: Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) plays a critical role in the
detoxification of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species constituting a major
cellular defense mechanism against agents that induce oxidative stress. The MnSOD
promoter contains an activator protein-2 (AP-2) binding site that modifies
transcription of MnSOD. Mutations have been identified in the proximal region of 
the promoter in human tumor cell lines. One of these mutations (-102C>T) has been
shown to change the binding pattern of AP-2 leading to a reduction in
transcriptional activity. The aim of our study was to develop a method to
identify and determine the frequency of this (-102C>T) polymorphism in human
tissues.
RESULTS: A new TaqMan allelic discrimination genotype method was successfully
applied to genomic DNA samples derived from blood, buccal swabs, snap frozen
tissue and paraffin blocks. The polymorphism was shown to be in Hardy-Weinberg
Equilibrium in an evaluation of 130 Caucasians from Warsaw, Poland: 44 (33.8%)
were heterozygous and 6 (4.6%) were homozygous for -102T.
CONCLUSION: This report represents the first description of the MnSOD -102C>T
polymorphism in human subjects by a novel Taqman allelic discrimination assay.
This method should enable molecular epidemiological studies to evaluate possible 
associations of this polymorphism with malignancies and other diseases related to
reactive oxygen species.

PMCID: PMC544190
PMID: 15598343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Cell Biol. 2004 Dec 6;167(5):925-34.

Terminal osteoblast differentiation, mediated by runx2 and p27KIP1, is disrupted 
in osteosarcoma.

Thomas DM(1), Johnson SA, Sims NA, Trivett MK, Slavin JL, Rubin BP, Waring P,
McArthur GA, Walkley CR, Holloway AJ, Diyagama D, Grim JE, Clurman BE, Bowtell
DD, Lee JS, Gutierrez GM, Piscopo DM, Carty SA, Hinds PW.

Author information: 
(1)Ian Potter Foundation Centre for Cancer Genomics and Predictive Medicine, and 
Sir Donald and Lady Trescowthick Laboratories, Peter MacCallum Cancer Center,
Victoria, Melbourne, Australia. david.thomas@petermac.org

The molecular basis for the inverse relationship between differentiation and
tumorigenesis is unknown. The function of runx2, a master regulator of osteoblast
differentiation belonging to the runt family of tumor suppressor genes, is
consistently disrupted in osteosarcoma cell lines. Ectopic expression of runx2
induces p27KIP1, thereby inhibiting the activity of S-phase cyclin complexes and 
leading to the dephosphorylation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein
(pRb) and a G1 cell cycle arrest. Runx2 physically interacts with the
hypophosphorylated form of pRb, a known coactivator of runx2, thereby completing 
a feed-forward loop in which progressive cell cycle exit promotes increased
expression of the osteoblast phenotype. Loss of p27KIP1 perturbs transient and
terminal cell cycle exit in osteoblasts. Consistent with the incompatibility of
malignant transformation and permanent cell cycle exit, loss of p27KIP1
expression correlates with dedifferentiation in high-grade human osteosarcomas.
Physiologic coupling of osteoblast differentiation to cell cycle withdrawal is
mediated through runx2 and p27KIP1, and these processes are disrupted in
osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC2172443
PMID: 15583032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Seikagaku. 2004 Oct;76(10):1305-19.

[Biochemistry and structural biology in the post-genome era: search for the
underlying mechanisms of biological molecules].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry/Gene Regulation, Yokohama City University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 3 9 Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

PMID: 15580862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jan;232(1):200-8.

Identification of a novel type II classical cadherin: rat cadherin19 is expressed
in the cranial ganglia and Schwann cell precursors during development.

Takahashi M(1), Osumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neuroscience, Center for Translational and Advanced 
Animal Research on Human Diseases, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

To identify a novel type II classical cadherin, we searched the genome database
and found rat cadherin19 (cad19) with high similarity to human cadherin19. We
also found nucleotide sequences corresponding to rat cad19 in mouse and chicken
genomes. In situ hybridization of rat cad19 revealed that rat cad19 mRNA was
initially expressed in cephalic neural crest cells, and then in the cranial
ganglia, migrating trunk neural crest cells, the nascent dorsal root ganglia, and
the sympathetic ganglia. Expression of cad19 overlapped with that of neural crest
markers, including Sox10 and AP-2, but cad19 expression was confined to
subpopulations of the neural crest-derived cells, those typically observed in the
satellite glia at the periphery of the ganglia and Schwann cell precursors along 
the peripheral nerves. cad19 mRNA was not detected in cells expressing Phox2b, an
epibranchial placode-derived neurons, nor in those expressing neuronal markers
such as Hu protein. These observations suggest that cad19 is expressed in neural 
crest-derived, non-neuronal cells. Although the expression of cad19 mRNA
persisted in Schwann cell precursors at E14.5, it was no longer detected in
maturing Schwann cells at later stages. These results suggest that cad19 is an
evolutionarily conserved cadherin and may be involved in the early development of
Schwann cells in the peripheral nervous system.

PMID: 15580626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Oncogene. 2005 Jan 20;24(4):637-49.

KAI1 promoter activity is dependent on p53, junB and AP2: evidence for a possible
mechanism underlying loss of KAI1 expression in cancer cells.

Marreiros A(1), Dudgeon K, Dao V, Grimm MO, Czolij R, Crossley M, Jackson P.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Centre, Prince of Wales Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia.

A molecular mechanism to explain reduced KAI1 expression in invasive and
metastatic tumour cells remains elusive. In this report, we extend an earlier
study in bladder cells to confirm that a 76 bp region of the KAI1 promoter
(residues -922 to -847), with binding motifs for p53, AP1 and AP2, is required
for high level activity of a KAI1 reporter in prostate cancer cell lines. Gel
shift and supershift experiments supported binding of p53, junB and heterodimers 
of AP2alpha/AP2gamma or AP2beta/AP2gamma to this sequence. Introduction of
mutations into specific motifs demonstrated an essential requirement for p53 and 
junB to reporter activity, and that functional synergy between these two factors 
enhanced activity. A further elevation of reporter activity required AP2. Roles
of individual p53, junB and AP2 proteins, as well as functional synergy between
p53 and junB, were confirmed in transfection experiments. Western blotting
analysis showed that an absence of wild-type p53, and/or a loss of junB and AP2
protein expression, correlated with downregulation of KAI1 mRNA levels in a
series of prostate cancer cell lines. A loss of p53 function and/or expression of
junB, combined with reduced expression of specific AP2 proteins may underly
downregulated KAI1 expression in tumour cells.

PMID: 15580298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Stem Cells. 2004;22(7):1356-72.

Expression of telomerase extends the lifespan and enhances osteogenic
differentiation of adipose tissue-derived stromal cells.

Kang SK(1), Putnam L, Dufour J, Ylostalo J, Jung JS, Bunnell BA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy, Tulane National Primate Research Center, Tulane
University Health Sciences Center, Covington, LA 70433, USA.

Expression of TERT, the catalytic protein subunit of the telomerase complex, can 
be used to generate cell lines that expand indefinitely and retain multilineage
potential. We have created immortal adipose stromal cell lines (ATSCs) by stably 
transducing nonhuman primate-derived ATSCs with a retroviral vector expressing
TERT. Transduced cells (ATSC-TERT) had an increased level of telomerase activity 
and increased mean telomere length in the absence of malignant cellular
transformation. Long-term culture of the ATSC-TERT cells demonstrated that the
cells retain the ability to undergo differentiation along multiple lineages such 
as adipogenic, chondrogenic, and neurogenic. Untransduced cells demonstrated
markedly reduced multilineage and self-renewal potentials after 12 passages in
vitro. To determine the functional role of telomerase during osteogenesis, we
examined osteogenic differentiation potential of ATSC-TERT cells in vitro.
Compared with naive ATSCs, which typically begin to accumulate calcium after 3-4 
weeks of induction by osteogenic differentiation medium, ATSC-TERT cells were
found to accumulate significant amounts of calcium after only 1 week of culture
in osteogenic induction medium. The cells have increased production of
osteoblastic markers, such as AP2, osteoblast-specific factor 2, chondroitin
sulfate proteoglycan 4, and the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily,
compared with control ATSCs, indicating that telomerase expression may aid in
maintaining the osteogenic stem cell pool during in vitro expansion. These
results show that ectopic expression of the telomerase gene in nonhuman primate
ATSCs prevents senescence-associated impairment of osteoblast functions and that 
telomerase therapy may be a useful strategy for bone regeneration and repair.

PMID: 15579653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2004 Dec;128(12):1364-71.

Cytosine arabinoside substitution decreases transcription factor-DNA binding
element complex formation.

Zhang X(1), Kiechle FL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, William Beaumont Hospital, Royal Oak, Mich
48073, USA.

CONTEXT: The pyrimidine nucleoside analog, cytosine arabinoside (Ara-C), is an
effective therapeutic agent for acute leukemia. The phosphorylated triphosphate, 
cytosine arabinoside triphosphate, competes with deoxycytosine triphosphate as a 
substrate for incorporation into DNA. Once incorporated into DNA, it inhibits DNA
polymerase and topoisomerase I and modifies the tertiary structure of DNA.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if the substitution of Ara-C for cytosine in
double-stranded oligonucleotides that contain 4 specific transcription factor
binding sites (TATA, GATA, C/EBP, and AP-2alpha) alters transcription factor
binding to their respective DNA binding elements.
DESIGN: Transcription factors were obtained from nuclear extracts from human
promyelocytic leukemia HL-60 cells. [32P]-end-labeled double-stranded
oligonucleotides that contained 1 or 2 specific transcription factor binding
sites with or without Ara-C substitution for cytosine were used to assess
transcription factor binding by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
RESULTS: The substitution of Ara-C for cytosine within and outside the
transcription factor binding element (AP-2alpha, C/EBP), outside the binding
element only (GATA, TATA), or within the binding element only (AP-2alpha) all
result in a reduction in transcription factor binding to their respective DNA
binding element.
CONCLUSION: The reduction of the binding capacity of transcription factors with
their respective DNA binding elements may depend on structural changes within
oligonucleotides induced by Ara-C incorporation. This altered binding capacity of
transcription factors to their DNA binding elements may represent one mechanism
for Ara-C cytotoxicity secondary to inhibition of transcription of new messenger 
RNAs and, subsequently, translation of new proteins.

PMID: 15578880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2004 Dec;114(7):1818-25.

Quantitative transcriptional analysis of fusing and nonfusing cranial suture
complexes in mice.

Nacamuli RP(1), Song HM, Fang TD, Fong KD, Mathy JA, Shi YY, Salim A, Longaker
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, Calif
94305-5148, USA.

Previous studies have documented the differences in expression of various genes
associated with the process of osteogenesis in fusing and nonfusing cranial
sutures, including growth factors, growth factor receptors, and extracellular
matrix molecules. Most of these studies were performed in rats, and although the 
biology regulating cranial suture fusion in mice and rats is presumed to be
similar, studies are needed to verify these expression patterns as mice become
increasingly utilized for scientific inquiry into the molecular biology of suture
fusion and patency. The purpose of this study was to determine the differences in
expression of several genes known to be critical to osteoblast biology. Posterior
frontal and sagittal suture complexes (including the associated dura mater,
suture mesenchyme, and osteogenic fronts) were isolated from 5-, 15-, 25-, 35-,
and 45-day-old male CD-1 mice (n = 8 per age; n = 40 total). Total cellular RNA
was extracted and converted to cDNA. Quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction was then performed for the following genes:
transforming growth factor beta1 and beta3, fibroblast growth factor receptor 1, 
Runx2,Osteopontin, and Osteocalcin. Expression of all genes examined was
increased significantly in the posterior frontal suture as compared with the
sagittal suture. Peak expression for all genes was observed on day 25. These data
demonstrate that the expression of osteogenic growth factors, growth factor
receptors, transcription factors, and extracellular matrix molecules is increased
in the fusing posterior frontal suture in mice.

PMID: 15577353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Biol Cell. 2005 Feb;16(2):881-90. Epub 2004 Dec 1.

Laminin-5 induces osteogenic gene expression in human mesenchymal stem cells
through an ERK-dependent pathway.

Klees RF(1), Salasznyk RM, Kingsley K, Williams WA, Boskey A, Plopper GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180-3596, 
USA.

The laminin family of proteins is critical for managing a variety of cellular
activities including migration, adhesion, and differentiation. In bone, the roles
of laminins in controlling osteogenic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem
cells (hMSC) are unknown. We report here that laminin-5 is found in bone and
expressed by hMSC. hMSC isolated from bone synthesize laminin-5 and adhere to
exogenous laminin-5 through alpha3beta1 integrin. Adhesion to laminin-5 activates
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) within 30 min and leads to
phosphorylation of the osteogenic transcription factor Runx2/CBFA-1 within 8 d.
Cells plated on laminin-5 for 16 d express increased levels of osteogenic marker 
genes, and those plated for 21 d deposit a mineralized matrix, indicative of
osteogenic differentiation. Addition of the ERK inhibitor PD98059 mitigates these
effects. We conclude that contact with laminin-5 is sufficient to activate ERK
and to stimulate osteogenic differentiation in hMSC.

PMCID: PMC545919
PMID: 15574877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Jul;204(1):63-72.

Smad function and intranuclear targeting share a Runx2 motif required for
osteogenic lineage induction and BMP2 responsive transcription.

Afzal F(1), Pratap J, Ito K, Ito Y, Stein JL, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS, Lian JB,
Javed A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

The coordinated activity of Runx2 and BMP/TGFbeta-activated Smads is critical for
formation of the skeleton, but the precise structural basis for the Runx2/Smad
interaction has not been resolved. By deletion mutagenesis, we have defined the
Runx2 motif required for physical and functional interaction with either BMP or
TGFbeta responsive Smads. Smad responsive transcriptional activity was retained
upon deletion of the C-terminus to amino acid (aa) 432 but lost with deletion to 
aa 391. Thus the Smad interacting domain (SMID) of Runx2 (432-391) is embedded in
the well-defined nuclear matrix targeting signal (NMTS) that mediates
intranuclear trafficking. The SMID suffices as an interacting module when fused
to the heterologous Gal-4 protein. Formation of the Runx2 and Smad complex is
dependent on Runx2 phosphorylation through the MAPK signaling pathway, as
determined by co-immunoprecipitation studies. We established that all SMID/NMTS
deficient Runx2 mutants do not show in situ association with Smad in the nucleus 
nor do they support BMP2-mediated osteogenic induction of the mesenchymal C2C12
cell line. Thus, we provide direct evidence that the SMID/NMTS domain (391-432)
of Runx2 is essential for BMP2-mediated osteoblast differentiation. Our findings 
suggest that TGFbeta/ BMP2 signaling, MAPK dependent phosphorylation, and Runx2
subnuclear targeting converge to induce the osteogenic phenotype.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15573378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Feb 1;303(1):160-73.

Stabilin-1 and stabilin-2 are both directed into the early endocytic pathway in
hepatic sinusoidal endothelium via interactions with clathrin/AP-2, independent
of ligand binding.

Hansen B(1), Longati P, Elvevold K, Nedredal GI, Schledzewski K, Olsen R,
Falkowski M, Kzhyshkowska J, Carlsson F, Johansson S, Smedsrød B, Goerdt S,
Johansson S, McCourt P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Centre Mannheim, Ruprecht-Karls 
University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany.

Liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) mediate clearance of hyaluronan (HA)
and scavenger receptor ligands, for example, advanced glycation end product
(AGE)-modified proteins and oxidized lipids from the circulation. We recently
cloned stabilin-1 and -2, two members of a novel family of transmembrane proteins
expressed in LSECs. By using primary LSECs and HEK293 cells separately expressing
either stabilin, we have investigated their roles in the early events of
endocytosis with respect to localization, ligand-binding properties, and
associations with clathrin and adaptor protein (AP)-2. Both stabilins were
present at the cell surface, although surface levels of stabilin-1 were limited. 
In addition, stabilins were present in early endosomal antigen (EEA)-1+
organelles colocalizing with endocytosed AGE-modified bovine serum albumin (BSA).
Treating cells with monensin further pronounced this distribution. Recombinant
stabilin-2, but not recombinant stabilin-1, bound HA and the scavenger receptor
ligands AGE-modified BSA, formaldehyde-treated BSA, and collagen N-terminal
propeptides. In LSECs, both stabilins were associated with clathrin and AP-2, but
not with each other. These interactions did not change upon addition of exogenous
HA, suggesting that stabilins are constitutively internalized. In conclusion,
hepatic stabilins are both present in the early endocytic pathway, associating
with clathrin/AP-2, but whereas stabilin-2 has a clear scavenging profile,
stabilin-1 does not recognize these ligands.

PMID: 15572036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Eur J Cancer. 2004 Dec;40(18):2820-8.

Methylation analysis of the neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) promoter in peripheral
nerve sheath tumours.

Harder A(1), Rosche M, Reuss DE, Holtkamp N, Uhlmann K, Friedrich R, Mautner VF, 
von Deimling A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Charité-University Medicine Berlin,
Augustenburger Platz 1, Berlin 13353, Germany. anja.harder@charite.de

Peripheral nerve sheath tumours are hallmarks of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). 
Development of plexiform neurofibromas to malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumours (MPNST) is common. The NF1 gene promoter harbours a hypomethylated CpG
island. Thus, methylation changes may be involved in the development of different
types of neurofibromas and malignant transformation. We investigated
NF1-associated dermal (n=9) and plexiform neurofibromas (n=7), MPNST (n=5) and
non-NF1 leucocyte samples (n=20) for their methylation pattern by bisulphite
genomic sequencing. We could not find global hypermethylation in the NF1 promoter
in our series. Nevertheless, site-specific methylation, involving transcription
factor binding sites for SP1, CRE (-10), and AP-2, was observed. One region of
the 5'-UTR (untranslated region) overlapping with a putative AP-2 binding site
was methylated at 30-100% in 4/20 control samples. In conclusion, we did not find
hypermethylation in NF1-associated tumours. Instead, low level methylation could 
parallel a global genomic hypomethylation in malignancy.

PMID: 15571966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 15;10(22):7621-8.

Expression of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 in breast cancer with a 
special reference to activator protein-2, HER2, and prognosis.

Pellikainen JM(1), Ropponen KM, Kataja VV, Kellokoski JK, Eskelinen MJ, Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, University of Kuopio, Kuopio,
Finland.

PURPOSE: In the present study, we investigated the expression and prognostic
value of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9 in breast cancer as well as
their relation to transcription factor activator protein (AP)-2 and HER2
oncogene. The role of invasion and metastasis-promoting MMPs and their potential 
regulators, AP-2 and HER2, is currently still unclear in breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: MMP-2 and MMP-9 expressions were analyzed
immunohistochemically in a large prospective series of 421 breast cancer patients
diagnosed and treated between 1990 and 1995 at Kuopio University Hospital
(Kuopio, Finland). The relation of MMP-2 and MMP-9 expressions to AP-2, HER2,
clinicopathological data, and survival was investigated.
RESULTS: Both MMP-2 and MMP-9 were expressed in the cytoplasm of malignant and
stromal cells. High expression of MMPs in carcinoma cells was related to small
tumors (T1, stage I), whereas positive stromal expression of MMPs was associated 
with aggressive factors. High expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in carcinoma cells,
but not in stromal cells, was related to high AP-2 expression. Positive stromal
MMP-2 expression was associated with HER2 overexpression in the whole patient
group and in the node-negative patient subgroup. Positive stromal MMP-9
expression was related to HER2 overexpression in estrogen receptor (ER)-positive 
disease. In the univariate survival analysis, positive stromal MMP-9 predicted
shorter recurrence-free survival (RFS; P=0.0389) and breast cancer-related
survival (BCRS; P=0.0081) in ER+ disease, especially in the subgroup of ER+
tumors of < or =2 cm in diameter (T1; P=0.0031 for RFS, and P=0.0089 for BCRS).
High MMP-9 expression in cancer cells predicted longer RFS (P=0.0351) in the
whole patient group. In the multivariate analysis of the whole patient group, the
independent predictors of shorter RFS were reduced MMP-9 expression in carcinoma 
cells (P=0.0248), HER2 overexpression (P=0.0001), and advanced-stage disease
(P=0.0002). Shorter BCRS was predicted by advanced-stage disease (P <0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in breast cancer seems to be partly
related to expression of AP-2 and HER2. Positive stromal MMP-9 expression
predicts poor survival in the hormone-responsive small tumors, whereas MMP-9
expression in carcinoma cells favors survival. Evaluation of MMP-9 expression
seems to add valuable information on breast cancer prognosis.

PMID: 15569994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jan 7;326(1):147-53.

S100A4 inhibition by RNAi up-regulates osteoblast related genes in periodontal
ligament cells.

Kato C(1), Kojima T, Komaki M, Mimori K, Duarte WR, Takenaga K, Ishikawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Periodontology, Department of Hard Tissue Engineering, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University Graduate School, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549,
Japan. chiyu.peri@tmd.ac.jp

Periodontal ligament (PDL) is a thin fibrous connective tissue located between
alveolar bone and cementum that remains unmineralized physiologically. It is thus
thought that PDL cells possess mechanisms to inhibit mineralization. It has been 
demonstrated that S100A4, a member of the S100 calcium-binding protein family, is
synthesized and secreted by PDL cells, and that it may act as an inhibitor of
mineralization. However, the mechanisms of action of S100A4 in mineralization
have not been thoroughly clarified. In the present study we investigated the
effects of S100A4 inhibition by a short interfering RNA (siRNA) on the expression
of osteoblast related genes by human PDL cells. Inhibition of S100A4 by siRNA
resulted in increased expression of osteoblastic markers such as osteopontin and 
osteocalcin, and the osteoblast-specific transcription factors, Runx2/Cbfa1 and
Osterix. These results indicate that S100A4 suppresses the expression of
osteoblastic genes in PDL cells and may thus inhibit mineralization in the PDL.

PMID: 15567164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2004 Dec;44(4):225-9.

Large fontanelles are a shared feature of haploinsufficiency of RUNX2 and its
co-activator CBFB.

Goto T(1), Aramaki M, Yoshihashi H, Nishimura G, Hasegawa Y, Takahashi T, Ishii
T, Fukushima Y, Kosaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Kiyose Children's Hospital, Tokyo,
Japan.

CBFB at 16q22 heterodimerizes with either RUNX2 (also known as CBFA1) or RUNX1
(CBFA2) to activate the transcription of downstream molecules. RUNX2 regulates
osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation and its haploinsufficiency 
leads to cleidocranial dysplasia, characterized large fontanelles, hypoplasia or 
aplasia of the clavicles, hypoplasia of the distal phalanges, and a wide pubic
symphysis. Complete loss of Runx1 or Cbfb in mice is lethal because of the
absence of fetal liver hematopoiesis. Fetal rescue in Cbfb(-/-) mice by providing
the Cbfb functions in the hematopoietic progenitors leads to wide fontanelle and 
delayed chondrocyte maturation, presumably resulting from the incomplete function
of the transcriptional pathway mediated by the Cbfb-Runx2 heterodimer. The
present report describes a patient with a small deletion of chromosome 16q22.1
encompassing CBFB. Skeletal abnormalities included a widely open fontanelle,
multiple wormian bones along the sagittal suture, hypoplasia of the distal
phalanges, and mildly shortened clavicles. G-banding analysis revealed a
shortening of the 16q22.1 band. A fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis,
using the BAC probe spanning the CBFB locus at 16q22.1, revealed that the CBFB
probe hybridized to only one of the two homologous chromosome 16 regions.
Array-comparative genomic hybridization analysis revealed that the deletion spans
1.2 megabases. In reviewing eight previously reported cases of 16q interstitial
deletions involving band q22, large cranial sutures were noted in all but one
case. Considering the phenotypic similarity of the 16q22 deletion case and
Cbfb(-/-) mice rescued for hematopoiesis and the consistency of the phenotype
among 16q22 deletion cases, we suggest that the common phenotypic feature of the 
16q22 deletion, large fontanelles, can be attributed to a haploinsufficiency of
CBFB.

PMID: 15566413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Mar 1;94(4):720-30.

SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex is obligatory for BMP2-induced,
Runx2-dependent skeletal gene expression that controls osteoblast
differentiation.

Young DW(1), Pratap J, Javed A, Weiner B, Ohkawa Y, van Wijnen A, Montecino M,
Stein GS, Stein JL, Imbalzano AN, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655-0105, USA.

Development of bone tissue requires maturation of osteoblasts from mesenchymal
precursors. BMP2, a member of the TGFbeta superfamily, and the Runx2 (AML3/Cbfa1)
transcription factor, a downstream BMP2 effector, are regulatory signals required
for osteoblast differentiation. While Runx2 responsive osteogenic gene expression
has been functionally linked to alterations in chromatin structure, the factors
that govern this chromatin remodeling remain to be identified. Here, we address
the role of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling enzymes in BMP2-induced,
Runx2-dependent development of the osteoblast phenotype. For these studies, we
have examined calvarial cells from wild-type (WT) mice and mice that are
homozygous for the Runx2 null allele, as well as the C2C12 model of BMP2-induced 
osteogenesis. By the analysis of microarray data, we find that several components
of the SWI/SNF complex are regulated during BMP2-mediated osteoblast
differentiation. Brg1 is an essential DNA dependent ATPase subunit of the SWI/SNF
complex. Thus, functional studies were carried out using a fibroblast cell line
that conditionally expresses a mutant Brg1 protein, which exerts a dominant
negative effect on SWI/SNF function. Our findings demonstrate that SWI/SNF is
required for BMP2-induced expression of alkaline phosphatase (APase), an early
marker reflecting Runx2 control of osteoblast differentiation. In addition, Brg1 
is expressed in cells within the developing skeleton of the mouse embryo as well 
as in osteoblasts ex vivo. Taken together these results support the concept that 
BMP2-mediated osteogenesis requires Runx2, and demonstrates that initiation of
BMP2-induced, Runx2-dependent skeletal gene expression requires SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complexes.

PMID: 15565649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Gene. 2004 Dec 8;343(1):117-26.

YY1 is involved in RANKL-induced transcription of the tartrate-resistant acid
phosphatase gene in osteoclast differentiation.

Shi Z(1), Silveira A, Patel P, Feng X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1670 University 
BLVD, VH G046B, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) ligand (RANKL), a
critical activator of osteoclast differentiation, plays a pivotal role in
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) gene expression. Previously, we showed
that upstream stimulatory factors (USF) 1 and 2 are implicated in the
RANKL-induced TRAP transcriptional activation via a 12-bp USF binding site in the
TRAP promoter. In that study, we also demonstrated that a RANKL-induced nuclear
protein binds to a 50-bp oligonucleotide (Oligo IV) corresponding to a distinct
TRAP promoter region. Here we report the identification and functional
characterization of the nuclear protein binding to Oligo IV. We identified a
21-bp sequence CTGTTTATGATGGCGAGGGGG in Oligo IV that specifically binds the
RANKL-induced nuclear protein from RAW264.7 cells by performing a series of
competition assays. Computer analysis of the 21-bp sequence revealed that the
sequence contains a putative Yin Yang 1 (YY1) binding site overlapped with a
putative activator protein-2 (AP-2) binding site. Competition and supershift
assays indicated that the nuclear protein binding to the 21-bp sequence is YY1,
not AP-2. Functionally, mutation of the YY1-binding site resulted in a reduction 
in the RANKL-induced TRAP transcription in RAW264.7 cells, demonstrating that YY1
positively regulates RANKL-induced TRAP transcriptional activation. In
conclusion, our data demonstrated that YY1 plays a functional role in
RANKL-mediated TRAP gene expression during osteoclast differentiation.

PMID: 15563837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cancer Res. 2004 Nov 15;64(22):8256-61.

Physical and functional interactions between the Wwox tumor suppressor protein
and the AP-2gamma transcription factor.

Aqeilan RI(1), Palamarchuk A, Weigel RJ, Herrero JJ, Pekarsky Y, Croce CM.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
USA.

The WWOX gene encodes a tumor suppressor WW domain-containing protein, Wwox.
Alterations of WWOX have been demonstrated in multiple types of cancer, and
introduction of Wwox into Wwox-negative tumor cells has resulted in tumor
suppression and apoptosis. The Wwox protein contains two WW domains that
typically bind proline-rich motifs and mediate protein-protein interactions.
Recently, we have described functional cross-talk between the Wwox protein and
the p53 homologue, p73. To further explore the biological function of Wwox, we
investigated other interacting candidates. In this report, we demonstrate a
physical and functional association between AP-2gamma transcription factor and
the Wwox protein. AP-2gamma at 20q13.2 encodes a transcription factor and is
frequently amplified in breast carcinoma. We show that Wwox binds to the PPPY
motif of AP-2gamma via its first WW domain. Alterations of tyrosine 33 in the
first WW domain of Wwox or the proline-rich motif in AP-2gamma dramatically
reduce this interaction. In addition, our results demonstrate that Wwox
expression triggers redistribution of nuclear AP-2gamma to the cytoplasm, hence
suppressing its transactivating function. Our results suggest that Wwox tumor
suppressor protein inhibits AP-2gamma oncogenic activity by sequestering it in
the cytoplasm.

PMID: 15548692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Gene. 2004 Nov 10;342(1):13-24.

Skeletal hormones and the C/EBP and Runx transcription factors: interactions that
integrate and redefine gene expression.

Centrella M(1), Christakos S, McCarthy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street,
New Haven, CT 06520-8041, USA. michael.centrella@yale.edu

Systemic hormones and local growth factors have significant and often complex
roles in normal tissue development, growth, remodeling, and repair. Early efforts
in skeletal tissue attempted to define active panels of these agents and their
direct effects on cell proliferation, matrix production, and secretion of other
soluble mediators of differentiated cell function. Initial results resolved many 
of these questions and began to unveil functional interactions between specific
hormones and growth factors. More recent evidence suggests that interactions
between individual hormone systems also occur in less anticipated but probably
not less meaningful ways. In some cases, these interactions may help to define a 
spectrum of effects on gene expression by focusing, refocusing, or integrating
the activity of previously recognized transcription regulators. Other studies in 
isolated osteoblasts predict that certain steroid hormones have distinctive
effects on specific transcription factors with important roles in bone growth and
repair. In this review, we focus on studies that define functional and physical
interactions between molecular mediators of hormone activity that could directly 
effect skeletal growth factor biology.

PMID: 15527960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Feb 1;94(2):307-16.

Genistein stimulates the osteoblastic differentiation via NO/cGMP in bone marrow 
culture.

Pan W(1), Quarles LD, Song LH, Yu YH, Jiao C, Tang HB, Jiang CH, Deng HW, Li YJ, 
Zhou HH, Xiao ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Central South University, Changsha 410078,
China.

The soybean phytoestrogen, genistein (Gen), has anabolic effects on bone through 
mechanisms that remain to be elucidated. We examined the role of nitric oxide
(NO) and its downstream effector guanylyl cyclase (GC) in mediating the effects
of Gen on the proliferation and osteoblastic maturation of primary mouse bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs). Gen (10(-8) approximately 10(-6)
M) resulted in a dose-dependent increase in cell proliferation as measured by
increased [3H]thymidine incorporation, and stimulated osteoblastic maturation as 
assessed by culture duration-dependent increments in alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity, calcium deposition into extracellular matrix and Runx2/Cbfa1 gene
expression in BMSCs cultures. Gen also resulted in a dose-dependent increase in
NO synthase (NOS) activity, NO formation, and cGMP production in BMSCs cultures. 
The effects of Gen were mimicked by 17beta-estradiol (E2, 10(-8) M). Concurrent
treatment with the estrogen receptor (ER) antagonist ICI182,780 (10(-7) M) or the
NOS inhibitor L-NAME (3 x 10(-3) M) diminished the Gen (10(-6) M)-mediated
increase in NOS activity, NO production, and cGMP content. In contrast, a soluble
GC inhibitor 1H-[1,2,4]oxadiazolo [4,3,-a]quinoxalin-1-one (ODQ, 10(-6) M)
selectively blocked the Gen (10(-6) M)-mediated increase in cGMP content but not 
in NO production and NOS activity. Moreover, inhibition of ER, NOS activity or
cGMP blocked Gen-induced proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of BMSCs 
and Runx2/Cbfa1 gene expression in culture. Gen has estrogen-like activity and
stimulates the proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of mouse BMSCs at
least in part through NO/cGMP pathway.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15526288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Feb 1;94(2):403-18.

Beta-catenin and BMP-2 synergize to promote osteoblast differentiation and new
bone formation.

Mbalaviele G(1), Sheikh S, Stains JP, Salazar VS, Cheng SL, Chen D, Civitelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Mutations of critical components of the Wnt pathway profoundly affect skeletal
development and maintenance, probably via modulation of beta-catenin signaling.
We tested the hypothesis that beta-catenin is involved in mesenchymal lineage
allocation to osteogenic cells using a beta-catenin mutant with constitutive
transcriptional activity (DeltaN151). Although this stable beta-catenin had no
effects by itself on osteogenic differentiation of multipotent embryonic cell
lines, it synergized with bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) resulting in
dramatic stimulation of alkaline phosphatase activity, osteocalcin gene
expression, and matrix mineralization. Likewise, DeltaN151 and BMP-2
synergistically stimulated new bone formation after subperiosteal injection in
mouse calvaria in vivo. Conversely, DeltaN151 prevented adipogenic
differentiation from pre-adipocytic or uncommitted mesenchymal cells in vitro.
Intriguingly, the synergism with BMP-2 on gene transcription occurred without
altering expression of Cbfa1/Runx2, suggesting actions independent or downstream 
of this osteoblast-specific transcription factor. Thus, beta-catenin directs
osteogenic lineage allocation by enhancing mesenchymal cell responsiveness to
osteogenic factors, such as BMP-2, in part via Tcf/Lef dependent mechanisms. In
vivo, this synergism leads to increased new bone formation.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2647989
PMID: 15526274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2004 Nov;370(5):331-9. Epub 2004 Oct 28.

Involvement of AP-2 binding sites in regulation of human beta-glucuronidase.

Kunert-Keil C(1), Sperker B, Bien S, Wolf G, Grube M, Kroemer HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Peter Holtz Research Center of Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Ernst Moritz Arndt-University,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Strasse 23d, 17487 Greifswald, Germany.

The lysosomal hydrolase beta-glucuronidase (beta-gluc) can be used for the
bioactivation of non-toxic glucuronide prodrugs of anticancer agents. The enzyme 
is present at high levels in many tumours and hence may lead to an enhanced drug 
targeting by tumour-selective release of the active anticancer drug. Individual
expression and regulation of this enzyme is one factor modulating the
bioactivation of glucuronide prodrugs. Nevertheless, in contrast to murine
beta-gluc, which is inducible by androgens, the human enzyme has been regarded as
an unregulated housekeeping gene due to a lacking TATA box and high G+C contents 
within the putative promotor sequence. Despite these facts, we were able to
demonstrate downregulation of human beta-gluc expression by the calcium ionophore
A23187 and the calcium ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin in the human hepatoma cell
line HepG2. However, cis-acting elements responsible for this regulation have not
yet been identified. We therefore characterised the 5'-untranslated region of the
human beta-gluc gene using transient transfection assays with promotor-luciferase
constructs in HepG2 cells and cloned fragments between 3,770 bp and 107 bp.
A23187 reduced the beta-gluc promotor activity. This effect disappeared using
fragments smaller than 356 bp. Using site-directed in vitro mutagenesis and
gel-electrophoretic-mobility shift assays, we found evidence of an involvement of
transcription factor activating protein-2 (AP-2) binding sites on the regulation 
of human beta-glucuronidase by A23187. Our studies provide a basis for the
understanding of the transcriptional regulation of the human beta-glucuronidase
gene and could be useful for the optimisation of glucuronide prodrug therapy.

PMID: 15526106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Cell Biochem. 2005 Jan 1;94(1):25-38.

Regulation of gene expression in melanoma: new approaches for treatment.

Leslie MC(1), Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77230-1429, USA.

The molecular changes associated with the transition of melanoma cells from
radial growth phase (RGP) to vertical growth phase (VGP, metastatic phenotype)
are not yet well defined. We have demonstrated that the progression of human
melanoma is associated with loss of expression of the transcription factor AP-2. 
In metastatic melanoma cells, this loss resulted in overexpression of MCAM/MUC18,
MMP-2, the thrombin receptor (PAR-1), and lack of c-KIT expression. The
transition from RGP to VGP is also associated with overexpression of the
angiogenic factor IL-8. Additionally, the transition of melanoma cells from RGP
to VGP is associated with overexpression of the transcription factors CREB and
ATF-1, both of which may act as survival factors for human melanoma cells.
Inactivation of CREB/ATF-1 activities in metastatic melanoma cells by
dominant-negative CREB or by anti-ATF-1 single chain antibody fragment (ScFv),
resulted in deregulation of MMP-2 and MCAM/MUC18, increased the sensitivity of
melanoma cells to apoptosis, and inhibition of their tumorigenicity and
metastatic potential in vivo. In this prospect article, we summarize our data on 
the role of AP-2 and CREB/ATF-1 in the progression of human melanoma and report
on the development of new fully human antibodies anti-MCAM/MUC18 and anti-IL-8
which could serve as new modalities for the treatment of melanoma.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15523674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Nutr. 2004 Nov;134(11):3190S-3191S.

Manganese superoxide dismutase: genetic variation and regulation.

St Clair D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536,
USA. DSTCL00@uky.edu

PMID: 15514302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2004 Nov 5;88(3):369-78.

Runx2/Cbfa1-genetically engineered skeletal myoblasts mineralize collagen
scaffolds in vitro.

Gersbach CA(1), Byers BA, Pavlath GK, Guldberg RE, García AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology 
and Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA.

Genetic engineering of progenitor and stem cells is an attractive approach to
address cell sourcing limitations associated with tissue engineering
applications. Bone tissue engineering represents a promising strategy to repair
large bone defects, but has been limited in part by the availability of a
sustained, mineralizing cell source. This study examined the in vitro
mineralization potential of primary skeletal myoblasts genetically engineered to 
overexpress Runx2/Cbfa1, an osteoblastic transcriptional regulator essential to
bone formation. These cells were viable at the periphery of 3D fibrous collagen
scaffolds for 6 weeks of static culture. Exogenous Runx2 expression induced
osteogenic differentiation and repressed myogenesis in these constructs relative 
to controls. Runx2-modified cells deposited significant amounts of mineralized
matrix and hydroxyapatite, as determined by microcomputed tomography,
histological analysis, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, whereas
scaffolds seeded with control cells exhibited no mineralized regions. Although
mineralization by Runx2-engineered cells was confined to the periphery of the
construct, colocalizing with cell viability, it was sufficient to increase the
compressive modulus of constructs 30-fold relative to controls. This work
demonstrates that Runx2 overexpression in skeletal myoblasts may address current 
obstacles of bone tissue engineering by providing a potent cell source for in
vitro mineralization and construct maturation. Additionally, the use of genetic
engineering methods to express downstream control factors and transcriptional
regulators, in contrast to soluble signaling molecules, represents a robust
strategy to enhance cellular activities for tissue engineering applications.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15486943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Cell Sci. 2004 Nov 1;117(Pt 23):5489-96. Epub 2004 Oct 12.

The C-terminal domain LLKIL motif of CXCR2 is required for ligand-mediated
polarization of early signals during chemotaxis.

Sai J(1), Fan GH, Wang D, Richmond A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veteran Affairs, Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

HEK293 cells expressing wild-type CXCR2 recruit PH-Akt-GFP to the leading edge of
the cell in response to chemokine. However, in cells expressing mutant CXCR2
defective in AP-2 and HIP binding, i.e. with a mutation in the LLKIL motif,
PH-Akt-GFP does not localize to the leading edge in response to ligand.
Inhibition of Akt/PKB by transfection of HEK 293 cells with a dominant negative
(kinase defective) Akt/PKB inhibits CXCR2 mediated chemotaxis. FRET analysis
reveals that membrane-bound activated Cdc42 and Rac1 localize to the leading edge
of cells expressing wild-type CXCR2 receptor, but not in cells expressing mutant 
CXCR2. By contrast, when the activation of Cdc42 and Rac1 are monitored by
affinity precipitation assay, cells expressing either wild-type or LLKIL mutant
receptors show equivalent ligand induction. Altogether, these data suggest that
restricted localized activation of Akt/PKB, Rac1 and Cdc42 is crucial for
chemotactic responses and that events mediated by the LLKIL motif are crucial for
chemotaxis.

PMCID: PMC2668248
PMID: 15479720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1189-96. Epub 2004 Oct 10.

Cited2 controls left-right patterning and heart development through a
Nodal-Pitx2c pathway.

Bamforth SD(1), Bragança J, Farthing CR, Schneider JE, Broadbent C, Michell AC,
Clarke K, Neubauer S, Norris D, Brown NA, Anderson RH, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Malformations of the septum, outflow tract and aortic arch are the most common
congenital cardiovascular defects and occur in mice lacking Cited2, a
transcriptional coactivator of TFAP2. Here we show that Cited2(-/-) mice also
develop laterality defects, including right isomerism, abnormal cardiac looping
and hyposplenia, which are suppressed on a mixed genetic background. Cited2(-/-) 
mice lack expression of the Nodal target genes Pitx2c, Nodal and Ebaf in the left
lateral plate mesoderm, where they are required for establishing laterality and
cardiovascular development. CITED2 and TFAP2 were detected at the Pitx2c promoter
in embryonic hearts, and they activate Pitx2c transcription in transient
transfection assays. We propose that an abnormal Nodal-Pitx2c pathway represents 
a unifying mechanism for the cardiovascular malformations observed in Cited2(-/-)
mice, and that such malformations may be the sole manifestation of a laterality
defect.

PMID: 15475956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mod Pathol. 2005 Mar;18(3):431-8.

Distinct spatial expression patterns of AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma in non-neoplastic
human breast and breast cancer.

Friedrichs N(1), Jäger R, Paggen E, Rudlowski C, Merkelbach-Bruse S, Schorle H,
Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Bonn Medical
School, Bonn, Germany. Nicolaus.Friedrichs@ukb.uni-bonn.de

Although transcription factors AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma have been implicated in
the control of estrogen receptor (ER) and ErbB-2, their impact for breast cancer 
is still controversial. To better understand the role of AP-2 proteins in mammary
neoplasia, the analysis of their spatial expression pattern in normal breast and 
breast cancer is required. A total of 51 specimens of female breast cancer
patients and a tissue microarray containing 93 additional female breast cancer
cases were immunohistochemically stained for AP-2alpha, AP-2gamma, ER and ErbB-2.
In 70 cases of the tissue microarray, survival data comprising a period of up to 
30 years were present. In non-neoplastic breast tissue, AP-2alpha was expressed
in the inner glandular cell layer while AP-2gamma was expressed in the outer
myoepithelial cell layer. Ductal carcinoma in situ revealed strongly
AP-2alpha-positive tumor cells surrounded by a layer of AP-2gamma-positive
myoepithelial cells. In invasive carcinoma, expression of AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma
was variable. High expression of ER and AP-2alpha showed better survival rates
than low expression of these markers. AP-2gamma expression had no effect on
survival. These results for the first time reveal a distinct spatial expression
pattern of AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma in normal breast and in ductal carcinoma in
situ with specific AP-2gamma expression in myoepithelium. High ER and AP-2alpha
expression in invasive breast cancer showed favorable survival rates. Therefore, 
AP-2alpha expression seems to be associated with better prognosis of breast
cancer. AP-2gamma expression has no influence on survival reflecting that
myoepithelial cells are not involved in the neoplastic process.

PMID: 15467710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(20):8847-61.

Bone-specific transcription factor Runx2 interacts with the
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 receptor to up-regulate rat osteocalcin gene
expression in osteoblastic cells.

Paredes R(1), Arriagada G, Cruzat F, Villagra A, Olate J, Zaidi K, van Wijnen A, 
Lian JB, Stein GS, Stein JL, Montecino M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Biologicas,
Universidad de Concepcion, Casilla 160-C, Concepcion, Chile.

Bone-specific transcription of the osteocalcin (OC) gene is regulated principally
by the Runx2 transcription factor and is further stimulated in response to
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 via its specific receptor (VDR). The rat OC gene
promoter contains three recognition sites for Runx2 (sites A, B, and C). Mutation
of sites A and B, which flank the 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-responsive
element (VDRE), abolishes 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-dependent enhancement of 
OC transcription, indicating a tight functional relationship between the VDR and 
Runx2 factors. In contrast to most of the members of the nuclear receptor family,
VDR possesses a very short N-terminal A/B domain, which has led to the suggestion
that its N-terminal region does not contribute to transcriptional enhancement.
Here, we have combined transient-overexpression, coimmunoprecipitation, in situ
colocalization, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and glutathione S-transferase
pull-down analyses to demonstrate that in osteoblastic cells expressing OC, VDR
interacts directly with Runx2 bound to site B, which is located immediately
adjacent to the VDRE. This interaction contributes significantly to
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-dependent enhancement of the OC promoter and
requires a region located C terminal to the runt homology DNA binding domain of
Runx2 and the N-terminal region of VDR. Together, our results indicate that Runx2
plays a key role in the 1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3-dependent stimulation of
the OC promoter in osteoblastic cells by further stabilizing the interaction of
the VDR with the VDRE. These studies demonstrate a novel mechanism for
combinatorial control of bone tissue-specific gene expression. This mechanism
involves the intersection of two major pathways: Runx2, a "master"
transcriptional regulator of osteoblast differentiation, and
1alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3, a hormone that promotes expression of genes
associated with these terminally differentiated bone cells.

PMCID: PMC517904
PMID: 15456860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Skin Pharmacol Physiol. 2004 Sep-Oct;17(5):232-7.

Ectoin: an effective natural substance to prevent UVA-induced premature
photoaging.

Buenger J(1), Driller H.

Author information: 
(1)Merck KGaA, Pigments Cosmetics Actives, Business Unit Cosmetics, Research and 
Development, Darmstadt, Germany. Joachim.Buenger@merck.de

With the help of a new 'UVA stress model', it was shown that Ectoin protects the 
skin from the effects of UVA-induced cell damage in a number of different ways.
Using cell cultures, high-performance thin-layer chromatography, gel
electrophoresis mobility shift assays, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction, ion exchange chromatography and UV spectroscopy, it was demonstrated
that the UVA-induced second messenger release, transcription factor AP-2
activation, intercellular adhesion molecule-1 expression and mitochondrial DNA
mutation could be prevented. The results obtained clearly demonstrate that Ectoin
counteracts the effects of UVA-induced and accelerated skin aging at different
cell levels.

2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15452409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Apr;203(1):133-43.

Overlapping expression of Runx1(Cbfa2) and Runx2(Cbfa1) transcription factors
supports cooperative induction of skeletal development.

Smith N(1), Dong Y, Lian JB, Pratap J, Kingsley PD, van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL,
Schwarz EM, O'Keefe RJ, Stein GS, Drissi MH.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Musculoskeletal Research, University of Rochester, Rochester,
New York, USA.

Identifying the genetic pathways that regulate skeletal development is necessary 
to correct a variety of cartilage and bone abnormalities. The Runx family of
transcription factors play a fundamental role in organ development and cell
differentiation. Initial studies have shown that both Runx1 and Runx2 are
expressed in pre-chondrogenic mesenchyme of the developing embryo at E12.5.
Abrogation of the Runx2 gene completely inhibits bone formation yet the cartilage
anlagen in these mice is fully formed. In the present study, we hypothesized that
Runx1 may compensate for the lack of Runx2 in vivo to induce the early stages of 
skeletal formation and development. Histologic beta-gal stained sections using
the Runx1(+/-)-Lac-Z mice demonstrate Runx1 promoter activity in pre-chondrocytic
cell populations. In situ hybridization using Runx1 and Runx2 specific probes
indicate that both factors are expressed in mesenchymal stem cell progenitors
during early embryonic development. During later stages of mouse skeletal
formation, Runx1 is excluded from the hypertrophic cartilage while Runx2 is
present in these matured chondrocyte populations. Quantification of Runx
expression by real time RT-PCR and Western blot analyses reveals that Runx1 and
Runx2 are differentially modulated during embryogenesis suggesting a temporal
role for each of these transcriptional regulators during skeletal formation. We
provide evidence that haploinsufficiency results in normal appearing embryo
skeletons of heterozygote Runx2 and Runx1 mutant mouse models; however, a delay
in bone formation was identified in the calvarium. In summary, our results
support a function for Runx1 and Runx2 during skeletal development with a
possible role for Runx1 in mediating early events of endochondral and
intramembranous bone formation, while Runx2 is a potent inducer of late stages of
chondrocyte and osteoblast differentiation.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Int J Cancer. 2005 Jan 10;113(2):221-8.

Frequent downregulation of the runt domain transcription factors RUNX1, RUNX3 and
their cofactor CBFB in gastric cancer.

Sakakura C(1), Hagiwara A, Miyagawa K, Nakashima S, Yoshikawa T, Kin S, Nakase Y,
Ito K, Yamagishi H, Yazumi S, Chiba T, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Surgery and Regenerative Medicine, Surgery
and Physiology of Digestive System, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Kamigyo-ku, Kawaramachi-dori, Kyoto 602, Japan. sakakura@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Our previous studies suggest that lack of RUNX3 function is causally related to
the genesis and progression of human gastric cancer, but potential roles of other
members of the RUNX family genes have not yet been reported. We examined the
expression of 3 Runt-related (RUNX) genes, RUNX1, RUNX2 and CBFB, in gastric
cancer cell lines and primary gastric cancer specimens and compared them to those
of RUNX3 reported earlier in conjunction with clinicopathologic factors.
Expression of RUNX family genes in 9 gastric cancer cell lines, 56 primary
gastric cancer specimens and surrounding normal gastric mucosa were estimated by 
Northern blot analysis, quantitative RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. Northern
blot analysis in gastric cancer cell lines showed downregulation of RUNX1 and
RUNX3 in 67% and 78% of the cell lines tested, respectively. The ratio of the
average RUNX mRNA/beta-actin mRNA ratio (x10(3)) for RUNX1 was 48.0 +/- 21.1 vs. 
21.4 +/- 8.1; RUNX2, 1.1 +/- 0.3 vs. 1.0 +/- 0.2; RUNX3, 9.2 +/- 6.3 vs. 3.1 +/- 
1.3 and CBFB, 42.0 +/- 19.4 vs. 21.0 +/- 8.4 (normal vs. tumor, respectively,
average +/-SD). The basal RUNX2 expression was very weak, and there was no
significant change in gastric cancers. Both RUNX1 and RUNX3 showed remarkable
downregulation in 62% and 69%, respectively, of surgically resected specimens
compared to surrounding mucosa analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR (p < 0.01).
Furthermore, CBFB, the gene encoding the cofactor of RUNX1, -2, -3, was also
downregulated in significant fraction (32%, p < 0.05). The percentage of
downregulation of RUNX1, RUNX3 and CBFB increased as the cancer stage progressed.
Tricostatin A and 5'-azacitidin reactivate RUNX3 expression, but they could not
reactivate expression of RUNX1 and CBFBeta in gastric cancer cells, suggesting
that the downregulation was due to mechanisms other than methylation of the
promoter region. These findings suggest that RUNX1 and CBFBeta in addition to
RUNX3 play some roles in gastric cancers and that roles of RUNX gene family in
gastric cancer are more widespread and complex than previously realized.

PMID: 15386419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Biol Chem. 2004 Dec 17;279(51):53323-30. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

Phosphophoryn regulates the gene expression and differentiation of NIH3T3,
MC3T3-E1, and human mesenchymal stem cells via the integrin/MAPK signaling
pathway.

Jadlowiec J(1), Koch H, Zhang X, Campbell PG, Seyedain M, Sfeir C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Pathology, School of Dental Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Terrace St., Pittsburgh, PA 15261-1964, USA.

Extracellular matrix proteins (ECMs) serve as both a structural support for cells
and a dynamic biochemical network that directs cellular activities. ECM proteins 
such as those of the SIBLING family (small integrin-binding ligand glycoprotein) 
could possess inherent growth factor activity. In this study, we demonstrate that
exon 5 of dentin matrix protein 3 (phosphophoryn (PP)), a non-collagenous dentin 
ECM protein and SIBLING protein family member, up-regulates osteoblast marker
genes in primary human adult mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs), a mouse osteoblastic
cell line (MC3T3-E1), and a mouse fibroblastic cell line (NIH3T3). Quantitative
real-time PCR technology was used to quantify gene expression levels of bone
markers such as Runx2, Osx (Osterix), bone/liver/kidney Alp (alkaline
phosphatase), Ocn (osteocalcin), and Bsp (bone sialoprotein) in response to
recombinant PP and stably transfected PP. PP up-regulated Runx2, Osx, and Ocn
gene expression. PP increased OCN protein production in hMSCs and MC3T3-E1. ALP
activity and calcium deposition was increased by PP in hMSC. Furthermore, an
alpha(v)beta(3) integrin-blocking antibody significantly inhibited recombinant
PP-induced expression of Runx2 in hMSCs, suggesting that signaling by PP is
mediated through the integrin pathway. PP was also shown to activate p38, ERK1/2,
and JNK, three components of the MAPK pathway. These data demonstrate a novel
signaling function for PP in cell differentiation beyond the hypothesized role of
PP in biomineralization.

PMID: 15371433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Oct 1;93(2):374-83.

Dexamethasone inhibits insulin-induced chondrogenesis of ATDC5 cells by
preventing PI3K-Akt signaling and DNA binding of Runx2.

Fujita T(1), Fukuyama R, Enomoto H, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Setsunan
University, Hirakata, 573-0101, Japan.

Glucocorticoids play important roles in cell growth and differentiation. In this 
study, we investigated the effect of application of dexamethasone (DEX) at the
early stage of chondrogenesis using the prechondrogenic cell line, ATDC5, which
differentiates into chondrocytes in the presence of insulin. When ATDC5 cells
were cultured in the presence of DEX and insulin, DEX inhibited insulin-induced
cellular condensation and subsequent cartilaginous nodule formation, and reduced 
proteoglycan synthesis and type II collagen expression dose-dependently.
Pretreatment with 10(-8) M DEX for 1 day inhibited insulin-induced Akt
phosphorylation, but not ERK1/2 phosphorylation, in ATDC5 cells. Treatment of
ATDC5 cells with insulin for more than 2 days upregulated the levels of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) subunit proteins, p85 and p110, and Akt,
whereas the upregulation was inhibited in the presence of 10(-8) M DEX. In
electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSAs), treatment with 10(-8) M DEX
inhibited DNA binding of Runx2 during culture of ATDC5 cells with insulin.
Reporter assays using osteocalcin promoter showed that DEX inhibited
Runx2-dependent transcription dose-dependently. Adenoviral introduction of
dominant-negative (dn)-Akt or dn-Runx2 into ATDC5 cells inhibited cellular
condensation and reduced proteoglycan synthesis upon incubation with insulin,
whereas adenoviral introduction of Akt or Runx2 prevented the inhibition of
chondrogenesis by DEX. These findings indicate that DEX inhibits chondrogenesis
of ATDC5 cells at the early stage by downregulating Akt phosphorylation as well
as the protein levels of PI3K subunits and Akt, thereby suppressing PI3K-Akt
signaling, and by inhibiting DNA binding of Runx2 and Runx2-dependent
transcription.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15368363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 1;23(19):3701-10. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

Two WXXF-based motifs in NECAPs define the specificity of accessory protein
binding to AP-1 and AP-2.

Ritter B(1), Denisov AY, Philie J, Deprez C, Tung EC, Gehring K, McPherson PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The adaptor proteins AP-2 and AP-1/GGAs are essential components of clathrin
coats at the plasma membrane and trans-Golgi network, respectively. The adaptors 
recruit accessory proteins to clathrin-coated pits, which is dependent on the
adaptor ear domains engaging short peptide motifs in the accessory proteins.
Here, we perform an extensive mutational analysis of a novel WXXF-based motif
that functions to mediate the binding of an array of accessory proteins to the
alpha-adaptin ear domain of AP-2. Using nuclear magnetic resonance and mutational
studies, we identified WXXF-based motifs as major ligands for a site on the
alpha-ear previously shown to bind the DPW-bearing proteins epsin 1/2. We also
defined the determinants that allow for specific binding of the alpha-ear motif
to AP-2 as compared to those that allow a highly related WXXF-based motif to bind
to the ear domains of AP-1/GGAs. Intriguingly, placement of acidic residues
around the WXXF cores is critical for binding specificity. These studies provide 
a structural basis for the specific recruitment of accessory proteins to
appropriate sites of clathrin-coated vesicle formation.

PMCID: PMC522786
PMID: 15359277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 3;321(4):942-8.

Regulation of adipocyte differentiation and insulin action with rapamycin.

Cho HJ(1), Park J, Lee HW, Lee YS, Kim JB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742,
Republic of Korea.

Here, we demonstrated that inhibition of mTOR with rapamycin has negative effects
on adipocyte differentiation and insulin signaling. Rapamycin significantly
reduced expression of most adipocyte marker genes including PPARgamma, adipsin,
aP2, ADD1/SREBP1c, and FAS, and decreased intracellular lipid accumulation in
3T3-L1 and 3T3-F442A cells, suggesting that rapamycin would affect both
lipogenesis and adipogenesis. Contrary to the previous report that suppressive
effect of rapamycin on adipogenesis is limited to the clonal expansion, we
revealed that its inhibitory effect persisted throughout the process of adipocyte
differentiation. Thus, it is likely that constitutive activation of mTOR might be
required for the execution of adipogenic programming. In differentiated 3T3-L1
adipocytes, chronic treatment of rapamycin blunted the phosphorylation of AKT and
GSK, which is stimulated by insulin, and reduced insulin-dependent glucose uptake
activity. Taken together, these results suggest that rapamycin not only prevents 
adipocyte differentiation by decrease of adipogenesis and lipogenesis but also
downregulates insulin action in adipocytes, implying that mTOR would play
important roles in adipogenesis and insulin action.

PMID: 15358118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Res. 2004 Sep 1;64(17):6075-81.

CITED4 inhibits hypoxia-activated transcription in cancer cells, and its
cytoplasmic location in breast cancer is associated with elevated expression of
tumor cell hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha.

Fox SB(1), Bragança J, Turley H, Campo L, Han C, Gatter KC, Bhattacharya S,
Harris AL.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital and 
Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, 
Henry Wellcome Building of Genomic Medicine, University of Oxford, UK.
stephen.fox@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

The interaction of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha and the CH1 domain of the
transcriptional coactivator p300/CBP is necessary for the expression of hypoxia
responsive genes and tumor angiogenesis. The transcription factor CITED2 binds
p300/CBP at the CH1 domain and functions as a negative regulator of hypoxia
signaling by competing with hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha. CITED4, a recently
identified member of the CITED family, binds p300/CBP via the CH1 domain and
functions as a coactivator for transcription factor AP-2. Here, we show that
CITED4 blocks the binding of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha to p300 in vitro and
inhibits hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha transactivation and hypoxia-mediated
reporter gene activation. These studies suggest that CITED4 might function as an 
inhibitor of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha. To explore the function of CITED4
in breast cancer, we determined its expression in normal, in situ and invasive
breast cancers. We also correlated its expression in 286 invasive breast tumors
with clinicopathological, hypoxia markers and survival. In contrast to the
nuclear localization of CITED4 in normal breast tissue, breast tumors were
characterized by cytoplasmic and nuclear localization. Nuclear CITED4 expression 
was significantly inversely associated with tumor hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha
(P < 0.05), tumor size (P = 0.03), tumor grade (P = 0.0001), and Chalkley vessel 
count (P = 0.04). CITED4 showed no significant correlation with patient age (P = 
0.45), estrogen receptor (P = 0.11), or epidermal growth factor receptor (P =
0.48). These results show that breast cancer development is characterized by
either nuclear loss or cytoplasmic translocation of CITED4, with consequent loss 
of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha transcriptional antagonist activity. This may 
be an important mechanism by which tumors enhance hypoxia-inducible factor
expression and result in an aggressive phenotype.

PMID: 15342390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Nov;15(11):4990-5000. Epub 2004 Aug 25.

In vitro formation of recycling vesicles from endosomes requires adaptor
protein-1/clathrin and is regulated by rab4 and the connector rabaptin-5.

Pagano A(1), Crottet P, Prescianotto-Baschong C, Spiess M.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

The involvement of clathrin and associated adaptor proteins in receptor recycling
from endosomes back to the plasma membrane is controversial. We have used an in
vitro assay to identify the molecular requirements for the formation of recycling
vesicles. Cells expressing the asialoglycoprotein receptor H1, a typical
recycling receptor, were surface biotinylated and then allowed to endocytose for 
10 min. After stripping away surface-biotin, the cells were permeabilized and the
cytosol washed away. In a temperature-, cytosol-, and nucleotide-dependent
manner, the formation of sealed vesicles containing biotinylated H1 could be
reconstituted. Vesicle formation was strongly inhibited upon immunodepletion of
adaptor protein (AP)-1, but not of AP-2 or AP-3, from the cytosol, and was
restored by readdition of purified AP-1. Vesicle formation was stimulated by
supplemented clathrin, but inhibited by brefeldin A, consistent with the
involvement of ARF1 and a brefeldin-sensitive guanine nucleotide exchange factor.
The GTPase rab4, but not rab5, was required to generate endosome-derived
vesicles. Depletion of rabaptin-5/rabex-5, a known interactor of both rab4 and
gamma-adaptin, stimulated and addition of the purified protein strongly inhibited
vesicle production. The results indicate that recycling is mediated by
AP-1/clathrin-coated vesicles and regulated by rab4 and rabaptin-5/rabex-5.

PMCID: PMC524758
PMID: 15331762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):45669-75. Epub 2004 Aug 24.

Activator protein 2alpha associates with adenomatous polyposis coli/beta-catenin 
and Inhibits beta-catenin/T-cell factor transcriptional activity in colorectal
cancer cells.

Li Q(1), Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute and Department of Environmental and Molecular
Toxicology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon 97331-6512, USA.

In most human colorectal cancers, mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli
gene (APC) or CTNNB1 constitutively activate the beta-catenin/T-cell factor
(TCF)/lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF) signaling pathway. Here, we show that the
transcription factor activator protein (AP)-2alpha inhibited a
beta-catenin/TCF-responsive reporter in human embryonic kidney 293 cells and in
two human colorectal cancer lines, despite the fact that beta-catenin and TCF-4
protein levels were unchanged in the nucleus. Co-immunoprecipitation studies
revealed that AP-2alpha formed a complex with APC and beta-catenin and that
AP-2alpha disrupted beta-catenin/TCF-4 interactions in the nucleus. Thus,
AP-2alpha.APC.beta-catenin complex formation appears to suppress beta-catenin
transactivation by shifting the pool of nuclear beta-catenin toward an inactive
form, having reduced binding to TCF/LEF transcription factors. Glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assays showed that AP-2alpha physically associated with
APC rather than with beta-catenin, and the AP-2alpha binding site was identified 
in the N terminus of APC, involving both the heptad and armadillo repeat domains,
whereas the APC binding site in AP-2alpha was in the basic region of the
C-terminal DNA binding domain. These findings provide the first evidence for a
specific interaction between the tumor suppressor protein APC and the
transcription factor AP-2alpha, and they suggest a link between the Wnt signaling
pathway and various other pathways of development and differentiation associated 
with AP-2alpha.

PMCID: PMC2276578
PMID: 15331612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Sep;11(9):901-6. Epub 2004 Aug 22.

CBFbeta allosterically regulates the Runx1 Runt domain via a dynamic
conformational equilibrium.

Yan J(1), Liu Y, Lukasik SM, Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22906, USA.

Core binding factors (CBFs) are heterodimeric transcription factors consisting of
a DNA-binding CBFalpha subunit and non-DNA-binding CBFbeta subunit. The CBFbeta
subunit increases the affinity of the DNA-binding Runt domain of CBFalpha for DNA
while making no direct contacts to the DNA. We present evidence for
conformational exchange in the S-switch region in a Runt domain-DNA complex that 
is quenched upon CBFbeta binding. Analysis of (15)N backbone relaxation
parameters shows that binding of CBFbeta reduces the backbone dynamics in the
microsecond-to-millisecond time frame for several regions of the Runt domain that
make energetically important contacts with the DNA. The DNA also undergoes
conformational exchange in the Runt domain-DNA complex that is quenched in the
presence of CBFbeta. Our results indicate that allosteric regulation by the
CBFbeta subunit is mediated by a shift in an existing dynamic conformational
equilibrium of both the Runt domain and DNA.

PMID: 15322525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):46326-34. Epub 2004 Aug 17.

Brg-1 is required for maximal transcription of the human matrix
metalloproteinase-2 gene.

Ma Z(1), Chang MJ, Shah R, Adamski J, Zhao X, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294-0005, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-dependent endopeptidases whose aberrant
expression are correlated with tumor invasion and angiogenesis. The transcription
factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 are required for constitutive expression of MMP-2 in
tumor cells; however, the regulatory mechanisms of MMP-2 expression are not well 
understood. We investigated the involvement of Brg-1, the ATPase subunit of the
SWI/SNF complex, in human MMP-2 gene transcription. Reconstitution of Brg-1
enhances MMP-2 transcription in Brg-1-deficient SW-13 cells. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrates that Brg-1 is required for recruitment of 
Sp1, AP-2, and polymerase II to the MMP-2 promoter, whereas the binding of Sp3 to
the MMP-2 promoter is decreased upon Brg-1 reconstitution. Furthermore, Sp1
interacts with Brg-1 in vivo. Restriction enzyme accessibility assays indicate
that accessibility of the MMP-2 promoter region is not changed in the absence or 
presence of Brg-1. These results illustrate the connection between the SWI/SNF
complex and optimal expression of MMP-2 and highlight the critical function of
Brg-1 in regulating the recruitment of Sp1, Sp3, AP-2, and polymerase II to the
MMP-2 promoter.

PMID: 15317818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Cancer Res. 2004 Aug 15;64(16):5905-12.

The retinoid antagonist MX781 induces clusterin expression in prostate cancer
cells via heat shock factor-1 and activator protein-1 transcription factors.

Bayon Y(1), Ortiz MA, Lopez-Hernandez FJ, Howe PH, Piedrafita FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, San Diego, California 92121, USA.
jpiedrafita@skcc.org

Retinoids mediate numerous biological responses through the transcriptional
activation of nuclear retinoid receptors. Due to their antiproliferative
activity, retinoids have shown promise as anticancer agents. Synthetic analogs
have been described that selectively activate one subset of the retinoid
receptors or inhibit their transcriptional activity. Some of these compounds
exhibit strong anticancer activity, which is associated with their ability to
induce apoptosis. Here we describe that the retinoid antagonist MX781 causes a
substantial increase of clusterin mRNA and protein levels in prostate carcinoma
cells. In contrast, retinoic acid and other synthetic agonists and antagonists
show no effect on clusterin mRNA/protein levels. Induction of clusterin mRNA is
associated with transcriptional activation of the clusterin promoter, which
requires the proximal -218-bp region containing binding sites for heat shock
factor (HSF)-1, activator protein (AP)-2, and AP-1 transcription factors. MX781
slightly induces AP-1 DNA binding activity, and mutation of the AP-1 site
differentially affects the activation of the clusterin promoter in a cell
type-specific manner. In contrast, a robust increase of HSF-1 DNA binding
activity is observed in all cancer cell lines examined, and mutation of the heat 
shock element site in the clusterin promoter completely abolishes MX781-induced
transcriptional activation in PC3 and DU145 cells. Other agonist retinoid-related
molecules also induce AP-1 activity, but not HSF-1, and elicit no effect on
clusterin expression levels. These data point to HSF-1 as an important factor
regulating clusterin expression in response to MX781, although AP-1 activity may 
also participate in a cell type-specific manner.

PMID: 15313936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Sep;19(9):1481-9. Epub 2004 Jun 7.

Aged mice require full transcription factor, Runx2/Cbfa1, gene dosage for
cancellous bone regeneration after bone marrow ablation.

Tsuji K(1), Komori T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 101-0062, Japan.

Runx2 is prerequisite for the osteoblastic differentiation in vivo. To elucidate 
Runx2 gene functions in adult bone metabolism, we conducted bone marrow ablation 
in Runx2 heterozygous knockout mice and found that aged (but not young) adult
Runx2 heterozygous knockout mice have reduced new bone formation capacity after
bone marrow ablation. We also found that bone marrow cells from aged Runx2
heterozygous knockout mice have reduced ALP(+) colony-forming potential in vitro.
This indicates that full Runx2 dosage is needed for the maintenance of
osteoblastic activity in adult mice.INTRODUCTION: Null mutation of the Runx2 gene
results in total loss of osteoblast differentiation, and heterozygous Runx2
deficiency causes cleidocranial dysplasia in humans and mice. However, Runx2 gene
functions in adult bone metabolism are not known. We therefore examined the
effects of Runx2 gene function in adult mice with heterozygous loss of the Runx2 
gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Bone marrow ablation was conducted in young adult (2.5 +/-
0.5 months old) or aged adult (7.5 +/- 0.5 months old) Runx2 heterozygous
knockout mice and wildtype (WT) littermates. Cancellous bone regeneration was
evaluated by 2D microCT.
RESULTS: Although new bone formation was observed after bone marrow ablation in
the operated bone marrow cavity of WT mice, such bone formation was significantly
reduced in Runx2 heterozygous knockout mice. Interestingly, this effect was
observed specifically in aged but not young adult mice. Runx2 heterozygous
deficiency in aged mice significantly reduced the number of alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP)(+) cell colonies in the bone marrow cell cultures, indicating a reduction
in the numbers of osteoprogenitor cells. Such effects of heterozygous Runx2
deficiency on osteoblasts in vitro was specific to the cells from aged adult
mice, and it was not observed in the cultures of marrow cells from young adult
mice.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that full gene dosage of Runx2 is required for
cancellous bone formation after bone marrow ablation in adult mice.

PMID: 15312248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Dev Dyn. 2004 Sep;231(1):128-35.

Identification and embryonic expression of a new AP-2 transcription factor, AP-2 
epsilon.

Wang HV(1), Vaupel K, Buettner R, Bosserhoff AK, Moser M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Plank-Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

AP-2 proteins comprise a family of highly related transcription factors, which
are expressed during mouse embryogenesis in a variety of ectodermal,
neuroectodermal, and mesenchymal tissues. AP-2 transcription factors were shown
to be involved in morphogenesis of craniofacial, urogenital, neural
crest-derived, and placental tissues. By means of a partial cDNA fragment
identified during an expressed sequence tag search for AP-2 genes, we identified 
a fifth, previously unknown AP-2-related gene, AP-2 epsilon. AP-2 epsilon encodes
an open reading frame of 434 amino acids, which reveals the typical modular
structure of AP-2 transcription factors with highly conserved C-terminal DNA
binding and dimerization domains. Although the N-terminally localized activation 
domain is less homologous, position and identity of amino acids essential for
transcriptional transactivation are conserved. Reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction analyses of murine embryos revealed AP-2 epsilon expression from
gestational stage embryonic day 7.5 throughout all later embryonic stages until
birth. Whole-mount in situ hybridization using a specific AP-2 epsilon cDNA
fragment demonstrated that during embryogenesis, expression of AP-2 epsilon is
mainly restricted to neural tissue, especially the midbrain, hindbrain, and
olfactory bulb. This expression pattern was confirmed by immunohistochemistry
with an AP-2 epsilon-specific antiserum. By using this antiserum, we could
further localize AP-2 epsilon expression in a hypothalamic nucleus and the
neuroepithelium of the vomeronasal organ, suggesting an important function of
AP-2 epsilon for the development of the olfactory system.

PMID: 15305293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Clin Oncol. 2004 Sep 15;22(18):3741-50. Epub 2004 Aug 2.

Individual patient data-based meta-analysis of patients aged 16 to 60 years with 
core binding factor acute myeloid leukemia: a survey of the German Acute Myeloid 
Leukemia Intergroup.

Schlenk RF(1), Benner A, Krauter J, Büchner T, Sauerland C, Ehninger G, Schaich
M, Mohr B, Niederwieser D, Krahl R, Pasold R, Döhner K, Ganser A, Döhner H, Heil 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

PURPOSE: To evaluate prognostic factors for relapse-free survival (RFS) and
overall survival (OS) and to assess the impact of different postremission
therapies in adult patients with core binding factor (CBF) acute myeloid
leukemias (AML).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Individual patient data-based meta-analysis was performed
on 392 adults (median age, 42 years; range, 16 to 60 years) with CBF AML
(t(8;21), n = 191; inv(16), n = 201) treated between 1993 and 2002 in prospective
German AML treatment trials.
RESULTS: RFS was 60% and 58% and OS was 65% and 74% in the t(8;21) and inv(16)
groups after 3 years, respectively. For postremission therapy, intention-to-treat
analysis revealed no difference between intensive chemotherapy and autologous
transplantation in the t(8;21) group and between chemotherapy, autologous, and
allogeneic transplantation in the inv(16) group. In the t(8;21) group,
significant prognostic variables for longer RFS and OS were lower WBC and higher 
platelet counts; loss of the Y chromosome in male patients was prognostic for
shorter OS. In the inv(16) group, trisomy 22 was a significant prognostic
variable for longer RFS. For patients who experienced relapse, second complete
remission rate was significantly lower in patients with t(8;21), resulting in a
significantly inferior survival duration after relapse compared with patients
with inv(16).
CONCLUSION: We provide novel prognostic factors for CBF AML and show that
patients with t(8;21) who experience relapse have an inferior survival duration.

PMID: 15289486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Br J Haematol. 2004 Aug;126(4):593-601.

Dendritic cells fused with core binding factor-beta positive acute myeloid
leukaemia blast cells induce activation of cytotoxic lymphocytes.

Banat GA(1), Usluoglu N, Hoeck M, Ihlow K, Hoppmann S, Pralle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology and Oncology, Medical Centre University of Giessen, 
Giessen, Germany. a.banat@innere.med.uni-giessen.de

Several reports have described various strategies of dendritic cell (DC)
vaccination to induce specific T-cell responses in patients with acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML). About 50-60% of AML cases blasts have chromosomal abnormalities,
such as inv(16) or t(8,21), which could encode for leukaemia-specific antigenic
peptide sequences, possibly presented in the context of self-major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. As the co-culture of AML blasts with 
T lymphocytes seldom resulted in T-cell stimulation, we fused AML blasts with
autologous DC to enhance this effect. The fusion cells expressed MHC class I and 
II, CD40, B7-1, B7-2, CD209 and several adhesion molecules. In a mixed lymphocyte
hybrid reaction, the fusion cells induced the proliferation of autologous T
cells. Moreover, in the special case of fusion cells established from AML blasts 
with the chromosomal abnormality inv(16), the autologous T lymphocytes could be
primed to induce cytotoxicity against up to 70% autologous AML blasts in a
effector:target ratio of 20:1. Blocking assays demonstrated that the lysis was
chiefly mediated by CD8(+), CCR7(-) T lymphocytes, which could be further
expanded in the form of effector memory CD8(+) T cells by repeated co-cultures
with the autologous fusion cells.

PMID: 15287954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):42453-61. Epub 2004 Jul 23.

The forkhead transcription factor FoxC2 inhibits white adipocyte differentiation.

Davis KE(1), Moldes M, Farmer SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

In this study, we show that expression of FoxC2 blocks the capacity of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes to undergo adipogenesis in the presence of dexamethasone,
isobutylmethylxanthine, and insulin. This block is characterized by an extensive 
decrease in the expression of proteins associated with the function of the mature
fat cell, most notably C/EBPalpha, adiponectin, perilipin, and the
adipose-specific fatty acid-binding protein, FABP4/aP2. Since the expression of
these proteins lies downstream of PPARgamma, we overexpressed PPARgamma in Swiss 
mouse fibroblasts to promote adipocyte differentiation. We show that FoxC2 blocks
the ability of PPARgamma to induce adipogenic gene expression in response to
exposure of the cells to dexamethasone, isobutylmethylxanthine, insulin, and a
PPARgamma ligand. Interestingly, the expression of aP2 escapes the inhibitory
action of FoxC2 under conditions that promote maximum PPARgamma activity. In
contrast, FoxC2 inhibits the expression of C/EBPalpha, perilipin, and adiponectin
even in the presence of potent PPARgamma ligands. Finally, we show that FoxC2
does not affect the ability of PPARgamma to bind to or transactivate from a
PPARgamma response element. These data suggest that FoxC2 blocks adipogenesis by 
inhibiting the capacity of PPARgamma to promote the expression of a subset of
adipogenic genes.

PMID: 15277530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Differentiation. 2004 Jun;72(5):185-97.

AP-2 transcription factor family member expression, activity, and regulation in
human epidermal keratinocytes in vitro.

Popa C(1), Dahler AL, Serewko-Auret MM, Wong CF, Smith L, Barnes LM, Strutton GM,
Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Pathobiology Group, Cancer Biology Program, Centre for Immunology
and Cancer Research, University of Queensland, Building 1, R Wing, Level 4,
Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

The AP-2 transcription factor family is presumed to play an important role in the
regulation of the keratinocyte squamous differentiation program; however, limited
functional data are available to support this. In the present study, the activity
and regulation of AP-2 were examined in differentiating human epidermal
keratinocytes. We report that (1) AP-2 transcriptional activity decreases in
differentiated keratinocytes but remains unchanged in differentiation-insensitive
squamous cell carcinoma cell lines, (2) diminished AP-2 transcriptional activity 
is associated with a loss of specific DNA-bound AP-2 complexes, and (3) there is 
an increase in the ability of cytoplasmic extracts, derived from differentiated
keratinocytes, to phosphorylate AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta when cells
differentiate. In contrast, extracts from differentiation-insensitive squamous
cell carcinoma cells are unable to phosphorylate AP-2 proteins. Finally, the
phosphorylation of recombinant AP-2 alpha by cytosolic extracts from
differentiated keratinocytes is associated with decreased AP-2 DNA-binding
activity. Combined, these data indicate that AP-2 trans-activation and
DNA-binding activity decrease as keratinocytes differentiate, and that this
decreased activity is associated with an enhanced ability to phosphorylate AP-2
alpha and beta.

PMID: 15270775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Exp Neurol. 2004 Aug;188(2):205-23.

BMP signaling initiates a neural crest differentiation program in embryonic rat
CNS stem cells.

Gajavelli S(1), Wood PM, Pennica D, Whittemore SR, Tsoulfas P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis, University of
Miami School of Medicine, FL 33136, USA.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have an important role in neuronal and
astrocytic differentiation of embryonic and adult neural stem cells (NSCs). Here,
we show that BMP6, BMP7, GDF5, and GDF6 instructively differentiate E12, E14, and
E17 rat cortical NSCs into a variety of neural crest lineages. Clonal analysis
shows that BMP7-treated NSCs develop mostly into smooth muscle and peripheral
glia. We observed a rapid induction of premigratory neural crest markers like
p75NTR, and AP-2 alpha followed by Msx1, Msx2, and Slug, transcription factors
that participate in neural crest development. These results suggest that NSCs
cultured in vitro in the presence of FGF2 display expanded developmental
potential.

PMID: 15246821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Urology. 2004 Jul;64(1):162-7.

Differential expression of activator protein-2 isoforms in renal cell carcinoma.

Oya M(1), Mikami S, Mizuno R, Miyajima A, Horiguchi Y, Nakashima J, Marumo K,
Mukai M, Murai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of activator protein-2 (AP-2) in renal 
cell carcinoma (RCC) by immunohistochemistry. Three AP-2 isoforms alpha (alpha), 
beta (beta), and gamma (gamma) are known to exhibit a highly homologous
structure; however, their functions are considered to be different. AP-2 has been
implicated to play a role in carcinogenesis, as well as in the development of the
kidney.
METHODS: The expression of the three AP-2 isoforms, alpha, beta, and gamma, was
determined in 58 patients with RCC by immunohistochemistry. Epidermal growth
factor receptor and erbB2 expression in 42 patients with RCC was also evaluated
to investigate the correlation with AP-2 isoforms.
RESULTS: AP-2 isoforms are differentially expressed in normal renal tubules. Of
58 RCC tissue specimens, 15 (25.9%) demonstrated nuclear and cytoplasmic
expression of AP-2alpha. Clear cell RCC had a significantly greater rate of
AP-2alpha expression than the nonclear subtypes (14 of 41 clear versus 1 of 17
nonclear subtypes). Of the 58 specimens, 8 (13.8%) showed nuclear staining for
AP-2beta; notably, localized small cases had a significantly greater rate of
nuclear staining for AP-2beta (5 of 13 in pT1a versus 3 of 45 in pT1b or
greater). In addition, only 2 cases (3.5%) demonstrated nuclear staining for
AP-2gamma. Epidermal growth factor receptor and erbB2 expression did not
correlate with expression of the AP-2 isoforms.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2 isoforms were differentially expressed in RCC, as well as in
the adult normal kidney. AP-2alpha was dominantly expressed in clear cell RCC.
AP-2beta expression was observed in the low-stage subtypes of RCC, and this
transcription factor may be related to early carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15245963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Curr Opin Plant Biol. 2004 Aug;7(4):465-71.

Regulation of disease resistance pathways by AP2/ERF transcription factors.

Gutterson N(1), Reuber TL.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Biotechnology, 21375 Cabot Blvd, Hayward, California 94545, USA.
ngutterson@mendelbio.com

The AP2 transcription factor family, found only in plants, includes several genes
that encode proteins involved in the regulation of disease resistance pathways.
These genes are members of the ethylene response factor (ERF) subfamily of AP2
transcription factor genes, which have only a single DNA-binding domain and are
distinct from members of the dehydration-responsive element binding (DREB)
subfamily. Some ERF subgroups are enriched in such genes, suggesting that they
have conserved functions that are required for the regulation of disease
resistance pathways. The expression of several ERF genes is regulated by plant
hormones, such as jasmonic acid, salicylic acid and ethylene, as well as by
pathogen challenge. A phylogenetic overview of these genes, with a focus on
Arabidopsis, rice and tomato, suggests that despite broad conservation of their
function in monocots and dicots, some structural elements are specialized within 
each of these two lineages.

PMID: 15231271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Am J Hematol. 2004 Jul;76(3):300-3.

Childhood acute myeloid leukemia with CBFbeta-MYH11 rearrangement: study of
incidence, morphology, cytogenetics, and clinical outcomes of Chinese in Hong
Kong.

Chan NP(1), Wong WS, Ng MH, Tsang KS, Lau TT, Leung Y, Chik KW, Shing MM, Li CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.

We analyzed 43 consecutive cases of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML) for
the presence of the CBFbeta-MYH11 rearrangement using molecular techniques in a
regional hospital in Hong Kong. Five cases (11.6%), 3 girls and 2 boys, ranging
in age from 8 months to 14 years old, were found positive for the CBFbeta-MYH11
rearrangement. Morphologically, they were FAB M2 or M4 with or without
eosinophilia (Eo). Typical M4Eo was observed in only one case. The molecular
findings were in complete concordance with cytogenetic data, which revealed
inv(16)(p13q22) in all and also gains of chromosome 4, 8, 22, and Y in one
patient. Clinically, all 5 patients achieved complete remission after
chemotherapy with favorable outcomes except for the patient with infantile AML,
who relapsed 11 months after diagnosis, underwent cord blood transplantation, and
was in second remission. This is the first clinicopathological study and
documentation of the incidence of CBFbeta-MYH11 in childhood AML of Chinese in
Hong Kong.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15224374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Eur J Pharmacol. 2004 Jul 8;495(1):17-26.

A novel oxyiminoalkanoic acid derivative, TAK-559, activates human peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor subtypes.

Sakamoto J(1), Kimura H, Moriyama S, Imoto H, Momose Y, Odaka H, Sawada H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Discovery Center, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Chemical Industries, Ltd., Osaka, Japan. Sakamoto_Jyun-ichi@takeda.co.jp

A novel oxyiminoalkanoic acid derivative, TAK-559,
(E)-4-[4-[(5-methyl-2-phenyl-1,
3-oxazol-4-yl)methoxy]benzyloxyimino]-4-phenylbutyric acid, was synthesized as a 
candidate of a new type of insulin-sensitizing agent. We report here activation
of human peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (hPPAR) subtypes by TAK-559. 
In a transient transactivation assay, TAK-559 was a potent hPPARgamma1 and
hPPARalpha agonist with EC50 values of 31 and 67 nM, respectively. Furthermore,
TAK-559 was a partial agonist for hPPARgamma1 with about 68% of maximal
activation obtained with rosiglitazone (5-(4-(2-(methyl(2-pyridinyl)amino)ethoxy)
benzyl)-1,3-thiazolidine-2,4-dione), a thiazolidinedione derivative, which is
known as a PPARgamma agonist. PPARdelta was significantly activated at a high
concentration (10 microM) of TAK-559. Competition-binding assays using
radiolabeled ligand indicated that the transactivation of all hPPAR subtypes by
TAK-559 was due to direct binding of TAK-559 to each subtype. We also
demonstrated that TAK-559 acts to recruit the coactivator SRC-1 to each of
hPPARgamma1 and hPPARalpha, and to dissociate the corepressor NCoR from each of
hPPARgamma1 and hPPARalpha. Taken together, we conclude that TAK-559 is a dual
agonist for hPPARgamma1 and hPPARalpha with nearly equal EC50 values, a partial
agonist for hPPARgamma1, and has a rather slight agonist activity for hPPARdelta.

Copyright 2004 Elsiever B.V.

PMID: 15219816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2004;105(1):47-53.

Mapping of three translocation breakpoints associated with orofacial clefting
within 6p24 and identification of new transcripts within the region.

Davies SJ(1), Wise C, Venkatesh B, Mirza G, Jefferson A, Volpi EV, Ragoussis J.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, UK. s.davies@ucl.ac.uk

Orofacial clefting (OFC) is a common congenital malformation. Here we report the 
refinement of three translocation breakpoints of patients exhibiting OFC within
the 6p24 region, and the isolation and characterisation of novel genes, one of
which is directly disrupted by the translocation breakpoint of a patient. The
gene has been characterized and orthologues identified in bovine, murine and
pufferfish.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15218257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Endothelium. 2004 Jan-Feb;11(1):17-28.

Effects of cyclic strain on vascular cells.

Kakisis JD(1), Liapis CD, Sumpio BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06510, USA.

Hemodynamic forces, including shear stress and cyclic strain, have been
recognized as important modulators of vascular cell morphology and function. The 
mechanism by which vascular cells sense and transduce the extracellular
mechanical signals into the cell nucleus has only recently begun to come to
light. Integrins, ion channels, platelet-derived growth factor receptors, and G
proteins have been recognized as mechanosensors, converting the mechanical
stimuli into chemical signals. Activation of second messengers, including
mitogen-activated protein kinases, protein kinase C, and Akt, follows, leading to
an increase in the activity of transcription factors such as activator protein
(AP)-1, AP-2, cAMP-responsive element (CRE), early growth response (Egr)-1, and
nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B. Binding of these factors to the DNA leads to
activation of numerous genes that regulate cell proliferation, apoptosis,
differentiation, morphology, migration, and secretory function. Understanding of 
these responses has provided new insights in the pathogenesis and treatment of
vascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis and intimal hyperplasia.

PMID: 15203876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Eur J Cancer. 2004 Jul;40(10):1485-95.

Expression of HER2 and its association with AP-2 in breast cancer.

Pellikainen J(1), Naukkarinen A, Ropponen K, Rummukainen J, Kataja V, Kellokoski 
J, Eskelinen M, Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

The aim of the study was to investigate the relationship between the expression
of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) and activator protein 2
(AP-2), as well as the prognostic significance of HER2 in breast cancer. HER2 and
AP-2 expressions were immunohistochemically (IHC) analysed in a large
prospective, consecutive series of 425 breast cancer patients diagnosed and
treated between 1990 and 1995 at the Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
In a subset of patients (n = 71), the gene amplification status was examined by
using a chromogenic in situ hybridisation (CISH) analysis. Expression of HER2 was
studied in relation to AP-2, clinicopathological parameters and patients'
survival. Pathological membranous overexpression of the HER2 receptor was seen in
13% of the carcinomas, which was related both to gene amplification (78% of the
cases) and high nuclear expression of AP-2 (67%, P = 0.007). HER2-positivity was 
most often seen in carcinomas having both high nuclear and high cytoplasmic AP-2 
expression (P < 0.001). In the univariate survival analyses HER2-positivity
predicted a shorter recurrence-free survival (RFS) (P < 0.0001) and a shorter
breast cancer-related survival (BCRS) (P = 0.0063) in the whole patient group, as
well as in the subgroup of node-negative patients. In the node-positive patients,
HER2-positivity predicted only a shorter RFS. Combined expression of HER2 and
nuclear AP-2 resulted in the separation of four groups with different prognoses, 
the best prognosis being for patients in the HER2-/AP-2+ group and the worse
prognosis for those in the HER2+/AP-2- group. In the multivariate survival
analyses, HER2-positivity independently predicted a shorter RFS in the whole
patient group (P = 0.0067), as well as in the subgroup of node-positive patients 
(P = 0.0209). In conclusion, pathological membranous overexpression of the HER2
receptor in breast cancer is related both to gene amplification and a high AP-2
expression. Combining HER2 and AP-2 expressions may provide valuable information 
on the prognosis of breast cancer patients.

PMID: 15196531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Bone. 2004 Jun;34(6):1029-36.

RUNX2 alleles associated with BMD in Scottish women; interaction of RUNX2 alleles
with menopausal status and body mass index.

Vaughan T(1), Reid DM, Morrison NA, Ralston SH.

Author information: 
(1)School of Health Science, Griffith University Gold Coast Campus, 4215
Queensland, Australia.

Bone mineral density (BMD) is influenced by both environmental and genetic
factors. We previously reported the association of the RUNX2 A allele with
increased bone mineral density (BMD) and protection against a common form of
osteoporotic fracture within a Geelong population. We genotyped 991 women from a 
Scottish cohort to decipher the role of RUNX2 alleles in regulating BMD. The
alleles of RUNX2 within the glutamine-alanine repeat were determined by MspA1I
restriction digest. Allele frequencies estimated from Scottish cohort were G
allele, 0.87 +/- 0.01; A allele, 0.08 +/- 0.01; and 11Ala alanine deletion
allele, 0.05 +/- 0.01. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to adjust for the
covariates weight and age for BMD at the femoral neck (FN). The A allele was
associated with higher FN BMD (P = 0.035) within a postmenopausal subgroup of the
population (n = 312). The effect of RUNX2 A alleles increased with increasing
weight; A alleles were associated with FN BMD in those above the median BMI (BMI 
> 25), while no association was observed in thin/normal (BMI </= 25)
postmenopausal women. Glutamine variants and an alanine insertion were identified
within the group. These data suggest that the RUNX2 alleles are associated with
BMD in a menopause- and weight-dependent manner.

PMID: 15193550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mamm Genome. 2004 Jun;15(6):424-32.

An ENU-induced mutation in AP-2alpha leads to middle ear and ocular defects in
Doarad mice.

Ahituv N(1), Erven A, Fuchs H, Guy K, Ashery-Padan R, Williams T, de Angelis MH, 
Avraham KB, Steel KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, 69978, Tel Aviv, Israel.

One of the advantages of N-ethyl- N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced mutagenesis is
that, after randomly causing point mutations, a variety of alleles can be
generated in genes leading to diverse phenotypes. For example, transcription
factor AP-2alpha ( Tcfap2a) null homozygote mice show a large spectrum of
developmental defects, among them missing middle ear bones and tympanic ring.
This is the usual occurrence, where mutations causing middle ear anomalies
usually coincide with other abnormalities. Using ENU-induced mutagenesis, we
discovered a new dominant Tcfap2a mutant named Doarad ( Dor) that has a missense 
mutation in the PY motif of its transactivation domain, leading to a misshapen
malleus, incus, and stapes without any other observable phenotype. Dor homozygous
mice die perinatally, showing prominent abnormal facial structures and ocular
defects. In vitro assays suggest that this mutation causes a "gain of function"
in the transcriptional activation of AP-2alpha. These mice enable us to address
more specifically the developmental role of Tcfap2a in the eye and middle ear and
are the first report of a mutation in a gene specifically causing middle ear
abnormalities, leading to conductive hearing loss.

PMID: 15181535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Mol Neurosci. 2004;23(3):225-33.

Apolipoprotein E as a target for developing new therapeutics for Alzheimer's
disease based on studies from protein, RNA, and regulatory region of the gene.

Lahiri DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of
Psychiatric Research, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA. dlahiri@iupui.edu

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia, is a progressive,
degenerative disorder of the central nervous system. The major hallmarks of AD
include selective neuronal cell death and the presence of amyloid deposits and
neurofibrillary tangles. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) has also been shown to
colocalize with these neuropathological lesions. Here is reviewed the role of
ApoE in AD. The human ApoE gene has three alleles (epsilon2, epsilon3,
epsilon4)-all products of the same gene. The epsilon3-allele accounts for the
majority of the ApoE gene pool (approximately 70-80%), the epsilon4-allele
accounts for 10-15% and the epsilon2 allele for 5-10%. Inheritance of the
epsilon4-allele strongly increases the risk for developing AD at an earlier age. 
Functions of ApoE include cholesterol transport, neuronal repair, dendritic
growth and anti-inflammatory activities. Putative pathological functions or
"risk-factor activities" of ApoE-epsilon4 include its role in promoting amyloid
accumulation, neurotoxicity, oxidative stress and neuro fibrillary tangles.ApoE
mRNA is most abundant in the liver followed by the brain, where it is synthesized
and secreted primarily by astrocytes. ApoE protein and mRNA are further detected 
in cortical and hippocampal neurons in humans. ApoE gene expression is induced by
brain injury in some neurons and upregulated in astrocytes during aging. In AD,
an increased ApoE mRNA was reported in the hippocampus. The risk for AD has been 
reported to correlate with transcriptional activity of the ApoE gene. Binding
sites for putative transcriptional factors (TF), such as AP-1, AP-2 and
NF-kappaB, are present in the ApoE promoter. The promoter also contains sites for
the inflammatory response transcription factors IL-6 RE-BP, MED1, STAT1 and
STAT2. A functional peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) 
has been detected in the ApoE/ApoCI intergenic region. ApoE mRNA levels were
shown to be regulated by ciglitazone, a PPARgamma inducer. Certain statin drugs
may also affect ApoE promoter activity. Two distal enhancers that specify ApoE
gene expression in macrophages were identified. These results have implications
for the regulation of ApoE gene expression, which plays an important role in the 
development of AD. The interaction of different transcription factors with the
regulatory region of the ApoE gene is important to understand the
neuroinflammatory process seen in AD.

Copyright 2004 Humana Press Inc.

PMID: 15181251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 15;382(Pt 1):323-9.

Dual regulation of AP-2alpha transcriptional activation by poly(ADP-ribose)
polymerase-1.

Li M(1), Naidu P, Yu Y, Berger NA, Kannan P.

Author information: 
(1)MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University, 2500 MetroHealth 
Drive, Cleveland, OH 44109, USA.

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is a co-activator for AP-2alpha (activator
protein 2alpha)-mediated transcriptional activation. In the present study, we
find that the role of PARP-1 in AP-2alpha transcription is distinctly dualistic
with opposing effects. Separate regions of PARP-1 interact with AP-2alpha and
independently control its transcriptional activation. The C-terminus containing
the catalytic domain strongly interacts with AP-2alpha, whereas low-affinity
binding is seen in the middle region, which includes the breast-cancer
susceptibility gene 1 C-terminal domain and automodification region. The middle
region enhances AP-2alpha transcription. Even portions of this region
independently interact and have partial effects on transcription. The catalytic
domain strongly poly-(ADP-ribosyl)ates AP-2alpha. This modification, on the other
hand, affects its DNA binding. 3-Aminobenzamide and 6(5H)-phenanthridinone that
inhibit the enzymic activity significantly enhance the binding of AP-2alpha to
its target sequence and increase its transcriptional activity. The enzymic
activity of PARP-1 is known to be induced by stress conditions that damage
cellular DNA, and the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of target proteins is transient in
nature with a half-life of less than a minute. We hypothesize that PARP-1
enhances the transcriptional activity of AP-2alpha in normal circumstances,
whereas its enzymic activity is used as a temporary shut-off mechanism during
unfavourable conditions.

PMCID: PMC1133945
PMID: 15170387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Oncogene. 2004 May 24;23(24):4346-52.

Homologs of RUNX and CBF beta/PEBP2 beta in C. elegans.

Lee J(1), Ahnn J, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory, Department of Biology, Yonsei University, 134
Shinchon, Seoul 120-749, Korea. leej@yonsei.ac.kr

RUNX proteins are evolutionarily well-conserved transcription factors that are
involved in essential aspects of the development of metazoan animals ranging from
nematodes to humans. Genetic or epigenetic defects in any one of the three RUNX
proteins in humans cause severe diseases. Although much is known about the
functions and signaling pathways of the RUNX proteins through the use of
mammalian systems, there are still gaps in our knowledge with regard to the
functions of the RUNX proteins in normal development and disease states.
Recently, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans was revealed to bear one RUNX
homolog (RNT-1) and one homolog of the RUNX protein partner CBF beta/PEBP2 beta
(BRO-1). The expression patterns and biological functions of RNT-1 and the manner
in which it is regulated are all comparable to what has been observed for the
mammalian RUNX proteins. Thus, the nematode system is a promising model system
for elucidating the functions and regulation of Runt proteins. In addition, it
has recently emerged that the RNT-1 protein is involved in a transforming growth 
factor beta signaling pathway. The bro-1 gene encoding the CBF beta homolog is
exclusively expressed in the hypodermis, not in the intestine, which indicates
that additional tissue-specific cofactors in the intestine might exist. The
possible autoregulation of RNT-1 expression by RNT-1/BRO-1 in the hypodermal
cells is also discussed.

PMID: 15156192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncogene. 2004 May 24;23(24):4238-48.

Core-binding factors in hematopoiesis and immune function.

de Bruijn MF(1), Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Core binding factors are heterodimeric transcription factors containing a DNA
binding Runx1, Runx2, or Runx3 subunit, along with a non DNA binding CBF beta
subunit. All four subunits are required at one or more stages of hematopoiesis.
This review describes the role of Runx1 and CBF beta in the initiation of
hematopoiesis in the embryo, and in the emergence of hematopoietic stem cells. We
also discuss the later stages of hematopoiesis for which members of the core
binding factor family are required, as well as the recently described roles for
these proteins in autoimmunity.

PMID: 15156179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 23;279(30):31622-8. Epub 2004 May 20.

Neuregulin inhibits acetylcholine receptor aggregation in myotubes.

Trinidad JC(1), Cohen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The high local concentration of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) at the vertebrate
neuromuscular junction results from their aggregation by the agrin/MuSK signaling
pathway and their synthetic up-regulation by the neuregulin/ErbB pathway. Here,
we show a novel role for the neuregulin/ErbB pathway, the inhibition of AChR
aggregation on the muscle surface. Treatment of C2C12 myotubes with the
neuregulin epidermal growth factor domain decreased the number of both
spontaneous and agrin-induced AChR clusters, in part by increasing the rate of
cluster disassembly. Upon cluster disassembly, AChRs were internalized into
caveolae (as identified by caveolin-3). Time-lapse microscopy revealed that
individual AChR clusters fragmented into puncta, and application of neuregulin
accelerated the rate at which AChR clusters decreased in area without affecting
the density of AChRs remaining in individual clusters (as measured by the
fluorescence intensity/unit area). We propose that this novel action of
neuregulin regulates synaptic competition at the developing neuromuscular
junction.

PMID: 15155732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Oncogene. 2004 Jul 15;23(32):5496-504.

Suppression of invasion and peritoneal carcinomatosis of ovarian cancer cells by 
overexpression of AP-2alpha.

Sumigama S(1), Ito T, Kajiyama H, Shibata K, Tamakoshi K, Kikkawa F, Williams T, 
Tainsky MA, Nomura S, Mizutani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya Graduate University School of 
Medicine, Tsurumai-cho 65, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

A previous report demonstrated that AP-2alpha favors the survival of ovarian
cancer patients by clinical findings. However, the functional roles of AP-2alpha 
in human ovarian cancers have not been determined. To clarify the roles, we
overexpressed AP-2alpha in SKOV3 human ovarian cancer cells, which originally
possess little AP-2alpha. AP-2alpha overexpression changed cell morphology from
spindle to epithelioid type and suppressed cell proliferation and invasion, which
would be partially correlated with decreased phosphorylation levels of the erbB2,
Akt and ERK pathways, increased E-cadherin and reduced pro-matrix
metalloproteinase-2 levels. Moreover, nude mice intraperitoneally injected with
AP-2alpha-overexpressing cells survived longer than those with neo-transfected
cells. The present data represent the first direct evidence that AP-2alpha plays 
a tumor suppressive role in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 15146170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2004 Jun 1;69(3):462-8.

Differentiation of preosteoblasts is affected by implant surface
microtopographies.

Schneider GB(1), Zaharias R, Seabold D, Keller J, Stanford C.

Author information: 
(1)Dows Institute for Dental Research and the Department of Prosthodontics, N402,
University of Iowa College of Dentistry, Iowa City, Iowa 52242.

Osteogenesis involves the recruitment of multipotent mesenchymal cells and the
progressive differentiation of these cells into osteoblasts. The transcription
factor Runx2 regulates osteoblast differentiation and expression of genes
necessary for the development of a mineralized phenotype. The purpose of this
study was to determine if preosteoblast cell differentiation associated with
Runx2 and osteocalcin gene expression was influenced by implant surface
microtopography. Human embryonic palatal mesenchymal cells (HEPM cells) were
cultured on grooved or roughened cpTi implant discs. Cell phenotypes were
evaluated with epifluorescent microscopy. Real-time PCR was used for quantitative
analysis of Runx2 and osteocalcin gene expression. HEPM cells mineralized when
grown on rough and grooved implant surfaces relative to tissue culture plastic.
Real-time PCR showed significant (p < 0.05) increases in Runx2 and osteocalcin
gene expression in cells cultured on rough and grooved implant microtopographies.
These results suggest that preosteoblast cell differentiation is affected by
implant surface microtopographies during osseointegration of dental implants.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biomed Mater Res 69A: 462-468, 2004

PMID: 15127393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 May 21;318(1):213-8.

Sequential gene promoter interactions by C/EBPbeta, C/EBPalpha, and PPARgamma
during adipogenesis.

Tang QQ(1), Zhang JW, Daniel Lane M.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N.
Wolfe Street Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 27;321(3):752.

Treatment of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes with differentiation inducers triggers a
cascade in which C/EBPbeta is rapidly expressed, followed by C/EBPalpha and
PPARgamma. C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma then activate the expression of adipocyte
genes that produce the differentiated phenotype. Circumstantial evidence
indicates that C/EBPbeta activates transcription of the C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma 
genes, both of which possess C/EBP regulatory elements in their proximal
promoters. Although C/EBPbeta is expressed immediately upon induction of
differentiation, acquisition of DNA binding activity is delayed for approximately
14h. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis conducted 24h after induction 
revealed that C/EBPbeta binds to C/EBP regulatory elements in the proximal
promoters of the C/EBPalpha and PPARgamma genes. ChIP analysis showed that after 
an additional delay C/EBPalpha binds to its own promoter and to the promoters of 
the PPARgamma and 422/aP2 genes. These findings support the view that once
expressed, C/EBPalpha is responsible for maintaining the expression of PPARgamma,
and C/EBPalpha, as well as adipocyte proteins (e.g., 422/aP2) in the terminally
differentiated state. Together these findings provide compelling evidence that
C/EBPbeta, C/EBPalpha, and PPARgamma participate in a cascade during
adipogenesis.

PMID: 15110775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2004 Apr;77(4):855-65.

Effect of long-term blockade of CRF(1) receptors on exploratory behaviour,
monoamines and transcription factor AP-2.

Mällo T(1), Berggård C, Eller M, Damberg M, Oreland L, Harro J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Centre of Behavioural and Health Sciences,
University of Tartu, Tiigi 78, 50410 Tartu, Estonia.

Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) holds a central role in reactions to various
environmental stimuli. In the present study, the administration of a selective
nonpeptide CRF(1) receptor antagonist, CP-154,526, for 6 days, exerted an
anxiolytic effect in the elevated zero-maze (EZM) test. CP-154,526 did not affect
behaviour in the exploration box when administered acutely, but increased
exploration when administered for 5 days, contingently with daily behavioural
testing. This effect, although of lesser magnitude, was also present in animals
with neurotoxin DSP-4-induced selective denervation of locus coeruleus (LC)
projections. When drug administration and behavioural testing were noncontingent 
in a 2-week administration schedule, CP-154,526 blocked the habituation-induced
increase in exploration. This suggests that drug-environment interaction is an
important component in the manifestation of the anxiolytic-like effects of CRF(1)
receptor blockade. Long-term administration of CP-154,526 had a decreasing effect
on noradrenaline (NA) metabolism in the frontal cortex. No manipulation
influenced the levels of the transcription factor AP-2 isoforms in the LC area.
AP-2 levels correlated positively with 3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) in 
the frontal cortex of vehicle-treated animals. There was a negative correlation
between the NA levels in the hippocampus and AP-2 isoforms in the LC area of
naive animals. In contrast, in vehicle-treated animals, this correlation was
positive. Treatment with CP-154,526, however, made the associations between LC
AP-2 levels and hippocampal NA content negative, as was the case in the naive
animals. This suggests that CRF(1) receptor blockade counteracts certain
mechanisms of habituation, possibly by reducing the LC activity.

PMID: 15099932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Apr 16;1678(1):14-21.

Calretinin gene promoter activity is differently regulated in neurons and cancer 
cells. Role of AP2-like cis element and zinc ions.

Billing-Marczak K(1), Zieminska E, Lesniak W, Lazarewicz JW, Kuznicki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of
Experimental Biology, 3 Pasteur Street, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.

Calretinin (CR) is an EF-hand calcium binding protein expressed in a
tissue-specific manner. CR gene is active in some neurons, such as cerebellar
granule neurons and in some tumor cells such as colon adenocarcinoma or
epithelial mesothelioma. Our aim was to understand the mechanism(s) involved in
tissue-specific regulation of CR gene transcription. Our recent paper showed that
an "AP2-like" sequence located between -90/-80 bp of the CR gene promoter is
important for specific expression of this gene in neurons differentiating from
DEV multipotent cells [Biochim. Biophys. Acta (1577) 2000 412]. We now show by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) that in cerebellar granule neurons,
there is a nuclear protein that interacts with the "AP2-like" sequence. This
interaction results in an increased CR gene promoter activity. In contrast, the
"AP2-like" sequence does not play such a role in regulation of the CR gene
transcription in adenocarcinoma and mesothelioma cancer cells. In these cells
mutation in the "AP2-like" element did not affect transcriptional activity of the
CR gene promoter and no protein binding to this element was observed by EMSA.
These data clearly show that expression of CR gene in neurons and cancer cells is
regulated by different mechanisms. On the other hand, in both cell types, the
activity of CR gene promoter can be stimulated by zinc ions.

PMID: 15093134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. In Silico Biol. 2004;4(2):109-25.

Content analysis of the core promoter region of human genes.

Bajic VB(1), Choudhary V, Hock CK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Infocomm Research, 21 Heng Mui Keng Terrace, Singapore.
bajicv@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

We analyzed an extended core promoter regions covering [-70,+60] segment relative
to the transcription start site of human promoters contained in the Eukaryotic
Promoter Database. The analysis was made by using the Match program ver. 1.9 with
an optimized setting and the TRANSFAC Professional database ver. 7.2. This
analysis revealed that the most common transcription factor binding site in the
examined collection of core promoters appears to be initiator (characterized by
GEN_INI), which is expected. The other less obvious sites found were Spz1, E2F-1,
ZF5, and C/EBP. The 'cap' site was also in this most common group.
Over-representation of these sites relative to the non-promoter background data
ranged from 0.3167 to 32.1645. These sites were characterized by being present in
more than 60% of promoter sequences. Interestingly, the TATA-box has been found
in only 11.63% of all examined promoters. The study is complemented by separate
analyses of promoter groups having different GC content. These additional
analyses revealed that the most common promoter elements found also include AP-2,
CdxA, Pax-2, SRY, STAT1 and STAT5A. It was also observed that a number of
promoter elements show strong preference either for the GC-rich or the GC-poor
core promoters.

PMID: 15089758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. FASEB J. 2004 Jun;18(9):1037-9. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Functional characterization of the 5' flanking region of the BACE gene:
identification of a 91 bp fragment involved in basal level of BACE promoter
expression.

Ge YW(1), Maloney B, Sambamurti K, Lahiri DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatric Research, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Pathological characteristics of Alzheimer's disease (AD) include amyloid-beta
(Abeta) plaques. Abeta is derived from the Abeta peptide precursor protein (APP) 
by gamma- and beta-secretases, the latter known as beta-site APP-cleaving enzyme 
1 (BACE1, or herein BACE). We have also described potentially important regions
in the promoter of BACE, which may regulate its activity (1). Herein, we have
functionally dissected the regulatory regions within the BACE promoter into areas
containing positive and negative regulatory elements. The 4.1 kb promoter region 
(-3765/+364, +1 being the transcription start site [TSS]) includes positive
regulatory element in the -2975 to -2062 region flanked on either side by
negative regulatory elements at -3764/-2975 and -2062/-1056. This is separated
from the minimal promoter and 5' UTR by a neutral region of roughly 700 base
pairs (bp). A 91 bp fragment (224/314) is the shortest region with a significant 
reporter gene activity and constitutes the minimal promoter element for BACE.
Neuronal preference of the promoter was apparent in the 141 bp fragment (224/364)
that contained the 91 bp fragment. Gel shift results also suggest the strongest
signal of DNA-protein interaction with the 91 bp fragment in neuronal nuclear
extracts. This interaction was strongly blocked by an activator protein (AP)2
binding oligomer. Super gel shift assays suggest that both the AP2-binding
oligomer and the 91 bp fragment interfered with each other's binding capacity. An
AP2 sequence is predicted to occur within the 91 bp fragment. We also found
stimulating protein (SP)1-binding sites in this region of the promoter. Thus,
functional and gel shift analysis indicate that the 91 bp fragment containing the
AP2 and SP1 binding sites constitutes the core promoter region of BACE. Changes
in the activity of this region could play an important role in regulating BACE
activity in neurons.

PMID: 15059977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2004 Apr;111(4):537-45. Epub 2003 Dec 31.

Transcription factor AP-2beta genotype, striatal dopamine D2 receptor density and
cerebrospinal fluid monoamine metabolite concentrations in humans.

Damberg M(1), Berggård C, Farde L, Sedvall GC, Jönsson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. mattias.damberg@neuro.uu.se

Transcription factor AP-2beta has been suggested to influence brain monoaminergic
systems by regulating target genes. In order to explore a possible functional
role, AP-2beta genotype was analysed in relation to striatal dopamine D2 receptor
density determined in vivo by positron emission tomography in human subjects (n =
52). The AP-2beta genotype was also analysed in relation to cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) concentrations of homovanillic acid (HVA), 3-methoxy-4-hydroxy-phenylglycol
(MHPG) and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in healthy human subjects (n =
90). There was no association between the AP-2beta genotype and measures of
dopamine receptor density, or CSF 5-HIAA concentrations. However, AP-2beta
genotype was associated with CSF-levels of HVA (in women) and MHPG. These data
may suggest a functional involvement of AP-2beta in the dopaminergic system, but 
should be interpreted with caution until replicated.

PMID: 15057523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 23;317(1):235-43.

SP-transcription factors are involved in basal MVP promoter activity and its
stimulation by HDAC inhibitors.

Steiner E(1), Holzmann K, Pirker C, Elbling L, Micksche M, Berger W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Applied and Experimental Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research,
Medical University Vienna, Borschkegasse 8a, A-1090 Vienna, Austria.

The major vault protein (MVP) has been implicated in multidrug resistance,
cellular transport, and malignant transformation. In this study we aimed to
identify crucial MVP promoter elements that regulate MVP expression. By mutation 
as well as deletion analysis a conserved proximal GC-box element was demonstrated
to be essential for basal human MVP promoter transactivation. Binding of
Sp-family transcription factors but not AP2 to this element in vitro and in vivo 
was shown by EMSA and ChIP assays, respectively. Inhibition of GC-box binding by 
a dominant-negative Sp1-variant and by mithramycin A distinctly attenuated MVP
promoter activity. In Sp-null Drosophila cells, the silent human MVP promoter was
transactivated by several human Sp-family members. In human cells the MVP
promoter was potently stimulated by the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors
butyrate (NaB) and trichostatin A (TSA), resulting in enhanced MVP expression.
This stimulation was substantially decreased by mutation of the single GC-box and
by application of mithramycin A. Treatment with HDAC inhibitors led to a distinct
decrease of Sp1 but increase of Sp3 binding in vivo to the respective promoter
sequence as demonstrated by ChIP assays. Summarising, this study identifies
variations in Sp-transcription factor binding to a single proximal GC-box element
as critical for basal MVP promoter activation and its stimulation by HDAC
inhibitors.

PMID: 15047174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 23;317(1):121-7.

Cysteamine alters redox state, HIF-1alpha transcriptional interactions and
reduces duodenal mucosal oxygenation: novel insight into the mechanisms of
duodenal ulceration.

Khomenko T(1), Deng X, Sandor Z, Tarnawski AS, Szabo S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Service, Diagnostic and Molecular Medicine
Health Care Group, Department of Medicine, VA Medical Center, CA 90822, USA.

Our recent studies demonstrated a critical role of enhanced transcriptional
activity of early growth response factor-1 (Egr-1) in early stages of
cysteamine-induced duodenal ulcer in rats. Since cysteamine is also a reducing
agent, the aims of this study were to determine the effect of cysteamine on
proximal duodenal mucosa: (a) redox status, (b) mucosal oxygenation, (c)
expression of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1alpha) and its binding to DNA, and
(d) HIF-1alpha interaction with Egr-1 and other redox-sensitive transcription
factors. Here we demonstrate for the first time that cysteamine treatment reduced
the duodenal oxygenation by 19% (vs. baseline) and markedly increased the redox
status in duodenal mucosa (p<0.05). Cysteamine increased HIF-1alpha expression,
its binding to DNA, and enhanced the HIF-1alpha interactions with Egr-1 and other
transcription factors (e.g., AP-1, AP-2, L-III BP, NF-E1, NF-E2, STAT4, and MRE),
their binding to DNA. Thus, these data demonstrate the involvement of the
redox-dependent regulatory mechanisms in the early stages of duodenal ulceration.

PMID: 15047156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Apr 6;101(14):4924-9. Epub 2004 Mar 24.

Identification of genes that synergize with Cbfb-MYH11 in the pathogenesis of
acute myeloid leukemia.

Castilla LH(1), Perrat P, Martinez NJ, Landrette SF, Keys R, Oikemus S, Flanegan 
J, Heilman S, Garrett L, Dutra A, Anderson S, Pihan GA, Wolff L, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. lucio.castilla@umassmed.edu

Acute myeloid leukemia subtype M4 with eosinophilia is associated with a
chromosome 16 inversion that creates a fusion gene CBFB-MYH11. We have previously
shown that CBFB-MYH11 is necessary but not sufficient for leukemogenesis. Here,
we report the identification of genes that specifically cooperate with CBFB-MYH11
in leukemogenesis. Neonatal injection of Cbfb-MYH11 knock-in chimeric mice with
retrovirus 4070A led to the development of acute myeloid leukemia in 2-5 months. 
Each leukemia sample contained one or a few viral insertions, suggesting that
alteration of one gene could be sufficient to synergize with Cbfb-MYH11. The
chromosomal position of 67 independent retroviral insertion sites (RISs) was
determined, and 90% of the RISs mapped within 10 kb of a flanking gene. In total,
54 candidate genes were identified; six of them were common insertion sites
(CISs). CIS genes included members of a zinc finger transcription factors family,
Plag1 and Plagl2, with eight and two independent insertions, respectively. CIS
genes also included Runx2, Myb, H2T24, and D6Mm5e. Comparison of the remaining 48
genes with single insertion sites with known leukemia-associated RISs indicated
that 18 coincide with known RISs. To our knowledge, this retroviral genetic
screen is the first to identify genes that cooperate with a fusion gene important
for human myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC387350
PMID: 15044690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Physiol Genomics. 2004 Jun 17;18(1):99-107. Epub 2004 Jun 17.

Critical role for transcription factor AP-2alpha in human trophoblast
differentiation.

Cheng YH(1), Aronow BJ, Hossain S, Trapnell B, Kong S, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Research Foundation and
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.
cheny0@cchmc.org

To examine whether AP-2alpha is a critical component of the genetic program that 
directs human trophoblast differentiation, we used DNA microarray analyses to
characterize the effects of a dominant-negative form of the AP-2 protein upon in 
vitro differentiating cytotrophoblast cells. Human cytotrophoblast cells (>95%
pure) were cultured for 3 days in the presence of control medium or medium
containing an adenovirus that expresses a dominant-negative mutant of AP-2
(Ad2.AP-2D/N) or an adenovirus lacking the AP-2 mutant gene (Ad.WT). DNA
microarray analyses using Affymetrix human U95Av2 GeneChips were performed on RNA
extracted from the three groups of cells immediately prior to and after 3 days of
cell culture. Cells infected with Ad2.AP-2D/N or Ad2.WT underwent morphological
differentiation similar to that of uninfected cells, with greater than 90% of the
cells in each group fusing to form multinucleated syncytiotrophoblast cells.
However, Ad2.AP-2D/N markedly inhibited the induction or repression of many genes
that were regulated in the noninfected and Ad2.WT-infected cells during
differentiation. Eighteen of the 25 most induced genes and 17 of the 20 most
repressed genes during differentiation were AP-2 dependent, with the majority of 
these related to extracellular organization, cellular communication, and signal
transduction. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that AP-2 plays a
critical role for both the induction and repression of genes that comprise
postsyncytialization gene expression programs of trophoblast differentiation and 
maturation. AP-2, however, is not required for the fusion of cytotrophoblast
cells to form a syncytium or the expression of syncytin.

PMID: 15039486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Novartis Found Symp. 2004;256:74-89; discussion 89-91, 106-11, 266-9.

How do chemokine/chemokine receptor activations affect tumorigenesis?

Richmond A(1), Fan GH, Dhawan P, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Nashville, TN, USA.

Cells that display chemokine receptors are capable of responding to a gradient of
chemokine with a motility response that can translate into a chemotactic
response. This continuous response to the chemokine sometimes requires that the
chemokine receptor be internalized and recycled back to the membrane. We have
shown that ligand activation of the CXC chemokine receptor, CXCR2, results in
movement of the receptor into clathrin coated pits, followed by movement into the
early endosome, the sorting endosome, then on to the recycling endosome prior to 
trafficking back into the plasma membrane compartment. Prolonged exposure to
saturating concentrations of the ligand results in movement of a large percentage
of the receptor into the late endosome and on to the lysosome for degradation.
Mutation of the receptor in a manner which impairs receptor internalization by
altering the binding of adaptor proteins AP-2 or beta arrestin to CXCR2, results 
in a marked reduction in the chemotactic response. Chemokine receptors also
activate multiple intracellular signals that lead to the activation of the
transcription factor, nuclear factor kappa beta (NF-kappaB). Transformation is
often associated with a constitutive activation of NF-kappaB, leading to
endogenous expression of chemokines and their receptors. This creates an
autocrine loop with NF-kappaB in the activated state, and altered cxpression of
factors that promote tumour angiogenesis and escape from apoptosis. We have shown
that the constitutive activation of NF-kappaB in human melanoma tumours is
accompanied by constitutive activation of the NF-kappaB inducing kinase (NIK) as 
well as the constitutive activation of AKT. As these factors that modulate the
expression of anti-apoptotic factors work together, the tumour cells exhibit
enhanced survival and growth. This never ending cycle of activation of NF-kappaB,
leading to enhanced production of chemokines, enhanced activation of AKT and
NF-kappaB, and enhanced transcription of inhibitors of apoptosis and chemokines, 
is one that has been used to foster the growth of the tumour to the disadvantage 
of the host. Thus we propose that blocking CXCR2 and/or NF-kappaB offers
potential therapeutic promise for a number of chronic inflammatory conditions and
cancers, including malignant melanoma.

PMID: 15027484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Semin Cancer Biol. 2004 Apr;14(2):81-91.

Molecular regulation of angiogenesis and tumorigenesis by signal transduction
pathways: evidence of predictable and reproducible patterns of synergy in diverse
neoplasms.

Arbiser JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Emory University School of Medicine, WMB 5309, 1639
Pierce Drive, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. jarbise@emory.edu

A large number of oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes, and signal transduction
pathways have been described. Currently, a framework that allows prediction of
tumor behavior based upon oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and signal transduction
pathways is lacking. In 1869, Mendeleev published a periodic table of elements
which allowed prediction of properties of elements based upon atomic weights that
allowed prediction of chemical and physical properties of elements yet to be
discovered. In this paper, I will discuss recurrent patterns of synergy found in 
the literature and our laboratory between tumor suppressor genes, oncogenes, and 
signaling pathways that allows one to predict the signaling pathway in a given
tumor based upon the inactivation of a tumor suppressor gene. These patterns can 
be found in multiple different human neoplasms. Conversely, one can predict the
inactivation of a tumor suppressor based upon the activation status of a
signaling pathway. This knowledge can be used by a clinician or pathologist with 
access to immunohistochemistry to make predictions based upon simple technologies
and determine the signaling pathways involved in a patient's tumor. These
strategies may be useful in the design of prevention and treatment strategies for
cancer.

PMID: 15018892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Dev Biol. 2004 Mar 15;267(2):399-417.

Loss of AP-2alpha impacts multiple aspects of ventral body wall development and
closure.

Brewer S(1), Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Human birth defects involving the ventral body wall are common, yet little is
known about the mechanism of body wall closure in mammals. The AP-2alpha
transcription factor knock-out mouse provides an exceptional tool to understand
this particular pathology, since it has one of the most severe ventral body wall 
closure defects, thoracoabdominoschisis. To gain insight into the complex
morphological events responsible for body wall closure, we have studied this
developmental process in AP-2alpha knock-out mice. Several tissues involved in
normal ventral body wall closure are defective in the absence of AP-2alpha,
including those associated with the primary body wall, the umbilical ring, and
the mesoderm of the secondary body wall. These defects, coupled with the
expression pattern of AP-2alpha, suggest that AP-2alpha is involved in multiple
developmental mechanisms directing the morphogenesis of the ventral body wall,
including cell migration, differentiation, and death. There is a failure of
migration and fusion of the body folds at the umbilical ring, as well as in the
formation and migration of the abdominal bands and ventral musculature.
Furthermore, the mechanism of cell deposition at the umbilical ring is disturbed.
Consequently, the mesodermal compartment of the body wall is underdeveloped. We
also suggest that AP-2alpha is required for signaling from the surface ectoderm
to the underlying mesoderm for proper development and closure of the ventral body
wall. These findings provide a fundamental understanding of how AP-2alpha
functions in the closure of the ventral body wall, as well as offer insight into 
related human birth defects.

PMID: 15013802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Eur J Immunogenet. 2004 Feb;31(1):15-9.

Allele-specific binding to the -308 single nucleotide polymorphism site in the
tumour necrosis factor-alpha promoter.

Baseggio L(1), Bartholin L, Chantome A, Charlot C, Rimokh R, Salles G.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe d'Accueil 3737 Pathologie des Cellules Lymphoïdes, Claude Bernard
University, Lyon, France.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)
promoter region may modulate TNF-alpha gene transcriptional activity by modifying
the binding of transcription factors. Here we confirm that a specific DNA complex
binds preferentially the variant TNF2 allele in various cell types and
demonstrate that activating protein (AP)-2, myeloid zinc finger gene 1 (MZF-1)
and Sp1 are not involved in this complex.

PMID: 15009176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Endocrinology. 2004 Jun;145(6):2760-6. Epub 2004 Mar 4.

Requirement for proximal putative Sp1 and AP-2 cis-deoxyribonucleic acid elements
in mediating basal and luteinizing hormone- and insulin-dependent in vitro
transcriptional activation of the CYP17 gene in porcine theca cells.

Zhang G(1), Veldhuis JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
Mayo Medical and Graduate Schools of Medicine, General Clinical Research Center, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The cytochrome P450 17alpha-hydroxylase/C(17-20) lyase (CYP17) enzyme catalyzes
the first committed step in androgen biosynthesis. In primary cultures of
immature swine theca cells, LH and insulin induce CYP17 mRNA and incompletely
processed heteronuclear RNA supraadditively over 2-6 h. To monitor in vitro
transcriptional control by these two physiological signals, we cloned a -976 to
+31-bp 5'-upstream region of the homologous CYP17 gene and fused it to a
cytoplasmically targeted firefly luciferase minigene (CYP17/luc). LH and insulin 
individually stimulated transcriptional activity of transiently transfected
CYP17/luc in theca cells by 2.7 +/- 0.31- and 2.5 +/- 0.24-fold over basal,
respectively, at an optimal concentration (both 100 ng/ml) and time (6 h; both P 
< 0.01). Combined peptidyl agonists stimulated CYP17/luc by 6.6 +/- 1.2-fold (P <
0.001). To identify possible LH- and insulin-sensitive cis-acting DNA regulatory 
regions, we prepared four deletional constructs, -839, -473, -174, and -75/+35 bp
5' upstream of the transcriptional start site. Deletion from -976 to -839 bp
decreased basal transcriptional activity by 89% and that stimulated by LH,
insulin, and both effectors by 82%, 91%, and 78%, respectively (each P < 0.01).
Further deletion to -473 bp conferred partial responsiveness to combined hormone 
stimulation, suggesting an intervening inhibitory sequence. Truncation to -174 bp
and more proximally reduced basal CYP17/luc activity and hormonal action by more 
than 95% (P < 0.001). The marked loss of combined LH and insulin stimulation
caused by deleting the region between -473 and -175 bp suggested the possible
relevance of partially overlapping specificity protein-1 (Sp1) and activating
protein-2 (AP-2)-like binding sites located between -193 and -180 bp. Point
mutation of the proximal Sp1-like element in full-length -976/+31 CYP17/luc
impaired basal transcription minimally (by 21%; P = NS) and stimulation by LH
(76%), insulin (67%), and combined peptides (54%) significantly (each P < 0.05
vs. wild type). Mutation of the AP-2 site alone decreased basal CYP17/luc
activity nonsignificantly (by 25%), but repressed stimulated transcriptional
responses prominently, viz. to LH (57%), insulin (77%), and both effectors (82%; 
each P < 0.025 vs. wild type). Mutation of both sites inhibited basal and
hormonally stimulated CYP17/luc activity by more than 95% (P < 0.001). At the
level of second messenger signaling, insulin did not potentiate LH-enhanced cAMP 
accumulation, whereas a stable cAMP analog mimicked LH action and augmented
insulin's stimulation of full-length and deletional fragments of CYP17/luc. In
summary, LH and insulin stimulate transcriptional activity of a -976/+31 bp
5'-upstream cis-acting region of the (porcine) CYP17 gene individually and
jointly in primary cultures of theca cells. Maximal transcriptional
responsiveness to these peptide hormones requires proximal Sp1 and AP-2-like
sequences -193 to -180 bp 5' upstream of the transcriptional start site.
Exogenous cAMP mimics transcriptional up-regulation by LH and interacts
analogously with insulin. These data are consistent with convergent drive of
CYP17 gene expression by cAMP-protein kinase A and insulinsignaling pathways in
untransformed theca cells.

PMID: 15001547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Cancer Res. 2004 Mar 1;64(5):1611-20.

Hypermethylation of a small CpGuanine-rich region correlates with loss of
activator protein-2alpha expression during progression of breast cancer.

Douglas DB(1), Akiyama Y, Carraway H, Belinsky SA, Esteller M, Gabrielson E,
Weitzman S, Williams T, Herman JG, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 
21231, USA.

The transcription factor activator protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) has recently been
implicated as a tumor suppressor protein that can be lost during tumor
progression and that exhibits growth-inhibitory properties when overexpressed in 
cancer cell lines. We now demonstrate that hypermethylation of a discrete 5'
region within a promoter CpG island of the gene is associated in breast cancer
with the loss of AP-2alpha expression. Multiple CpG sites within the island
become hypermethylated during breast cancer evolution. However, only
hypermethylation of the most CpG-rich region, a small, approximately 300-bp area 
at the 3' end of exon 1, fully distinguishes neoplastic from normal breast tissue
and correlates with transcriptional silencing. In cell culture, silenced
AP-2alpha, associated with exon 1 hypermethylation, is re-expressed by
5-aza-2'deoxycytidine resulting in the restoration of a functional DNA
sequence-specific binding protein. In vivo, as detected by a very sensitive
nested PCR approach, methylation of the discrete AP-2alpha exon 1 region does not
occur in normal breast epithelium and occurs in only 3 (16%) of 19 ductal
carcinoma in situ (DCIS) lesions, but is present in 12 (75%) of 16 invasive
breast tumors (P < 0.001; DCIS versus invasive cancers). Tumors unmethylated for 
this region expressed AP-2alpha protein throughout, whereas tumors with
hypermethylation showed large areas of loss. Our studies then determine that
hypermethylation of a small region of a CpG island correlates with silencing of
AP-2alpha in breast cancer and suggest that inactivation of this gene could be a 
factor in, and a useful marker for, the progression of DCIS lesions.

PMID: 14996719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Dev Genes Evol. 2004 Mar;214(3):105-14. Epub 2004 Feb 18.

Analysis of gymnosperm two-AP2-domain-containing genes.

Shigyo M(1), Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Systems Studies, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, 153-8902 Tokyo, Japan.

AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) and APETALA2 (AP2) are transcription factors that are involved
in several developmental processes in Arabidopsis thaliana. They are similar in
structure, containing two AP2 domains, and have partially redundant functions in 
reproductive organ development. Expression and functional analyses of ANT and AP2
homologs have been performed previously in almost all angiosperms. In this study,
one ANT homolog and two AP2 homologs were isolated from the gymnosperm Pinus
thunbergii and were named PtANTL1, PtAP2L1, and PtAP2L2. PtANTL1 is the first
reported gymnosperm ANT homologous gene. Based on a gene tree constructed with
sequences of all A. thaliana two-AP2-domain-containing genes, it is likely that
PtANTL1 and ANT, and likewise PtAP2L1 and AP2, are orthologs. The expression
patterns of PtANTL1/PtAP2L1/PtAP2L2 were examined with Southern hybridization of 
the quantitative RT-PCR products and in situ hybridization. PtANTL1 and PtAP2L1
had almost identical expression patterns in the analyzed organs, and
PtANTL1/PtAP2L1/PtAP2L2 were continually expressed in the developing female cone.
Our analysis suggests that gymnosperms have orthologs to both ANT and AP2, and
that the most recent common ancestor of extant seed plants has two type AP2
subfamily genes, ANT-like and AP2-like, involved in the development of female
reproductive organs.

PMID: 14986134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Development. 2004 Apr;131(7):1463-77. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Neural crest survival and differentiation in zebrafish depends on mont
blanc/tfap2a gene function.

Barrallo-Gimeno A(1), Holzschuh J, Driever W, Knapik EW.

Author information: 
(1)GSF, Institute for Mammalian Genetics, Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany.

Neural crest progenitor cells are the main contributors to craniofacial cartilage
and connective tissue of the vertebrate head. These progenitor cells also give
rise to the pigment, neuronal and glial cell lineages. To study the molecular
basis of neural crest differentiation, we have cloned the gene disrupted in the
mont blanc (mob(m610)) mutation, which affects all neural crest derivatives.
Using a positional candidate cloning approach we identified an A to G transition 
within the 3' splice site of the sixth intron of the tfap2a gene that abolishes
the last exon encoding the crucial protein dimerization and DNA-binding domains. 
Neural crest induction and specification are not hindered in mob(m610) mutant
embryos, as revealed by normal expression of early neural crest specific genes
such as snail2, foxd3 and sox10. In addition, the initial stages of cranial
neural crest migration appear undisturbed, while at a later phase the
craniofacial primordia in pharyngeal arches two to seven fail to express their
typical set of genes (sox9a, wnt5a, dlx2, hoxa2/b2). In mob(m610) mutant embryos,
the cell number of neuronal and glial derivatives of neural crest is greatly
reduced, suggesting that tfap2a is required for their normal development. By
tracing the fate of neural crest progenitors in live mont blanc (mob(m610))
embryos, we found that at 24 hpf neural crest cells migrate normally in the first
pharyngeal arch while the preotic and postotic neural crest cells begin migration
but fail to descend to the pharyngeal region of the head. TUNEL assay and
Acridine Orange staining revealed that in the absence of tfap2a a subset of
neural crest cells are unable to undergo terminal differentiation and die by
apoptosis. Furthermore, surviving neural crest cells in tfap2a/mob(m610) mutant
embryos proliferate normally and later differentiate to individual derivatives.
Our results indicate that tfap2a is essential to turn on the normal developmental
program in arches 2-7 and in trunk neural crest. Thus, tfap2a does not appear to 
be involved in early specification and cell proliferation of neural crest, but it
is a key regulator of an early differentiation phase and is required for cell
survival in neural crest derived cell lineages.

PMID: 14985255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Blood. 2004 Jun 1;103(11):4302-9. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Human potassium chloride cotransporter 1 (SLC12A4) promoter is regulated by AP-2 
and contains a functional downstream promoter element.

Zhou GP(1), Wong C, Su R, Crable SC, Anderson KP, Gallagher PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, PO Box 208064,
333 Cedar St, New Haven, CT 06520-8064, USA.

Most K-Cl cotransport in the erythrocyte is attributed to potassium chloride
cotransporter 1 (KCC1). K-Cl cotransport is elevated in sickle erythrocytes, and 
the KCC1 gene has been proposed as a modifier gene in sickle cell disease. To
provide insight into our understanding of the regulation of the human KCC1 gene, 
we mapped the 5' end of the KCC1 cDNA, cloned the corresponding genomic DNA, and 
identified the KCC1 gene promoter. The core promoter lacks a TATA box and is
composed of an initiator element (InR) and a downstream promoter element (DPE), a
combination found primarily in Drosophila gene promoters and rarely observed in
mammalian gene promoters. Mutational analyses demonstrated that both the InR and 
DPE sites were critical for full promoter activity. In vitro DNase I
footprinting, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and reporter gene assays
identified functional AP-2 and Sp1 sites in this region. The KCC1 promoter was
transactivated by forced expression of AP-2 in heterologous cells. Sequences
encoding the InR, DPE, AP-2, and Sp1 sites were 100% conserved between human and 
murine KCC1 genes. In vivo studies using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
with antihistone H3 and antihistone H4 antibodies demonstrated hyperacetylation
of this core promoter region.

PMID: 14976052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Dev Biol. 2004 Mar 1;267(1):135-52.

Wnt1-Cre-mediated deletion of AP-2alpha causes multiple neural crest-related
defects.

Brewer S(1), Feng W, Huang J, Sullivan S, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The AP-2alpha transcription factor is required for multiple aspects of vertebrate
development and mice lacking the AP-2alpha gene (tcfap2a) die at birth from
severe defects affecting the head and trunk. Several of the defects associated
with the tcfap2a-null mutation affect neural crest cell (NCC) derivatives
including the craniofacial skeleton, cranial ganglia, and heart outflow tract.
Consequently, there is considerable interest in the role of AP-2alpha in neural
crest cell function in development and evolution. In addition, the expression of 
the AP-2alpha gene is utilized as a marker for premigratory and migratory neural 
crest cells in many vertebrate species. Here, we have specifically addressed how 
the presence of AP-2alpha in neural crest cells affects development by creating a
conditional (floxed) version of tcfap2a which has subsequently been intercrossed 
with mice expressing Cre recombinase under the control of Wnt1 cis-regulatory
sequences. Neural crest-specific disruption of tcfap2a results in frequent
perinatal lethality associated with neural tube closure defects and cleft
secondary palate. A small but significant fraction of mutant mice can survive
into adulthood, but have retarded craniofacial growth, abnormal middle ear
development, and defects in pigmentation. The phenotypes obtained confirm that
AP-2alpha directs important aspects of neural crest cell function. At the same
time, we did not observe several neurocristopathies affecting the head and heart 
that might be expected based on the phenotype of the AP-2alpha-null mouse. These 
results have important implications for the evolution and function of the AP-2
gene family in both the neural crest and the vertebrate embryo.

PMID: 14975722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Dev Biol. 2004 Mar 1;267(1):72-92.

Frontonasal process-specific disruption of AP-2alpha results in postnatal
midfacial hypoplasia, vascular anomalies, and nasal cavity defects.

Nelson DK(1), Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

A majority of the bones of the vertebrate cranial vault and craniofacial complex 
develop via intramembranous ossification, and are separated by fibrous sutures
that undergo osteogenic differentiation in response to growth stimuli.
Craniosynostosis is a common human birth defect that results from the premature
bony fusion within skull sutures, and causes a myriad of complications including 
mental retardation and craniofacial anomalies. Synostosis of facial sutures has
been reported to cause midfacial hypoplasia in some craniosynostosis cases, but
most studies focus on cranial vault sutures. In this study, we have generated a
mouse model of frontonasal suture synostosis and midfacial hypoplasia through the
tissue-specific elimination of the AP-2alpha transcription factor. We report here
the generation AP-2CRE, a frontonasal process (FNP)- and limb-specific CRE
recombinase allele that is directed by human AP-2alpha promoter and enhancer
elements. We used the AP-2CRE line in combination with the conditional AP-2alpha 
line to produce a new frontonasal knockout (FKO) mutant that lacks AP-2alpha in
the FNP and limbs. FKO mice exhibit shortened snouts and wide-set eyes that
become apparent at postnatal day 15. The most prominent defects in FKO snouts are
(1) a lack of growth within the frontonasal sutures, and (2) a reduction in the
snout vasculature. Additional defects are observed in the FKO nasal bones and
sutures, the nasal cavity cartilage and bony projections, and the olfactory
epithelium. The characteristics of the FKO mouse model are a unique combination
of midfacial growth anomalies, and provide the first evidence that AP-2alpha is
essential for appropriate postnatal craniofacial morphogenesis.

PMID: 14975718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jun;286(6):E958-62. Epub 2004 Feb 17.

Subcutaneous abdominal preadipocyte differentiation in vitro inversely correlates
with central obesity.

Permana PA(1), Nair S, Lee YH, Luczy-Bachman G, Vozarova De Courten B, Tataranni 
PA.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Diabetes and Nutrition Section, Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical
Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Phoenix, Arizona 85016, USA.
paska.permana@med.va.gov

Expansion of adipose tissue mass results from increased number and size of
adipocyte cells. We hypothesized that subcutaneous abdominal preadipocytes in
obese individuals might have an intrinsically higher propensity to differentiate 
into adipocytes. Thus we investigated the relationship between obesity and the
level of in vitro preadipocyte differentiation in Pima Indians. Subcutaneous
abdominal stromal vascular fractions containing preadipocytes were cultured from 
58 nondiabetic subjects [31 M/27 F, 30 +/- 6 yr, body fat 34 +/- 8% by
dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (means +/- SD)]. The average percentage of
preadipocyte differentiation (PDIFF; cell count by microscopy) was 11 +/- 11%
(range 0.2-51%). PDIFF correlated negatively with percent body fat (r = -0.35, P 
= 0.006) and waist circumference (r = -0.45, P = 0.0004). Multiple regression
analysis indicated that waist circumference (P = 0.01), sex (P = 0.01), and
percent body fat (P = 0.05) were significant determinants of PDIFF. Molecular
characterization of predifferentiated cultured cells was performed by real-time
PCR measurements of glucocorticoid receptor-alpha (GRalpha), insulin-like growth 
factor I receptor (IGF-IR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
(PPARgamma), enhancer-binding protein GATA-3, CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein-alpha undifferentiated protein (CUP/AP-2alpha), and endothelial
cell-specific marker 2 (ECSM2). The mRNA concentrations of GRalpha correlated
with PDIFF (r = 0.29, P = 0.03), but the others did not (IGF-IR, r = 0.003, P =
1.0; PPARgamma, r = -0.1, P = 0.5; GATA-3, r = 0.02, P = 0.9; CUP/AP-2alpha, r = 
-0.2, P = 0.1; ECSM2, r = 0.04, P = 0.7). Contrary to our hypothesis, the results
may indicate a blunted in vitro differentiation potential of preadipocytes in
centrally obese individuals. The lower differentiation potential of preadipocytes
in the obese subjects might be due, at least partly, to decreased glucocorticoid 
receptor expression.

PMID: 14970008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Feb;19(2):245-55.

Negative regulation of chondrocyte differentiation by transcription factor
AP-2alpha.

Huang Z(1), Xu H, Sandell L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. huangz@msnotes.wustl.edu

This study investigated the role of transcription factor AP-2alpha in chondrocyte
differentiation in vitro. AP-2alpha mRNA declined during differentiation, and
overexpression of AP-2alpha inhibited differentiation. The results demonstrated
that AP-2alpha plays a negative role in chondrocyte differentiation.INTRODUCTION:
Transcription factor AP-2alpha has been detected in growth plate and articular
chondrocytes and has been shown to regulate cartilage matrix gene expression in
vitro. However, the precise functional role of AP-2alpha in chondrocyte
differentiation is not known. In this study, we assessed the expression and the
function of AP-2alpha in chondrocyte differentiation of ATDC5 cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Chondrocyte differentiation of ATDC5 cells was induced
with insulin or transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta). Proteoglycan
production was assessed by alcian blue staining, and expression levels of
chondrocyte marker genes and AP-2 gene family were determined by quantitative
real time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
Overexpression of AP-2alpha in ATDC5 cells was accomplished by retroviral
infection. Infected cells were selected for G418 resistance and pooled for
further analysis.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative real time RT-PCR analysis showed that among
the four members of the AP-2 gene family, AP-2alpha mRNA was the most abundant.
AP-2alpha mRNA levels progressively declined during the differentiation induced
by either insulin or TGF-beta treatment. Retroviral expression of AP-2alpha in
ATDC5 cells prevented the formation of cartilage nodules, suppressed the
proteoglycan production, and inhibited the expression of type II collagen,
aggrecan, and type X collagen. Expression profile analysis of key transcription
factors involved in chondrogenesis showed that overexpression of AP-2alpha
maintained the expression of Sox9 but suppressed the expression of SoxS and Sox6.
Taken together, we provide, for the first time, molecular and cellular evidence
suggesting that AP-2alpha is a negative regulator of chondrocyte differentiation.

PMID: 14969394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Leukemia. 2004 Apr;18(4):881.

No evidence for core-binding factor CBFbeta as a leukemia predisposing factor in 
chromosome 16q22-linked familial AML.

Escher R, Hagos F, Michaud J, Sveen L, Horwitz M, Olopade OI, Scott HS.

PMID: 14961030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. EMBO J. 2004 Feb 25;23(4):790-9. Epub 2004 Feb 12.

Tyrosine phosphorylation controls Runx2-mediated subnuclear targeting of YAP to
repress transcription.

Zaidi SK(1), Sullivan AJ, Medina R, Ito Y, van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Lian JB,
Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655-0106, USA.

Src/Yes tyrosine kinase signaling contributes to the regulation of bone
homeostasis and inhibits osteoblast activity. Here we show that the endogenous
Yes-associated protein (YAP), a mediator of Src/Yes signaling, interacts with the
native Runx2 protein, an osteoblast-related transcription factor, and suppresses 
Runx2 transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner. Runx2, through its PY 
motif, recruits YAP to subnuclear domains in situ and to the osteocalcin (OC)
gene promoter in vivo. Inhibition of Src/Yes kinase blocks tyrosine
phosphorylation of YAP and dissociates endogenous Runx2-YAP complexes.
Consequently, recruitment of the YAP co-repressor to subnuclear domains is
abrogated and expression of the endogenous OC gene is induced. Our results
suggest that Src/Yes signals are integrated through organization of Runx2-YAP
transcriptional complexes at subnuclear sites to attenuate skeletal gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC380991
PMID: 14765127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cell Death Differ. 2004 May;11(5):485-93.

Transcription factor AP-2alpha triggers apoptosis in cardiac myocytes.

Müller FU(1), Loser K, Kleideiter U, Neumann J, von Wallbrunn C, Dobner T, Scheld
HH, Bantel H, Engels IH, Schulze-Osthoff K, Schmitz W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Münster, Domagkstr.
12, Münster D-48129, Germany. mullerf@uni-muenster.de

Idiopathic-dilated cardiomyopathy (IDC) is a common primary myocardial disease of
unknown etiology associated with apoptosis, cardiac dilatation, progressive heart
failure and increased mortality. An elevation of the transcription factor
activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) is involved in vertebrate embryonic
development and oncogenesis. Here, we show that AP-2alpha protein is expressed in
the human heart and increased in human failing myocardium with IDC.
Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of human AP-2alpha triggered apoptosis and
increased mRNA levels of Bcl-2 family members Bax and Bcl-x in rat
cardiomyocytes. Immunohistological analysis of human myocardium revealed an
increased percentage of AP-2alpha-positive nuclei in IDC and, interestingly, a
colocalization of AP-2alpha-positive but not -negative cells with a
caspase-cleaved fragment of poly(ADP-ribose)polymerase. We suggest AP-2alpha as a
novel cardiac regulator implicated in the activation of apoptosis in IDC.

2004

PMID: 14752511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cancer Res. 2004 Jan 15;64(2):631-8.

Activator protein 2alpha inhibits tumorigenicity and represses vascular
endothelial growth factor transcription in prostate cancer cells.

Ruiz M(1), Pettaway C, Song R, Stoeltzing O, Ellis L, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Activator protein-2alpha (AP-2) is a transcription factor that regulates
proliferation and differentiation in mammalian cells. We have shown previously
that although AP-2 is expressed highly in normal prostatic epithelium, its
expression is lost in high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia and prostate
cancer, suggesting that loss of AP-2 plays a role in prostate cancer development.
We demonstrate that forced AP-2 expression in the prostate cancer cell line
LNCaP-LN3 (AP-2 negative) inhibited dramatically tumor incidence in nude mice. To
identify the genes that might have been responsible for this effect, we used
microchip expression array. We found several genes known to be involved in
malignancy were deregulated, including the vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) gene. Because VEGF was down-regulated by 14.7-fold in the AP-2-transfected
cells and because it is a major angiogenic factor in prostate cancer development 
and progression, we chose to examine the AP-2-VEGF interaction. Our evidence
suggests that AP-2 repressed transcriptionally the VEGF promoter by competing
with the transcriptional activator Sp3. Loss of AP-2 in prostate cancer cells
reduced the AP-2:Sp3 ratio and activated VEGF expression. AP-2 acts as a
tumor-suppressor gene in prostate cancer. Elucidating the molecular events
resulting from loss of AP-2 in the prostate epithelium has implications for the
understanding and prevention of the onset of prostate cancer.

PMID: 14744778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Dec 30;1635(2-3):104-16.

Regulation of sphingosine kinase 1 gene expression by protein kinase C in a human
leukemia cell line, MEG-O1.

Nakade Y(1), Banno Y, T-Koizumi K, Hagiwara K, Sobue S, Koda M, Suzuki M, Kojima 
T, Takagi A, Asano H, Nozawa Y, Murate T.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University School of
Health Sciences, Higashi, Japan.

The prolonged treatment with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) of a human
megakaryoblastic leukemia cell line, MEG-O1, induced increase of sphingosine
kinase (SPHK) enzyme activity and SPHK1 protein expression as well as SPHK1
message. Protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor prevented the PMA-induced SPHK1 gene
expression. To elucidate the regulatory mechanism of this gene expression, we
examined the promoter area (distal to the first exon) and its binding proteins.
Luciferase analyses showed that the area of 300 bp from the first exon was
sufficient for PMA-responsiveness, and that specificity protein 1 (Sp1)- and two 
activator protein 2 (AP-2)-binding motifs within this area were necessary for
responsiveness. Inhibitors for PKC and MEK1 decreased this PMA-induced promoter
activity. Electrophoresis mobility shift assay (EMSA) showed that Sp1 protein was
originally bound to the Sp1 site and that two additional bands bound to the two
AP-2 motifs were observed only when stimulated with PMA in MEG-O1 cells. The
appearance of these bands resulted from binding to an unknown protein rather than
AP-2. These results indicated that PMA up-regulates SPHK1 gene expression through
PMA-responsive elements of the 5' promoter area of the gene, and suggested that
PMA-mediated SPHK1 gene expression would be mediated via PKC- and ERK-dependent
signal transduction pathway by binding the transcription factor to AP-2 motifs.

PMID: 14729073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Endocrinology. 2004 Apr;145(4):1685-94. Epub 2004 Jan 8.

Transcriptional regulation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta gene during
villous trophoblast differentiation.

Knöfler M(1), Saleh L, Bauer S, Galos B, Rotheneder H, Husslein P, Helmer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Vienna, Austria.
martin.knoefler@akh-wien.ac.at

Expression of the trophoblast-specific subunit of human chorionic gonadotropin,
CGbeta, is associated with fusion of cytotrophoblasts into a multinuclear
syncytium. Here, we studied regulation of the CGbeta5 gene in trophoblasts
undergoing in vitro syncytialization. Transfection of luciferase reporters
harboring different lengths of the CGbeta5 upstream sequence revealed that the
proximal promoter region (-345 to +114) is sufficient to govern
differentiation-dependent induction. Mutational analyses suggested that two
selective promoter factor (Sp) and three activating protein 2 (AP-2) recognition 
sequences are necessary for full activity of the promoter. During
syncytialization these elements interacted with increasing amounts of the
transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2alpha in electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, but only AP-2alpha binding rose upon elevation of cAMP levels with
forskolin. Increasing expression of different isoforms of Sp1 and Sp3 could also 
be detected by Western blot analyses. Sp1/Sp3 localized to syncytial nuclei both 
in differentiated cultures and in term placental tissue, suggesting assembly of
functional transcriptional complexes. Costaining of the transcription factors
with E-cadherin on term placental sections revealed that 47 and 33% of
cytotrophoblast nuclei were negative for Sp1 and Sp3, respectively. In contrast, 
immunohistochemistry of early tissue demonstrated expression of Sp1 in the
majority of cyto- and syncytiotrophoblasts, whereas Sp3 was absent from the
syncytium. Sp1 and Sp3 induced wild-type/mutant promoter constructs upon
transfection in Sp-deficient SL-2 cells, indicating that the Sp elements function
as activating sequences. The data suggest that increasing concentrations of Sp1, 
Sp3, and AP-2alpha enhance transcription of CGbeta in differentiating term
trophoblasts, whereas a different combination of factors may control expression
in early placentas.

PMID: 14715707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12190-205. Epub 2003 Dec 31.

ZNF143 mediates basal and tissue-specific expression of human transaldolase.

Grossman CE(1), Qian Y, Banki K, Perl A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, State University of New York, Upstate Medical
University, College of Medicine, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Transaldolase regulates redox-dependent apoptosis through controlling NADPH and
ribose 5-phosphate production via the pentose phosphate pathway. The minimal
promoter sufficient to drive chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene
activity was mapped to nucleotides -49 to -1 relative to the transcription start 
site of the human transaldolase gene. DNase I footprinting with nuclear extracts 
of transaldolase-expressing cell lines unveiled protection of nucleotides -29 to 
-16. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified a single dominant
DNA-protein complex that was abolished by consensus sequence for transcription
factor ZNF143/76 or mutation of the ZNF76/143 motif within the transaldolase
promoter. Mutation of an AP-2alpha recognition sequence, partially overlapping
the ZNF143 motif, increased TAL-H promoter activity in HeLa cells, without
significant impact on HepG2 cells, which do not express AP-2alpha. Cooperativity 
of ZNF143 with AP-2alpha was supported by supershift analysis of HeLa cells where
AP-2 may act as cell type-specific repressor of TAL promoter activity. However,
overexpression of full-length ZNF143, ZNF76, or dominant-negative DNA-binding
domain of ZNF143 enhanced, maintained, or abolished transaldolase promoter
activity, respectively, in HepG2 and HeLa cells, suggesting that ZNF143 initiates
transcription from the transaldolase core promoter. ZNF143 overexpression also
increased transaldolase enzyme activity. ZNF143 and transaldolase expression
correlated in 21 different human tissues and were coordinately upregulated 14-
and 34-fold, respectively, in lactating mammary glands compared with nonlactating
ones. Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies confirm that ZNF143/73 associates
with the transaldolase promoter in vivo. Thus, ZNF143 plays a key role in basal
and tissue-specific expression of transaldolase and regulation of the metabolic
network controlling cell survival and differentiation.

PMID: 14702349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Seikagaku. 2003 Nov;75(11):1449-52.

[Regulatory mechanism of endocytosis by inositol phospholipids].

[Article in Japanese]

Kinuta M(1), Takei K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine and
Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

PMID: 14699846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Dyn. 2004 Jan;229(1):87-98.

Skeletal and pigment cell defects in the lockjaw mutant reveal multiple roles for
zebrafish tfap2a in neural crest development.

Knight RD(1), Javidan Y, Nelson S, Zhang T, Schilling T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California, USA.

Members of the AP-2 transcription factor family have critical roles in many
aspects of embryonic development. The zebrafish tfap2a mutant lockjaw (low)
displays defects in skeletal and pigment cell derivatives of the neural crest.
Here we show essential roles for tfap2a in subsets of embryonic cartilages and
pigment cells. Defects in cartilage of the hyoid arch in low correlate with a
loss of Hox group 2 gene expression and are suggestive of a transformation to a
mandibular fate. In contrast, loss of joints in the mandibular arch and defects
in certain types of pigment cells suggest a requirement for tfap2a independent of
Hox regulation. Early melanophores do not develop in low mutants, and we propose 
that this results in part from a loss of kit function, leading to defects in
migration, as well as kit-independent defects in melanophore specification.
Iridophores are also reduced in low, in contrast to xanthophores, revealing a
role for tfap2a in the development of pigment subpopulations. We propose a model 
of tfap2a function in the neural crest in which there are independent functions
for tfap2a in specification of subpopulations of pigment cells and segmental
patterning of the pharyngeal skeleton through the regulation of Hox genes.
Developmental Dynamics 229:87-98, 2004.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14699580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Dev Biol. 2004 Jan 1;265(1):246-61.

Transcription factor Ap-2alpha is necessary for development of embryonic
melanophores, autonomic neurons and pharyngeal skeleton in zebrafish.

O'Brien EK(1), d'Alençon C, Bonde G, Li W, Schoenebeck J, Allende ML, Gelb BD,
Yelon D, Eisen JS, Cornell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa
City, IA 52242, USA.

The genes that control development of embryonic melanocytes are poorly defined.
Although transcription factor Ap-2alpha is expressed in neural crest (NC) cells, 
its role in development of embryonic melanocytes and other neural crest
derivatives is unclear because mouse Ap-2alpha mutants die before melanogenesis. 
We show that zebrafish embryos injected with morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides complementary to ap-2alpha (ap-2alpha MO) complete early
morphogenesis normally and have neural crest cells. Expression of c-kit, which
encodes the receptor for the Steel ligand, is reduced in these embryos, and,
similar to zebrafish c-kit mutant embryos, embryonic melanophores are reduced in 
number and migration. The effects of ap-2alpha MO injected into heterozygous and 
homozygous c-kit mutants support the notion that Ap-2alpha works through C-kit
and additional target genes to mediate melanophore cell number and migration. In 
contrast to c-kit mutant embryos, in ap-2alpha MO-injected embryos, melanophores 
are small and under-pigmented, and unexpectedly, analysis of mosaic embryos
suggests Ap-2alpha regulates melanophore differentiation through cell
non-autonomous targets. In addition to melanophore phenotypes, we document
reduction of other neural crest derivatives in ap-2alpha MO-injected embryos,
including jaw cartilage, enteric neurons, and sympathetic neurons. These results 
reveal that Ap-2alpha regulates multiple steps of melanophore development, and is
required for development of other neuronal and non-neuronal neural crest
derivatives.

PMID: 14697367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cancer Res. 2003 Dec 15;63(24):8955-61.

Butyrates, as a single drug, induce histone acetylation and granulocytic
maturation: possible selectivity on core binding factor-acute myeloid leukemia
blasts.

Gozzini A(1), Rovida E, Dello Sbarba P, Galimberti S, Santini V.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology and. Experimental Pathology and Oncology, Università
di Firenze, Florence, Italy.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2004 May 15;;64(14):3725. Galimbert S [corrected to Galimberti S].

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease characterized by a block of maturation.
Genes coding for core binding factors are rearranged in a considerable subset of 
AML cases and result in an altered interaction of core binding factor (CBF)
subunits with transcriptional coregulators (NCoR/SMRT). Recruitment of histone
deacetylase is also altered in AML, and a subsequent transcriptional repression
of target genes involved in myeloid maturation is determined. We determined here 
the effects of two histone deacetylase inhibitors, sodium butyrate and the stable
prodrug xylitol butyrate derivative (D1), on a t(8;21)-positive cell line
(Kasumi-1) as well as primary AML blasts. Exposure (24-96 h) to butyrates (1 mM) 
of Kasumi-1 cells induced histone H4 acetylation, whereas H3 acetylation was
unchanged. Induction of morphological and immunophenotypic granulocytic
maturation (96 h), also confirmed by an increased expression of CAAT/enhancer
binding protein alpha, was observed. Inhibition of proliferation and apoptosis
via activation of caspase-9 was also observed. In primary AML blasts, butyrates
(0.5 mM) increased histone H4 acetylation of 18 of 19 cases tested. Terminal
granulocytic maturation was observed in all cases (5 of 5) characterized by
chromosomal translocations involving CBF, whereas in non-CBF cases, maturation
was incomplete (4 of 8) or absent (4 of 8). Our data indicate the possibility to 
effectively remove, in CBF AML cases, the maturation block generated by histone
deacetylase stable recruitment, contributing to a possible development of
molecularly targeted therapies of AML.

PMID: 14695213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Cell Biol. 2003 Dec 22;163(6):1281-90.

Recognition of dileucine-based sorting signals from HIV-1 Nef and LIMP-II by the 
AP-1 gamma-sigma1 and AP-3 delta-sigma3 hemicomplexes.

Janvier K(1), Kato Y, Boehm M, Rose JR, Martina JA, Kim BY, Venkatesan S,
Bonifacino JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The sorting of transmembrane proteins to endosomes and lysosomes is mediated by
signals present in the cytosolic tails of the proteins. A subset of these signals
conform to the [DE]XXXL[LI] consensus motif and mediate sorting via interactions 
with heterotetrameric adaptor protein (AP) complexes. However, the identity of
the AP subunits that recognize these signals remains controversial. We have used 
a yeast three-hybrid assay to demonstrate that [DE]XXXL[LI]-type signals from the
human immunodeficiency virus negative factor protein and the lysosomal integral
membrane protein II interact with combinations of the gamma and sigma1 subunits
of AP-1 and the delta and sigma3 subunits of AP-3, but not the analogous
combinations of AP-2 and AP-4 subunits. The sequence requirements for these
interactions are similar to those for binding to the whole AP complexes in vitro 
and for function of the signals in vivo. These observations reveal a novel mode
of recognition of sorting signals involving the gamma/delta and sigma subunits of
AP-1 and AP-3.

PMCID: PMC2173715
PMID: 14691137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Neuropsychobiology. 2003;48(4):169-75.

Transcription factor AP-2beta genotype associated with anxiety-related
personality traits in women. A replication study.

Damberg M(1), Berggård C, Mattila-Evenden M, Rylander G, Forslund K, Garpenstrand
H, Bergman H, Gustavsson JP, Jönsson EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. mattias.damberg@neuro.uu.se

Attempts to link transmitter system genes to certain aspects of personality have 
been performed. Several monoamine-related gene variants have been investigated.
We previously reported an association between a transcription factor activating
protein-2beta (AP-2beta) variant and anxiety-related personality traits as
estimated by Karolinska Scales of Personality (KSP). To confirm this reported
association, we have, in the present study, analysed an enlarged group of healthy
volunteers (n = 370) with regard to AP-2beta genotype and personality traits. For
estimation of personality traits, individuals completed 5 different personality
questionnaires, i.e. Swedish Universities Scales of Personality (SSP),
Health-Relevant 5- Factor Personality Inventory (HP5i), Temperament and Character
Inventory, the Revised NEO Personality Inventory and KSP. In contrast to men,
women having two long AP-2beta alleles displayed lower scores for muscular
tension (KSP; F = 10.65, p = 0.0013), somatic trait anxiety (SSP; F = 7.18, p =
0.0081), trait irritability (SSP; F = 4.51, p = 0.032), mistrust (SSP; F = 4.01, 
p = 0.0468) and negative affectivity (HP5i; F = 10.20, p = 0.0017) than women
with at least one short allele. The data presented in this study, together with
our previously published data, suggest that AP-2beta intron 2 genotype is
associated with low levels of anxiety-related personality traits in women. Hence,
these data further suggest the human AP-2beta gene as a novel candidate gene in
personality.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14673213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(1):245-57.

Transcription Factors Pax6 and AP-2alpha Interact To Coordinate Corneal
Epithelial Repair by Controlling Expression of Matrix Metalloproteinase
Gelatinase B.

Sivak JM(1), West-Mays JA, Yee A, Williams T, Fini ME.

Author information: 
(1)Evelyn F. and William L. McKnight Vision Research Center, Bascom Palmer Eye
Institute, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Pax6 is a paired box containing transcription factor that resides at the top of a
genetic hierarchy controlling eye development. It continues to be expressed in
tissues of the adult eye, but its role in this capacity is unclear. Pax6 is
present in the adult corneal epithelium, and we showed that the amount of Pax6 is
increased at the migrating front as the epithelium resurfaces the cornea after
injury. We also showed that Pax6 controls activity of the transcriptional
promoter for the matrix metalloproteinase, gelatinase B (gelB; MMP-9) in cell
culture transfection studies. gelB expression is turned on at the migrating
epithelial front in the cornea, and it coordinates and effects aspects of
epithelial regeneration. We define here two positively acting Pax6 response
elements in the gelB promoter. Pax6 binds directly to one of these sites through 
the paired DNA-binding domain. It binds the second site indirectly by interaction
with AP-2alpha, a transcription factor that also exerts control over eye
development. Pax6 control of gelB expression was examined in vivo by using a
corneal reepithelialization model in mice heterozygous for a Pax6 paired-domain
mutation (Sey(+/-)). A reduced Pax6 dosage in these mice resulted in a loss of
gelB expression at the migrating epithelial front. This effect was correlated
with an increase in inflammation and the rate of reepithelialization, a finding
consistent with the phenotype of gelB knockout mice. Together, these data
indicate that Pax6 controls activity of the gelB promoter through cooperative
interactions with AP-2alpha and support an active role for Pax6 in maintenance
and repair of the adult corneal epithelium.

PMCID: PMC303332
PMID: 14673159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):574-87. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Binding of AP-2 and ETS-domain family members is associated with enhancer
activity in the hypersensitive site III region of the human growth
hormone/chorionic somatomammotropin locus.

Jin Y(1), Norquay LD, Yang X, Gregoire S, Cattini PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Manitoba, 730 William Avenue,
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3E 3J7.

The human GH gene family is specifically expressed in somatotrophs of the
anterior pituitary and placental syncytiotrophoblast. Two nuclease-hypersensitive
sites, HS III and HS V, are associated with a region of chromatin located 28 and 
30 kb upstream of the pituitary GH gene transcription initiation site (+1) in
both pituitary and placenta nuclei. A role for this region in pituitary GH gene
expression has been reported, but the potential relevance to placental gene
expression has not been determined. Deletion analysis of a 5.2-kb region
(nucleotides - 27,568/-32,746) containing HS III to V-related sequences localized
significant enhancer activity to a 574-bp HS III fragment (nucleotides
-27,676/-28,249) in multiple transfected cell lines. Four nuclease-protected
regions [footprints (FP) 1-4] were identified in the 574-bp fragment. FP2 and FP3
were detected with placenta cell nuclear protein, whereas FP1 and FP4 were
observed with placental and nonplacental cell nuclear extract. Disruption of FP1 
had no effect on heterologous promoter activity in transfected pituitary and
placental cells, whereas loss of FP2 and FP3 resulted in modest increases in
placental cells, reflecting the presence of repressor activity associated with
these regions in vitro. In contrast, disruption of the FP4 region by mutation or 
deletion significantly reduced enhancer activity. As a result, 30-fold enhancer
activity was localized to a 41-bp region in transfected placental tumor cells.
Binding of candidate proteins, activator protein (AP)-2 (FP3) and Elk-1 (FP4),
was confirmed using competition assays with specific oligonucleotides and
antibodies. Moreover, these factors were associated with the hyperacetylated HS
III region in human pituitary [activator protein 2 (AP-2) and Elk-1] and term
placenta (AP-2) chromatin. These data implicate AP-2 and ETS-domain family
members in the regulation of the GH/CS locus and raise the possibility that
different complexes form in the HS III region in placenta and pituitary cells.

PMID: 14673137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Gene. 2003 Dec 4;321:93-102.

Molecular cloning and characterization of AP-2 epsilon, a fifth member of the
AP-2 family.

Tummala R(1), Romano RA, Fuchs E, Sinha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, 3435 Main
Street, 121 Farber Hall, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

The mammalian AP-2 family of transcription factors consists of four members, AP-2
alpha, AP-2 beta, AP-2 gamma and AP-2 delta, which play an important role in
regulating gene expression during development and differentiation of multiple
organs and tissues. The defining feature of the AP-2 family is a highly conserved
carboxy-terminal basic helix-turn-helix domain that is involved in dimerization
and sequence-specific DNA-binding. In this report, we use bioinformatics to
identify both the mouse and human AP-2 epsilon, a fifth member of the AP-2
family. The predicted mouse and human AP-2 epsilon proteins consist of 442 amino 
acids and show a high level of sequence similarity with other AP-2 proteins in
the DNA-binding and dimerization domain and weak similarity in the N-terminal
activation domain. Northern blot analysis reveals that among the adult mouse
tissues examined, AP-2 epsilon is highly expressed in skin tissue. The human AP-2
epsilon gene maps to chromosome 1p42, consists of seven exons spanning 23 kb and 
exhibits a genomic structure similar to other AP-2 family members. Human AP-2
epsilon mRNA is expressed in human skin and keratinocytes grown in culture.
Finally, we show that recombinant AP-2 epsilon can bind to AP-2 binding sequences
from keratin promoters in electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Our study
establishes AP-2 epsilon as a novel member of the AP-2 family, and suggests that 
it may play an important role in skin biology.

PMID: 14636996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Br J Haematol. 2003 Dec;123(5):819-29.

Core-binding factor-beta positive acute myeloid leukaemia cells induce T-cell
responses.

Banat GA(1), Ihlow K, Usluoglu N, Hoppmann S, Hoeck M, Pralle H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Medical Centre University of Giessen,
Klinikstr. 36, Giessen, Germany. a.banat@innere.med.uni-giessen.de

The addition of specific cytokines is a mandatory prerequisite for the generation
and subsequent function of leukaemia-derived dendritic cells (DC) believed to
induce specific T-cell responses. In this study, we report the ability of blasts 
derived from cytogenetically classified acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) cells with 
the inversion of chromosome 16 to stimulate allogeneic and autologous T cells
without additional cytokines. They displayed a measurable immunogenic effect.
Sixteen of 17 established, stable AML cell lines, growing primary tumour cells
from patients with a variety of chromosomal abnormalities, altered their surface 
marker expression pattern in proliferating culture. They lost the progenitor
markers CD33, CD13 and CD34 while significantly increasing expression of the
co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86. Four cell lines derived from inv(16)
positive blasts mounted allogeneic as well as autologous T cell activation with
concomitant expression of CD25 and CD69. Moreover, oligoclonal expanded T cells
were able to lyse inv(16) AML blasts in a specific major histocompatibility
complex class I-restricted and CD80-dependent manner. AML blasts with karyotypes 
other than inv(16) activated T cells, but without inducing a significant
proliferation. We conclude from this study that AML blasts derived from inv(16)
positive patients may be preferential targets for AML immunotherapy strategies.

PMID: 14632772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Blood. 2004 Mar 15;103(6):2316-24. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

High incidence of somatic mutations in the AML1/RUNX1 gene in myelodysplastic
syndrome and low blast percentage myeloid leukemia with myelodysplasia.

Harada H(1), Harada Y, Niimi H, Kyo T, Kimura A, Inaba T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and
Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553,
Japan. herf1@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

A high incidence of somatically acquired point mutations in the AML1/RUNX1 gene
has been reported in poorly differentiated acute myeloid leukemia (AML, M0) and
in radiation-associated and therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or
AML. The vast majority of AML1 mutations identified in these diseases were
localized in the amino (N)-terminal region, especially in the DNA-binding Runt
homology domain. In this report, we show that AML1 point mutations were found in 
26 (23.6%) of 110 patients with refractory anemia with excess blasts (RAEB), RAEB
in transformation (RAEBt), and AML following MDS (defined these 3 disease
categories as MDS/AML). Among them, 9 (8.2%) mutations occurred in the carboxy
(C)-terminal region, which were exclusively found in MDS/AML and were strongly
correlated with sporadic MDS/AML. All patients with MDS/AML with an AML1 mutation
expressed wild-type AML1 protein and had a significantly worse prognosis than
those without AML1 mutations. Most AML1 mutants lost trans-activation potential, 
regardless of their DNA binding potential. These data suggested that AML1 point
mutation is one of the major driving forces of MDS/AML, and these mutations may
represent a distinct clinicopathologic-genetic entity.

PMID: 14615365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2003 Nov;6(4):210-9.

AP-2 and HNK-1 define distinct populations of cranial neural crest cells.

Minarcik JC(1), Golden JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if distinct populations of cranial neural crest cells
(CNCC) exist by characterization of their divergent gene expression patterns.
DESIGN: Identification of unique populations of CNCC was determined by a
combination of lineage and immunohistochemical analyses.
SETTING: Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and the
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104.
RESULTS: We found antibodies of two proteins previously described as identifying 
all CNCC, label three populations of CNCC at specific time-points. Furthermore,
the activating protein 2 (AP-2) expressing CNCC become neural or mesenchymal NCC 
derivatives whereas the HNK-1 labeled cells do not participate in the mesenchymal
lineage.
CONCLUSION: These data provide molecular markers for unique CNCC fates and thus
will be invaluable in the characterizing of craniofacial anomalies related to
defects in NCCS. In addition, our data suggest AP-2 may function in determining
the unique mesenchymal fate of CNCCs.

PMID: 14606524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Hum Genet. 2004 Jan;114(2):149-56. Epub 2003 Nov 5.

Identification of transcripts from a subtraction library which might be
responsible for the mild phenotype in an intrafamilially variable course of
Duchenne muscular dystrophy.

Sifringer M(1), Uhlenberg B, Lammel S, Hanke R, Neumann B, von Moers A, Koch I,
Speer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, Charité, Humboldt-University Berlin,
Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

While frame-shift mutations are usually found in Duchenne muscular dystrophy
(DMD), in-frame mutations are associated with the less severe phenotype of
Becker's muscular dystrophy. Exceptions have been reported in both directions
suggesting the existence of modifying genes, which might be helpful for
innovation of new therapeutic strategies. We report on the very rare case of an
intrafamilially different course of DMD, with the younger brother being far less 
affected than the older one when compared at the same age. In this context, we
constructed a subtraction library enriched for transcripts over-expressed in the 
patient with the milder phenotype. Twelve random clones were sequenced, followed 
by database analysis. Six of them, casein kinase 1 alpha 1, RAP2B, dynactin 3
light chain, core binding factor beta, myosin light polypeptide 2 and one
hypothetical gene, were further analysed by real-time RT-PCR. All these genes
were over-expressed 3-20 times in the less affected patient compared with the
more severely affected one. Casein kinase 1 and the hypothetical gene showed even
a slightly higher expression than the control. Up-regulation of myosin light
polypeptide 2, one of the most sensitive markers of muscle fibre regeneration,
obviously reflects the milder phenotype. Casein kinase 1, dynactin and core
binding factor are supposed to be involved in cell cycle pathways. RAP is a
component of the signalling network which controls fundamental cellular processes
such as proliferation and differentiation. All four might be interesting
candidates for a therapeutic approach to diminish progression of dystrophy in
DMD.

PMID: 14600829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Gene. 2003 Nov 27;320:155-64.

Functional characterization of the interacting domains of the positive
coactivator PC4 with the transcription factor AP-2alpha.

Zhong L(1), Wang Y, Kannan P, Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 110 East Warren Avenue,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The transcriptional positive cofactor 4 (PC4) physically interacts with the
transcription factor, activator protein-2 (AP-2) alpha, and overexpression of PC4
results in a relief of the AP-2 transcriptional self-interference, which is
induced by high levels of AP-2alpha expression. PC4 was initially described as a 
DNA-binding protein that enhances the activator-dependent transcription of class 
II genes in vitro, but it was later shown that PC4 could also act as a potent
repressor of transcription on specific DNA structures such as single-stranded
(ss) DNA, DNA ends and heteroduplex DNA. To further explore the functional
domains of PC4 and its ssDNA-binding effect in the interaction with AP-2alpha and
on AP-2 transcriptional activity, we investigated the C-terminal domain of PC4
(PC4-CTD) and several PC4 mutants in which the ssDNA binding function was
interrupted. We found that the C-terminal domain of PC4 physically interacts with
AP-2alpha and retains the function of full-length protein in relieving
transcription self-interference of AP-2. A point-mutated form of PC4 within the
C-terminal domain beta-ridge, PC4 W89A, or a triple mutant in the beta2-beta3
loop of PC4, F77A/K78G/K80G, inactivate the ability of PC4 to bind AP-2alpha and 
to relieve the transcription self-interference of AP-2alpha. In addition,
point-mutated forms of AP-2alpha within the activation domain (AD) that
inactivate AP-2 transcription activity also lose their self-interference
function. Our data suggest that the C-terminal domain of the transcription
cofactor PC4 is critical for AP-2alpha transcriptional interference that is
mediated by the activation domain of AP-2alpha.

PMID: 14597399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mol Cancer Res. 2003 Oct;1(12):921-9.

Transcription factor AP-2gamma stimulates proliferation and apoptosis and impairs
differentiation in a transgenic model.

Jäger R(1), Werling U, Rimpf S, Jacob A, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of 
Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.

AP-2 transcription factors play pivotal roles in orchestrating embryonic
development by influencing the differentiation, proliferation, and survival of
cells. Furthermore, AP-2 transcription factors have been implicated in
carcinogenesis, a process where the normal growth and differentiation program of 
cells is disturbed. To experimentally address the potential involvement of AP-2
in mammary gland tumorigenesis, we generated mice overexpressing AP-2gamma by
transgenesis using the mouse mammary tumor virus-long terminal repeat as the
transgene-driving promoter unit. In the mammary gland, transgene expression
elicited a hyperproliferation that, however, was counterbalanced by the enhanced 
apoptosis of epithelial cells leading to a hypoplasia of the alveolar epithelium 
during late pregnancy. In addition, secretory differentiation was impaired,
resulting in a lactation failure. In male transgenic mice, the seminal vesicles
were sites of strong transgene expression. There the effects of AP-2gamma on
proliferation and apoptosis were even more pronounced, and differentiation was
impaired, too, as revealed by the absence of androgen receptor immunoreactivity. 
In both tissues, the mammary gland and the seminal vesicles, enhanced
steady-state transcript levels of the AP-2 target gene IGFBP-5 were detected,
revealing a potential mechanism of AP-2-induced apoptosis. Our results suggest a 
role of AP-2 transcription factors in the maintenance of a proliferative and
undifferentiated state of cells, characteristics not only important during
embryonic development but also in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 14573793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2003 Oct;24(2):460-75.

Cloning and characterization of the mouse AP-2 epsilon gene: a novel family
member expressed in the developing olfactory bulb.

Feng W(1), Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology and Cellular and Structural Biology,
BRB151, Campus Box C286, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East
Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Members of the mammalian AP-2 transcription factor family have critical
regulatory roles in many aspects of development and are also implicated in cancer
progression. Four AP-2 genes have been previously characterized in mouse and
human, encoding the AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, AP-2gamma, and AP-2delta proteins. Here 
we report the cloning and characterization of the fifth member of the vertebrate 
AP-2 family, AP-2epsilon. The AP-2epsilon protein is very similar to the other
family members in its DNA binding and dimerization domain and also contains
conserved proline and aromatic amino acid residues in the activation domain.
Consistent with these observations, AP-2epsilon can bind to the GC-rich AP-2
consensus sequence and can dimerize either with itself or with any of the other
AP-2 proteins. The AP-2epsilon protein is also able to activate transcription in 
a binding site-dependent manner. However, the mouse AP-2epsilon gene is
distinctive from the other AP-2 genes in its pattern of expression during
embryogenesis. Unlike AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma, transcripts
corresponding to AP-2epsilon are not found in the neural crest and its
derivatives. Instead, AP-2epsilon is expressed most prominently in the mitral
cell layer of the developing olfactory bulb. A comparison of AP-2 gene family
expression in the olfactory system suggests both distinct and overlapping
functions for these transcription factors in forebrain development.

PMID: 14572467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biochem J. 2004 Jan 15;377(Pt 2):429-38.

Activator protein-2gamma (AP-2gamma) expression is specifically induced by
oestrogens through binding of the oestrogen receptor to a canonical element
within the 5'-untranslated region.

Orso F(1), Cottone E, Hasleton MD, Ibbitt JC, Sismondi P, Hurst HC, De Bortoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment, University of Turin, 10060
Candiolo, Turin, Italy.

The activator protein 2 (AP-2) transcription factors are essential proteins for
oestrogenic repression of the ERBB2 proto-oncogene in breast cancer cells. In the
present study, we have examined the possible oestrogenic regulation of AP-2 genes
themselves in breast-tumour-derived lines. As early as 1 h after oestrogen
treatment, AP-2gamma mRNA was markedly increased, whereas AP-2alpha was
down-regulated, but with slower kinetics, and AP-2beta was not affected at all.
Addition of anti-oestrogens ablated these effects. Modulation of the protein
levels corresponded to changes in the transcript levels, thus suggesting that in 
oestrogen-treated cells, an inversion of the balance between AP-2alpha and
AP-2gamma isoforms occurs. The 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) of the human
AP-2gamma gene contains one consensus and one degenerate oestrogen-responsive
element (ERE). Reporter constructs carrying the AP-2gamma promoter and the 5'-UTR
were up-regulated by oestrogens in transient transfection assays. Deletion of the
most conserved (but not of the degenerate) ERE from reporter constructs abrogated
the oestrogenic response, although both ERE-containing segments were footprinted 
in DNaseI protection assays. In vitro binding assays demonstrated the ability of 
oestrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) to bind to this site, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of the endogenous gene showed that ERalpha occupies 
this region in response to oestrogens. We conclude that AP-2gamma is a primary
oestrogen-responsive gene and suggest that AP-2 proteins may mediate some
oestrogenic responses.

PMCID: PMC1223884
PMID: 14565844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Nov;23(21):7658-66.

Transcriptional coactivator Cited2 induces Bmi1 and Mel18 and controls fibroblast
proliferation via Ink4a/ARF.

Kranc KR(1), Bamforth SD, Bragança J, Norbury C, van Lohuizen M, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Cited2 (CBP/p300 interacting transactivator with ED-rich tail 2) is required for 
embryonic development, coactivation of transcription factor AP-2, and inhibition 
of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 transactivation. Cited2 is induced by multiple
growth factors and cytokines and oncogenically transforms cells. Here, we show
that the proliferation of Cited2(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts ceases
prematurely. This is associated with a reduction in growth fraction, senescent
cellular morphology, and increased expression of the cell proliferation
inhibitors p16(INK4a), p19(ARF), and p15(INK4b). Deletion of INK4a/ARF (encoding 
p16(INK4a) and p19(ARF)) completely rescued the defective proliferation of
Cited2(-/-) fibroblasts. However, the deletion of INK4a/ARF did not rescue the
embryonic malformations observed in Cited2(-/-) mice, indicating that
INK4a/ARF-independent pathways are likely to be involved here. We found that
Cited2(-/-) fibroblasts had reduced expression of the polycomb-group genes Bmi1
and Mel18, which function as INK4a/ARF and Hox repressors. Complementation with
CITED2-expressing retrovirus enhanced proliferation, induced Bmi1/Mel18
expression, and decreased INK4a/ARF expression. Bmi1- and Mel18-expressing
retroviruses enhanced the proliferation of Cited2(-/-) fibroblasts, indicating
that they function downstream of Cited2. Our results provide genetic evidence
that Cited2 controls the expression of INK4a/ARF and fibroblast proliferation, at
least in part via the polycomb-group genes Bmi1 and Mel18.

PMCID: PMC207593
PMID: 14560011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Di Yi Jun Yi Da Xue Xue Bao. 2003 Oct;23(10):1038-41.

[Detection of core-binding factor in acute leukemia with interphase fluorescence 
in situ hybridization].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XL(1), Du QF, Song LL, Zhang S, Li R, Lin R, Liu QF, Zhou SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Nanfang Hospital, First Military Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the chromosomal abnormalities involving the core-binding
factor (CBF) in acute leukemia at initial diagnosis with interphase in situ
hybridization (I-FISH) technique, and monitor the minimal residual disease (MRD) 
after treatment with I-FISH. This study also aim to compare the sensitivity of
I-FISH at initial diagnosis with that of conventional G-banding analysis.
METHODS: Based on the diagnosis of bone marrow morphology, 15 acute leukemia
patients were examined with conventional G-banding and I-FISH techniques. Seven
of these patients were monitored for MRD with I-FISH after treatment.
RESULTS: On the basis of the false-positive rate acquired from normal subjects,
the normal cutoff values of the 3 probes including AML1/ETO translocation probe, 
MYH11 breakpoint region probe and ETV6/AML1 translocation probe were 4.13%, 1.95%
and 2.12% respectively. With conventional G-banding analysis, 40% (6/15) patients
were found with chromosomal abnormality involving CBF, including 5 of the 8 M2
patients with t (8;21) and 1 of the 2 M4EO patients with inv (16). No B-ALL cases
were identified with t (12;21). With I-FISH, however, 80% (12/15) of the cases
were found with genetic abnormality involving CBF, including all the 8 M2 cases
with AML1/ETO fusion gene, both of the M4EO cases with CBFbeta/MYH11 and 2 of the
5 B-ALL cases with ETV6/AML1. In the 7 cases monitored for MRD level with I-FISH,
2 M2 cases and 1 B-ALL case were with positive results.
CONCLUSIONS: I-FISH is more sensitive than conventional G-binding analysis in
detecting the chromosomal abnormalities involving CBF in acute leukemia. At the
time of initial diagnosis, combination of the two techniques may lead to more
comprehensive and accurate results.

PMID: 14559688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;9(12):4627-35.

Control of COX-2 gene expression through peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma in human cervical cancer cells.

Han S(1), Inoue H, Flowers LC, Sidell N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

PURPOSE: The peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPARgamma), a
ligand-dependent transcription factor belonging to the family of nuclear
receptors, has been implicated in the control of cyclooxygenase (COX) 2
expression in some tissue, although the exact mechanism(s) of this activity has
not been elucidated. In this study we explored the possible mechanism(s) of
control of COX-2 gene expression through PPARgamma signaling in human cervical
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using primary human cervical tissues and the CaSki human
cervical cancer cell line, we assayed for PPARgamma and COX-2 mRNA expression by 
reverse transcription-PCR. Nuclear protein binding activities to three response
elements located in the COX-2 promoter [nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB), cyclic 
AMP response element, and activator protein (AP)-2] were measured by gel mobility
shift assays. We used transient transfection assays with COX-2 promoter reporter 
gene constructs to determine the regulatory sites in this promoter, which
mediates PPARgamma regulation of COX-2 activity.
RESULTS: We showed, for the first time, that primary human cervical cancer
tissues express PPARgamma. Using CaSki cells, we demonstrated that COX-2 and
PPARgamma mRNA levels were inversely regulated by PPARgamma ligands in that these
compounds up-regulated PPARgamma but down-regulated COX-2. In contrast, epidermal
growth factor (EGF), a potent activator of COX-2, decreased PPARgamma mRNA
levels. This down-regulation of PPARgamma mRNA by EGF was blocked in the presence
of NS-398, a selective COX-2 inhibitor. PPARgamma ligands suppressed the binding 
activities of AP-1 (binding to CRE) and NFkappaB but not AP-2. Transient
transfection results indicated that EGF stimulated whereas PPARgamma ligands
inhibited COX-2 promoter (-327/+59) activity. This effect by PPARgamma ligands on
the COX-2 promoter was blocked when the CRE, but not the NFkappaB, binding site
was mutagenized.
CONCLUSION: Cervical cancer cells express readily detectable levels of PPARgamma.
There is reciprocal negative regulation between COX-2 and PPARgamma signaling in 
human cervical cancer cells. The ability of PPARgamma ligands to inhibit COX-2
appears to be mediated predominantly through inhibition of AP-1 protein binding
to the CRE site in the COX-2 promoter.

PMID: 14555539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 26;278(52):52093-101. Epub 2003 Oct 9.

Cell cycle arrest and apoptosis induction by activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha)
and the role of p53 and p21WAF1/CIP1 in AP-2alpha-mediated growth inhibition.

Wajapeyee N(1), Somasundaram K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore 560 012, India.

Activator protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) is a sequence-specific DNA-binding
transcription factor implicated in differentiation and transformation. In this
study, we have made a replication-deficient recombinant adenovirus that expresses
functional AP-2alpha (Ad-AP2). Cells infected with Ad-AP2 expressed induced
levels of AP-2alpha protein, which bound to DNA in a sequence-specific manner and
activated the AP-2-specific reporter 3X-AP2. Expression of AP-2alpha from Ad-AP2 
inhibited cellular DNA synthesis and induced apoptosis. Ad-AP2 infection resulted
in efficient inhibition of growth of cancer cells of six different types. In
addition, prior expression of AP-2alpha increased the chemosensitivity of H460, a
lung carcinoma cell line, to adriamycin (2.5-fold) and cisplatin (5-fold).
Furthermore, the growth inhibition by AP-2alpha was found to be less efficient in
the absence of p53 or p21, which correlated with reduced apoptosis in p53 null
cells and lack of DNA synthesis inhibition in p21WAF1/CIP1 null cells by
AP-2alpha, respectively. These results suggest that AP-2alpha inhibits the growth
of cells by inducing cell cycle arrest and apoptosis and that the use of
AP-2alpha should be explored as a therapeutic strategy either alone or in
combination with chemotherapy.

PMID: 14551210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5741-54. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

Noradrenergic neurons in the zebrafish hindbrain are induced by retinoic acid and
require tfap2a for expression of the neurotransmitter phenotype.

Holzschuh J(1), Barrallo-Gimeno A, Ettl AK, Durr K, Knapik EW, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Institute Biology 1, University of Freiburg,
Hauptstrasse 1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

Tfap2a is a transcriptional activator expressed in many different cell types,
including neurons, neural crest derivatives and epidermis. We show that mutations
at the zebrafish locus previously called mont blanc (mob) or lockjaw (low) encode
tfap2a. The mutant phenotype reveals that tfap2a is essential for the development
of hindbrain noradrenergic (NA) neurons of the locus coeruleus, medulla and area 
postrema, as well as for sympathetic NA neurons, epibranchial placode derived
visceral sensory ganglia, and craniofacial and trunk crest derivatives. We focus 
our analysis on the role of tfap2a NA differentiation in the CNS. In the locus
coeruleus, Phox2a and Tfap2a are co-expressed and are both required for NA
development. By contrast, in the medulla Phox2a and Tfap2a are expressed in
adjacent overlapping domains, but only tfap2a activity is required for NA
differentiation, as NA neurons develop normally in soulless/phox2a mutant
medulla. phox2a and tfap2a do not appear to affect each others expression. Our
studies show that two distinct inductive mechanisms control NA development in the
zebrafish hindbrain. For the posterior hindbrain, we identify retinoic acid as an
important signal to induce NA differentiation in the medulla oblongata and area
postrema, where it expands the tfap2a expression domain and thus acts upstream of
tfap2a. By contrast, previous work revealed Fgf8 to be involved in specification 
of NA neurons in the locus coeruleus. Thus, although the inductive signals may be
distinct, hindbrain NA neurons of the locus coeruleus and the posterior groups
both require Tfap2a to establish their noradrenergic identity.

PMID: 14534139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5755-68. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

lockjaw encodes a zebrafish tfap2a required for early neural crest development.

Knight RD(1), Nair S, Nelson SS, Afshar A, Javidan Y, Geisler R, Rauch GJ,
Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The neural crest is a uniquely vertebrate cell type that gives rise to much of
the craniofacial skeleton, pigment cells and peripheral nervous system, yet its
specification and diversification during embryogenesis are poorly understood.
Zebrafish homozygous for the lockjaw (low) mutation show defects in all of these 
derivatives and we show that low (allelic with montblanc) encodes a zebrafish
tfap2a, one of a small family of transcription factors implicated in epidermal
and neural crest development. A point mutation in low truncates the DNA binding
and dimerization domains of tfap2a, causing a loss of function. Consistent with
this, injection of antisense morpholino oligonucleotides directed against splice 
sites in tfap2a into wild-type embryos produces a phenotype identical to low.
Analysis of early ectodermal markers revealed that neural crest specification and
migration are disrupted in low mutant embryos. TUNEL labeling of dying cells in
mutants revealed a transient period of apoptosis in crest cells prior to and
during their migration. In the cranial neural crest, gene expression in the
mandibular arch is unaffected in low mutants, in contrast to the hyoid arch,
which shows severe reductions in dlx2 and hoxa2 expression. Mosaic analysis,
using cell transplantation, demonstrated that neural crest defects in low are
cell autonomous and secondarily cause disruptions in surrounding mesoderm. These 
studies demonstrate that low is required for early steps in neural crest
development and suggest that tfap2a is essential for the survival of a subset of 
neural crest derivatives.

PMID: 14534133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. FEBS Lett. 2003 Sep 25;552(2-3):120-4.

Placental leucine aminopeptidase/oxytocinase gene regulation by activator
protein-2 in BeWo cell model of human trophoblast differentiation.

Iwanaga K(1), Nomura S, Ito T, Ikoma Y, Yamamoto E, Okada M, Itakura A, Kikkawa
F, Tsujimoto M, Mizutani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 466-8550 Nagoya, Japan.

Placental leucine aminopeptidase (P-LAP) is located preferentially in
syncytiotrophoblasts in human placenta. Here we investigated P-LAP expression and
the regulatory mechanisms in BeWo choriocarcinoma cells with forskolin
(FSK)-induced differentiation. Morphologically differentiated cells revealed
enhanced P-LAP staining. FSK significantly increased P-LAP activity and mRNA.
Deletion or mutation of activator protein-2 (AP-2) binding site in the
footprint-3 (-216 to -172) of P-LAP promoter abrogated the stimulatory effects of
FSK on luciferase activity of the construct -216/+49. In AP-2-deficient Hep-G2
cells, FSK failed to stimulate luciferase activity of the construct -216/+49.
Among the isoforms, BeWo expressed AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma, while FSK increased
only AP-2alpha. These results suggest differentiation-dependent P-LAP expression 
in trophoblasts, which involves increased AP-2alpha binding.

PMID: 14527672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Dev Dyn. 2003 Oct;228(2):194-207.

Identification and regulation of tissue-specific cis-acting elements associated
with the human AP-2alpha gene.

Zhang J(1), Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Mice lacking transcription factor AP-2alpha exhibit defects in the formation of
the head, body wall, heart, neural tube, eye, and limbs, reflecting important
sites of AP-2alpha expression in the developing embryo. AP-2alpha is also
expressed in the postnatal mammary gland and has been linked to tumor progression
and defects in growth regulation in the breast. We have used a transgenic mouse
approach to identify tissue-specific cis-acting sequences associated with
expression of the human AP-2alpha gene. Our analysis indicates that multiple
elements located throughout the gene contribute to expression in the trigeminal
ganglia, spinal cord, mammary gland, and epidermis. A discrete cis-element
located within the fifth intron is required for expression in the face and limbs,
and we have derived a permanent line of AP-2alpha::lacZ transgenic mice to assess
expression of this latter enhancer throughout morphogenesis. We also introduced
this transgene into an AP-2alpha-null mouse background and detected subtle
alterations of its expression within the progress zone and apical ectodermal
ridge of the forelimbs. Similar changes in lacZ expression were observed within
the zeugopod, and these correlated with defects in radius condensation in
AP-2alpha-knockout mice. Taken together, these findings indicate that cell:cell
communication within the forelimb is altered in the absence of AP-2alpha and
reveal novel regulatory potential for AP-2alpha in limb development.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14517991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Pathol. 2003 Oct;201(2):278-87.

Expression of AP-2alpha, c-kit, and cleaved caspase-6 and -3 in naevi and
malignant melanomas of the skin. A possible role for caspases in melanoma
progression?

Woenckhaus C(1), Giebel J, Failing K, Fenic I, Dittberner T, Poetsch M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
woenck@uni-greifswald.de

Progression of melanoma is associated with loss of the transcription factor
AP-2alpha and tyrosine-kinase receptor c-kit. However, the mechanisms by which
these two proteins are down-regulated have not been fully elucidated. Fifty
non-selected melanomas comprising ten superficial spreading melanomas (five
exhibiting a radial growth phase and five a vertical growth phase), ten primary
nodular melanomas, 30 melanoma metastases, and 16 naevi were investigated by
direct sequencing analysis of the AP-2alpha and c-kit genes and by
immunohistochemistry for the respective proteins. Because it has recently been
demonstrated that AP-2alpha is preferentially cleaved by caspase-6 and to a
lesser extent by caspase-3, immunohistochemistry for the cleaved (activated)
forms of caspase-6 (c-casp-6) and caspase-3 (c-casp-3) was carried out. No
mutations were identified in the c-kit gene, but three different point mutations 
were demonstrated in the activation motif of AP-2alpha in four tumours: one
vertical growth phase superficial spreading melanoma, one nodular melanoma, and
two metastases. Immunohistochemistry revealed progressive loss of the AP-2alpha
and c-kit proteins in primary melanomas and metastases when compared with naevi. 
The decrease of both markers was more accentuated in the dermal component of all 
primary tumours, with c-kit more affected than AP-2alpha. All invasive melanomas 
and metastases expressed c-casp-6. c-casp-3 was expressed by 83% of the
metastases and in the dermal component of one nodular melanoma. These findings
suggest that the loss of AP-2alpha protein expression during the progression of
melanoma could be related to mutation of the gene in only a small number of
tumours, whereas the expression and activation of caspases, most prominently
caspase-6, may be an important factor for the down-regulation of AP-2alpha
protein. Furthermore, this study supports recent data that the activation of
caspases does not inevitably result in apoptosis, but may also contribute to
tumour progression in melanomas.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 14517845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2003;(3):251-2.

Cancer gene validation using ribozymes and macroarray.

Minoshima H(1), Suyama E, Kawasaki H, Taira K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biotechnology, School of Engineering, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan.

Transcription factor AP-2 seems to play an important role in the malignancy of
melanoma. In this study, we constructed ribozyme expression vectors to suppress
the expression of AP-2 (AP-2-ribozymes) and then examined gene expression in
human A375P melanoma cells that stably expressed ribozymes targeted to the AP-2
transcript. A comparison of the gene-expression profiles of A375P cells that
expressed AP-2-ribozymes and those transfected with the empty vector revealed
changes in levels of expression of several genes. Here we described that the
combination of gene suppression by ribozymes and the analysis of gene expression 
using a macro-array provides a good approach for elucidating signal transduction 
pathways. These results provide further insight into the role of AP-2 in human
melanoma cells.

PMID: 14510475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2003 Dec 19;278(51):51872-84. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

Two distinct transport motifs in the adenovirus E3/10.4-14.5 proteins act in
concert to down-modulate apoptosis receptors and the epidermal growth factor
receptor.

Hilgendorf A(1), Lindberg J, Ruzsics Z, Höning S, Elsing A, Löfqvist M, Engelmann
H, Burgert HG.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Centre of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Department of Virology,
81377 Munich, Germany.

The adenovirus (Ad) early transcription unit E3 encodes immunosubversive
functions. The E3 transmembrane proteins 10.4 and 14.5 form a complex that
down-regulates the epidermal growth factor receptor and apoptosis receptors from 
the cell surface by diverting them to endosomes/lysosomes for degradation. The
latter process protects infected cells from ligand-induced apoptosis. The
mechanism by which 10.4-14.5 mediate re-routing remains elusive. We examined the 
role of putative YXX Phi and dileucine (LL) transport motifs within Ad2 10.4-14.5
for target protein modulation. By generating stable E3 transfectants expressing
10.4-14.5 proteins with alanine substitutions in these motifs, we show that 3 of 
the 5 motifs are essential for functional activity. Whereas tyrosine 74 in 14.5
appears to be important for efficient 10.4-14.5 interaction, the 122YXX Phi motif
in 14.5 and the dileucine motif Leu 87-Leu88 in 10.4 constitute genuine transport
motifs: disruption of either motif abolished binding to the cellular adaptor
proteins AP-1 and AP-2, as shown by surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy, and
caused missorting, dramatically altering cell surface appearance and the
intracellular location of viral proteins. Fluorescence-activated cell sorter
analysis and immunofluorescence data provide evidence that Tyr122 in 14.5 is
essential for rapid endocytosis of the 10.4-14.5 complex, whereas the 10.4LL
motif acts down-stream and protects 10.4-14.5 from extensive degradation by
rerouting it into a recycling pathway. Infection of primary cells with
adenoviruses carrying the relevant point mutations confirmed the crucial role of 
these transport motifs for down-regulation of Fas, TRAIL-R1, TRAIL-R2, and
epidermal growth factor receptor. Thus, two distinct transport motifs present in 
two proteins synergize for efficient target removal and immune evasion.

PMID: 14506242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 3;309(4):910-6.

Effect of cysteamine on redox-sensitive thiol-containing proteins in the duodenal
mucosa.

Khomenko T(1), Deng X, Jadus MR, Szabo S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Service, Diagnostic and Molecular Medicine
Health Care Group, VA Medical Center, Long Beach, CA 90822, USA.

Recent studies from our laboratory demonstrated that Egr-1 is upregulated in the 
rat duodenal mucosa during cysteamine-induced duodenal ulceration and that
antisense egr-1 oligonucleotide aggravates the duodenal ulcers. This study was
aimed to determine the effects of cysteamine on redox-sensitive Egr-1
transcriptional activity and on other thiol-containing proteins such as redox
factor-1 (Ref-1) and thioredoxin (Trx). Here we demonstrate for the first time
that cysteamine increases the expression and nuclear translocation of Egr-1,
Ref-1, and Trx, and activates binding of Egr-1 to DNA. Moreover, we also show
that Egr-1 forms a complex with other redox-sensitive transcription factors
(e.g., AP-1, AP-2, NFATc, Sp1, PAX-5, MTF-1, c-Myb, and CREB) in rat duodenal
mucosa and that cysteamine enhances the formation of these complexes. The
antioxidant ebselen markedly elevated the nuclear Ref-1 expression and Egr-1/DNA 
binding, and decreased the ulcerogenic effect of cysteamine as did catalase.
Thus, redox-sensitive signaling systems seem to play an important role in
cysteamine-induced duodenal ulceration.

PMID: 13679060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46632-42. Epub 2003 Sep 15.

Loss of activator protein-2alpha results in overexpression of protease-activated 
receptor-1 and correlates with the malignant phenotype of human melanoma.

Tellez C(1), McCarty M, Ruiz M, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology 173, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Increasing evidence implicates the protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) as a
contributor to tumor invasion and metastasis of human melanoma. Here we
demonstrate that the metastatic potential of human melanoma cells correlates with
overexpression of PAR-1. We also provide evidence that an inverse correlation
exists between the expression of activator protein-2alpha (AP-2) and the
expression of PAR-1 in human melanoma cells. Reexpression of AP-2 in WM266-4
melanoma cells, which are AP-2-negative, resulted in decreased mRNA and protein
expression of PAR-1. The promoter of the PAR-1 gene contains multiple putative
consensus elements for the transcription factors AP-2 and specificity protein 1
(Sp1). Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the PAR-1 promoter regions bp
-365 to -329 (complex 1) and bp -206 to -180 (complex 2) demonstrated that Sp1
was predominantly bound to the PAR-1 promoter in metastatic cells, whereas AP-2
was bound to the PAR-1 promoter in nonmetastatic cells. In vitro analysis of
complex 1 demonstrated that AP-2 and Sp1 bound to this region in a mutually
exclusive manner. Transfection experiments with full-length and progressive
deletions of the PAR-1 promoter luciferase constructs demonstrated that
metastatic melanoma cells had increased PAR-1 promoter activity compared with low
and nonmetastatic melanoma cells. Our data show that exogenous AP-2 expression
decreased promoter activity, whereas transient expression of Sp1 further
increased expression of the reporter gene. Mutational analysis of complex 1
within PAR-1 luciferase constructs further demonstrated that the regulation of
PAR-1 was mediated through interactions with AP-2 and Sp1. Our data suggest that 
loss of AP-2 in metastatic cells alters the AP-2/Sp1 ratio, resulting in
overexpression of PAR-1. Taken together, our results provide strong evidence that
loss of AP-2 correlates with overexpression of PAR-1, which in turn contributes
to the acquisition of the malignant phenotype of human melanoma.

PMID: 12975361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47498-507. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

Mitochondrial cytochrome c release mediates ceramide-induced activator protein 2 
activation and gene expression in keratinocytes.

Grether-Beck S(1), Felsner I, Brenden H, Krutmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology, Institut fuer Umweltmedizinische Forschung,
Heinrich-Heine-University gGmbH, Auf'm Hennekamp 50, D-40225 Duesseldorf,
Germany.

The intracellular signaling pathway(s) through which second messenger ceramides
induce gene expression in human cells has not yet been characterized. In the
present study, ceramide-induced expression of intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1), which requires activation of transcription factor activator protein 2
(AP-2), was found to be mediated through a mitochondrial pathway. Inhibitors of
mitochondrial electron transport chain (e.g. rotenone, thenoyltrifluoroacetone,
and antimycin A) reduced ceramide-induced ICAM-1 expression. Stimulation of human
keratinocytes with cell-permeant ceramides at concentrations that did not induce 
apoptosis (no activation of caspases 3, 8, and 9 and no nucleosomal
fragmentation) but caused AP-2 activation and ICAM-1 induction released
cytochrome c (cyt c) from mitochondria into the cytoplasm of cells. This cyt c
release was an indispensable prerequisite for effective ceramide signaling,
because its inhibition by modulating the mitochondrial megachannel with bonkrekic
acid or carboxyatractyloside prevented ceramide-induced AP-2 activation and
ICAM-1 expression. Analysis of the interaction between cyt c and AP-2 revealed
that cyt c oxidized AP-2 and that this redox regulation greatly enhanced the DNA 
binding capacity of AP-2. Mitochondria thus have a previously unrecognized
function in signaling ceramide-induced transcription factor activation and gene
regulation.

PMID: 12952965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. BMC Pharmacol. 2003 Aug 28;3:10. Epub 2003 Aug 28.

Phenelzine treatment increases transcription factor AP-2 levels in rat brain.

Damberg M(1), Berggård C, Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. mattias.damberg@neuro.uu.se

BACKGROUND: The elevations of noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) levels in
response to acute serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) or tricyclic antidepressant
(TCA) exposure are not consistent with the time course for the therapeutic action
of these antidepressants. Thus, neuronal adaptations are needed for the
therapeutic effect to arise. Transcription factor Activating Protein -2 (AP-2) is
critical for mammalian neural gene expression. Several genes involved in
brainstem CNS transmitter systems, especially the monoamines, have AP-2 binding
sites in their regulatory regions. We have previously shown that treatment with
citalopram and imipramin resulted in a decrease in AP-2alpha and AP-2beta levels 
in rat brain. We have also reported an association between a specific genotype of
AP-2beta to personality traits, binge-eating disorder and platelet monoamine
oxidase (MAO) activity.
RESULTS: Subchronic administration (10 days) of phenelzine (PLZ) increased the
levels of AP-2alpha, AP-2beta and the DNA binding activity of AP-2 in nuclear
extracts prepared from rat whole brain when compared with sham treated animals.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that AP-2 is not involved in the therapeutic
effect of antidepressants. Rather, the effects of antidepressants seen on the
levels of AP-2 might be involved in the expression of side-effects during the
lag-period.

PMCID: PMC194722
PMID: 12943557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Br J Cancer. 2003 Sep 1;89(5):899-906.

Different mechanisms are implicated in ERBB2 gene overexpression in breast and in
other cancers.

Vernimmen D(1), Gueders M, Pisvin S, Delvenne P, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Experimental Cancer Research Center, Liège
University, B-4000 Liège, Belgium.

The ERBB2 gene is overexpressed in 30% of breast cancers and this has been
correlated with poor prognosis. ERBB2 is upregulated in other cancers such as
prostate, pancreas, colon and ovary. In breast cancer cells, the mechanisms
leading to ERBB2 gene overexpression are increased transcription and gene
amplification. In these cancers, AP-2 transcription factors are involved in ERBB2
overexpression, and AP-2 levels are correlated with p185(c-)(erbB-2) levels. In
this work, we wanted to know if the same molecular mechanisms are responsible for
the ERBB2 upregulation in non-breast cancers. We compared ERBB2 gene copy number,
p185(c-)(erbB-2) and mRNA levels with AP-2 levels in several ovary, prostate,
colon and pancreas cancer cells. A moderate expression of erbB-2 mRNA and protein
were observed in some cells without gene amplification. In contrast to breast
cancer cells, AP-2 factors were absent or low in some non-breast cells which did 
express ERBB2. It is thus likely that AP-2 is not a major player in the increased
levels of erbB-2 transcripts in non-breast cancer cells. The transcriptional
activity of the ERBB2 promoter in colon and ovary cancer cells was estimated
using reporter vectors. The results showed that the promoter regions involved in 
ERBB2 gene overexpression in breast cancer cells are different from those that
lead to the gene upregulation in colon and ovary cancers. In conclusion, our
results indicate that different transcriptional and post-transcriptional
mechanisms are responsible for the increased levels of erbB-2 transcript and
protein in breast and non-breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2394491
PMID: 12942124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Eur J Haematol. 2003 Sep;71(3):143-54.

Core binding factor (CBF) acute myeloid leukemia: is molecular monitoring by
RT-PCR useful clinically?

Marcucci G(1), Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, and
Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA. marcucci-1@medctr.osu.edu

Clonal chromosomal abnormalities are the most important prognostic indicators in 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Two of the most prevalent cytogenetic subtypes of
adult primary AML, t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13q22)/t(16;16)(p13;q22), are
characterized by disruption of the AML1(CBFA2, RUNX1) and CBFbeta genes,
respectively, which encode subunits of core binding factor (CBF), a regulator of 
normal hematopoiesis. At the molecular level, t(8;21) and inv(16)/t(16;16) result
in the creation of novel fusion genes, AML1/ETO and CBFbeta/MYH11, respectively, 
which encode fusion transcripts readily detectable by the reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Although the detection of
t(8;21) or inv(16)/t(16;16) in adult patients with primary AML represents a
favorable independent prognostic indicator for achievement of cure following
intensive chemotherapy or stem cell transplantation, a substantial number of
these patients (i.e. 40-50%) relapse and eventually die of their disease.
Therefore, timely identification and therapeutic stratification of those patients
deemed at high risk for disease relapse could ultimately result in a further
improvement of clinical outcome within these cytogenetic subgroups of AML. As
relapse is likely to occur as the result of failure of treatment to completely
eradicate leukemic blasts, the detection of the AML1/ETO and CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion
transcripts using sensitive RT-PCR assays has been utilized as a surrogate marker
for resistant disease and, in turn, to predict disease recurrence during
remission. The purpose of this paper is to review the applicability of this
strategy to the clinical management of t(8;21) and inv(16)/t(16;16) primary AML, 
here collectively referred to as CBF AML.

PMID: 12930314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2003 Aug;51(6):382-9.

[Chromosomal translocations in human malignant hematopoiesis. Structural and
functional consequences].

[Article in French]

Nguyen Khac F(1), Bernard OA.

Author information: 
(1)E210 Inserm, Tour Pasteur, hôpital Necker-Enfants-malades, 149, rue de Sèvres,
75743 Paris 15, France.

The improvement of molecular biology techniques and human genome mapping and
sequencing boosted the molecular analysis of chromosomal abnormalities observed
in human hematological malignancies. The characterization of structural
abnormalities (translocation, deletion) has proven particularly seminal. A better
understanding of the pathology itself and of its generation arose from the
identification of the genes involved in the chromosomal translocations of human
leukemia. This work summaries some of the present knowledge regarding human
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 12927896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Biol Reprod. 2003 Dec;69(6):1979-88. Epub 2003 Aug 6.

Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) stimulation of the kit ligand promoter in
sertoli cells requires an Sp1-binding region, a canonical TATA box, and a
cAMP-induced factor binding to an immediately downstream GC-rich element.

Grimaldi P(1), Capolunghi F, Geremia R, Rossi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Cell Biology, Section of Anatomy, University
of Rome Tor Vergata, 00133 Rome, Italy. grimaldi@uniroma2.it

Expression of Kit ligand (KL) mRNA is induced in primary prepuberal Sertoli cells
by FSH and by other agents that increase cAMP levels. The cAMP effect is exerted 
at the transcriptional level and appears to be cell type specific, since it is
not observed in other KL-expressing primary cells or cell lines. Deletion
analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse KL gene shows that the proximal
promoter sequence between -88 and +8 from the transcriptional start site is
necessary and sufficient to obtain the full cAMP responsiveness of the promoter
in primary mouse Sertoli cells. In the -88/+8 promoter region, several cis-acting
elements play a role in cAMP response. The -88/-56 sequence is necessary for full
induction of the gene, since its removal causes a drastic decrease in cAMP
responsiveness; however, cAMP-stimulated expression is still observed with the
minimal promoter region between -55 and +8. A more detailed mutational analysis
of the minimal promoter region shows that mutations in the canonical TATA box
sequence and in an immediately downstream GC-rich element completely abolish cAMP
responsiveness. DNA-binding experiments show that transcription factor Sp1 binds 
to the -88/-56 fragment of the KL proximal promoter in both control and
cAMP-stimulated cells, whereas a new cAMP-induced complex is observed when the
-55/+8 minimal promoter region is used as probe. The canonical TATA box sequence 
is essential for formation of the latter complex. We also show that the binding
of an unknown nuclear factor (different from Sp1, Egr-1, Rnf6, and AP-2) to a
GC-rich element between -19 and +8 increases after cAMP treatment, and this
effect seems to be specific of primary Sertoli cells. Thus, cAMP-induced
transcription from the KL gene promoter in primary mouse Sertoli cells is
mediated by a complex interaction among a Sp1-binding region, factors recognizing
the canonical TATA box sequence, and a not yet identified cAMP-induced factor
binding a GC-rich sequence just downstream from it.

PMID: 12904318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nucleic Acids Res Suppl. 2002;(2):247-8.

Identification of AP-2-regulated genes by macroarray profiling of gene expression
in human A375P melanoma.

Suyama E(1), Minoshima H, Kawasaki H, Taira K.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Function Research Laboratory, National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology (AIST), 1-1-1 Higashi, Tsukuba Science City, Ibaraki
305-8562, Japan.

Transcription factor AP-2 is a negative regulator of metastasis. Its expression
is down regulated with progression of melanoma cells to metastasis. In this
study, we performed macroarray profiling of gene expression of human A375P
melanoma cells and their derivatives with overexpression of AP-2 and
dominant-negative AP-2. Such comprehensive analysis lead to an identification of 
genes such as MMP-2, E-cadherin, melanoma adhesion molecule, early growth
response 1, fibroblast growth factor 3, ubiquitin C, histone deacetylase 3 and
integrin alpha 5,7, beta 3,5 as regulated by AP-2. Whereas some of these are
known as AP-2-regulated genes, the others are not so far. Thus the study reports 
for the first time identification of new genes regulated by AP-2 that may be
involved in metastasis of melanoma.

PMID: 12903198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Cell Biol. 2003 Jul 7;162(1):113-24.

ARF6 stimulates clathrin/AP-2 recruitment to synaptic membranes by activating
phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type Igamma.

Krauss M(1), Kinuta M, Wenk MR, De Camilli P, Takei K, Haucke V.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Dept. of Biochemistry II,
University of Göttingen, Humboldtallee 23, Göttingen D-37073, Germany.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis of synaptic vesicle membranes involves the
recruitment of clathrin and AP-2 adaptor complexes to the presynaptic plasma
membrane. Phosphoinositides have been implicated in nucleating coat assembly by
directly binding to several endocytotic proteins including AP-2 and AP180. Here, 
we show that the stimulatory effect of ATP and GTPgammaS on clathrin coat
recruitment is mediated at least in part by increased levels of PIP2. We also
provide evidence for a role of ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (ARF6) via direct
stimulation of a synaptically enriched phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinase 
type Igamma (PIPKIgamma), in this effect. These data suggest a model according to
which activation of PIPKIgamma by ARF6-GTP facilitates clathrin-coated pit
assembly at the synapse.

PMCID: PMC2172713
PMID: 12847086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol. 2003 Aug;273(2):677-80.

Dynamic expression of Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4), a target of transcription
factor AP-2alpha during murine mid-embryogenesis.

Ehlermann J(1), Pfisterer P, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of 
Bonn Medical School, Bonn, Germany.

Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4) belongs to the family of transcription factors that 
are thought to be involved in the regulation of epithelial and germ cell
differentiation, based on their expression in postproliferative cells of the
skin, gut, and testes. Gene ablation experiments suggest that Klf4 plays a role
in keratinocyte differentiation, since mice lacking Klf4 fail to establish proper
barrier function and, as a consequence, die postnatally due to dehydration.
Recent studies have shown that Klf4 is also expressed in postnatal male mice, in 
postmeiotic sperm cells undergoing terminal differentiation into sperm cells.
However, prior to the current study, the expression pattern of Klf4 during early 
and mid-embryogenesis had not been examined. Here we demonstrate that Klf4
transcripts can be detected from embryonic day 4.5 (E4.5) on in the developing
conceptus, and that Klf4 expression before E10 is restricted to extraembryonic
tissues. The embryo proper displays a highly dynamic and changing Klf4 signal
from E10 of murine development on. In addition to being expressed in a stripe of 
mesenchymal cells extending from the forelimb bud rostrally over the branchial
arches to the developing eye, Klf4 is also expressed in the mesenchyme
surrounding the nasal pit at day E11.5. In addition, Klf4 has been detected in
the apical ectodermal ridge and adjacent mesenchymal cells in the limb buds, and 
in mesenchymal cells of the developing body wall in trunk areas. These findings
suggest that Klf4 plays an important role in regulating cellular proliferation,
which underlies the morphogenetic changes that shape the developing embryo.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12845703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jul;88(7):3305-11.

Identification of an enhancer of the human activating protein-2alpha gene that
contains a critical Ets1 binding site.

Cheng YH(1), Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and Department of Pediatrics,
Division of Endocrinology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. cheny0@cchmc.org

Deletion analysis studies of the 5'-flanking region of the activating
protein-2alpha (AP-2alpha) gene indicates that the proximal 152 bp are essential 
for minimal promoter activity and that a 140-bp fragment from nucleotides -1279
to -1139 acts as an enhancer of basal transcriptional activity. Ligation of the
140-bp fragment to a minimal AP-2alpha promoter or a heterologous simian virus 40
promoter luciferase reporter plasmid conferred enhancer activity in trophoblast
cells. In deoxyribonuclease I footprint studies, nuclear extracts from
trophoblast cells protected two regions of the 140-bp fragment, E2 and E3.
Site-directed mutagenesis of an Ets1-binding site in E2 significantly inhibited
AP-2alpha enhancer activity, whereas mutagenesis of two putative polyomavirus
enhancer activator-3-binding sites on E2 and an insulin upstream factor 1-binding
site in E3 had no effect on enhancer activity. Gel shift and supershift assays
indicated that Ets1 binds to the Ets site in E2, and overexpression of Ets1 in
transfection studies induced AP-2alpha promoter activity. As the transcription
factor Ets1 is abundant in trophoblast cells, these investigations strongly
suggest that AP-2alpha gene expression in the placenta is enhanced by a
cis-acting element at nucleotides -1279 to -1139 that contains a critical
Ets1-binding site.

PMID: 12843180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Invest Dermatol. 2003 Jul;121(1):13-9.

Expression patterns of the transcription factor AP-2alpha during hair follicle
morphogenesis and cycling.

Panteleyev AA(1), Mitchell PJ, Paus R, Christiano AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Columbia University, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA. ap374@columbia.edu

AP-2alpha is a member of a family of transcription factors expressed in cells of 
the epithelial and neural crest lineage. AP-2alpha plays an essential role in
embryonic development and in regulation of epithelial gene transcription. To
further characterize the role of AP-2alpha in skin biology, we assessed its
expression in the skin of C57BL/6J mice during defined stages of hair follicle
morphogenesis and cycling. During early hair follicle morphogenesis, AP-2alpha
was upregulated in the epidermal placode, in the basal keratinocytes of the hair 
follicle bud, and then in the inner root sheath. The follicular papilla cells
underwent a brief upregulation of AP-2alpha expression during the initiation of
hair shaft formation and active hair follicle downward growth. Completion of hair
follicle morphogenesis was associated with a marked reduction of AP-2alpha
immunoreactivity in the lower portion of the hair follicle including both
epithelial and mesenchymal compartments. In adolescent mouse skin, consistently
strong AP-2alpha expression was found in the basal keratinocytes of the
epidermis, in the hair follicle infundibulum, and in the sebocytes. In the
follicular papilla, AP-2alpha was weakly expressed in telogen, significantly
upregulated in early anagen, then gradually declined, and reappeared again in
middle catagen. In the inner root sheaths, AP-2alpha expression was detected
during early and middle anagen and during middle catagen stages. Prominent
AP-2alpha expression was also seen in the zone of club hair formation. Therefore,
AP-2alpha upregulation in both epithelial and mesenchymal hair follicle
compartments was coordinated with initiation of major remodeling processes. Our
findings support the use of the hair follicle as a model to explore the role of
AP-2alpha in physiologic remodeling of developing organs and in reciprocal
ectodermal-mesenchymal interactions.

PMID: 12839558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Dairy Sci. 2003 Jun;86(6):2213-8.

Associations of a polymorphic AP-2 binding site in the 5'-flanking region of the 
bovine beta-lactoglobulin gene with milk proteins.

Kuss AW(1), Gogol J, Geidermann H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Biotechnology, University of Hohenheim,
D-70593 Stuttgart, Germany.

Studies on a polymorphic position (R10) in an Activator-Protein-2 (AP-2) binding 
site of the bovine beta-Lactoglobulin (beta-Lg) gene promoter region and
quantitative traits of individual milk proteins were based on material from 79
German Holstein Friesian (HF) and 61 Simmental (Sm) cows. At least four milk
samples per cow were analyzed with alkaline Urea-PAGE in combination with
densitometry for quantification of individual milk proteins. The two alleles of
the R10 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) carry either G or C in position -435
bp of the beta-Lg promoter region. G- and C-alleles were found in Sm with nearly 
equal frequencies, while in HF the C-allele frequency was higher (0.73) than that
of the G-allele. In both breeds, the R10 G-homozygotes had higher (P < 0.001)
amounts of beta-Lg secreted per day and proportion of beta-Lg in milk protein
compared with the C-homozygotes. A similar association was found for
alpha-lactalbumin, whereas the relative proportions and daily secreted amounts of
caseins (alphaS1, beta, kappa) showed lower values in beta-Lg R10 G-homozygotes. 
A positive association (P < 0.001) of R10 CC with milk yield has also been
observed and indicates a close proximity of the beta-Lg locus to a candidate gene
for this trait. The association between the SNP in the AP-2 binding site of the
beta-Lg gene and its gene product can be explained as the result of differences
in protein binding activity, and, therefore, allele specific differences in gene 
expression. Thus, our study clearly links a DNA polymorphism of molecular
function very closely with in vivo expression parameters of the same locus.

PMID: 12836958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Cancer. 2003 Jul 1;98(1):18-23.

Elevated expression levels of NCOA3, TOP1, and TFAP2C in breast tumors as
predictors of poor prognosis.

Zhao C(1), Yasui K, Lee CJ, Kurioka H, Hosokawa Y, Oka T, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Amplification of DNA in certain chromosomal regions plays a crucial
role in the development and progression of human malignancies, specifically when 
protooncogenic target genes within those amplicons are overexpressed. Comparative
genomic hybridization studies have revealed frequent amplification at 20q in
primary breast tumors. The aim of the current study was to identify specific
genes in the 20q amplicon that were likely to have clinical significance.
METHODS: The authors examined 38 primary breast tumors by using a quantitative
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay to determine
expression levels of 18 potential targets for amplification events involving 20q.
Potential correlations between elevated expression of the genes in question and
clinicopathologic parameters or clinical outcomes were analyzed.
RESULTS: Elevated expression of NABC1 was significantly associated with positive 
estrogen (P < 0.001) and progesterone (P = 0.027) receptors in breast tumors, and
high expression of PTK6 was significantly correlated with positive estrogen
receptor status (P = 0.022) and postmenopausal status (P = 0.008). Patients whose
tumors showed elevated expression of NCOA3 (AIB1) had significantly shorter
disease-free (P = 0.017) and overall (P = 0.0021) survival times after surgery
than did other patients with breast tumors. Reduced disease-free survival, but
not reduced overall survival, was associated with high expression of TOP1 (P =
0.035) and TFAP2C (P = 0.035).
CONCLUSIONS: TOP1, TFAP2C, and (particularly) NCOA3 may be prognostic indicators 
for patients with breast tumors.

Copyright 2003 American Cancer Society.DOI 10.1002/cncr.11482

PMID: 12833450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Apoptosis. 2003 Aug;8(4):371-6.

Sequence-based discovery of a synthetic peptide inhibitor of caspase 6.

Nyormoi O(1), Wang Z, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical/Biotechnology Research Institute, North Carolina Central
University, 700 George St., Durham, NC 27707, USA. onyormoi@wpo.nccu.edu

We recently demonstrated that tumor necrosis factor alpha activates caspase 6,
which in turn cleaves transcription factor AP-2 alpha. We mapped the cleavage
site at 19 amino acids from the N-terminus at the sequence
aspartate-argenine-histidine-aspartate (DRHD). Mutating aspartic acid at position
19 abrogated the cleavage site. From these observations, we hypothesized that the
DRHD peptide could act as a caspase 6 inhibitor. To test this hypothesis, the
peptide zAsp(Ome)-Arg-His-Asp(Ome)-fluoromethyl ketone (zDRHDfmk) was
synthesized. Here we show that zDRHDfmk inhibits TNFalpha-induced caspase 6
activity and apoptosis in breast cancer cells. When compared to other caspase
inhibitors, zDRHDfmk inhibited caspase 6 activity more effectively than the
general caspase inhibitor zVal-Ala-Lys(Ome)-fluoromethy ketone (zVADfmk) or the
caspase 6 inhibitor zVal-Glu-Ile-Asp-(Ome)-fluoromethyl ketone (zVEIDfmk).
However, it was less effective in inhibiting TNFalpha-induced apoptosis than
zVADfmk or zVEIDfmk, presumably because caspase 6 is only one of at least three
effector caspases, the others being caspase 3 and 7, that are active during
caspase-dependent apoptosis. The discovery of this sequence-based caspase 6
inhibitor provides a new tool for studying caspase 6. More importantly, it could 
be used, in combination with other agents, as a drug to inhibit apoptosis in
neurodegenrative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

PMID: 12815280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Bone Miner Metab. 2003;21(4):193-7.

Requisite roles of Runx2 and Cbfb in skeletal development.

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2
Yamada-oka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

Each Runx (runt-related gene) protein exerts a fundamental role in different cell
lineages. Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and plays an
important role in chondrocyte maturation. Runx2 determines the lineage of
osteoblastic cells from multipotent mesenchymal cells, enhances osteoblast
differentiation at an early stage, and inhibits osteoblast differentiation at a
late stage. In addition, Runx2 is involved in the production of bone matrix
proteins. Further, Runx2 is a positive regulator of chondrocyte maturation and is
involved in vascular invasion into the cartilage. Core binding factor beta (Cbfb)
is a cotranscription factor which forms a heterodimer with Runx proteins. Cbfb is
required for the functions of Runx1 and Runx2. Thus, Runx2/Cbfb heterodimers play
essential roles in skeletal development.

PMID: 12811622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 2003 Aug 29;278(35):33097-104. Epub 2003 Jun 13.

Mutagenesis of the Runt domain defines two energetic hot spots for
heterodimerization with the core binding factor beta subunit.

Zhang L(1), Li Z, Yan J, Pradhan P, Corpora T, Cheney MD, Bravo J, Warren AJ,
Bushweller JH, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

Core-binding factors (CBFs) are a small family of heterodimeric transcription
factors that play critical roles in several developmental pathways and in human
disease. Mutations in CBF genes are found in leukemias, bone disorders, and
gastric cancers. CBFs consist of a DNA-binding CBF alpha subunit (Runx1, Runx2,
or Runx3) and a non-DNA-binding CBF beta subunit. CBF alpha binds DNA in a
sequence-specific manner, whereas CBF beta enhances DNA binding by CBF alpha.
Both DNA binding and heterodimerization with CBF beta are mediated by a single
domain in the CBF alpha subunits known as the "Runt domain." We analyzed the
energetic contribution of amino acids in the Runx1 Runt domain to
heterodimerization with CBF beta. We identified two energetic "hot spots" that
were also found in a similar analysis of CBF beta (Tang, Y.-Y., Shi, J., Zhang,
L., Davis, A., Bravo, J., Warren, A. J., Speck, N. A., and Bushweller, J. H.
(2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 39579-39588). The importance of the hot spot residues 
for Runx1 function was demonstrated in in vivo transient transfection assays.
These data refine the structural analyses and further our understanding of the
Runx1-CBF beta interface.

PMID: 12807883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biol Reprod. 2003 Oct;69(4):1220-30. Epub 2003 Jun 11.

Sp1 and Sp3 Are important regulators of AP-2gamma gene transcription.

Li M(1), Kellems RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
School, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

AP-2gamma is a member of the AP-2 transcription factor family, is highly enriched
in the trophoblast cell lineage, and is essential for placental development. In
an effort to identify factors regulating AP-2gamma gene expression, we isolated
and characterized the promoter and 5'-flanking region of the mouse and human
AP-2gamma genes. The transcription start site of the mouse AP-2gamma gene was
mapped by primer extension and 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends. Deletion
analysis of the 5'-flanking region revealed a 704-base pair (bp) sequence located
approximately 6 kilobases (kb) upstream of the transcription start site that is
required for enhanced expression in trophoblast cells. Additional gene transfer
studies showed that basal promoter activity resides within a highly conserved,
approximately 200-bp DNA sequence located immediately upstream of the
transcription start site. The conserved region is highly GC-rich and lacks
typical TATA or CCAAT boxes. Multiple potential Sp- and AP-2-binding sites are
clustered within this region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated 
that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to three sites in the promoter region of the mouse
AP-2gamma gene. Combined mutation of the three putative Sp sites reduced promoter
activity by 80% in trophoblast and nontrophoblast cells, demonstrating the
functional importance of these sites in regulating AP-2gamma gene expression. In 
summary, we have identified a potential trophoblast cell-specific regulatory
element located approximately 6 kb upstream of the murine AP-2gamma gene
transcription start site, and we have shown that Sp1 and Sp3 bind to
cis-regulatory elements located in the promoter proximal region and contribute to
basal promoter activity.

PMID: 12801994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Gene. 2003 May 22;310:133-42.

Characterization of the human p11 promoter sequence.

Huang X(1), Pawliczak R, Yao XL, Madara P, Alsaaty S, Shelhamer JH, Cowan MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Critical Care Medicine Department, The National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

p11 is expressed in many different cell types, and serves a variety of regulatory
functions. In order to better understand the transcriptional control of this
protein, the 5' promoter region of the human p11 gene was cloned and sequenced.
After confirming the transcription start point (TSP) using 5' rapid amplification
of cDNA ends analysis, the 5' promoter was analysed. The sequence lacks a TATA
box, but contains a variety of putative regulatory elements. There are two GAS
sites, two AP-1 sites, two overlapping Sp-1 sites, and a gamma-IRE site clustered
between -1080 and -1450. There is another cluster of putative regulatory sites
between the TSP and -550 which contains two Sp-1 sites, two AP-2 sites, one GAS
site, one NF-kappaB site, an incomplete CAAT box (8/9) and an overlapping
Sp-1/AP-2 site at -17 to -26. Reporter gene constructs containing 4225 and 1498
bases 5' of the TSP demonstrated excellent unidirectional transcriptional
activity in both constructs. Reporter genes containing serial 5' deletions were
compared to the -1498 construct. The reporter gene which contained base pairs
(bp) -36 to +89 had almost no activity. The reporter gene containing -188 to +89 
had 50% of the -1498 construct, indicating that this sequence contains at least
the minimal promoter. The Sp-1/AP-2 site near the transcription start site was
studied by electrophoretic mobility shift and reporter gene assays. Addition of
HeLa cell nuclear extract to labeled double-stranded (ds) oligonucleotide
containing this sequence resulted in a gel shift which was inhibited by excess
unlabeled ds oligonucleotide and by a consensus cold Sp-1 ds oligonucleotide,
indicating specific Sp-1 binding. Excess AP-2 or NF-kappaB ds oligonucleotide had
no effect on nuclear protein binding to the sequence. Mutation of the p11
wild-type Sp-1/AP-2 sequence eliminated both nuclear protein binding and the
sequences ability to compete with native sequence for nuclear binding protein. A 
-1048 to +89 reporter construct containing a mutated Sp-1/AP-2 site resulted in a
40% decrease in transcriptional activity. Therefore, the 5' flanking sequence of 
the p11 gene exhibits promoter activity which may be localized to a variety of
controlling regions, of which the proximal Sp-1/AP-2 site appears to be important
for basal activity via its Sp-1 binding ability.

PMID: 12801640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jun;9(6):2267-76.

Tumor-specific transcription factor binding to an activator protein-2/Sp1 element
of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor promoter in a first large
series of resected gastrointestinal cancers.

Schewe DM(1), Leupold JH, Boyd DD, Lengyel ER, Wang H, Gruetzner KU, Schildberg
FW, Jauch KW, Allgayer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig Maximilians University of 
Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany.

PURPOSE: Evidence for transactivation of genes via specific promoter elements has
been derived from studies on tumor cell lines but rarely on resected tumors.
However, the proof of an in vivo relevance and the identification of patients
with a potential tumor-specific gene expression is essential to transfer
molecular-targeting strategies into clinical applications. This study gives the
first clinical evidence that urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor
(u-PAR) gene expression is tumor-specifically regulated via an activator protein 
(AP)-2/Sp1 promoter element in a large patient subpopulation.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: In 145 gastrointestinal cancer patients, electrophoretic
mobility shift analysis and supershift assays for u-PAR-promoter region -152/-135
were performed in tumors and corresponding normal tissues. u-PAR protein levels
were measured by ELISA.
RESULTS: Binding of Sp1 to region -152/-135 in tumors in contrast to
corresponding normal mucosae was observed in 55% of colorectal and in 52% of
gastric cancer patients. Tumor-specific binding of an AP-2-related factor was
seen in 59% of colorectal and in 63% of gastric cancer patients. A significant
correlation between AP-2 (P < 0.0001) and Sp1 (P = 0.0003) binding with a high
u-PAR expression was observed in tumors but not in normal mucosae. Tissues of
five nontumor patients did not show transcription factor binding to this region.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to show the tumor-specific binding of
trans-activators to the u-PAR promoter region (-152/-135) biochemically in a
large series of resected tumors. For the subpopulation of approximately 60% of
patients with tumor-restricted u-PAR-transactivation, a molecular targeting of
this region or its activating pathways should be pursued as a new antimetastasis 
therapy approach.

PMID: 12796395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Oncogene. 2003 May 19;22(20):3130-7.

Role and regulation of the thrombin receptor (PAR-1) in human melanoma.

Tellez C(1), Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

To determine treatment strategies and predict the clinical outcome of patients
with melanoma it is important to understand the etiology of this disease.
Recently, there has been some insight into molecular basis of melanoma including 
identification of a few of the regulatory factors and genes involved in this
disease. For instance, the transcription factor AP-2 plays a tumor
suppressor-like role in melanoma progression by regulating genes involved in
tumor growth and metastasis. Previously, we have shown that the progression of
human melanoma to the metastatic phenotype is associated with loss of AP-2
expression and deregulation of target genes such as MUC18/MCAM, c-KIT, and MMP-2.
Increasing evidence demonstrates that the thrombin receptor (protease-activated
receptor-1, PAR-1) plays a major role in tumor invasion and contributes to the
metastatic phenotype of human melanoma. This review focuses on the role of the
thrombin receptor in melanoma and its regulation by AP-2. We show that loss of
AP-2 expression in metastatic melanoma cells correlates with overexpression of
the thrombin receptor. Our analysis of AP-2/Sp1 complexes within the regulatory
region of the thrombin receptor demonstrates that AP-2 binds the proximal 3'
region of the promoter and diminishes PAR-1 expression. Levels of AP-2 and Sp1
proteins in a panel of melanoma cell lines demonstrated a marked decrease in the 
ratio of AP-2/Sp1, a decrease that correlated with overexpression of PAR-1 in
metastatic melanoma cells. We propose that loss of AP-2 results in increased
expression of the thrombin receptor, which subsequently contributes to the
metastatic phenotype of melanoma by upregulating the expression of adhesion
molecules, proteases, and angiogenic molecules.

PMID: 12789289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Dev Genes Evol. 2003 Jul;213(7):363-7. Epub 2003 May 17.

Complementary expression of AP-2 and AP-2rep in ectodermal derivatives of Xenopus
embryos.

Gotoh M(1), Izutsu Y, Maéno M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Science and Technology, Niigata University, 8050
Ikarashi-2, Niigata 950-2181, Japan.

In an attempt to define the pattern of developmental expression of AP-2rep and
AP-2 in Xenopus embryos, we cloned a Xenopus AP-2rep cDNA. The AP-2rep message
was localized in the organizer region at the gastrula stage whereas AP-2 was
expressed ventro-laterally in the animal hemisphere. Later, AP-2rep was expressed
in the entire neural tissue at the neurula stage while AP-2 was predominantly
expressed in the cranial neural crest areas. The endogenous expression of AP-2 in
the neural crest area was diminished by ectopic injection of AP-2rep RNA,
suggesting a role for AP-2rep in the differentiation of neural tissues by
restricting the expression of AP-2 in the Xenopus embryo.

PMID: 12756566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Neurotox Res. 2002 Aug-Sep;4(5-6):421-426.

Risk factors for the neurohumoral alterations underlying personality
disturbances.

Oreland L(1), Damberg M, Hallman J, Berggård C, Garpenstrand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, P.O. Box 593, BMC, Uppsala
University, SE-751 24 Uppsala, Sweden.

Numerous studies have shown that MAO-B activity in platelets correlates with
specific personality characteristics such as sensation seeking and impulsiveness.
Low levels of platelet MAO as well as the personality traits associated with
these low levels have been associated with type 2 alcoholism, recurrent
criminality and antisocial violent behavior. Platelet MAO has a high degree of
heritability and regulation of MAOB gene expression seems to explain most of the 
inter-individual differences in activity. The transcription factor family AP-2 is
an important regulatory factor for neural gene expression and neural development,
especially in midbrain structures, including the monoaminergic nuclei. In man,
the gene encoding AP-2beta contains a polymorphic region in the second intron,
consisting of a variable number of tandem repeats [CAAA](4-5). The long AP-2beta 
allele has previously been associated with specific personality traits as well as
with binge-eating disorder characterized by an impulsive temperament. We have
shown that males and females homozygous for the long AP-2beta allele display
significantly lower platelet MAO activity compared to subjects with one or two
short alleles. Thus, we find it likely that the personality disturbances
previously linked to low platelet MAO activity could be associated with the
presence of two long alleles of the AP-2beta gene. We suggest that the molecular 
mechanisms underlying the association between platelet MAO and vulnerability,
e.g. substance abuse, may involve specific transcription factors that regulate
the expression of midbrain monoamine structures as well as that of platelet MAO.

PMID: 12754156  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


373. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2003 Feb;23(2):101-11.

Cloning and characterization of porcine common gamma chain gene.

Honma D(1), Uenishi H, Hiraiwa H, Watanabe S, Tang W, Kiyokawa N, Fujimoto J,
Yasue H, Sakimura K.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Department, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences,
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0901, Japan.

The common gamma chain, which was originally identified as a component of
interleukin-2 receptors (IL-2R), plays a key role in differentiation of T
lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells. In the present study, cDNA of the
porcine common gamma chain gene and its genomic DNA were molecularly cloned and
characterized. The porcine common gamma chain gene was found to consist of 8
exons, spanning approximately 3.7 kb, and to encode a 368-amino acid polypeptide.
The amino acid sequence showed 82.4%, 71.1%, 86.1%, and 84.8% similarities with
that of human, murine, bovine, and canine chains, respectively. The common gamma 
chain gene was assigned to swine chromosome Xq13 by FISH analysis and was
consistent with the result of radiation hybrid (RH) mapping. When various porcine
tissues were examined for the expression of this gene, the expression was
observed in lymphocytes and lymphocyte-related tissues. Since GATA, T cell
factor-1 (TCF-1), Ets-1, activated protein2 (AP-2), and Ikaros2 binding motifs
were demonstrated in the 5' upstream region of this gene, promoter activity was
investigated using luciferase gene as a reporter. The results indicate that the
Ets-1 binding motif in the segment from -95 to -59 (major transcription
initiation site: +1) was an essential cis-acting regulatory element for the
common gamma chain gene in lymphoid cells.

PMID: 12744775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2003;20(3):251-63.

Transcriptional regulation of metastasis-related genes in human melanoma.

Nyormoi O(1), Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Department of Cancer
Biology, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Melanoma begins with benign nevi and progresses to radial growth phase (RGP) and 
to vertical growth phase [(VGP), metastatic phenotype]. The molecular changes
associated with these transitions are not yet well defined. However,
transcriptional regulation of some genes that are critical in melanoma
progression is beginning to be elucidated. The first part of this review will
focus on our recent studies demonstrating that progression of human melanoma is
associated with loss of expression of the transcription factor AP-2. In
metastatic melanoma cells, this loss resulted in overexpression of MCAM/MUC18 and
MMP-2, and lack of expression of c-KIT. In further investigations, we inactivated
AP-2 in SB-2 primary cutaneous melanoma cells by using a dominant-negative AP-2, 
the AP-2B gene. Expression of AP-2B in SB-2 cells augmented their tumorigenicity 
in nude mice and upregulated MMP-2 expression and activity. We have also recently
demonstrated that loss of AP-2 expression in metastatic melanoma cells resulted
in overproduction of the thrombin receptor, PAR-1. Other studies have shown that 
AP-2 regulates additional genes involved in melanoma development and progression,
including E-cadherin, p21/WAF-1, HER2, Bcl-2, FAS/APO-1, IGF-R-1, and VEGF. We
propose that loss of AP-2 is crucial in the development of malignant melanoma.
Additionally, the transition of melanoma cells from RGP to VGP is associated with
overexpression of two transcription factors, CREB and ATF-1, both of which may
act as survival factors for human melanoma cells. The second part of the review
will briefly discuss the role of other transcription factors, including ATF-2,
SNAIL, MITF, and NFkappaB in the progression of human melanoma and will summarize
recent knowledge on how changes in the expression of these transcription factors 
contribute to acquisition of the metastatic phenotype in human melanoma.

PMID: 12741683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt 3):925-32.

Characterization of the human activator protein-2gamma (AP-2gamma) gene: control 
of expression by Sp1/Sp3 in breast tumour cells.

Hasleton MD(1), Ibbitt JC, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Molecular Oncology Unit, Imperial College of Science,
Technology and Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0HS, U.K.

The activator protein-2 (AP-2) family of DNA-binding transcription factors are
developmentally regulated and also play a role in human neoplasia. In particular,
the AP-2gamma protein has been shown to be overexpressed in a high percentage of 
breast tumours. In the present study, we report the complete sequence
determination of the human TFAP2C gene encoding the AP-2gamma transcription
factor plus the mapping of the transcription start site used in breast
tumour-derived cells. The 5'-end of the gene lies within a CpG island and
transcription is initiated at a single site within a classical initiator motif.
We have gone on to investigate why some breast tumour-derived cell lines readily 
express AP-2gamma, whereas others do not, and show that the proximal promoter
(+191 to -312) is differentially active in the two cell phenotypes. DNase
footprinting led to the identification of three Sp1/Sp3-binding sites within this
region, two of which are absolutely required both for promoter function and
cell-type-specific activity. By Western blotting a panel of expressing and
non-expressing breast tumour lines we show that the latter have higher levels of 
Sp3. Furthermore, increasing Sp3 levels in AP-2gamma-expressing cells led to the 
repression of AP-2gamma promoter activity, particularly when Sp3 inhibitory
function was maximized through sumoylation. We propose that differences in the
level and activity of Sp3 between breast tumour lines can determine the
expression level of their AP-2gamma gene.

PMCID: PMC1223543
PMID: 12733991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 11;278(28):25357-68. Epub 2003 May 5.

Molecular and functional characterization of clathrin- and AP-2-binding
determinants within a disordered domain of auxilin.

Scheele U(1), Alves J, Frank R, Duwel M, Kalthoff C, Ungewickell E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Biophysical Chemistry, Hannover Medical
School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Uncoating of clathrin-coated vesicles requires the J-domain protein auxilin for
targeting hsc70 to the clathrin coats and for stimulating the hsc70 ATPase
activity. This results in the release of hsc70-complexed clathrin triskelia and
concomitant dissociation of the coat. To understand the complex role of auxilin
in uncoating and clathrin assembly in more detail, we analyzed the molecular
organization of its clathrin-binding domain (amino acids 547-813). CD
spectroscopy of auxilin fragments revealed that the clathrin-binding domain is
almost completely disordered in solution. By systematic mapping using synthetic
peptides and by site-directed mutagenesis, we identified short peptide sequences 
involved in clathrin heavy chain and AP-2 binding and evaluated their
significance for the function of auxilin. Some of the binding determinants,
including those containing sequences 674DPF and 636WDW, showed dual specificity
for both clathrin and AP-2. In contrast, the two DLL motifs within the
clathrin-binding domain were exclusively involved in clathrin binding.
Surprisingly, they interacted not only with the N-terminal domain of the heavy
chain, but also with the distal domain. Moreover, both DLL peptides proved to be 
essential for clathrin assembly and uncoating. In addition, we found that the
motif 726NWQ is required for efficient clathrin assembly activity. Auxilin shares
a number of protein-protein interaction motifs with other endocytic proteins,
including AP180. We demonstrate that AP180 and auxilin compete for binding to the
alpha-ear domain of AP-2. Like AP180, auxilin also directly interacts with the
ear domain of beta-adaptin. On the basis of our data, we propose a refined model 
for the uncoating mechanism of clathrin-coated vesicles.

PMID: 12732633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 May;3(2):213-7.

Expression of Tfap2d, the gene encoding the transcription factor Ap-2 delta,
during mouse embryogenesis.

Zhao F(1), Lufkin T, Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA.

Tfap2d encodes a novel member of the AP-2 family of transcription factors, called
Ap-2 delta. Ap-2 delta has a unique DNA sequence binding specificity and lacks a 
PY motif as well as several highly conserved residues in the transactivation
domain that are essential for transcriptional activation for other AP-2 proteins.
In this study, we characterized the expression pattern of Tfap2d in mouse embryos
from E7.5 to E16.5 using in situ hybridization as a first step towards
understanding the role of Ap-2 delta during development. Overall, Tfap2d is
expressed with a more restricted temporal and spatial pattern than the other
Tfap2 genes, with signals observed in the central nervous system, retina, and,
uniquely, in the developing heart. Signals were not detected in tissues such as
the neural crest, facial mesenchyme, and limbs where the other Tfap2 genes are
expressed. The expression of Tfap2d was first noted at E9.5, later than other
Tfap2 genes, with signals from the heart and brain. The expression in the
developing myocardium persisted through E10.5. Expression of Tfap2d was diffuse
in the developing brain at E10.5 to E11.0, but became restricted to the roof of
the third vesicle with two narrow columns extending forward along the wall of the
third vesicle and the roof of the heopallial cortex in the forebrain from E12.5
onwards. Tfap2d expression was also observed in the spinal cord at E10.5. From
E13.5 to E16.5, Tfap2d was expressed in the retinal epithelium. Based on Tfap2d's
unique expression pattern and functional features, we believe that Ap-2 delta
plays a role during mammalian development that is non-overlapping with those of
the other Ap-2 transcription factors.

PMID: 12711551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Lab Invest. 2003 Apr;83(4):571-8.

Terminal renal failure in mice lacking transcription factor AP-2 beta.

Moser M(1), Dahmen S, Kluge R, Gröne H, Dahmen J, Kunz D, Schorle H, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry,
Martinsried, Germany.

Inactivation of the transcription factor AP-2 beta in a genetically mixed
C57BL/6/129S1 mouse strain resulted in perinatal lethality as a consequence of
massively enhanced apoptotic death of renal epithelial cells (Genes Dev
1997;11:1938-1948). Recently, we observed that the phenotype is modulated by
genetic background because AP-2 beta mutant mice, backcrossed onto 129P2
background, survive approximately 2 weeks after birth, allowing for a detailed
analysis of kidney function. Here we show that kidneys reveal varying amounts of 
cysts derived from all tubular structures (proximal and distal tubuli, collecting
ducts). However, all mice died irrespective of the degree of cyst formation.
Serum analysis of AP-2 beta mutant animals revealed defective tubular secretory
function and ion homeostasis including severe hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia,
and hyperuremia. Because hormonal calcium regulation was not impaired, the mice
developed secondary renal hyperparathyroidism as typically observed in patients
with terminal renal failure. We further demonstrate that molecular defects in the
collecting duct system lead to insufficient water retention and urinary
concentration. In summary, our studies reveal essential, nonredundant roles of
AP-2 beta in renal tubular functions.

PMID: 12695560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Differentiation. 2003 Apr;71(3):206-16.

Positive influence of AP-2alpha transcription factor on cadherin gene expression 
and differentiation of the ocular surface.

West-Mays JA(1), Sivak JM, Papagiotas SS, Kim J, Nottoli T, Williams T, Fini ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Health
Sciences Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada. westmayj@mcmaster.ca

The family of transcription factors Activating protein-2 (AP-2) are known to play
important roles in numerous developmental events, including those associated with
differentiation of stratified epithelia. However, to date, the influence of the
AP-2 genes on endogenous gene expression in the stratified epithelia and how this
affects differentiation has not been well defined. The following study examines
the detailed expression of the AP-2alpha and AP-2beta proteins in the stratified 
epithelia of the ocular surface, including that in the cornea and developing
eyelids. The effect of altered levels of the AP-2alpha gene on ocular surface
differentiation was also examined using a corneal epithelial cell line and
AP-2alpha chimeric mice. Immunolocalization studies revealed that, while AP-2beta
was broadly expressed throughout all cell layers of the stratified corneal
epithelium, AP-2alpha expression was confined to cell compartments more basally
located. AP-2alpha was also highly expressed in the less differentiated cell
layers of the eyelid epidermis. Overexpression of the AP-2alpha gene in the
corneal cell line, SIRC, resulted in a dramatic change in cell phenotype
including a clumping growth behavior that was distinct from the smooth monolayer 
of the parent cell line. Accompanying this change was an up-regulation in levels 
of the cell adhesion molecule, N-cadherin. Examination of the ocular surface of
AP-2alpha chimeric mice, derived from a mixed population of AP-2alpha-/- and
AP-2alpha+/+, revealed that a down-regulation in E-cadherin expression is
correlated with location of the AP-2alpha-/- null cells. Together, these findings
demonstrate that AP-2alpha participates in regulating differentiation of the
ocular surface through induction in cadherin expression.

PMCID: PMC2517417
PMID: 12694203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Biochem Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;81(1):43-50.

Polymorphic mutations of the Mn-SOD gene in intact human lymphocytes and oral
squamous cell carcinoma cell lines.

Kamatani T(1), Yamamoto T, Yoneda K, Osaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Kochi Medical School, Kohasu, Oko-cho,
Nankoku-city, Kochi 783-8505, Japan. kamatani@med.kochi-ms.ac.jp

Mutations of the superoxide dismutase (SOD) genes are associated with neoplastic 
and non-neoplastic diseases. However, the existence of polymorphic mutations of
manganese SOD (Mn-SOD) has not been explored in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
cells or in normal cells. In the present study, we examined mutations in the 5'
flanking region of the Mn-SOD gene and Mn-SOD mRNA using 10 human oral SCC (OSC) 
cell lines and intact lymphocytes obtained from 10 healthy donors and one patient
with OSC. The polymerase chain reaction products of DNA obtained from lymphocytes
revealed insertions at many sites (-1833, -1575, -1093, -1056, -325, -318, and
-310) in 10 of the 11 donors. Transitions and (or) transversions were also
observed at -1638 and -216 in lymphocytes from six donors and one donor,
respectively. In DNA obtained from OSC cells, insertions and transitions and (or)
transversions were more frequent than those in DNA from lymphocytes. In addition,
deletions at -1341 and -1288 were observed in all lines except for one line. In
these mutations, the transcription factor binding sites were not involved except 
for the AP-2 binding site (-102) in three cell lines. In Mn-SOD mRNA, Val at -9
position was varied to Ala in lymphocytes from two donors and three OSC cell
lines, respectively. In the remaining cell lines, Mn-SOD mRNA from lymphocytes
and OSC cell lines revealed heterozygosity (Ala/Val) and homozygosity (Val/Nal), 
respectively. The Mn-SOD activities in lymphocytes were 3.8-5.8 x 10(-4) U/10(6) 
cells and the activities in OSC cell lines were 1.8-8.3 x 10(-4) U/10(6) cells.
These Mn-SOD activities were not correlated with the mutations of DNA and mRNA.
From these results, it is indicated that polymorphic mutations of Mn-SOD exist in
human normal cells and that the deletions might be obtained in the course of
malignant transformation of OSC although decrease in Mn-SOD activity is not
involved in the transformation.

PMID: 12683635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Med Genet. 2003 Apr;40(4):e43.

Genetic variation analysis of MLP, TFAP2A, and CSK in patients with neural tube
defects.

Klootwijk R, Hol FA, Wu M, Willemen JJ, Groenen P, Hamel B, Straatman H,
Steegers-Theunissen RP, Mariman EC, Franke B.

PMCID: PMC1735439
PMID: 12676916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Apr 10;112(1-2):153-62.

Role of an AP-2-like element in transcriptional regulation of mouse mu-opioid
receptor gene.

Ko JL(1), Liu HC, Loh HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. kojane@shu.edu

Previously, several important cis-elements and trans-factors have been shown to
play a functional role in the proximal promoter of mouse mu-opioid receptor (MOR)
gene. In this study, we defined another functional element located the in -450 to
-400 bp (translational start site designated as +1) region of the proximal
promoter, which is also essential for the full promoter activity. It is
designated as the morAP-2-like element for its sequence homologous to the
consensus AP-2 element. Surprisingly, electrophoretic mobility shift analysis
(EMSA) revealed that Sp1 and Sp3, but not AP-2 proteins, were specifically bound 
to the morAP-2-like element. Mutation of the morAP-2-like element, resulting in a
loss of Sp binding, led to an approximately 35% decrease in activity, further
confirming the positive role of the morAP-2-like element in MOR gene expression. 
Dephosphorylation of Sp proteins with alkaline phosphatase also decreased Sp
binding to the morAP-2-like element in EMSA, suggesting phosphorylation of Sp is 
essential for its binding to this element. However, direct or indirect activation
of PKA, a classical G-protein coupled signaling pathway, resulted in no
significant change of Sp binding to the morAP-2-like element, nor of the promoter
activity the SH-SY5Y cells, MOR expressing cells, suggesting that phosphorylation
of Sp does not involve PKA. These results suggest that the binding of different
phosphorylated forms of Sp proteins to the morAP-2-like element may contribute to
the fine tuning of MOR expression in different cells.

PMID: 12670713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003 Mar 15;187(3):147-61.

Kinetics of lipopolysaccharide-induced transcription factor
activation/inactivation and relation to proinflammatory gene expression in the
murine spleen.

Zhou HR(1), Islam Z, Pestka JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University,
East Lansing, MI 48824-1224, USA.

Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) elicits inflammation and endotoxic shock by
inducing proinflammatory cytokine gene expression. The purpose of this study was 
to test the hypothesis that differential activation of transcription factor
binding in the spleen correlates with proinflammatory cytokine gene expression in
mice exposed to LPS. When proinflammatory cytokine expression in spleen was
evaluated in mice injected ip with 4 mg/kg LPS over an 8-h period, tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin (IL)-1beta, and IL-6 mRNAs were elevated up
to 5-, 6-, and 300-fold, respectively, over vehicle controls. Both TNF- alpha and
IL-6 mRNA peaked at 2 h and begin to decline thereafter, whereas IL-1beta mRNA
remained elevated from 2 to 8 h. The capacities of splenic nuclear proteins to
bind to six different consensus transcriptional control motifs associated with
proinflammatory cytokine promoters were also measured over 8 h. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA) revealed that binding activity was markedly increased
at 0.5 to 8 h for activator protein-1 (AP-1) as were CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP) and nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) at 0.5 to 1.5 h. At 0.5 h, 
cyclic AMP response element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB) and binding was slightly
elevated, whereas activator protein- 2 (AP-2) and specificity protein 1 (Sp1)
binding were not affected. Antibody supershift EMSA and Western blot analysis
confirmed that increased binding of these factors correlated with LPS-induced
increases in nuclear concentrations of AP-1 (c-Jun, phosphorylated c-Jun, Jun D, 
and Jun B), C/EBPbeta, NF-kappaB (p50, p65, and c-Rel), CREB (CREB-1, CREB-2, and
ATF-2), and AP-2alpha proteins. Remarkably, after 8 h, C/EBP, CREB, AP-2, and Sp1
binding activities were greatly depleted relative to both naive and corresponding
vehicle controls. When mice were exposed to a second dose of LPS, 8 h after a 4
mg/kg priming dose, TNF-alpha and IL-6 mRNA responses were markedly impaired,
suggesting that the mice were endotoxin tolerant at this time point. Taken
together, the quiescent, active, and suppressive phases of transcription factor
binding observed in this model were highly consistent with the rapid transient
nature of LPS-induced proinflammatory cytokine expression in vivo as well as
tolerance to secondary LPS exposure.

PMID: 12662898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Dev Biol. 2003 Apr 1;256(1):127-45.

Overexpression of transcription factor AP-2alpha suppresses mammary gland growth 
and morphogenesis.

Zhang J(1), Brewer S, Huang J, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

AP-2 transcription factors are key regulators of mouse embryonic development.
Aberrant expression of these genes has also been linked to the progression of
human breast cancer. Here, we have investigated the role of the AP-2 gene family 
in the postnatal maturation of the mouse mammary gland. Analysis of AP-2 RNA and 
protein levels demonstrates that these genes are expressed in the mammary glands 
of virgin and pregnant mice. Subsequently, AP-2 expression declines during
lactation and then is reactivated during involution. The AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma 
proteins are localized in the ductal epithelium, as well as in the terminal end
buds, suggesting that they may influence growth of the ductal network. We have
tested this hypothesis by targeting AP-2alpha expression to the mouse mammary
gland using the MMTV promoter. Our studies indicate that overexpression of
AP-2alpha inhibits mammary gland growth and morphogenesis, and this coincides
with a rise in PTHrP expression. Alveolar budding is severely curtailed in
transgenic virgin mice, while lobuloalveolar development and functional
differentiation are inhibited during pregnancy and lactation, respectively. Our
studies strongly support a role for the AP-2 proteins in regulating the
proliferation and differentiation of mammary gland epithelial cells in both mouse
and human.

PMID: 12654297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 30;278(22):19597-602. Epub 2003 Mar 17.

Pituitary tumor AP-2alpha recognizes a cryptic promoter in intron 4 of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 4.

Yu S(1), Asa SL, Weigel RJ, Ezzat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M9,
Canada.

Fibroblast growth factor receptors (FGFRs) have been implicated in a multitude of
proliferative functions, and FGFR4 is expressed differentially in normal and
neoplastic pituitary. Human pituitary tumors express a truncated FGFR4 isoform
(ptd-FGFR4) for which transcription is initiated from a downstream alternative
site. Analysis of FGFR4 intronic sequences predicted a possible promoter within
intron 4 (In4) including a classic TATA box with a possible transcriptional start
site in intron 5. We show here that the human In4 sequence can direct luciferase 
reporter activity in transfected pituitary GH4 cells. Four overlapping fragments 
(A1, A2, B1, and B2) of this intron were examined by electromobility shift assay 
using nuclear extracts from rat pituitary tumors. Of these, fragment B2 formed
complexes with nuclear rat pituitary GH4 extracts that were competed specifically
by wild type but not mutant oligonucleotides for the neural crest cell
lineage-derived activating transcription factor AP-2. Conversely, an AP-2
consensus sequence probe was competed by the In4 B2 oligonucleotide but not by
other fragments of the same intron. The In4 B2 complex was competed partially by 
NFkappaB, supershifted by an AP-2alpha-specific antibody, and co-migrated with
the same probe incubated with recombinant AP-2alpha protein. We also examined the
ability of primary human pituitary tumor extracts to interact with the In4 B2
fragment. Pituitary tumor-In4 B2 complexes were competed specifically by wild
type AP-2 but not mutant AP-2 oligonucleotides. Western blotting revealed higher 
levels of AP-2alpha expression in primary human pituitary tumors than in
nontumorous tissue. Mutagenesis of the putative AP-2 binding site in In4 B2
resulted in a marked loss of promoter activity in a luciferase assay. AP-2alpha
transfection in the presence of the histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin-A 
resulted in enhanced expression of endogenous ptd-FGFR4. These data indicate that
a cryptic promoter within intron 4 binds AP-2alpha. AP-2alpha and chromatin
changes may contribute to the utilization of an alternative transcription start
site leading to the genesis of the tumorigenic ptd-FGFR4 isoform.

PMID: 12642581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hypertens Res. 2003 Feb;26 Suppl:S129-34.

Variations of human adrenomedullin gene and its relation to cardiovascular
diseases.

Ishimitsu T(1), Tsukada K, Minami J, Ono H, Matsuoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hypertension and Cardiorenal Medicine, Dokkyo University School 
of Medicine, Mibu, Tochigi 321-0293, Japan. isimitu@dokkyomed.ac.jp

The studies concerning the structure and variations of the human adrenomedullin
(AM) gene are reviewed, and their relations to the gene function and genetic
predisposition to cardiovascular diseases are discussed. The genomic human AM
gene is composed of four exons, and the whole nucleotide sequence corresponding
to mature AM resides in the fourth exon. In chromosomal sublocalization, the AM
gene is located in the distal portion of the short arm of chromosome 11
(11p15.1-3). Analysis of the promoter region of the AM gene has revealed that two
transcription factors, nuclear factor for interleukin-6 expression (NF-IL6) and
activator protein 2 (AP-2), participate in the regulation of AM gene expression. 
It is surmised that NF-IL6 mediates inflammatory stimuli and AP-2 mediates
signals of phospholipase C and protein kinase C activation. In addition to these 
factors, hypoxia induces AM gene expression via the hypoxia inducible factor-1
(HIF-1) binding site. The 3'-end of the AM gene is flanked by a microsatellite
marker of cytosine adenine (CA) repeats. In Japanese, there are four types of
alleles with different CA-repeat numbers: 11, 13, 14 and 19. It is suggested that
existence of the 19-repeat allele is associated with genetic predispositions to
develop essential hypertension and diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 12630823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Mol Cell Biochem. 2003 Jan;243(1-2):87-95.

Transcriptional regulation of Na+/H+ exchanger expression in the intact mouse.

Rieder CV(1), Fliegel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, CIHR Membrane Protein Group, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

We examined regulation of the Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE1 isoform) in the developing
mouse. We generated transgenic mice with the Na+/H+ exchanger promoter directing 
expression of the beta-Galactosidase reporter. We found that expression of the
Na+/H+ exchanger was maximum in the heart and liver of 12-day-old embryonic mice.
Similar results were found in mice using the green fluorescent protein reporter
driven by the Na+/H+ exchanger promoter. Detailed examination of the myocardium
revealed that the GFP reporter protein was expressed in the cytoplasm of
cardiomyocyte cells. We examined NHE1 protein expression in transgenic mice
lacking the transcription factors AP-2alpha or the transcription factor COUP-TF1.
Eighteen-day-old AP-2alpha heterozygote mice show no large changes in NHE1
expression in heart, lung, liver, kidney and brain. In contrast, 18-day-old
embryos from AP-2alpha null mice showed a large increase in Na+/H+ exchanger
protein expression in the brain. NHE1 protein levels in COUP-TF1 knockout embryos
did not differ from wild type embryos. The results suggest that AP-2alpha and
COUP-TF1 are not critical to NHE1 expression in the late stage embryo and that
other related transcription factors may function in regulation of the Na+/H+
exchanger.

PMID: 12619893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Mar 1;31(5):1571-5.

Transcriptional activation by AP-2alpha is modulated by the oncogene DEK.

Campillos M(1), García MA, Valdivieso F, Vázquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, 28049 Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain.

Cell differentiation and development are highly regulated processes at the
transcriptional level. One of the main transcription factors that regulate these 
processes is AP-2alpha, a cell-type specific protein required for vertebrate
development and embryogenesis. AP-2alpha also regulates apoptosis and cell-cycle 
specific events by interacting with the oncogene c-Myc. In searching for novel
AP-2alpha- interacting factors, using an affinity chromatography approach, we
have observed that oncoprotein DEK interacts with AP-2alpha in vitro. The
existence of an interaction between AP-2alpha and DEK in cellular cultures was
demonstrated by expression of a tagged AP-2alpha form followed by
immunodetection. By transient co-expression experiments using a reporter for APOE
promoter activity we have found that DEK stimulates the transactivation activity 
of AP-2alpha over APOE promoter. Finally, electrophoretic mobility shift assays
suggested that DEK enhances the DNA-binding activity of AP-2alpha. Our data
suggest a novel cellular function of DEK as a transcriptional co-activator.

PMCID: PMC149840
PMID: 12595566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 21;301(4):855-61.

Promoter analysis of the human SLC7A7 gene encoding y+L amino acid transporter-1 
(y+LAT-1).

Mykkänen J(1), Toivonen M, Kleemola M, Savontaus ML, Simell O, Aula P, Huoponen
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520, Turku, Finland. juha.mykkanen@utu.fi

The human SLC7A7 gene on chromosome 14q11.2 encodes the y+L amino acid
transporter-1 (y+LAT-1) protein that transports, together with the 4F2hc cell
surface antigen, cationic amino acids through the basolateral membrane of
epithelial cells in the small intestine and kidney. The SLC7A7 gene comprises 11 
exons, but the first two are not translated. Mutations in the coding region of
the SLC7A7 gene cause a rare autosomal disorder, lysinuric protein intolerance
(LPI). We have now investigated the expression levels and putative 5' promoter
elements of the SLC7A7. The 5' region of the first untranslated exon contains no 
TATA-box, Inr elements nor other classical promoter elements, but has instead
other putative transcription factor binding sequences. The E-box and AP-2
elements were able to bind proteins in HEK293 cells and adult kidney tissue
extracts, but not in fibroblasts. Using transient transfection and luciferase
reporter gene studies, we showed that the first two introns located in the
untranslated region contained transcriptional enhancer elements. Northern blot
analysis showed low and equal SLC7A7 mRNA levels in the control and LPI patient
fibroblastoid and lymphoblast cells.

PMID: 12589791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):16021-9. Epub 2003 Feb 12.

Physical and functional interactions among AP-2 transcription factors,
p300/CREB-binding protein, and CITED2.

Bragança J(1), Eloranta JJ, Bamforth SD, Ibbitt JC, Hurst HC, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, Henry Wellcome Building of Genomic Medicine, University of Oxford,
Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

The transcriptional co-activators and histone acetyltransferases
p300/CREB-binding protein (CBP) interact with CITED2, a transcription factor AP-2
(TFAP2) co-activator. p300/CBP, CITED2, and TFAP2A are essential for normal
neural tube and cardiac development. Here we show that p300 and CBP co-activate
TFAP2A in the presence of CITED2. TFAP2A transcriptional activity was modestly
impaired in p300(+/-) and CBP(+/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts; this was rescued 
by ectopic expression of p300/CBP. p300, TFAP2A, and endogenous CITED2 could be
co-immunoprecipitated from transfected U2-OS cells indicating that they can
interact physically in vivo. CITED2 interacted with the dimerization domain of
TFAP2C, which is highly conserved in TFAP2A/B. In mammalian two-hybrid
experiments, full-length p300 and TFAP2A interacted only when CITED2 was
co-transfected. N-terminal residues of TFAP2A, containing the transactivation
domain, are both necessary and sufficient for interaction with p300, and this
interaction was independent of CITED2. Consistent with this, N-terminal residues 
of TFAP2A were required for p300- and CITED2-dependent co-activation. A histone
acetyltransferase-deficient p300 mutant (D1399Y) did not co-activate TFAP2A and
did not affect the expression or cellular localization of TFAP2A or CITED2. In
mammalian two-hybrid experiments p300D1399Y failed to interact with TFAP2A,
explaining, at least in part, its failure to function as a co-activator. Our
results suggest a model wherein interactions among TFAP2A, CITED2, and p300/CBP
are necessary for TFAP2A-mediated transcriptional activation and for normal
neural tube and cardiac development.

PMID: 12586840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Int J Cancer. 2003 Apr 20;104(4):504-11.

Disulfiram-mediated inhibition of NF-kappaB activity enhances cytotoxicity of
5-fluorouracil in human colorectal cancer cell lines.

Wang W(1), McLeod HL, Cassidy J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Medical Sciences,
University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom.
w.wang@beatson.gla.ac.uk

5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is the major chemotherapeutic component for colorectal
cancer (CRC) and other types of solid tumours. Resistance of cancer cells to 5-FU
is considered the major obstacle for successful chemotherapy. NF-kappaB is a
transcription factor. Cancer cells with high NF-kappaB nuclear activity
demonstrate robust chemo- and radio-resistance. We demonstrated that nuclear
NF-kappaB activity in CRC cell lines, DLD-1 and RKO(WT), was significantly
induced by 5-FU in a concentration- and time-dependent manner. 5-FU induced
IkappaBalpha degradation and promoted both NF-kappaB nuclear translocation and
its DNA binding activity. 5-FU treatment did not influence the activities of
AP-1, AP-2, Oct-1, SP-1, CRE-B and TFIID. Disulfiram (DS), a clinically used
anti-alcoholism drug, strongly inhibited constitutive and 5-FU-induced NF-kappaB 
activity in a dose-dependent manner. DS inhibited both NF-kappaB nuclear
translocation and DNA binding activity but had no effect on 5-FU-induced
IkappaBalpha degradation. Used in combination, DS significantly enhanced the
apoptotic effect of 5-FU on DLD-1 and RKO(WT) cell lines and synergistically
potentiated the cytotoxicity of 5-FU to both cell lines. DS also effectively
abolished 5-FU chemoresistance in a 5-FU resistant cell line H630(5-FU) in vitro.
As DS has extensive preclinical and clinical experience, translating its
anticancer usage from in vitro study to clinical trials is relatively
straightforward.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12584750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2003 Feb;13(1):40-8.

Eukaryotic transcriptional regulatory complexes: cooperativity from near and
afar.

Ogata K(1), Sato K, Tahirov TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 3-9
Fukuura, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. ogata@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2003 Apr;13(2):262. Tahirov Tahir [corrected to Tahirov
Tahir H].

It is characteristic of eukaryotic transcription that a unique combination of
multiple transcriptional regulatory proteins bound to promoter DNA specifically
activate or repress downstream target genes; this is referred to as combinatorial
gene regulation. Recently determined structures have revealed different modes of 
protein-protein interaction on the promoter DNA from near (e.g. the
Runx1-CBFbeta-DNA, NFAT-Fos-Jun-DNA, GABPalpha-GABPbeta-DNA, Ets-1-Pax-5-DNA and 
PU.1-IRF-4-DNA complexes) and afar with DNA looping (e.g. the c-Myb-C/EBPbeta-DNA
complex), and their regulatory mechanisms.

PMID: 12581658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Blood. 2003 Jun 1;101(11):4333-41. Epub 2003 Feb 6.

RUNX1 and GATA-1 coexpression and cooperation in megakaryocytic differentiation.

Elagib KE(1), Racke FK, Mogass M, Khetawat R, Delehanty LL, Goldfarb AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908-0904, USA.

Megakaryocytic and erythroid lineages derive from a common bipotential progenitor
and share many transcription factors, most prominently factors of the GATA
zinc-finger family. Little is known about transcription factors unique to the
megakaryocytic lineage that might program divergence from the erythroid pathway. 
To identify such factors, we used the K562 system in which megakaryocyte lineage 
commitment is dependent on sustained extracellular regulatory kinase (ERK)
activation and is inhibited by stromal cell contact. During megakaryocytic
induction in this system, the myeloid transcription factor RUNX1 underwent
up-regulation, dependent on ERK signaling and inhibitable by stromal cell
contact. Immunostaining of healthy human bone marrow confirmed a strong
expression of RUNX1 and its cofactor, core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta), in
megakaryocytes and a minimal expression in erythroblasts. In primary human
hematopoietic progenitor cultures, RUNX1 and CBFbeta up-regulation preceded
megakaryocytic differentiation, and down-regulation of these factors preceded
erythroid differentiation. Functional studies showed cooperation among RUNX1,
CBFbeta, and GATA-1 in the activation of a megakaryocytic promoter. By contrast, 
the RUNX1-ETO leukemic fusion protein potently repressed GATA-1-mediated
transactivation. These functional interactions correlated with physical
interactions observed between GATA-1 and RUNX1 factors. Enforced RUNX1 expression
in K562 cells enhanced the induction of the megakaryocytic integrin proteins
alphaIIb and alpha2. These results suggest that RUNX1 may participate in the
programming of megakaryocytic lineage commitment through functional and physical 
interactions with GATA transcription factors. By contrast, RUNX1-ETO inhibition
of GATA function may constitute a potential mechanism for the blockade of
erythroid and megakaryocytic differentiation seen in leukemias with t(8;21).

PMID: 12576332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2003 Feb;13(1):48-54.

The core-binding factor leukemias: lessons learned from murine models.

Downing JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA. jim.downing@stjude.org

The recent development of murine models of core-binding factor leukemias has
provided important insights into the underlying molecular pathology of this
common subtype of acute myeloid leukemia. Evidence from these models supports the
idea that acute myeloid leukemia 1/core-binding factor beta-subunit
(AML1/CBFbeta) has a critical role in the control of the self-renewal capacity of
hematopoietic stem cells and their progeny. Moreover, the accumulated data
demonstrate that the expression of translocation-encoded AML1 or CBFbeta fusion
proteins are insufficient by themselves to induce a full leukemic phenotype. The 
models that have been developed should prove to be of value for defining the
range of mutations that can cooperate with AML1/CBFbeta fusion proteins, and for 
assessing novel therapies targeted toward the pathways that are altered by the
expression of these fusion proteins.

PMID: 12573435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2003 Feb;13(1):43-7.

RUNX transcription factors as key targets of TGF-beta superfamily signaling.

Ito Y(1), Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology and Oncology Research Institute,
National University of Singapore, Singapore. itoy@imcb.nus.edu.sg

The Runt domain transcription factors, RUNX1, RUNX2 and RUNX3, are integral
components of signaling cascades mediated by both TGF-beta and bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMPs) in several important biological systems. RUNX2 functions
synergistically with Smad1 and Smad5 to regulate bone-specific genes when BMP
induces osteogenesis. RUNX3, which has been mapped to locus 1p36, is a major
tumor suppressor of gastric cancer and appears to be an important component of
the TGF-beta-induced tumor suppressor pathway. A possible relationship between
the TGF-beta-induced tumor-suppressor pathway and a postulated tumor suppressor
gene on 1p36 must be examined.

PMID: 12573434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Curr Pharm Des. 2003;9(7):531-41.

Protein kinases and the hypoxia-inducible factor-1, two switches in angiogenesis.

Mazure NM(1), Brahimi-Horn MC, Pouysségur J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, CNRS-UMR
6543, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, 33 Avenue de Valombrose, 06189 Nice, France.

In the last few decades it has become clear that detailed understanding of the
mechanisms of angiogenesis, a process leading to growth of new blood vessels,
should lead to improved treatment of diseases such as ischemic disorders and
cancer where neovascularization is impaired or activated, respectively. In this
review, we will outline some of our recent findings concerning the regulation of 
the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a key player in angiogenesis and
one of its transcription factors, the hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) a master
gene product driving adaptation to hypoxia. We will discuss the observation that 
growth factors and oncogenic transformation via the mitogen-activated protein
kinases p42/p44 MAPKs not only activate the VEGF promoter through the Sp1/AP-2
transcriptional factor complex but also phosphorylate HIF-1alpha leading in turn 
to enhance HIF-1 dependent transcriptional activation of VEGF. The
stress-activated protein kinases (SAPK) also contribute to angiogenesis by
stabilizing VEGF mRNA. Finally, we will present recent advances into
oxygen-sensing, in particular the HIF-hydroxylases that govern HIF-1alpha
instability (PHD2) or inactivation (FIH-1). The revelation of these oxygen
sensors has provided pharmacologists with new molecular targets for the
development of novel therapies to control angiogenesis either positively or
negatively.

PMID: 12570801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 14;301(3):764-8.

Transcriptional regulation of human Galbeta1,3GalNAc/Galbeta1, 4GlcNAc
alpha2,3-sialyltransferase (hST3Gal IV) gene in testis and ovary cell lines.

Taniguchi A(1), Hioki M, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Bionic Materials Group, Biomaterials Center, National Institute for Materials 
Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. taniguchi.akiyoshi@nims.go.jp

The mRNA expression of sialyltransferase genes is regulated in a
cell-type-specific manner. The mRNAs of human Galbeta1, 3GalNAc/Galbeta1, 4
GlcNAc alpha2,3-sialyltransferase gene (hST3Gal IV) consist of six isoforms, type
A1, A2, B1, B2, B3, and BX. These mRNAs are transcribed from different promoters,
pA, pB1, pB2, pB3, and pBX, respectively. Type B mRNAs are expressed in several
cells, whereas type A mRNAs are specifically expressed in testis, ovary, and
placenta, suggesting that pA promoter activity is especially high in these
tissues. We show herein germ-cell specific transcriptional regulation of the
hST3Gal IV pA promoter. Using a luciferase assay, pA promoter activity is shown
to be high in testis and ovary cell lines. We identified the enhancer region of
the pA promoter, located at nt -520 to -420. These results suggest that this
element plays a critical role in germ-cell specific regulation of the pA
promoter. The results of site-directed mutagenesis suggest that AP2 and c-Ets
sites in this region are involved in pA promoter activity, which in turn suggests
that the hST3Gal IV gene is regulated in a tissue-restricted fashion at the level
of transcription.

PMID: 12565846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Sheng Wu Yi Xue Gong Cheng Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Dec;19(4):697-702.

[The study on the interleukin-8 (IL-8)].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang W(1), Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, West China Medical Center, Sichuan
University, Chengdu 610041.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8), which is a member of C-X-C chemokine subfamily, is an
important activator and chemoattractant for neutrophils and has been implicated
in a variety of inflammatory diseases. Numerous reports show that various cells
express IL-8 mRNA and produce IL-8 protein rapidly, including monocytes, T
lymphocytes, neutrophils, fibroblasts, endothelial cells and epithelial cells.
The human IL-8 gene has a length of 5191 bp and contains four exons separated by 
three introns. It maps to human chromosome 4q12-q21. The mRNA consists of a 101
bases 5' untranslated region, an open reading frame of 297 bases, and a long 3'
untranslated region of 1.2 kb. The 5' flanking region of the IL-8 gene contains
potential binding sites for several nuclear factors including activated protein-1
(AP-1), activated protein-2 (AP-2), nuclear factor-gene binding (NF-kappa B),
nuclear factor-interleukin-6 (NF-IL-6, also calls CAAT/enhancer-binding proteins,
C/EBP), IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), and
so on. IL-8 gene expression is regulated initially at the level of gene
transcription. The rapid induction of IL-8 gene expression is likely mediated by 
latent transcription factors that bind the IL-8 promoter. AP-1 and NF-IL-6
physically interact with NF-kappa B, and functional cooperativity among these
factors appears to be critical for optimal IL-8 promoter activity in different
cell types. The IL-8 receptor (IL-8R) is a dimeric glycoprotein consisting of a
59 KDa and a 67 KDa subunit. It has been given the name CDw128. It is expressed
in many different cell types including those not responding to IL-8. The receptor
density is approximately 20,000/cell in neutrophils, 1,040/cell in monocytes, and
300/cell in T-lymphocytes. The IL-8R is a member of the family of
G-protein-coupled receptors. There are at least two different IL-8 receptor types
(CXCR1 and CXCR2). The activities of IL-8 are not species-specific. IL-8 affects 
the adhesion of neutrophils to the endothelium and induces the transendothelial
migration of neutrophils. IL-8 also exhibits in vitro chemotactic activities
against of T-lymphocytes and basophils. IL-8 gene expression can be regulated by 
fluid shear stress, which may play an important role in the genesis and
development of both inflammation and arterosclerosis.

PMID: 12561382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Apr;17(4):550-61. Epub 2003 Jan 2.

Follicle-stimulating hormone increases testicular Anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH)
production through sertoli cell proliferation and a nonclassical cyclic adenosine
5'-monophosphate-mediated activation of the AMH Gene.

Lukas-Croisier C(1), Lasala C, Nicaud J, Bedecarrás P, Kumar TR, Dutertre M,
Matzuk MM, Picard JY, Josso N, Rey R.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Endocrinológicas, Hospital de Niños, Gallo 1330,
C1425EFD Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) production by testicular Sertoli cells is high
before puberty and can be further induced by FSH. Our objective was to delineate 
the mechanisms by which FSH stimulates AMH production. Assay of serum AMH levels 
and histological morphometric analysis in prepubertal FSH-deficient transgenic
mice showed that serum AMH and testicular mass were decreased owing to reduced
Sertoli cell number. All parameters resumed normal values in mice treated with
recombinant FSH. We also analyzed the ability of FSH and the factors involved in 
its signaling pathway to activate AMH transcription by transfecting AMH
promoter-luc reporter constructs of different lengths in a prepubertal Sertoli
cell line. Our results showed that FSH activates AMH transcription via adenylate 
cyclase, cAMP, and protein kinase A but involving a nonclassical cAMP-response
pathway requiring nuclear factor-kappaB and activating protein 2 binding sites,
which lie more than 1.9 kb upstream of the AMH transcription start site. This is 
the first report showing the importance of distant sequences in the regulation of
AMH expression. We conclude that prepubertal testicular AMH production is
increased by FSH stimulation through Sertoli cell proliferation and an
enhancement of AMH gene transcription.

PMID: 12554789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Gene. 2003 Jan 2;302(1-2):155-64.

Identification of regulatory regions within the KAI1 promoter: a role for binding
of AP1, AP2 and p53.

Marreiros A(1), Czolij R, Yardley G, Crossley M, Jackson P.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research Centre, Level 2 Clinical Sciences Building, Prince of Wales 
Hospital, Barker Street, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia.

The mechanism underlying loss of KAI1 gene expression in invasive and metastatic 
tumour cells is unknown. A possible scenario could involve altered expression or 
function of protein factors normally involved in regulating KAI1 transcription.
To explore this possibility, we have initiated a study to characterise regulatory
elements of the KAI1 promoter, using as a model, two bladder cancer cell lines
(BL13 and HT1376) expressing high levels of endogenous KAI1 messenger RNA (mRNA).
Transfection experiments using reporter plasmids with progressive KAI1 promoter
deletions, identified a 76 bp region upstream of the transcription initiation
site which contained putative binding motifs for AP2, p53 and AP1, as essential
for reporter activity. DNA-binding studies using nuclear extracts from both cell 
lines, showed that AP1 and AP2 formed specific complexes with oligonucleotides
containing KAI1 promoter motifs. Mutation of either motif abrogated reporter
activity and abolished specific complex formation. In BL13 cells (endogenous
wildtype p53), but not in HT1376 cells (endogenous mutant p53), mutation of the
p53-binding motif also abrogated reporter activity and abolished specific complex
formation in gel shift assays. These data suggested that a combination of AP2,
p53 and AP1 binding to specific motifs within the KAI1 promoter might be required
for high level promoter activity and that loss of expression or function of these
factors might contribute to loss of KAI1 expression in invasive tumours and
tumour cell lines. To explore this possibility, we examined levels of these
proteins in nuclear extracts of BL13 and HT1376, as well as three bladder cancer 
cell lines which expressed little or no KAI1 mRNA. Our data suggested that a loss
of KAI1 mRNA was not simply due to absence of AP2, AP1 or p53 expression.

PMID: 12527206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochem J. 2003 Apr 15;371(Pt 2):265-75.

Transcriptional regulation of the human Sp1 gene promoter by the specificity
protein (Sp) family members nuclear factor Y (NF-Y) and E2F.

Nicolás M(1), Noé V, Ciudad CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

We analysed in detail the minimal promoter of transcription factor Sp1, which
extends 217 bp from the initiation of transcription. Within this sequence we
identified putative binding sites for Sp1, nuclear factor Y (NF-Y), activator
protein 2 ('AP-2'), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ('C/EBP') and E2F
transcription factors. In one case, the boxes for Sp1 and NF-Y are overlapping.
Gel-shift and supershift assays demonstrated specific binding of Sp1, Sp3 and
NF-Y proteins. Transient transfections and luciferase assays revealed activation 
of the Sp1 minimal promoter upon overexpression of Sp1 itself, NF-Y and E2F.
Whereas overexpression of NF-Y or E2F had an additive effect on Sp1
overexpression, the activation of Sp1 transcription due to Sp1 was counteracted
by Sp3 overexpression. Mutagenesis analysis of the NFY/Sp1-overlapping box
revealed that both factors compete for this box, and that when the NF-Y site of
this overlapping box is specifically mutated there is an increase in Sp1 binding,
thus increasing transcriptional activity. These results help to explain the
complex regulation of the Sp1 gene, which depends on the relative amounts of Sp1,
Sp3, E2F and NF-Y proteins in the cell.

PMCID: PMC1223280
PMID: 12513689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jan 21;100(2):532-7. Epub 2003 Jan 2.

Induction of neural crest in Xenopus by transcription factor AP2alpha.

Luo T(1), Lee YH, Saint-Jeannet JP, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We report experiments with Xenopus laevis, using both intact embryos and
ectodermal explants, showing that the transcription factor AP2alpha is positively
regulated by bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and Wnt signaling, and that this
activation is an essential step in the induction of neural crest (NC). Ectopic
expression of AP2alpha is sufficient to activate high-level expression of
NC-specific genes such as Slug and Sox9, which can occur as isolated domains
within the neural plate as well as by expansion of endogenous NC territories.
AP2alpha also has the property of inducing NC in isolated ectoderm in which Wnt
signaling is provided but BMP signaling is minimized by overexpression of
chordin. Like other NC regulatory factors, activation of AP2alpha requires some
attenuation of endogenous BMP signaling; however, this process occurs at a lower 
threshold for AP2alpha. Furthermore, AP2alpha expression domains are larger than 
for other NC factors. Loss-of-function experiments with antisense AP2alpha
morpholino oligonucleotides result in severe reduction in the NC territory. These
results support a central role for AP2alpha in NC induction. We propose a model
in which AP2alpha expression, along with inactivation of NC inhibitory factors
such as Dlx3, establish a feedback loop comprising AP2alpha, Sox9, and Slug,
leading to and maintaining NC specification.

PMCID: PMC141030
PMID: 12511599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Jan;44(1):235-43.

Isolation and characterization of the human CP49 gene promoter.

DePianto DJ(1), Hess JF, Blankenship TN, FitzGerald PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, School of Medicine, University
of California-Davis, One Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

PURPOSE: This study focuses on the identification of regulatory elements that
contribute to lens-specific expression of the human CP49 gene within the
5'-flanking DNA sequences.
METHODS: The DNA sequence upstream of the human CP49 coding region was subcloned 
as a set of 5' and 3' deletion series. The constructs were transfected into lens 
(N/N1003A) and nonlens (NIH3T3) cell lines and chicken primary lens cultures, to 
test for promoter activity and specificity. To further test the specificity, a
portion of the 5' flanking DNA sequence was used to drive transgene expression in
mice. The flanking DNA sequence was analyzed for potential transcription
factor-binding sites.
RESULTS: The 5'-flanking DNA preferentially activated reporter gene expression in
a lens-preferred manner when transfected into cultured cells. Transgene
expression driven by the CP49 promoter region was lens specific. Analysis of the 
proximal promoter sequence revealed the presence of potential binding sites for
the AP-1, AP-2, and OCT-1 transcription factors and the absence of TATA and CAAT 
boxes.
CONCLUSIONS: The sequence upstream of the CP49 gene possesses promoter activity
and is able to drive lens-preferred expression in both transfection and
transgenic experiments. Promoter activity is dependent on the presence of the
proximal 300 bp directly upstream of the coding region.

PMID: 12506080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cancer Biol Ther. 2002 Sep-Oct;1(5):492-6.

c-Myc overcomes cell cycle inhibition by CBFbeta-SMMHC, a myeloid leukemia
oncoprotein.

Bernardin F(1), Yang Y, Civin CI, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, 1650 Orleans
Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Thirty percent of acute myeloid leukemia cases express a Core Binding Factor
(CBF) oncoprotein or harbor point mutations in one or both AML1 (RUNX1) genes.
Each of these alterations reduces endogenous CBF activities. CBFbeta-SMMHC is
expressed from the inv(16) chromosome in 8% of AML cases and inhibits endogenous 
CBF DNA-binding. Inhibition of CBF reduces Retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation
and slows the G(1) to S cell cycle transition. c-Myc, a protein which stimulates 
S phase entry, is over-expressed in one-third of AMLs. We have developed Ba/F3
cell lines in which zinc regulates CBFbeta-SMMHC expression and
4-hydroxytamoxifen activates c-Myc-ER. In these lines, c-Myc-ER overcomes
inhibition of cell cycle progression mediated by CBFbeta-SMMHC. CBFbeta-SMMHC
does not affect endogenous c-Myc RNA levels, indicating that CBF does not
regulate the c-Myc gene. Conversely, c-Myc-ER does not alter CBF DNA-binding
activity. Thus, c-Myc-ER acts downstream of CBFbeta-SMMHC to stimulate cell cycle
progression. In a subset of CBF leukemias, elevated expression of c-Myc is
expected to facilitate the proliferation of the leukemic blasts and thereby
potentiate the ability of CBF oncoproteins to block differentiation.

PMID: 12496475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Haematologica. 2002 Dec;87(12):1307-23.

Core binding factor genes and human leukemia.

Hart SM(1), Foroni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Royal Free and University College School of
Medicine, London, UK. s.hart@ic.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The core binding factor (CBF) transcription complex, consisting of
the interacting proteins RUNX1 and CBFb, is essential for normal hematopoiesis.
Recent studies have shown that mutations and gene rearrangements involving this
complex are frequently implicated in leukemogenesis. Understanding the molecular 
events leading to the disruption of CBF has provided important insights into our 
understanding of the normal regulatory pathways that control hematopoiesis and
has begun to reveal how alterations in these pathways induce leukemia.
INFORMATION SOURCES: Both authors are involved in the identification and
characterization of chromosomal abnormalities associated with hematologic
malignancy. This has led to contributions to multicenter clinical and laboratory 
investigations as well as publications in peer-reviewed journals. All of the
references cited in this review are published in journals covered by Medline.
State of the Art. The core binding factor (CBF) is a heterodimeric transcription 
factor composed of the RUNX1 and CBFb subunits. RUNX1 is the DNA binding element 
of the complex and its affinity is greatly increased in the presence of CBFb.
Knock-out studies in mice have demonstrated that both RUNX1 and CBFb are
necessary for definitive hematopoiesis. Furthermore, reciprocal chromosomal
translocations involving both partners have been directly implicated in
leukemogenesis. Evidence is now emerging that at least some of the resulting
fusion proteins, namely ETV6-RUNX1, RUNX1-MTG8 and CBFb-MYH11 dominantly inhibit 
the function of native CBF by recruiting transcriptional co-repressor complexes. 
However, knock-in studies have shown that whilst expression of these fusion genes
may disrupt normal hematopoiesis, this, by itself, is not sufficient for the
subsequent development of leukemia. Mutations of RUNX1 have been identified in
familial platelet disorder (FDP), in which there is a congenital predisposition
to the development of AML and heterozygous point mutations have been identified
in the RUNX1 gene in some leukemias. Moreover, a small number of cases have been 
reported in which amplification of RUNX1 has been detected in childhood ALL
suggesting mechanisms other than loss of function, such as gene dosage may also
play a role.
CONCLUSIONS: Understanding the role CBF plays in normal hematopoiesis and
hematologic malignancies has provided critical reagents for the accurate
identification of the broad group of leukemias harboring alterations of CBF. The 
application of these molecular approaches has already shown an impact on the
clinical management of these patients and as more information becomes available, 
the ability to tailor therapy to improve each patient's chance of a cure becomes 
feasible.

PMID: 12495904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Gene. 2002 Nov 13;301(1-2):43-51.

The human transcription factor activation protein-2 gamma (AP-2gamma): gene
structure, promoter, and expression in mammary carcinoma cell lines.

Li M(1), Wang Y, Yu Y, Nishizawa M, Nakajima T, Ito S, Kannan P.

Author information: 
(1)Rammelkamp Center for Education and Research, MetroHealth Campus, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44109, USA.

Human activation protein-2 gamma (hAP-2gamma) is a key developmental
transcription factor. It has been implicated in mammary carcinogenesis through
its regulation of HER-2/neu proto-oncogene and estrogen receptor gene The
hAP-2gamma gene is located on human chromosome 20q13.2. We cloned this gene,
deduced its genomic structure, and mapped and analyzed its promoter. The
hAP-2gamma gene contains seven exons. Primer extension analysis and 5'-rapid
amplification of complementary DNA ends studies show that there is a single
transcription start site 232 nt upstream of the translational start codon. The
promoter lacks canonical binding sites for basal transcription factors such as
TATA and CCAAT boxes, but contains a cluster of CpG islands and may rely on an
initiator element for transcription. Deletion analyses of the promoter and
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase reporter gene assays indicate that the
sequence between -746 and -575 is important for its expression in mammary
carcinoma cell lines. The hAP-2gamma gene is marginally activated in these cells 
suggesting that increased transcription partly contributes to its abundance.
Architecture of the gene and promoter strikingly resembles that of hAP-2alpha,
which is located on a different chromosome, suggesting a cognate origin.
hAP-2alpha and hAP-2gamma have some common and some distinct roles in cells, and 
are likely the remarkable results of gene duplication, translocation and
functional divergence through evolution.

PMID: 12490322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2003 Jan;13(1):11-7.

Chronic citalopram treatment induces time-dependent changes in the expression and
DNA-binding activity of transcription factor AP-2 in rat brain.

Berggård C(1), Damberg M, Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, PO Box
593 BMC, SE-751 24, Uppsala, Sweden.

Imbalances in the midbrain monoaminergic systems have been implicated to play a
role in neuropsychiatric conditions. Several genes in these systems have binding 
sites for transcription factor activating protein-2 (AP-2) in their regulatory
regions. Thus, AP-2 may be a factor controlling the expression of genes in the
monoaminergic systems important for maintaining normal psychiatric functions. The
present study indicates that subchronic treatment with the antidepressant
citalopram induces time-dependent changes in DNA-binding activity and levels of
transcription factor AP-2 in rat whole brain. Rats were treated with citalopram
(10 mg/kg) for 1, 3, 7 and 21 days. Animals treated for 7 days had significantly 
decreased DNA-binding activity and levels of AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta isoforms
when compared to saline-treated animals. There was no observed difference between
citalopram- and saline-treated animals after 21 days. Elucidation of the
molecular mechanisms underlying mental disorders is important for future drug
development, where transcription factors might be important drug targets.

PMID: 12480117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. BMC Cancer. 2002 Dec 10;2:35. Epub 2002 Dec 10.

Increased expression of AP2 and Sp1 transcription factors in human thyroid
tumors: a role in NIS expression regulation?

Chiefari E(1), Brunetti A, Arturi F, Bidart JM, Russo D, Schlumberger M, Filetti 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University of Roma La Sapienza, Roma, Italy. 
e.chiefari@tin.it

BACKGROUND: Sodium/iodide symporter (NIS) is a key protein in iodide transport by
thyroid cells and this activity is a prerequisite for effective radioiodide
treatment of thyroid cancer. In the majority of thyroid cancers, however, iodide 
uptake is reduced, probably as a result of decreased NIS protein expression.
METHODS: To identify the mechanisms that negatively affect NIS expression in
thyroid tumors, we performed electrophoresis mobility shift assays and immunoblot
analysis of nuclear protein extracts from normal and tumoral thyroid tissues from
14 unrelated patients.
RESULTS: Two proteins closely related to the transcription factors AP2 and Sp1
were identified in the nuclear extracts. Expression of both AP2 and Sp1 in
nuclear extracts from thyroid tumors was significantly higher than that observed 
in corresponding normal tissues.
CONCLUSION: These observations raise the possibility that NIS expression, and
subsequently iodide transport, are reduced in thyroid tumors at least in part
owing to alterations in the binding activity of AP2 and Sp1 transcription factors
to NIS promoter.

PMCID: PMC139985
PMID: 12475396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Dec 15;64(12):1757-65.

Inhibition of zinc finger protein-DNA interactions by sodium selenite.

Larabee JL(1), Hocker JR, Hanas RJ, Kahn FM, Hanas JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
College of Medicine, 800 Research Parkway, Room 448, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
USA.

Sodium selenite and sodium selenate were analyzed for their ability to alter the 
DNA binding mechanisms of the Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger proteins, transcription
factor IIIA (TFIIIA) and Sp1. TFIIIA is a positive regulator of 5S ribosomal RNA 
synthesis, and Sp1 is involved in cell proliferation and invasiveness. As assayed
by DNase I protection, the interaction of the DNA binding domain of TFIIIA with
the 5S ribosomal gene was inhibited by 25 microM selenite ions but not by 250
microM selenate ions. Selenite inhibition kinetics of TFIIIA progressed to
completion in about 5 min. Preincubation of free TFIIIA with selenite resulted in
DNA binding inhibition, whereas preincubation of a TFIIIA/5S RNA complex with
selenite did not. Since 5S RNA binds to the TFIIIA DNA binding domain, this
result is consistent with an inhibition mechanism via selenite binding to that
region of this protein. Inhibition was not readily reversible and occurred in the
presence of an excess of beta-mercaptoethanol; elevated amounts of dithiothreitol
mitigated the inhibitory effect. Significantly less selenite (2.5-5 microM)
inhibited the specific DNA binding of transcription factor Sp1 to the simian
virus 40 (SV40) early promoter/enhancer. The selenite inhibition kinetics of Sp1 
were fast, going to completion in about 1 min. SV40 DNA binding by the non-zinc
finger transcription factor AP-2 was not inhibited by selenite. Inhibition of
Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger proteins by micromolar amounts of selenite points to
additional mechanisms for selenite-induced diminution of cell growth and
anticancer activity.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.

PMID: 12445865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Nov 26;99(24):15626-31. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

A genomic-scale view of the cAMP response element-enhancer decoy: a tumor
target-based genetic tool.

Cho YS(1), Kim MK, Cheadle C, Neary C, Park YG, Becker KG, Cho-Chung YS.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Biochemistry Section, Basic Research Laboratory, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.

Enhancer DNA decoy oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) inhibit transcription by
competing for transcription factors. A decoy ODN composed of the cAMP response
element (CRE) inhibits CRE-directed gene transcription and tumor growth without
affecting normal cell growth. Here, we use DNA microarrays to analyze the global 
effects of the CRE-decoy ODN in cancer cell lines and in tumors grown in nude
mice. The CRE-decoy up-regulates the AP-2beta transcription factor gene in tumors
but not in the livers of host animals. The up-regulated expression of AP-2beta is
clustered with the up-regulation of other genes involved in development and cell 
differentiation. Concomitantly, another cluster of genes involved in cell
proliferation and transformation is down-regulated. The observed alterations
indicate that CRE-directed transcription favors tumor growth. The CRE-decoy ODN, 
therefore, may serve as a target-based genetic tool to treat cancer and other
diseases in which CRE-directed transcription is abnormally used.

PMCID: PMC137767
PMID: 12438686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Oct;971:92-4.

Reduction of adrenal and kidney epinephrine and phenylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase in AP-2 knockout mouse fetuses.

Kennedy B(1), Enns R, Nelson D, Williams T, Bao X, Ziegler MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego Medical Center, 200
West Arbor Drive, San Diego, California 92103-8341, USA.

PMID: 12438097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):639-44. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

Cbfbeta interacts with Runx2 and has a critical role in bone development.

Kundu M(1), Javed A, Jeon JP, Horner A, Shum L, Eckhaus M, Muenke M, Lian JB,
Yang Y, Nuckolls GH, Stein GS, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, 49 Convent Drive, Building 49, Room
3A26, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Runx2 (runt-related transcription factor 2, also known as Cbfa1, Osf2 and AML3)
is essential for bone development in mice, and mutations in RUNX2 are found in
65-80% of individuals with cleidocranial dysplasia. Although all Runx family
members can interact with Cbfbeta (core-binding factor b, encoded by Cbfb), a
role for Cbfbeta in bone development has not been demonstrated owing to lethality
in Cbfb(-/-) mouse embryos at 12.5 days post coitum (d.p.c.) from hemorrhages and
lack of definitive hematopoiesis. Using a 'knock-in' strategy, we generated mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells that express Cbfb fused in-frame to a cDNA encoding
green fluorescent protein (GFP). Cbfb(+/GFP) mice had normal life spans and
appeared normal, but Cbfb(GFP/GFP) pups died within the first day after birth.
The Cbfb(GFP/GFP) mice exhibited a delay in endochondral and intramembranous
ossification as well as in chondrocyte differentiation, similar to but less
severe than delays observed in Runx2(-/-) mice. We demonstrate that Cbfbeta is
expressed in developing bone and forms a functional interaction with Runx2, and
that Cbfb(GFP) is a hypomorphic allele. The fusion allele maintains sufficient
function in hematopoietic cells to bypass the early embryonic lethality, and
identifies a new role for Cbfb in bone development. Our findings raise the
possibility that mutations in CBFB may be responsible for some cases of
cleidocranial dysplasia that are not linked to mutations in RUNX2.

PMID: 12434156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):645-9. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

The core-binding factor beta subunit is required for bone formation and
hematopoietic maturation.

Miller J(1), Horner A, Stacy T, Lowrey C, Lian JB, Stein G, Nuckolls GH, Speck
NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

Core-binding factor beta (Cbfbeta) is the common non-DNA-binding subunit of the
Cbf family of heterodimeric transcription factors. Mice deficient in Cbfbeta have
a severe block in fetal liver hematopoiesis at the stage of hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC) emergence. Here we show that by providing Cbfbeta function in
endothelial cells and hematopoietic progenitors we can rescue fetal liver
hematopoiesis in Cbfbeta-deficient embryos. The rescued mice die at birth,
however, with severe defects in skeletal development, though intramembranous
ossification occurs to some extent. Fetal liver hematopoiesis is restored at
embryonic day (E) 12.5, but by E17.5 significant impairments in lymphopoiesis and
myelopoiesis are observed. Thus, we conclude that the Cbfbeta subunit is required
for HSC emergence, bone formation and normal differentiation of lymphoid and
myeloid lineage cells.

PMID: 12434155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Nat Genet. 2002 Dec;32(4):633-8. Epub 2002 Nov 18.

Core-binding factor beta interacts with Runx2 and is required for skeletal
development.

Yoshida CA(1), Furuichi T, Fujita T, Fukuyama R, Kanatani N, Kobayashi S, Satake 
M, Takada K, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2
Yamada-oka Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta, also called polyomavirus enhancer binding
protein 2beta (PEBP2B)) is associated with an inversion of chromosome 16 and is
associated with acute myeloid leukemia in humans. CBFbeta forms a heterodimer
with RUNX1 (runt-related transcription factor 1), which has a DNA binding domain 
homologous to the pair-rule protein runt in Drosophila melanogaster. Both RUNX1
and CBFbeta are essential for hematopoiesis. Haploinsufficiency of another
runt-related protein, RUNX2 (also called CBFA1), causes cleidocranial dysplasia
in humans and is essential in skeletal development by regulating osteoblast
differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. Mice deficient in Cbfb (Cbfb(-/-))
die at midgestation, so the function of Cbfbeta in skeletal development has yet
to be ascertained. To investigate this issue, we rescued hematopoiesis of
Cbfb(-/-) mice by introducing Cbfb using the Gata1 promoter. The rescued
Cbfb(-/-) mice recapitulated fetal liver hematopoiesis in erythroid and
megakaryocytic lineages and survived until birth, but showed severely delayed
bone formation. Although mesenchymal cells differentiated into immature
osteoblasts, intramembranous bones were poorly formed. The maturation of
chondrocytes into hypertrophic cells was markedly delayed, and no endochondral
bones were formed. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter assays
showed that Cbfbeta was necessary for the efficient DNA binding of Runx2 and for 
Runx2-dependent transcriptional activation. These findings indicate that Cbfbeta 
is required for the function of Runx2 in skeletal development.

PMID: 12434152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Biol Cell. 2002 Nov;13(11):4029-44.

Differential regulation of tumor angiogenesis by distinct ErbB homo- and
heterodimers.

Yen L(1), Benlimame N, Nie ZR, Xiao D, Wang T, Al Moustafa AE, Esumi H, Milanini 
J, Hynes NE, Pages G, Alaoui-Jamali MA.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research of the Sir Mortimer B Davis Jewish
General Hospital, Department of Medicine and McGill Centre for Translational
Research in Cancer, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1E2, Canada.

Interactions between cancer cells and their microenvironment are critical for the
development and progression of solid tumors. This study is the first to examine
the role of all members of the ErbB tyrosine kinase receptors (epidermal growth
factor receptor [EGFR], ErbB-2, ErbB-3, or ErbB-4), expressed singly or as paired
receptor combinations, in the regulation of angiogenesis both in vitro and in
vivo. Comparison of all receptor combinations reveals that EGFR/ErbB-2 and
ErbB-2/ErbB-3 heterodimers are the most potent inducers of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) mRNA expression compared with EGFR/ErbB-3, EGFR/ErbB-4,
ErbB-2/ErbB-4, and ErbB-3/ErbB-4. Immunohistochemistry of tumor xenografts
overexpressing these heterodimers shows increased VEGF expression and remarkably 
enhanced vascularity. Enhanced VEGF expression is associated with increased VEGF 
transcription. Deletional analysis reveals that ErbB-mediated transcriptional
up-regulation of VEGF involves a hypoxia-inducible factor 1-independent
responsive region located between nucleotides -88 to -66 of the VEGF promoter.
Mutational analysis reveals that the Sp-1 and AP-2 transcription factor binding
elements within this region are required for up-regulation of VEGF by heregulin
beta1 and that this up-regulation is dependent on the activity of extracellular
signal-related protein kinases. These results emphasize the biological
implications of cell signaling diversity among members of the ErbB receptor
family in regulation of the tumor microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC133612
PMID: 12429844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Nov;8(11):3487-95.

Reduced nuclear expression of transcription factor AP-2 associates with
aggressive breast cancer.

Pellikainen J(1), Kataja V, Ropponen K, Kellokoski J, Pietiläinen T, Böhm J,
Eskelinen M, Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, University of Kuopio, FIN-70211
Kuopio, Finland.

PURPOSE: We proposed to investigate the expression and prognostic significance of
activator protein 2 (AP-2) in breast cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: AP-2 was immunohistochemically analyzed in a prospective,
consecutive series of 420 breast cancer patients diagnosed and treated between
1990 and 1995 at Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. AP-2 expression was
further compared with clinicopathological parameters and patients' survival.
RESULTS: Nuclear AP-2 expression was lower in carcinomas compared with normal
ductal breast epithelium (P < 0.001). Nuclear expression was more often seen in
lobular than in ductal or other carcinomas (P = 0.048). Cytoplasmic staining was 
present in 47% of the carcinomas. Low nuclear AP-2 expression level in carcinomas
was associated with advanced stage (P = 0.002), axillary lymph node positivity (P
= 0.012), poor differentiation (P = 0.001), and recurrences (P = 0.003). In
univariate survival analyses, low nuclear AP-2 expression (P = 0.0028), advanced 
stage (P < 0.0001), lymph node metastases (P < 0.0001), and poor differentiation 
(P = 0.0498) predicted shorter recurrence-free survival (RFS). Low nuclear AP-2
staining and/or shift to cytoplasmic expression predicted shorter RFS (P =
0.0050) and breast cancer-related survival (BCRS; P = 0.0314) in univariate
analyses. Cytoplasmic expression alone did not have prognostic value. In
multivariate analysis, low nuclear AP-2 expression (P = 0.0292) and advanced
stage (P = 0.0001) were independent predictors of shorter RFS; and stage (P <
0.0001) and ER-status (P = 0.0321) independently predicted BCRS. In the
lymph-node positive patients, RFS was independently predicted by stage (P =
0.0110) and nuclear AP-2 status (P = 0.0151).
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2 seems to have a protective role in breast cancer. Low nuclear
AP-2 expression was associated with disease progression and increased metastatic 
capability of the tumor. In addition, reduced nuclear AP-2 expression
independently predicted elevated risk of recurrent disease in breast cancer.

PMID: 12429639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Biochem J. 2003 Feb 15;370(Pt 1):323-9.

Identification of HTF (HER2 transcription factor) as an AP-2 (activator
protein-2) transcription factor and contribution of the HTF binding site to ERBB2
gene overexpression.

Vernimmen D(1), Begon D, Salvador C, Gofflot S, Grooteclaes M, Winkler R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Laboratory, Experimental Cancer Research Center, University
of Liege, Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liege, Belgium.

The ERBB2 gene is overexpressed in 30% of human breast cancers and this is
correlated with poor prognosis. Overexpression of the ERBB2 gene is due to
increased transcription and gene amplification. Our previous studies have
identified a new cis element in the ERBB2 promoter which is involved in the
gene's overexpression. This cis element, located 501 bp upstream from the main
ERBB2 transcription initiation site, binds a transcription factor called HTF
(HER2 transcription factor). We report here the identification of HTF as an AP-2 
(activator protein-2) transcription factor. The new cis element is bound by AP-2 
with high affinity, compared with a previously described AP-2 binding site
located 284 bp downstream. Co-transfection of an AP-2alpha expression vector with
a reporter vector containing the newly identified AP-2 binding site in front of a
minimal ERBB2 promoter induced a dose-dependent increase in transcriptional
activity. We examined the contribution of the new AP-2 binding site to ERBB2
overexpression. For this purpose we abolished the new and/or the previously
described AP-2 binding sequence by site-directed mutagenesis. The results show
that the two functional AP-2 sites in the first 700 bp of the ERBB2 promoter
co-operate to achieve maximal transcriptional activity.

PMCID: PMC1223148
PMID: 12418962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;22(23):8278-91.

Multimerization via its myosin domain facilitates nuclear localization and
inhibition of core binding factor (CBF) activities by the CBFbeta-smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain myeloid leukemia oncoprotein.

Kummalue T(1), Lou J, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.

In CBFbeta-SMMHC, core binding factor beta (CBFbeta) is fused to the
alpha-helical rod domain of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (SMMHC). We
generated Ba/F3 hematopoietic cells expressing a CBFbeta-SMMHC variant lacking 28
amino acids homologous to the assembly competence domain (ACD) required for
multimerization of skeletal muscle myosin. CBFbeta-SMMHC(DeltaACD) multimerized
less effectively than either wild-type protein or a variant lacking a different
28-residue segment. In contrast to the control proteins, the DeltaACD mutant did 
not inhibit CBF DNA binding, AML1-mediated reporter activation, or G(1) to S cell
cycle progression, the last being dependent upon activation of CBF-regulated
genes. We also linked the CBFbeta domain to 149 or 83 C-terminal CBFbeta-SMMHC
residues, retaining 86 or 20 amino acids N-terminal to the ACD.
CBFbeta-SMMHC(149C) multimerized and slowed Ba/F3 proliferation, whereas
CBFbeta-SMMHC(83C) did not. The majority of CBFbeta-SMMHC and CBFbeta-SMMHC(149C)
was detected in the nucleus, whereas the DeltaACD and 83C variants were
predominantly cytoplasmic, indicating that multimerization facilitates nuclear
retention of CBFbeta-SMMHC. When linked to the simian virus 40 nuclear
localization signal (NLS), a significant fraction of CBFbeta-SMMHC(DeltaACD)
entered the nucleus but only mildly inhibited CBF activities. As
NLS-CBFbeta-SMMHC(83C) remained cytoplasmic, we directed the ACD to CBF target
genes by linking it to the AML1 DNA binding domain or to full-length AML1. These 
AML1-ACD fusion proteins did not affect Ba/F3 proliferation, in contrast to
AML1-ETO, which markedly slowed G(1) to S progression dependent upon the
integrity of its DNA-binding domain. Thus, the ACD facilitates inhibition of CBF 
by mediating multimerization of CBFbeta-SMMHC in the nucleus. Therapeutics
targeting the ACD may be effective in acute myeloid leukemia cases associated
with CBFbeta-SMMHC expression.

PMCID: PMC134059
PMID: 12417730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Br J Pharmacol. 2002 Nov;137(6):901-9.

Inhibitory mechanism of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by bucillamine.

Koyama S(1), Takagi H, Otani A, Oh H, Nishimura K, Honda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8397, Japan.

1. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) plays an important role in the
neovascularization of ischaemic retinal diseases such as proliferative diabetic
retinopathy. We determined that bucillamine, an anti-rheumatic drug, inhibits the
VEGF production induced by hypoxia in bovine retinal microcapillary endothelial
cells (BREC). To further clarify the inhibitory mechanism, we investigated the
possible mechanism by which bucillamine exerts this inhibitory effect. 2.
Bucillamine (100 micro M) decreased the hypoxia-induced increase of VEGF mRNA by 
54.5% (P<0.001). Bucillamine (100 micro M) reduced the hypoxia-induced VEGF
content in culture media by 29.0% (P<0.001), while monosulfydryl drugs,
N-acetylcysteine and D-penicillamine, did not. 3. Bucillamine (100 micro M) did
not affect VEGF mRNA half-life (hypoxia, 4.3 h; hypoxia+bucillamine, 3.9 h;
normoxia, 2.7 h; normoxia+bucillamine, 2.7 h). 4. Reporter gene studies revealed 
that bucillamine reduced transcriptional activity in the 5'-flanking region of
the VEGF gene by 74.0%. Hypoxia stimulated binding activity of BREC nuclear
protein to a hypoxia responsive element (HRE), which was decreased by
bucillamine. 5. Bucillamine inhibited hypoxic-induction of HIF-1alpha mRNA by
73.1% (P<0.001). Bucillamine also inhibited spontaneous VEGF mRNA expression by
26.6%. Furthermore, it inhibited activity of VEGF promoter and decreased binding 
activity to Sp1 and HRE, but did not alter AP1 and AP2 activity in normoxia. 6.
These data suggest that bucillamine inhibits hypoxic induction of VEGF through
inhibition of HIF-1 induction and binding activity in BREC. Bucillamine also
inhibits the spontaneous expression of VEGF mRNA by its effect on Sp1 and HRE
binding.

PMCID: PMC1573552
PMID: 12411422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Eur J Pharmacol. 2002 Oct 25;453(2-3):149-58.

Penta-O-galloyl-beta-D-glucose inhibits the invasion of mouse melanoma by
suppressing metalloproteinase-9 through down-regulation of activator protein-1.

Ho LL(1), Chen WJ, Lin-Shiau SY, Lin JK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
No. 1, Section 1, Jen-Ai Road, Taipei, Taiwan

Penta-O-galloyl-beta-D-glucose (5GG) inhibited the invasion of highly metastatic 
mouse melanoma B16F10 cells in vitro, as demonstrated by transwell assay. Its
ability to diminish the activity of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) was
demonstrated by zymographic assay. Our data showed 5GG could diminish the
activity of MMP-9 more than that of MMP-2. The effect on MMP-9 was elicited in a 
dose- and time-dependent manner, with IC50 of 15 microM. Next, we analyzed the
amounts of MMP-9 and MMP-2 protein in conditioned media and in the cells. The
data indicated MMP-9 proteins were also suppressed by 5GG in the same manner. In 
accordance with these data above, the results of reverse transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern blot analysis showed a reduced level of
MMP-9 mRNA. Furthermore, we studied transcription factor binding to MMP-2 and
MMP-9 promoter regions by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) in the
nucleus. The results suggested that the transcription factor binding activities
of Activator protein-1 (AP-1) and Sp-1 sites was mainly down-regulated by 5GG in 
the concentration range of 5-15 microM, but not that of nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB), polioma enhancer activator 3 (PEA-3), and Activator protein-2 (AP-2)
sites. The Western blot analysis of AP-1 nuclear protein showed a reduced level
of c-Jun but not of c-Fos. In addition, the expression of Sp-1 and c-Jun protein 
was also suppressed. To elucidate whether the transcriptional activity of AP-1 or
Sp-1 sites is more important, we transfected MMP-9/luciferase reporter vector,
under MMP-9 promoter control, into the cells. We found that a decreased
transcriptional activity of AP-1 sites is sufficient to reduce MMP-9 promoter
activity. These results lead us to conclude that 5GG restricts the invasive
ability of B16F10 mouse melanoma cells by reducing MMP-9 activity, by suppressing
the transcriptional activity of AP-1 sites and the expression of c-Jun protein.
The result may provide a potential mechanism for 5GG in cancer chemopreventive
action.

PMID: 12398898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Development. 2002 Nov;129(21):4953-62.

Amphioxus and lamprey AP-2 genes: implications for neural crest evolution and
migration patterns.

Meulemans D(1), Bronner-Fraser M.

Collaborators: Bronner-Fraser M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
91125, USA.

The neural crest is a uniquely vertebrate cell type present in the most basal
vertebrates, but not in cephalochordates. We have studied differences in
regulation of the neural crest marker AP-2 across two evolutionary transitions:
invertebrate to vertebrate, and agnathan to gnathostome. Isolation and comparison
of amphioxus, lamprey and axolotl AP-2 reveals its extensive expansion in the
vertebrate dorsal neural tube and pharyngeal arches, implying co-option of AP-2
genes by neural crest cells early in vertebrate evolution. Expression in
non-neural ectoderm is a conserved feature in amphioxus and vertebrates,
suggesting an ancient role for AP-2 genes in this tissue. There is also common
expression in subsets of ventrolateral neurons in the anterior neural tube,
consistent with a primitive role in brain development. Comparison of AP-2
expression in axolotl and lamprey suggests an elaboration of cranial neural crest
patterning in gnathostomes. However, migration of AP-2-expressing neural crest
cells medial to the pharyngeal arch mesoderm appears to be a primitive feature
retained in all vertebrates. Because AP-2 has essential roles in cranial neural
crest differentiation and proliferation, the co-option of AP-2 by neural crest
cells in the vertebrate lineage was a potentially crucial event in vertebrate
evolution.

PMID: 12397104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Blood. 2003 Jan 15;101(2):673-80. Epub 2002 Sep 5.

Implications of somatic mutations in the AML1 gene in radiation-associated and
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia.

Harada H(1), Harada Y, Tanaka H, Kimura A, Inaba T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology and the Department of Hematology/Oncology,
Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University,
Japan. herf1@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Somatically acquired point mutations of AML1/RUNX1 gene have been recently
identified in rare cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS). Moreover, germ line mutations of AML1 were found in an autosomal 
dominant disease, familial platelet disorder with predisposition to AML
(FPD/AML), suggesting that AML1 mutants, as well as AML1 chimeras, contribute to 
the transformation of hematopoietic progenitors. In this report, we showed that
AML1 point mutations were found in 6 (46%) of 13 MDS patients among atomic bomb
(A-bomb) survivors in Hiroshima. Unlike acute or chronic leukemia patients among 
A-bomb survivors, MDS patients exposed relatively low-dose radiation and
developed the disease after a long latency period. AML1 mutations also were found
in 5 (38%) of 13 therapy-related AML/MDS patients who were treated with
alkylating agents with or without local radiation therapy. In contrast, frequency
of AML1 mutation in sporadic MDS patients was 2.7% (2 of 74). Among AML1
mutations identified in this study, truncated-type mutants lost DNA binding
potential and trans-activation activity. All missense mutations with one
exception (Gly42Arg) lacked DNA binding ability and down-regulated the
trans-activation potential of wild-type AML1 in a dominant-negative fashion. The 
Gly42Arg mutation that was shared by 2 patients bound DNA even more avidly than
wild-type AML1 and enhanced the trans-activation potential of normal AML1. These 
results suggest that AML1 point mutations are related to low-dose radiation or
alkylating agents and play a role distinct from that of leukemogenic chimeras as 
a result of chromosomal translocations caused by sublethal radiation or
topoisomerase II inhibitors.

PMID: 12393679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;22(22):7877-88.

The retinoblastoma protein binds the promoter of the survival gene bcl-2 and
regulates its transcription in epithelial cells through transcription factor
AP-2.

Decary S(1), Decesse JT, Ogryzko V, Reed JC, Naguibneva I, Harel-Bellan A,
Cremisi CE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire Oncogenese, Differenciation et Transduction du Signal, CNRS UPR
9079, Institut Andre Lwoff, 94801 Villejuif, France. The Burnham Institute, La
JollaCalifornia 92037, USA.

The retinoblastoma (RB) gene product has been shown to restrict cell
proliferation, promote cell differentiation, and inhibit apoptosis. Loss of RB
function can induce both p53-dependent apoptosis and p53-independent apoptosis;
little is known about the mechanisms of RB-regulated p53-independent apoptosis.
Here we show that RB specifically activates transcription of the survival gene
bcl-2 in epithelial cells but not in NIH 3T3 mesenchymal cells. This
transcriptional activity is mediated by the transcription factor AP-2. By
monitoring protein-DNA interactions in living cells using formaldehyde
cross-linking and chromatin immunoprecipitation, we show that endogenous RB and
AP-2 both bind to the same bcl-2 promoter sequence. In addition, we demonstrate
that RB and AP-2 also bind to the E-cadherin gene promoter in vivo, consistent
with regulation of this promoter by both AP-2 and RB in epithelial cells. This
study provides evidence that RB activates bcl-2 and E-cadherin by binding
directly to the respective promoter sequences and not indirectly by repressing an
inhibitor. This recruitment is mediated by a transcription factor, in this case
AP-2. For the first time, our results suggest a direct molecular mechanism by
which RB might inhibit apoptosis independently of p53. The results are discussed 
in a context where RB and Bcl-2 contribute under nonpathological conditions to
the maintenance of cell viability in association with a differentiated phenotype,
contributing to the tumor suppressor function of RB and playing important roles
in normal development.

PMCID: PMC134726
PMID: 12391156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Immunol. 2002 Oct 15;169(8):4362-9.

Distinct roles for c-Myb and core binding factor/polyoma enhancer-binding protein
2 in the assembly and function of a multiprotein complex on the TCR delta
enhancer in vivo.

Hernández-Munain C(1), Krangel MS.

Author information: 
(1)Basel Institute for Immunology, Basel, Switzerland. chmunain@cbm.uam.es

Enhancers and promoters within TCR loci functionally collaborate to modify
chromatin structure and to confer accessibility to the transcription and V(D)J
recombination machineries during T cell development in the thymus. Two enhancers 
at the TCRalphadelta locus, the TCR alpha enhancer and the TCR delta enhancer
(Edelta), are responsible for orchestrating the distinct developmental programs
for V(D)J recombination and transcription of the TCR alpha and delta genes,
respectively. Edelta function depends critically on transcription factors core
binding factor (CBF)/polyoma enhancer-binding protein 2 (PEBP2) and c-Myb as
measured by transcriptional activation of transiently transfected substrates in
Jurkat cells, and by activation of V(D)J recombination within
chromatin-integrated substrates in transgenic mice. To understand the molecular
mechanisms for synergy between these transcription factors in the context of
chromatin, we used in vivo footprinting to study the requirements for protein
binding to Edelta within wild-type and mutant versions of a human TCR delta
minilocus in stably transfected Jurkat cells. Our data indicate that CBF/PEBP2
plays primarily a structural role as it induces a conformational change in the
enhanceosome that is associated with augmented binding of c-Myb. In contrast,
c-Myb has no apparent affect on CBF/PEBP2 binding, but is critical for
transcriptional activation. Thus, our data reveal distinct functions for c-Myb
and CBF/PEBP2 in the assembly and function of an Edelta enhanceosome in the
context of chromatin in vivo.

PMID: 12370369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Oct 1;30(19):4145-57.

Sp1 and AP2 regulate but do not constitute TATA-less human TAF(II)55 core
promoter activity.

Zhou T(1), Chiang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Human TAF(II)55 (hTAF(II)55), a component of the general transcription factor
TFIID, is the only general transcription factor encoded by an intronless gene
identified thus far. Analysis of the TATA-less hTAF(II)55 promoter-proximal
sequence reveals putative binding sites for STAT-1, MEF2, E2F, Sp1, AP2, AREB6
and E47. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, DNase I footprinting and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we demonstrate that Sp1 and AP2 can bind
simultaneously to juxtaposed Sp1- and AP2-binding sites in the hTAF(II)55
promoter-proximal region and functionally modulate hTAF(II)55 promoter activity, 
as evidenced by reporter gene assays performed in transiently transfected human
C-33A and insect SL2 cell lines. Interestingly, removal of all the
promoter-proximal Sp1-binding sites does not impair the function of the
hTAF(II)55 core promoter. Moreover, a 52-bp DNA fragment containing only the
hTAF(II)55 initiator (Inr) and downstream promoter element (DPE) is able to
support Gal4-VP16-mediated activation in vivo and in vitro. Our data suggest that
Sp1, although it plays an enhancing role in hTAF(II)55 gene expression, is not
essential for hTAF(II)55 core promoter activity. Interestingly, mutations
introduced at the Inr and DPE differentially affect the selection of
transcription start sites, suggesting that these two core promoter elements play 
a non-redundant role in the function of TATA-less promoters.

PMCID: PMC140537
PMID: 12364593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biochem J. 2003 Jan 15;369(Pt 2):341-9.

Essential role of an activator protein-2 (AP-2)/specificity protein 1 (Sp1)
cluster in the UVB-mediated induction of the human vascular endothelial growth
factor in HaCaT keratinocytes.

Brenneisen P(1), Blaudschun R, Gille J, Schneider L, Hinrichs R, Wlaschek M,
Eming S, Scharffetter-Kochanek K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Physiological Chemistry I, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf,
Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. PeterBrenneisen@web.de

Chronic sun exposure of the skin has long been postulated to enhance cutaneous
angiogenesis, resulting in highly vascularized skin cancers. As the UVB component
of sunlight is a major contributor to photocarcinogenesis, we aimed to explore
the effects of UVB radiation on vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) gene
expression, using the immortalized keratinocyte cell line HaCaT as a model for
transformed premalignant epithelial cells. In the present paper, we studied the
molecular mechanism of UVB-induced VEGF providing a major angiogenic activity in 
tumour progression and invasion. After 12-24 h of UVB irradiation, a 2.4- to
2.7-fold increase in endogenous VEGF protein level was measured, correlating with
an up to 2.5-fold induction of promoter-based reporter gene constructs of VEGF.
Furthermore, we identified a GC-rich UVB-responsive region between -87 and -65 bp
of the VEGF promoter. In electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, this region binds
Sp1-dependent protein complexes constitutively and an additional UVB-inducible
protein complex distinct from Sp1 protein. The transcription factor AP-2
(activator protein-2) was detected as a component of the UVB-inducible protein
complex. The critical role of the AP-2/Sp1 (specificity protein 1) cluster was
supported by demonstration of a significant reduction of UVB-mediated promoter
activity upon deletion of this recognition site. The specificity of this region
for UVB irradiation was demonstrated using PMA, which increased VEGF activity in 
HaCaT cells after transient transfection of the deleted promoter construct. In
conclusion, our data clarified regulatory mechanisms of UVB-dependent VEGF
stimulation which may be critical for angiogenic processes in the skin.

PMCID: PMC1223081
PMID: 12358602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Sep 27;330(3):290-2.

No association between a transcription factor Activating Protein 2beta (AP-2beta)
gene variant and schizophrenia.

Jönsson EG(1), Damberg M, Forslund K, Mattila-Evenden M, Rylander G, Asberg M,
Oreland L, Sedvall GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, HUBIN project, Psychiatry Section,
Karolinska Institute and Hospital, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden. erikj@ks.se

Genetic components are involved in the aetiology of schizophrenia. Activating
Protein 2 (AP-2) transcription factors are essential for neural gene expression
and neural development. Transcription factor AP-2beta has also been connected
with monoaminergic genes and monoamine levels in various brain regions. Thus, the
AP-2beta gene is a suitable candidate taking both the neurodevelopmental and
dopamine hypotheses of schizophrenia into account. We investigated 135
schizophrenic patients and 382 control subjects with regard to an intronic
AP-2beta variant without evidence of any association. We conclude that the
investigated AP-2beta variant is not of major importance to schizophrenia in the 
investigated Swedish population.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12270648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochemistry. 2002 Oct 1;41(39):11847-56.

Modulation of the human protein kinase C alpha gene promoter by activator
protein-2.

Clark JH(1), Haridasse V, Glazer RI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University
School of Medicine, 3970 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, D.C. 20007, USA.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry 2002 Oct 29;41(43):13116.

Protein kinase Calpha (PKCalpha) is a phospholipid-dependent
protein-serine/threonine kinase that plays a major role in intracellular
signaling pathways associated with transformation and tumor progression.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and GBM cell lines exhibit increased levels of
PKCalpha compared to normal brain tissue that relates to their proliferative and 
invasive potential. To investigate the transcriptional regulation of PKCalpha,
the 5'-flanking sequence of the human PKCalpha gene was cloned and its promoter
activity assessed in U-87 GBM cells. This sequence contained a TATA-less promoter
region and a single transcription start site within an initiator sequence. Basal 
promoter activity was restricted to a region spanning -227 to +77 relative to the
transcription start site. DNase I footprinting revealed multiple activator
protein-2 (AP-2) binding sites and one Sp1 binding site within this region, and
point mutations of two AP-2 elements resulted in a loss of DNA binding and
transcriptional activation. Overexpression of Sp1 in either U-87 or insect cells 
increased transcription from the -227/+77 promoter region, whereas overexpression
of AP-2 increased transcription only in insect cells. Cis activation of the
promoter in U-87 cells was increased by phorbol esters but not by cyclic AMP or
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase inhibitors. These results provide evidence that cis
activation of the basal promoter of the human PKCalpha gene occurs through an
AP-2-dependent, phorbol ester-responsive pathway, which suggests an
autoregulatory manner of transcription in GBM.

PMID: 12269829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Blood. 2002 Oct 1;100(7):2449-56.

Role of Cbfb in hematopoiesis and perturbations resulting from expression of the 
leukemogenic fusion gene Cbfb-MYH11.

Kundu M(1), Chen A, Anderson S, Kirby M, Xu L, Castilla LH, Bodine D, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch and Genetic Disease Research Branch,
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, 20892, USA.

Core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta) and CBFalpha2 form a heterodimeric
transcription factor that plays an important role in hematopoiesis. The genes
encoding either CBFbeta or CBFalpha2 are involved in chromosomal rearrangements
in more than 30% of cases of acute myeloid leukemia (AML), suggesting that
CBFbeta and CBFalpha2 play important roles in leukemogenesis. Inv(16)(p13;q22) is
found in almost all cases of AML M4Eo and results in the fusion of CBFB with
MYH11, the gene encoding smooth muscle myosin heavy chain. Mouse embryos
heterozygous for a Cbfb-MYH11 knock-in gene lack definitive hematopoiesis, a
phenotype shared by Cbfb(-/-) embryos. In this study we generated a Cbfb-GFP
knock-in mouse model to characterize the normal expression pattern of Cbfbeta in 
hematopoietic cells. In midgestation embryos, Cbfbeta was expressed in
populations enriched for hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors. This
population of stem cells and progenitors was not present in mouse embryos
heterozygous for the Cbfb-MYH11 knock-in gene. Together, these data suggest that 
Cbfb-MYH11 blocks embryonic hematopoiesis at the stem-progenitor cell level and
that Cbfb is essential for the generation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cells. In adult mice, Cbfbeta was expressed in stem and progenitor cells, as well
as mature myeloid and lymphoid cells. Although it was expressed in erythroid
progenitors, Cbfbeta was not expressed during the terminal stages of
erythropoiesis. Our data indicate that Cbfb is required for myeloid and lymphoid 
differentiation; but does not play a critical role in erythroid differentiation.

PMID: 12239155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Life Sci. 2002 Oct 4;71(20):2369-81.

Selective changes in DNA binding activity of transcription factors in UM-X7.1
cardiomyopathic hamsters.

Ambra R(1), Di Nardo P, Fantini C, Minieri M, Canali R, Natella F, Virgili F.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radicals Research Group, National Institute for Food and Nutrition
Research, via Ardeatina 546, 00178, Rome, Italy. ambra@inran.it

UM-X7.1 hamsters (CH) are considered a representative model for human
cardiomyopathy. CH display the loss of the cytoskeletal delta-sarcoglycan
protein, associated with myocardium remodeling and fatal reduction of heart
functional efficiency. Even though altered redox balance and calcium homeostasis 
have already been reported to affect cardiomyocyte function, the molecular
mechanisms underlying this pathology are largely unknown. We found no significant
differences in DNA binding activity of redox-related (NF-kappaB, Sp1, AP-1 and
AP-2) transcription factors in heart ventricles of 90 day-old CH, compared to
normal animals. On the other hand, DNA binding activity of calcium-dependent
transcription factors NF-AT3 and CREB were increased and decreased respectively
in CH vs. normal ventricles. Western blot experiments confirmed the down
regulation of CREB levels and suggest a novel regulation mechanism for this
transcription factor in the heart. Our results are consistent with recent studies
on NF-AT3, GATA4 and CREB transgenic mice, and provide clues for the
comprehension of pathogenetic mechanisms of hamster hereditary cardiomyopathy.

PMID: 12231398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):43873-80. Epub 2002 Sep 12.

The human reduced folate carrier gene is regulated by the AP2 and sp1
transcription factor families and a functional 61-base pair polymorphism.

Whetstine JR(1), Witt TL, Matherly LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

Recently, our laboratory reported an intricate regulation of the human reduced
folate carrier (hRFC) gene, involving multiple promoters and noncoding exons. We 
localized promoter activity to a 452-bp GC-rich region upstream of noncoding exon
A, including a 47-bp basal promoter with a CRE/AP-1-like consensus element that
bound the bZip family of DNA-binding proteins (e.g. CREB-1 and c-Jun). We now
report that three nearly identical tandem repeats (49-61 bp) in the hRFC-A
upstream region are involved in regulating promoter activity. By in vitro binding
assays, multiple transcription factors (e.g. AP2 and Sp1/Sp3) bound this region. 
When AP2 was cotransfected with the hRFC-A reporter construct into HT1080 cells, 
promoter activity increased 3-fold. In Drosophila SL2 cells, Sp1 transactivated
promoter A and showed synergism with CREB-1. However, c-Jun was antagonistic to
the effects of Sp1. A sequence variant in the hRFC-A repeated region was
identified, involving an exact duplication of a 61-bp sequence. This variant had 
an allelic frequency of 78% in 72 genomic DNAs and resulted in a 63% increase in 
promoter activity. These results identify important regions in the hRFC-A
promoter and critical roles for AP2 and Sp1, in combination with the bZip
transcription factors. Moreover, they document a functionally novel polymorphism 
that increases promoter activity and may contribute to interpatient variations in
hRFC expression and effects on tissue folate homeostasis and antitumor response
to antifolates.

PMID: 12228234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 22;277(47):45028-33. Epub 2002 Sep 10.

Tumor suppressor activity of AP2alpha mediated through a direct interaction with 
p53.

McPherson LA(1), Loktev AV, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, MSLS P228, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

The AP2 transcription factor family is a set of developmentally regulated,
retinoic acid inducible genes composed of four related factors, AP2alpha,
AP2beta, AP2gamma, and AP2delta. AP2 factors orchestrate a variety of cell
processes including apoptosis, cell growth, and tissue differentiation during
embryogenesis. In studies of primary malignancies, AP2alpha has been shown to
function as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer, colon cancer, and malignant
melanoma. In cell culture models, overexpression of AP2alpha inhibits cell
division and stable colony formation, whereas, a dominant-negative AP2alpha
mutant increases invasiveness and tumorigenicity. Here we show that AP2alpha
targets the p53 tumor suppressor protein. Studies with chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrate that AP2alpha is brought to p53 binding sites in 
p53-regulated promoters. The interaction between AP2alpha and p53 augments
p53-mediated transcriptional activation, which results in up-regulation of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1). AP2alpha is able to induce G(1)
and G(2) cell cycle arrest only in the presence of wild-type p53. Thus, we
conclude that the tumor suppressor activity of AP2alpha is mediated through a
direct interaction with p53. These results also provide a mechanism to explain
patterns of gene expression in cancers where AP2alpha is known to function as a
tumor suppressor.

PMID: 12226108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Development. 2002 Oct;129(19):4613-25.

Fgf8 is required for pharyngeal arch and cardiovascular development in the mouse.

Abu-Issa R(1), Smyth G, Smoak I, Yamamura K, Meyers EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Neonatal Perinatal Research Institute, Duke
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

We present here an analysis of cardiovascular and pharyngeal arch development in 
mouse embryos hypomorphic for Fgf8. Previously, we have described the generation 
of Fgf8 compound heterozygous (Fgf8(neo/-)) embryos. Although early analysis
demonstrated that some of these embryos have abnormal left-right (LR) axis
specification and cardiac looping reversals, the number and type of cardiac
defects present at term suggested an additional role for Fgf8 in cardiovascular
development. Most Fgf8(neo/-) mutant embryos survive to term with abnormal
cardiovascular patterning, including outflow tract, arch artery and intracardiac 
defects. In addition, these mutants have hypoplastic pharyngeal arches, small or 
absent thymus and abnormal craniofacial development. Neural crest cells (NCCs)
populate the pharyngeal arches and contribute to many structures of the face,
neck and cardiovascular system, suggesting that Fgf8 may be required for NCC
development. Fgf8 is expressed within the developing pharyngeal arch ectoderm and
endoderm during NCC migration through the arches. Analysis of NCC development in 
Fgf8(neo/-) mutant embryos demonstrates that NCCs are specified and migrate, but 
undergo cell death in areas both adjacent and distal to where Fgf8 is normally
expressed. This study defines the cardiovascular defects present in Fgf8 mutants 
and supports a role for Fgf8 in development of all the pharyngeal arches and in
NCC survival.

PMID: 12223417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Mol Biol. 2002 Sep 13;322(2):259-72.

The RUNX1 Runt domain at 1.25A resolution: a structural switch and specifically
bound chloride ions modulate DNA binding.

Bäckström S(1), Wolf-Watz M, Grundström C, Härd T, Grundström T, Sauer UH.

Author information: 
(1)Biocrystallography Group, Umeå Centre for Molecular Pathogenesis (UCMP), Umeå 
University, SE-901 87 Umeå, Sweden.

The evolutionarily conserved Runt homology domain is characteristic of the RUNX
family of heterodimeric eukaryotic transcription factors, including RUNX1, RUNX2 
and RUNX3. The genes for RUNX1, also termed acute myeloid leukemia protein 1,
AML1, and its dimerization partner core-binding factor beta, CBFbeta, are
essential for hematopoietic development and are together the most common targets 
for gene rearrangements in acute human leukemias. Here, we describe the crystal
structure of the uncomplexed RUNX1 Runt domain at 1.25A resolution and compare
its conformation to previously published structures in complex with DNA, CBFbeta 
or both. We find that complex formation induces significant structural
rearrangements in this immunoglobulin (Ig)-like DNA-binding domain. Most
pronounced is the movement of loop L11, which changes from a closed conformation 
in the free Runt structure to an open conformation in the CBFbeta-bound and
DNA-bound forms. This transition, which we refer to as the S-switch, and
accompanying structural movements that affect other parts of the Runt domain are 
crucial for sustained DNA binding. The closed to open transition can be induced
by CBFbeta alone; suggesting that one role of CBFbeta is to trigger the S-switch 
and to stabilize the Runt domain in a conformation enhanced for DNA binding.A
feature of the Runt domain hitherto unobserved in any Ig-like DNA-binding domain 
is the presence of two specifically bound chloride ions. One chloride ion is
coordinated by amino acid residues that make direct DNA contact. In a series of
electrophoretic mobility-shift analyses, we demonstrate a chloride ion
concentration-dependent stimulation of the DNA-binding activity of Runt in the
physiological range. A comparable DNA-binding stimulation was observed for
negatively charged amino acid residues. This suggests a regulatory mechanism of
RUNX proteins through acidic amino acid residues provided by activation domains
during cooperative interaction with other transcription factors.

PMID: 12217689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Carcinog. 2002 Aug;34(4):172-9.

Tumorigenic effect of transcription factor hAP-2alpha and the intricate link
between hAP-2alpha activation and squelching.

Yu Y(1), Wang Y, Li M, Kannan P.

Author information: 
(1)Rammelkamp Center for Education and Research, MetroHealth Campus, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Overexpression of human activator protein-2alpha (hAP-2alpha) is carcinogenic.
Its aberrant regulation is the underlying tumorigenic event in the human
teratocarcinoma cell line PA-1. In this cell line excess hAP-2alpha protein binds
and sequesters coactivators, which interferes with the activity of other
activators and with its own activity. The N-terminus of hAP-2alpha, which
contains an activation domain, is critical in squelching and tumorigenicity.
Mutation analyses of the N-terminus region showed that activation and squelching 
were intricately linked; nevertheless, squelching could occur in the absence of
activity. Cells overexpressing squelching-proficient mutants grew efficiently on 
soft agar irrespective of their ability to activate transcription, which
indicates that these cells are tumorigenic. Mutants that lacked both properties
were nontumorigenic. These results suggest that squelching, but not activation,
causes transformation and that the factors that are sequestered at this region
are critical in tumorigenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12203368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 1;277(44):42268-79. Epub 2002 Aug 27.

Loricrin expression in cultured human keratinocytes is controlled by a complex
interplay between transcription factors of the Sp1, CREB, AP1, and AP2 families.

Jang SI(1), Steinert PM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Skin Biology, NIAMS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-8023, USA. jangs@mail.nih.gov

The major protein component of the cornified cell envelope barrier structure of
the epidermis is loricrin, and it is expressed late during terminal
differentiation in epidermal keratinocytes. We have previously shown that an AP1 
site located in the proximal promoter region (position -55) is essential for
human loricrin promoter activity (Rossi, A., Jang, S-I., Ceci, R., Steinert, P.
M., and Markova, N. G. (1998) J. Invest. Dermatol. 110, 34-40). In this study we 
show that its regulation requires complex cooperative and competitive
interactions between multiple transcription factors in keratinocytes located in
different compartments of the epidermis. We show that as few as 154 base pairs of
5'-upstream sequences from the cap site can direct the keratinocyte-specific
expression in cultured keratinocytes. Mutation and DNA-protein analyses show that
Sp1, c-Jun, an unidentified regulator, and the co-activator p300/CREB-binding
protein up-regulate whereas Sp3, CREB-1/CREMalpha/ATF-1, Jun B, and an AP2-like
protein (termed the keratinocyte-specific repressor-1 (KSR-1)) suppress loricrin 
promoter activity. We show that CREB protein can compete with c-Jun for the AP1
site and repress loricrin promoter activity. We show here that the protein kinase
A pathway can activate loricrin expression by manipulation of the Sp1, Sp3, and
KSR-1 levels in the nucleus. Thus, in undifferentiated cells, loricrin expression
is suppressed by Jun B, Sp3, and KSR-1 proteins. But in advanced differentiated
cells, levels of Sp3, KSR-1, and CREB proteins are lower; the unidentified
regulator protein can bind; Sp1 and c-Jun are increased; and then p300/CBP is
recruited. Together, these events allow loricrin transcription to proceed.
Indeed, the synergistic effects of the Sp1, c-Jun, and p300 factors indicate that
p300/CBP might act as bridge to form an active transcription complex.

PMID: 12200429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Arch Dermatol Res. 2002 Aug;294(6):273-80. Epub 2002 Jul 20.

Different properties of three isoforms (alpha, beta, and gamma) of transcription 
factor AP-2 in the expression of human keratinocyte genes.

Oyama N(1), Takahashi H, Tojo M, Iwatsuki K, Iizuka H, Nakamura K, Homma Y,
Kaneko F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Fukushima Medical University School of Medicine,
Japan.

The transcription factor AP-2/promoter system is essential for gene expression
associated with ectodermal development, particularly in the neural crest and
skin. Three AP-2 isoforms, alpha, beta, and gamma, exhibit a highly homologous
structure, but their functions are considered to be different. Here, we report on
the role of each AP-2 isoform in complex keratinocyte biology including
proliferation, differentiation, and carcinogenesis. The expression of AP-2 was
investigated immunohistochemically in serial skin sections from normal and
psoriatic skin, and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC). AP-2alpha was present only in 
the nuclei of normal basal keratinocytes, but was significantly increased in
lesional proliferating keratinocytes of both diseases. AP-2beta was completely
absent from all skin samples except dermal sweat glands, whereas AP-2gamma was
present homogeneously throughout the epidermis in normal and psoriatic skin as
well as in the SCC lesion. Their restricted expression patterns correlated with
in vitro DNA binding assays using selective keratinocyte gene promoters and three
recombinant AP-2 isoforms generated bacterially as glutathione S-transferase
fusion protein. Epidermal growth factor receptor and basal keratin K14 promoters 
bound to AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma with similar affinities, whereas suprabasal
keratin K1, type I transglutaminase, and involucrin promoters predominantly bound
to AP-2gamma rather than AP-2alpha. In contrast, AP-2beta did not bind to any of 
the five promoters despite specific binding to the AP-2 consensus probe. These
results suggest that AP-2alpha is closely associated with keratinocyte
proliferation and/or carcinogenesis rather than differentiation, while AP-2gamma 
is ubiquitous in all stages of keratinocyte biology. Taken together, three AP-2
isoforms perform unique roles in the spatial and temporal expression of human
keratinocyte-related genes, thereby maintaining epidermal homeostasis. Disruption
of the epidermal AP-2 balance may contribute to hyperproliferative conditions,
such as psoriasis and SCC.

PMID: 12192491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Br J Haematol. 2002 Sep;118(3):714-27.

Chromatin modification, leukaemia and implications for therapy.

Jones LK(1), Saha V.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Children's Cancer Group, Department of Paediatric
Haematology and Oncology, Royal London Hospital, London, UK.

PMID: 12181038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Neuroendocrinology. 2002 Aug;76(2):111-20.

Sustained increases in activating transcription factor-2 and activator protein-2 
in the rat supraoptic nucleus during water deprivation.

Meeker RB(1), Fernandes A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, 27599,
USA. meeker@glial.med.unc.edu

During increases in plasma osmolality, extrinsic and intrinsic stimuli converge
on the neuroendocrine cells within the supraoptic nucleus (SON) and
paraventricular nucleus and evoke the release of vasopressin (VP). This release
is accompanied by an increase in VP synthesis, but the signal transduction
pathways that coordinate these two processes are still poorly understood. Several
transcription factors have been suggested to be intermediates in this process,
but their expression is often transient in spite of continued VP synthesis.
Transcription factor expression during chronic neuroendocrine cell stimulation
has rarely been examined. In an effort to identify sustained increases, we
examined the expression of several transcription factors in the SON of normal
rats and rats deprived of water for 44 h. Alpha and beta isoforms of activator
protein-2 (AP-2 alpha; AP-beta), activating transcription factor-2 (ATF-2), the
phosphorylated form of cyclic AMP response element binding protein and
phospho-cJun were all expressed in the rat SON under basal conditions. Increases 
in AP-2 alpha and ATF-2 were sustained throughout the SON during water
deprivation, suggesting that these transcription factors could play a role in the
maintenance of VP and oxytocin gene transcription in response to dehydration.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 12169772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 18;277(42):39082-92. Epub 2002 Aug 6.

The role of Sp1 and AP-2 in basal and protein kinase A--induced expression of
mitochondrial serine:pyruvate aminotransferase in hepatocytes.

Uchida C(1), Oda T, Sugiyama T, Otani S, Kitagawa M, Ichiyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry I, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1 
Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan. cuchida@hama-med.ac.jp

Transcription of mitochondrial serine:pyruvate aminotransferase (SPT) mRNA
(SPTm-mRNA) in rat liver is unique in that it occurs from the upstream site of
the two transcription start sites within the first exon of the SPT gene and is
selectively enhanced by cAMP via the protein kinase A (PKA) signaling pathway. In
this study, we identified the DNA elements and nuclear factors responsible for
the basal and PKA-induced activities of the upstream promoter. By using a
luciferase reporter assay with HepG2 cells, DNase I footprinting analysis, and
gel shift experiments, we identified the binding sites for Sp1 and AP-2 within
the regions -125 to -89 and -14 to +10, respectively. Mutational analyses
indicated that these regions are essential for the transcription factor binding
and the SPT promoter activity. Expression of AP-2 caused a marked increase in the
basal promoter activity to about the same level as that achieved by PKA. On the
other hand, both the basal and PKA-induced activities were elevated by
overexpression of Sp1, its effect on PKA-induced activity being more pronounced
with coexpression of CBP and repressed by E1A oncoprotein. These results suggest 
that AP-2 and Sp1 regulate basal promoter activity, and Sp1 is also involved in
PKA-mediated expression of the rat SPT gene in concert with the transcriptional
coactivator CBP.

PMID: 12169688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Aug 19;1577(1):63-72.

An AP2 domain transcription factor HvCBF1 activates expression of cold-responsive
genes in barley through interaction with a (G/a)(C/t)CGAC motif.

Xue GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Plant Industry, 120 Meiers Rd, Indooroopilly, Qld 4068, Australia.
Gang.Ping.Xue@pi.csiro.au

A HvCBF1 cDNA encoding an AP2 domain-containing protein was isolated from barley 
leaves. Expression of HvCBF1 was induced in barley leaves by exposure to a low
temperature (2 degrees C), but not by drought or abscisic acid (ABA) treatment.
Functional analysis showed that HvCBF1 was a transcriptional activator, capable
of activating expression of reporter genes driven by a cold- and
drought-responsive HVA1s promoter in barley leaves. Transactivation analysis of
HvCBF1 on a number of synthetic oligonucleotides containing potential C-repeat
(CRT)/dehydration-responsive element (DRE) derived from cold-responsive barley
genes revealed that HvCBF1 interacted much more efficiently with a GCCGAC motif
than a previously identified barley low-temperature-responsive element (LTRE),
CCGAAA. A detailed base-substitution mutagenesis study revealed that only the
CGAC sequence of the GCCGAC motif was highly conserved for interacting with
HvCBF1. The promoter activity of the mutant motifs, ACCGAC and GTCGAC, was 36%
and 75% of that of the GCCGAC motif, respectively. The base composition
surrounding the GCCGAC motif also had a significant effect on the efficiency of
the motif. These data suggest that barley HvCBF1 protein interacts with the
(G/a)(C/t)CGAC motif and is involved in regulation of cold-responsive genes in
barley via an ABA-independent signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 12151096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Aug;16(8):1864-80.

Transcription of cholesterol side-chain cleavage cytochrome P450 in the placenta:
activating protein-2 assumes the role of steroidogenic factor-1 by binding to an 
overlapping promoter element.

Ben-Zimra M(1), Koler M, Orly J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel 91904.

Progesterone is essential to the sustenance of pregnancy in humans and other
mammals. From the second trimester on, the human placenta is the sole origin of
de novo synthesized steroid hormones. In mice, placentation at midgestation is
accompanied by a temporal rise of steroid hormone synthesis commencing in the
giant cells of the mouse trophoblast. In doing so, the giant trophoblasts, as any
other steroidogenic cell, express high levels of the key steroidogenic enzyme,
cholesterol side-chain cleavage cytochrome P450 (P450scc). Because steroidogenic 
factor 1 (SF-1), the transcription factor required for expression of P450scc in
the adrenals and the gonads, is not expressed in the placenta, we hypothesized
that placenta-specific nuclear factor(s) (PNF) assumes the role of SF-1 by
binding to the same promoter region that harbors the SF-1 recognition site in the
P450scc gene. To address this possibility, we used SCC1, a well conserved
proximal region in the P450scc genes (-60/-32 in the rat gene) to purify PNF from
human term placenta. Sequencing of the purified PNF revealed that it is the alpha
isoform of the human activating protein-2 (AP-2alpha). Specific antibodies tested
in EMSA confirmed that AP-2alpha is the predominant isoform that binds SCC1 in
the human placenta, whereas AP-2gamma is the only mouse placental protein that
binds this oligonucleotide. Functional studies showed that coexpression of the
rat P450scc promoter (-378/+8 CAT) and AP-2 isoforms (alpha or gamma) in human
embryonic kidney 293 cells results in a marked activation of chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) transcription that is dependent on an intact AP-2 motif, 
GCCTTGAGC. This motif conforms with consensus sequences previously determined for
binding of the AP-2 alpha and gamma isoforms. Mutations of the AP-2 element
ablated binding of AP-2 to SCC1, as well as severely diminished the promoter
activity in primary mouse giant trophoblasts and human choriocarcinoma JAR cells.
Collectively, these studies suggest that expression of placental P450scc is
governed by AP-2 factors that bind to a cis-element that largely overlaps the
sequence required for recognition of SF-1 in other steroidogenic tissues.

PMID: 12145340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36129-36. Epub 2002 Jul 24.

A cyclic AMP-dependent pathway regulates the expression of acetylcholinesterase
during myogenic differentiation of C2C12 cells.

Siow NL(1), Choi RC, Cheng AW, Jiang JX, Wan DC, Zhu SQ, Tsim KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Molecular Neuroscience Center, The Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay Road, Hong Kong, China.

The expression of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) is markedly increased during
myogenic differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts to myotubes; the expression is
mediated by intrinsic factor(s) during muscle differentiation. In order to
analyze the molecular mechanisms regulating AChE expression during myogenic
differentiation, a approximately 2.2-kb human AChE promoter tagged with a
luciferase reporter gene, namely pAChE-Luc, was stably transfected into C2C12
cells. The profile of promoter-driven luciferase activity during myogenic
differentiation of C2C12 myotubes was found to be similar to that of endogenous
expression of AChE catalytic subunit. The increase of AChE expression was
reciprocally regulated by a cAMP-dependent signaling pathway. The level of
intracellular cAMP, the activity of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, the
phosphorylation of cAMP-responsive element binding protein and the activity of
cAMP- responsive element (CRE) were down-regulated during the myotube formation. 
Mutating the CRE site of human AChE promoter altered the original myogenic
profile of the promoter activity and its suppressive response to cAMP. In
addition, the suppressive effect of the CRE site is dependent on its location on 
the promoter. Therefore, our results suggest that a cAMP-dependent signaling
pathway serves as a suppressive element in regulating the expression of AChE
during early myogenesis.

PMID: 12140295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Histochem Cytochem. 2002 Aug;50(8):1059-65.

Distribution of the transcription factors Sox9, AP-2, and [delta]EF1 in adult
murine articular and meniscal cartilage and growth plate.

Davies SR(1), Sakano S, Zhu Y, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, Department
of Orthopaedic Surgery, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The control of extracellular matrix (ECM) production is important for the
development, maintenance, and repair of cartilage tissues. Matrix molecule
synthesis is generally regulated by the rate of gene transcription determined by 
DNA transcription factors. We have shown that transcription factors Sox9, AP-2,
and [delta]EF1 are able to alter the rate of CD-RAP transcription in vitro: Sox9 
upregulates, AP-2 exhibits biphasic effects, and [delta]EF1 represses expression 
of the CD-RAP gene. To correlate these in vitro activities in vivo, transcription
factors were co-immunolocalized with ECM proteins in three different cartilage
tissues in which the rates of biosynthesis are quite different: articular,
meniscal, and growth plate. Immunoreactivities of type II collagen and CD-RAP
were higher in growth plate than in either the articular or meniscal cartilages
and correlated positively with Sox9 protein. Sox9 staining decreased with
hypertrophy and was low in articular and meniscal cartilages. In contrast, AP-2
and [delta]EF1 were low in proliferating chondrocytes but high in lower growth
plate, articular, and meniscal cartilages. This increase was also accompanied by 
intense nuclear staining. These immunohistochemical results are the first to
localize both [delta]EF1 and AP-2 to adult articular, meniscal, and growth plate 
cartilages and provide in vivo correlation of previous molecular biological
studies.

PMID: 12133909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Front Biosci. 2002 Aug 1;7:c74-82.

Expression microarray analysis of brain tumors: what have we learned so far.

Hunter SB(1), Moreno CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30087, USA. Stephen_Hunter@Emory.org

This review covers the emerging field of expression microarray technology as
applied to human brain tumors. Dual and single color techniques are described and
contrasted, and the importance of proper handling of the starting material is
emphasized. Difficulties with data interpretation are described and current
approaches to cluster analysis reviewed. Microarray studies of general importance
or specifically pertaining to brain tumors, published in the initial few years of
this technology, are summarized. Although this technology is still in its
infancy, microarray has distinguished prognostic groups within medulloblastomas
and separated medulloblastomas from morphologically identical supratentorial
PNETs. Differential expression of a number of genes previously known to be
involved in the pathogenesis of brain tumors has been confirmed. These genes
include EGFR, VEGF, transcription factor AP-2, insulin growth factor binding
proteins 3 and 5, matrix metalloproteinases, tissue inhibitors of matrix
metalloproteinases, CD44, basic fibroblast growth factor, and cathepsin H.
Finally, novel roles for a few genes, including insulin growth factor binding
protein 2 and apolipoprotein D, have been revealed for the first time by
expression microarrays.

PMID: 12133823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Jul 15;64(2):177-84.

Induction of cyclooxygenase-2 by staurosporine through the activation of nuclear 
factor for IL-6 (NF-IL6) and activator protein 2 (AP2) in an osteoblast-like cell
line.

Wang CY(1), Lei HJ, Huang CY, Zhang Z, Mukherjee AB, Yuan CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National Chiao Tung
University, 75 Po-Ai Street, Hsinchu 30050, Taiwan, ROC.

The induction of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) plays a crucial role in many
physiological and pathological processes. The expression of the COX-2 gene is
regulated by many extracellular stimuli, including growth factors, cytokines, and
tumor promoters. Staurosporine, a potential anti-tumor drug, was found recently
to up-regulate the expression of the COX-2 gene in the mouse osteoblast-like cell
line MC3T3-E1. The ability of staurosporine to induce the expression of the COX-2
gene was investigated using luciferase reporters controlled by various COX-2 core
promoter regions. Two cis-acting sites for activator protein 2 (AP2) and nuclear 
factor for IL-6 (NF-IL6), respectively, were identified as responsible for the
staurosporine-mediated COX-2 up-regulation. Mutational analysis further verified 
that both NF-IL6 and AP2 are involved in this process. Further studies showed the
stimulatory effect of staurosporine on luciferase activity to be both time- and
concentration-dependent. Luciferase activity could be induced at as low as 5 nM
staurosporine and reached a maximum at around 20 nM. At 50 nM, the stimulatory
effect of staurosporine on luciferase activity reached a maximum at about 8 hr
and fell rapidly following 10 hr of incubation. Interestingly, a selective
protein kinase C inhibitor,
2-[1-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)indol-3-yl]-3-(indol-3-yl) maleimide (GF109203X),
failed to stimulate luciferase activity under the same conditions. This finding
implies that staurosporine-mediated COX-2 gene expression is specific and
independent of protein kinase C activity.

PMID: 12123737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2002 May;109(5-6):963-75.

Smoking only explains part of the associations between platelet monoamine oxidase
activity and personality.

Oreland L(1), Damberg M, Hallman J, Garpenstrand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, BMC, University of
Uppsala, Sweden. Lars.Oreland@neuro.uu.se

Platelet monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity has been shown to be inversely
associated with personality traits such as sensation seeking, impulsiveness and
extraversion. Those personality traits have also been linked to vulnerability for
substance abuse, e.g. tobacco smoking and early onset or "type 2" alcoholism.
Compounds in cigarette smoke have been shown to be inhibitors of MAO, which has
led several authors to claim that there is no association between alcoholism,
which is the most studied psychiatric condition, and platelet MAO if the effect
of smoking is removed. With regard to the association between personality and
platelet MAO, authors have in general been cautious. In the present paper we
describe a number of results which show that there is such an association, both
in clinical series if the effect of smoking is removed and in series where
smoking have never taken place. A cornerstone in this regard is the significant
association between platelet MAO activity and both behaviour/personality,
voluntary alcohol intake and biochemical measures of CNS serotonergic activity in
non-human primates. Strong evidence that the regulation of platelet MAO activity 
takes place on a transcriptional level with an involvement of transcription
factors, likely to also regulate central monoaminergic activity, are presented.

PMID: 12111482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Jun;963:297-305.

Molecular genetics of acute myeloid leukemia.

Bernasconi P(1), Boni M, Cavigliano PM, Calatroni S, Giardini I, Rocca B,
Caresana M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Blood, Heart and Lung Medical Sciences of the University of
Pavia and Division of Hematology, Policlinico San Matteo IRCCS, Pavia, Italy.
p.bernasconi@smatteo.pv.it

Recurring chromosomal abnormalities are detected in most patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). They may be associated with a distinct AML FAB subtype or
may identify distinct clinicobiological entities within the same FAB subtype.
Therefore, cytogenetic investigation has a pivotal role in AML diagnosis. In
addition, it is one of the most valuable prognostic determinants of the disease, 
as recently demonstrated. The development of new molecular techniques, such as
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and fluorescence in situ
hybridization, has allowed perfect definition of the chromosome regions
containing genes with a crucial role in normal hemopoiesis and leukemia.
Understanding the action of such genes provides new insights into AML
pathogenesis and has led us to envisage new therapeutic options.

PMID: 12095955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Jun;961:172-7.

p38 MAP kinase regulation of AP-2 binding in TGF-beta1-stimulated chondrogenesis 
of human trabecular bone-derived cells.

Tuli R(1), Seghatoleslami MR, Tuli S, Howard MS, Danielson KG, Tuan RS.

Author information: 
(1)Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases/NIH, 50 South Drive, Building 50 Room 1503,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Collagenase-treated, explanted human trabecular-bone chips are an excellent
source of osteoblast-like cells. We have recently shown the multiple
differentiation potential of these cells; in addition to osteogenesis and
adipogenesis, these cells also undergo chondrogenesis when maintained as
high-density pellet cultures (250,000 cells/pellet) in a serum-free, chemically
defined medium stimulated with TGF-beta1 (10 ng/mL). In this investigation, we
have analyzed how transactivating nuclear transcription factors, specifically
AP-2 and SP-1, may interact with common cis-acting elements found in the
regulatory region of cartilage-specific genes as part of the signal transduction 
mechanism of TGF-beta1 and p38 during chondrogenesis of human trabecular
bone-derived multipotential cells. Both TGF-beta1 stimulation and p38 MAP kinase 
activation affect the binding of AP-2 as well as SP-1 to oligonucleotides with
sequence similarity to the overlapping AP-2/SP-1 sites found in the putative
52-bp immediate upstream regulatory region and the 5'-untranslated region of the 
human aggrecan gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that TGF-beta1
treatment of the bone-derived cells inhibits AP-2 DNA binding but enhances the
DNA binding ability of SP-1. Additionally, treatment of these
TGF-beta1-stimulated cells with p38 MAP kinase inhibitor, SB203580, rescued the
AP-2 DNA binding but did not affect SP-1 DNA binding. These findings indicate
that AP-2 DNA binding is the target of both TGF-beta1 and p38 MAP kinase
signaling pathways and suggest a possible signal transduction cascade whereby
TGF-beta1 induction of chondrogenesis involves the activation of p38 MAP kinase
and the subsequent inhibition of DNA binding by AP-2, thereby preventing the
transcriptional repression of the aggrecan gene.

PMID: 12081893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30798-804. Epub 2002 Jun 18.

Transcription factor AP-2 interacts with the SUMO-conjugating enzyme UBC9 and is 
sumolated in vivo.

Eloranta JJ(1), Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research United Kingdom, Molecular Oncology Unit, Hammersmith Hospital,
Du Cane Rd., London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

The members of the AP-2 family of transcription factors are developmentally
regulated and have distinct yet overlapping functions in the regulation of many
genes governing growth and differentiation. All AP-2 factors appear to be capable
of binding very similar DNA recognition sites, and the determinants of functional
specificity remain to be elucidated. AP-2 transcription factors have been shown
to act both as transcriptional activators and repressors in a promoter-specific
manner. Although several mediators of their activation function have been
suggested, few mechanisms for the repression or down-regulation of
transactivation have been described. In a two-hybrid screen for proteins
interacting with AP-2 factors, we have identified the UBC9 gene that encodes the 
E2 (ubiquitin carrier protein)-conjugating enzyme for the small ubiquitin-like
modifier, SUMO. The interaction domain resides in the C-terminal half of AP-2,
which contains the conserved DNA binding and dimerization domains. We have
detected sumolated forms of endogenous AP-2 in mammalian cells and have further
mapped the in vivo sumolation site to conserved lysine 10. Transient transfection
studies indicate that sumolation of AP-2 decreases its transcription activation
potential, and we discuss the possible mechanisms for the observed suppression of
AP-2 transactivation.

PMID: 12072434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Neurochem. 2002 May;81(4):673-85.

Involvement of NF-Y and Sp1 in basal and cAMP-stimulated transcriptional
activation of the tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH ) gene in the pineal gland.

Côté F(1), Schussler N, Boularand S, Peirotes A, Thévenot E, Mallet J, Vodjdani
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire de la Neurotransmission et des Processus 
Neurodégénératifs, CNRS, UMR 7091, Bâtiment CERVI, Hôpital de la Pitié
Salpêtrière, 83 boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France.

The expression of the tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) gene, encoding the
rate-limiting enzyme of serotonin biosynthesis, is tightly regulated both at the 
transcriptional and at the post-transcriptional levels. In the pineal gland,
transcription of the gene is activated in response to an intracellular circadian 
increase of the cAMP concentration. We have previously shown that transcription
of a 2.1-kb fragment of the human TPH promoter is induced by cAMP, although it
lacks the canonical cAMP responsive element, CRE. The minimal promoter (-73/+29) 
has only weak transcriptional activity but is responsive to cAMP. It contains an 
inverted CCAAT box, which was demonstrated to be involved in this response. Here,
we have extended our investigation to the functional features of the inverted
CCAAT box in the -252/+29 TPH promoter, which has a higher basal activity. We
show that an additional cis -acting sequence, the adjacent GC-rich region,
cooperates with the inverted CCAAT box for the full activation of basal
transcription, and that both elements are essential for the full cAMP response.
We also show that in pinealocytes, NF-Y and Sp1 transactivators bind the inverted
CCAAT box and GC-rich-region, respectively. These factors participate in a novel 
pathway for the cAMP-mediated response of the TPH promoter, which is independent 
of the canonical CRE-mediated response.

PMID: 12065627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Jun 14;191(2):127-36.

AP-2alpha modulates human corticotropin-releasing hormone gene expression in the 
placenta by direct protein-protein interaction.

Cheng YH(1), Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center and Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Endocrinology, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. cheny0@chmcc.org

Since AP-2alpha induces the expression of hPL, hCG and other
syncytiotrophoblast-specific marker genes in cytotrophoblast cells during in
vitro differentiation, we have examined whether AP-2alpha also induces hCRH gene 
expression during differentiation of cytotrophoblast cells. Infection of human
cytotrophoblast cells in vitro with an adenovirus expressing AP-2alpha resulted
in a twofold increase in hCRH mRNA levels, while infection with an adenovirus
expressing a dominant/negative mutant of AP-2alpha inhibited basal hCRH mRNA
levels by 40% and completely blocked the induction of hCRH mRNA by AP-2alpha.
Transient transfection studies in AtT-20 and HepG2 cells indicated that the
induction of hCRH mRNA levels was due, at least in part, to transcriptional
activation of the hCRH gene. Gel mobility shift and immunoprecipitation assays
strongly suggest that AP-2alpha induces hCRH gene expression by interacting with 
CREB and not by binding directly to the hCRH promoter.

PMID: 12062896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. FEBS Lett. 2002 Apr 24;517(1-3):272-6.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the human p19(INK4d) gene promoter.

Matsuzaki Y(1), Miyazawa K, Yokota T, Hitomi T, Yamagishi H, Sakai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine,
Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

p19(INK4d), a member of the INK4 family of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)
inhibitors, negatively regulates the cyclin D-CDK4/6 complexes, which promote
G1/S transition by phosphorylating the retinoblastoma tumor-suppressor gene
product. To investigate the mechanism of transcriptional regulation of the
p19(INK4d) gene, we characterized the 5'-flanking region of the human p19(INK4d) 
gene. The cap-site hunting method revealed that the transcription starts at -16
nucleotide (nt) upstream of the initiation codon. The 5'-flanking region of the
human p19(INK4d) gene was ligated to a luciferase reporter gene and possessed
functional promoter activity. Luciferase assay with a series of truncated
5'-flanking regions indicated that the region from -81 to -2 nt could drive the
transcription of the p19(INK4d) gene. Several Sp1 and activating protein 2
binding sites are located within the region from -81 to -2 nt. Mutation of the
second Sp1 binding site from -33 to -25 nt decreased the promoter activity.
Collectively, it was demonstrated that the human p19(INK4d) gene is under the
control of TATA-less promoter and the Sp1 binding site is involved in the
transcription.

PMID: 12062451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Int J Mol Med. 2002 Jul;10(1):65-71.

Activation and repression of growth factor receptor gene transcription (Review).

DiMario JX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Chicago Medical School, North Chicago,
IL 60064, USA. dimarioj@finchcms.edu

Growth factor receptors mediate cell signaling events that regulate a diverse
array of cellular activities including cell proliferation, homeostasis, and
differentiation of both normal and cancer cells. Studies of the mechanisms
governing transcription of growth factor receptor genes have revealed common
structural features of their promoters. These common features include GC rich
promoter regions and multiple Sp factor binding sites based upon which most of
these promoters are transactivated. Mechanisms of growth factor receptor promoter
activation via these common structural features will be reviewed, with particular
attention to control of FGFR1 promoter activity in skeletal muscle cells. Of
equal importance in cellular function is the repression of growth factor receptor
signaling and gene expression. Mechanisms that repress growth factor receptor
promoter activity operate via direct repression at transcriptional activator
binding sites and via protein-protein interactions that abrogate activator
function. Mechanisms of growth factor receptor transcriptional repression will be
considered in the context of known tumor suppressors, transcription activator
availability, as well as in light of emerging potential Sp1-like transcriptional 
repressors.

PMID: 12060852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Immunol. 2002 Jun 15;168(12):6279-85.

Functional analysis of the human complement receptor 2 (CR2/CD21) promoter:
characterization of basal transcriptional mechanisms.

Ulgiati D(1), Pham C, Holers VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Division of Rheumatology, University of Colorado
Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Human complement receptor (CR) type 2 (CR2/CD21) is a 145-kDa membrane protein
encoded within the regulators of complement activation gene cluster localized on 
human chromosome 1q32. Understanding the mechanisms that regulate CR2 expression 
is important because CR2 is expressed during specific stages of B cell
development, and several lines of evidence suggest a role for altered CR2
function or expression in a number of autoimmune diseases. Additionally, even
modest changes in CR2 expression are likely to affect relative B cell responses. 
In this study we have delineated the transcriptional requirements of the human
CR2 gene. We have studied the human CR2 proximal promoter and identified sites
important for controlling the level of transcription in CR2-expressing cells. We 
have determined that four functionally relevant sites lie within very close
proximity to the transcriptional initiation site. These sites bind the
transcription factors USF1, an AP-2-like transcription factor, and Sp1.

PMID: 12055242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2002 Apr 15;134(2):142-4.

Chromosome 16 inversion-associated translocations in acute myeloid leukemia
elucidated using a dual-color CBFB DNA probe.

Aventín A(1), Espadaler M, Casas S, Duarte J, Nomdedéu J, Sierra J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
aaventin@hsp.santpau.es

We describe two cases of acute myelomonocytic leukemia with eosinophilia
(AML-M4Eo) that were diagnosed with an inv(16)(p13q22) based on conventional
cytogenetics (CC) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique using a
chromosome 16p arm specific paint probe. Additional FISH analysis with a
dual-color CBFB DNA probe showed that the 3' portion of the CBFB gene was
translocated to chromosome 10p13 in the first patient and 1p36 in the other.
These two cases indicate that some inv(16)(p13q22) identified by CC and FISH with
chromosome arm-specific painting probe may represent cases of
inversion-associated translocation. We suggest that all cases with
inv(16)(p13q22) should be investigated by FISH with appropriate probes for a
possible translocation of 16q22-->qter to another chromosome.

PMID: 12034528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jun;22(12):4293-308.

Dissection of a complex enhancer element: maintenance of keratinocyte specificity
but loss of differentiation specificity.

Kaufman CK(1), Sinha S, Bolotin D, Fan J, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

In this report, we explored the mechanisms underlying keratinocyte-specific and
differentiation-specific gene expression in the skin. We have identified five
keratinocyte-specific, open chromatin regions that exist within the 6 kb of 5'
upstream regulatory sequence known to faithfully recapitulate the strong
endogenous keratin 5 (K5) promoter and/or enhancer activity. One of these, DNase 
I-hypersensitive site (HSs) 4, was unique in that it acted independently to drive
abundant and keratinocyte-specific reporter gene activity in culture and in
transgenic mice, despite the fact that it was not essential for K5 enhancer
activity. We have identified evolutionarily conserved regulatory elements and a
number of their associated proteins that bind to this compact and complex
enhancer element. The 125-bp 3' half of this element (referred to as 4.2) is by
far the smallest known strong enhancer element possessing keratinocyte-specific
activity in vivo. Interestingly, its activity is restricted to a subset of
progeny of K5-expressing cells located within the sebaceous gland. The other half
of HSs 4 (termed 4.1) possesses activity to suppress sebocyte-specific expression
and induce expression in the channel (inner root sheath) cells surrounding the
hair shaft. Our findings lead us to a view of keratinocyte gene expression which 
is determined by multiple regulatory modules, many of which contain AP-2 and/or
Sp1/Sp3 binding sites for enhancing expression in skin epithelium, but which also
harbor one or more unique sites for the binding of factors which determine
specificity. Through mixing and matching of these modules, additional levels of
specificity are obtained, indicating that both transcriptional repressors and
activators govern the specificity.

PMCID: PMC133856
PMID: 12024040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 26;277(30):27433-41. Epub 2002 May 20.

Effect of tyrosine kinase inhibitors on clathrin-coated pit recruitment and
internalization of epidermal growth factor receptor.

Sorkina T(1), Huang F, Beguinot L, Sorkin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
4200 E Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80111, USA.

Several inhibitors of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) kinase and Src
family kinases (SFK) were employed to study the role of these kinases in EGFR
internalization through clathrin-coated pits. The EGFR kinase-specific compound
PD158780 substantially diminished EGFR internalization. PP2, an inhibitor of SFK,
had a moderate effect on EGFR internalization in several types of cells,
including cells lacking SFK, indicating that the inhibition of endocytosis by PP2
is mediated by kinases other than SFK. In contrast, SU6656, a more specific
inhibitor of SFK, did not affect EGFR internalization. To examine what stage of
internalization requires receptor kinase activity, we established a quantitative 
assay based on three-dimensional fluorescence microscopy that measures
co-localization of an EGF-rhodamine conjugate and a fluorescently tagged clathrin
adaptor protein complex, AP-2. Interestingly, recruitment of EGFR into coated
pits did not require physiological temperature because the maximal accumulation
of EGFR in coated pits was observed at 4 degrees C. Pretreatment of the cells
with PD158780 prevented EGFR recruitment into coated pits, whereas the inhibitor 
did not block the internalization of receptors that had first been allowed to
enter the coated pits at 4 degrees C. These data demonstrate that the activation 
of receptor kinase is essential for the initial, coated pit recruitment step of
endocytosis.

PMID: 12021271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Development. 2002 Jun;129(11):2733-47.

Transcription factor AP-2gamma is essential in the extra-embryonic lineages for
early postimplantation development.

Auman HJ(1), Nottoli T, Lakiza O, Winger Q, Donaldson S, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University, 
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

Erratum in
    Development 2002 Jul;129(13):3280.

The members of the AP-2 family of transcription factors play important roles
during mammalian development and morphogenesis. AP-2gamma (Tcfap2c - Mouse Genome
Informatics) is a retinoic acid-responsive gene implicated in placental
development and the progression of human breast cancer. We show that AP-2gamma is
present in all cells of preimplantation embryos and becomes restricted to the
extra-embryonic lineages at the time of implantation. To study further the
biological function of AP-2gamma, we have generated Tcfap2c-deficient mice by
gene disruption. The majority of Tcfap2c(-/-) mice failed to survive beyond 8.5
days post coitum (d.p.c.). At 7.5 d.p.c., Tcfap2c(-/-) mutants were typically
arrested or retarded in their embryonic development in comparison to controls.
Morphological and molecular analyses of mutants revealed that gastrulation could 
be initiated and that anterior-posterior patterning of the epiblast remained
intact. However, the Tcfap2c mutants failed to establish a normal
maternal-embryonic interface, and the extra-embryonic tissues were malformed.
Moreover, the trophoblast-specific expression of eomesodermin and Cdx2, two genes
implicated in FGF-responsive trophoblast stem cell maintenance, was significantly
reduced. Chimera studies demonstrated that AP-2gamma plays no major autonomous
role in the development of the embryo proper. By contrast, the presence of
AP-2gamma in the extra-embryonic membranes is required for normal development of 
this compartment and also for survival of the mouse embryo.

PMID: 12015300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Haematologica. 2002 May;87(5):554-5.

Two more inv(16) acute myeloid leukemia cases with infrequent CBFbeta-MYH11
fusion transcript: clinical and molecular findings.

Martinelli G, Ottaviani E, Buonamici S, Isidori A, Malagola M, Piccaluga P,
Baccarani M.

PMID: 12010674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Leuk Lymphoma. 2002 Mar;43(3):617-21.

Mutational analyses of the AML1 gene in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome.

Imai O(1), Kurokawa M, Izutsu K, Hangaishi A, Maki K, Ogawa S, Chiba S, Mitani K,
Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Japan.

The AML1 gene is the most frequent target of translocations associated with human
leukemias. We recently found somatic point mutations of the AML1 gene, V105ter
and R139G, in two cases of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Both mutations are
present in the region encoding the Runt domain of AML1, and cause loss of the
DNA-binding ability of the resultant products. Of these mutants, V105ter has also
lost the ability to heterodimerize with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta. On the other hand, the
R139G mutant acts as a dominant negative inhibitor through competing with
wild-type AML1 for interaction with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta. In this review, we
summarize mutational changes of the AML1 gene in hematological malignancies,
especially in MDS and discuss the mechanism whereby the mutant acts as a dominant
negative inhibitor of wild-type AML1.

PMID: 12002768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Prostate. 2002 Jun 1;52(1):82-8.

DNA methylation in the androgen receptor gene promoter region in rat prostate
cancers.

Takahashi S(1), Inaguma S, Sakakibara M, Cho YM, Suzuki S, Ikeda Y, Cui L, Shirai
T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Nagoya City University Medical School,
Mizuho-cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya, Japan. sattak@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Invasive adenocarcinomas developing in the rat dorsolateral prostate 
on combined treatment with 3,2'-dimethyl-4-aminobiphenyl (DMAB) and testosterone 
propionate (TP) are biologically androgen-independent and lacking androgen
receptor protein (AR) expression. The present study was conducted to assess the
mechanisms underlying this loss of AR expression in rat prostate cancer.
METHODS: The methylation status of the AR gene promoter region in rat prostate
cancer and cell lines (PLS10, 20, and 30) was examined by Southern blotting,
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction, and methylation-sensitive
single-strand conformation analysis (MS-SSCA).
RESULTS: AR mRNA expression was not detected in any of the rat prostate cancers
or cancer cell lines tested by Northern blot analysis. Higher levels of
methylated CpGs were observed in PLS20 than PLS10 or 30. Demethylation treatment 
by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine restored AR mRNA expression in PLS20. The CpGs
suggested to be responsible for AR expression in rat prostate cancer were found
to be located -9 and -1 nucleotides upstream of the transcriptional initiation
site. All of the examined rat prostate and seminal vesicle cancers demonstrated
hypermethylation at these CpG sites.
CONCLUSIONS: These data clearly demonstrate that aberrant hypermethylation in the
AR promoter region may play a critical role in AR expression in rat prostate
cancers.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11992622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(11):5395-403.

Regulation of tumor necrosis factor alpha promoter by human parvovirus B19 NS1
through activation of AP-1 and AP-2.

Fu Y(1), Ishii KK, Munakata Y, Saitoh T, Kaku M, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Hematology, Department of Clinical Medicine,
Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

Human parvovirus B19 frequently causes acute and chronic arthritis in adults. The
molecular mechanism of B19 arthritis, however, remains poorly understood. We
previously showed that the transmission of B19 from rheumatoid synoviocytes to
monocytic cells is associated with enhanced secretion of tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-alpha), which triggers inflammation, and interleukin-6. To determine
the role of B19 in the production of TNF-alpha, we focused on the function of its
nonstructural protein, NS1, and established monocytic U937 lines transduced with 
the NS1 gene under the control of an inducible promoter. Production of TNF-alpha 
mRNA and protein was elevated in a manner associated with NS1 expression.
Reporter assays revealed that AP-1 and AP-2 motifs on the TNF-alpha promoter were
responsible for NS1-mediated up-regulation. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay 
showed specific binding of nuclear proteins from NS1 gene-transduced cells with
the AP-1 or AP-2 probe. Antibodies against transcription factors AP-1 and AP-2
and anti-NS1 antibody inhibited the binding of nuclear proteins to the
corresponding probes. These data indicate that NS1 up-regulates TNF-alpha
transcription via activation of AP-1 and AP-2 in monocytic cells. The molecular
mechanisms of NS1-mediated TNF-alpha expression would explain the pathogenesis of
B19-associated inflammation.

PMCID: PMC137035
PMID: 11991968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Leukemia. 2002 May;16(5):964-9.

Screening for core binding factor gene rearrangements in acute myeloid leukemia.

Grimwade D.

PMID: 11986969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Blood. 2002 May 15;99(10):3848-50.

Unlike AML1, CBFbeta gene is not deregulated by point mutations in acute myeloid 
leukemia and in myelodysplastic syndromes.

Leroy H(1), Roumier C, Grardel-Duflos N, Macintyre E, Lepelley P, Fenaux P,
Preudhomme C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie A, Hôpital Calmette, and Service des Maladies du
Sang, CHU Lille, Unité 524 INSERM, Institut de Recherche sur le Cancer de Lille, 
Paris, France.

The core-binding factor (CBF) complex is a heterodimeric transcription factor
composed of 2 subunits, CBFalpha and CBFbeta, that play a major role in
hematopoiesis. Both members of the CBF complex are frequently altered in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) by translocation, most commonly t(8;21), t(12;21), and
t(3;21) for CBFalpha, located in 21q22, and inv(16)(p13;q22) for CBFbeta, located
on 16q22. Recently, a new mechanism of alteration of CBFalpha, by point mutation,
has been reported in myeloid malignancies, particularly in M0 AML. In the present
study, we found no point mutation of the CBFbeta gene in 30 myelodysplastic
syndromes and 100 AMLs, suggesting a limited role, if any, of CBFbeta point
mutations in those disorders.

PMID: 11986246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Cell Biochem Funct. 2002 Jun;20(2):163-70.

Functional characterization of the 5' flanking region of human ubiquitin fusion
degradation 1 like gene (UFD1L).

Amati F(1), Conti E, Botta A, Amicucci P, Dallapiccola B, Novelli G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia e Diagnostica per Immagini, Università Tor
Vergata, Via Montpellier 1, 00133 Roma, Italy.

UFD1L (Ubiquitin Fusion Degradation 1 Like) gene encodes for a component of a
multi-complex involved in the degradation of ubiquitin fusion proteins. The gene 
maps on chromosome 22q11, in a region commonly deleted in severe congenital
disorders such as DiGeorge (DGS) and velo-cardio-facial (VCFS) syndromes. UFD1L
is a single copy gene ubiquitously expressed in high levels in the pharyngeal
pouches and fourth branchial arch artery during development. To understand the
regulation of UFD1L expression we performed a functional analysis of its 5'
regulatory region. 5'-RACE and primer extension analyses revealed the presence of
different transcription start sites in adult and fetal tissues. UFD1L 5' flanking
region contains a TATA-box motif and is also very GC-rich with a CpG island
encompassing exon 1. Transcriptional activity of this region was examined by
transfection experiments of promoter-GFP reporter gene constructs in a human
epithelial cell line. These experiments revealed the importance of the region
between -17 and -463 nt which contains the TATA-box. EMSA assay resulted in the
detection of five functional consensus sequences respectively for the
transcription complex TFIID and for the transcription factors AP-1 (one site),
AP-2 (one) and Sp1 (two).

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11979512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;95(1-2):34-42.

Human ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit gene amplification and transcriptional 
regulation in a homogeneous staining chromosome region responsible for the
mechanism of drug resistance.

Zhou B(1), Mo X, Liu X, Qiu W, Yen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte
CA 91010-3000, USA.

In our previous publication it was shown that a Gemcitabine-resistant KBGem clone
derived from step-wise exposure to Gemcitabine resulted in overexpression of the 
human Ribonucleotide Reductase M2 subunit (hRRM2) mRNA and protein (Goan et al., 
1999). In this study we confirm these results and show that the hRRM2 gene
amplification arises in a homogeneous staining region (hsr) derived from
chromosome translocation. The hydroxyurea-resistant clone (KBHURs) was studied as
a comparison. PCR analysis of the hRRM2 gene promoter confirmed the
amplification. Northern and Western blots were further employed to confirm the
gene amplification and hRRM2 mRNA and protein expression were compatible with the
level of drug resistance. Cells synchronized by serum starvation and then
returned to serum-containing growth conditions showed a rapid induction of high
levels of transcription of the hRRM2 gene. To clarify whether expression of hRRM2
mRNA was regulated at a transcriptional level, several transcription factors,
including AP-1, Sp1, AP-2, CREB, NF-kappa B, and OCT1, were examined by gel-shift
assay. Interestingly, the KBGem clone was regulated by different transcription
factors than the KBHURs clone. Compared to the wild-type KB cells (KBwt), the
KBGem clone exhibited a different binding pattern for Sp1 and NF-kappa B. The
KBHURs clone, however, demonstrated a unique binding pattern with AP-1 and CREB, 
different from the KBwt control as well as the KBGem clone. Therefore, we
conclude that the drug-resistant phenotype is associated with human RRM2 gene
amplification from a homogeneous staining chromosome region and altered
transcription regulation. Each clone demonstrated a unique pattern of
transcription factor binding that may play a vital role in the mechanism of drug 
resistance.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11978967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):24875-82. Epub 2002 Apr 24.

Combinatorial interactions of p53, activating protein-2, and YB-1 with a single
enhancer element regulate gelatinase A expression in neoplastic cells.

Mertens PR(1), Steinmann K, Alfonso-Jaume MA, En-Nia A, Sun Y, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Immunology, Medical Clinic II, RWTH Aachen,
Pauwelsstrasse 30, Germany. Pmertens@ukaachen.de

Gelatinase A, also denoted matrix metalloproteinase 2, plays multiple critical
roles in the neoplastic process, including facilitation of neoangiogenesis and
formation of distal metastases. The transcriptional regulation of the gelatinase 
A gene is under the control of strong, evolutionarily conserved cis-acting
enhancer elements, designated the r2 (human) or RE-1 (rat), that harbor
contiguous binding motifs for the transcription factors activating protein-2
(AP2), p53, and YB-1. Using recombinant transcription factors, complex patterns
of RE-1 binding were observed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Increased 
complex formation was detected with the AP2/YB-1 and AP2/p53 combinations, while 
YB-1 competed with p53 for binding. The combination of AP2, p53, and YB-1 yielded
novel ternary complexes, particularly when binding to single-stranded RE-1
probes. Transient transfection of hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines with a
series of gelatinase A luciferase reporter constructs were in accordance with the
binding patterns determined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. Combined AP2
and p53 increased gelatinase A luciferase reporter activity significantly, and
the inclusion of YB-1 yielded further increase in both reporter activity and
secreted levels of gelatinase A protein. YB-1 and p53 expression are increased
following multiple genotoxic stresses, including irradiation, and the synergistic
interactions of these induced transcription factors with the widely expressed AP2
protein provide a probable pathophysiologic mechanism for the enhanced tumor cell
synthesis of gelatinase A induced by radiation.

PMID: 11973333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Biol. 2002 May 1;245(1):136-44.

Transcription factor AP-2 is an essential and direct regulator of epidermal
development in Xenopus.

Luo T(1), Matsuo-Takasaki M, Thomas ML, Weeks DL, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Expression of the Xenopus homolog of the mammalian transcription factor AP-2alpha
(XAP-2) is activated throughout the animal hemisphere shortly after the
midblastula transition, and becomes restricted to prospective epidermis by the
end of gastrulation, under the control of BMP signal modulation. Elevated
expression in the future neural crest region begins at this time. Ectopic
expression of XAP-2 can restore transcription of epidermal genes in neuralized
ectoderm, both in ectodermal explants and in the intact embryo. Likewise, loss of
XAP-2 function, accomplished by injection of antisense oligonucleotides or by
overexpression of antimorphic XAP-2 derivatives, leads to loss of epidermal and
gain of neural gene expression. These treatments also result in gastrulation
failure. Thus, AP-2 is a critical regulator of ectodermal determination that is
required for normal epidermal development and morphogenesis in the frog embryo.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11969261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Dev Biol. 2002 May 1;245(1):13-27.

Ectopic expression of AP-2alpha transcription factor in the lens disrupts fiber
cell differentiation.

West-Mays JA(1), Coyle BM, Piatigorsky J, Papagiotas S, Libby D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, New England Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111,
USA. JWest-Mays@Lifespan.org

Erratum in
    Dev Biol 2002 Jul 15;247(2):406.

AP-2alpha is a developmentally important transcription factor which has been
implicated in the regulation of cell growth, programmed cell death, and
differentiation. To investigate the specific function of AP-2alpha in
differentiation of the lens, AP-2alpha was expressed in the differentiating lens 
fiber cells under control of the alphaA-crystallin promoter. Normally, AP-2alpha 
is selectively expressed in lens epithelial cells and expression terminates at
the lens equator, where epithelial cells terminally differentiate into fiber
cells. Ectopic expression of the AP-2alpha gene in the fiber cell compartment
resulted in bilateral cataracts and microphthalmia in mice by 2 weeks of age.
Histological evaluation of embryonic and adult transgenic lenses revealed a
significant reduction in lens size and anterior shifting of the transitional
zone. Two aspects of fiber cell differentiation were also blocked, including the 
migration of newly formed fiber cells and an inhibition in fiber cell
denucleation. Correlated with these defects were expanded expression of
E-cadherin in the lens transitional zone and reduced expression of the fiber
cell-specific protein MIP (major intrinsic protein). Together, these data
demonstrate that AP-2alpha acts as a negative regulator of terminal fiber cell
differentiation through the regulation of genes involved in cell adhesion and
migration.

(c)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11969252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Teratology. 2002 May;65(5):213-8.

Exencephaly in a subset of animals heterozygous for AP-2alpha mutation.

Kohlbecker A(1), Lee AE, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, ITG, Institute for Toxicology and Genetics,
Leopoldshafen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor AP-2alpha has been implicated as a
cell-type-specific regulator of gene expression during vertebrate embryogenesis
based on its expression pattern in neural crest cells, ectoderm, and the nervous 
system in mouse, chick, and frog embryos. AP-2alpha is prominently expressed in
cranial neural crest cells, a population of cells migrating from the lateral
margins of the neural folds during closure of the neural tube in E (embryonic day
of development) 8-9 mouse embryos. Homozygous AP-2alpha mutant mice die
perinatally with cranio-abdominoschisis, full facial clefting, and defects in
cranial ganglia and sensory organs.
METHODS: Mice heterozygous for the AP-2alpha mutation on a 129/Sv strain were
crossed with wildtype mice from the strain 129/Ola. The resulting embryos were
genotyped, examined and used for histological analysis.
RESULTS: A subset of animals heterozygous for the AP-2alpha mutation develop a
midbrain exencephaly after the mutation was crossed for one generation in the
129/Ola mouse strain. Up to 14% of the animals show a failure of the cranial
neural folds to close resulting in a partial exencephaly, all of them being
heterozygous for the mutation. The affected animals show reduced rostrocaudal
dimensions of the skull and malformations of the bones of the cranial vault. The 
neural tube defects vary from pure midbrain exencephaly to a forebrain/midbrain
exencephaly where the proliferating neural tissue covers the eyes completely.
CONCLUSIONS: The results support a role of AP-2alpha in the etiology of
exencephalic disorders. The phenotype observed might be due to a downregulation
of the remaining allele suggesting the presence of an upstream modifier gene.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11967920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 2002 Apr;12(2):225-30.

Transcription factor complexes.

Burley SK(1), Kamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The 
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.
sburley@stromix.com

Considerable progress has been made during the past year on structural studies of
the eukaryotic and bacterial transcription factors that control RNA polymerase
function via the formation of multiprotein complexes on promoter DNA. Recently
determined structures include negative cofactor 2 recognizing a preformed
TATA-box-binding protein-DNA binary complex, a dimer of BmrR bound to both DNA
and tetra-phenylphosphonium, DNA-bound complexes of SarA and FadR,
leukemia-associated AML1-CBFbeta-DNA ternary complexes and a SAP1-SRF-DNA ternary
complex.

PMID: 11959501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cancer Res. 2002 Apr 15;62(8):2232-5.

Acceleration of G(1) cooperates with core binding factor beta-smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain to induce acute leukemia in mice.

Yang Y(1), Wang W, Cleaves R, Zahurak M, Cheng L, Civin CI, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cancer Research Building, Johns Hopkins University,
1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The genes encoding the AML1 (RUNX1) or CBFbeta subunits of core binding factor
(CBF) are commonly altered by translocation or mutation in human leukemias.
Because CBF oncoproteins slow G(1), we sought to determine whether mutations that
accelerate G(1) potentiate their ability to induce transformation. Wild-type or
p16(INK4a)p19(ARF) (-/-) marrow cells transduced with CBFbeta-smooth muscle
myosin heavy chain (SMMHC) were transplanted into wild-type, syngeneic
recipients. CBFbeta-SMMHC significantly increased the development of acute
leukemias from marrow lacking the overlapping p16p19 genes, based on analysis of 
Kaplan-Meier event-time distributions. Wild-type marrow was also transduced with 
vectors expressing either E7 alone or both E7 and CBFbeta-SMMHC. Combining
oncogenes again increased leukemia formation. Exposing mice transplanted with
CBFbeta-SMMHC-transduced cells to a mutagen, ethylnitrosourea, markedly
accelerated leukemogenesis compared to expressing CBFbeta-SMMHC with loss of
p16p19, indicating the need for multiple "hits" for transformation. The
INV/p16p19 and INV/E7 leukemias were lymphoid and were clonal and
retransplantable. Overall, these findings indicate that CBF mutations cooperate
with genetic alterations that accelerate G(1) to induce acute leukemia.

PMID: 11956074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Cell Biochem. 2002 Feb;231(1-2):155-61.

Activation of the human transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-alpha) gene by the 
hepatitis B viral X protein (HBx) through AP-2 sites.

Kim JH(1), Rho HM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Korea.

The HBx protein is known as a transactivator and potential oncogene, and
TGF-alpha as a potent mitogen in hepatocellular carcinoma. By assays of serial
deletion of the promoter of TGF-alpha gene and the cotransfection of HBx and AP-2
expression vectors, we observed that the HBx significantly activated the promoter
activity through AP-2 sites located in the proximal region of the TGF-alpha
promoter (-136 to -30). This effect was also observed in the heterologous
promoter assay system containing AP-2 sites. The mutation analyses of three AP-2 
sites in the promoter revealed that all three AP-2 sites contributed to the
activation of the TGF-a gene in the presence of HBx. Accordingly, the mRNA level 
of TGF-alpha was significantly elevated in the HBx-expressing cell, HepG2-HBx and
the HBV-producing cell, HepG2-K8. These results suggest that the HBx protein
could increase the mitogenic effect of TGF-alpha by the transactivation of the
gene through AP-2 binding sites and consequently, these interactions may
accelerate the process of hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 11952158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Genesis. 2002 Apr;32(4):247-58.

Cooperative E-box regulation of human GLI1 by TWIST and USF.

Villavicencio EH(1), Yoon JW, Frank DJ, Füchtbauer EM, Walterhouse DO, Iannaccone
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Memorial Institute for Education and Research, Northwestern
University Medical School, 2300 Children's Plaza, Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

Sonic hedgehog signaling plays a critical role in vertebrate patterning, and
signaling defects are associated with severe birth defects and cancer in man.
GLI1 encodes a critical transcription activator in this pathway. GLI1 is
expressed in human basal cell carcinomas and sarcomas. Despite the significance
of the GLI1 gene in human disease, few immediate upstream regulators of GLI1
expression are known. We previously demonstrated that a 5' region, including 5'
flanking sequence, an untranslated exon, and 425 bp of the first intron,
regulates the human GLI1 gene. Here we show that inactivating mutations in E-box,
GC box, AP-2, GATA, GSG, PuF, and Zeste sites identified three critical
regulatory elements, including a GC box that binds Sp1 and two intronic E-boxes
that bind USF proteins or Twist. Expression of Twist but not a frame shift
mutation of Twist activates the wild-type human GLI1 regulatory sequences but not
with inactivating mutations of the E-boxes. Twist activates GLI1 reporter
expression through E-box +482 but requires binding of USF proteins to E-box +157.
Twist mutations cause human birth defects and Twist is overexpressed in many
rhabdomyosarcomas, suggesting that one of Twist's primary roles is the regulation
of GLI1.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11948912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 May;22(9):3149-56.

Transcription factor gene AP-2 gamma essential for early murine development.

Werling U(1), Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, ITG, Institute for Toxicology and Genetics, 76344
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

Transcription factor gene AP-2 gamma belongs to a family of four closely related 
genes. AP-2 gamma had been implicated in multiple functions during proliferation 
and differentiation based on its expression pattern in trophoblast, neural crest,
and ectoderm cells in murine embryos. In order to address the question of the
role of AP-2 gamma during mammalian development, we generated mice harboring a
disrupted AP-2 gamma allele. AP-2 gamma heterozygous mice are viable and display 
reduced body sizes at birth but are fertile. Mice deficient for AP-2 gamma,
however, are growth retarded and die at days 7 to 9 of embryonic development.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the trophectodermal cells that are
found to express AP-2 gamma fail to proliferate, leading to failure of labyrinth 
layer formation. As a consequence, the developing embryo suffers from
malnutrition and dies. Analysis of embryo cultures suggests that AP-2 gamma is
also implicated in the regulation of the adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene, a gene
involved in purine metabolism found expressed at the maternal-fetal interface.
Therefore, AP-2 gamma seems to be required in early embryonic development because
it regulates the genetic programs controlling proliferation and differentiation
of extraembryonic trophectodermal cells.

PMCID: PMC133770
PMID: 11940672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Hum Genet. 2002 Feb;110(2):111-21. Epub 2001 Dec 14.

A genomic map of a 6-Mb region at 13q21-q22 implicated in cancer development:
identification and characterization of candidate genes.

Rozenblum E(1), Vahteristo P, Sandberg T, Bergthorsson JT, Syrjakoski K, Weaver
D, Haraldsson K, Johannsdottir HK, Vehmanen P, Nigam S, Golberger N, Robbins C,
Pak E, Dutra A, Gillander E, Stephan DA, Bailey-Wilson J, Juo SH, Kainu T, Arason
A, Barkardottir RB, Nevanlinna H, Borg A, Kallioniemi OP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Chromosomal region 13q21-q22 harbors a putative breast cancer susceptibility gene
and has been implicated as a common site for somatic deletions in a variety of
malignant tumors. We have built a complete physical clone contig for a region
between D13S1308 and AFM220YE9 based on 18 yeast artificial chromosome and 81
bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clones linked together by 22 genetic
markers and 61 other sequence tagged sites. Combining data from 47 sequenced BACs
(as of June 2001), we have assembled in silico an integrated 5.7-Mb genomic map
with 90% sequence coverage. This area contains eight known genes, two
hypothetical proteins, 24 additional Unigene clusters, and approximately 100
predicted genes and exons. We have determined the cDNA and genomic sequence, and 
tissue expression profiles for the KIAA1008 protein (homologous to the yeast
mitotic control protein dis3+), KLF12 (AP-2 repressor), progesterone induced
blocking factor 1, zinc finger transcription factor KLF5, and LIM domain only-7, 
and for the hypothetical proteins FLJ22624 and FLJ21869. Mutation screening of
the five known genes in 19 breast cancer families has revealed numerous
polymorphisms, but no deleterious mutations. These data provide a basis and
resources for further analyses of this chromosomal region in the development of
cancer.

PMID: 11935316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2001 Nov 25;81(22):1360-4.

[Activation of transcription factors and induction of cytokines from macrophages 
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

[Article in Chinese]

He B(1), Zhao M, Qi G.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Peking University, Third 
Hospital, Beijing 100083, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the activation of transcription factors and induction
of cytokines from alveolar macrophages in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
METHODS: Alveolar macrophages were collected by fibrobronchoscopy from 8 patients
with chronic bronchitis, 8 patients with COPD, and 8 healthy volunteers. All
patients were at stable stage. The macrophages thus collected were cultured and
stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 10 micrograms/ml). The IL-8, IL-1 beta, 
TNF alpha and IL-6 thus produced were measured by ELISA in the supernatant.
Nuclear factor-kappa B (NF kappa B), activator protein-1 (AP-1), AP-2 and AP-3
were detected by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
RESULTS: The concentration of IL-8 released from macrophages of patients with
COPD at stable stage before LPS stimulation was about 3 times higher than that in
the healthy control (F = 4.34, P < 0.05). The concentration of IL-8 released from
macrophages in patients with COPD was increased further after LPS stimulation in 
comparison to that in healthy controls(F = 3.56, P < 0.05). The concentration of 
IL-1 beta and that of TNF alpha released from macrophages of COPD patients were
further increased after LPS stimulation (P < 0.05) in the COPD patients, but
there was no difference in the concentration of IL-1 beta and between the control
and COPD patients before LPS stimulation. The constitutive activity of AP-1 and
the activity of NF kappa B induced by LPS were higher in the patients with COPD
than in the controls.
CONCLUSION: The alverlar macrophages of patients with COPD at stable stage may
release higher concentration of IL-8 and IL-1 beta. LPS stimulation increases the
release of IL-1 beta and TNF alpha of alveolar macrophages. Enhancement of
activity of NF kappa B and AP-1 may positively regulate the production of IL-8
and IL-1 beta in the airflow obstruction.

PMID: 11930628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Methods Enzymol. 2002;349:306-12.

Transcription regulation of human manganese superoxide dismutase gene.

St Clair DK(1), Porntadavity S, Xu Y, Kiningham K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536, USA.

The human MnSOD gene has a typical housekeeping gene promoter, but is highly
inducible by various physical, chemical, and biological agents. Transcription
factors SP-1 and AP-2 seem to have opposite roles in the transcriptional activity
of the basal promoter. Whereas SP-1 plays a positive role, which is absolutely
essential for transcription from the human MnSOD promoter, AP-2 appears to play a
negative role in this process. An enhancer element is found in the promoter
region of the human MnSOD gene. Several important enhancer elements are located
in the second intron. The NF-kappa B site in the second intron is essential but
not sufficient for high-level induction of MnSOD by cytokines. Although mutations
in the regulatory elements may be partially responsible for the lack of induction
of MnSOD in some cell types, differences in the degree of induction exist that
cannot be accounted for by the defect in the DNA sequence. It is highly likely
that this difference is due to the presence or absence of coactivator or
suppressor proteins in the cells and may have a physiological role in the defense
against oxidative stress.

PMID: 11912921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Clin Pathol. 2002 Mar;55(3):195-9.

Age related expression of Werner's syndrome protein in selected tissues and
coexpression of transcription factors.

Motonaga K(1), Itoh M, Hachiya Y, Endo A, Kato K, Ishikura H, Saito Y, Mori S,
Takashima S, Goto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Center of
Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi, Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.
motonaga@ncnp.go.jp

AIMS: Werner's syndrome (WS) is an uncommon autosomal recessive disease resulting
from mutational inactivation of human WRN helicase, Werner's syndrome protein
(WRNp). Patients with WS progressively develop a variety of aging characteristics
after puberty. The aim of this study was to determine the distribution of WRNp
and the expression of the transcription factors regulating WRN gene expression in
a variety of human organs in an attempt to understand the WS phenotype.
METHODS: Tissue specimens were obtained from 16 controls aged from 27 gestational
weeks to 70 years of age and a 56 year old female patient with WS. The
distribution of WRNp and the expression of the transcription factors regulating
WRN gene expression-SP1, AP2, and retinoblastoma protein (Rb)- were studied in
the various human organs by immunohistochemical and immunoblot analyses.
RESULTS: In the healthy controls after puberty, high expression of WRNp was
detected in seminiferous epithelial cells and Leydig cells in the testis,
glandular acini in the pancreas, and the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis in
the adrenal cortex. In addition, the SP1 and AP2 transcription factors, which
regulate WRNp gene expression, appeared in an age dependent manner in those
regions where WRNp was expressed. In controls after puberty, SP1 was expressed in
the testis and adrenal gland, whereas AP2 was expressed in the pancreas.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that the age specific onset of WS may be
related to age dependent expression of WRNp in specific organs.

PMCID: PMC1769603
PMID: 11896071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 31;277(22):19897-904. Epub 2002 Mar 11.

HIP1 and HIP12 display differential binding to F-actin, AP2, and clathrin.
Identification of a novel interaction with clathrin light chain.

Legendre-Guillemin V(1), Metzler M, Charbonneau M, Gan L, Chopra V, Philie J,
Hayden MR, McPherson PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HIP1) and HIP12 are orthologues of Sla2p, a
yeast protein with essential functions in endocytosis and regulation of the actin
cytoskeleton. We now report that HIP1 and HIP12 are major components of the
clathrin coat that interact but differ in their ability to bind clathrin and the 
clathrin adaptor AP2. HIP1 contains a clathrin-box and AP2 consensus-binding
sites that display high affinity binding to the terminal domain of the clathrin
heavy chain and the ear domain of the AP2 alpha subunit, respectively. These
consensus sites are poorly conserved in HIP12 and correspondingly, HIP12 does not
bind to AP2 nor does it demonstrate high affinity clathrin binding. Moreover,
HIP12 co-sediments with F-actin in contrast to HIP1, which exhibits no
interaction with actin in vitro. Despite these differences, both proteins
efficiently stimulate clathrin assembly through their central helical domain.
Interestingly, in both HIP1 and HIP12, this domain binds directly to the clathrin
light chain. Our data suggest that HIP1 and HIP12 play related yet distinct
functional roles in clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

PMID: 11889126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Biochem J. 2002 Mar 15;362(Pt 3):597-607.

The beta-appendages of the four adaptor-protein (AP) complexes: structure and
binding properties, and identification of sorting nexin 9 as an accessory protein
to AP-2.

Lundmark R(1), Carlsson SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, S-901 87
Umeå, Sweden.

Adaptor protein (AP) complexes are essential components for the formation of
coated vesicles and the recognition of cargo proteins for intracellular
transport. Each AP complex exposes two appendage domains with that function to
bind regulatory accessory proteins in the cytosol. Secondary structure
predictions, sequence alignments and CD spectroscopy were used to relate the
beta-appendages of all human AP complexes to the previously published crystal
structure of AP-2. The results suggested that the beta-appendages of AP-1, AP-2
and AP-3 have similar structures, consisting of two subdomains, whereas that of
AP-4 lacks the inner subdomain. Pull-down and overlay assays showed partial
overlap in the binding specificities of the beta-appendages of AP-1 and AP-2,
whereas the corresponding domain of AP-3 displayed a unique binding pattern. That
AP-4 may have a truncated, non-functional domain was indicated by its apparent
inability to bind any proteins from cytosol. Of several novel
beta-appendage-binding proteins detected, one that had affinity exclusively for
AP-2 was identified as sorting nexin 9 (SNX9). SNX9, which contains a phox and an
Src homology 3 domain, was found in large complexes and was at least partially
associated with AP-2 in the cytosol. SNX9 may function to assist AP-2 in its role
at the plasma membrane.

PMCID: PMC1222423
PMID: 11879186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Invest Dermatol. 2002 Mar;118(3):519-29.

17beta-estradiol enhances vascular endothelial growth factor production and
dihydrotestosterone antagonizes the enhancement via the regulation of adenylate
cyclase in differentiated THP-1 cells.

Kanda N(1), Watanabe S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Teikyo University, School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. nmk@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp

We studied the in vitro effects of sex hormones on vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) production in differentiated THP-1 monocytic cells.
Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate differentiated THP-1 into macrophage-like cells. 
17beta-estradiol (10 (-9) M) increased VEGF secretion of controls 3.1-fold in
differentiated THP-1 and this effect of 17beta-estradiol was antagonized by
dihydrotestosterone, although dihydrotestosterone alone did not alter VEGF
secretion. 17beta-estradiol increased steady-state mRNA level of VEGF and the
increase was counteracted by dihydrotestosterone in differentiated THP-1,
although dihydrotestosterone alone did not alter the VEGF mRNA level.
Progesterone did not affect the constitutive and 17beta-estradiol-induced VEGF
secretion and mRNA level. Transient transfection revealed that 17beta-estradiol
enhanced chloramphenicol acetyl transferase expression driven by VEGF promoter
and the enhancement was antagonized by dihydrotestosterone. Adenylate cyclase
inhibitor suppressed 17beta-estradiol-induced enhancement of VEGF secretion, mRNA
level, and promoter activity, whereas dihydrotestosterone-induced suppression on 
the effects of 17beta-estradiol was counteracted by 3',5'-adenosine cyclic
monophosphate (cAMP) analog. 17beta-estradiol increased intracellular cAMP level 
by activating adenylate cyclase, while dihydrotestosterone reduced the basal and 
17beta-estradiol-increased cAMP level by inhibiting adenylate cyclase.
Transfection with 5'-deleted VEGF promoters demonstrated that the region between 
-88 and -66 bp may be involved in the transcriptional regulation by each hormone.
The mutation within activator protein-2 element in this region abrogated the
transcriptional stimulation and repression by the respective hormones.
17beta-estradiol activated transcription from activator protein-2-responsive
reporter plasmid while dihydrotestosterone antagonized the effect of
17beta-estradiol. These results suggest that 17beta-estradiol enhances VEGF
production while dihydrotestosterone antagonizes the effect of 17beta-estradiol
via up- or downregulation of adenylate cyclase in differentiated THP-1.

PMID: 11874493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2002 Jan;71(1):47-57.

Dominant negative interference of transcription factor AP-2 causes inhibition of 
ErbB-3 expression and suppresses malignant cell growth.

Zhu CH(1), Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radical & Radiation Biology Program, Department of Radiation Oncology,
and Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, 
USA.

ErbB-3 (HER3) is a member of the epidermal growth factor receptor family.
Increasing evidence suggests that elevated expression of ErbB-3 is important for 
malignancy. In this study, we found that elevated levels of ErbB-3 expression did
not occur in the absence of AP-2gamma in a panel of human mammary epithelial and 
fibroblasts cell lines. In contrast, there was no association between the
expression of AP-2alpha or AP-2beta and the level of ErbB-3, or between AP-2alpha
and AP-2gamma double positivity and ErbB-3 expression. In co-transfection
experiments, exogenous expression of AP-2gamma robustly activated ErbB-3 promoter
activity. Moreover, expression of a dominant negative AP-2 protein, AP-2delta
(deleted residues 31-117), not only repressed the ErbB-3 promoter activity but
also suppressed endogenous ErbB-3 transcription in the ErbB-3 overexpressing cell
line MRC-5VA. Overexpression of AP-2A resulted in a decreased proliferation rate 
and inhibitin of colony formation. Taken together, these data strongly support a 
role for the AP-2 gene family, in particular, AP-2gamma, in the control of ErbB-3
expression. Interference with the function of transcription factor AP-2 might
provide a potential strategy for modulation of the malignant phenotype.

PMID: 11859873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):127-9.

Conditional inactivation of transcription factor AP-2gamma by using the Cre/loxP 
recombination system.

Werling U(1), Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute for Toxicology and Genetics,
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

PMID: 11857798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16484-8. Epub 2002 Feb 19.

Mechanism of interaction between leucine-based sorting signals from the invariant
chain and clathrin-associated adaptor protein complexes AP1 and AP2.

Kongsvik TL(1), Höning S, Bakke O, Rodionov DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cell Biology, Department of Biology, University of Oslo,
P. O. Box 1050 Blindern, N-0316 Oslo, Norway.

The cytoplasmic tail of the invariant chain contains two leucine-based sorting
signals, and each of those seems sufficient to route the invariant chain to its
intracellular destination in either normal or polarized cells. It is believed
that the intracellular routing of the invariant chain is mediated by its
interactions with the clathrin-associated adaptor protein complexes AP1 and AP2. 
We () have previously demonstrated the in vitro interactions between the
cytoplasmic tail of the invariant chain and AP1/AP2 complexes. These interactions
were specific and depended on the critical leucine residues in the invariant
chain's sorting signals. In the present study, we decided to investigate the
molecular mechanism of these interactions. To this end, we constructed a set of
glutathione S-transferase fusion proteins that contained the intact cytoplasmic
tail of the invariant chain and its various mutants to define residues important 
for its interactions with AP1 and AP-2. Our results demonstrated the importance
of several residues other than the critical leucine residues for such
interactions. A strong correlation between in vitro binding of AP2 to the
invariant chain and in vivo internalization of the invariant chain was observed, 
confirming the primary role of AP2 in recognition of endocytic signals. In
addition, we demonstrated different requirements for AP1 and AP2 binding to
cytoplasmic tail of the invariant chain, which may reflect that the different
sorting pathways mediated by AP1 and AP2 involve their recognition of the primary
structure of the sorting signal.

PMID: 11854303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem J. 2002 Mar 1;362(Pt 2):401-12.

Transcriptional regulation of the human manganese superoxide dismutase gene: the 
role of specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and activating protein-2 (AP-2).

Xu Y(1), Porntadavity S, St Clair DK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, 361 Health Sciences
Research Building, Lexington KY 40536, USA.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) plays an important role in regulating
cellular redox conditions. Expression of MnSOD has been shown to protect against 
damage by oxidative stress and to suppress the malignant phenotype of human
cancer cells. We have previously cloned the human MnSOD (SOD2) gene and analysed 
its 5' proximal promoter, which has been characterized by a lack of a TATA or
CAAT box and the presence of multiple GC boxes. To define further the molecular
mechanisms for the regulation of MnSOD expression, multiple transcription
factor-binding motifs containing overlapping specificity protein 1 (Sp1)- and
activator protein (AP)-2-binding sites were identified by DNase I footprinting
analysis. Functional studies in three cell lines with different levels of Sp1 and
AP-2 proteins suggested that the cellular levels of these proteins may
differentially regulate transcription via GC-binding motifs in the human SOD2
promoter. Co-transfection of an Sp1 expression vector resulted in an increase in 
the transcription of the promoter-driven reporter gene. In contrast,
co-transfection of the AP-2 expression vector caused a decrease in transcription.
Direct mutagenesis analysis of Sp1- and AP-2-binding sites showed that Sp1 is
essential for transcription of the human SOD2 gene, whereas AP-2 plays a negative
role in the transcription. Immunoprecipitation of Sp1 and AP-2 proteins
demonstrated that Sp1 interacts with AP-2 in vivo. Two-hybrid analysis revealed
that interaction between Sp1 and AP-2 plays both a positive and negative role in 
the transcription of the reporter gene in vivo. Taken together, our data indicate
that AP-2 down-regulates transcription of the human SOD2 gene via its interaction
with Sp1 within the promoter region. These findings, coupled with our previous
observation that several cancer cell lines have mutations in the promoter region 
of the human MnSOD gene, which lead to an increase in an AP-2-binding site and a 
decrease in the promoter activity, signal the importance of understanding the
promoter structure and the regulation of the human SOD2 gene by Sp1 and AP-2.

PMCID: PMC1222401
PMID: 11853549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2002 Mar;282(3):G491-500.

Molecular cloning and functional analysis of the human Na(+)/H(+) exchanger NHE3 
promoter.

Malakooti J(1), Memark VC, Dudeja PK, Ramaswamy K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Digestive and Liver Diseases, University of
Illinois at Chicago and Chicago Veterans Affairs Westside Division, Chicago,
Illinois 60612, USA. malakoot@uic.edu

Na(+)/H(+) exchanger (NHE) isoforms NHE2 and NHE3, colocalized to the brush
border membrane of the epithelial cells, exhibit differences in their pattern of 
tissue expression and regulation by various molecular signals. To investigate the
mechanisms involved in regulation of NHE3 gene expression, the human NHE3
promoter region was cloned and characterized. Primer extension experiments
located the transcription start site to a position 116 nucleotides upstream from 
the translation start codon. The 5'-flanking region lacked a CCAAT box but
contained a TATA-like sequence. Nucleotide sequencing of the 5'-flanking region
revealed the presence of a number of cis elements including Sp1, AP-2, MZF-1,
CdxA, Cdx-2, steroid and nonsteroid hormone receptor half sites, and a phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate-response element. Transient transfection experiments
using C2/bbe cell line defined a maximal promoter activity in -95/+5 region. The 
regulatory response elements clustered within this region include a potential
transcription factor IID (TF IID), a CACCC, two Sp1, and two AP-2 motifs.
Deletion of a fragment containing the AP-2 and Sp1 motifs resulted in a drastic
decrease in promoter activity. In gel mobility shift assays, an oligonucleotide
spanning from -78 to -56 bp bound a recombinant AP-2, and the corresponding
binding activity in nuclear extracts was supershifted with anti-AP2alpha
antibody. Our studies suggest that the NHE3 expression is regulated by a
combination of cis elements and their cognate transcription factors that include 
the AP-2 and Sp1 family members.

PMID: 11841999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Peptides. 2002 Mar;23(3):555-60.

Effect of a regulatory mutation on the rat atrial natriuretic peptide gene
transcription.

Rubattu S(1), Giliberti R, De Paolis P, Stanzione R, Spinsanti P, Venturelli V,
Volpe M.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Neuromed, Polo Molisano dell'Universita' La Sapienza di Roma,
Pozzilli, Italy. rubattu.speranza@neuromed.it

To investigate the functional relevance of a regulatory mutation affecting the
enhancer element PEA2 of the rat ANP gene we transfected rat cardiomyocytes and
aortic endothelial cells with either the mutant or the wild-type ANP promoter
construct (-683 +54) and performed CAT assays both at baseline and in response to
Phenylephrine and Angiotensin II. In the myocardial cells we also determined the 
DNA/nuclear protein interaction through electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
These studies showed a significantly lower degree of ANP transcription in the
presence of the mutant PEA2 site, thus demonstrating its functional significance 
and the biological relevance of ANP gene structural alterations.

PMID: 11836006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Cell Biochem. 2002;84(4):699-707.

CDP and AP-2 mediated repression mechanism of the replication-dependent hamster
histone H3.2 promoter.

Wu F(1), Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, California 90089-9176, USA.

The replication-dependent hamster histone H3.2 promoter contains two tandem CCAAT
repeats located upstream of the TATA element. It has been shown that the NF-Y/CBF
complex binds to a single CCAAT motif with high affinity, whereas the CCAAT
displacement protein (CDP) binds to at least two CCAAT motifs in close proximity.
Here, we report that the two CCAAT motifs within the H3.2 promoter confer
transcriptional repression of the promoter during the cell cycle. While we cannot
detect direct association of CDP with Rb in vitro, we discover that CDP can bind 
AP-2, a ubiquitous factor that interacts with Rb. The interaction domains between
CDP and AP-2 are mapped to the highly conserved cut repeats of CDP as well as the
basic and dimerization region of AP-2. Further, in transfection assays, CDP and
AP-2 act synergistically to suppress the H3.2 promoter. Together, these data
support a repression mechanism mediated by CDP and AP-2 that regulates H3.2 gene 
expression during the mammalian cell cycle.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11835395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1364-72.

In vitro analyses of known and novel RUNX1/AML1 mutations in dominant familial
platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia: implications
for mechanisms of pathogenesis.

Michaud J(1), Wu F, Osato M, Cottles GM, Yanagida M, Asou N, Shigesada K, Ito Y, 
Benson KF, Raskind WH, Rossier C, Antonarakis SE, Israels S, McNicol A, Weiss H, 
Horwitz M, Scott HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva University Medical School, Switzerland.

Familial platelet disorder with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia
(FPD/AML) is an autosomal dominant familial platelet disorder characterized by
thrombocytopenia and a propensity to develop AML. Mutation analyses of RUNX1 in 3
families with FPD/AML showing linkage to chromosome 21q22.1 revealed 3 novel
heterozygous point mutations (K83E, R135fsX177 (IVS4 + 3delA), and Y260X).
Functional investigations of the 7 FPD/AML RUNX1 Runt domain point mutations
described to date (2 frameshift, 2 nonsense, and 3 missense mutations) were
performed. Consistent with the position of the mutations in the Runt domain at
the RUNX1-DNA interface, DNA binding of all mutant RUNX1 proteins was absent or
significantly decreased. In general, missense and nonsense RUNX1 proteins
retained the ability to heterodimerize with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta and inhibited
transactivation of a reporter gene by wild-type RUNX1. Colocalization of mutant
RUNX1 and PEBP2beta/CBFbeta in the cytoplasm was observed. These results suggest 
that the sequestration of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta by mutant RUNX1 may cause the
inhibitory effects. While haploinsufficiency of RUNX1 causes FPD/AML in some
families (deletions and frameshifts), mutant RUNX1 proteins (missense and
nonsense) may also inhibit wild-type RUNX1, possibly creating a higher propensity
to develop leukemia. This is consistent with the hypothesis that a second
mutation has to occur, either in RUNX1 or another gene, to cause leukemia among
individuals harboring RUNX1 FPD/AML mutations and that the propensity to acquire 
these additional mutations is determined, at least partially, by the initial
RUNX1 mutation.

PMID: 11830488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Biochem J. 2002 Feb 15;362(Pt 1):41-50.

Structural and functional characterization of the human and mouse fibulin-1 gene 
promoters: role of Sp1 and Sp3.

Castoldi M(1), Chu ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
233 South 10th Street, Philadelphia, PA 19107, U.S.A.

Fibulin-1 is a multifunctional extracellular protein involved in diverse
biological processes including cardiovascular development, haemostasis and
cancer. To investigate the transcriptional regulation of the gene encoding
fibulin-1 we cloned and analysed about 4.0 kb of the 5'-flanking regions of both 
the human and mouse fibulin-1 genes. The human and mouse fibulin-1 promoters
share little sequence similarity except for a short region of approx. 150-170 bp 
immediately upstream of the translation start site. The conserved region contains
a TATA-like sequence (ATAATT) and multiple consensus binding sites for Sp1 and
activator protein 2 (AP-2). That the short conserved region in each gene confers 
basal promoter activity is demonstrated by transient transfections of promoter
deletion constructs for both the human and mouse genes into cells that express
fibulin-1 constitutively. Co-transfections of promoter constructs with expression
plasmids for Sp1, Sp3 and Sp4 into Drosophila SL2 cells indicate that Sp1 and Sp3
are essential for transcriptional activation and that these two factors act
synergistically. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays show that Sp1 and Sp3, but
not AP-2, bind to the basal promoter of the human fibulin-1 gene. The results
demonstrate the functional importance of Sp1 and Sp3 in regulating the expression
of the fibulin-1 gene.

PMCID: PMC1222358
PMID: 11829738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Hypertens. 2002 Feb;20(2):219-28.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of the upstream rat atrial
natriuretic peptide promoter.

Mayer B(1), Kaiser T, Kempt P, Cornelius T, Holmer SR, Schunkert H.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin II, Universität Regensburg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The upregulation of left ventricular atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) 
serves as a molecular marker of cardiac hypertrophy. The precise mechanisms
underlying this gene induction are unclear, since the presently cloned 3.6 kilo
base (kb) rat ANP promoter failed to substantially induce coupled reporter genes 
in chronically hypertrophied hearts. The aim of this study was to clone and to
functionally analyse the upstream ANP promoter.
DESIGN: Upstream of the known ANP promoter, a 1.5 kb segment was cloned by the
promoter walker method and found to harbour a putative CCAAT-binding site as well
as multiple putative transcription factor binding sites. This newly cloned
segment was ligated with a reporter gene, in vivo transfected into rat
myocardium, and analysed under basal conditions or after stimulation with both
acute (isovolumetric contractions in the Langendorff apparatus) and chronic wall 
stress (aortic banding).
RESULTS: Reporter gene constructs carrying the newly cloned segment conferred
only little promoter activity. In hearts exposed to acute wall stress, the
previously cloned 3.6 kb ANP promoter as well as a constitutive promoter (pGL3
promoter vector) were active but markedly suppressed after extension with the
newly cloned upstream promoter (-88.1 and -85.5%; P < 0.05 respectively). Site
directed mutagenesis of two AP-2 transcription factor binding sites (base pairs
-3946 to -3954 or -4192 to -4200) eliminated this silencing effect. In hearts
with chronic pressure overload hypertrophy as well as in normal, unstimulated
hearts the activity of the 3.6 kb ANP promoter was weak and also abolished after 
ligation with the 1.5 kb upstream segment. Moreover, both putative AP-2 binding
sites within the upstream rat ANP promoter bound specifically to nuclear proteins
of unstimulated, acute and chronic pressure overloaded hearts as demonstrated by 
electrophoresis mobility shift assays.
CONCLUSION: Novel silencer elements were cloned, localized to two AP-2 binding
sites in the upstream ANP promoter, and functionally characterized. Given that
the putative upregulation of left ventricular ANP by the extensively studied 3.6 
kb proximal promoter region is substantially diminished by the newly cloned
segment, the functional significance of regulatory elements within the proximal
promoter region should be re-evaluated. The molecular mechanism causing ANP mRNA 
induction in left ventricular hypertrophy remains obscure.

PMID: 11821706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Toxicol Sci. 2002 Feb;65(2):211-9.

Sodium arsenite inhibits and reverses expression of adipogenic and fat
cell-specific genes during in vitro adipogenesis.

Wauson EM(1), Langan AS, Vorce RL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Toxicology and Department of Pharmacology, University
of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-6260, USA.

Comment in
    Toxicol Sci. 2002 Feb;65(2):161-3.

Arsenic causes cancer in humans, but its mechanism of action is unique among
known carcinogenic agents. As a naturally occurring component of sediments and
ground water, human exposure to arsenic is inevitable, necessitating the
establishment of exposure limits. Because cancer is characterized as an imbalance
between cell growth and differentiation, it has been hypothesized that arsenic
exerts its carcinogenic effect, in part, by perturbing the balance between these 
antagonistic processes. Previous work in this laboratory has demonstrated that
sodium arsenite prevents adipocytic differentiation of C3H 10T1/2 cells, leading 
to the hypothesis that the underlying mechanism involves downregulation of genes 
associated with adipogenesis. In support of this hypothesis, it was found that
mRNA levels of peroxisome proliferative-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma),
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha), and adipocyte-selective,
fatty acid-binding protein (aP2) are decreased in arsenic-treated cells;
arsenic-induced phenotypic reversion of differentiated adipocytes correlates with
reduced aP2 expression. Arsenic also blocks upregulation of p21(Cip1/Waf1), a
factor whose expression is tightly regulated during adipogenesis. The
differentiating effect of pioglitazone, which induces adipogenesis by activating 
PPAR gamma, is inhibited by arsenic, suggesting that arsenic interferes with
adipogenic signaling at or below the level of PPAR gamma. Because C/EBP alpha is 
important in the expression of certain keratinocyte-specific genes, the negative 
effect of arsenic on C/EBP alpha might also contribute to the development of skin
cancer. PPAR gamma, C/EBP alpha, and p21(Cip1/Waf1) are important in numerous
normal and pathological processes, including carcinogenesis, leading us to
postulate that perturbation of these factors by arsenic might contribute to the
carcinogenic effect of this metalloid.

PMID: 11812925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):1048-53.

Ap-2 and Ikaros regulate transcription of human placental leucine
aminopeptidase/oxytocinase gene.

Ito T(1), Nomura S, Okada M, Katsumata Y, Kikkawa F, Rogi T, Tsujimoto M,
Mizutani S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya University School of Medicine,
Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

P-LAP is identical with cystine aminopeptidase as oxytocinase. We previously
located on the placental leucine aminopeptidase (P-LAP) gene the footprint site
with the high promoter activity (FP3: -214 to -183) and found a possible
interaction between it and AP-2 in choriocarcinoma cells. Here, we investigated
FP3 in detail and identified the elements responsible for the high basal rate of 
transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated that FP3 would 
interact with Ikaros as well as AP-2. Further analysis using antibody against
Ikaros confirmed that Ikaros was indeed present and bound to FP3. In addition,
AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma antibodies supershifted the second complex at FP3.
Functionally, mutations that eliminate AP-2 binding reduced promoter activity
significantly, while those that eliminate Ikaros binding reduced promoter
activity insignificantly. Double mutations of AP-2 and Ikaros decreased promoter 
activity progressively. We conclude that AP-2 is the main activator and Ikaros
functions cooperatively with it for maximal expression of the human P-LAP gene.

PMID: 11798181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2002 Jan 25;290(3):998-1009.

DNA-binding specificity of the ERF/AP2 domain of Arabidopsis DREBs, transcription
factors involved in dehydration- and cold-inducible gene expression.

Sakuma Y(1), Liu Q, Dubouzet JG, Abe H, Shinozaki K, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Division, Japan International Research Center for
Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS), 1-1 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8686, Japan.

DRE/CRT is a cis-acting element that is involved in gene expression responsive to
drought and low-temperature stress in higher plants. DREB1A/CBF3 and DREB2A are
transcription factors that specifically bind to DRE/CRT in Arabidopsis. We
precisely analyzed the DNA-binding specificity of DREBs. Both DREBs specifically 
bound to six nucleotides (A/GCCGAC) of DRE. However, these proteins had different
binding specificities to the second or third nucleotides of DRE. Gel mobility
shift assay using mutant DREB proteins showed that the two amino acids, valine
and glutamic acid conserved in the ERF/AP2 domains, especially valine, have
important roles in DNA-binding specificity. In the Arabidopsis genome, 145
DREB/ERF-related proteins are encoded. These proteins were classified into five
groups-AP-2 subfamily, RAV subfamily, DREB subfamily, ERF subfamily, and others. 
The DREB subfamily included three novel DREB1A- and six DREB2A-related proteins. 
We analyzed expression of novel genes for these proteins and discuss their roles 
in stress-responsive gene expression.

PMID: 11798174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9247-54. Epub 2002 Jan 2.

beta-Arrestin/AP-2 interaction in G protein-coupled receptor internalization:
identification of a beta-arrestin binging site in beta 2-adaptin.

Laporte SA(1), Miller WE, Kim KM, Caron MG.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute Laboratories, the Department of Cell Biology, 
and the Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

beta-Arrestins, proteins involved in the turn-off of G protein-coupled receptor
(GPCR) activation, bind to the beta(2)-adaptin subunit of the clathrin adaptor
AP-2. The interaction of beta(2)-adaptin with beta-arrestin involves critical
arginine residues in the C-terminal domain of beta-arrestin and plays an
important role in initiating clathrin-mediated endocytosis of the
beta(2)-adrenergic receptor (beta(2)AR) (Laporte, S. A., Oakley, R. H., Holt, J. 
A., Barak, L. S., and Caron, M. G. (2000) J. Biol. Chem. 275, 23120--23126).
However, the beta-arrestin-binding site in beta(2)-adaptin has not been
identified, and little is known about the role of beta-arrestin/AP-2 interaction 
in the endocytosis of other GPCRs. Using in vitro binding assays, we have
identified two glutamate residues (Glu-849 and Glu-902) in beta(2)-adaptin that
are important in beta-arrestin binding. These residues are located in the
platform subdomain of the C terminus of beta(2)-adaptin, where accessory/adapter 
endocytic proteins for other classes of receptors interact, distinct from the
main site where clathrin interacts. The functional significance of the
beta-arrestin/AP-2/clathrin complex in the endocytosis of GPCRs such as the
beta(2)AR and vasopressin type II receptor was evaluated using mutant constructs 
of the beta(2)-adaptin C terminus containing either the clathrin and the
beta-arrestin binding domains or the beta-arrestin-binding domain alone. When
expressed in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, both constructs acted as dominant 
negatives inhibiting the agonist-induced internalization of the beta(2)AR and the
vasopressin type II receptor. In addition, although the beta(2)-adaptin construct
containing both the clathrin and beta-arrestin binding domains was able to block 
the endocytosis of transferrin receptors, a beta(2)-adaptin construct capable of 
associating with beta-arrestin but lacking its high affinity clathrin interaction
did not interfere with transferrin receptor endocytosis. These results suggest
that the interaction of beta-arrestin with beta(2)-adaptin represents a selective
endocytic trigger for several members of the GPCR family.

PMID: 11777907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):7945-54. Epub 2001 Dec 31.

AP-2 gamma and the homeodomain protein distal-less 3 are required for
placental-specific expression of the murine 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
VI gene, Hsd3b6.

Peng L(1), Payne AH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

The enzyme 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/isomerase (3 beta-HSD) is
essential for the biosynthesis of all active steroid hormones. It exists as
multiple isoforms in humans and rodents, each the product of a distinct gene.
Human 3 beta-HSD I in placenta is essential for placental progesterone
biosynthesis and thus is essential for the maintenance of pregnancy. The murine
ortholog, 3 beta-HSD VI, is the only isoform expressed in giant trophoblast cells
during the first half of mouse pregnancy. This study was designed to identify the
cis-acting element(s) and the associated transcription factors required for
trophoblast-specific expression of 3 beta-HSD VI. Transfection studies in
placental and nonplacental cells identified a novel 66-bp trophoblast-specific
enhancer element located between -2896 and -2831 of the 3 beta-HSD VI promoter.
DNase protection analysis of the enhancer element identified three
trophoblast-specific binding sites, FPI, FPII, and FPIII. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays with oligonucleotides representing the protected sequences,
FPI and FPIII, and nuclear extracts isolated from human JEG-3 cells and from
mouse trophoblast cells, demonstrated the same binding pattern that was distinct 
from the binding pattern with mouse Leydig cell nuclear proteins. Further
electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified AP-2 gamma and the homeodomain
protein, Dlx 3, as the transcription factors that specifically bind to FPI and
FPIII, respectively. Site-specific mutations in each of the binding sites
eliminated enhancer activity indicating that AP-2 gamma and Dlx 3, together with 
an additional transcription factor(s) that are conserved between humans and mice,
are required for trophoblast-specific expression of 3 beta-HSD VI.

PMID: 11773066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):9800-5. Epub 2001 Dec 28.

Increased MMP-2 expression in connective tissue growth factor over-expression
vascular smooth muscle cells.

Fan WH(1), Karnovsky MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA. wenhuafan@hms.harvard.edu

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is abundantly expressed in the vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMC) of atherosclerotic lesions but not in normal vessels. 
CTGF is able to promote VSMC proliferation and migration and influences the
composition of extracellular matrix. The mechanisms for controlling these events 
remain unclear. We studied the effects of CTGF on matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) by introducing a CTGF over-expression construct into VSMC. We found that
the over-expression of CTGF significantly increased the activity of MMP-2 in VSMC
conditioned medium. MMP-2 activity was similarly increased by exogenous CTGF
treatment, and this effect could be blocked by an anti-CTGF antibody. We also
showed that the increased MMP-2 activity was due to an increase in MMP-2 mRNA
levels in VSMC. We further studied the mechanisms involved in the regulation of
MMP-2 mRNA levels and found that the AP-2 transcription factor is responsible for
most of the CTGF-induced MMP-2 transcription. Because MMP-2 is an important
factor directly involved in controlling cell movement and the turnover of
extracellular matrix, our study may provide a mechanism for CTGF-promoted VSMC
migration.

PMID: 11773059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Clin Cancer Res. 2001 Dec;7(12):4086-95.

Activator protein 2alpha transcription factor expression is associated with
luminal differentiation and is lost in prostate cancer.

Ruiz M(1), Troncoso P, Bruns C, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: Prostate cancer progression is associated with deregulation of genes
like E-cadherin, p21/WAF1, MMP-2, VEGF, and IGF-binding protein, 3 and 5, all of 
which are target genes for the transcription factor activator protein 2alpha
(AP-2alpha). We, therefore, hypothesize that the development/progression of
prostate cancer is associated with changes in the expression of AP-2alpha.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We used immunofluorescent staining to assess the presence of
AP-2alpha in normal, benign, and malignant human prostate tissues and to
correlate its expression with tumor grade and stage.
RESULTS: We found that although AP-2alpha was expressed in normal prostate
epithelium, it was not expressed in 30 prostate cancer specimens of different
Gleason scores. Moreover, AP-2alpha protein was present in the luminal cell layer
but not in the basal cell layer of the normal epithelium, which indicated that
the loss of AP-2alpha staining in the prostate cancer specimens was not
attributable to a lack of AP-2alpha-expressing cells. Further analysis
demonstrated the presence of AP-2alpha in 2 (40%) of 5 atrophic normal
epithelium, in 4 (24%) of 17 cases of benign prostatic hyperplasia, and in 2
(13%) of 13 cases of high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Loss or
reduction in AP-2alpha expression was also observed in LNCaP, LNCaP-LN3, and
PC3M-LN4 cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that AP-2alpha expression is associated with
normal luminal differentiation and that a loss of AP-2alpha expression occurs
early in the development of prostate adenocarcinoma. Loss of AP-2alpha may lead
to deregulation in AP-2alpha target genes that normally regulate cellular growth 
and differentiation.

PMID: 11751506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Nov;31(11):3165-74.

PEBP2 and c-myb sites crucial for lambda5 core enhancer activity in pre-B cells.

Mårtensson A(1), Xie XQ, Persson C, Holm M, Grundström T, Mårtensson IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell- and Molecular Biology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

The lambda5 gene is expressed exclusively in precursor (pre-) B cells where its
gene product, as part of the pre-B cell receptor, is crucial for the
proliferation of these cells. Several DNA regions regulate the activity and
expression pattern of the lambda5 gene. Amongst these is an enhancer, B(lambda5),
located 5' of the gene. Here we analyze the lambda5 enhancer core, b(lambda5),
which in earlier experiments was demonstrated to retain 50% of the enhancer
activity, and show that this activity is restricted to pre-B cells. We identify a
DNA element within b(lambda5), PEBP2(lambda5), which is essential for enhancer
activity: mutation within this site dramatically reduces core enhancer activity
in pre-B cells. The PEBP2(lambda5) site binds bacterially produced polyoma
enhancer binding proteins (PEBP) (Runx/AML/CBFA). Furthermore, PEBP2 proteins
present in nuclear extracts from murine pre-B cells bind to the PEBP2(lambda5)
element. PEBP2 proteins in mature B cells also bind to the PEBP2(lambda5
)element, implying that if PEBP2 proteins are responsible for the stage-specific 
expression, they have to be non-activating or inhibiting in mature B cells. We
also demonstrate that a described partner of PEBP2, c-myb, binds to a sequence
termed myb(lambda5) located just upstream of the PEBP2(lambda5) site in the core 
enhancer. The myb(lambda5) element is also crucial for enhancer activity, since
mutating the myb site reduces core enhancer activity to the same extent as
mutating the PEBP2 site. Earlier reports have shown that c-myb is expressed at
high levels in pre-B cell lines whereas its expression is down-regulated in more 
mature B cell lines. Thus, c-myb may be involved in determining the
stage-specific expression of the lambda5 gene.

PMID: 11745333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 8;277(10):8559-65. Epub 2001 Dec 14.

Human CREB-binding protein/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich tail
(CITED) 4, a new member of the CITED family, functions as a co-activator for
transcription factor AP-2.

Bragança J(1), Swingler T, Marques FI, Jones T, Eloranta JJ, Hurst HC, Shioda T, 
Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Henry Wellcome Building of Genomic Medicine, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

Members of the CREB-binding protein/p300-interacting transactivator with ED-rich 
tail (CITED) family bind CREB-binding protein and p300 with high affinity and
regulate gene transcription. Gene knockout studies indicate that CITED2 is
required for neural crest and neural tube development and that it functions as a 
co-activator for transcription factor AP-2 (TFAP2). Here we describe human
CITED4, a new member of this family, which is encoded by a single exon mapping to
chromosome 1p34--1p35. CITED4 and p300/CREB-binding protein are present in
endogenous naturally occurring complexes, indicating that they interact
physiologically. The interaction occurs between the cysteine-histidine-rich
domain 1 of p300 and the carboxyl terminus of CITED4. In keeping with this,
CITED4 functions as a transactivator when artificially targeted to a promoter
element. CITED4 physically interacts with all TFAP2 isoforms in vitro and
strongly co-activates all TFAP2 isoforms in Hep3B cells. Co-activation of TFAP2
requires amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal residues of CITED4. In HepG2 cells,
CITED4 is significantly weaker than CITED2 for TFAP2C co-activation. These
results suggest that CITED4 may function as a co-activator for TFAP2. They also
suggest the existence of cell type- and TFAP2 isoform-specific co-activation by
CITED2 and CITED4, which may result in differential modulation of TFAP2 function.

PMID: 11744733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):139-49.

Requirement for AP-2alpha in cardiac outflow tract morphogenesis.

Brewer S(1), Jiang X, Donaldson S, Williams T, Sucov HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
266 Whitney Avenue, KBT 1034, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

Most developing structures that express the transcription factor gene AP-2alpha
are compromised in AP-2alpha mutant mouse embryos. Since the cardiac neural crest
population is one prominent site of AP-2alpha expression, and because the neural 
crest is known to be required for normal cardiac morphogenesis, we have
investigated the involvement of AP-2alpha in cardiac development. All
AP-2alpha-deficient embryos examined had malformations of the outflow tract of
the developing heart: most had double outlet right ventricle, and a small
fraction had persistent truncus arteriosus. To visualize AP-2alpha-expressing
cells during the period of cardiac morphogenesis, we established a new mutant
germline allele in which an IRES-lacZ sequence was inserted by homologous
recombination into the AP-2alpha locus. Positive expression was observed in the
cardiac neural crest population during the E9.5-10.5 period (as well as in other 
known domains of AP-2alpha expression previously noted by in situ hybridization
studies), and was mostly extinguished by E11.5 when the cardiac neural crest has 
migrated into the outflow tract of the developing heart. Importantly, the
distribution of AP-2alpha-expressing cardiac neural crest appeared to be
identical in normal and mutant embryos. From this analysis, we propose that the
AP-2alpha gene functions within the neural crest lineage, that AP-2alpha is not
required for neural crest cell migration, and that normal AP-2alpha gene function
is required prior to E11.5. AP-2alpha may be involved in an interaction between
neural crest and surrounding tissues in the subpharyngeal region, thereby
promoting normal outflow tract morphogenesis.

PMID: 11744375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. EMBO J. 2001 Dec 17;20(24):7008-21.

Polarized trafficking and surface expression of the AQP4 water channel are
coordinated by serial and regulated interactions with different clathrin-adaptor 
complexes.

Madrid R(1), Le Maout S, Barrault MB, Janvier K, Benichou S, Mérot J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biologie Cellulaire, Département de Biologie Cellulaire et
Moléculaire, CEA/Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, Cedex, France.

Aquaporin 4 (AQP4) is the predominant water channel in the brain. It is targeted 
to specific membrane domains of astrocytes and plays a crucial role in cerebral
water balance in response to brain edema formation. AQP4 is also specifically
expressed in the basolateral membranes of epithelial cells. However, the
molecular mechanisms involved in its polarized targeting and membrane trafficking
remain largely unknown. Here, we show that two independent C-terminal signals
determine AQP4 basolateral membrane targeting in epithelial MDCK cells. One
signal involves a tyrosine-based motif; the other is encoded by a di-leucine-like
motif. We found that the tyrosine-based basolateral sorting signal also
determines AQP4 clathrin-dependent endocytosis through direct interaction with
the mu subunit of AP2 adaptor complex. Once endocytosed, a regulated switch in mu
subunit interaction changes AP2 adaptor association to AP3. We found that the
stress-induced kinase casein kinase (CK)II phosphorylates the Ser276 immediately 
preceding the tyrosine motif, increasing AQP4-mu 3A interaction and enhancing
AQP4-lysosomal targeting and degradation. AQP4 phosphorylation by CKII may thus
provide a mechanism that regulates AQP4 cell surface expression.

PMCID: PMC125333
PMID: 11742978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6637-44. Epub 2001 Dec 10.

A subtractive gene expression screen suggests a role of transcription factor AP-2
alpha in control of proliferation and differentiation.

Pfisterer P(1), Ehlermann J, Hegen M, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, ITG, Hermann von Helmholtz Platz 1, 76344
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

The transcription factor AP-2 alpha has been implicated as a cell type-specific
regulator of gene expression during vertebrate embryogenesis based on its
expression pattern in neural crest cells, ectoderm, and the nervous system in
mouse and frog embryos. AP-2 alpha is prominently expressed in cranial neural
crest cells, a population of cells that migrate from the lateral margins of the
brain plate during closure of the neural tube at day 8-9 of embryonic
development. Homozygous AP-2 alpha mutant mice die perinatally with
cranio-abdominoschisis, full facial clefting, and defects in cranial ganglia and 
sensory organs, indicating the importance of this gene for proper development. By
using a subtractive cloning approach, we identified a set of genes repressed by
AP-2 alpha that are described to retard cellular proliferation and induce
differentiation and apoptosis. We show that these target genes are prematurely
expressed in AP-2 alpha mutant mice. One of the genes isolated, the Krüppel-box
transcription factor KLF-4 implicated in induction of terminal differentiation
and growth regulation, is found expressed in mutant embryonic fibroblasts. We
show that fibroblasts lacking AP-2 alpha display retarded growth but no enhanced 
apoptosis. Based on these data we suggest that AP-2 alpha might be required for
cell proliferation by suppression of genes inducing terminal differentiation,
apoptosis, and growth retardation.

PMID: 11741941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. FEBS Lett. 2001 Dec 7;509(2):207-12.

Modulation of HIV-1 enhancer activity and virus production by cAMP.

Banas B(1), Eberle J, Banas B, Schlöndorff D, Luckow B.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Poliklinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Molekulare
Infektiologie, Pettenkoferstrasse 8a, D-80336 Munich, Germany.
banas@medpoli.med.uni-muenchen.de

The effect of cAMP on the transcriptional activity of the HIV-1 long terminal
repeat/enhancer was investigated and compared to the effect of cAMP on virus
replication. In culture cAMP repressed virus replication in vivo using different 
cell types. Transient transfection studies with HIV-1 enhancer-derived luciferase
reporter gene constructs identified the minimal DNA sequence mediating the
negative regulatory effect of cAMP on HIV-1 transcription. A single nuclear
factor kappaB element from the HIV-1 enhancer mediates the repressive effect on
transcription. AP-2 is not involved in cAMP repression. Stable transfection of
Jurkat T cells with the co-activators CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300
completely abolished the cAMP repressive effect, supporting the hypothesis that
elevation of intracellular cAMP increases phosphorylation of CREB, which then
competes with phosphorylated p65 and Ets-1 for limiting amounts of CBP/p300
thereby mediating the observed repressive effect on transcription. These findings
suggest an important role of cAMP on HIV-1 transcription.

PMID: 11741590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Jan;282(1):F164-9.

Estradiol upregulates mesangial cell MMP-2 activity via the transcription factor 
AP-2.

Guccione M(1), Silbiger S, Lei J, Neugarten J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, and
the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10467, USA.

The accumulation of extracellular matrix in the glomerular mesangium reflects the
net balance between the synthesis and degradation of matrix components. We have
shown that estradiol suppresses the synthesis of types I and IV collagen by
cultured mesangial cells (Kwan G, Neugarten J, Sherman M, Ding Q, Fotadar U, Lei 
J, and Silbiger S. Kidney Int 50: 1173-1179, 1996; Neugarten J, Acharya A, Lei J,
and Silbiger S. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 279: F309-F318, 2000; Neugarten J,
Medve I, Lei J, and Silbiger SR. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 277: F1-F8, 1999;
Neugarten J and Silbiger S. Am J Kidney Dis 26: 147-151, 1995; Silbiger S, Lei J,
and Neugarten J. Kidney Int 55: 1268-1276, 1998; Silbiger S, Lei J, Ziyadeh FN,
and Neugarten J. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 274: F1113-F1118, 1998). In the
present study, we evaluated the effects of sex hormones on the activity of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) in murine mesangial cells, the synthesis of which is 
regulated by the transcription factor activator protein-2 (AP-2). Estradiol
stimulated MMP-2 activity by increasing MMP-2 protein levels in a dose-dependent 
manner. These effects occurred at physiological concentrations of estradiol and
were receptor mediated. Estradiol also increased AP-2 protein levels and
increased binding of mesangial cell nuclear extracts to an AP-2 consensus binding
sequence oligonucleotide. The ability of estradiol to increase AP-2 protein
expression, AP-2/DNA binding activity, MMP-2 protein expression, and
metalloproteinase activity was reversed by PD-98059, a selective inhibitor of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase/mitogen-activated protein kinase (ERK/MAPK)
signaling cascade. We conclude that estradiol upregulates the MAPK cascade, which
in turn stimulates the synthesis of AP-2 protein. The resultant increased
AP-2/DNA binding activity leads to increased synthesis of MMP-2 and increased
metalloproteinase activity. Stimulation of metalloproteinase activity by
estradiol may contribute to the protective effect of female gender on renal
disease progression.

PMID: 11739124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Breast Cancer Res. 2001;3(6):395-8. Epub 2001 Oct 1.

Update on HER-2 as a target for cancer therapy: the ERBB2 promoter and its
exploitation for cancer treatment.

Hurst HC(1).

Author information: 
(1)ICRF Molecular Oncology Unit, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.
hurst@icrf.icnet.uk

Overexpression of the ERBB2 proto-oncogene is associated with amplification of
the gene in breast cancer but increased activity of the promoter also plays a
significant role. Members of two transcription factor families (AP-2 and Ets)
show increased binding to the promoter in over-expressing cells. Consequently,
strategies have been devised to target promoter activity, either through the DNA 
binding sites for these factors, or through another promoter sequence, a
polypurine-polypyrimidine repeat structure. The promoter has also been exploited 
for its tumour-specific activity to direct the accumulation of cytotoxic
compounds selectively within cancer cells. Our current understanding of the ERBB2
promoter is reviewed and the status of these therapeutic avenues is discussed.

PMCID: PMC138707
PMID: 11737892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002 Jan;34(1):78-86.

Cloning and characterization of a novel human transcription factor AP-2 beta like
gene (TFAP2BL1).

Cheng C(1), Ying K, Xu M, Zhao W, Zhou Z, Huang Y, Wang W, Xu J, Zeng L, Xie Y,
Mao Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, People's Republic of China.

The AP-2 transcription factor has been shown to play an important role in
development, morphogenesis, apoptosis, cell-cycle control and has also been
implicated in mammary oncogenesis. Here we report the cloning and
characterization of a novel human transcription factor AP-2 like gene (TFAP2BL1),
which is located on human chromosome 6p12.1-21.1. The TFAP2BL1 cDNA is 2076 base 
pairs in length, encoding a 452-amino acid polypeptide related to human
Ap-2protein. TFAP2BL1 gene has significantly high homology to transcription
factor AP-2 gene of human, mouse, chicken, sheep, fruit fly, and C. elegans at
amino acid level. RT-PCR analysis shows its relatively high expression level in
adult thymus, prostate, small intestine, skeletal muscle, placenta, brain, and
testis tissues.

PMID: 11733187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 1;61(23):8416-21.

The constitutive photomorphogenesis 9 signalosome directs vascular endothelial
growth factor production in tumor cells.

Pollmann C(1), Huang X, Mall J, Bech-Otschir D, Naumann M, Dubiel W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Surgery, Medical Faculty Charité,
Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. christianpollman@hotmail.com

Angiogenesis is a prerequisite for solid tumor growth and metastasis. Elucidation
of the signaling pathways that control tumor angiogenesis constitutes the basis
for a rational antiangiogenic tumor therapy. Here we show that the production of 
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in HeLa and HL-60 cells is directed by 
the constitutive photomorphogenesis 9 signalosome (CSN). The CSN is a kinase
complex that cooperates with the ubiquitin/26S proteasome system in regulating
the stability of proteins involved in signal transduction. VEGF expression is
controlled by the transcription factors activator protein (AP)-1, AP-2, SP-1, and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1. Inhibition of CSN kinase activity by 50 microM
curcumin for 2 h decreases the cellular c-Jun concentration, resulting in a
reduction of the VEGF production by approximately 75%. The removal of the
inhibitor from the cells led to a time-dependent recovery of endogenous c-Jun
that is paralleled by increasing VEGF production. Elevated cellular CSN activity 
induced by CSN subunit 2 overexpression causes increased VEGF production in HeLa 
cells. A competitor of CSN-dependent c-Jun phosphorylation, the NH(2)-terminal
c-Jun fragment Deltac-Jun(1-226), inhibits VEGF production in HeLa cells. The
transcription factors AP-2 and SP-1 act independently of the CSN. They contribute
less than a quarter to basal VEGF production. Under our experimental conditions, 
hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha protein was not detected. Overexpression of the
tumor suppressor p53 reduces VEGF production in HeLa cells. p53 competes with
c-Jun for CSN-specific phosphorylation with the consequence of c-Jun
destabilization. We conclude that CSN-directed c-Jun signaling mediates high VEGF
production in HeLa and HL-60 cells. The data provide an explanation for the known
antiangiogenic and antitumorigenic activities of curcumin. Because the CSN
regulates the major part of VEGF production in the tested tumor cells, it
constitutes a potentially important target for tumor therapy.

PMID: 11731421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Dec 1;29(23):4843-50.

The role of basal and myogenic factors in the transcriptional activation of
utrophin promoter A: implications for therapeutic up-regulation in Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.

Perkins KJ(1), Burton EA, Davies KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Genetics and MRC Functional Genetics Unit,
University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.

Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive muscle wasting disease
caused by the absence of a muscle cytoskeletal protein, dystrophin. Utrophin is
the autosomal homologue of dystrophin. We previously demonstrated that
overexpression of utrophin in the muscles of dystrophin-null transgenic mice
completely prevented the phenotype arising from dystrophin deficiency. Two
independently regulated promoters control utrophin expression and the upstream
promoter (promoter A) is synaptically regulated in muscle. In this study, we have
investigated basal regulation and myogenic induction of promoter A. Interactions 
between Ap2 and Sp1 and their cognate DNA motifs are critical for basal
transcription from the minimal promoter region. During differentiation of C2C12
myoblasts in vitro, a 2-fold increase in A-utrophin mRNA level was observed.
Expression of a reporter gene, whose transcription was driven by a 1.3 kb
promoter A fragment, paralleled expression of the endogenous transcript. Myogenic
induction mapped to a conserved upstream muscle-specific E-box, which was shown
to bind myogenic regulatory factors, transactivating the promoter up to 18-fold
in transient assays. This study provides a basis for further understanding the
regulatory mechanisms that control utrophin expression in muscle and may
facilitate the development of reagents to effect therapeutic up-regulation of
utrophin in DMD.

PMCID: PMC96689
PMID: 11726694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 30;289(2):337-44.

Identification and characterization of the human serotonin-4 receptor gene
promoter.

Hiroi T(1), Hayashi-Kobayashi N, Nagumo S, Ino M, Okawa Y, Aoba A, Matsui H.

Author information: 
(1)Radioisotope Research Institute, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki 216-8511, Japan.

The human serotonin-4 (5-HT(4)) receptor gene expression is highly regulated in
various tissues. We isolated the human 5-HT(4) receptor gene containing the
5'-flanking region and characterized its promoter. By 5'-RACE (5'-rapid
amplification of the cDNA ends) and inverse PCR, multiple transcription
initiation sites were identified. The most 5' one (assigned to +1) was 5135 bp
upstream to the translation start site. The 500-bp 5'-flanking region contained
potential binding sites for transcription factor Sp-1, AP-2, AP-4, and GATA.
However, this region lacked TATA- and CAAT-boxes. Transient transfection analyses
in human choriocarcinoma T3M-3 (5-HT(4) receptor-positive) and HepG2 (5-HT(4)
receptor-negative) cells revealed that the region (-210 to -105) is necessary for
the basic and cell-type specific 5-HT(4) receptor gene expression. In addition,
untranslated exon 1 contained negative (+112 to +182) as well as positive (+1 to 
+111) modulators, indicating that exon 1 plays a regulatory role in the 5-HT(4)
receptor gene expression.

PMID: 11716477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Nat Genet. 2001 Dec;29(4):469-74.

Cardiac malformations, adrenal agenesis, neural crest defects and exencephaly in 
mice lacking Cited2, a new Tfap2 co-activator.

Bamforth SD(1), Bragança J, Eloranta JJ, Murdoch JN, Marques FI, Kranc KR, Farza 
H, Henderson DJ, Hurst HC, Bhattacharya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust
Center for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN UK.

The protein EP300 and its paralog CREBBP (CREB-binding protein) are ubiquitously 
expressed transcriptional co-activators and histone acetyl transferases. The gene
EP300 is essential for normal cardiac and neural development, whereas CREBBP is
essential for neurulation, hematopoietic differentiation, angiogenesis and
skeletal and cardiac development. Mutations in CREBBP cause Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome, which is characterized by mental retardation, skeletal abnormalities
and congenital cardiac defects. The CBP/p300-interacting transactivator with
ED-rich tail 2 (CITED2) binds EP300 and CREBBP with high affinity and regulates
gene transcription. Here we show that Cited2-/- embryos die with cardiac
malformations, adrenal agenesis, abnormal cranial ganglia and exencephaly. The
cardiac defects include atrial and ventricular septal defects, overriding aorta, 
double-outlet right ventricle, persistent truncus arteriosus and right-sided
aortic arches. We find increased apoptosis in the midbrain region and a marked
reduction in ErbB3-expressing neural crest cells in mid-embryogenesis. We show
that CITED2 interacts with and co-activates all isoforms of transcription factor 
AP-2 (TFAP2). Transactivation by TFAP2 isoforms is defective in Cited2-/-
embryonic fibroblasts and is rescued by ectopically expressed CITED2. As certain 
Tfap2 isoforms are essential in neural crest, neural tube and cardiac
development, we propose that abnormal embryogenesis in mice lacking Cited2
results, at least in part, from its role as a Tfap2 co-activator.

PMID: 11694877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):927-32.

Lipopolysaccharide regulates constitutive and inducible transcription factor
activities differentially in vivo in the rat.

Ye X(1), Liu SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Long Island Campus for the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New Hyde Park, New York 11040, USA.

The pathophysiology of septic shock is characterized by the induction of multiple
proinflammatory genes and their products. Transcription factors play key roles in
the transcription of these genes. Transcription factors may play important roles 
in the pathophysiology of septic shock. However, little information is available 
regarding the in vivo transcription factor activities during sepsis. We have
studied the in vivo effects of LPS on the DNA binding activities of transcription
factors Sp1 (promoter selective transcription factor), AP-2 (activating
protein-2), AP-1 (activating protein-1), NF-kappaB (nuclear factor kappa B), and 
CREB (cAMP response element binding protein). We found that LPS up-regulated the 
DNA binding activity of inducible transcription factors AP-1, NF-kappaB, and CREB
in a time-dependent manner, but down-regulated the DNA binding activity of
constitutive transcription factors Sp1 and AP-2. Thus, LPS regulates the
inducible and constitutive transcription factors differentially under in vivo
conditions.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11688998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):752-6.

Downregulation of repressive CUP/AP-2 isoforms during adipocyte differentiation.

Holt EH(1), Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Activation of transcription of the C/EBPalpha (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
alpha) gene is a critical event in the differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
into adipocytes. The kinetics of this process parallels a decline of AP-2alpha
protein (also referred to as CUP, C/EBP undifferentiated protein) and decreased
binding of CUP/AP-2alpha to the C/EBPalpha promoter. Mutation of the CUP/AP-2
binding sites in the C/EBPalpha promoter results in increased C/EBPalpha
expression. Based on these findings, it appears that decline in AP-2alpha
expression is an important early event in the adipocyte differentiation program. 
In the studies presented here, we identify three mRNAs that encode the repressive
CUP/AP-2alpha isoforms expressed in undifferentiated 3T3-L1 preadipocytes. We
demonstrate that the kinetics of the decline of these isoforms' expression over
the course of differentiation parallels both the decrease in CUP/AP-2alpha DNA
binding activity and the increase in C/EBPalpha protein observed in previous
studies.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11688971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Nov 2;313(1-2):102-4.

Levels of transcription factors AP-2alpha and AP-2beta in the brainstem are
correlated to monoamine turnover in the rat forebrain.

Damberg M(1), Eller M, Tõnissaar M, Oreland L, Harro J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, S-751
24 Uppsala, Sweden.

The transcription factors AP-2alpha and AP-2beta are implicated to play an
important role during embryonic development of different parts of the brain, and 
in targeted regulation of gene expression in the adult brain. Several
monoaminergic genes have binding sites for AP-2 in regulatory regions. We have in
the present study, analysed the association between AP-2 levels in the brainstem 
of rats (n=9) and monoamine levels in the frontal cortex, septum and hippocampus.
Several regionally specific correlations were found between AP-2alpha and
AP-2beta and specific monoamines in the rat forebrain. The data support our
notion that the transcription factor AP-2 family is involved in the regulation of
the monoaminergic systems and, therefore, might be involved in the
pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric disorders.

PMID: 11684350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Growth Factors. 2001;19(1):19-34.

Role of AP-1 and HIF-1 transcription factors in TGF-beta activation of VEGF
expression.

Shih SC(1), Claffey KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Opthalmology, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02139, USA.

Aberrant expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been
demonstrated to be associated with most human solid tumors. Here we report that
TGF-beta potently induces VEGF expression in human HT-1080 fibrosarcomas
primarily through transcriptional activation with no significant changes in mRNA 
turnover. The tyrosine kinase inhibitor genistein and AP-1 inhibitor curcumin
significantly blocked TGF-beta induction of VEGF expression while SP-1 and MKK1
inhibitors did not. TGF-beta enhanced both AP-1 and HIF-1 DNA binding activities 
whereas SP-1, AP-2 and NF-1 did not show major changes. Transcriptional reporter 
assays provided further evidence that TGF-beta augmented both AP-1 and HIF-1
activities. Moreover, TGF-beta-treated HT-1080 cells contained higher levels of
HIF-1alpha and c-jun proteins in nuclear extracts. TGF-beta and hypoxia
synergistically induced VEGF mRNA expression. Given the fact that most tumors
respond to hypoxic stress with increased VEGF expression via HIF-1-dependent
transcription, this study identifies for the first time that TGF-beta also
increases VEGF mRNA in an AP-l/HIF-1-dependent mechanism and may potentiate the
hypoxic response.

PMID: 11678207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Invest Dermatol. 2001 Oct;117(4):864-70.

Redistribution of transcription factor AP-2alpha in differentiating cultured
human epidermal cells.

Mazina OM(1), Phillips MA, Williams T, Vines CA, Cherr GN, Rice RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis,
95616-8588, USA.

Expression of the transcription factor AP-2alpha was examined in cultured human
epidermal cells. Levels of AP-2alpha mRNA increased substantially after the
cultures reached confluence, similar to the expression pattern of the
differentiation markers involucrin and keratinocyte transglutaminase. The level
of AP-2alpha protein in nuclear extracts declined markedly after confluence,
however, along with its ability to form complexes with oligonucleotides
containing the AP-2 response element. In contrast, the levels of AP-2alpha
protein in cytoplasmic extracts increased dramatically after confluence, but
these extracts had low DNA binding activity. Supershift experiments with specific
antisera detected only AP-2alpha and not the beta or gamma isoforms. Examination 
of its localization by confocal microscopy revealed that AP-2alpha was primarily 
in the nucleus of basal cells and largely cytoplasmic in the most superficial
cells. Localization was a dynamic phenomenon in that changing the medium resulted
in accumulation of this transcription factor in the nucleus after several hours. 
Overall, the data indicate that AP-2alpha transcriptional activity is regulated
in a differentiation-dependent manner in cultured keratinocytes and that this
occurs by relocalization of the protein. Nuclear localization of the AP-2alpha
protein in basal cells permits its accessibility to response elements in gene
promoters, whereas sequestration in the cytoplasm as the differentiation program 
progresses curtails its transcriptional activity. This regulatory scheme may
provide keratinocytes with the ability to restore AP-2 transcriptional activity
rapidly by redistribution to the nucleus after receiving an appropriate growth
signal, such as a medium change.

PMID: 11676824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Biochem J. 2001 Nov 1;359(Pt 3):669-77.

Characterization of the MN/CA 9 promoter proximal region: a role for specificity 
protein (SP) and activator protein 1 (AP1) factors.

Kaluzová M(1), Pastoreková S, Svastová E, Pastorek J, Stanbridge EJ, Kaluz S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovak
Republic.

MN/CA IX (MN) is a tumour-associated isoenzyme of the carbonic anhydrase family. 
Previous deletion analysis of the MN promoter established that protected regions 
(PRs) 1 and 2 are crucial for its transcriptional activity. Computer-assisted
searching indicated putative binding sites for activator protein (AP) 2 and
specificity protein (SP) 1 transcription factors, plus a CACCC box in PR1 and an 
AP1 site in PR2. PR1 produced four complexes in electrophoretic mobility-shift
assay (EMSA) with HeLa nuclear extracts. Of these, three were completely competed
with the SP1 and transforming growth factor-beta retinoblastoma control-element
CACCC box (RCE) probes, whereas the AP2 probe competed against the same three
complexes partially. Supershift EMSA identified SP1 in the complex 1 and SP3 in
the complexes 2 and 4. Point mutations in the SP1 site abrogated the PR1
function, while mutations affecting the overlapping CACCC box/AP2 site in PR1 had
minor effect on MN promoter activity. Block-replaced MN promoter mutants that had
a consensus binding site (SP1 or AP2) or the RCE in place of PR1 demonstrated the
stringent selectivity of the PR1 position as only the SP1 mutant reconstituted
the MN promoter activity. The consensus SP1 probe generated the same SP1 and SP3 
complexes as PR1 in EMSA; therefore we conclude that SP activity is both
necessary and sufficient in the PR1 position. The critical role of AP1 in the PR2
position was confirmed by supershift of the PR2 complex with c-Fos antibody and
markedly decreased activity of the construct with a mutated AP1 site. Detailed
deletion analysis proved that PR1+PR2 account for 90% of the MN promoter
activity, while neither PR1 nor PR2 on their own are sufficient for
transactivation. Thus, synergistic co-operation between SP and AP1 factors bound 
to the adjacent PR1 and PR2, respectively, is necessary for MN transcriptional
activity. The PR1+PR2 module also stimulated transcription from a heterologous
promoter. The modulation of AP1 activity with PMA stimulated MN expression and
activated the MN promoter, whereas inhibition of protein kinase C activity had no
effect on MN expression in HeLa cells.

PMCID: PMC1222189
PMID: 11672442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Life Sci. 2001 Sep 21;69(18):2157-65.

Differential expression of AP-2gamma and AP-2alpha during human trophoblast
differentiation.

Richardson BD(1), Cheng YH, Langland RA, Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, OH,
USA. brian.richardson.chmcc.org

Previous studies from our laboratory demonstrated that AP-2alpha induces the
expression of the hPL and hCG genes in cultured trophoblast cells. In the current
study, we have shown by transient transfection studies that AP-2gamma, which is
the product of a separate gene from AP-2alpha, also stimulates hPL and hCGbeta
promoter activities. However, AP-2gamma mRNA levels during in vitro
differentiation of human cytotrophoblast cells were strikingly different than
those of AP-2alpha mRNA levels, with AP-2alpha increasing and AP-2gamma markedly 
decreasing during the differentiation process. The amount of AP-2gamma protein
binding to AP-2 elements on the hPL promoter, as determined by supershift assays,
also markedly decreased during the differentiation process. These findings
strongly suggest that AP-2gamma action in cytotrophoblast cells is repressed by a
co-factor(s) that inhibits AP-2gamma action or is prevented by the absence of a
co-factor(s) that is essential for AP-2gamma action.

PMID: 11669459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Hum Mutat. 2001 Nov;18(5):444-50.

Variability of the CD36 gene in West Africa.

Gelhaus A(1), Scheding A, Browne E, Burchard GD, Horstmann RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical
Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

Studying 12 selected individuals from a malaria-endemic area in West Africa, 24
variants of the CD36 gene were found, 21 of them novel ones. These included three
single-nucleotide substitutions causing non-conservative amino acid exchanges
E123K, T174A, and I271T as well as a three base pair (bp) insertion resulting in 
the addition of an asparagine residue (N232-233ins). The E123K variant was
located within the putative ligand-binding domain for oxidized low density
lipoprotein, while the other substitutions resided outside any of the binding
sites for reaction partners mapped on CD36 so far. Twelve single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified in untranslated parts of the exons and in
introns. Five additional SNPs were located in the promoter region whereby
-144G-->T, -53G-->T, and -2A-->G alter putative binding sites for the
transcription factors purine factor (PuF), phorbol ester-responsive element AP-2,
and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein. A G-->T exchange at position -50 appears to
introduce a new recognition site for PuF. Calculations of nucleotide diversity
revealed extraordinarily high numbers for all parts of the gene, which may,
however, to some extent be due to the selection of individuals studied.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11668637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Nov;281(5):L1271-8.

Nuclear factor-kappa B augments beta(2)-adrenergic receptor expression in human
airway epithelial cells.

Aksoy MO(1), Bin W, Yang Y, Yun-You D, Kelsen SG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140,
USA.

Interleukin (IL)-1 beta increases beta(2)-adrenergic receptor (beta(2)-AR) mRNA
and density by protein kinase C (PKC)-dependent mechanisms in human airway
epithelial cells. The present study examined the role of several nuclear
transcription factors in the PKC-activated upregulation of beta(2)-AR expression.
BEAS-2B cells were exposed to the PKC activator phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate
(PMA; 0.1 microM for 2-18 h). PMA had no effect on activator protein (AP)-2 or
cAMP response element binding protein DNA binding activity but markedly increased
nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B and AP-1 binding as assessed by electrophoretic gel
mobility shift assay. PMA also increased the activity of a beta(2)-AR
promoter-luciferase reporter construct in transiently transfected cells. These
effects were inhibited by the PKC inhibitors Ro-31-8220 and calphostin C.
Furthermore, with increasing Ro-31-8220, beta(2)-AR promoter-reporter activity
correlated closely with both NF-kappa B and AP-1 activities (r > 0.89 for both). 
Finally, the selective NF-kappa B inhibitor MG-132 dose dependently reduced
NF-kappa B binding and beta(2)-AR promoter activity but increased AP-1 binding.
We conclude that PKC-induced upregulation of beta(2)-AR expression in human
airway epithelial cells appears to be mediated, at least in part, by increases in
NF-kappa B activity.

PMID: 11597920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Cell Biochem. 2001 Aug 21-Sep 5;83(3):364-72.

Expression of AP-2 transcription factor and of its downstream target genes c-kit,
E-cadherin and p21 in human cutaneous melanoma.

Baldi A(1), Santini D, Battista T, Dragonetti E, Ferranti G, Petitti T, Groeger
AM, Angelini A, Rossiello R, Baldi F, Natali PG, Paggi MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Center for Experimental
Research, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

The AP-2 transcription factor plays a pivotal role in regulating the expression
of several genes involved in tumor growth and progression of melanoma. We
determined, by Western blot, variation in the level of expression of AP-2 and
three of its downstream targets, c-kit, E-cadherin, and p21 in several human
melanoma cell lines and, by immunohistochemistry, in a group of 99 histological
samples including benign and malignant melanocytic lesions. A significant
negative correlation between AP-2 expression level and tumor thickness was found.
Moreover, AP-2 expression was positively associated with E-cadherin and c-kit
expression. In contrast, there was a significant negative association between
AP-2 and p21 expression levels. These findings suggest that p21 is independent of
AP-2 transactivator function during the latest phases of melanoma progression.
Finally, AP-2, c-kit, E-cadherin, and p21 expression levels did not show to be
able to distinguish between dysplastic nevi and nevi without dysplasia. We
conclude that changes in the expression of these proteins are involved in the
later phases of melanoma progression, and may be responsible for the transition
from local invasive melanoma to metastasis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11596105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Sep;18(3):307-19.

Doublecortin interacts with mu subunits of clathrin adaptor complexes in the
developing nervous system.

Friocourt G(1), Chafey P, Billuart P, Koulakoff A, Vinet MC, Schaar BT, McConnell
SK, Francis F, Chelly J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiopathologie des retards mentaux, ICGM,
INSERM, CHU, Cochin, 24, rue du Faubourg Saint Jacques, Paris, 75014, France.

Doublecortin is a microtubule-associated protein required for normal
corticogenesis in the developing brain. We carried out a yeast two-hybrid screen 
to identify interacting proteins. One of the isolated clones encodes the mu1
subunit of the adaptor complex AP-1 involved in clathrin-dependent protein
sorting. We found that Doublecortin also interacts in yeast with mu2 from the
AP-2 complex. Mutagenesis and pull-down experiments showed that these
interactions were mediated through a tyrosine-based sorting signal (YLPL) in the 
C-terminal part of Doublecortin. The functional relevance of these interactions
was suggested by the coimmunoprecipitation of Doublecortin with AP-1 and AP-2
from mouse brain extracts. This interaction was further supported by RNA in situ 
hybridization and immunofluorescence studies. Taken together these data indicate 
that a certain proportion of Doublecortin interacts with AP-1 and/or AP-2 in vivo
and are consistent with a potential involvement of Doublecortin in protein
sorting or vesicular trafficking.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11591131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46230-6. Epub 2001 Sep 27.

Clathrin- and AP-2-binding sites in HIP1 uncover a general assembly role for
endocytic accessory proteins.

Mishra SK(1), Agostinelli NR, Brett TJ, Mizukami I, Ross TS, Traub LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a major pathway for the internalization of
macromolecules into the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. The principle coat
components, clathrin and the AP-2 adaptor complex, assemble a polyhedral lattice 
at plasma membrane bud sites with the aid of several endocytic accessory
proteins. Here, we show that huntingtin-interacting protein 1 (HIP1), a binding
partner of huntingtin, copurifies with brain clathrin-coated vesicles and
associates directly with both AP-2 and clathrin. The discrete interaction
sequences within HIP1 that facilitate binding are analogous to motifs present in 
other accessory proteins, including AP180, amphiphysin, and epsin. Bound to a
phosphoinositide-containing membrane surface via an epsin N-terminal homology
(ENTH) domain, HIP1 associates with AP-2 to provide coincident clathrin-binding
sites that together efficiently recruit clathrin to the bilayer. Our data
implicate HIP1 in endocytosis, and the similar modular architecture and function 
of HIP1, epsin, and AP180 suggest a common role in lipid-regulated clathrin
lattice biogenesis.

PMID: 11577110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Oct 5;287(4):921-6.

Functional analysis of the transcriptional activity of the mouse phospholipid
transfer protein gene.

Tu AY(1), Albers JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwest Lipid Research Laboratories, University of
Washington, 2121 N. 35th Street, Seattle, WA 98103, USA. aytu@u.washington.edu

Phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP) plays an important role in the metabolism of
plasma high density lipoprotein. The mouse gene encoding PLTP and its promoter
region has been cloned in our laboratory. The present study was conducted to
functionally analyze the transcriptional regulation of the mouse PLTP gene. The
results indicated that DNA sequences between -245 and -69 were responsible for
the full promoter activity and binding motifs for transcription factor Sp1 and
AP-2 within this functional promoter region were synergistically essential for
the basal transcription. The transcriptional activity of this gene was
significantly increased by chenodeoxycholic acid and fenofibrate, suggesting that
transcription factor farnesoid X-activated receptor (FXR) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) are likely involved in the transcriptional
regulation. DNA sequence analysis suggests that DNA sequences from -407 to -395
and from -393 to -381 are homologous to the recognition motifs of FXR, and those 
from -859 to -847 and from -309 to -297 are similar to the potential binding
motif for PPAR. These findings provide a molecular basis for further
investigation of the physiological function and regulation of the PLTP gene in
mice.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11573953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Curr Opin Hematol. 2001 Jul;8(4):201-5.

Function of the inv(16) fusion gene CBFB-MYH11.

Kundu M(1), Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 49
Convent Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. pliu@nhgri.nih.gov

Inv(16)(p13q22) is associated with acute myeloid leukemia subtype M4Eo, which is 
characterized by the presence of myelomonocytic blasts and atypical eosinophils. 
This chromosomal rearrangement results in the fusion of CBFB and MYH11 genes.
Mouse models indicate that the fusion gene, Cbfb-MYH11, inhibits differentiation 
of hematopoietic cells. Although expression of Cbfb-MYH11 is not sufficient for
leukemogenesis, a combination of Cbfb-MYH11 and additional mutations can lead
specifically to the development of myeloid leukemia. Normally, CBFbeta interacts 
with CBFalpha to form a transcriptionally active nuclear complex. In vitro
studies indicate that expression of CBFB-MYH11 leads to sequestration of
CBFalpha2 in the cytoplasm. It also has been shown to inhibit CBF-mediated
transactivation, slow cell cycle progression, delay the apoptotic response to DNA
damaging agents, and protect CBFalpha2 from degradation. The importance of these 
functions in vivo remains to be determined.

PMID: 11561156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Curr Opin Hematol. 2001 Jul;8(4):192-6.

Core binding factor and its role in normal hematopoietic development.

Speck NA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. 
Nancy.Speck@dartmouth.edu

The core binding factors are a small family of transcription factors comprising a
DNA binding CBFalpha subunit and a non-DNA binding CBFbeta subunit. One gene
encoding a CBFalpha subunit, RUNX1 (also known as AML1, CBFA2, and PEBPA2A), and 
the gene encoding CBFbeta (CBFB) are essential for hematopoiesis and are
frequently mutated in human leukemias. Both genes are required for the generation
of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) during embryonic development. Expression
studies in fish and frogs and functional analyses in flies indicate that a role
for these genes in hematopoiesis is evolutionarily conserved.

PMID: 11561154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 7;276(49):46251-9. Epub 2001 Sep 17.

Mu 2 binding directs the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator to
the clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway.

Weixel KM(1), Bradbury NA.

Author information: 
(1)Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) contains a
conserved tyrosine-based internalization motif, (1424)YDSI, which interacts with 
the endocytic clathrin adaptor complex, AP-2, and is required for its efficient
endocytosis. Although direct interactions between several endocytic sequences and
the medium chain and endocytic clathrin adaptor complexes have been shown by
protein-protein interaction assays, whether all these interactions occur in vivo 
or are physiologically important has not always been addressed. Here we show,
using both in vitro and in vivo assays, a physiologically relevant interaction
between CFTR and the mu subunit of AP-2. Cross-linking experiments were performed
using photoreactive peptides containing the YDSI motif and purified adaptor
complexes. CFTR peptides cross-linked a 50-kDa subunit of purified AP-2
complexes, the apparent molecular mass of mu 2. Furthermore, isolated mu 2 bound 
to the sorting motif, YDSI, both in cross-linking experiments and glutathione
S-transferase pull-down experiments, confirming that mu 2 mediates the
interaction between CFTR and AP-2 complexes. Inducible overexpression of
dominant-negative mu 2 in HeLa cells results in AP-2 complexes that fail to
interact with CFTR. Moreover, internalization of CFTR in mutant cells is greatly 
reduced compared with wild type HeLa cells. These results indicate that the AP-2 
endocytic complex selectively interacts with the conserved tyrosine-based
internalization signal in the carboxyl terminus of CFTR, YDSI. Furthermore, this 
interaction is mediated by the mu 2 subunit of AP-2 and mutations in mu 2 that
block its interaction with YDSI inhibit the incorporation of CFTR into the
clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway.

PMID: 11560923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Aug;20(8):473-81.

TPA-activated transcription of the human MnSOD gene: role of transcription
factors Sp-1 and Egr-1.

Porntadavity S(1), Xu Y, Kiningham K, Rangnekar VM, Prachayasittikul V, St Clair 
DK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536, USA.

Erratum in
    DNA Cell Biol. 2008 Nov;27(11):636. Prachayasitikul, V [corrected to
Prachayasittikul].

Induction of manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) in response to oxidative
stress has been well established in animals, tissues, and cell culture. However, 
the role of the human MnSOD (hMnSOD) promoter in stimulus-dependent activation of
transcription is unknown. The hMnSOD promoter lacks both a TATA and a CAAT box
but possesses several GC motifs. In a previous study, we showed that the basal
promoter contains multiple Sp1 and AP-2 binding sites and that Sp1 is essential
for the constitutive expression of the hMnSOD gene. In this study, we identified 
an Egr-1 binding site in the basal promoter of hMnSOD. We also found that the
basal promoter is responsive to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
(TPA)-activated hMnSOD transcription in the human hepatocarcinoma cell line
HepG2. The contributions of these binding sites and the roles of the
transcription factors Egr-1, AP-2, and Sp1 in the activation of hMnSOD
transcription by TPA were investigated by site-directed mutation analysis,
Western blotting, and overexpression of transcription factors. The results showed
that Sp1 plays a positive role for both basal and TPA-activated hMnSOD
transcription, whereas overexpression of Egr-1 has a negative role in the basal
promoter activity without any effect on TPA-mediated activation of hMnSOD
transcription.

PMID: 11560779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Biochemistry. 2001 Sep 25;40(38):11423-32.

Structure and backbone dynamics of Apo-CBFbeta in solution.

Wolf-Watz M(1), Grundström T, Härd T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Center for Structural Biochemistry, Royal
Institute of Technology (KTH), Novum, S-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden.

Runx proteins constitute a family of mammalian transcription factors that
interact with DNA through their evolutionarily conserved Runt domain. CBFbeta,
alternatively denoted PEBP2beta, is the non-DNA-binding heterodimer partner and
acts to enhance the DNA binding affinity of Runx proteins. Runx proteins and
CBFbeta are associated with a variety of biological functions and human diseases;
they are, for example, together the most frequent targets for chromosomal
rearrangements in acute human leukemias. We have determined the solution
structure and characterized the backbone dynamics of C-terminally truncated
fragments containing residues 1-141 of CBFbeta. The present apo-CBFbeta structure
is very similar to that seen in a Runt-CBFbeta complex. An evaluation of backbone
(15)N NMR relaxation parameters shows that CBFbeta is a rigid molecule with high 
order parameters throughout the backbone; the only regions displaying significant
dynamics are a long loop and the C-terminal alpha-helix. A few residues display
relaxation behavior indicating conformational exchange on microsecond to
millisecond time scales, but only one of these is located at the Runt binding
surface. Our structure and dynamics analysis of CBFbeta therefore suggests that
the protein binds to Runt without large conformational changes or induced folding
("lock-and-key" interaction). The apo-CBFbeta structure presented here exhibits
several significant differences with two other published NMR ensembles of very
similar protein fragments. The differences are located in four regions outside of
the central beta-barrel, whereas the beta-barrel itself is almost identical in
the three NMR structures. The comparison illustrates that independently
determined NMR structures may display rather large differences in backbone
conformation in regions that appear to be well-defined in each of the calculated 
NMR ensembles.

PMID: 11560490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2001 Aug;3(4):697-709.

V-Ha-Ras overexpression induces superoxide production and alters levels of
primary antioxidant enzymes.

Yang JQ(1), Li S, Huang Y, Zhang HJ, Domann FE, Buettner GR, Oberley LW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology and Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University
of Iowa, Iowa City 52242-1181, USA.

Reactive oxygen species have been shown to play important roles in v-Ha-Ras
mitogenic signaling. We hypothesized that v-Ha-Ras overexpression would induce
superoxide production, and therefore modify expression of the primary antioxidant
enzyme system. We have demonstrated that immortal rat kidney epithelial cells
stably transduced with constitutively active v-Ha-ras produced significantly
larger amounts of superoxide radical than wild-type or vector-transfected control
cells. The levels of the primary antioxidant enzymes copper- and zinc-containing 
superoxide dismutase, manganese-containing superoxide dismutase, catalase, and
glutathione peroxidase were increased in the superoxide-overproducing cells.
DNA-binding activities of the transcription factors activator protein-1,
activator protein-2, and nuclear factor-kappaB were all enhanced in the
superoxide-overproducing cells. These v-Ha-ras transduced cells also had a
shortened cell doubling time and higher plating efficiency, and displayed greater
constitutive levels of phosphorylated mitogen-activated protein kinases. These
data demonstrate that v-Ha-Ras overexpression increases superoxide production and
this apparently affects a wide variety of cell signaling and redox systems.

PMID: 11554455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Neurosci. 2001 Jul;14(2):363-72.

Developmental regulation and overexpression of the transcription factor AP-2, a
potential regulator of the timing of Schwann cell generation.

Stewart HJ(1), Brennan A, Rahman M, Zoidl G, Mitchell PJ, Jessen KR, Mirsky R.

Author information: 
(1)Trafford Centre for Medical Research, University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton
BN1 9RY, UK.

There is now evidence from in vivo and in vitro studies that the rate of Schwann 
cell generation is regulated by the balance of two opposing signals, beta
neuregulins and endothelins. The beta neuregulins promote the development of
precursors to Schwann cells whereas endothelins retard it through an action on
endothelin-B receptors. The present work has shown additional controls of this
transition, and implicates AP-2 transcription factors, in particular AP-2 alpha, 
as negative regulators of Schwann cell generation. We found that both AP-2 alpha 
and AP-2 gamma are present in early embryonic nerves, whereas AP-2 beta was not. 
Isoform-specific analysis of AP-2 alpha showed that isoform 3 was most abundant
with isoforms 1 and 2 present in lesser amounts; isoform 4 was absent. Maximal
AP-2 alpha and AP-2 gamma mRNA expression occurred at embryonic day (E) 12/13 in 
the mouse and at E14/15 in the rat, which correlates with the presence of Schwann
cell precursors in the nerve. In both rats and in mice, in vivo and in vitro,
downregulation of AP-2 alpha mRNA and protein coincided with one of the main
steps in Schwann cell development, the precursor-Schwann cell transition.
Moreover, Schwann cell generation was delayed if this downregulation was
prevented by enforced expression of AP-2 alpha in precursors. These studies
suggest that AP-2 is involved in the control of the timing of Schwann cell
development.

PMID: 11553286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Photochem Photobiol. 2001 Aug;74(2):274-82.

UVA-340 as energy source, mimicking natural sunlight, activates the transcription
factor AP-1 in cultured fibroblasts: evidence for involvement of protein
kinase-C.

Nakano H(1), Gasparro FP, Uitto J.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology and Biochemistry and
Molecular Pharmacology, Jefferson Medical College, Jefferson Institute of
Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is known to affect a variety of cellular functions,
including gene expression. A number of signaling pathways have been suggested to 
mediate these effects, including the participation of activator protein-1 (AP-1),
activator protein-2 (AP-2) and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B). The divergent
results from previous studies could be explained, at least in part, by the source
of UVR with different spectral characteristics as well as the type of cells
employed as targets. In this study we have utilized UVA-340 as an energy source
with output which closely matches the spectrum of natural sunlight over the range
of 295-350 nm for irradiation of cultured fibroblasts. Combination of
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and Northern analyses revealed activation
of AP-1 but not NF-kappa B or AP-2. Inhibition studies further suggested the
participation of protein kinase-C, but not protein kinase-A, and that an
inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MEK-1/2) did not alter the AP-1
activation. Free radical quenchers, sodium azide and N-acetylcysteine, did not
affect the AP-1 binding activity. Finally, UVA-340 was shown to enhance
transcriptional expression of the type-VII collagen gene (COL7A1), which is
endogenously expressed in dermal fibroblast in an AP-1 dependent manner.
Introduction of a mutation into the AP-1 site of the COL7A1 promoter abolished
this activation. Thus, our results obtained by utilizing a novel energy source,
UVA-340, mimicking natural sunlight at UVB and lower UVA range indicate a role
for AP-1 in mediating the enhanced gene expression by UVR. Collectively, these
results suggest that AP-1 is an important mediator of UVR action in fibroblasts.

PMID: 11547566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 2;276(44):40755-60. Epub 2001 Aug 24.

Cloning and characterization of a novel mouse AP-2 transcription factor,
AP-2delta, with unique DNA binding and transactivation properties.

Zhao F(1), Satoda M, Licht JD, Hayashizaki Y, Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 
10029, USA.

AP-2 transcription factors are sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins expressed
in neural crest and other tissues during mammalian development. Three mammalian
genes, AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma, have been reported previously. A
partial predicted AP-2 gene was identified in tandem with AP-2beta on human
chromosome 6p12-p21.1. The orthologous mouse gene, which we named Ap-2delta, was 
identified from a fetal mouse head cDNA library. Northern analysis revealed two
transcripts in embryonic and newborn mouse brain, with markedly higher
steady-state levels in the former. The predicted Ap-2delta protein comprised 452 
amino acids and was highly similar to other AP-2 proteins across the DNA-binding 
and dimerization domains. Ap-2delta formed homodimers and heterodimers in vitro, 
bound an optimized AP-2 consensus DNA sequence, and transactivated gene
expression in eukaryotic cells. Ap-2delta dimers bound poorly to an AP-2 binding 
sequence from the human metallothionein IIa promoter in vitro, revealing a
sequence specificity not previously observed among other AP-2 proteins. The PY
motif and critical residues in the transactivation domain, which are highly
conserved in the AP-2 family and believed necessary for transactivation, were
divergent in Ap-2delta. The unique protein sequence and functional features of
Ap-2delta suggest mechanisms, besides tissue-specific AP-2 gene expression, for
specific control of target gene activation.

PMID: 11522791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Nephrol. 2001 Jul-Aug;21(4):307-14.

Induction of transcription factor AP-2 by cytokines and prostaglandins in
cultured mesangial cells.

Suyama K(1), Kabuyama Y, Suzuki S, Kawasaki Y, Suzuki J, Suzuki H, Homma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Fukushima, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Activator protein-2 (AP-2) is an important transcription factor 
for activation of growth- and inflammatory-associated genes. To detect AP-2 in
the mesangium, the expression level of AP-2 was examined in cultured mesangial
cells in response to various cytokines and prostaglandins. The level was also
observed in kidney tissue samples obtained from patients with proteinuria and
from a rat nephrosis model.
METHODS: AP-2 was immunohistochemically detected with a specific antibody. The
expression level was analyzed by immunoblotting. Human tissue samples were
obtained from patients with proteinuria. Kidney samples were also obtained from
rats with puromycin aminonucleoside-induced nephrosis.
RESULTS: Pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-1 and IL-2, but not
TNF-alpha, induced AP-2 expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner in
cultured mesangial cells. PGE(2) and PGI(2) also induced AP-2 expression, while
PGF(2 alpha) failed to induce this protein. High expression levels of AP-2 were
observed in different cell types including mesangial cells of kidney samples from
patients with proteinuria. Similar results were obtained from the rat nephrosis
model.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate that the primary cytokines induce AP-2
protein in mesangial cells. AP-2 may act as a transcription factor to produce
additional cytokines and growth-associated gene products, suggesting an important
role for AP-2 for the function of mesangial cells in glomerular disorders.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11509803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Oct;69(4):695-703. Epub 2001 Aug 14.

Novel TFAP2B mutations that cause Char syndrome provide a genotype-phenotype
correlation.

Zhao F(1), Weismann CG, Satoda M, Pierpont ME, Sweeney E, Thompson EM, Gelb BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10029,
USA.

To elucidate further the role, in normal development and in disease pathogenesis,
of TFAP2B, a transcription factor expressed in neuroectoderm, we studied eight
patients with Char syndrome and their families. Four novel mutations were
identified, three residing in the basic domain, which is responsible for DNA
binding, and a fourth affecting a conserved PY motif in the transactivation
domain. Functional analyses of the four mutants disclosed that two, R225C and
R225S, failed to bind target sequence in vitro and that all four had dominant
negative effects when expressed in eukaryotic cells. Our present findings,
combined with data about two previously identified TFAP2B mutations, show that
dominant negative effects consistently appear to be involved in the etiology of
Char syndrome. Affected individuals in the family with the PY motif mutation,
P62R, had a high prevalence of patent ductus arteriosus but had only mild
abnormalities of facial features and no apparent hand anomalies, a phenotype
different from that associated with the five basic domain mutations. This
genotype-phenotype correlation supports the existence of TFAP2 coactivators that 
have tissue specificity and are important for ductal development but less
critical for craniofacial and limb development.

PMCID: PMC1226056
PMID: 11505339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2001 Jun;3(3):387-95.

Constitutive activation of transcription factor AP-2 is associated with decreased
MnSOD expression in transformed human lung fibroblasts.

Zhu C(1), Huang Y, Weydert CJ, Oberley LW, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Activator protein-2 (AP-2) is a transcription factor with transactivating and
transrepressing potential in different promoter contexts. AP-2 contains seven
cysteines, and its in vitro DNA binding activity is redox-sensitive. Superoxide
dismutase-2 (SOD2), which encodes the antioxidant enzyme manganese superoxide
dismutase (MnSOD), is a putative tumor suppressor gene whose loss of expression
is associated with the malignant phenotype. SOD2 promoter mutations that generate
new AP-2 sites are associated with loss of MnSOD expression in cancer cells. In
the current study, we have identified an inverse expression pattern between AP-2 
and MnSOD in normal versus transformed human cells. MRC5 cells are a normal human
lung fibroblast cell strain that is mortal and senesces after a certain number of
passages in vitro. MRC5-VA is a simian virus transformed variant of MRC5. We
determined the levels of expression of MnSOD and AP-2 in these two cell types at 
the levels of mRNA, protein, and activity. Our results indicated that MnSOD
expression was significantly decreased in MRC5-VA cells compared with MRC5 cells 
at each level of investigation, whereas AP-2 showed an opposing pattern of
expression and DNA binding activity. These results suggest that AP-2 may
participate in the mechanism(s) underlying decreased expression of SOD2 in
transformed cells.

PMID: 11491651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Mol Med (Berl). 2001 Jun;79(5-6):314-20.

Expression pattern of AP-2 transcription factors in cervical cancer cells and
analysis of their influence on human papillomavirus oncogene transcription.

Beger M(1), Butz K, Denk C, Williams T, Hurst HC, Hoppe-Seyler F.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg,
Germany.

The AP-2 family of transcription factors consists of three known members, namely 
AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma. In experimental systems AP-2 factors possess 
tumor suppressor-like activities, and alterations in the AP-2 expression pattern 
have been described for some tumor entities. In addition, AP-2 has been
implicated in the transcriptional control of human papillomaviruses (HPVs). We
investigated here the expression pattern of AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma,
as well as that of the cellular AP-2 target gene c-erbB-2, in a series of
cervical cancer cell lines. In addition, we analyzed the influence of AP-2
factors on the activity of the HPV16 and HPV18 E6/E7 oncogene promoter. We found 
that, with the exception of HPV-negative C33A cells, all investigated cervical
cancer cell lines expressed all three AP-2 family members, although at varying
levels. No linear correlation between AP-2 and c-erbB-2 levels was observed.
Although AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma can activate the c-erbB-2 promoter in
reporter gene assays, they do not stimulate the HPV16 or HPV18 E6/E7 promoter.
These results indicate that, although a rare event, loss of AP-2 expression
occurs in cervical cancer cells. Moreover, AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma are
neither sufficient nor required to activate the viral E6/E7 promoter.

PMID: 11485026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Electrophoresis. 2001 Jun;22(10):1979-86.

Nonradiochemical DNase I footprinting by capillary electrophoresis.

Wilson DO(1), Johnson P, McCord BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Ohio University, Athens 45701, USA.

A new application for DNase I footprinting using capillary electrophoresis (CE)
has been developed in order to decrease analysis time and to eliminate the use of
radiochemicals. An additional advantage of the new method over the traditional
radioactive methods is that the DNA probe can be labeled on both ends with
different fluorescein dyes. This provides an internal check of the identification
of protein-binding sites on DNA, because the binding region can be observed from 
both DNA strands. The initial parameters for the CE method were developed using
the Promega Core Footprinting Kit for analysis of AP-2 binding sites in the SV40 
enhancer sequence. After optimization of the method, the protocol was found to be
effective for footprint analysis of the immediate upstream region (bases -1 to
-370) of the rat glutathione peroxidase (GPX) and it permitted identification of 
a previously unknown binding site in the upstream sequence of the GPX gene.

PMID: 11465496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Leukemia. 2001 Jul;15(7):1072-80.

Quantification of CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion transcript by real time RT-PCR in patients
with INV(16) acute myeloid leukemia.

Marcucci G(1), Caligiuri MA, Döhner H, Archer KJ, Schlenk RF, Döhner K, Maghraby 
EA, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus 43210, USA.

Amplification of the CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion transcript by a qualitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) has been used to detect minimal 
residual disease (MRD) and assess the risk for disease relapse in inv(16)(p13q22)
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). This strategy has, however, produced conflicting
results and because of an uncertain predictive value, its use in the clinical
setting cannot be recommended. The objective of the current study was to evaluate
if quantification by Real Time RT-PCR could be useful to determine levels of
CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion transcripts predictive of clinical outcome in
inv(16)(p13q22) AML at diagnosis or during remission. Bone marrow (BM) samples
from 16 patients with inv(16) AML enrolled on a German multicenter trial (AML
HD93) were analyzed for levels of CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion transcripts by Real Time
RT-PCR at diagnosis (n= 14), during remission (n= 10) and at relapse (n=6). The
CBFbeta/MYH11 transcript copy number in each sample was normalized to copies of
an internal control housekeeping transcript (ie 18S). The copy number measured at
diagnosis or relapse were 3 to 4 log higher that those measured during remission,
following completion of induction treatment. A high CBFbeta/MYH11 transcript copy
number at diagnosis had a significant correlation with a high percentage of BM
blasts (Spearman's coefficient = -0.66; P= 0.03), and a borderline correlation
with a short complete remission (CR) duration (Spearman's coefficient = -0.51; P=
0.07). No difference in levels of CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion transcripts measured
during intensification therapy was found between patients destined to relapse and
those who continued in CCR (P= 0.75). Following completion of the entire
chemotherapy program, patients that during CR showed a CBFbeta/MYH11 fusion
transcript copy number >10 had a significantly shorter CR duration (P= 0.002) and
higher risk for disease relapse (P= 0.05) than patients with a CBFbeta/MYH11
fusion transcript copy number <10. The results of the current study, therefore,
suggest that it is possible to determine in remission samples a threshold of
CBFbeta/MYH11 transcript copy number above which relapse occurs and below which
continuous CR is likely.

PMID: 11455976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Cell Biol. 2001 Jul 9;154(1):33-48.

Large-scale chromatin decondensation and recondensation regulated by
transcription from a natural promoter.

Müller WG(1), Walker D, Hager GL, McNally JG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 41 Library Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have examined the relationship between transcription and chromatin structure
using a tandem array of the mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) promoter driving a
ras reporter. The array was visualized as a distinctive fluorescent structure in 
live cells stably transformed with a green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged
glucocorticoid receptor (GR), which localizes to the repeated MMTV elements after
steroid hormone treatment. Also found at the array by immunofluorescence were two
different steroid receptor coactivators (SRC1 and CBP) with acetyltransferase
activity, a chromatin remodeler (BRG1), and two transcription factors (NFI and
AP-2). Within 3 h after hormone addition, arrays visualized by GFP-GR or DNA
fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) decondensed to varying degrees, in the
most pronounced cases from a approximately 0.5-microm spot to form a fiber 1-10
microm long. Arrays later recondensed by 3-8 h of hormone treatment. The degree
of decondensation was proportional to the amount of transcript produced by the
array as detected by RNA FISH. Decondensation was blocked by two different drugs 
that inhibit polymerase II, 5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole
(DRB) and alpha-amanitin. These observations demonstrate a role for polymerase in
producing and maintaining decondensed chromatin. They also support fiber-packing 
models of higher order structure and suggest that transcription from a natural
promoter may occur at much higher DNA-packing densities than reported previously.

PMCID: PMC2196867
PMID: 11448988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Aug;21(15):4856-67.

Transcription factor AP-2alpha is preferentially cleaved by caspase 6 and
degraded by proteasome during tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced apoptosis in
breast cancer cells.

Nyormoi O(1), Wang Z, Doan D, Ruiz M, McConkey D, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Several reports have linked activating protein 2alpha (AP-2alpha) to apoptosis,
leading us to hypothesize that AP-2alpha is a substrate for caspases. We tested
this hypothesis by examining the effects of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha) on the expression of AP-2 in breast cancer cells. Here, we provide
evidence that TNF-alpha downregulates AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma expression
posttranscriptionally during TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis. Both a general caspase 
antagonist (zVADfmk) and a caspase 6-preferred antagonist (zVEIDfmk) inhibited
TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis and AP-2alpha downregulation. In vivo tests showed
that AP-2alpha was cleaved by caspases ahead of the DNA fragmentation phase of
apoptosis. Recombinant caspase 6 cleaved AP-2alpha preferentially, although
caspases 1 and 3 also cleaved it, albeit at 50-fold or higher concentrations.
Activated caspase 6 was detected in TNF-alpha-treated cells, thus confirming its 
involvement in AP-2alpha cleavage. All three caspases cleaved AP-2alpha at
asp(19) of the sequence asp-arg-his-asp (DRHD(19)). Mutating D(19) to A(19)
abrogated AP-2alpha cleavage by all three caspases. TNF-alpha-induced cleavage of
AP-2alpha in vivo led to AP-2alpha degradation and loss of DNA-binding activity, 
both of which were prevented by pretreatment with zVEIDfmk. AP-2alpha degradation
but not cleavage was inhibited in vivo by PS-431 (a proteasome antagonist),
suggesting that AP-2alpha is degraded subsequent to cleavage by caspase 6 or
caspase 6-like enzymes. Cells transfected with green fluorescent protein-tagged
mutant AP-2alpha are resistant to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis, further
demonstrating the link between caspase-mediated cleavage of AP-2alpha and
apoptosis. This is the first report to demonstrate that degradation of AP-2alpha 
is a critical event in TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis. Since the DRHD sequence in
vertebrate AP-2 is widely conserved, its cleavage by caspases may represent an
important mechanism for regulating cell survival, proliferation, differentiation,
and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC87191
PMID: 11438643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biochem. 2001 Jul;130(1):39-50.

Expression and exon/intron organization of two medaka fish homologs of the
mammalian guanylyl cyclase A.

Yamagami S(1), Suzuki K, Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan.

Two cDNA clones (OlGC2 and OlGC7) and their genomic DNA clones encoding medaka
fish homologs of mammalian natriuretic peptide receptor/membrane guanylyl cyclase
A (GC-A) were isolated, and their complete nucleotide sequences were determined. 
The open reading frame predicts a protein of 1,063 amino acids for OlGC2 cDNA
(4,283 bp), and one of 1,055 amino acids for OlGC7 cDNA (3,721 bp), respectively.
Northern blot analyses demonstrated 4.7 kb OlGC2 transcripts in the kidney and
gill, and 4.0 kb OlGC7 transcripts in the kidney, brain, and ovary, while RNase
protection analyses revealed that both genes are expressed in various adult
organs. Both the OlGC2 (about 33.0 kbp) and OlGC7 (about 44.3 kbp) genes consist 
of 22 exons with an exon/intron organization similar to those of the human GC-A
gene (about 16.6 kbp) and medaka fish GC-B homolog gene (OlGC1, about 93 kbp).
Intron 4 of OlGC2 contains two repeated sequence (RS) clusters, designated as RS1
(about 1 kbp) and RS2 (about 5 kbp), consisting of nucleotide
5'-AGCCTCTGCTCCTCCTTC-3'. In addition, many identical but variably sized
nucleotide sequences were found in introns in OlGC1, OlGC2, OlGC6, and OlGC7. The
OlGC2 and OlGC7 genes both have no apparent TATA box in the 5' flanking region
upstream of the putative transcription initiation point, but several consensus
sequences for cis-regulatory elements, including C/EBP, CREB, NF-IL6, and Sp1 and
AP-2, NF-IL6, c-Myb, and Sp1 are present in the 5'-flanking region of OlGC2 and
OlGC7, respectively.

PMID: 11432778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Clin Pathol. 2001 Jul;54(7):533-8.

Expression of transcription factor AP-2 in colorectal adenomas and
adenocarcinomas; comparison of immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridisation.

Ropponen KM(1), Kellokoski JK, Pirinen RT, Moisio KI, Eskelinen MJ, Alhava EM,
Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, University of Kuopio, PO Box
1627, FIN 70211, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS: To investigate whether the three different AP-2 isoforms are expressed
differently in colorectal adenomas and carcinomas.
METHODS: The study comprised 43 randomly selected patients diagnosed and treated 
at Kuopio University Hospital in 1996 for colorectal adenocarcinoma (n = 30) and 
colorectal adenoma (n = 13). The expression of AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma
was analysed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) and the mRNA status of AP-2alpha was
determined by in situ hybridisation (ISH) and confirmed by reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). AP-2 expression patterns were correlated with
clinicopathological variables.
RESULTS: In adenomas and carcinomas, AP-2beta cytoplasmic positivity was higher
than that of AP-2alpha or AP-2gamma. AP-2alpha expression was reduced in advanced
Dukes's stage carcinomas. In high grade carcinomas, both AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma 
expression was reduced. ISH demonstrated increased AP-2alpha values in high grade
carcinomas. Seven of 30 carcinoma specimens displayed a moderate or strong mRNA
signal, despite being negative for AP-2alpha protein. RT-PCR from AP-2alpha mRNA 
and protein positive tumours confirmed that the positive signal in ISH originated
from the exon 2 of TFAP2A.
CONCLUSIONS: AP-2alpha was reduced in advanced Dukes's stage adenocarcinomas.
Together with reduced AP-2gamma expression in high grade carcinomas, this might
contribute to tumour progression. The discrepancy between mRNA and protein
expression suggests that post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms might modify 
the availability of functional AP-2alpha protein in colorectal carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC1731475
PMID: 11429425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncogene. 2001 Jun 7;20(26):3363-75.

Dominant-negative transcription factor AP-2 augments SB-2 melanoma tumor growth
in vivo.

Gershenwald JE(1), Sumner W, Calderone T, Wang Z, Huang S, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that the transition of melanoma to the metastatic
phenotype is associated with a loss of expression of the transcription factor
AP-2. To further investigate the role of AP-2 in the progression of human
melanoma, we attempted to inactivate AP-2 in primary cutaneous SB-2 melanoma
cells by using a dominant-negative AP-2, or AP-2B, gene. AP-2B is an
alternatively spliced AP-2 variant capable of inhibiting AP-2 trans-activator
function. Stable transfection of primary cutaneous melanoma SB-2 cells with the
dominant-negative AP-2B gene was confirmed by RT--PCR and Northern blot analyses.
Electromobility shift assay using nuclear extracts from these cell lines
demonstrated decreased functional binding of AP-2B-transfected cells to the AP-2 
consensus binding sequence compared with neo-transfected controls. In addition,
CAT activity driven by a construct containing the AP-2 consensus binding sequence
was downregulated in the AP-2B transfected cells, indicating AP-2 activity was
quenched in the transfected cells. Orthotopic (subcutaneous) injection of the
dominant-negative (AP-2B)-transfected cell lines into nude mice increased their
tumorigenicity compared to control neo-transfected cells. The AP-2B-transfected
cells displayed an increase in MMP-2 expression (by Northern blot) and MMP-2
activity (by zymography), which resulted in an increase in invasiveness through
Matrigel-coated filters. The AP-2B-transfected tumors also displayed an increase 
in MMP-2 expression, microvessel density, and angiogenesis in vivo. These results
demonstrate that inactivation of AP-2 contributes to the progression of melanoma,
at least partially via deregulation of the MMP-2 gene.

PMID: 11423987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogene. 2001 May 3;20(20):2570-8.

The retinoblastoma-related Rb2/p130 gene is an effector downstream of AP-2 during
neural differentiation.

Paggi MG(1), Bonetto F, Severino A, Baldi A, Battista T, Bucci F, Felsani A,
Lombardi D, Giordano A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Centre for Experimental
Research, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Via delle Messi d'Oro 156, 00158 Rome,
Italy.

Rb2/p130, a member of the Retinoblastoma family of growth and tumour suppressor
genes, is extensively implicated in the control of cell cycle and
differentiation. The minimal promoter region of Rb2/p130 in T98G human
glioblastoma cells was identified and its analysis revealed the presence of a
KER1 palindromic sequence able to bind the transcription factor AP-2, a
regulatory protein that plays a crucial role in ectodermal differentiation. This 
KER1 site interacted in vitro with AP-2, and AP-2 overexpression increased
Rb2/p130 transcription and translation. We also found that rat PC12
pheochromocytoma cells, when induced to differentiate by NGF, displayed an
increase of AP-2 protein levels and of Rb2/p130 transcription and protein levels.
AP-2-transfected PC12 cells displayed enhanced transcription and translation of
Rb2/p130 and of the cdk inhibitor p21(WAF1/CIP1), a gene known to be under the
control of AP-2, but unable by itself to elicit PC12 differentiation.
Overexpression of either AP-2 or Rb2/p130 elicited per se cell differentiation in
the absence of NGF, while coexpression of AP-2B, a negative regulator of AP-2
transcriptional activity, inhibited only AP-2-induced differentiation.
Altogether, these results indicate that Rb2/p130 is a critical effector of AP-2
in sustaining ectodermal differentiation.

PMID: 11420667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Immunol. 2001 Jul 1;167(1):366-74.

IL-8 production in human lung fibroblasts and epithelial cells activated by the
Pseudomonas autoinducer N-3-oxododecanoyl homoserine lactone is transcriptionally
regulated by NF-kappa B and activator protein-2.

Smith RS(1), Fedyk ER, Springer TA, Mukaida N, Iglewski BH, Phipps RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

The destructive pulmonary inflammation associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa
colonization is caused, in part, by the production of the chemokine IL-8, which
recruits neutrophils into the lung. The Pseudomonas autoinducer,
N-3-oxododecanoyl homoserine lactone (3-O-C12-HSL), is a small lipid-soluble
molecule that is essential in the regulation of many P. aeruginosa virulence
factors, but little is known about how it affects eukaryotic cells. In this
report we demonstrate that 3-O-C12-HSL is a potent stimulator of both IL-8 mRNA
and protein from human fibroblasts and epithelial cells in vitro. The IL-8
produced from these 3-O-C12-HSL-stimulated cells was found to be functionally
active by inducing the chemotaxis of neutrophils. To determine a mechanism for
this IL-8 induction, deletion constructs of the IL-8 promoter were examined. It
was found that the DNA region between nucleotides -1481 and -546 and the
transcription factor NF-kappaB were essential for the maximal induction of IL-8
by 3-O-C12-HSL. This was confirmed by EMSAs, where 3-O-C12-HSL induced a shift
with both AP-2 and NF-kappaB consensus DNA. The activation of NF-kappaB and
subsequent production of IL-8 were found to be regulated by a mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathway. These findings support the concept that the severe lung
damage that accompanies P. aeruginosa infections is caused by an exuberant
neutrophil response stimulated by 3-O-C12-HSL-induced IL-8. Understanding the
mechanisms of 3-O-C12-HSL activation of lung structural cells may provide a means
to help control lung damage during infections with P. aeruginosa.

PMID: 11418672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 May 28;1519(1-2):96-105.

Two CCAAT boxes in a novel inverted repeat motif are required for Hlx homeobox
gene expression.

Bates MD(1), Schatzman LC, Harvey RP, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's
Hospital Research Foundation, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229, USA. michael.bates@chmcc.org

Hlx is a homeobox transcription factor gene required for normal intestinal and
hepatic growth in development. We previously found high sequence identity and 17 
conserved consensus cis-regulatory/transcription factor binding elements in the
mouse and human Hlx 5' regions. A 594 bp sequence in the Hlx 5' region possessing
the same activity in driving luciferase expression as larger Hlx 5' sequences had
three segments each necessary but not sufficient for luciferase expression in NIH
3T3 cells (which express Hlx). Nine of the conserved putative regulatory elements
are positioned within these segments, including two CCAAT boxes on opposite
strands within a conserved 44 bp inverted repeat sequence. To test the hypothesis
that these elements are required for promoter activity, we compared the reporter 
expression activity of segments containing mutations of these elements with
activity of the parent Hlx promoter sequence. We found that mutation of either
CCAAT box or a conserved AP-2 site resulted in a significant decrease in promoter
activity. Restoration of the inverted repeat with complementary mutations of both
CCAAT boxes did not restore activity. Further, mutation of other portions of the 
inverted repeat did not affect promoter activity. Mutation of other elements had 
no effect on promoter activity.

PMID: 11406277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2001 May 28;1519(1-2):85-91.

Expression of AP-2 alpha in SV40 immortalized human lung fibroblasts is
associated with a distinct pattern of cytosine methylation in the AP-2 alpha
promoter.

Zhu CH(1), Huang Y, Broman MT, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radical and Radiation Biology Program, Department of Radiology, The
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Activator protein-2 alpha (AP-2 alpha) is a cell type-specific, developmentally
regulated, transcription factor that has been implicated as a critical regulator 
of gene expression during vertebrate development and carcinogenesis. We found
that AP-2 alpha was differentially expressed in the normal human lung fibroblast 
cell strains WI38, MRC-5 and their respective SV40-transformed cell counterparts 
WI38-VA, MRC-5VA. Since CpG methylation within genetic regulatory regions has
been implicated as a mechanism of gene regulation, we investigated the CpG
methylation status of the AP-2 alpha gene promoter in these cells. High
resolution mapping of methylated cytosines revealed that differential expression 
of the AP-2 alpha gene in normal human lung fibroblasts and their
SV40-transformed counterparts was associated with distinct patterns of cytosine
methylation in the AP-2 alpha promoter just 5' to the transcription initiation
site. Site-specific methylation was positively correlated with increased AP-2
alpha gene expression in both transformed cell lines investigated. Interestingly,
one of the two major centers of hypermethylation in the transformed cells
encompassed the cis-element for the AP-2 repressing transcription factor AP-2rep 
(KLF12). Finally, a sequence variation in human lung fibroblasts relative to the 
published sequence revealed a previously unidentified AP-2 binding site at
position -528 with respect to the transcription initiation site that overlapped
the AP-2rep site. Our results suggest that transcriptional activation of AP-2
alpha in the SV40-transformed cells is mediated, at least in part, by
site-specific methylation of a negative regulatory cis-element in the AP-2 alpha 
promoter.

PMID: 11406275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mech Dev. 2001 Jun;104(1-2):151-4.

Cloning and expression pattern of a novel PEBP2 beta-binding protein (charged
amino acid rich leucine zipper-1[Crl-1]) in the mouse.

Sakuma T(1), Li QL, Jin Y, Choi LB, Kim EG, Ito K, Ito Y, Nomura S, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical School, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871,
Japan.

PEBP2 beta/Cbf beta is the beta subunit of PEBP2/Cbf, which has been demonstrated
to have important biological activities in hematopoiesis and osteogenesis.
However, PEBP2 beta is ubiquitously expressed, suggesting that PEBP2 has other
additionally important physiological activities. In an effort to elucidate other 
possible functions for PEBP2, we have isolated a novel gene that encodes a PEBP2 
beta-interacting protein from a mouse cDNA library. We have called this gene
Crl-1 for charged amino acid rich leucine zipper-1 (Crl-1) because it is rich in 
charged amino acids and contains a putative leucine zipper region. Expression
studies in a 17.5 days post-coitum mouse embryo demonstrated Crl-1 expression
mainly in the olfactory bulb and cerebral cortex. Post-natally, Crl-1 expression 
was additionally observed in the cerebellar cortex with strong expression in the 
hippocampus. These findings show that this novel PEBP2 beta-interacting protein
is expressed mainly in subsets of neuronal cells, suggesting that Crl-1 plays
some role in the developing mouse brain.

PMID: 11404095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Cell Biol. 2001 May 28;153(5):1111-20.

Stonin 2: an adaptor-like protein that interacts with components of the endocytic
machinery.

Martina JA(1), Bonangelino CJ, Aguilar RC, Bonifacino JS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Metabolism Branch, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Endocytosis of cell surface proteins is mediated by a complex molecular machinery
that assembles on the inner surface of the plasma membrane. Here, we report the
identification of two ubiquitously expressed human proteins, stonin 1 and stonin 
2, related to components of the endocytic machinery. The human stonins are
homologous to the Drosophila melanogaster stoned B protein and exhibit a modular 
structure consisting of an NH(2)-terminal proline-rich domain, a central region
of homology specific to the stonins, and a COOH-terminal region homologous to the
mu subunits of adaptor protein (AP) complexes. Stonin 2, but not stonin 1,
interacts with the endocytic machinery proteins Eps15, Eps15R, and intersectin 1.
These interactions occur via two NPF motifs in the proline-rich domain of stonin 
2 and Eps15 homology domains of Eps15, Eps15R, and intersectin 1. Stonin 2 also
interacts indirectly with the adaptor protein complex, AP-2. In addition, stonin 
2 binds to the C2B domains of synaptotagmins I and II. Overexpression of
GFP-stonin 2 interferes with recruitment of AP-2 to the plasma membrane and
impairs internalization of the transferrin, epidermal growth factor, and low
density lipoprotein receptors. These observations suggest that stonin 2 is a
novel component of the general endocytic machinery.

PMCID: PMC2174325
PMID: 11381094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochem Pharmacol. 2001 Jun 15;61(12):1543-50.

Mercuric ion inhibition of eukaryotic transcription factor binding to DNA.

Rodgers JS(1), Hocker JR, Hanas RJ, Nwosu EC, Hanas JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
College of Medicine, 800 Research Parkway, Room 448, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
USA.

Mercury has harmful effects in both rodents and humans. In rodent tissue culture 
cells exposed to HgCl(2), the metal ions were observed to concentrate in cell
nuclei and to associate with chromatin. Thus, transcription factors and other
proteins associated with chromatin are possible targets of mercuric ion toxicity.
In this study, mercuric ions were found to inhibit the DNA binding activity of
the Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger proteins transcription factor IIIA (TFIIIA) and Sp1.
These factors are prototypes of the largest eukaryotic protein superfamily.
Neither the presence of excess zinc ions nor beta-mercaptoethanol prevented
inhibition by mercuric ions. Mercuric ions also inhibited DNA binding by the
non-zinc finger protein AP2. Zinc finger-DNA binding was inhibited when both
TFIIIA/5S RNA complex and TFIIIA alone were preincubated with concentrations as
low as 15 microM mercuric ion. Inhibition occurred in less than 1 min and was not
readily reversible. Mercuric ions also inhibited the digestion of DNA by the
restriction enzymes BamHI or EcoRI. Inhibition of transcription factors as well
as potentially other DNA binding proteins by micromolar concentrations of
mercuric ion suggests additional biochemical mechanisms for mercury toxicity in
promoting disease via alterations in gene transcription patterns.

PMID: 11377384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Winter;97(4):304-9.

Molecular determinants of atrial and ventricular septal defects and patent ductus
arteriosus.

Vaughan CJ(1), Basson CT.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Septation defects and patent ductus arteriosus are the most common human
cardiovascular malformations (CVMs). Genetic factors play a major part in the
origin of these malformations. Recent molecular analyses have shed light on
several mendelian forms. In the autosomal dominant Holt-Oram syndrome, both
atrial and ventricular septal defects are inherited in association with limb
deformity as a result of mutations in the gene encoding the TBX5 transcription
factor. Mutations in the NKX2.5 transcription factor gene cause autosomal
dominant familial atrial septal defects in association with progressive
atrioventricular block as well as complex congenital heart disease. Common atrial
syndromes in autosomal dominant Ellis-van Creveld syndrome arise in the context
of axial skeletal and limb malformation as a result of mutations in the EVC gene,
whose function is unknown. Patent ductus arteriosus occurs in several syndromic
forms of congenital heart disease, including Holt-Oram syndrome. Recent analyses 
of autosomal dominant Char syndrome, which includes, with variable penetrance,
patent ductus arteriosus as well as craniofacial and hand malformations, have
shown that the syndrome is caused by mutations in the TFAP2B transcription factor
gene. Ongoing analyses are poised to determine the contribution of these genes as
well as others yet to be identified to common, sporadic forms of congenital heart
disease.

PMID: 11376442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jun 1;284(1):226-31.

Characterization of the promoter region of the human peroxisomal multifunctional 
enzyme type 2 gene.

Novikov DK(1), Kamps ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Biochemistry, University of Oulu, Oulu,
FIN-90570, Finland. dnovikov@sun3.oulu.fi

Peroxisomal multifunctional enzyme type 2 (perMFE-2) catalyzes conversion of
(24E)-3alpha,7alpha, 12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholest-24-enoyl-CoA to
(24-keto)-3alpha,7alpha,12alpha-trihydroxy-5beta-cholestanoyl-CoA, which are
physiological intermediates in cholic acid synthesis. In contrast to long chain
fatty acid oxidizing enzymes clofibrate does not induce peroxisomal enzymes
metabolizing bile acid intermediates. We proposed the existence of
PPAR-independent regulation of cholesterol side chain oxidation in the process of
bile acid synthesis. In the present study, we characterized the promoter region
of the human perMFE-2 gene. The promoter contains the Sp1/AP2 binding site
(-151/-142) within 197 base pairs upstream of the translation start site.
Mutation of the Sp1/AP2 binding site decreases the promoter activity. Analysis by
the luciferase assay revealed that the activity of the promoter region is strong 
in HepG2 and HeLa cell lines, although the activity in HepG2 cells was five- to
sixfold higher than that in HeLa cells. Transient transfection assays have
confirmed that AP2alpha and AP2gamma were able to transactivate the perMFE-2
promoter/luciferase chimeric gene. Cotransfections with Sp1 expression plasmid
decreased the promoter activity. We suggest that perMFE-2 promoter activity is
the result of both the abundance of AP2 and Sp1 family members and their relative
ratios.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11374894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 27;276(30):27944-9. Epub 2001 May 23.

Induction of AP-2alpha expression by adenoviral infection involves inactivation
of the AP-2rep transcriptional corepressor CtBP1.

Schuierer M(1), Hilger-Eversheim K, Dobner T, Bosserhoff AK, Moser M, Turner J,
Crossley M, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Microbiology, University of Regensburg Medical School,
Franz-Josef-Strauss-Allee 11, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany.

AP-2 transcription factors execute important functions during embryonic
development and malignant transformation. Recently, we have isolated a
transcriptional repressor of AP-2alpha expression, the novel Krüppel-related zinc
finger protein AP-2rep (Klf12). Here, we show that repression of AP-2alpha
transcription by AP-2rep is dependent on an N-terminal PVDLS motif that interacts
specifically with the corepressor CtBP1 both in vivo and in vitro. This
interaction motif was previously identified in the C-terminal region of the
adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. Infection of both HeLa and PA-1 cells with adenovirus
type 5 strongly induced AP-2alpha mRNA. Consistently, E1A was necessary and
sufficient to mediate up-regulation of AP-2alpha. Transiently transfected
wild-type E1A protein activated an AP-2rep sensitive cis-regulatory element of
the AP-2alpha promoter, but E1A protein harboring a mutation in the PVDLS motif
failed to activate. In summary, we conclude that the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A
activates transcription from the endogenous AP-2alpha gene, an effect that
involves transcriptional derepression of the AP-2alpha promoter by interaction of
E1A with the AP-2rep corepressor CtBP1.

PMID: 11373277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Blood. 2001 Jun 1;97(11):3581-8.

Primary chromosomal rearrangements of leukemia are frequently accompanied by
extensive submicroscopic deletions and may lead to altered prognosis.

Kolomietz E(1), Al-Maghrabi J, Brennan S, Karaskova J, Minkin S, Lipton J, Squire
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Ontario Cancer Institute, Princess Margaret Hospital, Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, M5G 2M9 Canada.

BCR/ABL fluorescent in situ hybridization study of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
and Philadelphia(+) (Ph(+)) acute lymphoid leukemia (ALL) indicated that
approximately 9% of patients exhibited an atypical hybridization pattern
consistent with a submicroscopic deletion of the 5' region of ABL and the 3'
region of the BCR genes on the 9q(+) chromosome. The CML patients with deletions 
had a shorter survival time and a high relapse rate following bone marrow
transplant. Since deletions are associated with both Ph(+) CML and ALL, it seemed
probable that other leukemia-associated genomic rearrangements may also have
submicroscopic deletions. This hypothesis was confirmed by the detection of
deletions of the 3' regions of the CBFB and the MLL genes in AML M4 patients with
inv(16) and in patients with ALL and AML associated with MLL gene translocations,
respectively. In contrast, analysis of the AML M3 group of patients and AML M2
showed that similar large deletions were not frequently associated with the
t(15;17) or t(8;21) translocations. Analysis of sequence data from each of the
breakpoint regions suggested that large submicroscopic deletions occur in regions
with a high overall density of Alu sequence repeats. These findings are the first
to show that the process of deletion formation is not disease specific in
leukemia and also implicate that the presence of repetitive DNA in the vicinity
of breakpoint regions may facilitate the generation of submicroscopic deletions. 
Such deletions could lead to the loss of one or more genes, and the associated
haploinsufficiency may result in the observed differences in clinical behavior.
(Blood. 2001;97:3581-3588)

PMID: 11369654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene. 2001 May 2;268(1-2):105-14.

Isolation and functional characterisation of the promoter region of the human
prion protein gene.

Mahal SP(1), Asante EA, Antoniou M, Collinge J.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurogenetics, Imperial College School of
Medicine at St. Mary's, W2 1PG, London, UK.

The human prion protein gene (PRNP) encodes a 33-35 kDa cell surface protein that
is highly expressed in the central nervous system and is vital to the
pathogenesis of prion diseases. We have characterised the promoter region of PRNP
as a first step towards defining the mechanisms regulating its expression.
Sequence analysis of a 2.7 kb genomic DNA fragment containing exon I and the
5'-flanking region of PRNP, revealed a number of putative transcriptional factor 
binding sites, including Sp1, Ap-1, Ap-2 and a CCAAT box. Transient transfection 
assays in tissue culture cells with constructs consisting of the wild-type and
deletion mutants of the PRNP 2.7 kb genomic fragment driving a luciferase
reporter gene, demonstrate an active promoter within a 273 bp region (-148 to
+125, relative to the cap site).

PMID: 11368906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Leukemia. 2001 Apr;15(4):664-5.

AML1/CBFbeta transcription complex: its role in normal hematopoiesis and
leukemia.

Downing JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA.

PMID: 11368373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur J Biochem. 2001 May;268(10):3017-27.

Cloning and functional characterization of the 5' flanking region of the human
mitochondrial malic enzyme gene. Regulatory role of Sp1 and AP-2.

Butta N(1), González-Manchón C, Arias-Salgado EG, Ayuso MS, Parrilla R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Human Molecular Genetics, Centro de
Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

This work reports the molecular cloning and functional characterization of the 5'
flanking region of the human mitochondrial malic enzyme (mME) gene. The proximal 
promoter region has features of housekeeping genes like high G + C-content and
absence of TATA or CCAAT boxes. Deletion analysis of the 5' region of the mME
showed that maximal transcriptional activity is located within the -205/+86
region. Footprinting analysis showed two protected regions, one comprising
potential overlapped AP-1, CREB, and AP-4 sites and a second one encompassing
AP-2 and several Sp1 ci-acting elements. Mutation of putative AP-1/AP-4/CREB
sites reduced basal promoter activity to less than 50%. Supershift assays
demonstrated the specific binding of Sp1 and AP-2 proteins. Moreover, experiments
in Drosophila SL2 cells lacking endogenous Sp1 demonstrated that the Sp1 site(s) 
is essential to maintain a normal basal rate of transcription of this gene. A
low-level expression of AP-2 enhanced the activity of a mME promoter construct in
HepG2 cells and this effect was prevented by disruption of the putative AP-2
element. In contrast, higher levels of expression of AP-2 induced a
DNA-independent inhibitory response. A biphasic regulation of endogenous mME gene
is also shown in HepG2 cells transfected with an AP-2 expression plasmid,
suggesting that availability of AP-2 protein may control this gene under
physiological conditions. A recombinant lambda genomic clone containing a mME
pseudogene was also isolated. The high degree of sequence conservation seems to
indicate a recent emergency of this human pseudogene.

PMID: 11358520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Lipid Res. 2001 May;42(5):783-91.

Interleukin 4 induces transcription of the 15-lipoxygenase I gene in human
endothelial cells.

Lee YW(1), Kühn H, Kaiser S, Hennig B, Daugherty A, Toborek M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington, KY
40536, USA.

The reticulocyte-type 15-lipoxygenase (15-LO-I) has been implicated in
atherogenesis because of its capability of oxidizing low density lipoprotein.
Therefore, we investigated the expression of the 15-LO-I gene in human umbilical 
vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). Nonactivated HUVEC did not exhibit detectable
15-LO-I mRNA. However, exposure of the cells to interleukin 4 (IL-4) induced the 
transcription of the 15-LO-I gene in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. 
Interestingly, this induction was not paralleled by a concomitant production of
the functional 15-LO-I enzyme, as indicated by activity assays and
immunoblotting. To gain more information about the mechanism of the induction
process, we investigated IL-4-dependent activation of nuclear transcription
factors for which binding sites were previously identified in the 5'-flanking
region of the human 15-LO-I gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed 
that IL-4 can activate signal transducer and activator of transcription 6,
activator protein 2, GATA motif-binding transcription factor 1, nuclear factor 1,
and SP-1 in HUVEC in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Activation of
these transcription factors was observed as early as 30 min after cytokine
exposure. These data indicate that IL-4 upregulates the transcription of the
15-LO-I gene in human vascular endothelial cells, and this process may involve
the activation of several nuclear transcription factors. The lack of active
15-LO-I protein in the presence of functional 15-LO-I mRNA suggests additional
regulatory elements of 15-LO expression at posttranscriptional levels.

PMID: 11352986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Immunol. 2001 May 15;166(10):6134-43.

Transcriptional regulation of CD28 expression by CD28GR, a novel promoter element
located in exon 1 of the CD28 gene.

Lin CJ(1), Tam RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Drug Discovery, ICN Pharmaceuticals, Costa Mesa, CA 92626, USA.

CD28 provides an essential costimulatory signal required for Ag-mediated T cell
activation via the TCR. Although accumulating evidence exists for the signaling
properties of CD28, less is known regarding the regulation of CD28 expression. In
this study, we have identified a novel promoter element of CD28, CD28GR
(GGGGAGGAGGGG), which is located between +181 and +192 in exon 1 of the CD28
gene. Mutations within the 12-bp CD28GR sequence abolished its transcriptional
activity. CD28GR contains a Sp1/EGR-1 binding site, which was found to act as the
predominant functional element for regulating CD28 gene expression in Jurkat
cells. Exon 1/CD28GR-driven transcription in Jurkat cells was augmented by
cotransfection with Sp1 or EGR-1 expression plasmid. Similar augmentation was
also shown with pharmacologic activation. This study is the first to identify a
regulatory element that is critical for conferring constitutive and
activation-induced transcriptional activation of the CD28 gene. Furthermore, our 
results proposed potential involvement of Sp1 in regulating CD28 expression. The 
linkage between Sp1 and the expression of CD28 has important implications in how 
viral infections, such as HIV, can induce immunosuppression.

PMID: 11342633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Plant Cell. 2001 May;13(5):1035-46.

Overexpression of the tobacco Tsi1 gene encoding an EREBP/AP2-type transcription 
factor enhances resistance against pathogen attack and osmotic stress in tobacco.

Park JM(1), Park CJ, Lee SB, Ham BK, Shin R, Paek KH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Biotechnology, Korea University, Anam-dong 5-1, Sungbuk-ku,
Seoul 136-701, Republic of Korea.

Using mRNA differential display analysis, we isolated a salt-induced transcript
that showed a significant sequence homology with an EREBP/AP2 DNA binding motif
from oilseed rape plants. With this cDNA fragment as a probe, cDNA clone Tsi1
(for Tobacco stress-induced gene1) was isolated from a tobacco cDNA library. RNA 
gel blot analysis indicated that transcripts homologous with Tsi1 were induced
not only in NaCl-treated leaves but also in leaves treated with ethephon or
salicylic acid. Transient expression analysis using a Tsi1::smGFP fusion gene in 
BY-2 cells indicated that the Tsi1 protein was targeted to the nucleus. Fusion
protein of Tsi1 with GAL4 DNA binding domain strongly activated transcription in 
yeast, and the transactivating activity was localized to the 13 C-terminal amino 
acids of Tsi1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that Tsi1 could
bind specifically to the GCC and the DRE/CRT sequences, although the binding
activity to the former was stronger than that to the latter. Furthermore,
Agrobacterium-mediated transient expression and transgenic plants expressing Tsi1
demonstrated that overexpression of the Tsi1 gene induced expression of several
pathogenesis-related genes under normal conditions, resulting in improved
tolerance to salt and pathogens. These results suggest that Tsi1 might be
involved as a positive trans-acting factor in two separate signal transduction
pathways under abiotic and biotic stress.

PMCID: PMC135557
PMID: 11340180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 May;59(1):17-24.

Involving AP-2 transcription factor in connexin 26 up-regulation during pregnancy
and lactation.

Tu ZJ(1), Pan W, Gong Z, Kiang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Transplantation, Department of Medicine,
University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Gap junction connexin 26 (Cx26) is up-regulated in mammary epithelial cells
during pregnancy and lactation. To understand the transcriptional regulation of
Cx26, we identified a protected DNase I footprint region (-140 to -113) in the
rat Cx26 promoter. This rCx26 Promoter Footprinting Region, or CPFR, contains an 
Sp binding site (CCGCCC) overlapping with an AP-2 binding site (GCCCGCGGC), and
is evolutionarily conserved. Nuclear extracts from rat mammary glands and human
MCF-10 mammary epithelial cells formed protein-DNA complexes with the labeled
CPFR probe in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA), and these
complexes were markedly enhanced during pregnancy and lactation. Antibody
supershift analysis further identified the presence of Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 in
these binding complexes. Human mammary epithelial MCF-10A and MCF-12A cells were 
transiently transfected with chimeric mutant rCx26 promoter/luciferase reporter
constructs, and luciferase activities measured. Mutations along the CPFR fragment
drastically reduced the promoter activity, specially at the Sp/AP-2 overlapping
site. Cotransfection of AP-2 with rCx26 promoter/reporter constructs into MCF-10 
cells markedly induced the reporter activity. These data infer that AP-2, along
with previously reported Sp transcription factors, is involved in the
up-regulation of Cx26 gene during pregnancy and lactation.

PMID: 11335942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochemistry. 2001 Feb 13;40(6):1824-34.

Translocation of the pAntp peptide and its amphipathic analogue AP-2AL.

Drin G(1), Déméné H, Temsamani J, Brasseur R.

Author information: 
(1)Synt:em, Parc Scientifique Georges Besse, 30000 Nîmes, France.

The pAntp peptide, corresponding to the third helix of the homeodomain of the
Antennapedia protein, enters by a receptor-independent process into eukaryotic
cells. The interaction between the pAntp peptide and the phospholipid matrix of
the plasma membrane seems to be the first step involved in the translocation
mechanism. However, the mechanism by which the peptide translocates through the
cell membrane is still not well established. We have investigated the
translocation ability of pAntp through a protein-free phospholipid membrane in
comparison with a more amphipathic analogue. We show by fluorescence
spectroscopy, circular dichroism, NMR spectroscopy, and molecular modeling that
pAntp is not sufficiently helically amphipathic to cross a phospholipid membrane 
of a model system. Due to its primary sequence related to its DNA binding ability
in the Antennapedia homeodomain-DNA complex, the pAntp peptide does not belong to
the amphipathic alpha-helical peptide family whose members are able to
translocate by pore formation.

PMID: 11327845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Mol Biol. 2001 Apr 27;308(2):191-203.

Functional mutagenesis of AML1/RUNX1 and PEBP2 beta/CBF beta define distinct,
non-overlapping sites for DNA recognition and heterodimerization by the Runt
domain.

Nagata T(1), Werner MH.

Author information: 
(1)The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, Box 42, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The Runt domain family of transcription factors play key roles in transcriptional
regulation of definitive hematopoiesis and osteogenesis. This transcription
factor family is characterized by a DNA-binding alpha-subunit harboring the Runt 
domain and a secondary subunit, beta, which binds to the Runt domain and enhances
its interaction with DNA. Missense mutations in the Runt domain from either the
blood or bone-related gene product are associated with the onset of acute human
leukemia as well as a disease of skeletal patterning known as cleidocranial
dysplasia. NMR "footprinting" analysis of Runt domain/beta/DNA ternary complexes 
in solution previously identified the likely residues that form the
heterodimerization and DNA-binding surfaces of the Runt domain. Functional
mutagenesis at 37 positions in the Runt domain or beta confirms the original
identification of these interaction surfaces and reveals that the
heterodimerization and DNA-binding surfaces of the Runt domain occur at distinct,
non-overlapping sites within the domain. The analysis of an additional 21
disease-related missense mutations identified from patients with either blood or 
bone disease demonstrates that the primary defect in these patients is a failure 
in DNA-recognition by the Runt domain. The molecular basis for the DNA-binding
defect is analyzed in the context of the three-dimensional structure of the Runt 
domain in binary and ternary protein/DNA complexes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11327761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 May;8(5):384-6.

DNA-binding by Ig-fold proteins.

Rudolph MJ, Gergen JP.

PMID: 11323707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 6;276(27):24661-6. Epub 2001 Apr 25.

Loss of E-cadherin expression in melanoma cells involves up-regulation of the
transcriptional repressor Snail.

Poser I(1), Domínguez D, de Herreros AG, Varnai A, Buettner R, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medical School Rheinisch-Westfälische Technische
Hochschule (RWTH) Aachen, D-52074 Aachen, Germany.

Malignant transformation of melanocytes frequently coincides with loss of
E-cadherin expression. Here we show that loss of E-cadherin in melanoma cell
lines does not involve mutations in the E-cadherin gene, promoter methylation, or
alterations in expression of AP-2 transcription factors as suggested previously. 
In a panel of different melanoma cell lines, E-cadherin expression was negatively
regulated by up-regulation of the transcription factor Snail. In comparison with 
primary human melanocytes, where Snail expression was not detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, significant expression was found in all 
eight melanoma cell lines. In parallel, Western blot and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed strong reduction of
E-cadherin expression in the melanoma cells. Consistently, transient transfection
of a Snail expression plasmid into human primary melanocytes led to significant
down-regulation of E-cadherin, whereas transient and stable transfection of an
antisense Snail construct induced reexpression of E-cadherin in Mel Ju and Mel Im
melanomas. In summary, we conclude that activation of Snail expression plays an
important role in down-regulation of E-cadherin and tumorigenesis of malignant
melanomas.

PMID: 11323412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Teratology. 2001 May;63(5):167-75.

A screen for mutations in human homologues of mice exencephaly genes Tfap2alpha
and Msx2 in patients with neural tube defects.

Stegmann K(1), Boecker J, Richter B, Capra V, Finnell RH, Ngo ET, Strehl E,
Ermert A, Koch MC.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinisches Zentrum für Humangenetik, Philipps-Universität Marburg, 35033
Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Very little is known about the identity of genetic factors involved
in the complex etiology of nonsyndromic neural tube defects (NTD). Potential
susceptibility genes have emerged from the vast number of mutant mouse strains
displaying NTD. Reasonable candidates are the human homologues of mice
exencephaly genes Tfap2alpha and Msx2, which are expressed in the developing
neural tube.
METHODS: A single-strand conformation analysis (SSCA) mutation screen of the
coding sequences of TFAP2alpha and MSX2 was performed for 204 nonsyndromic NTD
patients including cases of anencephaly (n = 10), encephalocele (n = 8), and
spina bifida aperta, SBA (n = 183). A selected number of SBA patients was
additionally tested for specific mutations in MTHFD, FRalpha, and PAX1 already
shown to be related to NTD.
RESULTS: Two TFAP2alpha point mutations in individual SBA patients were silent on
the amino acid level (C308C, T396T). On nucleic acid level, these mutations
change evolutionary conserved codons and thus may influence mRNA processing and
translation efficiency. One SBA patient displayed an exonic 9-bp deletion in MSX2
leading to a shortened and possibly less functional protein. None of these
mutations was found in 222 controls. Seven polymorphisms detected in TFAP2alpha
and MSX2 were equally distributed in patients and controls. Patients with
combined heterozygosity of an exonic MSX2 and an intronic TFAP2alpha polymorphism
were at a slightly increased risk of NTD (OR 1.71; 95% CI 0.57-5.39).
CONCLUSIONS: Although several new genetic variants were found in TFAP2 and MSX2, 
no statistically significant association was found between NTD cases and the new 
alleles or their combinations. Further studies are necessary to finally decide if
these gene variants may have acted as susceptibility factors in our individual
cases.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11320527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pigment Cell Res. 2001 Apr;14(2):78-85.

Gene regulation in melanoma progression by the AP-2 transcription factor.

Bar-Eli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA. mbareli@mail.mdanderson.org

The molecular changes associated with the transition of melanoma cells from
radial growth phase (RGP) to vertical growth phase [(VGP), metastatic phenotype] 
are not very well defined. We previously demonstrated that expression of the
cell-surface adhesion molecule MCAM/MUC18 correlates directly with the metastatic
potential of human melanoma cells. In addition, the progression of human melanoma
towards the metastatic phenotype is associated with loss of expression of the
tyrosine-kinase receptor c-KIT. In this review, I will summarize our recent
studies demonstrating that the expression of both genes is regulated by the AP-2 
transcription factor. Moreover, we have observed a loss of AP-2 expression in
metastatic melanoma cells. Re-expression of AP-2 in the highly metastatic A375SM 
cells decreased their tumorigenicity and inhibited their metastatic potential in 
nude mice. MCAM/MUC18 mRNA and protein expression was significantly
down-regulated while c-KIT expression was up-regulated in the AP-2-transfected
cells. To further investigate the role of AP-2 in the progression of human
melanoma, we attempted to inactivate AP-2 in primary cutaneous melanoma by using 
a dominant-negative AP-2, or the AP-2B gene. Expression of AP-2B in SB-2 cells
augmented their tumorigenicity in nude mice, and upregulated MMP-2 expression and
activity. As AP-2 also regulates other genes that are involved in the progression
of human melanoma such as E-cadherin, p21/WAF-1, HER2/neu, Bcl-2, FAS/APO-1,
IGF-R-1, VEGF and the thrombin receptor (PAR-1), we therefore propose that loss
of AP-2 is a crucial event in the development of malignant melanoma. In addition,
the transition of melanoma cells from RGP to VGP is also associated with
over-expression of the transcription factors CREB and ATF-1. The notion that the 
balance between AP-2 and CREB/ATF-1 expression determines the progression of
melanoma cells towards the metastatic phenotype will be discussed.

PMID: 11310795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Apr;268(8):2390-401.

Novel activator protein-2alpha splice-variants function as transactivators of the
ovine placental lactogen gene.

Limesand SW(1), Anthony RV.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Physiology,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1683, USA.

Activator protein-2 (AP-2) has been implicated as a transactivator of the human
and ovine placental lactogen (oPL) genes. Transcriptional enhancement through an 
AP-2 cis-acting element has been described for other genes expressed in the
placenta, but the AP-2 isoform enhancing expression is species dependent.
Transactivation of the oPL minimal promoter (-124 bp to +16 bp) by AP-2 was
confirmed by mutational analysis in transiently transfected human choriocarcinoma
cells (BeWo). AP-2alpha was localized in ovine chorionic epithelial cells by
immunohistochemistry and a 3-kb transcript was identified by Northern
hybridization. Four nearly full-length AP-2 cDNAs were isolated from an ovine
placenta cDNA library. Nucleotide sequencing these cDNAs revealed that the AP-2
mRNA expressed in the ovine placenta shares identity with human AP-2alpha, but
variations in the predicted N-terminus were observed, and three unique AP-2alpha 
splice-variants were identified. Expression of AP-2alpha variants in HepG2 cells,
devoid of endogenous AP-2, indicates that enhancement through the AP-2 element in
the oPL gene minimal promoter was variant dependent. RNA transcripts for all of
the ovine AP-2alpha splice-variants were confirmed in ovine placenta by RT-PCR,
and homologs for two variants were found in human placenta. However, only one
AP-2alpha transcript, which shares identity to Xenopus AP-2alpha, was expressed
in BeWo cells. Immunoblot analysis confirmed AP-2alpha variants in ovine
chorionic binucleate cell nuclear extracts, one of which migrates similar to the 
AP-2alpha variant identified in BeWo cell nuclear extracts. These data indicate
the presence of new mammalian AP-2alpha splice-variants that augment
transactivation of the oPL gene in ovine chorionic binucleate cells.

PMID: 11298758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Blood. 2001 Apr 15;97(8):2248-56.

Core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta), but not CBFbeta-smooth muscle myosin heavy
chain, rescues definitive hematopoiesis in CBFbeta-deficient embryonic stem
cells.

Miller JD(1), Stacy T, Liu PP, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta) is the non-DNA-binding subunit of the
heterodimeric CBFs. Genes encoding CBFbeta (CBFB), and one of the DNA-binding
CBFalpha subunits, Runx1 (also known as CBFalpha2, AML1, and PEBP2alphaB), are
required for normal hematopoiesis and are also frequent targets of chromosomal
translocations in acute leukemias in humans. Homozygous disruption of either the 
Runx1 or Cbfb gene in mice results in embryonic lethality at midgestation due to 
hemorrhaging in the central nervous system, and severely impairs fetal liver
hematopoiesis. Results of this study show that Cbfb-deficient mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells can differentiate into primitive erythroid colonies in vitro, but
are impaired in their ability to produce definitive erythroid and myeloid
colonies, mimicking the in vivo defect. Definitive hematopoiesis is restored by
ectopic expression of full-length Cbfb transgenes, as well as by a transgene
encoding only the heterodimerization domain of CBFbeta. In contrast, the
CBFbeta-smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (SMMHC) fusion protein generated by the 
inv(16) associated with acute myeloid leukemias (M4Eo) cannot rescue definitive
hematopoiesis by Cbfb-deficient ES cells. Sequences responsible for the inability
of CBFbeta-SMMHC to rescue definitive hematopoiesis reside in the SMMHC portion
of the fusion protein. Results also show that the CBFbeta-SMMHC fusion protein
transdominantly inhibits definitive hematopoiesis, but not to the same extent as 
homozygous loss of Runx1 or Cbfb. CBFbeta-SMMHC preferentially inhibits the
differentiation of myeloid lineage cells, while increasing the number of
blastlike cells in culture.

PMID: 11290585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):17770-8. Epub 2001 Feb 13.

Transcription factor AP-2 functions as a repressor that contributes to the
liver-specific expression of serum amyloid A1 gene.

Ren Y(1), Liao WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Program in Genes and
Development, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

We previously identified transcription factor AP-2 as the nuclear factor that
interacts with the tissue-specific repressor element in the rat serum amyloid A1 
(SAA1) promoter. In this report, we provide evidence for a second AP-2-binding
site and show that both AP-2 sites participate in mediating the transcription
repression of SAA1 promoter. This proximal AP-2 site overlaps with the
NFkappaB-binding site known to be essential for SAA1 promoter activity. Protein
binding competition experiments demonstrated that AP-2 and NFkappaB binding to
these overlapping sites were mutually exclusive. Furthermore, the addition of
AP-2 easily displaced prebound NFkappaB, whereas NFkappaB could not displace
AP-2. These results thus suggest that one mechanism by which AP-2 negatively
regulates SAA1 promoter activity may be by antagonizing the function of NFkappaB.
Consistent with a repression function, transient expression of AP-2 in HepG2
cells inhibited conditioned medium-induced SAA1 promoter activation. This
inhibition was dependent on functional AP-2-binding sites, since mutation of
AP-2-binding sites abolished inhibitory effects of AP-2 in HepG2 cells as well as
resulted in derepression of the SAA1 promoter in HeLa cells. In addition to SAA1,
we found that several other liver gene promoters also contain putative
AP-2-binding sites. Some of these sequences could specifically inhibit AP-2.DNA
complex formation, and for the human complement C3 promoter, overexpression of
AP-2 also could repress its cytokine-mediated activation. Finally, stable
expression of AP-2 in hepatoma cells significantly reduced the expression of
endogenous SAA, albumin, and alpha-fetoprotein genes. Taken together, our results
suggest that AP-2 may function as a transcription repressor to inhibit the
expression of not only SAA1 gene but also other liver genes in nonhepatic cells.

PMID: 11278660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):14407-13. Epub 2001 Jan 26.

A family of AP-2 proteins down-regulate manganese superoxide dismutase
expression.

Zhu CH(1), Huang Y, Oberley LW, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Free Radical & Radiation Biology Program, Department of Radiology, University 
of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (Mn-SOD) is a primary antioxidant enzyme whose
expression is essential for life in oxygen. Mn-SOD has tumor suppressor activity 
in a wide variety of tumors and transformed cell systems. Our initial
observations revealed that Mn-SOD expression was inversely correlated with
expression of AP-2 transcription factors in normal human fibroblasts and their
SV-40 transformed counterparts. Thus we hypothesized that AP-2 may down-regulate 
Mn-SOD expression. To examine the functional role of AP-2 on Mn-SOD promoter
transactivation we cotransfected AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells with a human Mn-SOD
promoter-reporter construct and expression vectors encoding each of the three
known AP-2 family members. Our results indicated that AP-2 could significantly
repress Mn-SOD promoter activity, and that this repression was both Mn-SOD
promoter and AP-2-specific. The three AP-2 proteins appeared to play distinct
roles in Mn-SOD gene regulation. Moreover, although all three AP-2 proteins could
repress the Mn-SOD promoter, AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma were more active in this
regard than AP-2beta. Transcriptional repression by AP-2 was not a general effect
in this system, because another AP-2-responsive gene, c-erbB-3, was
transactivated by AP-2. Repression of Mn-SOD by AP-2 was dependent on DNA
binding, and expression of AP-2B, a dominant negative incapable of DNA binding,
relieved the repression on Mn-SOD promoter and reactivated Mn-SOD expression in
the AP-2 abundant SV40-transformed fibroblast cell line MRC-5VA. These results
indicate that AP-2-mediated transcriptional repression contributes to the
constitutively low expression of Mn-SOD in SV40-transformed fibroblasts and
suggest a mechanism for Mn-SOD down-regulation in cancer.

PMID: 11278550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 4;276(18):15519-26. Epub 2001 Feb 2.

Genomic structure of the promoters of the human estrogen receptor-alpha gene
demonstrate changes in chromatin structure induced by AP2gamma.

Schuur ER(1), McPherson LA, Yang GP, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-3229, USA.

Expression of human estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) involves the activity from 
several promoters that give rise to alternate untranslated 5' exons. However, the
genomic locations of the alternate 5' exons have not been reported previously. We
have developed a contig map of the human ERalpha gene that includes all of the
known alternate 5' exons. By using S1 nuclease and 5'- rapid amplification of
cDNA ends, the cap sites for the alternate ERalpha transcripts E and H were
identified. DNase I-hypersensitive sites specific to ERalpha-positive cells were 
associated with each of the cap sites. A DNase I-hypersensitive site, HS1, was
localized to binding sites for AP2 in the untranslated region of exon 1 and was
invariably present in the chromatin structure of ERalpha-positive cells.
Overexpression of AP2gamma in human mammary epithelial cells generated the
HS1-hypersensitive site. The ERalpha promoter was induced by AP2gamma in mammary 
epithelial cells, and trans-activation was dependent upon the region of the
promoter containing the HS1 site. These results demonstrate that AP2gamma
trans-activates the ERalpha gene in hormone-responsive tumors by inducing changes
in the chromatin structure of the ERalpha promoter. These data are further
evidence for a critical role for AP2 in the oncogenesis of hormone-responsive
breast cancers.

PMID: 11278455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Struct Biol. 2001 Apr;8(4):371-8.

The leukemia-associated AML1 (Runx1)--CBF beta complex functions as a DNA-induced
molecular clamp.

Bravo J(1), Li Z, Speck NA, Warren AJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.

We have determined the structure, at 2.6 A resolution, of the AML1 (Runx1) Runt
domain--CBF beta--DNA ternary complex, the most common target for mutations in
human leukemia. The structure reveals that the Runt domain DNA binding mechanism 
is unique within the p53 family of transcription factors. The extended C-terminal
'tail' and 'wing' elements adopt a specific DNA-bound conformation that clamps
the phosphate backbone between the major and minor grooves of the distorted
B-form DNA recognition site. Furthermore, the extended 'tail' mediates most of
the NF-kappa B/Rel-like base-specific contacts in the major groove. The structure
clearly explains the molecular basis for the loss of DNA binding function of the 
Runt domain--CBF beta complex as a consequence of the human disease-associated
mutations in leukemogenesis and cleidocranial dysplasia.

PMID: 11276260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2001;83-A Suppl 1(Pt 1):S48-55.

Intimate relationship between TGF-beta/BMP signaling and runt domain
transcription factor, PEBP2/CBF.

Bae SC(1), Lee KS, Zhang YW, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, and Medical Research
Institute, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: When C2C12 pluripotent mesenchymal precursor cells are treated with
transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1), terminal differentiation into
myotubes is blocked. Treatment with bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) not only
blocks myogenic differentiation but also induces osteoblastic differentiation.
However, the molecular mechanisms governing the ability of TGF-beta and BMP to
induce ligand-specific responses and inhibit myogenic differentiation are not
known. The objective of our studies was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
that block myoblastic differentiation and induce osteoblastic differentiation in 
C2C12 cells.
METHODS: Induction of RUNX2/PEBP2alphaA/Cbfa1 by TGF-beta and BMP was examined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and Northern blot analysis. C2C12
cells stably expressing RUNX2 or Smad, or both, were established, and the role of
these genes in the process of osteoblastic differentiation was analyzed by
examining the expression of osteoblast-specific markers.
RESULTS: Treatment of C2C12 with TGF-beta and BMP-induced
RUNX2/PEBP2alphaA/Cbfa1, a global regulator of osteogenesis. Cooperation between 
RUNX2 and BMP-activated Smad induced osteoblastic differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Both TGF-beta and BMP activate transcription of RUNX2, which is
sufficient to inhibit myogenesis. To induce osteogenesis, BMP-induced RUNX2 must 
cooperate with BMP-activated Smads.

PMID: 11263665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1239-52.

Drosophila transcription factor AP-2 in proboscis, leg and brain central complex 
development.

Monge I(1), Krishnamurthy R, Sims D, Hirth F, Spengler M, Kammermeier L, Reichert
H, Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Zürich, CH-8057 Zürich, Switzerland.

We report loss- and gain-of-function analyses that identify essential roles in
development for Drosophila transcription factor AP-2. A mutagenesis screen
yielded 16 lethal point mutant alleles of dAP-2. Null mutants die as adults or
late pupae with a reduced proboscis, severely shortened legs (approximately 30%
of normal length) lacking tarsal joints, and disruptions in the protocerebral
central complex, a brain region critical for locomotion. Seven hypomorphic
alleles constitute a phenotypic series yielding hemizygous adults with legs
ranging from 40-95% of normal length. Hypomorphic alleles show additive effects
with respect to leg length and viability; and several heteroallelic lines were
established. Heteroallelic adults have moderately penetrant defects that include 
necrotic leg joints and ectopic growths (sometimes supernumerary antennae)
invading medial eye territory. Several dAP-2 alleles with DNA binding domain
missense mutations are null in hemizygotes but have dominant negative effects
when paired with hypomorphic alleles. In wild-type leg primordia, dAP-2 is
restricted to presumptive joints. Ectopic dAP-2 in leg discs can inhibit but not 
enhance leg elongation indicating that functions of dAP-2 in leg outgrowth are
region restricted. In wing discs, ectopic dAP-2 cell autonomously transforms
presumptive wing vein epithelium to ectopic sensory bristles, consistent with an 
instructive role in sensory organ development. These findings reveal multiple
functions for dAP-2 during morphogenesis of feeding and locomotor appendages and 
their neural circuitry, and provide a new paradigm for understanding AP-2 family 
transcription factors.

PMID: 11262226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1231-8.

The AP-2 transcription factor is required for joint formation and cell survival
in Drosophila leg development.

Kerber B(1), Monge I, Mueller M, Mitchell PJ, Cohen SM.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Meyerhofstr.1, 69117 Heidelberg,
Germany.

Flies mutant for the Drosophila homologue of the mammalian transcription factor
AP-2 show a severe reduction in leg length and fail to develop joint structures. 
Presumptive joint cells express dAP-2 in response to Notch signaling. dAP-2 is
required for joint cell differentiation and can induce formation of supernumerary
joints when misexpressed. Although dAP-2 is expressed only in presumptive joint
cells, its activity is required to support cell survival in the entire leg
segment. Taken together, our data indicate that dAP-2 is an important mediator of
Notch activity in leg development.

PMID: 11262225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell. 2001 Mar 9;104(5):755-67.

Structural analyses of DNA recognition by the AML1/Runx-1 Runt domain and its
allosteric control by CBFbeta.

Tahirov TH(1), Inoue-Bungo T, Morii H, Fujikawa A, Sasaki M, Kimura K, Shiina M, 
Sato K, Kumasaka T, Yamamoto M, Ishii S, Ogata K.

Author information: 
(1)Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology (KAST), Yokohama City University
School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura, Yokohama 236-0004, Kanazawa-ku, Japan.
tahir@med.yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Cell 2001 Apr 20;105(2):291.

The core binding factor (CBF) heterodimeric transcription factors comprised of
AML/CBFA/PEBP2alpha/Runx and CBFbeta/PEBP2beta subunits are essential for
differentiation of hematopoietic and bone cells, and their mutation is intimately
related to the development of acute leukemias and cleidocranial dysplasia. Here, 
we present the crystal structures of the AML1/Runx-1/CBFalpha(Runt
domain)-CBFbeta(core domain)-C/EBPbeta(bZip)-DNA, AML1/Runx-1/CBFalpha(Runt
domain)-C/EBPbeta(bZip)-DNA, and AML1/Runx-1/CBFalpha(Runt domain)-DNA complexes.
The hydrogen bonding network formed among CBFalpha(Runt domain) and CBFbeta, and 
CBFalpha(Runt domain) and DNA revealed the allosteric regulation mechanism of
CBFalpha(Runt domain)-DNA binding by CBFbeta. The point mutations of CBFalpha
related to the aforementioned diseases were also mapped and their effect on DNA
binding is discussed.

PMID: 11257229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;20(1):1-9.

Cloning and functional analysis of SEL1L promoter region, a pancreas-specific
gene.

Cattaneo M(1), Sorio C, Malferrari G, Rogozin IB, Bernard L, Scarpa A, Zollo M,
Biunno I.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate-CNR, Milan, Italy.

We examined the promoter activity of SEL1L, the human ortholog of the C. elegans 
gene sel-1, a negative regulator of LIN-12/NOTCH receptor proteins. To understand
the relation in SEL1L transcription pattern observed in different epithelial
cells, we determined the transcription start site and sequenced the 5' flanking
region. Sequence analysis revealed the presence of consensus promoter
elements--GC boxes and a CAAT box--but the absence of a TATA motif. Potential
binding sites for transcription factors that are involved in tissue-specific gene
expression were identified, including: activator protein-2 (AP-2), hepatocyte
nuclear factor-3 (HNF3 beta), homeobox Nkx2-5 and GATA-1. Transcription activity 
of the TATA-less SEL1L promoter was analyzed by transient transfection using
luciferase reporter gene constructs. A core basal promoter of 302 bp was
sufficient for constitutive promoter activity in all the cell types studied. This
genomic fragment contains a CAAT and several GC boxes. The activity of the SEL1L 
promoter was considerably higher in mouse pancreatic beta cells (beta TC3) than
in several human pancreatic neoplastic cell lines; an even greater reduction of
its activity was observed in cells of nonpancreatic origin. These results suggest
that SEL1L promoter may be a useful tool in gene therapy applications for
pancreatic pathologies.

PMID: 11242538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Motil Cytoskeleton. 2001 Mar;48(3):163-74.

Antisense targeting of c-fos transcripts inhibits serum- and TGF-beta
1-stimulated PAI-1 gene expression and directed motility in renal epithelial
cells.

Kutz SM(1), Providence KM, Higgins PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Biology and Cancer Research, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor type-1 (PAI-1), the major regulator of
pericellular plasmin generation, and the c-FOS transcription factor are expressed
by migrating cells in response to monolayer wounding. Induced c-fos and PAI-1
transcripts were evident within 30 min and 2 h, respectively, of scrape injury to
confluent, growth-arrested, cultures of NRK epithelial cells. Since c-FOS/AP-1
DNA-binding activity modulates both basal and inducible modes of PAI-1 gene
control, and AP-1 motif binding factors were present in quiescent as well as
stimulated NRK cells, a model of directionally regulated cell movement (migration
into scrape-denuded "wounds") was used to assess the consequences of c-fos
transcript targeting on PAI-1 expression and cell motility. This in vitro model
of epithelial injury closely approximated in vivo wound repair with regard to the
spatial and temporal emergence of cohorts of cells involved in migration,
proliferation, and PAI-1 expression. Stable cell lines (NRKsof) were generated by
transfection of parental NRK cells with a c-fos antisense expression vector.
Serum-inducible c-fos transcripts and PAI-1 protein levels were significantly
attenuated in NRKsof transfectants relative to parental controls or cells
transfected with a neo(R) vector without the sof insert. NRKsof cells had a
markedly impaired ability to repair scrape-generated monolayer wounds under
basal, serum-stimulated, or TGF-beta 1-supplemented culture conditions. Since
injury closure and PAI-1 induction were attenuated in c-fos antisense cells, it
was important to clarify the role of specific AP-1 sites in serum-mediated PAI-1 
transcription. PAI-1 "promoter"-driven CAT reporter expression was assessed
within the real time of serum-stimulated PAI-1 induction. A segment of the PAI-1 
promoter corresponding to nucleotides -533 to -764 upstream of the transcription 
start site functioned as a prominent serum-responsive region (SSR). The 9-fold
increase in CAT mRNA levels attained with the -533 to -764 bp PAI-1 SRR ligated
to a minimal PAI-1 promoter (i.e., 162 bp of 5' flanking sequence containing the 
basal transcription complex) closely approximated the serum-induced
transcriptional activity of a fully responsive (1,230 bp) PAI-1 promoter
construct as well as the endogenous PAI-1 gene. AP-1-like, CTF/NF-1-like, and
AP-2 sites were identified in the SRR. The SRR AP-1 motif was homologous to the
sequence TGACACA that mapped between nucleotides -740 and -703 in the human PAI-1
gene, a region essential for growth factor-inducible PAI-1 transcription. While
the functionality of this AP-1 site in wound-regulated PAI-1 synthesis remains to
be determined, antisense c-fos transcripts effectively attenuated PAI-1 induction
and basal as well as growth factor-stimulated cell locomotion, indicating that
expression of both the PAI-1 and c-fos genes is necessary for wound-initiated NRK
cell migration.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11223948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Life Sci. 2000 Dec 29;68(6):669-78.

Chronic pharmacological treatment with certain antidepressants alters the
expression and DNA-binding activity of transcription factor AP-2.

Damberg M(1), Ekblom J, Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Section of Pharmacology, Uppsala University,
Sweden.

Several of the genes in the serotonergic and the dopaminergic systems have
consensus binding sites for the AP-2 transcription factor family in their
regulatory regions. Imbalances in these systems have been implicated in many
psychiatric disorders, including depression and bipolar affective disorder. We
have made an effort to further elucidate the molecular mechanisms of drugs used
for affective disorders. Recently, we analyzed the effects of chronic treatment
with certain antidepressants on AP-2 in rat brain. The present study demonstrates
that chronic administration of three different classes of antidepressants
modulates the DNA-binding activity of AP-2 in the rat brain. Chronic
administration of citalopram (10 mg/kg), imipramin (10 mg/kg) and
lithium-chloride (40 mg/kg) significantly decreased DNA-binding activity of AP-2.
Furthermore, citalopram (10 mg/kg) and imipramin (10 mg/kg) significantly
decreased the amount of AP-2alpha protein as determined by ELISA. In addition,
citalopram (10 mg/kg) significantly decreased the amount of AP-2beta protein. In 
contrast, chronic administration of lithium-chloride (40 mg/kg) did not affect
the amount of the two AP-2 isoforms. An increased understanding of the function
of transcription factors and their involvement in human disease, such as
depression, could make it possible in the future to selectively modulate relevant
target genes directly.

PMID: 11205881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 2000;19(1-2):139-45.

MAP kinases and hypoxia in the control of VEGF expression.

Berra E(1), Pagès G, Pouysségur J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, CNRS-UMR
6543, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, Nice, France.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a potent cytokine secreted by
virtually all cells plays a key role in tumor angiogenesis. Disruption of one
VEGF allele in mice has revealed a dramatic lethal effect in early embryogenesis,
suggesting a very tight regulation of this gene. This commentary reviews the
mechanisms whereby VEGF mRNA is controlled within the tumor environment by
hypoxia and the MAP kinase signaling cascades. Using hamster fibroblasts as a
cellular model, we demonstrated that the Ras-mediated activation of p42/p44 MAP
kinases exerts a prominent action at the transcriptional level. In normoxic
conditions, p42/p44 MAPKs activate the VEGF promoter at the proximal (-88/-66)
region where Sp 1/AP-2 transcriptional factor complexes are recruited. At low O2 
tension, the stabilized and nuclear hypoxia inducible factor- 1alpha (HIF-1alpha)
is directly phosphorylated by p42/p44 MAPKs, an action which enhances
HIF-1-dependent transcriptional activition of VEGF. In addition, MAPKs activated 
under various cellular stresses (p38MAPK and JNK), contribute to the increased
expression of this angiogenic growth and survival factor by stabilizing the VEGF 
mRNA.

PMID: 11191053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Feb 23;281(2):409-15.

Repression of CD2 gene expression is mediated by an AP-2 related factor.

Outram SV(1), Grimwade D, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Imperial College of Science Technology and Medicine,
Sir Alexander Fleming Building, Imperial College Road, London SW7 2AZ, United
Kingdom. s.outram@ic.ac.uk

Tissue specific and developmental expression of the CD2 gene is tightly regulated
during T cell development. DNase I hypersensitivity analysis has revealed the
presence of two sites (DHS1 and 2) located 5' to the CD2 gene which have been
reported to be implicated in the developmental regulation of expression of CD2.
The location of DHS2 marks the position of the minimal promoter whereas DHS1 is
located approximately 1800 bp upstream. We show that repressor and derepressor
activities are contained within the region of DNA marked by DHS1. The repressor
is capable of regulating homologous and heterologous promoters regardless of
orientation. This activity is entirely dependent upon the presence of an AP-2
binding site as mutation of this site resulted in a loss of repressor activity. A
nuclear factor found in Jurkat cells specifically binds this site but was shown
to be serologically distinct from AP-2.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11181063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. EMBO J. 2001 Feb 15;20(4):723-33.

Dimerization with PEBP2beta protects RUNX1/AML1 from
ubiquitin-proteasome-mediated degradation.

Huang G(1), Shigesada K, Ito K, Wee HJ, Yokomizo T, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation, Department of Viral Oncology, and Molecular
Genetics, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

The RUNX family genes are the mammalian homologs of the Drosophila genes runt and
lozenge, and members of this family function as master regulators of definitive
hematopoiesis and osteogenesis. The RUNX genes encode the alpha subunit of the
transcription factor PEBP2/CBF. The beta subunit consists of the non-RUNX protein
PEBP2beta. We found that RUNX1/AML1, which is essential for hematopoiesis, is
continuously subjected to proteolytic degradation mediated by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. When PEBP2beta is present, however, the
ubiquitylation of RUNX1 is abrogated and this causes a dramatic inhibition of
RUNX1 proteolysis. Heterodimerization between PEBP2beta and RUNX1 thus appears to
be an essential step in the generation of transcriptionally competent RUNX1.
Consistent with this notion, RUNX1 was barely detected in PEBP2beta(-/-) mouse.
CBF(PEBP2)beta- SMMHC, the chimeric protein associated with inv(16) acute myeloid
leukemia, was found to protect RUNX1 from proteolytic degradation more
efficiently than PEBP2beta. These results reveal a hitherto unknown and major
role of PEBP2beta, namely that it regulates RUNX1 by controlling its turnover.
This has allowed us to gain new insights into the mechanism of leukemogenesis by 
CBFbeta-SMMHC.

PMCID: PMC145428
PMID: 11179217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Feb;26(1):21-9.

Functional characterization of the basal promoter of the murine LH receptor gene 
in immortalized mouse Leydig tumor cells.

Nikula H(1), Koskimies P, El-Hefnawy T, Huhtaniemi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520
Turku, Finland.

The nuclear proteins of the LH receptor (LHR) expressing murine Leydig tumor
cells (mLTC-1), binding to the LHR primary promoter, were studied by gel
retardation assays. Nuclear extracts of HeLa cells, not expressing LHR, were used
as control. Protein binding was characterized to the first 173 base pairs (bp) of
the LHR 5'-untranslated region, comprising the basal transcriptional promoter
activity in mLTC-1 cells, and accounting for the Leydig cell-specific LHR
expression. The promoter fragment is GC-rich and contains several Sp1 sites, one 
activating protein 2 (AP-2) site, and a putative SF-1 binding site. Three
subfragments of the 173 bp promoter, I (bases -1 to -55), II (-56 to -102) and
III (-103 to -173), were separately analyzed. Fragments II and III formed several
complexes with mLTC-1 and HeLa cell nuclear extracts. One complex with fragments 
II and III, using mLTC-1 and HeLa cell extracts, was similar to that formed with 
purified Sp1, and it could be removed by an Sp1 oligo and supershifted by an Sp1 
antibody. Both fragments formed additional complexes with mLTC-1 cell extracts
with no specificity for Sp1. Partly similar, though weaker, complexes were seen
with HeLa cell extracts. The most clearcut differences between the protein/DNA
complexes formed with LHR expressing mLTC-1 cells and non-expressing (HeLa, COS, 
HEK 293 and MSC-1) cells were found with fragment I. Extracts of the
non-expressing cells formed one prominent protein/DNA complex which was missing
in mLTC-1 cells. Purified Sp1 also bound to this fragment. The fragment
containing the putative SF-1 binding site did not form any protein/DNA complexes 
with mLTC-1 cell proteins. In conclusion, the murine LHR primary promoter binds, 
in addition to the Sp1 and AP-2 transcription factors, several other proteins.
The Sp1 protein can bind into at least three different sites in the basal
promoter. The other binding proteins differ most clearly between LHR expressing
and non-expressing cells in the promoter fragment closest to the translation
start site, suggesting a key role for this part of the promoter in cell-specific 
LHR expression.

PMID: 11174851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Gene. 2000 Dec 31;261(2):329-36.

Cloning and characterization of mouse glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate
amidotransferase 2 gene promoter.

Yamazaki K(1), Mizui Y, Oki T, Okada M, Tanaka I.

Author information: 
(1)Tsukuba Research Laboratories, Eisai Co., Ltd., 5-1-3, Tokodai, Tsukuba,
300-2635, Ibaraki, Japan. k5-yamazaki@hhc.eisa.co.jp

Glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFAT) is the first and
rate-limiting enzyme of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway, which plays an
important role in glucose toxicity and cellular insulin resistance. Thus, the
mechanisms by which GFAT expression is regulated under physiological and
pathological conditions are of interest in connection with diabetes. In this
study, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of the mouse GFAT2 gene and characterized
its promoter activity. Sequence analysis revealed several putative regulatory
elements Sp1, a CCAAT box, AP-1 and AP-2, but no TATA box. Transfection
experiments showed that the 5'-flanking region between -2462 to +38 relative to
the transcription start site of the GFAT2 gene drives transcription in NIH3T3
cells and that the fragment from -141 to -9 has the highest transcription
activity. Reporter assays using deletion and mutant variants suggested that the
Sp1 sites at positions -83 to -78 and -22 to -17 both play an important role in
the basal promoter activity of the mouse GFAT2 gene. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay showed DNA-protein binding at both Sp1 sites. We also compared the
promoter activities of mouse GFAT1 and GFAT2 in several cell lines.

PMID: 11167021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jan 12;488(1-2):81-4.

Chloride binding by the AML1/Runx1 transcription factor studied by NMR.

Wolf-Watz M(1), Bäckström S, Grundström T, Sauer U, Härd T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Royal Institute of Technology, Center for
Structural Biochemistry, Novum, Huddinge, Sweden.

It is known that the DNA binding Runt domain of the AML1/Runx1 transcription
factor coordinates Cl(-) ions. In this paper we have determined Cl(-) binding
affinities of AML1 by (35)Cl nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) linewidth analysis.
The Runt domain binds Cl(-) with a dissociation constant (K(d,Cl)) of 34 mM. If
CBFbeta is added to form a 1:1 complex, the K(d,Cl) value increases to 56 mM.
Homology modeling suggests that a high occupancy Cl(-) binding site overlaps with
the DNA binding surface. NMR data show that DNA displaces this Cl(-) ion.
Possible biological roles of Cl(-) binding are discussed based on these findings.

PMID: 11163800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 26;280(3):693-9.

Regulation of human PDE5A2 intronic promoter by cAMP and cGMP: identification of 
a critical Sp1-binding site.

Lin CS(1), Chow S, Lau A, Tu R, Lue TF.

Author information: 
(1)Knuppe Molecular Urology Laboratory, Department of Urology, School of
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143-1695, USA.

PDE5A gene encodes type 5 phosphodiesterase (PDE5), the principal cGMP-catalyzing
enzyme in the penis and the primary target of sildenafil (Viagra). We have
previously reported the isolation of three alternatively spliced PDE5A isoforms
in humans. We also reported the identification of three corresponding alternative
first exons and an intronic promoter in the human PDE5A gene. The intronic
promoter is situated upstream from the PDE5A2-specific first exon but downstream 
from the PDE5A1- and A3-specific first exons. In the current study we showed that
the intronic promoter could be upregulated by either cAMP or cGMP. In order to
identify possible regulatory elements in the promoter, we created deletion and
base-substitution mutants targeting one AP2- and four Sp1-binding sequences. Loss
of function of these mutants to bind to the respective transcription factors was 
verified by DNase I footprint analysis, and changes in promoter function were
analyzed with a luciferase reporter system. Mutation of the AP2-binding sequence 
and deletion of the 3'-most Sp1-binding site (within the exon) had little effects
on the basal or the cyclic nucleotide-inducible promoter functions. Mutation of
the 5'-most Sp1-binding site had much more severe effects on the basal and the
cyclic nucleotide-inducible promoter functions. Mutation of a neighboring site
that contains two overlapping Sp1-binding sequences completely nullified the
basal and cyclic nucleotide-inducible promoter activities. Thus, the PDE5A2
intronic promoter depends on the overlapping Sp1-binding site for basal and
cyclic nucleotide-inducible functions.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Toxicology. 2000 Mar 7;143(3):249-61.

Beryllium-stimulation does not activate transcription factors in a mouse hybrid
macrophage cell line.

Hamada H(1), Sawyer RT, Kittle LA, Newman LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
CO 80206, USA. sawyerr@njc.org

We tested the hypothesis that beryllium (Be) could stimulate H36.12j cell (12j)
TNF-alpha production by transcription factor-mediated pathways similar to those
induced by either LPS- or IFN-gamma stimulation. Unstimulated 12j cells produce
constitutive levels of TNF-alpha (175+/-18 pg/ml, mean +/- SEM) detected by ELISA
of culture supernatants after 24 h. Beryllium-stimulated (100 microM BeSO4) 12j
cell TNF-alpha (724+/-47 pg/ml) was observed after 24 h while LPS-stimulated (1
microg/ml) TNF-alpha (515+/-151 pg/ml) after 6 h. Recombinant-Mu-IFN-gamma (10 U)
stimulated 12j cell TNF-alpha at lower levels (284+/-31 pg/ml) while
rMu-IFN-gamma + Be-stimulated 12j cells produced 1195+/-225 pg/ml TNF-alpha.
Constitutive levels of transcription factors were observed in unstimulated 12j
cell nuclei. In LPS-stimulated 12j cells IkappaBalpha was degraded in the
cytoplasm and increased levels of NF-kappaB were found in nuclei after 30 min.
After 3 h there were increased levels of AP-1 and CREB, with increased amounts of
Fos family, Jun B and Jun D transcription factors. In contrast, Be-stimulation
failed to increase the levels of any transcription factor tested, NF-kappaB,
AP-1, AP-2, CREB, C/EBP, Sp-1, Egr-1, Ets, NF-Y or Oct-1, in 12j cells. A pattern
of increased transcription factors, similar to that observed for LPS-stimulation,
was found in 12j cell nuclei after stimulation with rMu-IFN-gamma. However,
NF-kappaB was increased at 3 h while AP-1 (Jun B and Jun D) and CREB were
increased at 15 h. Co-stimulation of 12j cells with rMu-IFN-gamma + Be increased 
the levels of NF-KB in 12j cell nuclei at 3 h, and the levels of AP-1 and CREB at
15 h, however, only Jun B was increased. Our data show 12j cell TNF-alpha
production was associated with increased levels of transcription factors present 
in nuclei with disparate kinetics and patterns of expression depending on the
trigger. We reject our initial hypothesis and conclude that Be-stimulation
signals 12j cell TNF-alpha synthesis via a transcription factor-independent
pathway. Beryllium may induce novel pathways of macrophage cytokine gene
regulation.

PMID: 10755711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Neurochem. 2001 Jan;76(1):280-94.

Regulation of the tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine beta-hydroxylase genes by the
transcription factor AP-2.

Kim HS(1), Hong SJ, LeDoux MS, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee, College of Medicine,
Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

The retinoic acid-inducible and developmentally regulated transcription factor
AP-2 plays an important role during development. In adult mammals, AP-2 is
expressed in both neural and non-neural tissues. However, the function of AP-2 in
different neuronal phenotypes is poorly understood. In this study,
transcriptional regulation of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and dopamine
beta-hydroxylase (DBH) genes by AP-2 was investigated. AP-2 binding sites were
identified in the upstream regions of both genes. Electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays (EMSA) and DNase I footprinting analyses indicate that the AP-2
interaction with these motifs is more prominent in catecholaminergic SK-N-BE(2)C 
and CATH.a than in non-catecholaminergic HeLa and HepG2 cell lines. Exogenous
expression of AP-2 robustly transactivated TH and DBH promoter activities in
non-catecholaminergic cell lines. While AP-2 regulates the DBH promoter activity 
via a single site, transactivation of the TH promoter by AP-2 appears to require 
multiple sites. In support of this, mutation of multiple AP-2 binding sites but
not that of single site diminished the basal promoter activity of the TH gene in 
cell lines that express TH and abolished transactivation by exogenous AP-2
expression in cell lines that do not express TH. In contrast, mutation of a
single AP-2 binding site of the DBH gene completely abolished transactivation by 
AP-2. Double-label immunohistochemistry showed that AP-2 is coexpressed with TH
in noradrenergic and adrenergic neurons in both the central and peripheral
nervous systems of adult rodents. Numerous non-catecholaminergic cell groups
within the spinal cord, medulla, cerebellum, and pons also express AP-2. The
concentration of AP-2 in dorsomedial locations along the neuraxis suggests a
regionally specific role for this transcription factor in the regulation of
neuronal function. Based on these findings we propose that AP-2 may coregulate TH
and DBH gene expression and thus participate in expression/maintenance of
neurotransmitter phenotypes in (nor)adrenergic neurons and neuroendocrine cells.

PMID: 11146001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Gene. 2000 Dec 30;260(1-2):1-12.

Regulatory roles of AP-2 transcription factors in vertebrate development,
apoptosis and cell-cycle control.

Hilger-Eversheim K(1), Moser M, Schorle H, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital RWTH, Pauwelsstrasse 30, D-52074, 
Aachen, Germany.

AP-2 transcription factors represent a family of three closely related and
evolutionarily conserved sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins, AP-2alpha, -beta
and -gamma. Subsequent studies have identified spatially and temporally regulated
embryonic expression patterns in a number of different tissues including neural
crest derivatives, neural, epidermal and urogenital tissues. Here, we review the 
current understanding of developmental defects in AP-2-deficient mice and
consider regulatory functions of AP-2 in control of apoptosis, cell cycle, and
gene expression. Recently, the first inherited human disorder, Char syndrome, was
identified to be caused by AP-2beta missense mutations. In light of the manifold 
and essential functions of AP-2 proteins in cell growth, differentiation and
programmed death, mutations or changes in precisely programmed expression
patterns are likely to contribute to other congenital malformations or neoplastic
diseases.

PMID: 11137286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 9;276(10):7661-71. Epub 2000 Dec 11.

Transcriptional activation of the rat vesicular monoamine transporter 2 promoter 
in gastric epithelial cells: regulation by gastrin.

Watson F(1), Kiernan RS, Deavall DG, Varro A, Dimaline R.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, United
Kingdom. watso@liv.ac.uk

Vesicular monoamine transporter 2 is important for the accumulation of monoamine 
neurotransmitters into synaptic vesicles and histamine transport into secretory
vesicles of the enterochromaffin-like cell of the gastric corpus. In this study
we have investigated the mechanisms regulating the transcriptional activation of 
the rat vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) promoter in gastric epithelial 
cells. Maintenance of basal levels of transcription was dependent on the presence
of SP1, cAMP-response element (CRE), and overlapping AP2/SP1 consensus sequences 
within the region of promoter from -86 to +1 base pairs (bp). Gastrin stimulation
increased transcriptional activity, and responsiveness was shown to be dependent 
on the CRE (-33 to -26 bp) and AP2/SP1 (-61 to -48 bp) consensus sites but
independent of the SP1 site at -86 to -81 bp. Gastrin-induced transcription was
dependent on the cooperative interaction of an uncharacterized nuclear factor of 
approximately 23.3 kDa that bound to the putative AP2/SP1 site, CRE-binding
protein (CREB), and CREB-binding protein/p300. Gastrin stimulation resulted in
the increased binding of phosphorylated CREB to the promoter, but it did not
result in the increased binding of the AP2/SP1-binding protein. The gastrin
responsiveness of the promoter was shown to be dependent on both the protein
kinase C and mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated
kinase kinase-signaling pathways, which may converge on the AP2/SP1-binding
protein.

PMID: 11113118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Blood. 2000 Dec 15;96(13):4178-84.

Zebrafish homolog of the leukemia gene CBFB: its expression during embryogenesis 
and its relationship to scl and gata-1 in hematopoiesis.

Blake T(1), Adya N, Kim CH, Oates AC, Zon L, Chitnis A, Weinstein BM, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mammalian CBFB encodes a transcription factor (CBF beta) that in combination with
CBF alpha 2 binds to specific DNA sequences and regulates expression of a number 
of hematopoietic genes. CBFB is associated with human leukemias through a
chromosome 16 inversion and is essential for definitive hematopoiesis during
mouse embryo development. We have isolated a zebrafish cbfb complementary DNA
(cDNA) clone from a zebrafish kidney cDNA library. This cbfb is highly homologous
to human and mouse CBFB/Cbfb genes at both the DNA and protein level. In
biochemical analyses, cbfbeta binds to human CBF alpha 2 and enhances its DNA
binding. During zebrafish development, cbfb is expressed in the lateral plate
mesoderm at tail bud stage and in the intermediate cell mass (ICM, the location
of embryonic hematopoiesis) between the 21- to 26-somite stages. The cbfb is also
expressed in Rohon-Beard cells, cranial nerve ganglia, hindbrain, retina,
branchial arches, jaw, and fin buds. Expression of cbfb is decreased or absent in
the ICM and Rohon-Beard cells in some hematopoietic mutants and is unaffected in 
others. We have also analyzed the expression of scl and gata-1 in the same
hematopoietic mutants to ascertain the relative order of these transcription
factors to cbfb in zebrafish hematopoiesis. Our results indicate that cbfb is
expressed in early hematopoietic progenitors and that its expression pattern in
the hematopoietic mutants is similar to that of scl. (Blood. 2000;96:4178-4184)

PMID: 11110689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Endocrinology. 2000 Dec;141(12):4583-91.

Insulin-Like growth factor I (IGF-I) and cyclic adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate
regulate IGF-binding protein-3 gene expression by transcriptional and
posttranscriptional mechanisms in mammary epithelial cells.

Cohick WS(1), Wang B, Verma P, Boisclair YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, New
Brunswick 08901, USA. cohick@aesop.rutgers.edu

Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) is a potent mitogen for both normal and
transformed mammary epithelial cells (MEC), and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3)
potentiates IGF-I action in these cells. The synthesis of IGFBP-3 is stimulated
by both IGF-I and agents that increase intracellular cAMP (e.g. forskolin) in the
bovine MEC line MAC-T. In addition, the combination of IGF-I and cAMP increases
IGFBP-3 messenger RNA to a greater extent than does either treatment alone. The
molecular mechanisms responsible for this regulation are not known and therefore 
represent the focus of this study. The half-life of IGFBP-3 messenger RNA in
untreated MAC-T cells was determined to be 11 h. Exposure to IGF-I or forskolin
increased the half-life to 27 and 101 h, respectively. Nuclear run-on assays
indicated that IGFBP-3 transcription rates were increased 3.5 +/- 0.83-fold (n = 
4) in cells treated with a combination of IGF-I and forskolin. To further study
this regulation, 1.1 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the IGFBP-3 promoter were
fused to a promoterless reporter plasmid encoding luciferase. Transient
transfection assays indicated that both IGF-I and forskolin alone produced small,
but significant, increases in IGFBP-3 promoter activity of 1.57 +/- 0.12 and 1.59
+/- 0.08-fold (P < 0.01), respectively (mean +/- SE; n = 7). However, the
combination of IGF-I and forskolin increased IGFBP-3 promoter activity 2.25 +/-
0.14-fold above control values (P < 0.01), suggesting that these factors activate
discrete signaling pathways that act in concert to stimulate IGFBP-3 gene
transcription. Deletion analysis indicated that promoter fragments containing as 
little as 267 bp upstream of the TATA box retained responsiveness to IGF-I and
forskolin. This region contains a 200-bp sequence that is approximately 80%
homologous between the murine and bovine promoters. It contains several conserved
AP-2 and Sp1 consensus binding sequences that may be important for the effects of
IGF-I and forskolin on IGFBP-3 promoter activity. In summary, these data indicate
that IGF-I and cAMP, working through separate signaling pathways, activate both
transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms to stimulate IGFBP-3
synthesis in MEC.

PMID: 11108271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cancer Invest. 2000;18(8):768-80.

Molecular and clinical advances in core binding factor primary acute myeloid
leukemia: a paradigm for translational research in malignant hematology.

Marcucci G(1), Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Arthur G. James Cancer Hospital, Columbus,
Ohio, USA. marcucci-1@medctr.osu.edu

Clonal chromosomal abnormalities are the most important prognostic indicators in 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Recent advances in molecular biology have allowed
structural and functional characterization of many of these genomic
rearrangements and have provided evidence for their primary role in
leukemogenesis. Two of the most prevalent cytogenetic subtypes of adult primary
or de novo AML, t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13q22), are characterized by
disruption of the AML1(CBF alpha 2) gene at 21q22 and the CBF beta gene at 16q22,
respectively. Both genes encode a subunit of core binding factor (CBF), a
regulator of normal hematopoiesis. At the molecular level, t(8;21)(q22;q22) and
inv(16)(p13q22) result in the creation of novel fusion genes, AML1/ETO and CBF
beta/MYH11, whose structures and functions are being successfully characterized
by in vitro studies and transgenic animal models. Detection of t(8;21)(q22;q22)
or inv(16)(p13q22) in adult patients with primary AML is a favorable independent 
prognostic indicator for achievement of cure after intensive chemotherapy or bone
marrow transplantation and may serve as a paradigm for risk-adapted treatment in 
AML. The purpose of this review is to summarize the recent advances in the
molecular biology and clinical management of t(8;21)(q22;q22) and inv(16)(p13q22)
primary AML, collectively referred to here as CBF AML.

PMID: 11107447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2000 Oct;11(5):361-8.

Function of CBFbeta/Bro proteins.

Adya N(1), Castilla LH, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mammalian core binding factor beta (CBFbeta) and Drosophila Brother (Bro) and
Big-brother (Bgb) proteins are transcription factors that dimerize with mammalian
Runx and Drosophila Runt and Lozenge proteins and augment their DNA binding
affinity and transcriptional potency. CBFbeta is essential for development and
sustenance of definitive hematopoiesis during mouse embryogenesis. Bro and Bgb
are required for Runt/Lozenge functions in Drosophila development. CBFbeta
contributes to leukemogenesis since the CBFB gene is specifically and
consistently mutated by a chromosome 16 inversion found in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia subtype M4Eo. The ubiquitous expression pattern of the CBFB gene
suggests that it may play important roles in many other organ systems.

PMID: 11105900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2000 Oct;11(5):347-60.

Alterations of the AML1 transcription factor in human leukemia.

Downing JR(1), Higuchi M, Lenny N, Yeoh AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA. jim.downing@stjude.org

The identification of clonal chromosomal translocations in human leukemias
provided one of the first insights into the underlying pathogenesis of this
clinically heterogeneous disease. Over the last decade a large number of these
chromosomal rearrangements have been molecularly cloned and the involved genes
identified. A surprising finding that has emerged from this work is that many of 
these chromosomal alterations target the genes encoding the AML1/CBFbeta
transcription factor complex, a critical regulator of normal hematopoiesis. In
this review, we summarize our present understanding of the mechanisms through
which alterations of AML1/CBFbeta contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 11105899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Nov 30;278(3):719-23.

Transcriptional factor AP-2gamma increases human cystatin A gene transcription of
keratinocytes.

Takahashi H(1), Oyama N, Itoh Y, Ishida-Yamamoto A, Kaneko F, Iizuka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa, 078-8510,
Japan.

The transcriptional activator protein-2 (AP-2) has been suggested to participate 
in keratinocyte gene regulation. Cystatin A, a cysteine proteinase inhibitor, is 
one of the cornified cell envelope constituents and is expressed in the upper
epidermis. We report AP-2-dependent transcriptional regulation of cystatin A gene
expression of keratinocytes. At least three isoforms of AP-2 (AP-2 alpha, beta,
gamma) have been described. Transfection of AP-2alpha, beta and gamma expression 
vectors into cultured normal human keratinocytes (NHK) resulted in increased
cystatin A expression in both mRNA and protein levels. Among the three isoforms
AP-2gamma was most potent in inducing cystatin A expression. In contrast,
transfection of antisense oriented AP-2gamma expression vector decreased basal
AP-2 expression, accompanied by decreased cystatin A mRNA. The fragment, +77 to
-478 of 5'-flanking region of human cystatin A gene, was subcloned into
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter vector (p478CAT). Cotransfection
of p478CAT vector with AP-2alpha, beta, and gamma expression vectors resulted in 
three-, three-, and sixfold increase in the CAT activity, respectively.
Transfection of the deleted construct (p478DeltaAP-2CAT, devoid of AP-2-like
binding site (-75 to -84)) decreased CAT activity by one-third compared to
p478CAT promoter activity. Cotransfection of p478DeltaAP-2CAT with AP-2alpha,
beta, and gamma expression vectors had no effect on the decreased promoter
activity. Immunohistochemical analysis of human skin showed that AP-2alpha is
exclusively expressed in the nuclei of basal cell layer. AP-2gamma is expressed
in the nuclei of basal, spinous, and granular cell layers. AP-2beta expression
was not observed in the epidermis. Gel mobility shift assay revealed that the
AP-2gamma protein specifically binds to oligonucleotides containing AP-2-like
binding site of cystatin A gene. These results indicate that AP-2gamma regulates 
the cystatin A gene expression of epidermal keratinocytes at the transcriptional 
level.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11095974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Gene. 2000 Oct 31;257(2):195-208.

Structural characterization and chromosomal localization of the mouse cDNA and
gene encoding the bone tyrosine phosphatase, mOST-PTP.

Morrison DF(1), Mauro LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Tyrosine kinases and phosphatases are regulators of the steady-state levels of
phosphotyrosine proteins and, in this way, are key players in determining the
functional state of the cell. As a unique member of the protein tyrosine
phosphatase (PTP) superfamily, osteotesticular PTP (OST-PTP) is a receptor
protein whose expression is highly regulated during osteoblast differentiation
and in response to modulators of bone remodeling such as parathyroid hormone and 
vitamin D3. To explore the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways important 
in the regulation of this gene, we characterized the structural organization of
the mouse OST-PTP cDNA and gene and determined its chromosomal localization. The 
mouse cDNA is approximately 5.5 kb including 5.1 kb of coding sequence, 315 bp 5'
UTR and 102 bp 3' UTR. It is expressed as a single approximately 5.8 kb
transcript in day 8 differentiated MC3T3 osteoblasts. Although highly homologous 
to the rat OST-PTP cDNA, the mouse cDNA possesses a 74 bp insert in the 5' UTR
which contains several potential transcription factor binding sites such as AP-2 
and NFkappaB. The mouse OST-PTP (mOST-PTP) gene is a single copy gene
encompassing 35 exons and spanning only 20.65 kb. As such, it is the smallest
gene of the characterized receptor PTP genes. This is due to the lack of large
introns and the conserved spatial organization of exons which encode specific
protein motifs in the mOST-PTP molecule. Sequence analysis of the putative
mOST-PTP promoter revealed basal elements as well as many potential cis-acting
regulatory elements with relevance to gene regulation in bone. Of particular
interest is the single osteoblast specific element known as osteocalcin specific 
element 2 (OSE2) found at position -1867, as well as numerous VDRE and NFkappaB
sites found throughout the promoter and the 5' UTR. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization studies have shown that mOST-PTP localizes to mouse chromosome 1,
region F-G which is syntenic to the segment of human chromosome 1q32-33. This
characterization of the mOST-PTP cDNA and gene will facilitate future experiments
exploring the mechanisms of regulation of this phosphatase during osteogenesis.

PMID: 11080586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2000 Sep;121(2):216-9.

Deletion of 3'-CBFB gene in association with an inversion (16)(p13q22) and a loss
of the Y chromosome in a 2-year-Old child with acute myelogenous leukemia-M4.

Batanian JR(1), Huang Y, Fallon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Hematology/Oncology, Saint Louis University
Pediatrics Research Institute, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2007 Nov;179(1):82-4.

Inversion 16(p13q22) is most commonly associated with acute myelomonocytic
leukemia with abnormal eosinophils (M4). In association with this inversion, a
proximal deletion at the 16p13 primary arm breakpoint occurs in 20% of cases. We 
report on a first case of inversion 16 with a distal deletion at the primary arm 
breakpoint 16q22, detected by using the fluorescent-labeled dual-color probe
CBFB.

PMID: 11063812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biochemistry. 2000 Nov 7;39(44):13565-74.

Interaction of CBF alpha/AML/PEBP2 alpha transcription factors with nucleosomes
containing promoter sequences requires flexibility in the translational
positioning of the histone octamer and exposure of the CBF alpha site.

Gutiérrez J(1), Sierra J, Medina R, Puchi M, Imschenetzky M, van Wijnen A, Lian
J, Stein G, Stein J, Montecino M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas,
Universidad de Concepción, Casilla 160-C, Concepción, Chile.

Chromatin remodeling at eukaryotic gene promoter sequences accompanies
transcriptional activation. Both molecular events rely on specific protein-DNA
interactions that occur within these promoter sequences. Binding of
CBFalpha/AML/PEBP2alpha (core binding factor alpha/acute myelogenous
leukemia/polyoma enhancer binding protein 2alpha) proteins is a key event in both
tissue-specific and developmentally regulated osteocalcin (OC) promoter activity.
To address linkage between chromatin organization and transcription factor
binding, we reconstituted segments of the rat OC gene proximal promoter into
mononucleosomes and studied binding of CBFalpha proteins. We analyzed binding of 
bacterially produced Cbfalpha2Alpha and Cbfalpha2B, two splice variants of the
human CBFalpha2 gene, and determined the effect of heterodimerization with the
Cbfbeta subunit on binding activity. Our results indicate that binding of the
truncated Cbfalpha2A protein to naked DNA is independent of Cbfbeta whereas
Cbfalpha2A binding to nucleosomal DNA was enhanced by Cbfbeta. In contrast, the
Cbfalpha2B interaction with either naked or nucleosomal DNA was strongly
dependent on heterodimerization with the Cbfbeta subunit. Additionally, our
results demonstrate that both Cbfalpha2A alone and Cbfalpha2B complexed with
Cbfbeta can interact with nucleosomal DNA only if there is a degree of
flexibility in the positioning of the histone octamer on the DNA fragment and
exposure of the CBFalpha site. This situation was achieved with a DNA segment of 
182 bp from the rat OC promoter that preferentially positions mononucleosomes
upstream of the CBFalpha binding site and leaves this element partially exposed. 
Taken together, these results suggest that nucleosomal translational positioning 
is a major determinant of the binding of CBFalpha factors to nucleosomal DNA.

PMID: 11063594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. EMBO J. 2000 Nov 1;19(21):5793-800.

Non-enzymatic triggering of the ceramide signalling cascade by solar UVA
radiation.

Grether-Beck S(1), Bonizzi G, Schmitt-Brenden H, Felsner I, Timmer A, Sies H,
Johnson JP, Piette J, Krutmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Photodermatology, Department of Dermatology,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrabetae 5, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Ceramide is a key component of intracellular stress responses. Evidence is
provided for a novel mechanism of ceramide formation that mediates solar
ultraviolet (UV) A radiation-induced expression of the intercellular adhesion
molecule (ICAM)-1. Similarly to UVA radiation, ceramide stimulation of human
keratinocytes induced ICAM-1 mRNA expression and activated the ICAM-1 promoter
through transcription factor AP-2. Ceramide-activated AP-2 and ceramide-induced
ICAM-1 reporter gene activation were abrogated through deletion of the AP-2
binding site. UVA radiation increased the level of ceramide in keratinocytes and 
inhibition of sphingomyelin synthesis prevented UVA radiation-induced ICAM-1
expression. Hitherto, two pathways have been identified for ceramide
accumulation: hydrolysis from sphingomyelin through neutral and acid
sphingomyelinases, and de novo synthesis by ceramide synthase. UVA radiation did 
not activate any of these enzymes. Ceramide generation in UVA-irradiated cells,
however, was inhibited by singlet oxygen quenchers and mimicked in unirradiated
cells by a singlet oxygen-generating system. In addition, UVA radiation and
singlet oxygen both generated ceramide in protein-free, sphingomyelin-containing 
liposomes. This study indicates that singlet oxygen triggers a third,
non-enzymatic mechanism of ceramide formation.

PMCID: PMC305810
PMID: 11060030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Nov 1;28(21):4076-82.

DNA binding properties of the Arabidopsis floral development protein
AINTEGUMENTA.

Nole-Wilson S(1), Krizek BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, 700 Sumter Street, University of South
Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res 2001 Mar 1;29(5):1261.

The Arabidopsis protein AINTEGUMENTA (ANT) is a member of a plant-specific family
of transcription factors (AP2/EREBP) that share either one or two copies of an
approximately 70 amino acid region called the AP2 repeat. DNA binding activity
has been demonstrated previously for members of this family containing a single
AP2 repeat. Using an in vitro selection procedure, the DNA binding specificity of
the two AP2 repeat containing protein ANT was found to be
5'-gCAC(A/G)N(A/T)TcCC(a/g)ANG(c/t)-3'. This consensus site is much longer than
sites recognized by proteins containing a single AP2 repeat and neither AP2
repeat of ANT was alone capable of binding to the selected sequences, suggesting 
that both AP2 repeats make DNA contacts. ANT binds to these DNA sequences as a
monomer but a higher order complex is also observed at high protein
concentrations. The ANT consensus site shows some similarity to the C-repeat/DRE 
elements bound by proteins that contain a single AP2 repeat, and we find that ANT
binds weakly to such sites. We propose a model in which each AP2 repeat of ANT
contacts adjacent sites within the consensus sequence. Our results suggest that
the AP2 repeat can be utilized in different ways for DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC113152
PMID: 11058102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12519-23.

Sequential repression and activation of the CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-alpha 
(C/EBPalpha ) gene during adipogenesis.

Jiang MS(1), Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-alpha (C/EBPalpha) functions as a pleiotropic
transcriptional activator of adipocyte genes during adipogenesis. Nuclear factor 
C/EBP undifferentiated protein (CUP), an isoform of activator protein-2alpha
(AP-2alpha), binds to repressive elements in the C/EBPalpha gene promoter,
silencing the gene until late in the differentiation program. The CUP regulatory 
element overlaps a Sp (GT-box) element in the promoter to which Sp3 (or Sp1) can 
bind. Binding by Sp3 or Sp1 and CUP/AP2-alpha is mutually exclusive. Sp3 is a
strong transcriptional activator of the C/EBPalpha gene promoter in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes and Schneider cells, this activation being repressed by
CUP/AP-2alpha. Sp3 is expressed throughout differentiation, whereas
CUP/AP-2alpha, which is expressed only by preadipocytes, is down-regulated during
differentiation coincident with transcription of the C/EBPalpha gene. Thus,
CUP/AP-2alpha delays access of Sp3 to the Sp regulatory element, preventing
premature expression of C/EBPalpha and thereby interference by C/EBPalpha (which 
is antimitotic) with mitotic clonal expansion, an essential early event in the
differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC18796
PMID: 11050170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Blood. 2000 Nov 1;96(9):3154-60.

Mutations of the AML1 gene in myelodysplastic syndrome and their functional
implications in leukemogenesis.

Imai Y(1), Kurokawa M, Izutsu K, Hangaishi A, Takeuchi K, Maki K, Ogawa S, Chiba 
S, Mitani K, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology and the Department of Pathology,
Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The AML1 gene encodes a DNA-binding protein that contains the runt domain and is 
the most frequent target of translocations associated with human leukemias. Here,
point mutations of the AML1 gene, V105ter (single-letter amino acid code) and
R139G, (single-letter amino acid codes) were identified in 2 cases of
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) by means of the reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction single-strand conformation polymorphism method. Both mutations are
present in the region encoding the runt domain of AML1 and cause loss of the
DNA-binding ability of the resultant products. Of these mutants, V105ter has also
lost the ability to heterodimerize with polyomavirus enhancer binding protein
2/core binding factor beta (PEBP2beta/CBFbeta). On the other hand, the R139G
mutant acts as a dominant negative inhibitor by competing with wild-type AML1 for
interaction with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta. This study is the first report that describes
mutations of AML1 in patients with MDS and the mechanism whereby the mutant acts 
as a dominant negative inhibitor of wild-type AML1.

PMID: 11049997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Free Radic Biol Med. 2000 Aug;29(3-4):254-62.

Regulation of genes encoding NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductases.

Jaiswal AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. ajaiswal@bcm.tmc.edu

NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1) and NRH:quinone oxidoreductase (NQO2) are
flavoproteins that catalyze two-electron reduction and detoxification of quinones
and its derivatives. This leads to the protection of cells against redox cycling,
oxidative stress, and neoplasia. NQO1 is expressed ubiquitously in all the
tissues. However, the level of expression varied among the human tissues. NQO1
gene is expressed at higher levels in several tumor tissue types, including liver
and colon, as compared to normal tissues of similar origin. NQO1 gene expression 
is coordinately induced with other detoxifying enzyme genes in response to
xenobiotics, antioxidants, oxidants, heavy metals, and radiations. Deletion
mutagenesis in the NQO1 gene promoter identified several cis-elements including
antioxidant response element (ARE), a basal element, and AP-2 element. ARE
elements have also been found in the promoter regions of other detoxifying enzyme
genes including glutathione S-transferases. ARE is essentially required for
expression and coordinated induction of NQO1 and other detoxifying enzyme genes. 
Nuclear transcription factors Nrf2 and c-Jun bind to the ARE and activate the
gene expression. The binding of Nrf2 + c-Jun to the ARE required unknown
cytosolic factor(s). In addition to Nrf2 and c-Jun, other nuclear transcription
factors including Nrf1, Jun-B, and Jun-D also bind to the ARE and regulate
expression and induction of NQO1 gene. A hypothetical model is presented based on
the available information on ARE-mediated regulation of detoxifying enzyme genes.
Briefly, the Nrf2 is retained in the cytosplasm by a repressor protein Keap1 in
untreated normal cells. The treatment of cells with xenobiotics and antioxidants 
leads to the activation of unknown cytosolic factor(s) that catalyze modification
of Nrf2 and/or Keap1. The modification follows dissociation of Nrf2 and Keap1.
The free Nrf2 translocates in the nucleus. Nrf2 in the nucleus heterodimerizes
with c-Jun and binds to the ARE resulting in the induction of NQO1 and other
ARE-regulated genes expression. The identity of cytosolic factor(s) remains
unknown.

PMID: 11035254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Neurochem. 2000 Nov;75(5):1940-50.

Transcriptional regulation of 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase gene
expression by cyclic AMP in C6 cells.

Gravel M(1), Gao E, Hervouet-Zeiber C, Parsons V, Braun PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
gravel@med.mcgill.ca

It was recently shown that the two transcripts encoding the isoforms of
2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP1 and CNP2) are differentially
regulated during the process of oligodendrocyte maturation. In oligodendrocyte
precursors, only CNP2 mRNA is present, whereas in differentiating
oligodendrocytes, both CNP1 and CNP2 mRNAs are expressed. This pattern of CNP
expression is likely due to stage-specific transcriptional regulation of the two 
CNP promoters during the process of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Here, we
report the influence of increased intracellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels on the
transcription of both CNP1 and CNP2 mRNAs in rat C6 glioma cells. We found that
the transcription of CNP1 mRNA was significantly increased in comparison with
that of CNP2 mRNA in cells treated with cAMP analogues to elevate intracellular
cAMP levels. This up-regulation of CNP1 expression (a) is due to an increase of
transcription, (b) requires de novo protein synthesis, and (c) requires the
activity of protein kinase A. These results are physiologically significant and
support the idea that a cAMP-mediated pathway is part of the molecular mechanisms
regulating the expression of CNP1 in oligodendrocytes. The regulation of CNP1
promoter activity by cAMP was then investigated in stably transfected C6 cell
lines containing various deletions of the CNP promoter directing the bacterial
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene. We showed that the sequence between
nucleotides -126 and -102 was essential for the cAMP-dependent induction of CNP1 
expression. Gel retardation analysis showed that two protein-DNA complexes are
formed between this sequence and nuclear factors from C6 cells treated or not
treated with cAMP. This suggests that the induction of CNP1 mRNA transcription is
not mediated by changes in binding of nuclear factors that interact directly with
the -126/-102 sequence. Sequence analysis of this region revealed the presence of
a putative activator protein-2 (AP-2) binding site. It is interesting that
mutagenesis of this region resulted in a significant reduction in transcriptional
responses to cAMP, implying a possible role for the AP-2 factor in the expression
of CNP1. In addition, we have shown that putative binding sites for activator
protein-4 and nuclear factor-1 adjacent to the AP-2 site are required for
efficient induction of CNP1 expression by cAMP. Taken together, our results show 
that the cAMP-dependent accumulation of CNP1 mRNA appears to depend on the
synergistic interaction of several regulatory elements.

PMID: 11032883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):752-8.

Identification of overlapping AP-2/NF-kappa B-responsive elements on the rat
cholecystokinin gene promoter.

Katsel PL(1), Greenstein RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York
10029, USA. katsep01@doc.mssm.edu

In this study we evaluate both proximal and more distal transcriptional
regulation of the 5' flanking region of the rat cholecystokinin gene in
transfected GH3 (rat pituitary tumor) cells. Transcriptional activity was
measured on the intact (-400 to +73) 5' flanking region of cholecystokinin (CCK),
as well as with DNA constructs, which were deleted in both the conventional 5' to
3', as well as an unconventional 3' to 5' direction. Our in vivo studies indicate
complex phorbol ester and forskolin interactions in the 10-base pair region
between -130 and -140. We conclude, there are at least two transcriptional
factors involved in regulation of the rat CCK transcription in this region. In
vitro studies utilizing heterologous nuclear (HeLa) extract, as well as purified 
transcription factors AP-2 and NF-kappa B, identify overlapped AP-2- and NF-kappa
B-responsive elements within the 17-base pair sequence between -149 and -134 of
the distal 5' flanking region. In this region complex transcriptional regulation 
occurs, which indicates inhibition of AP-2 CCK promoter complexing by NF-kappa B.
Six-point mutations introduced into this sequence prevent AP-2 and NF-kappa B
binding to CCK promoter, as well as its transcriptional activation by phorbol
ester and forskolin in GH3 cells.

PMID: 11022044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):28-34.

YY1 as a regulator of replication-dependent hamster histone H3.2 promoter and an 
interactive partner of AP-2.

Wu F(1), Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90089-9176, USA.

In analyzing cis-regulatory elements important for cell cycle control of the
replication-dependent hamster histone H3.2 gene, we discovered a binding site for
the transcription factor YY1 embedded within GC-rich sequences between the two
tandem CCAAT repeats proximal to the TATA element. Base mutations that
specifically eliminated YY1 binding resulted in suppression of the S phase
induction of the H3.2 promoter. In addition, we discovered that YY1 is an
interactive partner of AP-2, which also binds the H3.2 promoter and regulates its
cell cycle-dependent expression. The critical domains for YY1 and AP-2A
interaction are mapped, revealing that the N-terminal portion of YY1 (amino acids
1-300) and the DNA-binding/dimerization region of AP-2A are required. Our results
suggest that YY1, acting as a transcription factor binding to its site on the
promoter, or through protein-protein interaction with AP-2, may be part of a
regulatory network including key cell cycle regulators such as c-Myc and Rb in
controlling growth- and differentiation-regulated gene expression.

PMID: 11018030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 29;275(52):40732-41.

Characterization of an upstream enhancer region in the promoter of the human
endothelial nitric-oxide synthase gene.

Laumonnier Y(1), Nadaud S, Agrapart M, Soubrier F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U525, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex
10, France.

The endothelial nitric-oxide synthase gene is constitutively expressed in
endothelial cells. Several transcriptionally active regulatory elements have been
identified in the proximal promoter, including a GATA-2 and an Sp-1 binding site.
Because they cannot account for the constitutive expression of endothelial
nitric-oxide synthase gene in a restricted number of cells, we have searched for 
other cell-specific regulatory elements. By DNase I hypersensitivity mapping and 
deletion studies we have identified a 269-base pair activator element located 4.9
kilobases upstream from the transcription start site that acts as an enhancer.
DNase I footprinting and linker-scanning experiments showed that several regions 
within the 269-base pair enhancer are important for transcription factor binding 
and for full enhancer activity. The endothelial specificity of this activation
seems partly due to interaction between this enhancer in its native configuration
and the promoter in endothelial cells. EMSA experiments suggested the implication
of MZF-like, AP-2, Sp-1-related, and Ets-related factors. Among Ets factors, Erg 
was the only one able to bind to cognate sites in the enhancer, as found by EMSA 
and supershift experiments, and to activate the transcriptional activity of the
enhancer in cotransfection experiments. Therefore, multiple protein complexes
involving Erg, other Ets-related factors, AP-2, Sp-1-related factor, and MZF-like
factors are important for the function of this enhancer in endothelial cells.

PMID: 11013235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Pharmacol. 2000 Oct 15;60(8):1171-8.

Signaling angiogenesis via p42/p44 MAP kinase and hypoxia.

Berra E(1), Milanini J, Richard DE, Le Gall M, Viñals F, Gothié E, Roux D, Pagès 
G, Pouysségur J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Signaling, Developmental Biology, and Cancer Research, CNRS UMR
6543, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, 06189 Nice, France.

Angiogenesis is associated with a number of pathological situations. In this
study, we have focused our attention on the role of p42/p44 MAP
(mitogen-activated protein) kinases and hypoxia in the control of angiogenesis.
We demonstrate that p42/p44 MAP kinases play a pivotal role in angiogenesis by
exerting a determinant action at three levels: i) persistent activation of
p42/p44 MAP kinases abrogates apoptosis; ii) p42/p44 MAP kinase activity is
critical for controlling proliferation and growth arrest of confluent endothelial
cells; and iii) p42/p44 MAP kinases promote VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor) expression by activating its transcription via recruitment of the
AP-2/Sp1 (activator protein-2) complex on the proximal region (-88/-66) of the
VEGF promoter and by direct phosphorylation of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 alpha
(HIF-1 alpha). HIF-1 alpha plays a crucial role in the control of HIF-1 activity,
which mediates hypoxia-induced VEGF expression. We show that oxygen-regulated
HIF-1 alpha protein levels are not affected by intracellular localization
(nucleus versus cytoplasm). Finally, we propose a model which suggests an
autoregulatory feedback mechanism controlling HIF-1 alpha and therefore
HIF-1-dependent gene expression.

PMID: 11007955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 22;275(51):40511-6.

Transcriptional activation of the human hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase
gene in megakaryoblastic cells. Roles of the oct-1 element in the 5'-flanking
region and the AP-2 element in the untranslated exon 1.

Fujimori K(1), Kanaoka Y, Sakaguchi Y, Urade Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology and the Core Research for
Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Science and Technology Corporation,
Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan.

The human hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase (H-PGDS) gene is highly
expressed in human megakaryoblastic cells, in which phorbol ester induces its
expression. We characterized the promoter activity of the 5'-flanking region and 
the untranslated exon 1 (-1044 to +290) of the human H-PGDS gene in human
megakaryoblastic Dami cells. Transient expression analysis using the luciferase
reporter gene revealed that the 5'-flanking region and the untranslated exon 1
were sufficient for efficient expression of the H-PGDS gene in Dami cells, but
not in monocytic U937 cells. Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis of the Oct-1 
element in the 5'-flanking region decreased the promoter activity by
approximately 30% compared with that of the entire region from -1044 to +290. An 
electrophoretic mobility shift assay demonstrated that Oct-1 specifically bound
to the promoter region. Interestingly, even only untranslated exon 1 (+1 to +290)
showed approximately 60% of the promoter activity of the entire region from -1044
to +290. Site-directed mutagenesis of the AP-2 element within the untranslated
exon 1 abolished the basal promoter activity as well as its phorbol
ester-mediated up-regulation. In AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells, the H-PGDS promoter 
activity was enhanced by coexpression with AP-2alpha. These findings indicate
that the Oct-1 element in the 5'-flanking region acts as a positive cis-acting
element and that the AP-2 element in the untranslated exon 1 is crucial for both 
basal and phorbol ester-mediated up-regulation of human H-PGDS gene expression in
megakaryoblastic Dami cells.

PMID: 10998423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Neurochem. 2000 Oct;75(4):1408-18.

Tau promoter confers neuronal specificity and binds Sp1 and AP-2.

Heicklen-Klein A(1), Ginzburg I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

Tau, a microtubule-associated protein, is encoded by a single gene, whose
expression is primarily neuronal. In this work, we defined an 80-bp region of the
tau promoter that confers tau protein with neuronal expression. This fragment
works in conjunction with an endogenous initiation region to activate neuronal
precursor-specific transcription of the tau promoter and works independently of
this initiation region to confer nerve growth factor inducibility. Furthermore,
this 80-bp fragment binds both Sp1 and AP-2 proteins. DNase I foot-print analysis
revealed a third protein binding region at the center of this 80-bp fragment in
neuronal cells. Mutation within any of these three protein binding sites
decreases transcriptional activation of the tau gene. Comprehension of the
interactions that occur between cis- and trans-regulatory elements of the tau
promoter is important to understand the regulation of tau expression during
normal development and changes that may occur in many cases of dementia,
including Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 10987820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Neurosci Lett. 2000 Sep 22;291(3):204-6.

The genotype of human transcription factor AP-2beta is associated with platelet
monoamine oxidase B activity.

Damberg M(1), Garpenstrand H, Berggârd C, Asberg M, Hallman J, Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Platelet monoamine oxidase B (MAO; EC 1.4.3.4.) activity is stable in the
individual and is mainly genetically regulated. Levels of MAO-B in platelets have
repeatedly been shown to be associated with personality traits. We have recently 
also demonstrated an association between the genotype of AP-2beta to a variety of
personality traits as well as binge-eating disorder. In the present study we have
analysed blood samples from 158 males and 64 females with regard to platelet MAO 
activity and genotype of transcription factor AP-2beta. In both sexes homozygotes
for the long allele [CAAA](5) were significantly associated with low platelet MAO
activity P<0.0001 (males) and P=0.0158 (females). This study represents a novel
approach to increase the understanding about the molecular mechanisms for how the
MAOB gene is regulated in blood cells and how this regulation is linked to
personality traits.

PMID: 10984642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39579-88.

Energetic and functional contribution of residues in the core binding factor beta
(CBFbeta ) subunit to heterodimerization with CBFalpha.

Tang YY(1), Shi J, Zhang L, Davis A, Bravo J, Warren AJ, Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA. Yen-Yee.Tang@dartmouth.edu

Core-binding factors (CBFs) are a small family of heterodimeric transcription
factors that play critical roles in several developmental pathways, including
hematopoiesis and bone development. Mutations in CBF genes are found in leukemias
and bone disorders. CBFs consist of a DNA-binding CBFalpha subunit (Runx1, Runx2,
or Runx3) and a non-DNA-binding CBFbeta subunit. CBFalpha binds DNA in a
sequence-specific manner, whereas CBFbeta enhances DNA binding by CBFalpha.
Recent structural analyses of the DNA-binding Runt domain of CBFalpha and the
CBFbeta subunit identified the heterodimerization surfaces on each subunit. Here 
we identify amino acids in CBFbeta that mediate binding to CBFalpha. We determine
the energy contributed by each of these amino acids to heterodimerization and the
importance of these residues for in vivo function. These data refine the
structural analyses and further support the hypothesis that CBFbeta enhances DNA 
binding by inducing a conformational change in the Runt domain.

PMID: 10984496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Gene. 2000 Sep 5;255(1):93-104.

Genomic organization and promoter characterization of the rat cyclin B1 gene.

Trembley JH(1), Chen Z, Rodrigues CM, Kren BT, Steer CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Medical School, Box 36 UMHC,
420 Delaware St. S.E., 55455, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Cyclin B1 is a key regulatory protein involved in cellular mitosis. We have
cloned 1.8kb of DNA sequence upstream of the rat cyclin B1 gene translation start
site from Rattus norvegicus liver genomic DNA and a commercial rat testis genomic
library. The mRNA transcription start point (tsp) was determined by primer
extension and mRNA end ligation followed by RT-PCR across the ligated 3' and 5'
ends. An authentic tsp was confirmed approximately 100bp upstream of the
translation start site. A second potential tsp was also detected approximately
32bp downstream from the first. RT-PCR analysis of rat liver poly(A)(+) RNA using
5'-derived oligonucleotide primers indicated that the 5' end sequence was present
in both the 1.6 and 2. 4kb rat liver cyclin B1 mRNA species. Like many other
cyclin promoters, there was no apparent TATA box upstream of the transcription
initiation sites. However, computer analysis of the promoter region identified a 
group of consensus transcription factor binding sites, some of which are also
reported in other cyclin promoters. These include those for p53, p21, Ap-1, Ap-2,
Ets-1, CAATT, E-Box and Yi. We also performed luciferase reporter assays using a 
set of promoter deletion constructs in human HuH-7 hepatoma and HeLa carcinoma
cell lines. Our results suggest that an E-Box and/or CCAAT binding sites are
important for transcription, and that there may be negative regulatory elements
present between 1800 and 1100bp upstream of the translation start site.

PMID: 10974569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Gene. 2000 Sep 5;255(1):15-24.

Characterization of the human NTAK gene structure and distribution of the
isoforms for rat NTAK mRNA.

Yamada K(1), Ichino N, Nishii K, Sawada H, Higashiyama S, Ishiguro H, Nagatsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita Health University, Aichi
470-1192, Toyoake, Japan.

NTAK (neural- and thymus-derived activator for the ErbB kinase, neuregulin-2) is 
a novel member of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) family. We have isolated and 
characterized the human NTAK gene, comprising 12 exons spanning in excess of 55
kilobases (kb). The 7. 0kb long mRNA of the human NTAK gene was expressed in the 
human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cell line with two alternative isoforms detected.
Furthermore, six isoforms have been identified from rat brain and PC-12 cells.
Although the alpha isoform of the NTAK gene was found to be expressed in all
tissues including brain, the beta isoform was expressed only in rat brain
tissues. Potential regulatory regions included consensus binding sites for AP-2, 
TF-IIIA, Sp-1, and YY-1 located in the 5'-flanking region of the NTAK gene.

PMID: 10974560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Anat Rec. 2000 Sep 1;260(1):106-9.

Ectodermal markers delineate the neural fold interface during avian neurulation.

Lawson A(1), Colas JF, Schoenwolf GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

The formation and morphogenesis of the neural folds are important processes
underlying neurulation. We showed previously that these processes comprise four
key events in avian embryos: epithelial ridging, kinking, delamination, and
apposition. Collectively, these events establish the paired, bilaminar neural
folds, which fuse in the dorsal midline during late neurulation to close the
neural groove and to establish the neural tube. Here, we use an antisense
riboprobe for a new gene called Plato, as well as an antibody for a previously
cloned transcription factor, AP-2, as markers to identify critical subpopulations
of ectodermal cells during the formation and morphogenesis of the avian neural
folds. Plato antisense riboprobe marks the cranial neural ectoderm and
premigratory cranial neural crest cells, whereas AP-2 antibody marks the
epidermal ectoderm and the early migratory neural crest. We show that
subpopulations of ectodermal cells at the forebrain and midbrain levels undergo
considerable rearrangement within the neural fold transition zone, which
redistributes incipient neural crest cells from the neural ectodermal side of the
forming neural fold interface to the epidermal ectodermal side. Additionally, we 
show that Plato and AP-2 provide useful markers for delineating the incipient
neural fold interface.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10967542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Mol Biol. 2000 Aug 25;301(4):807-16.

Identification of amino acid residues of transcription factor AP-2 involved in
DNA binding.

García MA(1), Campillos M, Ogueta S, Valdivieso F, Vázquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, 28049, Spain.

AP-2 is a cell-type specific, developmentally regulated transcription factor
which has been described as a critical regulator of gene expression during
vertebrate development and embryogenesis. Although the overall domains of this
factor necessary for their activity have been identified, the exact identity of
AP-2 amino acid residues responsible for its interaction with the DNA structure
has not yet been described. Here, we describe the identification of a region of
AP-2 which was protected by an oligonucleotide probe containing its binding site 
from trypsin digestion, monitored by peptide mapping by MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry. Furthermore, we analyzed the relative in vitro DNA-binding
activity, the stimulatory potency on the AP-2-dependent APOE promoter, as well as
the ability to inhibit the effect of the wild-type protein of each one of a set
of single-site substitution AP-2 mutants spanning the identified region. Taken
together, our data clearly demonstrate that the region between amino acid
residues 252-260 of AP-2 is essential for its DNA-binding activity. Particularly,
the individual substitution in any of the residues 253, 254, 255, 257 or 260 is
sufficient for completely abolishing the interaction with DNA and the stimulation
of APOE promoter activity. These results indicate a crucial role of this region
in the formation of an active DNA-binding domain and strongly suggest that these 
residues provide direct contacts with the DNA structure at the AP-2 binding site.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10966787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Jul 25;165(1-2):17-24.

Role of Ets2 in cyclic AMP regulation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta
promoter.

Johnson W(1), Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Tarry Building 15-709, 303 East Chicago Avenue,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Activation of the human chorionic gonadotropin beta (hCGbeta) by the protein
kinase A (PKA) pathway has been shown to occur through an activating protein-2
(AP-2)-dependent mechanism. However, in HepG2 cells, which are deficient in AP-2,
the PKA catalytic subunit is still able to stimulate the hCGbeta promoter. Ets2
plays a critical role in placental development as revealed by placental
abnormalities in Ets2 knockout mice. Transfection of Ets2 into JEG-3 placental
cells causes a slight, but reproducible, increase in hCGbeta promoter basal
activity. However, cotransfection with the PKA catalytic subunit causes a strong 
synergistic increase in hCGbeta promoter activity. Ets2 synergistic activation of
the hCGbeta promoter is specific for the PKA pathway, as activation of the ras
pathway, which also acts through Ets2, does not activate the hCGbeta promoter.
c-Jun-mediated repression of hCGbeta is inhibited by Ets2 cotransfection,
indicating that protein-protein interactions may be responsible for Ets2
activation of the hCGbeta promoter.

PMID: 10940479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34672-80.

Identification of the elements regulating the expression of the cell adhesion
molecule MCAM/MUC18. Loss of AP-2 is not required for MCAM expression in melanoma
cell lines.

Mintz-Weber CS(1), Johnson JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Immunology, University of Munich, Munich 80336, Germany.

The cell adhesion molecule melonoma cell adhesion molecule (MCAM)/MUC18/CD146 is 
specifically up-regulated on tumors of neuroectodermal origin and in animal
models confers metastatic capacity to human melanoma cells. To identify critical 
regions regulating MCAM expression in melanomas, 1 kilobase of the MCAM 5' region
was analyzed for promoter activity and transcription factor binding in 1 glioma, 
1 carcinoma, and 4 melanoma cell lines. The minimal MCAM promoter (-106/+22 base 
pair (bp)) consists of 4 Sp-1 sites, two AP-2 elements, one cAMP responsive
element, and the initiator surrounding the transcriptional start site. Analysis
of mutated constructs indicated that the cAMP-responsive element is a major
transcriptional activator in the majority of cell lines. Site-directed
mutagenesis revealed that, in AP-2 expressing cells, the AP-2 site within the
core promoter (-23 bp) has an inhibitory influence on MCAM expression while the
AP-2 sites at -131 and -302 bp are activating. Functional AP-2 was observed in
both MCAM positive and MCAM negative melanoma cell lines indicating that
expression of MCAM does not require loss of this transcription factor.
Furthermore, all MCAM constructs were strongly expressed in MCAM negative as well
as MCAM positive cells, indicating that the expression of this gene is not
controlled solely by the presence of transactivating factors binding to the
investigated region.

PMID: 10938273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Endocrinology. 2000 Aug;141(8):2829-36.

Identification of a hormone-responsive promoter immediately upstream of exon 1c
in the human vitamin D receptor gene.

Byrne IM(1), Flanagan L, Tenniswood MP, Welsh J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Notre Dame, Indiana 46556,
USA.

To gain insight into the molecular regulation of the human vitamin D3 receptor
(hVDR), we have cloned and sequenced the 5' flanking region of exon 1c and
examined promoter activity of this region in breast cancer cells. Sequence
analysis of the first 1300 bp upstream of exon 1c reveals several characteristics
of a class II promoter, including GC-rich regions and the presence of a TATA box 
at -29 bp. Putative transcription factor binding sites identified in this
potential hVDR promoter include AP-2, Sp-1, and glucocorticoid response elements.
No consensus vitamin D3 (VDRE) or estrogen (ERE) responsive elements were
identified in the promoter sequence. Primer extension analysis performed with a
primer specific for exon 1c confirms that transcription initiated in the 5'
flanking region of exon 1c occurs in MCF-7 cells. Transient transfection of MCF-7
cells with this putative promoter region cloned into the pRLnull luciferase
reporter vector generates significant reporter gene activity that is enhanced by 
treatment with forskolin, retinoic acid, and 17beta-estradiol. The enhancement of
exon 1c promoter activity by 17beta-estradiol is blocked by the selective
estrogen response modifier (SERM) tamoxifen and is not observed in estrogen
receptor-negative breast cancer cells. In summary, we have cloned and
characterized a TATA containing promoter upstream of exon 1c of the hVDR and
provide evidence that this region represents a hormonally regulated hVDR
promoter.

PMID: 10919269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 22;275(38):29701-8.

Characterization of the activation domains of AP-2 family transcription factors.

Wankhade S(1), Yu Y, Weinberg J, Tainsky MA, Kannan P.

Author information: 
(1)Rammelkamp Center for Education and Research, MetroHealth Campus, Case Western
Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44109, USA.

Despite sequence variation, all AP-2 isotypes are capable of activating
transcription, which indicates a functional conservation. We used this property
to gain a unique insight into the structure and function of the activation motifs
of AP-2 family transcription factors. We have precisely localized the activation 
motif of human AP-2 alpha to amino acids 52-108. Our experiments indicate that
similar sequence of amino acids in all AP-2 isotypes except Drosophila AP-2 alpha
harbor their activation motifs. Within this sequence, fewer than 36 residues are 
critical for transcription activation. Our comparison studies and site-directed
mutagenic analyses show that these critical amino acids are strategically placed 
within this sequence. These residues are interspersed with nonessential and
influential residues that vary in composition and length, indicating a structural
flexibility. The Drosophila AP-2 alpha has its partly conserved activation motif 
in an extended region about twice the length of other AP-2 isotypes. Our results 
reveal essential elements of the amino acid composition of activators in general 
and shed new light on the mechanism of transcription activation.

PMID: 10899156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Anticancer Drugs. 2000 Apr;11(4):225-36.

Cisplatin resistance and oncogenes--a review.

Dempke W(1), Voigt W, Grothey A, Hill BT, Schmoll HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Martin-Luther-University, Halle/Saale,
Germany. wolfram.dempke@medizin.uni-halle.de

Cisplatin is among the most widely used broadly active cytotoxic anticancer
drugs; however, its clinical efficacy is often limited by primary or the
development of secondary resistance. Several mechanisms have been implicated in
cisplatin resistance, including reduced drug uptake, increased cellular
thiol/folate levels and increased DNA repair. More recently, additional pathways 
have been characterized indicating that altered expression of oncogenes that
subsequently limit the formation of cisplatin-DNA adducts and activate
anti-apoptotic pathways may also contribute to the resistance phenotype. Several 
lines of evidence suggest that expression of ras oncogenes can confer resistance 
to cisplatin by reducing drug uptake and increasing DNA repair; however, this is 
not a uniform finding. Tumor cells, in contrast to normal cells, respond to
cisplatin exposure with transient gene expression to protect or repair their
chromosomes. The c-fos/AP-1 complex, a master switch for turning on other genes
in response to DNA-damaging agents, has been shown to play a major role in
cisplatin resistance. In addition, AP-2 transcription factors, modulated by
protein kinase A, are also implicated in cisplatin resistance by regulating genes
encoding for DNA polymerase beta and metallothionines. Furthermore, considerable 
evidence indicates that mutated p53 plays a significant role in the development
of cisplatin resistance since several genes implicated in drug resistance and
apoptosis (e.g. mismatch repair, bcl-2, high mobility group proteins, DNA
polymerases alpha and beta, PCNA, and insulin-like growth factor) are known to be
regulated by the p53 oncoprotein. Improved understanding of molecular factors for
the development of cisplatin resistance may allow the prediction of clinical
response to cisplatin-based treatment. Furthermore, the identification of
oncogenes involved in cisplatin resistance has already led to in vitro approaches
which successfully inactivated these genes using ribozymes or antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides, thus restoring cisplatin sensitivity. It is conceivable
that these strategies, once transferred to a clinical setting, may have the
potential to enhance the efficacy of cisplatin against a great variety of
malignancies and thus more fully exploit the antineoplastic and curative
potential of this drug.

PMID: 10898536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Jul;115(1):30-6.

Ultraviolet-A-induced transactivation of the vascular endothelial growth factor
gene in HaCaT keratinocytes is conveyed by activator protein-2 transcription
factor.

Gille J(1), Reisinger K, Asbe-Vollkopf A, Hardt-Weinelt K, Kaufmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum der Dermatologie, Klinikum der J. W. Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany. Gille@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Ultraviolet-A radiation represents a significant proportion of the ultraviolet
solar spectrum that was recently shown to affect gene expression of epidermal
keratinocytes by molecular mechanisms distinct from ultraviolet-B radiation. As
ultraviolet-A either alone or in combination with ultraviolet-B may contribute to
photocarcinogenesis, we aimed to explore the biologic effects of ultraviolet-A
radiation on vascular endothelial growth factor gene expression by the
immortalized keratinocyte cell line HaCaT. As keratinocyte-derived vascular
endothelial growth factor not only provides the major cutaneous angiogenic
activity but may also augment the malignant phenotype of tumor cells, we studied 
the molecular mechanisms of ultraviolet-A-induced vascular endothelial growth
factor expression in HaCaT cells, serving as a transformed preneoplastic
epithelial cell line. Whereas ultraviolet-B-mediated vascular endothelial growth 
factor expression has been previously indicated to be conveyed by indirect
mechanisms, ultraviolet-A rapidly induced vascular endothelial growth factor mRNA
expression in a fashion comparable to that seen with the transforming growth
factor alpha, representing a direct and potent activator of vascular endothelial 
growth factor gene transcription. Ultraviolet-A was found to readily induce
vascular endothelial growth factor promoter-based reporter gene constructs
through a consensus element for activator protein-2 transcription factor. The
critical role of activator protein-2 was substantiated by demonstration of
ultraviolet-A-induced activator-protein-2-dependent nuclear DNA binding activity 
to this site, and by inhibition of ultraviolet-A-mediated vascular endothelial
growth factor gene transcription through insertion of a critical mutation within 
the activator protein-2 sequence. Together, our data further elucidate
photobiologic aspects of ultraviolet-A-induced gene expression by characterizing 
mechanisms of vascular endothelial growth factor upregulation at the molecular
level. In addition, our experiments support the concept of a more general
importance of activator protein-2 in ultra- violet-A-mediated responses by
keratinocytes or keratinocyte-derived cell lines.

PMID: 10886504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 15;275(37):28507-12.

Polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein 2/core binding factor/acute myeloid
leukemia factors contribute to the cell type-specific activity of the CD11a
integrin gene promoter.

Puig-Kröger A(1), López-Rodriguez C, Relloso M, Sánchez-Elsner T, Nueda A, Muñoz 
E, Bernabéu C, Corbi AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientificas, Madrid 28006, Spain.

The CD11a/CD18 leukocyte integrin (LFA-1; also known as alphaL/beta2) mediates
leukocyte transendothelial migration during immune and inflammatory responses and
participates in lymphoma metastasis. CD11a/CD18 leukocyte-restricted expression
is controlled by the CD11a gene promoter, which confers tissue-specific
expression to reporter genes in vitro and in vivo. DNase I protection analysis of
the CD11a proximal gene promoter revealed DNA-protein interactions centered at
position -110 (CD11a-110). Disruption of CD11a-110 reduced CD11a promoter
activity in a cell type-specific manner, as it reduced its activity by 70% in
Jurkat lymphoid cells, whereas the effect was considerably lower in K562 and
HepG2 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed evidence of cell
type-specific differences in CD11a-110 binding and indicated its specific
recognition by members of the polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein 2/core
binding factor (CBF)/acute myeloid leukemia (AML) family of transcription
factors. AML1B/CBFbeta transactivated the CD11a promoter, with
AML1B/CBFbeta-mediated transactivation being completely dependent on the
integrity of the CD11a-110 element. Therefore, CBF/AML factors play a role in the
cell type-restricted transcription of the CD11a integrin gene through recognition
of CD11a-110. The involvement of CBF/AML factors in CD11a expression raises the
possibility that CD11a/CD18 expression might be deregulated in acute myeloid and 
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemias, thus contributing to their altered
adhesion and metastatic potential.

PMID: 10882733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2000 May;64(5):1084-7.

Identification of the UV-responsive sequence in the human tissue plasminogen
activator gene.

Fujiwara J(1), Fujii M, Shimoda M, Ayusawa D.

Author information: 
(1)AISIN Cosmos R&D CO., Ltd., Kazusa Incubation Center, Yana Kisarazu, Chiba,
Japan.

Functional analysis of regulatory elements in the human tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA) gene showed that its promoter (-119/+169) is activated by UV
irradiation in HeLa cells. We demonstrated here that the AP-2 like CCCCACCC
sequence is involved in the UV-mediated activation and Sp1 binds to the sequence.

PMID: 10879489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 29;275(39):30387-93.

Physiological control of smooth muscle-specific gene expression through regulated
nuclear translocation of serum response factor.

Camoretti-Mercado B(1), Liu HW, Halayko AJ, Forsythe SM, Kyle JW, Li B, Fu Y,
McConville J, Kogut P, Vieira JE, Patel NM, Hershenson MB, Fuchs E, Sinha S,
Miano JM, Parmacek MS, Burkhardt JK, Solway J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

Prolonged serum deprivation induces a structurally and functionally contractile
phenotype in about 1/6 of cultured airway myocytes, which exhibit morphological
elongation and accumulate abundant contractile apparatus-associated proteins. We 
tested the hypothesis that transcriptional activation of genes encoding these
proteins accounts for their accumulation during this phenotypic transition by
measuring the transcriptional activities of the murine SM22 and human smooth
muscle myosin heavy chain promoters during transient transfection in
subconfluent, serum fed or 7 day serum-deprived cultured canine tracheal smooth
muscle cells. Contrary to our expectation, SM22 and smooth muscle myosin heavy
chain promoter activities (but not viral murine sarcoma virus-long terminal
repeat promoter activity) were decreased in long term serum-deprived myocytes by 
at least 8-fold. Because serum response factor (SRF) is a required
transcriptional activator of these and other smooth muscle-specific promoters, we
evaluated the expression and function of SRF in subconfluent and long term
serum-deprived cells. Whole cell SRF mRNA and protein were maintained at high
levels in serum-deprived myocytes, but SRF transcription-promoting activity,
nuclear SRF binding to consensus CArG sequences, and nuclear SRF protein were
reduced. Furthermore, immunocytochemistry revealed extranuclear redistribution of
SRF in serum-deprived myocytes; nuclear localization of SRF was restored after
serum refeeding. These results uncover a novel mechanism for physiological
control of smooth muscle-specific gene expression through extranuclear
redistribution of SRF and consequent down-regulation of its
transcription-promoting activity.

PMID: 10866994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Br J Cancer. 2000 Jun;82(12):2015-21.

Failure in post-transcriptional processing is a possible inactivation mechanism
of AP-2alpha in cutaneous melanoma.

Karjalainen JM(1), Kellokoski JK, Mannermaa AJ, Kujala HE, Moisio KI, Mitchell
PJ, Eskelinen MJ, Alhava EM, Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
Finland.

The loss of transcription factor AP-2alpha expression has been shown to associate
with tumourigenicity of melanoma cell lines and poor prognosis in primary
cutaneous melanoma. Altogether these findings suggest that the gene encoding
AP-2alpha (TFAP2A) acts as a tumour suppressor in melanoma. To learn more of
AP-2alpha's down-regulation mechanisms, we compared the immunohistochemical
AP-2alpha protein expression patterns with the corresponding mRNA expression
detected by in situ hybridization in 52 primary melanomas. Of the 25 samples with
AP-2alpha protein negative areas, 16 (64%) expressed mRNA throughout the
consecutive section. Nine specimens (36%) contained equally mRNA- and
protein-negative areas, suggesting that the loss of AP-2alpha protein associated 
with lack of the mRNA transcript. The highly AP-2alpha protein-positive tumours
(n = 27) were concordantly mRNA positive in 25 (92.6%) cases. Thirteen primary
tumours were further analysed using microsatellite markers D6S470 and D6S263 for 
loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of a locus harbouring TFAP2A. LOHs or chromosome 6
monosomy were found in four out of five (80%) informative AP-2alpha mRNA- and
protein-negative tumour areas, but also within five out of 13 (38%) informative
AP-2alpha mRNA-positive tumour areas. This chromosome region is thus suggestive
of harbouring a putative tumour suppressor gene of cutaneous melanoma, but this
referring specifically to TFAP2A could not be completely verified in this
analysis. We conclude that a failure in post-transcriptional processing of
AP-2alpha is a possible inactivation mechanism of AP-2alpha in cutaneous
melanoma.

PMCID: PMC2363258
PMID: 10864211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Br J Cancer. 2000 Jun;82(12):1974-83.

Expression of transcription factor AP-2alpha predicts survival in epithelial
ovarian cancer.

Anttila MA(1), Kellokoski JK, Moisio KI, Mitchell PJ, Saarikoski S, Syrjänen K,
Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Kupio and Kupio
University Hospital, Finland.

The 52-kDa activator protein (AP)-2 is a DNA-binding transcription factor which
has been reported to have growth inhibitory effects in cancer cell lines and in
human tumours. In this study the expression of AP-2alpha was analysed in 303
epithelial ovarian carcinomas by immunohistochemistry (IHC) with a polyclonal
AP-2alpha antibody and its mRNA status was determined by in situ hybridization
(ISH) and reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The
immunohistochemical expression of AP-2alpha was correlated with
clinicopathological variables, p21/WAF1 protein expression and survival. In
normal ovaries, epithelial cells expressed AP-2alpha protein only in the
cytoplasm. In carcinomas nuclear AP-2alpha expression was observed in 28% of the 
cases although cytoplasmic expression was more common (51%). The expression of
AP-2alpha varied according to the histological subtype and differentiation.
AP-2alpha and p21/WAF1 expressions did not correlate with each other. Both in
univariate (P = 0.002) and multivariate analyses (relative risks (RR) 1.6, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.13-2.18, P= 0.007) the high cytoplasmic AP-2alpha
expression favoured the overall survival. In contrast, the nuclear AP-2alpha
expression combined with low cytoplasmic expression increased the risk of dying
of ovarian cancer (RR = 2.10, 95% CI 1.13-3.83, P= 0.018). The shift in the
expression pattern of AP-2alpha (nuclear vs cytoplasmic) in carcinomas points out
to the possibility that this transcription factor may be used by oncogenes in
certain histological subtypes. Based on the mRNA analyses, the incomplete
expression and translation of AP-2alpha in ovarian cancer may be due to
post-transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC2363243
PMID: 10864206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol Res Commun. 2000 Mar;3(3):181-92.

Rat beta 1-adrenergic receptor regulatory region containing consensus AP-2
elements recognizes novel transactivator proteins.

Kirigiti P(1), Yang YF, Li X, Li B, Midson CN, Machida CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Oregon Regional Primate Research Center, Beaverton, 
Oregon, 97006, USA.

beta 1-Adrenergic receptors (beta1-ARs) serve as important regulators of central 
nervous system (CNS)-mediated behavior and several neural functions, including
mood, memory, neuroendocrine control, and stimulation of autonomic function.
Using beta 1-AR-luciferase reporter recombinants, we have previously determined
that important beta 1-AR genetic elements controlling expression within the C6
glioma cell line are contained within the region -396 to -299, relative to the
translational start site. By conducting progressive internal deletions of the rat
beta 1-AR 5' flanking region and with the use of beta 1-AR-luciferase
recombinants, we have verified that this region contains the primary beta 1-AR
promoter and/or major regulatory elements. To begin the identification of protein
factors involved in beta 1-AR transcriptional activity conferred by this beta
1-AR region and flanking sequences, we conducted electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using defined beta 1-AR DNA subregion probes. One probe (GS-1),
encompassing the region -396 to -367, was found to produce two major and two
minor mobility shift complexes when bound to nuclear extracts from the beta 1-AR 
expresser C6 cell line. UV-crosslinking of DNA-protein complexes, coupled with
DNase I digestion, indicated that this beta 1-AR region interacts with one major 
protein of approximately 117 kDa molecular weight and additional minor proteins. 
GS-1 DNA-protein complexes were observed using beta 1-AR expresser tissues in the
CNS, including cortex, hippocampus, and olfactory bulb. No DNA-protein complexes 
were observed when using nuclear extracts from beta 1-AR nonexpresser tissues; in
some cases, using L6 cells, previously characterized to express little or no
beta1-ARs, a reduction in intensities of the DNA-protein complexes was observed. 
Competition experiments indicate that nuclear protein binds to one of two
subregions within the GS-1 sequence that contain AP-2-like consensus elements.
Recombinant AP-2 protein will bind to both the beta 1-AR GS-1 promoter fragment
and commercially available AP-2 consensus element control probes. Interestingly, 
using antibody supershift and immunoblotting experiments, no supershifts were
observed and the major 117-kDa protein was not immunoreactive to antibodies
recognizing either AP-2 alpha or AP-2 beta. These results support our contention 
that this beta 1-AR regulatory region contains AP-2 consensus elements that
recognize novel transactivator proteins.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10860867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 16;272(3):882-6.

The repressive function of AP2 transcription factor on the hepatocyte growth
factor gene promoter.

Jiang JG(1), DeFrances MC, Machen J, Johnson C, Zarnegar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine, PA
15261, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor is an important multifunctional growth factor whose gene
expression is tightly regulated at the transcriptional level. Previous studies
from our laboratory have shown that several cis-acting elements are present in
the promoter and proximal promoter region of the HGF gene. In this study, we have
uncovered that AP2 transcription factor specifically binds to a regulatory site
located at -230 to -260 in the upstream region of the HGF gene promoter. Gelshift
and supershift assays confirmed that AP2 has high binding affinity to this
region. Functional studies which introduced a mutation in the AP2 core binding
region as well as cotransfection experiments using an AP2 expression vector
revealed that AP2 exerts a repressive role on the HGF gene promoter activity. The
AP2 binding site overlaps with those of NF1 and USF/E-box binding sites which we 
have recently shown to constitute a composite multifunctional docking site for
the members of the NF1 and USF transcription factor families. An inverse
correlation was noted between AP2 binding activity to this composite site and HGF
gene expression in different cell lines. Therefore, AP2-mediated repression of
the HGF gene promoter may be part of the molecular mechanism responsible for
regulating HGF expression.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10860846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. EMBO J. 2000 Jun 15;19(12):3004-15.

Structural basis for the heterodimeric interaction between the acute
leukaemia-associated transcription factors AML1 and CBFbeta.

Warren AJ(1), Bravo J, Williams RL, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK.
ajw@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Mutations in the genes encoding the interacting proteins AML1 and CBFbeta are the
most common genetic abnormalities in acute leukaemia, and congenital mutations in
the related AML3 gene are associated with disorders of osteogenesis. Furthermore,
the interaction of AML1 with CBFbeta is essential for haematopoiesis. We report
the 2.6 A resolution crystal structure of the complex between the AML1 Runt
domain and CBFbeta, which represents a paradigm for the mode of interaction of
this highly conserved family of transcription factors. The structure demonstrates
that point mutations associated with cleidocranial dysplasia map to the conserved
heterodimer interface, suggesting a role for CBFbeta in osteogenesis, and reveals
a potential protein interaction platform composed of conserved negatively charged
residues on the surface of CBFbeta.

PMCID: PMC203359
PMID: 10856244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Eur J Biochem. 2000 Jun;267(12):3559-66.

Transcriptional control of adrenomedullin induction by phorbol ester in human
monocytic leukemia cells.

Nakayama M(1), Takahashi K, Kitamuro T, Murakami O, Shirato K, Shibahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

Adrenomedullin is a potent vasodilator peptide that was originally identified
from human pheochromocytoma. In this study, we investigated the induction of
adrenomedullin gene expression in THP-1 acute monocytic leukemia cells during
differentiation into macrophage-like cells by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA), and identified a cis-regulatory
region of the human adrenomedullin gene responsible for TPA-induced
adrenomedullin expression. Upon treatment with TPA (100 ng x mL(-1)) for 24 h,
immunoreactive adrenomedullin concentrations in the culture medium and
adrenomedullin mRNA levels were increased more than 10-fold, concomitant with the
differentiation of THP-1 cells into macrophage-like cells. Actinomycin D
abolished the TPA-induced adrenomedullin expression, indicating that the
induction of ADM gene expression by TPA was regulated at the transcriptional
level. Transient transfection assay revealed that a cis-acting region (positions 
-70 to -30) of human adrenomedullin gene was necessary for TPA-induced reporter
gene expression. This region contains multiple copies of activator protein 2
(AP-2) binding sites, which are bound by purified AP-2 protein, as judged by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The binding activity to this region was
undetectable in nuclear extracts prepared from untreated THP-1 cells, but was
increased in extracts prepared from TPA-treated cells. The protein binding was
abolished by unlabeled oligonucleotides containing the AP-2 consensus sequence.
These results indicate that the region (-70 to -30) of the human ADM gene
containing multiple AP-2 binding sites is responsible for TPA-induced
adrenomedullin expression in THP-1 cells.

PMID: 10848972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Jun;14(6):837-47.

Molecular cloning, expression, and characterization of rat homolog of human
AP-2alpha that stimulates neuropeptide Y transcription activity in response to
nerve growth factor.

Li BS(1), Kramer PR, Zhao W, Ma W, Stenger DA, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, NINDS, National Institutes of Health Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-4130, USA.

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) plays an important role in the central regulation of
neuronal activity, endocrine and sexual behavior, and food intake. Although
transcription activity of the NPY gene in PC12 cells is regulated by a number of 
agents such as nerve growth factor (NGF), the mechanism responsible for the
NGF-elicited increase in the transcription of the NPY gene remains to be
explored. In this study, we isolated and characterized a nuclear protein that is 
bound to NGF-response elements (NGFRE) that lie between nucleotide -87 and -33 of
the rat NPY promoter gene. This nuclear protein is identical to the rat homolog
of human transcription factor AP-2alpha. We further demonstrated that rat AP-2a
promotes efficient NPY transcription activity in response to NGF. Finally, we
provide direct evidence that the mice lacking transcription factor AP-2alpha
exhibit reduced expression of NPY mRNA compared with wild-type mice, further
supporting the hypothesis that AP-2alpha is an important transcription factor in 
regulating NPY transcription activity.

PMID: 10847586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mech Dev. 2000 Jun;94(1-2):79-94.

Ectopic expression of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone and peripherin in the
respiratory epithelium of mice lacking transcription factor AP-2alpha.

Kramer PR(1), Guerrero G, Krishnamurthy R, Mitchell PJ, Wray S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology Section, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20895, USA.

The vertebrate transcription factor activator protein-2 (AP-2alpha) is involved
in craniofacial morphogenesis. In the nasal placode AP-2alpha expression
delineates presumptive respiratory epithelia from olfactory epithelia, with
AP-2alpha expression restricted to the anterior region of the respiratory
epithelium (absent from the olfactory epithelium) at later stages. To address the
role AP-2alpha plays in differentiation of cell groups in the nasal placode, the 
spatiotemporal expression pattern of four markers normally associated with
olfactory epithelial structures was analyzed in mice lacking AP-2alpha. These
markers were the intermediate filament protein peripherin, the neuropeptide
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH), the neural cell adhesion molecule
(NCAM) and the olfactory transcription factor Olf-1. Development of cells
expressing these markers was similar in both genotypes until embryonic day 12.5
(E12.5), indicating that the main olfactory epithelium and olfactory pit
formation was normal. At E13.5 in mutant mice, ectopic LHRH neurons and
peripherin axons were detected in respiratory epithelial areas, areas devoid of
Olf-1 and NCAM staining. Over the next few days, an increase in total nasal LHRH 
neurons occurred. The increase in nasal LHRH neurons could be accounted for by
LHRH neurons arising and migrating out of respiratory epithelial regions on
peripherin-positive fibers. These results indicate that AP-2alpha is not
essential for the separation of the olfactory and respiratory epithelium from the
nasal placode and is consistent with AP-2alpha preventing recapitulation of
developmental programs within the respiratory epithelium that lead to expression 
of LHRH and peripherin phenotypes.

PMID: 10842061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2000 Jun;22(6):714-21.

Mucoid Pseudomonas aeruginosa, TNF-alpha, and IL-1beta, but not IL-6, induce
human beta-defensin-2 in respiratory epithelia.

Harder J(1), Meyer-Hoffert U, Teran LM, Schwichtenberg L, Bartels J, Maune S,
Schröder JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Otolaryngology, University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany.

Cultured lung epithelial cells release antibacterial activity upon contact with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), which is impaired in cystic fibrosis (CF). In order 
to identify the factors responsible for killing PA by a biochemical approach, we 
purified antimicrobial activity from supernatants of the A549 lung epithelial
cell line, previously stimulated with PA bacteria, by subsequent high performance
liquid chromatography. NH(2)-terminal sequencing of a major bactericidal compound
revealed it to be identical with human beta-defensin-2 (hBD-2). A mucoid
phenotype of PA, but not two nonmucoid PA strains, high concentrations (> 10
microg/ml) of PA lipopolysaccharide, tumor necrosis factor alpha, and interleukin
(IL)-1beta, but not IL-6, dose-dependently induced hBD-2 messenger RNA in
cultured normal bronchial, tracheal, as well as normal and CF-derived nasal
epithelial cells. Genomic analysis of hBD-2 revealed a promoter region containing
several putative transcription factor binding sites, including nuclear factor
(NF) kappaB, activator protein (AP)-1, AP-2, and NF-IL-6, known to be involved in
the regulation of inflammatory responses. Thus, hBD-2 represents a major
inducible antimicrobial factor released by airway epithelial cells either on
contact with mucoid PA or by endogenously produced primary cytokines. Therefore, 
it might be important in lung infections caused by mucoid PA, including those
seen in patients with CF.

PMID: 10837369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27377-85.

The interferon- and differentiation-inducible p202a protein inhibits the
transcriptional activity of c-Myc by blocking its association with Max.

Wang H(1), Liu C, Lu Y, Chatterjee G, Ma XY, Eisenman RN, Lengyel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

p202a is a murine protein that is induced during the fusion of myoblasts to
myotubes and can also be induced by interferon. Even 2-3-fold overexpression of
p202a in cells retards proliferation. p202a was shown to modulate transcription
by binding, and inhibiting the activity of several transcription factors
including c-Fos, c-Jun, AP-2, E2F1, E2F4, NF-kappaB, MyoD, and myogenin. Here we 
report that p202a also bound the c-Myc protein in vitro and in vivo; the
C-terminal p202a b segment bound the C-terminal basic region
helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLHLZ) region of c-Myc. The transfection of a
p202a expression plasmid inhibited the c-Myc-dependent expression of reporter
plasmids in transient assays; moreover, overexpression of p202a in stable cell
lines decreased the endogenous levels of mRNAs whose expression is driven by
c-Myc. These effects of p202a are consistent with our finding that the binding of
p202a to c-Myc inhibited the binding of c-Myc to Max in vitro and in vivo. p202a 
also inhibited the c-Myc-induced anchorage-independent growth and apoptosis of
Rat-1 cells. The inhibition of c-Myc-dependent transcription, proliferation, and 
apoptosis by p202a is in line with the involvement of p202a in differentiation.

PMID: 10835425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Mol Psychiatry. 2000 Mar;5(2):220-4.

A polymorphic region in the human transcription factor AP-2beta gene is
associated with specific personality traits.

Damberg M(1), Garpenstrand H, Alfredsson J, Ekblom J, Forslund K, Rylander G,
Oreland L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Unit of Pharmacology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Transcription factor AP-2beta is implicated in playing an important role during
embryonic development of different parts of the brain, eg, midbrain, hindbrain,
spinal cord, dorsal and cranial root ganglia.1,2 The gene encoding AP-2beta
contains a polymorphic region which includes a tetranucleotide repeat of [CAAA]
four or five times, located in intron 2 between nucleotides 12593 and 12612.3
Since the midbrain contains structures important for variables such as mood and
personality, we have investigated if the AP-2beta genotype is associated with
personality traits estimated by the Karolinska Scales of Personality (KSP).
Identification of transcription factor genes as candidate genes in psychiatric
disorders is a novel approach to further elucidate the genetic factors that,
together with environmental factors, are involved in the expression of specific
psychiatric phenotypes. The AP-2beta genotype and KSP scores were determined for 
137 Caucasian volunteers (73 females and 64 males). The personality traits
muscular tension, guilt, somatic anxiety, psychastenia and indirect aggression
were significantly associated with the specific AP-2beta genotype, albeit with
significant difference between genders. Based on this result the human AP-2beta
gene seems to be an important candidate gene for personality disorders. Moreover,
the present results suggest that the structure of the intron 2 region of the
AP-2beta gene is one factor that contributes to development of the constitutional
component of specific personality traits.

PMID: 10822354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 2000 Jun;127(12):2751-61.

Analysis of cranial neural crest migratory pathways in axolotl using cell markers
and transplantation.

Epperlein H(1), Meulemans D, Bronner-Fraser M, Steinbeisser H, Selleck MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie, Techn.Universität, Fetscherstrasse 74, D-01307 Dresden,
Germany. mselleck@hsc.usc.edu.

We have examined the ability of normal and heterotopically transplanted neural
crest cells to migrate along cranial neural crest pathways in the axolotl using
focal DiI injections and in situ hybridization with the neural crest marker,
AP-2. DiI labeling demonstrates that cranial neural crest cells migrate as
distinct streams along prescribed pathways to populate the maxillary and
mandibular processes of the first branchial arch, the hyoid arch and gill arches 
1-4, following migratory pathways similar to those observed in other vertebrates.
Another neural crest marker, the transcription factor AP-2, is expressed by
premigratory neural crest cells within the neural folds and migrating neural
crest cells en route to and within the branchial arches. Rotations of the cranial
neural folds suggest that premigratory neural crest cells are not committed to a 
specific branchial arch fate, but can compensate when displaced short distances
from their targets by migrating to a new target arch. In contrast, when cells are
displaced far from their original location, they appear unable to respond
appropriately to their new milieu such that they fail to migrate or appear to
migrate randomly. When trunk neural folds are grafted heterotopically into the
head, trunk neural crest cells migrate in a highly disorganized fashion and fail 
to follow normal cranial neural crest pathways. Importantly, we find
incorporation of some trunk cells into branchial arch cartilage despite the
random nature of their migration. This is the first demonstration that trunk
neural crest cells can form cartilage when transplanted to the head. Our results 
indicate that, although cranial and trunk neural crest cells have inherent
differences in ability to recognize migratory pathways, trunk neural crest can
differentiate into cranial cartilage when given proper instructive cues.

PMID: 10821772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2000;26(1):75-83.

cis-elements required for expression of human protein C inhibitor gene in HepG2
cells and its androgen-dependent expression in rat reproductive organs.

Suzuki K(1), Hayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathobiology, Mie University School of Medicine,
Tsu-city, Japan. suzuki@doc.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

Protein C inhibitor (PCI) is a plasma serine protease inhibitor of activated
protein C, which is the main protease of the anticoagulant protein C pathway.
Human PCI is synthesized in the liver, kidney, and several reproductive organs
(testis, seminal vesicle, and prostate). In the present study, we characterized
cis-elements of the human PCI gene required for expression in the
hepatoma-derived cell line, HepG2 cells, and also evaluated rat PCI mRNA
expression, particularly on the effect of androgen in rat reproductive tissues.
On the PCI gene expression in HepG2 cells, transient expression assays using
several deletion mutants and site-directed mutants of the human PCI gene and gel 
mobility shift assays using several synthetic oligonucleotides showed that the
Spl-binding site (residues -302 to -294) and the upstream AP2-binding site
(residues -350 to -343) play roles as the promoter and the enhancer,
respectively. Both the A-activator-binding site (residues -422 to -414) and the
interferon-gamma response element (residues -164 to -157) serve as the silencer. 
In the study on PCI mRNA expression in the reproductive organs, we first cloned
rat PCI cDNA and then evaluated the effect of androgen on the PCI mRNA
expression. The isolated rat PCI cDNA contained a 1,218-bp coding region of a
406-amino acid precursor protein. The deduced amino acid sequence of rat PCI
showed an 85.7% and 62.2% homology with that of mouse and human PCIs,
respectively. Northern blot analysis showed that rat PCI mRNA was strongly
expressed in the seminal vesicles, moderately in the testes, but not in the
liver. PCI mRNA expression in seminal vesicles and testes increased during the
process of development. The PCI mRNA expression in seminal vesicles was
significantly decreased after castration or after 17beta-estradiol treatment.
Treatment with testosterone in the castrated rats significantly enhanced its mRNA
expression. These findings suggest that the PCI gene expression in rat seminal
vesicles is under androgen control.

PMID: 10805286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Neurosci. 2000 May 15;20(10):3926-35.

Postnatal handling increases the expression of cAMP-inducible transcription
factors in the rat hippocampus: the effects of thyroid hormones and serotonin.

Meaney MJ(1), Diorio J, Francis D, Weaver S, Yau J, Chapman K, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neuroendocrinology Laboratory, Douglas Hospital Research Center,
McGill University, Montreal, Canada. mdmm@musica.mcgill.ca

Postnatal handling increases glucocorticoid receptor expression in the rat
hippocampus, thus altering the regulation of hypothalamic synthesis of
corticotropin-releasing hormone and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal response
to stress. The effect on glucocorticoid receptor gene expression represents one
mechanism by which the early environment can exert a long-term effect on neural
development. The handling effect on hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor
expression is dependent on peripheral thyroid hormone release and the activation 
of ascending serotonergic pathways. In primary hippocampal cell cultures,
serotonin (5-HT) increases glucocorticoid receptor expression, and this effect
appears to be mediated by increased cAMP levels. In the current studies we
examined the in vivo effects of handling on hippocampal cAMP-protein kinase A
(PKA) activity. In 7-d-old rat pups, we found that (1) postnatal handling
increased adenylyl cyclase activity and hippocampal cAMP levels, (2) the effect
of handling on cAMP levels was completely blocked by treatment with either
propylthiouracil (PTU), a thyroid hormone synthesis inhibitor, or the 5-HT
receptor antagonist, ketanserin, and (3) handling also increased hippocampal PKA 
activity. We then examined the effects of handling on cAMP-inducible
transcription factors. Handling rapidly increased levels of the mRNAs for nerve
growth factor-inducible factor A (NGFI-A) (zif268, krox24) and activator
protein-2 (AP-2) as well as for NGFI-A and AP-2 immunoreactivity throughout the
hippocampus. Finally, we found that the effects of handling on NGFI-A and AP-2
expression were significantly reduced by concurrent treatment with either PTU or 
ketanserin, effects that paralleled those on cAMP formation. NGFI-A and AP-2 have
been implicated in the regulation of glucocorticoid receptor expression during
development. Thus, these findings suggest that postnatal handling might alter
glucocorticoid receptor gene expression via cAMP-PKA pathways involving the
activation of NGFI-A and AP-2.

PMID: 10804232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Endocrinology. 2000 May;141(5):1823-38.

Transcription factor activator protein-2 is required for continued luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone expression in the forebrain of developing mice.

Kramer PR(1), Krishnamurthy R, Mitchell PJ, Wray S.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Developmental Neurobiology Section, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892-4156, USA.

LHRH is the neuropeptide responsible for reproductive function. Prenatally, LHRH 
expression begins when neurons are in the olfactory pit and continues as these
cells migrate into the brain. Thus, LHRH neurons maintain neuropeptide expression
through very distinct environments. The regulatory interactions that control
onset and continued expression of the LHRH phenotype are unknown. To begin to
address this question primary LHRH neurons were removed from nasal explants at
different ages. A complementary DNA (cDNA) subtraction screen was performed
comparing a 3.5-days in vitro LHRH neuron [approximately embryonic day 15 (E15)
in vivo] to two 10.5-days in vitro LHRH neurons (approximately postnatal day 1 in
vivo). The transcription factor activator protein-2 (AP-2alpha) was
differentially expressed and was present in the developmentally younger LHRH
neuron. In vivo analysis revealed that LHRH neurons expressed AP-2 as they
migrated across the cribriform plate and into the forebrain beginning on E13.5,
but that coexpression of LHRH and AP-2 was no longer detected in postnatal day 1 
animals. This suggested a regulatory role for AP-2 in LHRH neurons. Analysis of
animals lacking AP-2alpha revealed a dramatic decrease in forebrain LHRH neurons 
between E13.5 and E14.5, correlating with normal onset of AP-2 expression in LHRH
neurons as they entered the central nervous system. Nasal cells robustly
expressing LHRH were still present on E 14.5. The continued presence of forebrain
LHRH cells is proposed based on a second marker, galanin, and lack of increased
apoptotic/necrotic cells in this region. A decrease in LHRH messenger RNA in
forebrain neurons indicates regulation of LHRH occurred at the transcriptional or
posttranscriptional level in mutant animals. These results indicate a
developmentally restricted involvement of the transcription factor AP-2 in LHRH
expression once the LHRH neurons have migrated into the forebrain, but before
establishment of an adult-like distribution.

PMID: 10803593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Genet. 2000 May;25(1):42-6.

Mutations in TFAP2B cause Char syndrome, a familial form of patent ductus
arteriosus.

Satoda M(1), Zhao F, Diaz GA, Burn J, Goodship J, Davidson HR, Pierpont ME, Gelb 
BD.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York,
USA.

Char syndrome is an autosomal dominant trait characterized by patent ductus
arteriosus, facial dysmorphism and hand anomalies. Using a positional candidacy
strategy, we mapped TFAP2B, encoding a transcription factor expressed in neural
crest cells, to the Char syndrome critical region and identified missense
mutations altering conserved residues in two affected families. Mutant TFAP2B
proteins dimerized properly in vitro, but showed abnormal binding to TFAP2 target
sequence. Dimerization of both mutants with normal TFAP2B adversely affected
transactivation, demonstrating a dominant-negative mechanism. Our work shows that
TFAP2B has a role in ductal, facial and limb development and suggests that Char
syndrome results from derangement of neural-crest-cell derivatives.

PMID: 10802654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Cell Biol. 2000 May 1;149(3):537-46.

Epsin 1 undergoes nucleocytosolic shuttling and its eps15 interactor
NH(2)-terminal homology (ENTH) domain, structurally similar to Armadillo and HEAT
repeats, interacts with the transcription factor promyelocytic leukemia Zn(2)+
finger protein (PLZF).

Hyman J(1), Chen H, Di Fiore PP, De Camilli P, Brunger AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Epsin (Eps15 interactor) is a cytosolic protein involved in clathrin-mediated
endocytosis via its direct interactions with clathrin, the clathrin adaptor AP-2,
and Eps15. The NH(2)-terminal portion of epsin contains a phylogenetically
conserved module of unknown function, known as the ENTH domain (epsin
NH(2)-terminal homology domain). We have now solved the crystal structure of rat 
epsin 1 ENTH domain to 1.8 A resolution. This domain is structurally similar to
armadillo and Heat repeats of beta-catenin and karyopherin-beta, respectively. We
have also identified and characterized the interaction of epsin 1, via the ENTH
domain, with the transcription factor promyelocytic leukemia Zn(2)+ finger
protein (PLZF). Leptomycin B, an antifungal antibiotic, which inhibits the Crm1- 
dependent nuclear export pathway, induces an accumulation of epsin 1 in the
nucleus. These findings suggest that epsin 1 may function in a signaling pathway 
connecting the endocytic machinery to the regulation of nuclear function.

PMCID: PMC2174850
PMID: 10791968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2000 May 1;377(1):69-79.

Interaction of Ap1, Ap2, and Sp1 with the regulatory regions of the human
pro-alpha1(I) collagen gene.

Vergeer WP(1), Sogo JM, Pretorius PJ, de Vries WN.

Author information: 
(1)School for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Potchefstroom University,
Potchefstroom, 2520, South Africa.

In the pro-alpha1(I) collagen gene a number of cis-regulatory elements, which
interact with a variety of trans-acting factors, are present in the promoter and 
first intron. We have undertaken a comprehensive study of Sp1, Ap1, and Ap2
binding in the region spanning -442 to +1697 nt. DNase I footprinting analysis
revealed these factors bind with varying affinities to some of the potential
sites: Sp1 binds to 16 of 34 potential sites, Ap2 binds to 22 of 40 potential
binding sites, and Ap1 binds to its only potential site. The Sp1 sites were
mostly clustered in the intron region, while the Ap2 sites were clustered in the 
promoter region. Transmission electron microscopic analysis of DNA-protein
complexes not only confirmed these results, but also clearly showed that
heterologous and/or homologous protein-protein interactions between Sp1 and/or
Ap2 bring the promoter and intron in contact with each other, with the resulting 
looping out of the intervening DNA. This strongly suggests that the DNA-looping
model is an explanation for the orientation preference of the enhancing element
in the first intron as these interactions possibly create an optimum environment 
for the binding of the rest of the transcriptional machinery.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10775443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Eur Urol. 2000 May;37(5):573-8.

Expression of activator protein 2 in prostate cancer is related to tumor
differentiation and cell proliferation.

Lipponen P(1), Aaltomaa S, Kellokoski J, Ala-Opas M, Kosma V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, University of Kuopio, Kuopio,
Finland. pertti.lipponen@kuopio.fi

OBJECTIVES: Activator protein 2 (AP-2) is a DNA-binding transcription factor that
can activate the expression of p21 (waf1/cip1), which in turn causes growth
arrest of cells through inhibition of cyclin-dependent kinases required in G1-S
progression. The aims of the present study were to analyze the expression of AP-2
in prostate cancer and to relate the results of AP-2 immunohistochemistry to
other known prognostic factors and patient survival.
METHODS: AP-2alpha was demonstrated by an immunohistochemical method in 215
prostate cancer cases, and the results of immunohistochemistry were related to
other known prognostic factors and patient survival.
RESULTS: The expression of AP-2alpha in carcinomas was usually weak and
cytoplasmic, similar to normal prostatic epithelium adjacent to tumors. In 6% of 
the tumors, the expression was strong, and in 15% no staining signal was
detected. Nuclear expression was detected in 22% of cases. Low fraction of
AP-2-expressing cells was related to high mitotic index, Ki67 labeling and high
expression of p21 (waf1/cip1). Nuclear expression of AP-2 was related to high
Gleason score, advanced T category, DNA aneuploidy and high S-phase fraction.
Nuclear expression was an indicator of unfavorable disease outcome, but in
multivariate analysis, expression of AP-2 had no prognostic value.
CONCLUSIONS: Cytoplasmic expression of AP-2alpha is reduced in poorly
differentiated prostate carcinomas. The rare nuclear expression occurs in a small
proportion of tumors which are aneuploid, have a high T category and high Gleason
score. The expression of AP-2 seems to have no prognostic value in prostate
cancer.

PMID: 10765096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Apr 10;256(1):272-81.

Hepatocyte growth factor signal coupling to various transcription factors depends
on triggering of Met receptor and protein kinase transducers in human hepatoma
cells HepG2.

Tacchini L(1), Dansi P, Matteucci E, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology and C. N. R. Center for Research on Cell
Pathology, University of Milano, Via L. Mangiagalli, Milano, 31-20133, Italy.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) regulates a wide variety of biological activities 
by binding to the tyrosine kinase receptor Met. In HGF-treated hepatocarcinoma
cells, we observed a biphasic activation of AP-1 and AP-2 transcription factors. 
For NF-kappaB complex the p50-p50 homodimer was activated before the p50-p65
heterodimer, and c-Myc/Max DNA-binding activity increased thereafter. Since these
transcription factors are responders to mitogenic stimulation through protein
kinase transducers, we tested the effects of inhibitors of these enzymes on the
DNA binding after HGF treatment. Inhibition of protein kinase C (PKC) with H7
strikingly activated NF-kappaB above the values observed after HGF alone. Under
this inhibitory condition, Met tyrosine phosphorylation was elevated as though
the phosphorylation-dependent activity of the receptor was partially blocked by
activation of PKC due to HGF. NF-kappaB DNA binding seems to be related to Met
triggering by HGF since it was largely prevented by genistein treatment, which
blocks receptor activity. Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase seems to be involved in
AP-1 binding activity stimulated by HGF. It is noteworthy that Met is responsive 
to HGF stimulating postreceptor signaling, which converges on the activation of
transcription factors acting coordinately to regulate target gene expression.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10739674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Neurochem. 2000 Apr;74(4):1355-62.

Regulation of mouse delta-opioid receptor gene transcription: involvement of the 
transcription factors AP-1 and AP-2.

Wöltje M(1), Kraus J, Höllt V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Magdeburg, Germany.

The aim of this study was to examine the effects of the phorbol ester
O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) and forskolin on delta-opioid receptor
gene transcription. Treatment of NG108-15 cells with TPA (100 nM) for 48 h
increased delta-opioid receptor mRNA levels, whereas different concentrations of 
forskolin induced a transient down-regulation of mRNA 5 h after treatment,
followed by increased mRNA levels after 48 h. Reporter gene assays in transiently
transfected NG108-15 cells in combination with electrophoretic mobility shift
assays indicate that the increase of delta-opioid receptor mRNA after stimulation
with TPA is mediated by transcription factor AP-1, which binds 355 bp upstream of
the start codon within the gene promoter. The forskolin-induced mRNA increase is 
mediated neither by a cyclic AMP-response element nor indirectly by AP-1
up-regulation. Reporter gene assays, mutational analysis, and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays revealed that delta-opioid receptor gene regulation by
forskolin is mediated by transcription factor AP-2, which binds to an element 157
bp upstream of the start codon.

PMID: 10737590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. FEBS Lett. 2000 Mar 24;470(2):167-72.

Biophysical characterization of interactions between the core binding factor
alpha and beta subunits and DNA.

Tang YY(1), Crute BE, Kelley JJ, Huang X, Yan J, Shi J, Hartman KL, Laue TM,
Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Core binding factors (CBFs) play key roles in several developmental pathways and 
in human disease. CBFs consist of a DNA binding CBFalpha subunit and a non-DNA
binding CBFbeta subunit that increases the affinity of CBFalpha for DNA. We
performed sedimentation equilibrium analyses to unequivocally establish the
stoichiometry of the CBFalpha:beta:DNA complex. Dissociation constants for all
four equilibria involving the CBFalpha Runt domain, CBFbeta, and DNA were
defined. Conformational changes associated with interactions between CBFalpha,
CBFbeta, and DNA were monitored by nuclear magnetic resonance and circular
dichroism spectroscopy. The data suggest that CBFbeta 'locks in' a high affinity 
DNA binding conformation of the CBFalpha Runt domain.

PMID: 10734228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. FEBS Lett. 2000 Mar 24;470(2):125-30.

Identification of the regions involved in DNA binding by the mouse PEBP2alpha
protein.

Pérez-Alvarado GC(1), Munnerlyn A, Dyson HJ, Grosschedl R, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and the Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2alpha (PEBP2alpha) is a DNA binding
transcriptional regulatory protein that binds conserved sites in the polyomavirus
enhancer, mammalian type C retroviral enhancers and T-cell receptor gene
enhancers. Binding of PEBP2alpha and homologous proteins to the consensus DNA
sequence TGPyGGTPy is mediated through a protein domain known as the runt domain.
Although recent NMR studies of DNA-bound forms of the runt domain have shown an
immunoglobulin-like (Ig) fold, the identification of residues of the protein that
are involved in DNA binding has been obscured by the low solubility of the runt
domain. Constructs of the mouse PEBP2alphaA1 gene were generated with N- and
C-terminal extensions beyond the runt homology region. The construct containing
residues Asp90 to Lys225 of the sequence (PEBP2alpha90-225) yielded soluble
protein. The residues that participate in DNA binding were determined by
comparing the NMR spectra of free and DNA-bound PEBP2alpha90-225. Analysis of the
changes in the NMR spectra of the two forms of the protein by chemical shift
deviation mapping allowed the unambiguous determination of the regions that are
responsible for specific DNA recognition by PEBP2alpha. Five regions in
PEBP2alpha90-225 that are localized at one end of the beta-barrel were found to
interact with DNA, similar to the DNA binding interactions of other Ig fold
proteins.

PMID: 10734220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Mech Dev. 2000 Apr;92(2):295-9.

Differential expression of retinoic acid-inducible (Stra) genes during mouse
placentation.

Sapin V(1), Bouillet P, Oulad-Abdelghani M, Dastugue B, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 384, Laboratoire de Biochimie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, 28
Place Henri Dunant, BP 38, 63001 Clermont-Ferrand, Cedex, France.

Several retinoid binding proteins and nuclear receptors are specifically
expressed in murine placenta. However, little is known about molecular events and
target genes regulated by retinoids during placentation. Here, we report that
several retinoic acid-inducible (Stra) genes, originally isolated by a
differential screening procedure, exhibit specific expression patterns in mouse
placental tissues. Three Stra genes, including the ephrinB1 receptor tyrosine
kinase ligand, are prominently expressed in the regions of exchanges between
maternal and embryonic circulations, i.e. the yolk sac and/or the labyrinthine
zone of the mature placenta. The Meis2 homeobox gene appears to be specifically
expressed in maternally-derived cell populations. Three other Stra genes,
including the AP-2-related gene AP-2gamma, are differentially expressed in the
trophoblastic cell lineage. Thus, retinoids may regulate various signaling
pathways in specific placental cell-types.

PMID: 10727869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Mol Cell Biochem. 2000 Jan;203(1-2):41-51.

Transcriptional regulation of cyclooxygenase-2 in the human microvascular
endothelial cell line, HMEC-1: control by the combinatorial actions of AP2,
NF-IL-6 and CRE elements.

Kirtikara K(1), Raghow R, Laulederkind SJ, Goorha S, Kanekura T, Ballou LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Tennessee, Memphis, USA.

Interleukin-1beta (IL-1) is a potent inducer of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and
prostaglandin biosynthesis in many types of cells, yet little is known about the 
molecular mechanisms regulating IL-1 mediated prostanoid biosynthesis in the
endothelium of the microvasculature. Therefore, we examined the cis- and
trans-acting factors regulating IL-1-induced COX-2 expression in the human
microvascular endothelial cell line, HMEC-1. IL-1 enhanced steady state levels of
COX-2 protein and mRNA synthesis by approximately 2-fold which preceded a 2-fold 
increase in PGF(alpha) biosynthesis. Expression of a series of COX-2
promoter-luciferase constructs in IL-1 treated HMEC-1 cells revealed that the
'full length' (-1432/+59 bp) promoter was 10 times more active than the SV-40
promoter/enhancer and that it could be further activated by IL-1. Surprisingly
however, all except for the shortest COX-2 promoter construct retained the
ability to respond to IL-1 and luciferase activity driven by -191/+59 bp COX-2
promoter was as responsive to IL-1 as the full-length promoter. Moreover,
site-directed promoter mutagenesis and electophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSA) indicate that the combinatorial actions of AP2, NF-IL6, and CRE elements
are critical for both constitutive and IL-1-inducible COX-2 promoter activity.
Understanding the mechanism(s) regulating COX-2 gene expression and prostaglandin
biosynthesis in the microvasculature has important implications with regard to
inflammation and angiogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 10724331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 24;275(12):8695-702.

Cbfa1 is a positive regulatory factor in chondrocyte maturation.

Enomoto H(1), Enomoto-Iwamoto M, Iwamoto M, Nomura S, Himeno M, Kitamura Y,
Kishimoto T, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2
Yamada-oka Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Cbfa1 is a transcription factor that belongs to the runt domain gene family.
Cbfa1-deficient mice showed a complete lack of bone formation due to the
maturational arrest of osteoblasts, demonstrating that Cbfa1 is an essential
factor for osteoblast differentiation. Further, chondrocyte maturation was
severely disturbed in Cbfa1-deficient mice. In this study, we examined the
possibility that Cbfa1 is also involved in the regulation of chondrocyte
differentiation. mRNAs for both Cbfa1 isotypes, type I Cbfa1 (Pebp2alphaA/Cbfa1) 
and type II Cbfa1 (Osf2/Cbfa1 or til-1), which are different in N-terminal
domain, were expressed in terminal hypertrophic chondrocytes as well as
osteoblasts. In addition, mRNA for type I Cbfa1 was expressed in other
hypertrophic chondrocytes and prehypertrophic chondropcytes. In a chondrogenic
cell line, ATDC5, the expression of type I Cbfa1 was elevated prior to
differentiation to the hypertrophic phenotype, which is characterized by type X
collagen expression. Treatment with antisense oligonucleotides for type I Cbfa1
severely reduced type X collagen expression in ATDC5 cells. Retrovirally forced
expression of either type I or type II Cbfa1 in chick immature chondrocytes
induced type X collagen and MMP13 expression, alkaline phosphatase activity, and 
extensive cartilage-matrix mineralization. These results indicate that Cbfa1 is
an important regulatory factor in chondrocyte maturation.

PMID: 10722711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Gene. 2000 Jan 25;242(1-2):295-305.

Woodchuck lymphotoxin-alpha, -beta and tumor necrosis factor genes: structure,
characterization and biological activity.

Li DH(1), Havell EA, Brown CL, Cullen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pathology and Parasitology, North Carolina State
University College of Veterinary Medicine, Raleigh 27606, USA.
dhli@leland.stanford.edu

We cloned and characterized the woodchuck tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and
lymphotoxin-alpha, -beta (LT-alpha, -beta) cDNAs, genes and proteins to
facilitate study of the functions of these cytokines during the course of
woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) infection. Woodchuck cDNA and genomic DNA
libraries were screened with woodchuck-specific DNA probes to isolate the cDNA
and gene clones for TNF, LT-alpha and LT-beta. The cDNAs for woodchuck TNF,
LT-alpha and LT-beta code for proteins of 233, 205 and 310 amino acids
respectively. The polypeptide encoded by each gene among woodchucks, humans and
mice can differ: the human TNF, LT-alpha and LT-beta genes encode polypeptides of
233, 205 and 244 amino acids respectively, whereas the mouse TNF, LT-alpha and
LT-beta genes encode polypeptides of 235, 202 and 306 amino acids respectively.
In the woodchuck, there are four exons for TNF, four exons for LT-alpha and three
exons for LT-beta. The RNA splicing patterns for TNF, LT-alpha and LT-beta genes 
are identical among woodchucks, humans and mice, except that the human LT-beta
gene contains four exons. The woodchuck TNF gene promoter contains consensus
sequences for binding of AP-1, AP-2, C/EBPbeta, CRE, Egr-1, Ets, NF-AT, NF-kappaB
and SP-1 transcription factors. LT-alpha has AP-2, Ets, NF-kappaB, SP-1 and STAT 
binding sites, and LT-beta has Egr-1/SP-1, Ets and NF-kappaB binding sites. The
bacterially expressed woodchuck TNF and LT-alpha proteins exhibited cytotoxic
activities on both mouse L929B and woodchuck A2 cells in the presence of
actinomycin D. The specific activities of TNF and LT-alpha were 2.62x10(8)
units/mg and 2.22x10(3) units/mg respectively for L929B cells, and 1.05x10(9)
units/mg and 3.56x10(4) units/mg respectively for A2 cells. However, only
woodchuck TNF showed cytotoxic activity on human HepG2 cells, with a specific
activity of 6.55x10(7) units/mg in the presence of actinomycin D. The data
obtained from this study will be useful to future investigations of the TNF and
LT antitumor and anti-viral activities, and their therapeutic potential in the
woodchuck model for human hepatitis B virus (HBV).

PMID: 10721723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cancer Metastasis Rev. 1999;18(3):377-85.

Role of AP-2 in tumor growth and metastasis of human melanoma.

Bar-Eli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, USA. mbareli@notes.mdacc.tmc.edu

We previously demonstrated that expression of the cell surface adhesion molecule 
MCAM/MUC18 correlates directly with the metastatic potential of human melanoma
cells. In addition, the progression of human melanoma towards the metastatic
phenotype is associated with loss of expression of the tyrosine-kinase receptor
c-KIT. This review summarizes our recent data demonstrating that the expression
of both genes is regulated by the AP-2 transcription factor. Moreover, we have
observed a loss of AP-2 expression in metastatic melanoma cells. Re-expression of
AP-2 in the highly metastatic A375SM cells decreased their tumorigenicity and
inhibited their metastatic potential in nude mice. MCAM/MUC18 mRNA and protein
expression was significantly downregulated while c-KIT expression was upregulated
in the AP-2 transfected cells. Since AP-2 also regulates other genes that are
involved in the progression of human melanoma such as E-cadherin, MMP-2,
p21WAF-1, HER-2, BCL-2, and insulin like growth factor receptor-1, we propose
that loss of AP-2 is a crucial event in the development of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 10721491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Feb 25;160(1-2):183-92.

Activator protein-2 regulates human placental lactogen gene expression.

Richardson BD(1), Langland RA, Bachurski CJ, Richards RG, Kessler CA, Cheng YH,
Handwerger S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229-3039, USA. brian.richardson@chmcc.org

DNase I footprint analysis of the human placental lactogen-A (hPL-A) promoter
using nuclear extracts from purified human trophoblast cells and BeWo
choriocarcinoma cells revealed five protected regions within the proximal 325 bp.
Two of the protected regions, FP4 (-289--267) and FP5 (-167--154), are homologous
to regions on the human growth hormone (hGH) promoter that bind transcription
factors AP-2 and/or NFI. Competitive gel shift assays and supershift assays
indicated that FP4 forms complexes with activator protein-2 (AP-2) and nuclear
factor I (NFI), while FP5 forms a complex with AP-2 alone. In transient
transfection studies in human trophoblast cells, hPL promoter constructs
containing point mutations in the AP-2 binding sites of FP4 and/or FP5 were
60-80% less active than plasmids containing the wild-type promoter. A mutation in
the NFI binding site of FP4, however, had little effect on promoter activity in
these cells. Overexpression of AP-2 in HepG2 cells co-transfected with the
wild-type hPL promoter resulted in a significant increase in promoter activity.
Taken together, these findings suggest a critical role for AP-2 in the regulation
of hPL gene expression.

PMID: 10715552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Apr;20(7):2543-55.

Defining the regulatory factors required for epidermal gene expression.

Sinha S(1), Degenstein L, Copenhaver C, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell
Biology, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Keratins K5 and K14 are the hallmarks of mitotically active keratinocytes of
stratified epithelia. They are transcribed at a high level and in a
tissue-specific manner, enabling us to use the K14 gene to elucidate the
regulatory mechanism underlying epidermis-specific transcription. We have
identified four DNase I-hypersensitive sites (HSs) present in the 5' regulatory
sequences of the K14 gene under specific conditions where the gene is actively
expressed. Two of these sites (HSsII and -III) are conserved in position and
sequence within the human and mouse K14 genes. Using an in vivo transgenic
approach and an in vitro keratinocyte culture approach, we have discovered that
most of K14's transcriptional activity is restricted to a novel 700-bp regulatory
domain encompassing these HSs. This enhancer is sufficient to confer
epidermis-specific activity to a heterologous promoter in transfection assays in 
culture and in transgenic mice in vivo. A 125-bp DNA fragment encompassing HSsII 
harbors the majority of the transactivation activity in vitro, and
electrophoretic mobility shift and mutational assays reveal a role for AP-1, ets,
and AP-2 family members in orchestrating the keratinocyte-preferred expression of
HSsII. The HSsII element also confers epidermal expressivity to a heterologous
promoter in transgenic mice, although it is not sufficient on its own to fully
restrict activity to keratinocytes. Within the HSsII element, the ets and AP-2
sites appear to be most critical in collaborating to regulate epidermal
specificity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC85466
PMID: 10713177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2000 Mar;278(3):F406-16.

Role of AP2 consensus sites in regulation of rat Npt2 (sodium-phosphate
cotransporter) promoter.

Shachaf C(1), Skorecki KL, Tzukerman M.

Author information: 
(1)Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Technion, Israel
Institute of Technology, Department of Molecular Medicine, Rambam Medical Center,
Haifa 31096, Israel.

Expression of the Npt2 gene, encoding the type II sodium-dependent phosphate
cotransporter, is restricted to renal proximal tubule epithelium. We have
isolated a 4,740-bp fragment of the 5'-flanking sequence of the rat Npt2 gene,
identified the transcription initiation site, and demonstrated that this
5'-flanking sequence drives luciferase-reporter gene expression, following
transfection in the proximal tubule cell-derived opossum kidney (OK) cell line
but not in unrelated cell lines. Analysis of the promoter sequence revealed the
presence of 10 consensus binding motifs for the AP2 transcription factor.
Transient transfection assays revealed an important effect of the number of
tandemly repeated AP2 sites in enhancing promoter activity. The promoter sequence
also revealed a pair of inverted repeats enclosing 1,324 bp of intervening
sequence and containing 8 of the total 10 AP2 consensus sites in the promoter
sequence. Deletion or reversal of orientation of the distal inverted repeat
resulted in marked enhancement of promoter activity. Electrophoretic mobility
shift analysis revealed a distinct pattern of transcription factor binding to
oligonucleotides containing AP2 sites, using nuclear extracts from OK cells,
compared with unrelated cell lines. Taken together, these results suggest an
important role for AP2 consensus binding sites in regulating Npt2 gene expression
and suggest a mechanism of regulation mediated by the interaction of inverted
repeats enclosing these sites.

PMID: 10710545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncogene. 2000 Jan 27;19(4):490-7.

Cofactor competition between the ligand-bound oestrogen receptor and an intron 1 
enhancer leads to oestrogen repression of ERBB2 expression in breast cancer.

Newman SP(1), Bates NP, Vernimmen D, Parker MG, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)ICRF Molecular Oncology Unit, ICSM @ Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

Overexpression of the ERBB2 proto-oncogene in breast tumours, which occurs in
25-30% of patients, correlates with poor prognosis. In oestrogen receptor (ER)
positive breast epithelial cells oestrogens reduce ERBB2 mRNA and protein levels,
an effect that is reversed in the presence of anti-oestrogens such as tamoxifen
and ICI 182780. Our previous studies have shown that the major effect of
oestrogen on ERBB2 expression is at the level of transcription and that this is
mediated through a region within the ERBB2 first intron which can act as an
oestrogen-suppressible enhancer in ER positive breast cells. In vitro
footprinting of the smallest DNA fragment that retained full activity revealed
four transcription factor binding sites. We report here that two of these sites
are recognized by AP-2 proteins and the other two are bound by a variety of bZIP 
factors, including CREB and ATFI, with a major complex containing ATFa/ JunD.
However, by using ER mutants it is clear that repression occurs essentially off
the DNA. Indeed, the essential domain of the ER responsible for repression of the
ERBB2 enhancer is a region termed AF2 which is required for the ligand-dependent 
association of non-DNA binding cofactors. We further demonstrate that one of
these ER cofactors, SRC-1, can relieve oestrogen repression of the ERBB2 enhancer
and conclude that these data fit with a model whereby the ER and the ERBB2
enhancer compete for this limiting, non-DNA binding cofactor. Thus, in
oestrogenic conditions SRC-1 preferentially binds to the ER which effectively
sequesters it thereby reducing enhancer activity, but in antioestrogenic media
the cofactor is released from the ER and is therefore available to activate the
ERBB2 enhancer.

PMID: 10698518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(1):24-30.

Novel polymorphisms of the AP-2 gene (6p24): analysis of association with
schizophrenia.

Kawanishi Y(1), Harada S, Tachikawa H, Okubo T, Shiraishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
qb2y-kwns@asahi-net.or.jp

The transcription factor activator protein 2 (AP-2) gene is a possible candidate 
gene for schizophrenia, since it maps near D6S470, a marker on chromosome 6p24
that provided evidence of linkage to schizophrenia. In the present study we
analyzed the promoter region and the whole coding region of the human AP-2 gene
in order to identify genetic variations that may lead to the modification of AP-2
expression or the alteration of protein function, contributing to schizophrenia
or particular schizophrenic phenotypes. Genomic DNA was isolated from the whole
blood samples of 87 unrelated schizophrenics and 100 healthy controls. Polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) was performed, using 15 primer sets that spanned the
promoter region and the whole coding region, and amplified products were screened
by single-strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. Aberrant SSCP
patterns were analyzed by direct sequencing. Three novel polymorphisms were found
in the promoter region; two relatively common (-90G-->C, -803G-->T) and one rare 
(-1769G-->A). Polymorphic status at both loci suggested strong linkage
disequilibrium between the -90G and -803G alleles, and between the -90C and -803T
alleles. Although no significant differences in genotypic and allelic frequencies
at the -90 and -803 loci were found between patients and controls, significant
differences in the distribution of genotypes at the -90 (P = 0.008) and -803 (P =
0.037) loci were observed in patients with an episodic course compared with
controls. However, the difference for the -803 locus was not significant after
Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons. Our data provided no direct
evidence of an association between schizophrenia and the polymorphisms of the
AP-2 gene, although the positive result at the -90 locus in schizophrenics with
an episodic course is potentially interesting.

PMID: 10697959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Gene. 2000 Feb 22;244(1-2):21-8.

PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 mutations in Japanese cleidocranial dysplasia patients.

Zhang YW(1), Yasui N, Kakazu N, Abe T, Takada K, Imai S, Sato M, Nomura S, Ochi
T, Okuzumi S, Nogami H, Nagai T, Ohashi H, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant human bone disease whose
genetic locus has been located on chromosome 6p21, where the PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1
gene essential for osteogenesis also maps. Previously, several heterozygous
mutations in PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 were found in CCD patients. In this study, we
identified six different types of mutations in PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 in Japanese CCD 
patients. Four cases were similar to those reported previously: two were nonsense
mutations in the Runt domain, one was a hemizygous deletion, and the other was a 
missense mutation in the Runt domain which abolished the DNA-binding activity of 
Runx2/PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1. The remaining two mutations were novel: one had a
heterozygous gt-to-tt mutation at the splice donor site (gt) between the
exon3-intron junction, which resulted in abnormal exon3 skipping, and the other
had a mutation in exon7, which led to the introduction of a translational stop
codon in the middle of the transactivation domain. Thus, defects in either the
DNA-binding domain or transactivation domain of Runx2/PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 can cause
CCD. The results not only provide a strong genetic evidence that mutations
involving in PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 contribute to CCD, but also provide a useful tool 
to study how Runx2/PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 plays its pivotal role during osteoblastic
differentiation.

PMID: 10689183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Feb;14(2):307-16.

Prolactin enhances CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-beta (C/EBP beta) and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR gamma) messenger RNA
expression and stimulates adipogenic conversion of NIH-3T3 cells.

Nanbu-Wakao R(1), Fujitani Y, Masuho Y, Muramatu M, Wakao H.

Author information: 
(1)Helix Research Institute, Chiba, Japan.

Extracellular stimuli trigger adipocyte differentiation by inducing the complex
cascades of transcription. Transcription factors CCAAT enhancer-binding proteins 
(C/EBPs) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) play
crucial roles in this process. Although ectopic expression of these factors in
NIH-3T3 cells, a multipotential mesenchymal stem cell line, results in adipogenic
conversion, little is known as to hormonal factors that regulate adipogenesis in 
these cells. In this report we demonstrate that PRL, a lactogenic hormone,
enhances C/EBPbeta and PPARbeta mRNA expression and augments adipogenic
conversion of NIH-3T3 cells. Moreover, we show that ectopic expression of the PRL
receptor in NIH-3T3 cells results in efficient adipocyte conversion when
stimulated with PRL and a PPARgamma ligand, as evidenced by expression of the
adipocyte differentiation-specific genes as well as the presence of fat-laden
cells. We further demonstrate that signal transducer and activator of
transcription 5 (Stat5), a PRL signal transducer, activates aP2 promoter in a
PRL-dependent manner. These results suggest that PRL acts as an
adipogenesis-enhancing hormone in NIH-3T3 cells.

PMID: 10674402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Feb 15;28(4):1036-43.

AP-2 family members regulate basal and cAMP-induced expression of human chorionic
gonadotropin.

LiCalsi C(1), Christophe S, Steger DJ, Buescher M, Fischer W, Mellon PL.

Author information: 
(1)The Departments of Reproductive Medicine and Neurosciences and the Center for 
the Study of Reproductive Biology and Disease, University of California at San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0674, USA.

The AP-2 family of transcriptional regulator proteins has three members, alpha,
beta and gamma. AP-2alpha and gamma are expressed in placenta and in the human
trophoblast cell line JEG-3. AP-2 has been shown to regulate expression of the
placental human chorionic gonado-tropin (hCG) alpha- and beta-subunit genes,
however, previous work did not distinguish between the family members. Tryptic
peptides of the AP-2 protein complexes purified from JEG-3 cells by
oligo-affinity chromatography using the hCGalpha AP-2 site match the amino acid
sequence of AP-2gamma. The fact that AP-2gamma is present at significant levels
and binds the hCGalpha trophoblast-specific element suggests that AP-2gamma is at
least part of the binding complex in vivo and plays a role in regulating hCG
expression. We show that mutation of each of four AP-2 binding sites within the
hCGbeta promoter decreases expression in transfection assays, demonstrating that 
all four sites are required for maximal expression in JEG-3 cells. Furthermore,
we find differences in regulation of the family members: AP-2alpha mRNA levels
increase in response to cAMP while AP-2gamma mRNA levels do not. The demonstrated
importance of the AP-2 sites in controlling hCGalpha and beta expression and the 
likely involvement of more than one family member suggest that a balance in AP-2 
proteins is involved in coordinate regulation of these genes. Moreover, many
placenta-restricted genes are regulated by AP-2 proteins, thus members of this
family may play an important overall role in placenta-specific expression.

PMCID: PMC102581
PMID: 10648798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Oncogene. 2000 Jan 13;19(2):280-8.

AP-2 transcription factors in the regulation of ERBB2 gene transcription by
oestrogen.

Perissi V(1), Menini N, Cottone E, Capello D, Sacco M, Montaldo F, De Bortoli M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment (IRCC), Str. Prov. 142, Km. 3.95, 
10060 Candiolo, Italy.

Transcription of the ERBB2 oncogene is repressed by oestrogen in human breast
cancer cells. We show that a 218 bp fragment of the human ERBB2 gene promoter is 
responsive to oestrogen in transient transfection in ZR75.1 and SKBR.3 cells when
the oestrogen receptor is expressed. Deletion analysis of this fragment shows
that a sequence located at the 5' end, which is known to mediate ERBB2
overexpression in breast cancer, is also responsible for the oestrogen response. 
This sequence binds AP-2 transcription factors and appears functionally identical
to an element of the oestrogen-dependent enhancer described in the first intron
of human ERBB2. We observed that oestrogen treatment down-regulates expression of
AP-2 proteins but does not affect the DNA binding activity of AP-2. Constitutive 
expression of AP-2beta or AP-2gamma, but not AP-2alpha, abrogates the estrogenic 
repression. Our results demonstrate that AP-2 transcription factors are
implicated in the oestrogenic regulation of ERBB2 gene expression and suggest a
complex interplay involving the different AP-2 isoforms and other unidentified
factors.

PMID: 10645007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Oncogene. 2000 Jan 6;19(1):106-14.

Indispensable role of the transcription factor PEBP2/CBF in angiogenic activity
of a murine endothelial cell MSS31.

Namba K(1), Abe M, Saito S, Satake M, Ohmoto T, Watanabe T, Sato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer,
Tohoku University, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Mice lacking the AML1/PEBP2alphaB/CBFa2 gene or PEBP2beta/CBFb gene exhibit a
defect in definitive hematopoiesis and die in utero because of hemorrhage in the 
central nervous system. Hematopoiesis in the embryo is considered to be tightly
associated with vascular development. Here we examined whether PEBP2/CBF plays
any role in angiogenesis besides that in definitive hematopoiesis. We found that 
AML1/PEBP2alphaB/CBFa2, PEBP2alphaA/CBFa1, and PEBP2beta/CBFb were expressed in a
murine endothelial cell line MSS31. The expression of these molecules as well as 
the DNA binding activity of PEBP2/CBF were augmented by angiogenic growth factors
such as bFGF and VEGF. Moreover, the expression of PEBP2 alpha/CBFa protein in
endothelial cells was confirmed at the site of angiogenesis in vivo. To further
clarify the role of PEBP2/CBF in angiogenesis, we established permanent
transfectants of PEBP2 beta-MYH11 gene, one that interacts with the runt domain
of the alpha subunit and deregulates PEBP2/CBF in a dominant interfering manner. 
Proliferation, migration, and tube formation of the PEBP2 beta-MYH11
transfectants were significantly reduced in comparison with those activities of
the mock transfectants. These results suggest that transcription factor PEBP2/CBF
plays an important role in angiogenesis.

PMID: 10644985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jan;45(1):55-62.

[Molecular mechanisms of PEBP2/CBF as a master regulator of tissue-specific gene 
expression].

[Article in Japanese]

Shigesada K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Japan.
kshigesa@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

PMID: 10643336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jan;45(1):48-54.

[PEBP2/CBF is a nuclear target of Smads in TGF-beta super family signaling].

[Article in Japanese]

Hanai J(1), Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo,
Japan. hanai@ns.jfcr.or.jp

PMID: 10643335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jan;45(1):40-7.

[Loss-of-function of AML1/PEBP2 alpha B and leukemogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Osato M(1), Ito Y, Asou N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Japan.
mosato@virus1.virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

PMID: 10643334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jan;45(1):13-7.

[Pebp2 alpha A/Cbfa1 is a master regulator of bone formation].

[Article in Japanese]

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.
komorit@imed3.med.osaka-u.ac

PMID: 10643330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2000 Jan;45(1):1-6.

[PEBP2/CBF/AML1: master regulators for tissue specific gene expression].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito Y.

PMID: 10643328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 Dec 10;74(1-2):208-16.

AP-2beta represses D(1A) dopamine receptor gene transcription in neuro2a cells.

Takeuchi S(1), Imafuku I, Waragai M, Roth C, Kanazawa I, Buettner R, Mouradian
MM, Okazawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

Expression of the D(1A) dopamine receptor in brain is restricted to specific
neuronal populations. To investigate the mechanism of this selective expression, 
we localized a silencer upstream of the human D(1A) gene and identified its
binding transcription factor in the D(1A)-negative neural cell line Neuro2a.
Using deletion CAT analysis, we narrowed this silencer to the region between
nucleotides -561 and -532 relative to the CAP site. This 30-bp region, designated
D1AS1, contains a sequence homologous to the AP-2 binding site and binds to a
factor that also interacts with the AP-2 consensus sequence. In gel supershift
assays, this factor is recognized by anti-AP-2beta antibody. Co-transfection of
Neuro2a cells with an AP-2beta expression vector repressed the basal CAT activity
of D(1A) promoter-reporter plasmids in a D1AS1-dependent manner. RT-PCR analysis 
indicated that, among AP-2 family members, Neuro2a cells express only AP-2beta.
Furthermore, co-transfection of these cells with decoy oligonucleotides
corresponding to the D1AS1 sequence de-repressed the D(1A) gene promoter. Unlike 
in Neuro2a cells, AP-2beta could not repress the D(1A) promoter in the
D(1A)-positive neural cell line, NS20Y. In addition, the expression of AP-2beta
in different brain regions does not inversely correlate with that of D(1A)
dopamine receptor. These observations taken together indicate that AP-2beta is a 
repressive transcription factor that acts on the D1AS1 silencer of the D(1A)
dopamine receptor gene via some cell-specific mechanism(s) in Neuro2a.

PMID: 10640692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Pathol. 1999 Dec;189(4):514-20.

Immunohistochemical analysis reveals a tumour suppressor-like role for the
transcription factor AP-2 in invasive breast cancer.

Gee JM(1), Robertson JF, Ellis IO, Nicholson RI, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Tenovus Cancer Research Centre, University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park,
Cardiff CF4 4XX, U.K.

This paper describes the generation and characterization of a monoclonal antibody
specific for two members of the AP-2 family of transcription factors, AP-2alpha
and AP-2beta, and its subsequent application to archival primary breast tumour
material. Nuclear localization of AP-2 was found in all expressing cases, but in 
general levels of immunostaining were low, with only 17 per cent of the 86
tumours examined showing very high expression levels. Nevertheless, data analysis
of the whole patient series allowed the identification of significant
relationships between levels of AP-2 and other important breast markers. Thus,
expression of AP-2alpha/beta was found to correlate significantly with expression
of both ER ( p=0.036*) and the universal cell-cycle inhibitor p21(cip) (
p=0.03*), but was inversely related to levels of the proto-oncogene ErbB2 (
p=0.008*). AP-2-positive tumours also showed a low rate of proliferation, with
significantly reduced mitotic count and a lower tumour grade. There was no
significant relationship with clinical parameters, but samples with adjacent
normal tissue indicated that loss of the AP-2 marker was associated with disease 
progression from normal breast through to invasive disease. This was confirmed by
examining separate series of pure normal and pure DCIS samples, both of which
expressed significantly higher levels of AP-2 ( p=0.0001* in each case) than the 
invasive tumours. Overall, these findings implicate AP-2alpha/beta as having a
role akin to that of a tumour suppressor in breast cancer.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 10629551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cancer Res. 1999 Dec 15;59(24):6214-22.

Structural basis for the regulation of UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine:
polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl transferase-3 gene expression in
adenocarcinoma cells.

Nomoto M(1), Izumi H, Ise T, Kato K, Takano H, Nagatani G, Shibao K, Ohta R,
Imamura T, Kuwano M, Matsuo K, Yamada Y, Itoh H, Kohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Occupational and Environmental 
Health, Japan, School of Medicine, Kitakyushu.

The UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine: polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyl
transferase-3 (Gal NAc-T3) gene, a member of the Gal NAc transferase gene family,
is expressed in a tissue-specific manner. To elucidate the function of this gene,
we have focused on the molecular mechanism underlying regulation of gene
expression. We have cloned Gal NAc-T3 cDNA and used it to show that Gal NAc-T3
mRNA is expressed in tumor cell lines derived from secretory epithelial tissue
adenocarcinomas but not in cell lines derived from bladder and epidermoid
carcinomas. Using a polyclonal antibody to Gal NAc-T3, we observed protein
expression in adenocarcinoma but not non-adenocarcinoma cell lines, and in breast
carcinoma cells but not in normal breast tissue. We used Gal NAc-T3 cDNA to
isolate three overlapping genomic clones containing the 5'-portion of the human
Gal NAc-T3 gene, and we sequenced 1.6 kb around the first exon. A transient
expression assay using the luciferase gene showed that promoter activity was much
higher in MCF-7 cells than in KB cells. In vivo footprint experiments showed
significant protection of a distal GC box, an NRF-1 site, and an AP-2 site in
MCF-7 cells. A novel stem and loop structure extending from nucleotide -103 to
nucleotide -165 and contiguous to these transcription factor binding sites seemed
to be functional in regulating Gal NAc-T3 gene transcription, and a KMnO4
footprint experiment showed that this stem and loop structure could be formed in 
vivo. We also observed dimethyl sulfate hypersensitive sites in the untranslated 
region around nucleotide +50 in MCF-7 but not in KB cells. These findings
indicate that Gal NAc-T3 gene expression is regulated by multiple systems,
including transcription factor binding sites and a stem-and-loop structure, and
that this regulation is restricted to cell lines derived from epithelial gland
adenocarcinomas but not cells derived from nonsecretory epithelial tissue
carcinomas. In addition, our immunohistochemical results suggest that our
anti-Gal NAc-T3 antibody may be useful for diagnostic purposes in the early
stages of breast cancer.

PMID: 10626815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jan 7;267(1):334-8.

Hypoxia-induced transcriptional activation of vascular endothelial growth factor 
is inhibited by serum.

D'Angelo G(1), Ladoux A, Frelin C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UPR 411, 660 route
des Lucioles, Sophia-Antipolis, Valbonne, 06560, France. dangelo@ipmc.cnrs.fr

Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) by cultured vascular
smooth muscle cells was analyzed. Serum and hypoxia had nearly additive actions
on VEGF mRNA expression. The function of the VEGF promoter in smooth muscle cells
was analyzed using transient luciferase reporter assays. Serum and hypoxia
stimulated expression of luciferase. The presence of hypoxia response element
(HRE) was necessary for the hypoxic induction. AP-1 sequences located upstream of
HRE and AP-2/Sp-1 sequences located downstream of HRE are not necessary. Hypoxic 
responses were best observed in serum-deprived cells. They were largely absent in
serum-stimulated cells. Serum did not suppress the hypoxic response by
interfering with the hypoxia sensor mechanism or with the signaling cascade that 
leads to the activation of HIF-1. It is concluded that growth-promoting cytokines
regulate hypoxic gene induction in smooth muscle cells.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10623620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Genes Cells. 1999 Dec;4(12):685-96.

Molecular basis of tissue-specific gene expression mediated by the runt domain
transcription factor PEBP2/CBF.

Ito Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Regulation, Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for
Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
yito@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The Runt domain transcription factor PEBP2/CBF is a heterodimer of alpha and beta
subunits. Of the three mammalian alpha subunit genes, which are homologues of the
Drosophila gene runt, PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 and PEBP2alphaB/AML1 are critical
regulators of osteogenesis and haematopoiesis, respectively. A unique functional 
interaction between PEBP2alphaB/AML1 and Ets-1 was recently observed, and
provides a clear example of context-dependent transcriptional regulation. An
elaborate mechanism of cooperation between the two factors may represent a basis 
for tissue-specific gene expression, which is thought to be achieved by
combinations of specific sets of transcription factors unique to each cell
lineage or stage of differentiation. A possible molecular basis for the critical 
role(s) played by PEBP2/CBF in tissue determination is discussed in light of
these observations.

PMID: 10620014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Neurosci Lett. 1999 Dec 10;276(3):149-52.

Sp1 and AP2 transcription factors are required for the human fragile mental
retardation promoter activity in SK-N-SH neuronal cells.

Carrillo C(1), Cisneros B, Montañez C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, Centro de Investigación y de
Estudios Avanzados del I.P.N., Mexico City, Mexico.

The promoter of the human fragile mental retardation gene (FMR1) was functionally
analyzed in order to identify elements responsible for its regulation. Plasmids
carrying the wild type or different deleted-promoter sequences driving the
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene (CAT) were transiently transfected into
the SK-N-SH cells and the CAT activity was assessed. Deletion studies suggested
that major regulatory elements are present in a DNA region between positions -123
and -51. Gel mobility shift and footprinting assays using a DNA fragment
encompassing that promoter region showed that SP1 and AP2 transcription factors
could be involved in the functioning of the FMR1 promoter.

PMID: 10612627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Dairy Res. 1999 Nov;66(4):537-44.

Differential expression of bovine beta-lactoglobulin A and B promoter variants in
transiently transfected HC11 cells.

Folch JM(1), Dovc P, Medrano JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis 95616-8521, USA.

Quantification of beta-lactoglobulin A and B in the milk of heterozygous animals 
has revealed a differential content of these two variants. Nucleotide sequence
analysis of the first 733 bp of the bovine beta-lactoglobulin promoter has
indicated the presence of ten polymorphic sites, nine of them being allele A and 
B specific mutations. To study the differential expression of these alleles,
constructs containing 753 bp long fragments of the bovine beta-lactoglobulin A
and B associated promoters were used in transient transfection experiments in
HC11 cells. A differential transcription activity directed by the A and B
specific promoters was consistently observed. The relative expression levels were
57% for beta-lactoglobulin A and 43% for beta-lactoglobulin B promoters. An
allele-specific mutation has been reported to have a differential binding
affinity to the activator protein-2 between the beta-lactoglobulin A and B
promoters. However, experiments in HC11 cells where the activator protein-2
binding sites were mutated in both beta-lactoglobulin A and B promoters showed no
major differences in activity between the mutated and native promoters.

PMID: 10612052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 31;274(53):37665-72.

Cis-acting DNA elements of mouse granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor
gene responsive to oxidized low density lipoprotein.

Matsumura T(1), Sakai M, Matsuda K, Furukawa N, Kaneko K, Shichiri M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Kumamoto University School of Medicine,
Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

We previously demonstrated that the induction of granulocyte/macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) played an important role in oxidized low
density lipoprotein (Ox-LDL)-induced macrophage growth as a growth priming
factor. The present study was undertaken to elucidate the transcriptional
regulation of the GM-CSF gene using Raw 264.7 cells, a mouse macrophage cell
line. Transient transfection into Raw 264.7 cells of several 5'-flanking regions 
of GM-CSF gene-luciferase fusion plasmids revealed the presence of two positive
regulatory sites in regions spanning from -97 to -59 and from -59 to -37 and one 
negative regulatory site from -120 to -97 in unstimulated cells. When cells were 
stimulated by Ox-LDL, there was one positive responsive site from -225 to -120
and one negative responsive site from -97 to -59, which contained the NF-kappaB
binding site. Computer analysis revealed the presence of a putative AP-2 binding 
site from -169 to -160. Mutagenesis of a putative AP-2 binding site and tandem
repeat of this site in plasmid resulted in a complete loss and increased
responsiveness to Ox-LDL, respectively. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
showed that Ox-LDL increased the binding of certain nuclear protein(s) to a
putative AP-2 binding site but decreased their binding to NF-kappaB binding site.
Supershift assay showed that nuclear proteins bound to NF-kappaB binding site
contained, at least, p50 and p65 but could not demonstrate nuclear protein(s)
bound to a putative AP-2 binding site. Our results suggested that a putative AP-2
binding site from -169 to -160 was a positive responsive element to Ox-LDL and
that the NF-kappaB binding site from -91 to -82 was a negative responsive element
in Ox-LDL-induced GM-CSF transcription.

PMID: 10608823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Leukemia. 1999 Dec;13(12):1932-42.

Leukemogenesis by CBF oncoproteins.

Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The AML1 and CBFbeta subunits of core binding factor (CBF) are involved in
several chromosomal abnormalities frequently associated with acute leukemias. As 
a result, the CBFbeta-SMMHC, AML1-ETO and AML1-MDS1/EVI1 fusion proteins are
expressed in subsets of acute myeloid leukemia, and TEL-AML1 is expressed in
B-lineage acute lymphocytic leukemia. These CBF oncoproteins likely contribute to
leukemogenesis in part by inhibiting endogenous CBF. As a result they are
expected to inhibit differentiation and perhaps apoptosis. In addition, the
domains unique to each fusion protein may also contribute to leukemogenesis via
unique mechanisms.

PMID: 10602413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 24;274(52):37154-60.

Purification and identification of a tissue-specific repressor involved in serum 
amyloid A1 gene expression.

Ren Y(1), Reddy SA, Liao WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that the 5'-flanking regions from the rat serum
amyloid A1 (SAA1) promoter are necessary and sufficient to confer specific
cytokine-induced expression in cultured hepatoma cells. Deletion analysis
identified a tissue-specific repressor (TSR) regulatory element, located between 
bp -289 and -256, that functioned as a silencer, contributing to the
transcription repression on SAA1 promoter in nonliver cells. When this 34-base
pair TSR-binding element was used as a probe in electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, an intense DNA-protein complex was detected in nuclear extracts from HeLa
and several other nonliver tissues. This TSR binding activity, however, was
undetectable in extracts from liver or liver-derived cells. The distribution of
TSR binding activity is therefore consistent with its regulatory role in
repressing SAA1 expression in a tissue-specific manner. In this study, we
purified TSR protein from HeLa nuclear extracts and showed that it has a
molecular mass of approximately 50 kDa. Surprisingly, protein sequencing and
antibody supershift experiments identified TSR as transcription factor AP-2.
Subsequent functional analysis showed that forced expression of AP-2 in HepG2
cells could indeed inhibit conditioned medium-induced SAA1 promoter activation.
Moreover, expression of a dominant-negative mutant of AP-2 in HeLa cells or
mutation of the AP-2-binding site led to derepression of the SAA1 promoter,
presumably by neutralizing the inhibitory effects of the endogenous wild-type
AP-2. Our results therefore demonstrate a novel function for AP-2 in the
transcriptional repression of SAA1 promoter. Together with its tissue
distribution, AP-2 may contribute to SAA1's highly liver-specific expression
pattern by restricting its expression in nonliver cells.

PMID: 10601277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(1):91-103.

Auto-inhibition and partner proteins, core-binding factor beta (CBFbeta) and
Ets-1, modulate DNA binding by CBFalpha2 (AML1).

Gu TL(1), Goetz TL, Graves BJ, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

Core-binding factor alpha2 (CBFalpha2; otherwise known as AML1 or PEBP2alphaB) is
a DNA-binding subunit in the family of core-binding factors (CBFs), heterodimeric
transcription factors that play pivotal roles in multiple developmental processes
in mammals, including hematopoiesis and bone development. The Runt domain in
CBFalpha2 (amino acids 51 to 178) mediates DNA binding and heterodimerization
with the non-DNA-binding CBFbeta subunit. Both the CBFbeta subunit and the
DNA-binding protein Ets-1 stimulate DNA binding by the CBFalpha2 protein. Here we
quantify and compare the extent of cooperativity between CBFalpha2, CBFbeta, and 
Ets-1. We also identify auto-inhibitory sequences within CBFalpha2 and sequences 
that modulate its interactions with CBFbeta and Ets-1. We show that sequences in 
the CBFalpha2 Runt domain and sequences C terminal to amino acid 214 inhibit DNA 
binding. Sequences C terminal to amino acid 214 also inhibit heterodimerization
with the non-DNA-binding CBFbeta subunit, particularly heterodimerization off
DNA. CBFbeta rescinds the intramolecular inhibition of CBFalpha2, stimulating DNA
binding approximately 40-fold. In comparison, Ets-1 stimulates CBFalpha2 DNA
binding 7- to 10-fold. Although the Runt domain alone is sufficient for
heterodimerization with CBFbeta, sequences N terminal to amino acid 41 and
between amino acids 190 and 214 are required for cooperative DNA binding with
Ets-1. Cooperative DNA binding with Ets-1 is less pronounced with the
CBFalpha2-CBFbeta heterodimer than with CBFalpha2 alone. These analyses
demonstrate that CBFalpha2 is subject to both negative regulation by
intramolecular interactions, and positive regulation by two alternative
partnerships.

PMCID: PMC85059
PMID: 10594012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 1;216(1):164-81.

Keratin 10 gene expression during differentiation of mouse epidermis requires
transcription factors C/EBP and AP-2.

Maytin EV(1), Lin JC, Krishnamurthy R, Batchvarova N, Ron D, Mitchell PJ, Habener
JF.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
02114, USA.

The epidermis forms a vital barrier composed of stratified keratinocytes and
their differentiated products. One of these products, keratin K10, is critical to
epidermal integrity, because mutations in k10 lead to abnormal blistering. For
the normal expression of k10, differentiation-associated transcription factors
C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta, and AP-2 are well positioned to play an important role.
Here, regulation of the k10 gene is examined in keratinocytes in the skin of
normal mice and in transgenic mice carrying targeted deletions of c/ebpbeta and
ap-2alpha. In cultured cells, C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta are each capable of
activating the k10 promoter via three binding sites, identified by site-directed 
mutagenesis. In a given epidermal cell in vivo, however, the selection of
C/EBPalpha versus C/EBPbeta for k10 regulation is determined via a third
transcription factor, AP-2. This novel regulatory scheme involves: (1) unique
gradients of expression for each transcription factor, i.e., C/EBPbeta and AP-2
most abundant in the lower epidermis, C/EBPalpha in the upper; (2) C/EBP-binding 
sites in the ap-2alpha gene promoter, through which C/EBPbeta stimulates
ap-2alpha; and (3) AP-2 binding sites in the c/ebpalpha promoter, through which
AP-2 represses c/ebpalpha. Promoter-analysis and gene-expression data presented
herein support a regulatory model in which C/EBPbeta activates and maintains AP-2
expression in basal keratinocytes, whereas AP-2 represses C/EBPalpha in those
cells. In response to differentiation signals, loss of AP-2 expression leads to
derepression of the c/ebpalpha promoter and activation of k10 as cells migrate
upward.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10588870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Nov;113(5):816-20.

Spatiotemporal expression pattern of keratins in skin of AP-2alpha-deficient
mice.

Talbot D(1), Loring J, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institute for Toxicology and Genetics,
Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Invest Dermatol 2000 Mar;114(3):609. Lorgin J [corrected to Loring J].

Transcription factor AP-2alpha has been implicated as being a cell-type-specific 
regulator of gene expression during vertebrate embryogenesis based on its
expression pattern in neural crest cells, ectoderm, and the nervous system in
mouse and frog embryos. In mice, AP-2alpha is expressed in surface ectoderm
beginning at the single cell layer state around E8.75. AP-2alpha-deficient mice, 
derived by targeted mutagenesis, display a severe ventral closure defect
resulting in cranio-abdominoschisis and a hypoplasia of the cranial ganglia. This
study analyzed the effect of a targeted disruption of the AP-2alpha gene on the
architecture and the expression of intermediate filaments in skin. We analyzed
skin samples from newborn mice and found no difference in either the morphology
of the skin or the amount of intermediate filaments expressed. This suggests that
despite the results from other analyses, loss of transcription factor AP-2alpha
does not affect the expression of intermediate filaments in the skin of newborn
animals. We found an altered spatial distribution of intermediate filament
expression in the single layered cranial ectoderm during days 9-12 of gestation
leading to an evenly distributed expression of keratin 5 and 15 in the mutants.
Furthermore, the mutants lack a ring of ectodermal cells highly positive for
keratin 15 in the area where lens induction occurs, indicating a defect in the
inductive interactions underlying eye formation.

PMID: 10571739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Nov;113(5):711-9.

Regulation of the melanoma cell adhesion molecule gene in melanoma: modulation of
mRNA synthesis by cyclic adenosine monophosphate, phorbol ester, and stem cell
fFactor/c-kKit signaling.

Karlen S(1), Braathen LR.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatological Clinic, University of Bern, Inselspital, Switzerland.
stephane.karlen@insel.ch

The melanoma cell adhesion molecule was identified as a human melanoma-associated
antigen that increases in expression as tumors increase in thickness and begin to
acquire metastatic potential. Clinical and experimental evidences suggest that
the development of metastatic capacity might be the consequence of increased
melanoma cell adhesion molecule expression. The mechanisms for upregulation of
the melanoma cell adhesion molecule during melanoma progression are, however,
still poorly understood. In this study, we show that melanoma cell adhesion
molecule expression is tightly regulated at the transcriptional level. Using a
combination of CAT reporter assays and semiquantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, we observed that cyclic adenosine
monophosphate significantly increases transcription of the melanoma cell adhesion
molecule in nonmetastatic melanoma cells. In metastatic cells, transcription of
the gene was constitutive and could not be further increased by cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate. On the other hand, melanoma cell adhesion molecule promoter
activity was impeded upon treatment with phorbol esters or in the presence of
stem cell factor, a phenomenon which was protein kinase C-dependent.
Promoter-deletion studies demonstrated that the first 196 nt of the melanoma cell
adhesion molecule promoter region are sufficient to get full expression in
metastatic melanoma cells. This fragment contains five binding sites for the
transcription factor Sp1 and DNA mobility shift experiments showed direct binding
of Sp1 to the promoter. In conclusion, our results indicate that Sp1 is
sufficient to drive constitutive melanoma cell adhesion molecule expression in
metastatic melanoma cells. In nonmetastatic cells, however, melanoma cell
adhesion molecule expression is repressed and we speculate that stem cell
factor/c-Kit signaling might be responsible for the control of melanoma cell
adhesion molecule synthesis, and thus, perhaps, of melanoma progression and
metastasis.

PMID: 10571724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Dec;56(6):1152-61.

Platelet-derived growth factor-BB inhibits rat alpha1D-adrenergic receptor gene
expression in vascular smooth muscle cells by inducing AP-2-like protein binding 
to alpha1D proximal promoter region.

Xin X(1), Yang N, Faber JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599-7545, USA.

We have previously found that, in addition to mediating contraction of vascular
smooth muscle, activation of alpha1D-adrenergic receptors (AR) induces smooth
muscle cell (SMC) hypertrophy. Despite their importance, little is known about
how alpha1D-AR expression is regulated. Recently, we demonstrated that
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-beta receptor stimulation, but not various 
other growth factors, inhibits transcription of alpha1D-, but not alpha1A- or
alpha1B-ARs, resulting in reduced norepinephrine-mediated SMC growth. To
investigate this inhibitory mechanism, herein we cloned and characterized 1.6 kb 
of the 5'-flanking region of the rat alpha1D-AR gene. Reporter gene transfection 
assays in rat aorta and vena cava SMCs showed that this 5'-flanking region, which
lacks a TATA-box, possesses strong promoter activity. Two transcription
initiation sites and their flanking promotor regions were identified, wherein the
proximal promotor mediated PDGF-BB inhibition of transcription. Gel mobility
shift assays suggested that Sp1 binds constitutively at two consensus sites
within the -399 base pair (bp)/-349-bp region of the proximal promotor. This
constitutive binding was unaffected by PDGF-BB. In contrast, a flanking motif
(-384 bp/-349 bp), possessing putative Sp1/activator protein-2 (AP-2) overlapping
binding sites and located upstream of the proximal transcription initiation site,
was required for PDGF-BB inhibition of alpha1D transcription. PDGF-BB increased
AP-2 binding to the distal AP-2 site in this region in the context of SMCs.
Furthermore, overexpression of AP-2 protein, by transgene transfection,
dose-dependently inhibited alpha1D-AR activity driven by this motif. Thus,
PDGF-BB may increase AP-2 binding within the proximal promoter to cause
down-regulation of alpha1D-AR expression in SMCs when PDGF is elevated, such as
in the postnatal growing vascular wall and in vascular hypertrophic diseases.

PMID: 10570042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. DNA Seq. 1999;10(1):55-60.

Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the
Sprague-Dawley rat thrombomodulin gene.

Yao A(1), Wang J, Fink LM, Hardin JW, Hauer-Jensen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock 72205, USA.

The 5'-flanking region of the rat thrombomodulin gene was cloned by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) amplification of adaptor-ligated rat genomic DNA fragment
libraries, using primers derived from the coding sequences of the thrombomodulin 
cDNA and adaptor primers. By sequence analysis putative regulatory elements in
the promoter domain were shown to include a TATA box and several conserved
binding sites for stimulatory protein 1 (SP1) and activator protein 2 (AP2). The 
transcription factor activator protein 1 (AP1) binding site located in the
5'-flanking region may serve as a negative gene regulatory site for tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). A potential retinoic acid response element
(RARE) and a possible cAMP response element are located in the putative promoter 
region, suggesting a role for retinoic acid and cAMP in the induction of
thrombomodulin gene expression. The rat thrombomodulin gene promoter sequence
shows 89% homology to that of mouse and 77% homology to that of human.

PMID: 10565546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Chem Res Toxicol. 1999 Nov;12(11):1098-109.

Regulation of expression of N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase in human mammary
epithelial cells: role of transcription factor AP-2.

Cerda SR(1), Chu SS, Garcia P, Chung J, Grumet JD, Thimmapaya B, Weitzman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, and Department of
Micro/Immunology, Lurie Cancer Center, Northwestern University Medical School,
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The DNA repair enzyme, N-methylpurine DNA glyclosylase (MPG), is overexpressed in
breast cancer as compared with its expression in normal breast epithelial cells. 
In an effort to determine the mechanism responsible for this difference in
expression, we studied rates and regulation of transcription of the MPG gene in
normal (HMEC), spontaneously immortalized (MCF10A), and malignant (T47D) mammary 
epithelial cells. Steady state levels of MPG mRNA are 3-4-fold greater in T47D
cells than in MCF10A cells. Nuclear "run-off" transcription measurements revealed
MPG transcription rates to be approximately 3-fold greater in the tumor cells
than in normal cells. Characterization of the MPG promoter by deletion analysis
and transient transfection experiments revealed that all basal promoter activity 
resided between nucleotides -227 and -81 upstream from the ATG translation start 
site. Constructs containing this region were expressed at 4-fold greater levels
when transfected into malignant T47D cells (56 x baseline) than in MCF10A cells
(14 x baseline). Computer database analysis of the region of nucleotides -227 to 
-81 revealed multiple overlapping Sp1 consensus binding sites and two overlapping
consensus AP-2 binding sites located between bases -181 and -169. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays indicated that while Sp1 bound this region of the promoter,
nuclear extracts from both cell types contained equal Sp1 binding activity. In
contrast, AP-2 binding activity was significantly greater in T47D cells, and
Western blots confirmed increased AP-2 protein levels in these cells.
Cotransfection into MCF10A cells of the MPG promoter construct and an AP-2
expression plasmid increased MPG promoter activity 2.1-fold. Cotransfection of a 
dominant negative mutant of AP-2 into T47D cells reduced the extent of MPG
promoter-driven transcription by 50%. To investigate the functional significance 
of the two overlapping AP-2 consensus binding sites, each site was mutated
separately. Mutation of the upstream site decreased promoter activity by 15%, but
mutation of the downstream site decreased promoter activity by 45% and abolished 
AP-2 binding to the promoter sequence. These data suggest that AP-2 is important 
in regulating MPG expression in breast cancer cells, and that the increased
amount of AP-2 in these cells plays a major role in directing the increased
expression of MPG.

PMID: 10563836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochemistry. 1999 Nov 16;38(46):15166-73.

An internalization-competent influenza hemagglutinin mutant causes the
redistribution of AP-2 to existing coated pits and is colocalized with AP-2 in
clathrin free clusters.

Brown CM(1), Roth MG, Henis YI, Petersen NO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada.

Image correlation spectroscopy and cross correlation spectroscopy were used to
demonstrate that approximately 25% of the internalization-competent influenza
virus hemagglutinin mutant, HA+8, is colocalized with clathrin and AP-2 at the
plasma membrane of intact cells, while wild-type HA (which is excluded from
coated pits) does not colocalize with either protein. Clathrin and AP-2 clusters 
were saturated when HA+8 was overexpressed, and this was accompanied by a
redistribution of AP-2 into existing coated pits. However, de novo coated pit
formation was not observed. In nontreated cells, the number of clusters of
clathrin or AP-2 colocalized with HA+8 was always comparable. Hypertonic
treatment which disperses the clathrin lattices resulted in more clusters
containing AP-2 and HA+8 than clathrin and HA+8. Less colocalization of HA+8 with
clathrin was also observed after cytosol acidification, which causes the
formation of deeply invaginated pits, where the HA+8 may be inaccessible to
extracellular labeling by antibodies, and blocks coated vesicle budding. However,
cytosol acidification elevated the number of clusters containing both HA+8 and
AP-2, suggesting an increase in their level of association outside of the deep
invaginations. Our results imply that AP-2 and HA+8 can colocalize in clusters
devoid of clathrin, at least in cells treated to alter the clathrin lattice
structure. Although we cannot ascertain whether this also occurs in untreated
cells, we propose that AP-2 binding to membrane proteins carrying internalization
signals can occur prior to the binding of AP-2 to clathrin. While such complexes 
can in principle serve to recruit clathrin for the formation of new coated pits, 
the higher affinity of the internalization signals for clathrin-associated AP-2
[Rapoport, I., et al. (1997) EMBO J. 16, 2240-2250] makes it more likely that
once the AP-2-membrane protein complexes form, they are quickly recruited into
existing coated pits.

PMID: 10563799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Nov;13(11):1963-75.

AP-2 (activating protein 2) and Sp1 (selective promoter factor 1) regulatory
elements play distinct roles in the control of basal activity and cyclic
adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate responsiveness of the human chorionic
gonadotropin-beta promoter.

Johnson W(1), Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The CG beta-subunit gene (CGbeta) arose evolutionarily from the LH beta-subunit
gene (LHbeta) through gene duplication. Although the promoter sequences of the
CGbeta and human (h) hLHbeta genes are greater than 90% homologous, their
expression patterns are distinct. LHbeta is expressed in pituitary gonadotrope
cells and CGbeta is expressed in placental trophoblast cells. The placental
specific and cAMP-inducible region within the CGbeta promoter has been mapped to 
a complex enhancer element spanning 118 bp (-318 to -200). Transcription
factor-binding sites within this enhancer have been partially characterized and
include multiple binding sites for AP-2 (activating protein 2) and Sp1 (selective
promoter factor 1), which activate basal and cAMP-induced expression. In this
study, we performed a detailed analysis of the recognition sites for these
transcription factors and examined the functional roles of these elements in the 
control of CGbeta expression. An upstream Sp1/AP-2 binding site (-318 to -279)
preferentially binds Sp1, which occludes AP-2 binding to an adjacent site. In
contrast, both Sp1 and AP-2 bind concurrently to a downstream composite Sp1/AP-2 
element (-220 to -188). Functionally, mutations in any of the Sp1 or AP-2 binding
sites cause a progressive decrease in basal CGbeta expression. However, cAMP
stimulation of the CGbeta promoter is reduced by AP-2 mutations, whereas Sp1
mutations enhance cAMP activation. We conclude that multiple AP-2 and Sp1
elements are required to maintain basal CGbeta promoter activity, but these
factors have opposing effects on cAMP regulation, which is mediated primarily by 
AP-2.

PMID: 10551788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Nov;13(11):1823-31.

A beta-turn endocytic code is required for optimal internalization of the growth 
hormone receptor but not for alpha-adaptin association.

Vleurick L(1), Pezet A, Kühn ER, Decuypere E, Edery M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U344, Faculté de Médecine Necker, Paris, France.

Intracellular trafficking of GH and its receptor, more particularly the chicken
GH receptor (cGHR), was examined in COS-7 cells using biochemical and structural 
studies. Internalization of radioactive GH by the cGHR is reduced as compared
with the rat GHR. On the contrary, activation of gene transcription through Janus
kinase-2 was similar for both species. Secondary structures of the cytoplasmic
domain of chicken and rat GHR were compared, since beta-turns were reported as
internalization signals. The substitution of Pro335-Asp335, present in mammalian 
GH receptors, with Thr307-Gln308 in the cGHR leads to the loss of a beta-turn
within a conserved cytoplasmic region. Mutational analysis indicated that the
lower rate of internalization of cGHR, as compared with mammalian GHR, was due to
this motif. Our data further show that alpha-adaptin, a subunit of adaptor
protein AP-2, associates with the GHR upon hormone stimulation. The
clathrin-coated pit pathway therefore seems to be involved in the endocytosis of 
cGHR, as AP-2 is known to intervene in the recruitment of receptors to these
pits. Interaction with alpha-adaptin may occur through a common epitope of the
chicken and mammalian GHR, since receptors from both species bind similar amounts
of alpha-adaptin; alternatively, two different epitopes with similar affinity may
be involved. Therefore, not alpha-adaptin but an uncharacterized factor,
presumably interacting with the identified beta-turn endocytic code, is
responsible for the difference in internalization kinetics. Finally, the present 
study illustrates that functional amino acid motifs of receptors can be derived
from comparative studies.

PMID: 10551776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Neurochem. 1999 Nov;73(5):1806-15.

Involvement of intronic sequences in cell-specific expression of the peripherin
gene.

Lecomte MJ(1), Basseville M, Fauquet M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, URA 2115 CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Peripherin is an intermediate filament protein expressed in restricted
populations of neurons. Our previous study of the chromatin structure of the
mouse peripherin gene in cells that do or do not express peripherin suggested
that the region located between -1,500 and +800 bp of the gene could be involved 
in its cell specificity. In the present work, we performed an in vitro functional
analysis of the 5' flanking region of the mouse peripherin gene and observed that
this region up to 9 kb contained both enhancer and inhibiting activities;
however, it was insufficient to achieve a complete extinction of reporter gene
expression in peripherin-negative cells. Furthermore, analysis of the first three
introns with the 5' flanking sequences of the gene showed that intron I greatly
increased specificity of the gene expression. Intron I also conferred the same
properties to thymidine kinase heterologous promoter. DNase I footprinting
experiments performed with intron I revealed at least two protected regions (Inl 
A and Inl B). Inl A encompasses an AP-2-like binding site that interacted with
both neuroblast and fibroblast nuclear factors, as well as with the recombinant
AP-2alpha protein. However, gel shift experiments suggested that the interacting 
nuclear factors are distinct from AP-2alpha itself and probably belong to the
AP-2 family. Inl B perfectly matched the consensus binding site for Sp1 and
specifically interacted with nuclear protein factors that showed the same binding
properties as the Sp1 family members. Fine deletion analysis of intron I
indicated that the Inl A element alone is responsible for its enhancing
properties, whereas a region located between +789 and +832 gives to intron I its 
silencer activity.

PMID: 10537038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Nov;56(5):982-8.

Lead inhibition of DNA-binding mechanism of Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger proteins.

Hanas JS(1), Rodgers JS, Bantle JA, Cheng YG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
College of Medicine, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73104, USA. Jay-Hanas@ouhsc.edu

The association of lead with chromatin in cells suggests that deleterious metal
effects may in part be mediated through alterations in gene function. To
elucidate if and how lead may alter DNA binding of cysteine-rich zinc finger
proteins, lead ions were analyzed for their ability to alter the DNA binding
mechanism of the Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger protein transcription factor IIIA
(TFIIIA). As assayed by DNase I protection, the interaction of TFIIIA with the
50-bp internal control region of the 5S ribosomal gene was partially inhibited by
5 microM lead ions and completely inhibited by 10 to 20 microM lead ions.
Preincubation of free TFIIIA with lead resulted in DNA-binding inhibition,
whereas preincubation of a TFIIIA/5S RNA complex with lead did not result in
DNA-binding inhibition. Because 5S RNA binds TFIIIA zinc fingers, this result is 
consistent with an inhibition mechanism via lead binding to zinc fingers. The
complete loss of DNase I protection on the 5S gene indicates the mechanism of
inhibition minimally involves the N-terminal fingers of TFIIIA. Inhibition was
not readily reversible and occurred in the presence of an excess of
beta-mercaptoethanol. Inhibition kinetics were fast, progressing to completion in
approximately 5 min. Millimolar concentrations of sulfhydryl-specific arsenic
ions were not inhibitory for TFIIIA binding. Micromolar concentrations of lead
inhibited DNA binding by Sp1, another Cys(2)His(2) finger protein, but not by the
nonfinger protein AP2. Inhibition of Cys(2)His(2) zinc finger transcription
factors by lead ions at concentrations near those known to have deleterious
physiological effects points to new molecular mechanisms for lead toxicity in
promoting disease.

PMID: 10531404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 29;274(44):31577-82.

Interaction and functional cooperation of PEBP2/CBF with Smads. Synergistic
induction of the immunoglobulin germline Calpha promoter.

Hanai J(1), Chen LF, Kanno T, Ohtani-Fujita N, Kim WY, Guo WH, Imamura T, Ishidou
Y, Fukuchi M, Shi MJ, Stavnezer J, Kawabata M, Miyazono K, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Cancer Institute of the Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, 1-37-1 Kami-ikebukuro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 70-8455, Japan.

Smads are signal transducers for members of the transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) superfamily. Upon ligand stimulation, receptor-regulated Smads
(R-Smads) are phosphorylated by serine/threonine kinase receptors, form complexes
with common-partner Smad, and translocate into the nucleus, where they regulate
the transcription of target genes together with other transcription factors.
Polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2/core binding factor (PEBP2/CBF) is a
transcription factor complex composed of alpha and beta subunits. The alpha
subunits of PEBP2/CBF, which contain the highly conserved Runt domain, play
essential roles in hematopoiesis and osteogenesis. Here we show that three
mammalian alpha subunits of PEBP2/CBF form complexes with R-Smads that act in
TGF-beta/activin pathways as well as those acting in bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP) pathways. Among them, PEBP2alphaC/CBFA3/AML2 forms a complex with Smad3 and
stimulates transcription of the germline Ig Calpha promoter in a cooperative
manner, for which binding of both factors to their specific binding sites is
essential. PEBP2 may thus be a nuclear target of TGF-beta/BMP signaling.

PMID: 10531362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5027-40.

Mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 show extensive remodeling of the hindbrain
and defects in craniofacial development.

Rossel M(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The analysis of mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 suggests that these two
genes function together to pattern the hindbrain. Separately, mutations in Hoxa1 
and Hoxb1 have profoundly different effects on hindbrain development. Hoxa1
mutations disrupt the rhombomeric organization of the hindbrain, whereas Hoxb1
mutations do not alter the rhombomeric pattern, but instead influence the fate of
cells originating in rhombomere 4. We suggest that these differences are not the 
consequences of different functional roles for these gene products, but rather
reflect differences in the kinetics of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 gene expression. In strong
support of the idea that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping functions, Hoxa1/Hoxb1 
double mutant homozygotes exhibit a plethora of defects either not seen, or seen 
only in a very mild form, in mice mutant for only Hoxa1 or Hoxb1. Examples
include: the loss of both rhombomeres 4 and 5, the selective loss of the 2(nd)
branchial arch, and the loss of most, but not all, 2(nd) branchial arch-derived
tissues. We suggest that the early role for both of these genes in hindbrain
development is specification of rhombomere identities and that the aberrant
development of the hindbrain in Hoxa1/Hoxb1 double mutants proceeds through two
phases, the misspecification of rhombomeres within the hindbrain, followed
subsequently by size regulation of the misspecified hindbrain through induction
of apoptosis.

PMID: 10529420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Cell Biol. 1999 Oct 18;147(2):235-46.

The karyopherin Kap122p/Pdr6p imports both subunits of the transcription factor
IIA into the nucleus.

Titov AA(1), Blobel G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Rockefeller
University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

We discovered a nuclear import pathway mediated by the product of the previously 
identified Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene PDR6 (pleiotropic drug resistance). This
gene product functions as a karyopherin (Kap) for nuclear import. Consistent with
previously proposed nomenclature, we have renamed this gene KAP122. Kap122p was
localized both to the cytoplasm and the nucleus. As a prominent import substrate 
of Kap122p, we identified the complex of the large and small subunit (Toa1p and
Toa2p, respectively) of the general transcription factor IIA (TFIIA). Recombinant
GST-Kap122p formed a complex with recombinant His(6)-Toa1p/Toa2p. In wild-type
cells, Toa1p and Toa2p were localized to the nucleus. Consistent with Kap122p
being the principal Kap for import of the Toa1p-Toa2p complex, we found that
deletion of KAP122 results in increased cytoplasmic localization of both Toa1p
and Toa2p. Deletion of KAP122 is not lethal, although deletion of TOA1 and TOA2
is. Together these data suggest that Kap122p is the major Kap for the import of
Toa1p-Toa2p into the nucleus. Like other substrate-Kap complexes, the
Toa1p/Toa2p/Kap122p complex isolated from yeast cytosol or reconstituted from
recombinant proteins, was dissociated by RanGTP but not RanGDP. Kap122p bound to 
nucleoporins, specifically, to the peptide repeat-containing fragments of Nup1p
and Nup2p.

PMCID: PMC2174230
PMID: 10525531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 7;18(41):5662-71.

Opposite transcriptional activity between the wild type c-myc gene coding for
c-Myc1 and c-Myc2 proteins and c-Myc1 and c-Myc2 separately.

Batsché E(1), Crémisi C.

Author information: 
(1)CJF INSERM 94-02, Université René Descartes, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75270
Paris cedex 06, France.

E-cadherin expression was previously shown to be activated by RB and c-myc
specifically in epithelial cells, through interaction with the AP-2 transcription
factor. Here we show that only a wild type c-myc gene, coding for the two c-Myc
proteins c-Myc2 and c-Myc1, was able to transactivate the E-cadherin promoter, in
contrast to c-Myc2 or c-Myc1 alone which strongly repressed E-cadherin in both
epithelial cells and fibroblasts. In addition, overexpression of c-myc2 or c-myc1
inhibited c-myc and RB-mediated activation in a dose-dependent manner, suggesting
that the ratio of the two c-Myc proteins is essential for transactivation. We
also showed by using several mutants of the E-cadherin promoter, that the AP-2
binding sites were the main target of c-myc2- and c-myc1-mediated repression.
AP-2-mediated inhibition was cell-type specific, as was the activation.
Nevertheless, when high amounts of c-myc2 and c-myc1 were used, a second
c-myc-mediated repression was observed, possibly mediated by the Inr sequence of 
the E-cadherin promoter. However, this repression was independent of cell type.
Our results suggest a new way to regulate c-myc transcriptional activity by
interfering with the ratio of the two c-myc proteins, which has already been
found to be disrupted in vivo in several tumor types.

PMID: 10523846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):105-11.

Characterization of the rat, mouse, and human genes of growth/differentiation
factor-15/macrophage inhibiting cytokine-1 (GDF-15/MIC-1).

Böttner M(1), Laaff M, Schechinger B, Rappold G, Unsicker K, Suter-Crazzolara C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
un691mb@genius.embnet.dkfz-heidelberg.de

We have isolated the rat, mouse and human genes of a distant member of the
TGF-beta superfamily, growth/differentiation factor-15/macrophage inhibiting
cytokine-1 (GDF-15/MIC-1) by screening of genomic libraries. All three genes are 
composed of two exons, and contain one single intron that interrupts the coding
sequences at identical positions within the prepro-domain of the corresponding
proteins. The predicted proteins contain the structural hallmarks of members of
the TGF-beta superfamily, including the seven conserved carboxy-terminal cysteine
residues that form the cystine knot. The orthologous molecules show the lowest
sequence conservation of all members of the TGF-beta superfamily. RT-PCR reveals 
an abundant expression of GDF-15/MIC-1 mRNA in numerous embryonic and adult
organs and tissues. Promoter analysis of the rat promoter indicates the presence 
of multiple regulatory elements, including a TATA-like sequence as well as
several SP1, AP-1 and AP-2 sites. Deletion analysis suggests that a 350 bp region
upstream of the start of the open reading frame appears to be the most important 
for regulation of transcription.

PMID: 10524241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Free Radic Res. 1999 Oct;31(4):357-65.

Mouse glutaredoxin - cDNA cloning, high level expression in E. coli and its
possible implication in redox regulation of the DNA binding activity in
transcription factor PEBP2.

Nakamura T(1), Ohno T, Hirota K, Nishiyama A, Nakamura H, Wada H, Yodoi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Responses, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Japan.

We have isolated a cDNA encoding glutaredoxin (GRX) from a mouse splenic cDNA
library. This cDNA encoded a protein of 107 amino acids with a calculated
molecular weight of 11.9 kDa. The deduced amino acid sequence of glutaredoxin in 
mouse was highly homologous with that in other mammals (81-89%), containing a
putative active sequence of -Cys-Pro-Try-Cys-. Recombinant mouse glutaredoxin
expressed in E. coli showed glutathione-disulfide oxidoreductase activity with
beta-hydroxyethyl disulfide as its substrate, whereas mutant glutaredoxin (Cys
22, Cys 25 to Ser) showed no activity. In electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
we proved that wild type GRX, not mutant one, recovered the DNA-binding activity 
of a transcription factor, PEBP2, oxidized by diamide. This showed that GRX may
be involved in the redox regulation of the DNA-binding activity of PEBP2 as is
the case with thioredoxin.

PMID: 10517541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Am J Physiol. 1999 Oct;277(4 Pt 2):F587-98.

Ksp-cadherin gene promoter. I. Characterization and renal epithelial
cell-specific activity.

Whyte DA(1), Li C, Thomson RB, Nix SL, Zanjani R, Karp SL, Aronson PS, Igarashi
P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

Kidney-specific cadherin (Ksp-cadherin, cadherin 16) is a novel, kidney-specific 
member of the cadherin superfamily that is expressed exclusively in the
basolateral membrane of renal tubular epithelial cells. To characterize the
Ksp-cadherin gene promoter, a lambda bacteriophage clone containing 3.7 kb of the
proximal 5' flanking region of the mouse Ksp-cadherin gene was isolated. The
transcription initiation site was mapped by RNase protection assays and 5' rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends, and a 709-bp intron was identified within the 5'
untranslated region. The proximal 5' flanking region was "TATA-less" but
contained other consensus promoter elements including an initiator (Inr), GC
boxes, and a CAAT box. Potential binding sites were identified for transcription 
factors that are involved in tissue-specific gene expression including activator 
protein-2 (AP-2), hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3), basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) proteins, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP), and GATA factors.
Transfection of luciferase reporter plasmids containing 2.6 kb of the 5' flanking
region markedly increased luciferase activity in renal epithelial cells (MDCK and
mIMCD-3) but not in mesenchymal cells (NIH 3T3 and MMR1). Deletion analysis
identified an 82-bp region from -31 to -113 that was essential for promoter
activity in transfected renal epithelial cells. Electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays showed that mIMCD-3 cells contain nuclear proteins that bind to this
region of the promoter. Mutational analysis showed that sequences within the
HNF-3 consensus site and CAAT box were involved in protein binding and promoter
activity. We conclude that the proximal 5' flanking region of the mouse
Ksp-cadherin gene contains an orientation-dependent promoter that is kidney
epithelial cell specific. The region of the promoter from -113 to -31 is required
for transcriptional activity and contains binding sites for nuclear proteins that
are specifically expressed in renal epithelial cells.

PMID: 10516284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Histol Histopathol. 1999 Oct;14(4):1213-21.

Regulation mechanisms for the heterodimeric transcription factor, PEBP2/CBF.

Bae SC(1), Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Chungbuk National University, 
Chungju, Korea. scbae@med.chungbuk.ac.kr

Members of the new PEBP2 (Polyomavirus Enhancer Binding Protein 2) family of
heterodimeric transcriptional regulatory protein are composed of two subunits,
alpha and beta. One of the genes encoding the alpha subunit, AML1/PEBP2 alpha B, 
was identified at the breakpoints of various chromosome translocations, including
t(8;21) and t(12;21) associated with acute myeloid leukemia and acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, respectively. The gene encoding the beta subunit (PEBP2
beta/CBFB) was also shown to be the target of the inversion of chromosome 16,
another chromosomal anomaly associated with acute myeloid leukemia. Targeted
disruption of either the Aml1/Pebp2 alpha B or Pebp2 beta/Cbfb gene resulted in
strikingly similar phenotypes such as lack of definitive hematopoiesis of the
fetal liver and accompanying hemorrhage of the central nervous system. These
observations suggest that both alpha and beta subunits of PEBP2 are indispensable
for its in vivo function. However, the heterodimerization of the alpha and beta
subunit does not seem to occur readily suggesting that their capacity to
associate might be an important rate limiting step in PEBP2 site-dependent
transcription regulation. In this review, we concentrate on the possible
regulatory mechanisms of PEBP2 activity in relation to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10506937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 8;274(41):29130-7.

The transcription factors Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 are required for constitutive matrix
metalloproteinase-2 gene expression in astroglioma cells.

Qin H(1), Sun Y, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-dependent endopeptidases that
contribute to pathological conditions associated with angiogenesis and tumor
invasion. MMP-2 is highly expressed in human astroglioma cells, and contributes
to the invasiveness of these cells. The human MMP-2 promoter contains potential
cis-acting regulatory elements including cAMP response element-binding protein,
AP-1, AP-2, PEA3, C/EBP, and Sp1. Deletion and site-directed mutagenesis analysis
of the MMP-2 promoter demonstrates that the Sp1 site at -91 to -84 base pairs and
the AP-2 site at -61 to -53 base pairs are critical for constitutive activity of 
this gene in invasive astroglioma cell lines. Electrophoretic gel shift analysis 
demonstrates binding of specific DNA-protein complexes to the Sp1 and AP-2 sites:
Sp1 and Sp3 bind to the Sp1 site, while the AP-2 transcription factor binds the
AP-2 element. Co-transfection expression experiments in Drosophilia SL2 cells
lacking endogenous Sp factors demonstrate that Sp1 and Sp3 function as activators
of the MMP-2 promoter and synergize for enhanced MMP-2 activation. Overexpression
of AP-2 in AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells enhances MMP-2 promoter activation. These
findings document the functional importance of Sp1, Sp3, and AP-2 in regulating
constitutive expression of MMP-2. Delineation of MMP-2 regulation may have
implications for development of new therapeutic strategies to arrest glioma
invasion.

PMID: 10506168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Invest Dermatol. 1999 Oct;113(4):600-6.

Induction of transcription factor AP-2 by inflammatory cytokines in human
keratinocytes.

Oyama N(1), Iwatsuki K, Homma Y, Kaneko F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Science, Fukushima Medical University School of
Medicine, Japan.

Activator protein-2 is an important transcription factor for the activation of a 
number of genes. Here we report the induction of activator protein-2 in response 
to inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 in keratinocytes. Immunoblotting 
and semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction assays using
normal human keratinocytes revealed that interleukin-6 caused a time- and
concentration-dependent induction of activator protein-2 mRNA and protein. The
increase of activator protein-2 mRNA was detected at 30 min after stimulation and
that of activator protein-2 protein was at 2 h. Their levels were lower than the 
control levels at 24 h. The interleukin-6-dependent induction of activator
protein-2 mRNA was completely blocked by adding actinomycin D, whereas it was
approximately 50% affected by cycloheximide. Co-incubation with neutralizing
antibodies against various inflammatory cytokines resulted in inhibition of the
interleukin-6-dependent activator protein-2 induction at varying degrees,
indicating an involvement of various cytokines in the activator protein-2
induction. The activator protein-2 induction was observed in keratinocytes
derived from lesional skins with psoriasis or squamous cell carcinoma, and the
high levels of activator protein-2 were histochemically detected in these
lesions. Furthermore, a gel mobility shift assay using the nuclear extracts from 
interleukin-6-treated cells showed that interleukin-6 induced the functional
activator protein-2 protein for the gene activation. These findings suggest a
possible regulation mechanism of activator protein-2 through a complex cytokine
system, which is conceivably the initial reaction leading to skin inflammation,
and resultant keratinocyte growth and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 10504447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. N Engl J Med. 1999 Sep 30;341(14):1051-62.

Acute myeloid leukemia.

Löwenberg B(1), Downing JR, Burnett A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University and University Hospital
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med 1999 Nov 4;341(19):1484.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2000 Feb 3;342(5):358-9.

PMID: 10502596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Endocrinology. 1999 Oct;140(10):4564-72.

Activation of the insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-5 promoter in
osteoblasts by cooperative E box, CCAAT enhancer-binding protein, and nuclear
factor-1 deoxyribonucleic acid-binding sequences.

Ji C(1), Chen Y, Centrella M, McCarthy TL.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Section of Plastic Surgery, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8041, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding protein-5 (IGFBP-5) has IGF-dependent
and -independent actions. PGE2 rapidly increases IGFBP-5 expression by
osteoblasts through cAMP-dependent processes. A minimal DNA sequence required for
basal and PGE2-stimulated IGFBP-5 promoter activity spans -69 to -35 bp. This
region adjoins a functional TATA box and contains E box, CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein (C/EBP), nuclear factor-1 (NF-1), and activator protein-2 (AP-2)
transcription factor related binding motifs. In this study we compared minimal
promoter sequences of -74 to +120 bp, without or with mutations in each potential
regulatory element, by reporter gene expression and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays. Mutation of the E box-related element reduced basal promoter
activity by 50% and eliminated the 2-fold stimulatory effect of PGE2. In
contrast, mutations in the C/EBP- or NF-1-related elements also reduced basal
promoter activity without fully eliminating the PGE2 effect. Overexpression of
C/EBPdelta stimulated basal IGFBP-5 promoter activity, and this effect was
eliminated by mutating the C/EBP-binding site. However, mutation of the
AP-2-binding site or overexpression of AP-2 did not correlate with basal or
PGE2-induced promoter activation. By electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
prominent gel shift complexes occurred with osteoblast nuclear extracts and
32P-labeled probes spanning the E box-, C/EBP-, and NF-1-related motifs. These
gel shift complexes were depleted by specific binding site mutations and were
enhanced by PGE2. Increased binding by extracts from PGE2-treated cultures was
blocked by cycloheximide treatment. These results identify several elements as
integral binding sequences for both basal and PGE2-stimulated IGFBP-5 promoter
activity. They further reveal that multiple sequences within this cluster form a 
basic transcription unit where nuclear factors can accumulate in a protein
synthesis-dependent way and enhance IGFBP-5 expression by osteoblasts in response
to PGE2.

PMID: 10499512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Oct 15;27(20):4040-9.

AP2alpha and AP2gamma: a comparison of binding site specificity and
trans-activation of the estrogen receptor promoter and single site promoter
constructs.

McPherson LA(1), Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, MSLS, Room P214, Stanford, CA
94305-5408, USA.

The AP2 transcription factors exhibit a high degree of homology in the DNA
binding and dimerization domains. In this study, we methodically compared the
binding specificity of AP2alpha and AP2gamma using PCR-assisted binding site
selection and competitive gel shift assay and determined that the consensus
binding site for both factors is(G)/(C)CCNN(A/)C(/G)(G)/(A)G(G/)C(/T.)The use of 
single site promoter constructs with either a high or low affinity site
demonstrated a direct relationship between site affinity and transcriptional
activation. Overexpression of AP2alpha and AP2gamma resulted in the activation of
a low affinity binding site construct to levels comparable to those seen with a
high affinity site construct at lower amounts of protein expression. Both
AP2alpha and AP2gamma were able to trans-activate the cloned human estrogen
receptor alpha promoter in ER-negative MDA-MB-231 cells through high affinity AP2
sites in the untranslated leader sequence. This provides a functional mechanism
to explain the correlation between AP2 activity and estrogen receptor expression 
in breast cancer. Since there is overexpression of AP2 factors in breast cancer
compared to normal breast epithelium, our results suggest that increased factor
expression may activate a set of target genes containing lower affinity binding
sites that would normally not be expressed in normal breast epithelium.

PMCID: PMC148672
PMID: 10497269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28794-802.

Expression of MXI1, a Myc antagonist, is regulated by Sp1 and AP2.

Benson LQ(1), Coon MR, Krueger LM, Han GC, Sarnaik AA, Wechsler DS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Michigan School of Medicine, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

MXI1, a member of the MAD family of Myc antagonists, encodes a transcription
factor whose expression must be tightly regulated to maintain normal cell growth 
and differentiation. To more closely investigate the transcriptional regulation
of the human MXI1 gene, we have cloned and characterized the MXI1 promoter. After
clarification of the 5'- and 3'-untranslated regions of the cDNA (indicating that
the true length of the MXI1 transcript is 2643 base pairs), we identified two
transcription initiation sites. We subsequently isolated the MXI1 promoter, which
is GC-rich and lacks a TATA box. Although it contains at least six potential
initiator sequences, functional studies indicate the proximal two initiator
sequences in combination with nearby Sp1 and MED-1 sites together account for
virtually all promoter activity. We also demonstrate that MXI1 promoter activity 
is repressed by high levels of AP2. These studies provide further insight into
the complex regulatory mechanisms governing MXI1 gene expression and its role in 
cellular differentiation and tumor suppression.

PMID: 10497252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Br J Cancer. 1999 Sep;81(1):133-40.

p22/WAF1 expression in human colorectal carcinoma: association with p53,
transcription factor AP-2 and prognosis.

Ropponen KM(1), Kellokoski JK, Lipponen PK, Pietiläinen T, Eskelinen MJ, Alhava
EM, Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Forensic Medicine, University of Kuopio, Kuopio
University Hospital, Finland.

p21/WAF1 expression was studied in a series of 162 colorectal carcinoma patients 
and its relation to p53- and activator protein (AP)-2 expressions and to stage as
well as survival was assessed. p21 expression was moderate or intense in 33% of
the tumours, and 53% of the tumours had moderate or strong p53 staining
intensity. Eighty-nine percent of the tumours showed a weak cytoplasmic AP-2
signal. As expected, p21 and p53 stainings were inversely related to each other
(P < 0.001). There was a significant positive association between p21 and AP-2
expression levels (P= 0.01). p21 intensity and percentage were higher in Dukes' A
and B stages (P< 0.001). The cancer-related survival and recurrence-free survival
(RFS) rates were significantly lower among patients with a low signal for p21 (P<
0.001) and low p21 percentage in tumour epithelium (P < 0.001). High p53 staining
intensity in tumour epithelium predicted poor survival (P = 0.01) and RFS (P =
0.003). In the multivariate analysis, p21 percentage distribution independently
predicted cancer-related survival in all cases, and p21 expression intensity in
T1-4/N0-3/M0 and T1-3/N0/M0 cases. p21 percentage distribution was an independent
predictor of RFS in all and T1-3/N0/M0 cases. AP-2 staining did not reach any
prognostic significance. These results suggest that the immunohistochemical
detection of cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 could be used to predict more 
precisely the outcome of colorectal cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2374357
PMID: 10487624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 17;274(38):26661-7.

Regulation of a cell type-specific silencer in the human interleukin-3 gene
promoter by the transcription factor YY1 and an AP2 sequence-recognizing factor.

Ye J(1), Young HA, Zhang X, Castranova V, Vallyathan V, Shi X.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Physiology Research Branch, Health Effect Laboratory Division,
NIOSH, National Institutes of Health, Morgantown, West Virginia 26505, USA.
jby4@cdc.gov

Negative regulation of cytokine gene transcription is an important mechanism in
maintaining homeostasis of immune function. In this study, we characterized a
silencer element in the human interleukin-3 gene promoter that is responsible for
the cell-specific expression of interleukin-3. This silencer activity was
proposed to be mediated by an unidentified nuclear inhibitory protein (NIP). In
this study, we have identified two nuclear factors that are responsible for the
silencer activity in T cells. The NIP element forms four specific DNA-protein
complexes (designated as complexes A-D) with the Jurkat nuclear proteins. Complex
A contains a nuclear protein that shares DNA-binding specificity with the
transcription factor AP2 (designated as an AP2 sequence-recognizing factor
(ASRF)). Formation of this ASRF complex is required for the NIP silencer
function, as mutation of the ASRF-binding site abrogated the silencer activity.
Complex B contains the nuclear factor YY1 (Yin-Yang 1), whose function is to
down-regulate ASRF activity in the silencer. YY1 activity is supported by data
from mutation and cotransfection analyses. Complexes C and D are formed by
nonspecific binding proteins and do not express any regulatory activity in the
NIP element. These data indicate that a cell type-specific silencer activity
might be determined by a unique profile of ubiquitous transcription factors.

PMID: 10480868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 1999 Sep 15;163(6):2977-81.

Cutting edge: SIV Nef protein utilizes both leucine- and tyrosine-based protein
sorting pathways for down-regulation of CD4.

Bresnahan PA(1), Yonemoto W, Greene WC.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Virology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco 94141, USA.

The Nef protein is unique to primate lentiviruses and is closely linked to
accelerated pathogenesis in both human and monkey hosts. Nef acts to
down-regulate CD4 and MHC class I, two receptors important for immune function. A
recent report demonstrated the presence of two tyrosine motifs in SIV Nef that
contribute to its ability to down-regulate CD4 and to associate with clathrin
adaptors. These tyrosine motifs are not present in HIV-1 Nef, which instead
utilizes a leucine-based motif for its down-regulation of CD4. We now report that
SIV Nef also contains a conserved leucine-based motif that contributes to CD4
down-regulation, functions to stimulate internalization, and contributes to the
association of SIV Nef with clathrin adaptors AP-1 and AP-2. These results
demonstrate that SIV Nef differs from HIV-1 Nef by its ability to use two
parallel pathways of the protein-sorting machinery based on either tyrosine or
leucine motifs.

PMID: 10477559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Oncogene. 1999 Aug 12;18(32):4632-9.

Synergy of PEBP2/CBF with mi transcription factor (MITF) for transactivation of
mouse mast cell protease 6 gene.

Ogihara H(1), Kanno T, Morii E, Kim DK, Lee YM, Sato M, Kim WY, Nomura S, Ito Y, 
Kitamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2 Yamada-oka,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The mi locus encodes a member of the basic - helix - loop - helix - leucine
zipper (bHLH-Zip) protein family of transcription factors (hereafter called
MITF). Although the bHLH-Zip family transcription factors generally recognize and
bind CANNTG motifs, the expression of mouse mast cell protease 6 (MMCP-6) gene is
regulated by MITF through the GACCTG motif in the promoter region. The GACCTG
motif was partly overlapped the TGTGGTC sequence, which was bound by polyomavirus
enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2). In the present study, the effect of PEBP2 on 
the expression of MMCP-6 gene was examined. PEBP2 that is composed of alpha and
beta subunits was expressed by mast cell lines and cultured mast cells derived
from spleen. The overexpression of dominant negative PEBP2 cDNA reduced the
expression of MMCP-6. Moreover, the simultaneous transfection of the plasmid
containing MITF cDNA and the plasmid containing PEBP2 cDNA increased the MMCP-6
promoter activity. For the synergistic action of PEBP2 and MITF, the intact
GACCTG and TGTGGTC motifs were prerequisite. The PEBP2alphaB1 mutant which lacked
the region downstream from the Runt domain did not bind MITF and lost the
synergistic function. These results indicated that PEBP2 and MITF synergistically
transactivated the MMCP-6 gene and that the region downstream from the Runt
domain of PEBP2alphaB1 was essential for the physical and functional interactions
with MITF.

PMID: 10467408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Aug;13(8):1402-16.

Activator protein-2 mediates transcriptional activation of the CYP11A1 gene by
interaction with Sp1 rather than binding to DNA.

Pena P(1), Reutens AT, Albanese C, D'Amico M, Watanabe G, Donner A, Shu IW,
Williams T, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)The Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The ovine P45 side chain cleavage (CYP11A1) enzyme gene, which catalyzes the
initial enzymatic step in steroid hormone biosynthesis is transcriptionally
regulated in cultured steroidogenic human trophoblastic JEG-3 cells. The ovine
CYP11A1 promoter contains two GC-rich footprinted regions referred to as ovine
footprints 5 (OF5) and OF3, which are well conserved among the CYP11A1 promoters 
of different species. These GC-rich sequences resemble activator protein-2
(AP-2)/Sp1 binding sites and were previously implicated in basal and
cAMP-regulated activity of the bovine and ovine CYP11A1 promoters. In the current
studies, AP-2 induced the ovine CYP11A1 promoter 4.5-fold in JEG-3 cells with
full induction requiring the previously defined cAMP-responsive elements. Point
mutation of OF3 abolished induction by AP-2, and OF3 was sufficient for induction
by AP-2 when linked to a heterologous promoter. AP-2 induction of the CYP11A1
promoter required the basic region (N165-N278) and the carboxy terminus of AP-2
(N413-N437). In the course of investigating the mechanisms by which OF5 and OF3
regulated CYP11A1 transcription, we found that OF5 and OF3 bound Sp1 and Sp3 in
JEG-3 cells. AP-2 did not bind OF5 or OF3 directly but rather formed a
multiprotein complex with Sp1 in JEG-3 cells. AP-2 associated directly with Sp1
in vitro requiring the AP-2 basic region and the Sp1 carboxy terminus. AP-2
induced Sp1/Sp3 activity independently of AP-2 binding to DNA using a GAL4
paradigm. The Sp1 and Sp3 transactivation domains were linked to the DNA-binding 
domain of GAL4, and their activity was assessed using a luciferase reporter gene 
containing only the GAL4 DNA-binding sites linked to the minimal TATA site. AP-2 
induced Sp1/ Sp3-GAL4 activity 3- to 4-fold, requiring both the amino and extreme
carboxy terminus of AP-2. We conclude that AP-2 can bind to and stimulate Sp1
activity and induces the ovine CYP11A1 promoter through conserved Sp1/Sp3-binding
sites in JEG-3 cells. The induction of Sp1 activity by AP-2 may contribute to the
induction of other genes that bind Sp1.

PMID: 10446912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 11;261(3):705-11.

The 5'-flanking sequence and regulatory elements of the cystatin S gene.

Shaw PA(1), Chaparro O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, New York, 10029, USA. pshaw@smtplink.mssm.edu

The gene encoding rat cystatin S (Cys S), a salivary gland-specific secretory
protein, has CAAT and TATA boxes upstream of the inititation codon (Cox and Shaw,
1992), and contains regions that resemble those of other hormonally responsive
eukaryotic genes. The 5'-flanking sequence of the rat Cys S gene has a potential 
CREB/AP-1 binding site (Rupp et al., 1990; Trejo et al., 1992), two potential
glucocorticoid responsive elements (GREs, Drouin et al., 1989), and a possible
GR/PR (glucocorticoid/progesterone) responsive element (Forman and Samuels,
1990). One of these potential GREs is adjacent to a potential AP-2 binding site, 
and another is typical of the glucocorticoid and progesterone receptor binding
site. In this report, we have identified three regions in the 5'-flanking region 
of the Cys S gene that are found in salivary gland-specific genes (Ting et al.,
1992) with a GT-rich region located between conserved elements II and III.
Transfection experiments described in this paper suggest that a 281-bp DNA
fragment from the Cys S gene promoter region with conserved elements II and III, 
the GT-rich region, and a possible GR/PR responsive element contains a negative
regulatory element. In addition, our experiments suggest that the GT-rich region 
by itself is acting as a positive regulatory element.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10441490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 1999 Aug 6;274(32):22705-12.

Tissue-specific regulation of the ecto-5'-nucleotidase promoter. Role of the camp
response element site in mediating repression by the upstream regulatory region.

Spychala J(1), Zimmermann AG, Mitchell BS.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
27599-6573, USA. jozek@med.unc.edu

We have isolated the 5' region of the ecto-5'-nucleotidase (low K(m) 5'-NT) gene 
and established that a 969-base pair (bp) fragment confers cell-specific
expression of a CAT reporter gene that correlates with the expression of
endogenous ecto-5'-NT mRNA and enzymatic activity. A 768-bp upstream negative
regulatory region has been identified that conferred lymphocyte-specific negative
regulation in a heterologous system with a 244-bp deoxycytidine kinase core
promoter. DNase I footprinting identified several protected areas including Sp1, 
Sp1/AP-2, and cAMP response element (CRE) binding sites within the 201-bp core
promoter region and Sp1, NRE-2a, TCF-1/LEF-1, and Sp1/NF-AT binding sites in the 
upstream regulatory region. Whereas the CRE site was essential in mediating the
negative activity of the upstream regulatory region in Jurkat but not in HeLa
cells, mutation of the Sp1/AP-2 site decreased promoter activity in both cell
lines. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay analysis of proteins binding to the
CRE site identified both ATF-1 and ATF-2 in Jurkat cells. Finally, phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate increased the activity of both the core and the 969-bp
promoter fragments, and this increase was abrogated by mutations at the CRE site.
In summary, we have identified a tissue-specific regulatory region 5' of the
ecto-5'-NT core promoter that requires the presence of a functional CRE site
within the basal promoter for its suppressive activity.

PMID: 10428853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Aug 2;261(2):381-4.

Characterization of the promoter region of the human RFP gene.

Iwata Y(1), Nakayama A, Murakami H, Iida K, Iwashita T, Asai N, Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

The RFP gene encodes a Ring finger protein that has a tripartite motif consisting
of a Ring finger, a B-box finger and a coiled-coil domain. In the present study, 
we cloned and characterized the promoter region of the human RFP gene. The
nucleotide sequence of the promoter was GC-rich and had no typical TATA and CAAT 
boxes. Instead, it contained one AP2 and two Sp1 binding sites within 100 base
pairs upstream of the transcription initiation site. Analysis by the luciferase
assay revealed that the activity of this promoter region is very strong in both
human and mouse cell lines, although the activity in human cells was
approximately 10-15 fold higher than that in mouse cells. In addition, the AP2
and Sp1 binding sites appeared to synergistically function for the promoter
activity. Thus, the promoter of the RFP gene could be useful for high levels of
expression of various genes in culture cells.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10425194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Glycobiology. 1999 Aug;9(8):797-806.

Genomic organization and promoter activity of glucosidase I gene.

Khan FA(1), Varma GM, Vijay IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Avian Sciences, University of Maryland, College Park,
MD 20742-2311, USA.

Glucosidase I initiates the processing of asparagine (N-) linked glycoproteins by
removing the distal alpha1,2-linked glucosyl residue of the tetradecasaccharide
Glc(3)Man(9)GlcNAc(2). The gene encoding this enzyme was isolated and its
structural organization and promoter activity determined. The major transcript
for glucosidase I on northern blot appeared to be 3.1 kb; Southern blotting and
DNA sequencing indicated the size of the gene to be 6.8 kb, comprising four exons
separated by three introns. The first exon encodes the cytoplasmic tail and
transmembrane domain; the fourth encodes the putative catalytic domain of the
enzyme. Exon-intron junctions are flanked by consensus splice donor and acceptor 
sequences. Transcription initiation sites were mapped by primer extension,
ribonuclease protection assay and RT-PCR analysis. Primer extension results
showed multiple initiation sites at -150, -156, and -272 bp relative to the
translation initiation codon ATG. Sequence analysis of 5' flanking region showed 
no canonical TATA box, a high GC content, Sp1 and ETF binding sites (typical of a
housekeeping gene promoter). Also noteworthy, the promoter region contains
several generic STAT factor binding sites, one nearly perfect, and two half GR
binding elements. Other cis- acting elements recognized by transcription factors 
such as AP-2, NF-kappaB, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor (PR) were
also present in the putative promoter region. To determine the promoter activity,
a construct encompassing the region between -2114 to -5 bp of the putative
promoter was ligated to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter
plasmid and transiently transfected into COS 7 cells. CAT assay results clearly
show transcriptional activity of the promoter.

PMID: 10406845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cell Signal. 1999 Jul;11(7):479-89.

Dual activity of pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate on kappa B-dependent gene expression
in U937 cells: I. Regulation by the phorbol ester TPA.

Watanabe K(1), Kazakova I, Furniss M, Miller SC.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, SRI International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

Pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) has been widely used as an inhibitor of the
nuclear factor-kappa B, (NF-kappa B) signalling pathway. Here, we show that kappa
B-dependent reporter gene expression induced by low concentrations of
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) is potentiated by PDTC in the human
pro-monocytic U937 cell line. The stimulatory effect of PDTC on kappa B-dependent
gene expression was shown with a 4 x kappa B chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
construct and required an intact kappa B element in the human immunodeficiency
virus long terminal repeat (HIV-1 LTR). Unexpectedly, an HIV-1 LTR construct with
a mutation of the activator protein 2 (AP-2) binding site located between the two
kappa B elements was unresponsive to the stimulatory effect of PDTC with TPA. The
stimulation or inhibition of kappa B-dependent gene expression was dependent on
PDTC pre-treatment and the concentration of TPA. No stimulatory effect on HIV-1
LTR activity was observed with the metal chelator dipyridyl or the anti-oxidant
N-acetyl-L-cysteine. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that PDTC
treatment potentiated kappa B-dependent gene expression in a manner dependent on 
the concentration of TPA.

PMID: 10405758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 22;261(1):53-7.

Identification of the region of mi transcription factor which is responsible for 
the synergy with PEBP2/CBF.

Morii E(1), Ogihara H, Kanno T, Kim DK, Nomura S, Ito Y, Kitamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2 Yamada-oka,
Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. morii@patho.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

The mi locus encodes the mi transcription factor (MITF), a member of the
basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper protein family of transcription factors.
MITF binds the alphaB1/AML1 subtype of the alpha subunit of the polyomavirus
enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2). These two transcription factors
synergistically transactivate the mouse mast cell protease 6 (MMCP-6) gene. The
interaction of PEBP2 with MITF is mediated through the region carboxy-terminal to
the DNA-binding Runt domain. In the present study, we examined the region of MITF
that is responsible for the interaction with PEBP2. The MITF mutant that lacked
the region aa 67-152 did not bind PEBP2, and the mutant that lacked the region aa
1-152 lost the synergistic function in the transactivation of the MMCP-6
promoter. We conclude that the region amino-terminal to the basic region of MITF 
is required for physical and functional interactions with PEBP2.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10405322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Nat Struct Biol. 1999 Jul;6(7):624-7.

Solution structure of core binding factor beta and map of the CBF alpha binding
site.

Huang X(1), Peng JW, Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville 22906, USA.

The core binding factor beta subunit (CBF beta) is the non-DNA binding subunit of
the core-binding factors, transcription factors essential for multiple
developmental processes including hematopoiesis and bone development. Chromosomal
translocations involving the human CBFB gene are associated with a large
percentage of human leukemias. The N-terminal 141 amino acids of CBF beta
contains the heterodimerization domain for the DNA-binding CBF alpha subunits,
and is sufficient for CBF beta function in vivo. Here we present the
high-resolution solution structure of the CBF beta heterodimerization domain. It 
is a novel alpha/beta structure consisting of two three-stranded beta-sheets
packed on one another in a sandwich arrangement, with four peripheral
alpha-helices. The CBF alpha binding site on CBF beta has been mapped by chemical
shift perturbation analysis.

PMID: 10404216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Nat Struct Biol. 1999 Jul;6(7):620-3.

Molecular insights into PEBP2/CBF beta-SMMHC associated acute leukemia revealed
from the structure of PEBP2/CBF beta.

Goger M(1), Gupta V, Kim WY, Shigesada K, Ito Y, Werner MH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

PEBP2/CBF is a heterodimeric transcription factor essential for genetic
regulation of hematopoiesis and osteogenesis. DNA binding by PEBP2/CBF alpha is
accomplished by a highly conserved DNA binding domain, the Runt domain (RD),
whose structure adopts an S-type immunoglobulin fold when bound to DNA. The
supplementary subunit beta enhances DNA binding by the RD in vitro, but its role 
in the control of gene expression has remained largely unknown in vivo.
Chromosome 16 inversion creates a chimeric gene product fusing PEBP2/CBF beta to 
a portion of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (PEBP2/CBF beta-SMMHC) that is 
causally associated with the onset of acute myeloid leukemia in humans. The
three-dimensional structure of PEBP2/CBF beta has been determined in solution and
is shown to adopt a fold related to the beta-barrel oligomer binding motif.
Direct analysis of a 43.6 kD ternary RD-beta-DNA complex identifies the likely
surface of beta in contact with the RD. The structure of PEBP2/CBF beta enables a
molecular understanding of the capacity of PEBP2/CBF beta-SMMHC to sequester
PEBP2/CBF alpha in the cytoplasm and therefore provides a molecular basis for
understanding leukemogenic transformation.

PMID: 10404215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Nat Struct Biol. 1999 Jul;6(7):615-9.

Immunoglobulin motif DNA recognition and heterodimerization of the PEBP2/CBF Runt
domain.

Nagata T(1), Gupta V, Sorce D, Kim WY, Sali A, Chait BT, Shigesada K, Ito Y,
Werner MH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Biophysics, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

The polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2) or core binding factor (CBF) 
is a heterodimeric enhancer binding protein that is associated with genetic
regulation of hematopoiesis and osteogenesis. Aberrant forms of PEBP2/CBF are
implicated in the cause of the acute human leukemias and in a disorder of bone
development known as cleidocranial dysplasia. The common denominator in the
natural and mutant forms of this protein is a highly conserved domain of
PEBP2/CBF alpha, termed the Runt domain (RD), which is responsible for both DNA
binding and heterodimerization with the beta subunit of PEBP2/CBF. The
three-dimensional structure of the RD bound to DNA has been determined to be an
S-type immunoglobulin fold, establishing a structural relationship between the RD
and the core DNA binding domains of NF-kappaB, NFAT1, p53 and the STAT proteins. 
NMR spectroscopy of a 43.6 kD RD-beta-DNA ternary complex identified the surface 
of the RD in contact with the beta subunit, suggesting a mechanism for the
enhancement of RD DNA binding by beta. Analysis of leukemogenic mutants within
the RD provides molecular insights into the role of this factor in leukemogenesis
and cleidocranial dysplasia.

PMID: 10404214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Neurosci Res. 1999 Apr;33(4):275-80.

Distribution of AP-2 subtypes in the adult mouse brain.

Shimada M(1), Konishi Y, Ohkawa N, Ohtaka-Maruyama C, Hanaoka F, Makino Y, Tamura
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiba University, Japan.

In the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), transcription factor activator
protein 2 (AP-2) is one of the critical regulatory factors for neural gene
expression and neural development. As AP-2 has diverged into several subtypes,
i.e. AP-2alpha, -2beta, and 2.2, we investigated the distribution of the AP-2
subtypes in the adult mouse brain by in situ hybridization using subtype-specific
probes. Though AP-2 was essentially expressed in most regions of the brain, the
hippocampus and cerebellum Purkinje cells exhibited a relatively high
concentration of transcripts of any of the AP-2 subtypes. Among AP-2alpha
variants, the expression of variant 1 was considerably lower than that of variant
3. Hence, the expression pattern of AP-2alpha variant 3 is suggested to represent
the major gene expression of AP-2alpha. On the other hand, the expression of
AP-2beta messenger RNA (mRNA) was higher than that of AP-2alpha in many regions. 
Especially, the olfactory bulb, hippocampus, cerebellum, and cerebral cortex
contained an abundance of these mRNAs. Different from those of AP-2alpha,
AP-2beta mRNAs were detected in considerable amounts in the glanular cells as
well as in Purkinje cells. AP-2.2 gene expression was weak throughout the brain. 
Consequently, we found that various AP-2 subtypes and variants were expressed in 
a similar distribution pattern with each having its own specific intensity but
that their precise distribution profiles were not exactly the same. In the mature
brain, AP-2 is thought to regulate neural gene expression through specific and
redundant association with a target gene.

PMID: 10401980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biochem. 1999 Jul;126(1):130-6.

AP-2 enhances Sp1-dependent activation of the growth-regulated human ATP/ADP
translocator.

Li R(1), Hodny Z, Zaid A, Barath P, Nelson BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Arrhenius Laboratories for Natural Sciences,
Stockholm University, Stockholm, S-106 91 Sweden. li@mail.biokemi.su.se

The mammalian ATP/ADP translocator isoform-2 (ANT2) gene is growth-activated.
Regulation of the gene appears to involve Sp1, as an essential activator, and a
suppressor through an Sp1 core element next to the transcription start. We show
here that the proximal promoter also binds AP-2 strongly and specifically to two 
sites, one of which overlaps the Sp1 proximal suppressor site. AP-2 binds with an
affinity of 10 to15 fold higher than that of Sp1. AP-2 alone does not alter the
ANT2 promoter activity in transfected SL2 cells, but enhances the Sp1-dependent
activation of the promoter several fold. Enhancement by AP-2 is observed only
when Sp1 is limiting for transcription activation. These data suggest that the
cellular AP-2/Sp1 ratio might influence ANT2 expression in developing or
differentiating cells.

PMID: 10393330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Oncogene. 1999 Jun 24;18(25):3682-95.

Exon 4-encoded acidic domain in the epithelium-restricted Ets factor, ESX,
confers potent transactivating capacity and binds to TATA-binding protein (TBP).

Chang CH(1), Scott GK, Baldwin MA, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94143-1270,
USA.

The Ets gene family has a complex evolutionary history with many family members
known to regulate genetic programs essential for differentiation and development,
and some known for their involvement in human tumorigenesis. To understand the
biological properties associated with a recently described epithelium-restricted 
Ets factor ESX, an 11 kb fragment from the 1q32.2 genomically localized human
gene was cloned and analysed. Upstream of the ESX promoter region in this genomic
fragment lies the terminal exon of a newly identified gene that encodes a
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme variant, UEV-1. Tissues expressing ESX produce a
primary 2.2 kb transcript along with a 4.1 kb secondary transcript arising by
alternate poly(A) site selection and uniquely recognized by a genomic probe from 
the 3' terminal region of the 11 kb clone. Endogenous expression of ESX results
in a 42 kDa nuclear protein having fivefold greater affinity for the
chromatin-nuclear matrix compartment as compared to other endogenous
transcription factors like AP-2 and the homologous Ets factor, ELF-1. Exon
mapping of the modular structure inferred from ESX cDNA and construction of
GAL4(DBD)-ESX expression constructs were used to identify a transactivating
domain encoded by exon 4 having comparable potency to the acidic transactivation 
domain of the viral transcription factor, VP16. This exon 4-encoded 31 amino acid
domain in ESX was shown by mutation and deletion analysis to possess a 13 residue
acidic transactivation core which, based on modeling and circular dichroism
analysis, is predicted to form an amphipathic alpha-helical secondary structure. 
Using recombinant GST-ESX (exon 4) fusion proteins in an in vitro pull-down
assay, this ESX transactivation domain was shown to bind specifically to one
component of the general transcription machinery, TATA-binding protein (TBP).
Transient transfection experiments confirmed the ability of this TBP-binding
transactivation domain in ESX to squelch heterologous promoters independent of
any promoter binding as efficiently as the transactivation domain from VP16.

PMID: 10391676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Oncogene. 1999 May 13;18(19):2942-54.

New Myc-interacting proteins: a second Myc network emerges.

Sakamuro D(1), Prendergast GC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4268, USA.

Despite its intensive investigation for almost two decades, c-Myc remains a
fascinating and enigmatic subject. A large and compelling body of evidence
indicates that c-Myc is a transcription factor with central roles in the
regulation of cell proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, but its exact
function has remained elusive. In this review we survey recent advances in the
identification and analysis of c-Myc-binding proteins, which suggest insights
into the transcriptional roles of c-Myc but which also extend the existing
functional paradigms. The C-terminal domain (CTD) of c-Myc mediates interaction
with Max and physiological recognition of DNA target sequences, events needed for
all biological actions. Recently described interactions between the CTD and other
cellular proteins, including YY-1, AP-2, BRCA-1, TFII-I, and Miz-1, suggest
levels of regulatory complexity beyond Max in controlling DNA recognition by
c-Myc. The N-terminal domain (NTD), which includes the evolutionarily conserved
and functionally crucial Myc Box sequences (MB1 and MB2), contains the
transcription activation domain (TAD) of c-Myc as well as regions required for
transcriptional repression, cell cycle regulation, transformation, and apoptosis.
In addition to interaction with the retinoblastoma family protein p107, the NTD
has been shown to interact with alpha-tubulin and the novel adaptor proteins
Binl, MM-1, Pam, TRRAP, and AMY-1. The structure of these proteins and their
effects on c-Myc actions suggest links to the transcriptional regulatory
machinery as well as to cell cycle regulation, chromatin modeling, and apoptosis.
Investigations of this emerging NTD-based network may reveal how c-Myc is
regulated and how it affects cell fate, as well as providing tools to distinguish
the physiological roles of various Myc target genes.

PMID: 10378691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Signal. 1999 May;11(5):371-83.

Dual activity of pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate on kappaB-dependent gene expression 
in U937 cells: II. Regulation by tumour necrosis factor-alpha.

Watanabe K(1), Kazakova I, Furniss M, Miller SC.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Pharmaceutical Discovery Division, SRI
International, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

In the human promonocytic U937 cell line, pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC) was 
a potent inhibitor of the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) signalling pathway
induced by the phorbol ester 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA). However,
PDTC did not inhibit tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha)-induced NF-kappaB
DNA binding activity but potentiated the effect of TNF-alpha on kappaB-dependent 
gene expression. The stimulatory effect of PDTC with TNF-alpha was not observed
with an HIV-1 LTR reporter construct containing two mutated kappaB binding sites 
or with a construct with a mutation of the activating protein (AP)-2 binding site
located between the two kappaB elements. Two distinct signalling pathways, one
mediated by TPA and the other by TNF-alpha, were shown to interact, functionally 
defining a threshold important in the inhibitory or stimulatory effect of PDTC on
kappaB-dependent gene expression. Evidence that PDTC induced AP-1 DNA binding and
AP-1 reporter gene activity, raised the hypothesis that the effect of PDTC was
mediated by an interaction between the AP-1 pathway and p65(RelA).
Co-transfection with expression vectors for p65(RelA) and the AP-1 subunits c-Fos
and c-Jun resulted in a decrease in the stimulatory effect of PDTC on HIV-1 LTR
activity. Co-transfection of p65(RelA) with Tam67, a dominant negative mutant of 
c-Jun defective in transactivation, stimulated the effect of PDTC on HIV-1 LTR
activity. Evidence that the stimulatory effect of Tam67 with PDTC was reduced
with c-Jun is consistent with the hypothesis.

PMID: 10376811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jul 1;27(13):2760-9.

SELEX and missing phosphate contact analyses reveal flexibility within the
AP-2[alpha] protein: DNA binding complex.

Mohibullah N(1), Donner A, Ippolito JA, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cellular and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The AP-2 family of transcription factors are defined by the presence of a novel
DNA binding domain, termed a 'basic helix-span-helix' motif. The AP-2 genes
regulate important aspects of vertebrate embryogenesis and have also been linked 
to the control of cell proliferation and tumorigenesis, but the cellular targets 
that the AP-2 proteins control are largely undefined. In particular, since only a
limited number of sequences have previously been utilized to define the nature of
the AP-2 binding site, the range of DNA sequences recognized by the AP-2 proteins
remains unknown. We have therefore utilized a SELEX analysis to identify multiple
new AP-2[alpha] binding sites. Moreover, we have devised a novel missing
phosphate and nucleotide competition analysis to characterize the residues in the
binding site required for AP-2[alpha] protein:DNA contact. These studies suggest 
that the AP-2[alpha] protein:DNA complex is flexible and indicate that
AP-2[alpha] can bind three related sequence motifs: GCC N3 GGC, GCC N4 GGC and
GCC N3/4 GGG. The availability of these more refined consensus sequences should
assist in the identification of target genes for this critical transcription
factor.

PMCID: PMC148486
PMID: 10373594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cancer Res. 1999 Jun 1;59(11):2527-31.

A new cis element is involved in the HER2 gene overexpression in human breast
cancer cells.

Grooteclaes M(1), Vernimmen D, Plaza S, Pasleau F, Hodzic D, Winkler-Gol R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Liège, Belgium.

The HER2 proto-oncogene product is overexpressed in 30% of breast cancers, and
this correlates with poor prognosis. Increased levels of HER2 mRNA in breast
cancer cell lines result from increased gene transcription. We report the
identification of a new 17-bp-long cis sequence located between positions -506
and -489 from the transcription start site. This sequence is recognized by a
trans-activating factor that we tentatively named HER2 transcription factor
(HTF). This factor, involved in the increased transcription of the HER2 gene in
the BT-474 mammary tumor cells, has a molecular weight of about Mr 50,000. HTF
can also bind, but with a lower affinity, to a related cis sequence present in
the epidermal growth factor receptor promoter. Interestingly, the HTF binding
activity is high in nuclear extracts from several mammary tumor cells
overexpressing the HER2 gene.

PMID: 10363966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 May;18(5):419-28.

Genomic organization of mouse gene zfp162.

Wrehlke C(1), Wiedemeyer WR, Schmitt-Wrede HP, Mincheva A, Lichter P, Wunderlich 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Parasitology and Centre for Biological and Medical
Research, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

We report the cloning and characterization of the alternatively spliced mouse
gene zfp162, formerly termed mzfm, the homolog of the human ZFM1 gene encoding
the splicing factor SF1 and a putative signal transduction and activation of RNA 
(STAR) protein. The zfp162 gene is about 14 kb long and consists of 14 exons and 
13 introns. Comparison of zfp162 with the genomic sequences of ZFM1/SF1 revealed 
that the exon-intron structure and exon sequences are well conserved between the 
genes, whereas the introns differ in length and sequence composition. Using
fluorescent in situ hybridization, the zfp162 gene was assigned to chromosome 19,
region B. Screening of a genomic library integrated in lambda DASH II resulted in
the identification of the 5'-flanking region of zfp162. Sequence analysis of this
region showed that zfp162 is a TATA-less gene containing an initiator control
element and two CCAAT boxes. The promoter exhibits the following motifs: AP-2,
CRE, Ets, GRE, HNF5, MRE, SP-1, TRE, TCF1, and PU.1. The core promoter, from
position -331 to -157, contains the motifs CRE, SP-1, MRE, and AP-2, as
determined in transfected CHO-K1 cells and IC-21 cells by reporter gene assay
using a secreted form of human placental alkaline phosphatase. The occurrence of 
PU.1/GRE supports the view that the zfp162 gene encodes a protein involved not
only in nuclear RNA metabolism, as the human ZFM1/SF1, but also in as yet unknown
macrophage-inherent functions.

PMID: 10360842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Feb;10(1):3-10.

Molecular regulation of adipocyte differentiation.

Cowherd RM(1), Lyle RE, McGehee RE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, USA.

Significant advances have been made recently toward understanding the molecular
events that regulate adipocyte differentiation. In vitro models of adipogenesis, 
such as the 3T3-L1 and F-442A preadipocyte cell lines have proven to be an
invaluable resource in elucidating mechanisms of adipocyte differentiation.
Subject to modulation by hormonal, dietary, and genetic influences, the
differentiation program now appears to be distinctly controlled through the
coordinate regulation of transcription factors that predominantly include members
of the C/EBP and PPAR families. Increased understanding of these critical factors
and how they are regulated will provide insights into adipose tissue development 
as well as treatment of obesity.

PMID: 10355023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 May 21;69(1):62-72.

Genomic organization and regulatory elements of the rat latexin gene, which is
expressed in a cell type-specific manner in both central and peripheral nervous
systems.

Miyasaka N(1), Hatanaka Y, Jin M, Arimatsu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, 11 Minamiooya, Machida-shi, Tokyo
194-8511, Japan. miyasaka@libra.ls.m-kagaku.co.jp

Latexin, a carboxypeptidase A inhibitor, is expressed in a cell type-specific
manner in both central and peripheral nervous systems in the rat. In the
neocortex, a specific subpopulation of neurons in layers V and VI expresses
latexin. In the primary sensory ganglia, the expression is restricted to smaller 
diameter neurons. As a first step to clarify regulatory mechanisms underlying
cell type-specific expression of latexin, we have determined the organization of 
the rat latexin gene and analyzed its regulatory elements. The latexin gene spans
approximately 5.8 kb, and consists of six exons and five introns. Three
transcription initiation sites were mapped. The upstream region lacks typical
TATA or CAAT boxes but has several GC-rich sites. To assess promoter activity,
the luciferase reporter gene fused to the 5'-flanking region (6.4 kb) of the
latexin gene was transiently transfected into several cell lines. Luciferase
activity was 2-8 times higher in latexin-expressing cells (PC12) than
non-expressing cells (NS20 and L6). Deletion analysis with PC12 cells revealed
that a core promoter is located between nucleotide positions -261 and -201
relative to the A of the initiation codon. Nerve growth factor (NGF)-responsive
element(s) is located between positions -518 and -262, in which AP-1, AP-2 and
NF-kappaB binding sites are found. Furthermore, we demonstrate that a 1.3 kb
genomic fragment containing the first intron has transcriptional enhancing
activity in PC12 cells. These results suggest that up and downstream regulatory
elements are involved in the control of cell type-specific expression of latexin.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10350638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Genes Cells. 1999 Mar;4(3):161-73.

alpha2D/A-adrenergic receptor gene induction in the retina by phorbol ester:
involvement of an AP-2 element.

Venkataraman V(1), Duda T, Sharma RK.

Author information: 
(1)The Unit of Regulatory and Molecular Biology, Departments of Cell Biology and 
Ophthalmology, NJMS, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey,
Stratford, NJ 08084, USA.

BACKGROUND: The alpha2-adrenergic receptor (alpha2-AR) expressed in the bovine
retina has been demonstrated to be of the alpha2D subtype. The bovine
alpha2D-adrenergic receptor (alpha2D/A-AR) gene has been cloned and
characterized. This report describes the induction of this gene by phorbol- 12,
13-myristate acetate (PMA), an activator of protein kinase C (PKC).
RESULTS: Treatment of the bovine retina for 60 min with PMA (1 micrometer)
resulted in significant and similar increases in alpha2D/A-AR mRNA level and gene
transcription. This indicates that PMA causes alpha2D/A-AR gene induction and
that this induction takes place directly at the transcriptional level. In C6
cells, treatment with PMA at a concentration which was as low as 0.1 micrometer
induced endogenous alpha2D/A-AR mRNA after 60 min. Luciferase reporter assays in 
C6 cells mapped the PMA-responsive element to a region between -247 bp and -163
bp on the alpha2D/A-AR promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed an 
increased binding of nuclear factor(s) from PMA-treated bovine retina to this
promoter region. Competition assays indicate that an AP-2 element may be involved
in the PMA-dependent induction.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate for the first time, the direct induction
of the alpha2D/A-AR gene by PMA and support a role for an AP-2 element in the
induction mechanism.

PMID: 10320481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. EMBO J. 1999 May 4;18(9):2551-62.

A WW domain-containing yes-associated protein (YAP) is a novel transcriptional
co-activator.

Yagi R(1), Chen LF, Shigesada K, Murakami Y, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogo-in, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

A protein module called the WW domain recognizes and binds to a short
oligopeptide called the PY motif, PPxY, to mediate protein-protein interactions. 
The PY motif is present in the transcription activation domains of a wide range
of transcription factors including c-Jun, AP-2, NF-E2, C/EBPalpha and PEBP2/CBF, 
suggesting that it plays an important role in transcriptional activation. We show
here that mutation of the PY motif in the subregion of the activation domain of
the DNA-binding subunit of PEBP2, PEBP2alpha, abolishes its transactivation
function. Using yeast two-hybrid screening, we demonstrate that Yes-associated
protein (YAP) binds to the PY motif of PEBP2alpha through its WW domain. The
C-terminal region of YAP fused to the DNA-binding domain of GAL4 showed
transactivation as strong as that of GAL4-VP16. Exogenously expressed YAP
conferred transcription-stimulating activity on the PY motif fused to the GAL4
DNA-binding domain as well as to native PEBP2alpha. The osteocalcin promoter was 
stimulated by exogenous PEBP2alphaA and a dominant negative form of YAP strongly 
inhibited this activity, suggesting YAP involvement in this promoter activity in 
vivo. These results indicate that the PY motif is a novel transcription
activation domain that functions by recruiting YAP as a strong transcription
activator to target genes.

PMCID: PMC1171336
PMID: 10228168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Chem Biol Interact. 1999 Mar 1;118(1):51-67.

Differential sensitivity of transcription factors to mustard-damaged DNA.

Chen XM(1), Gray PJ, Cullinane C, Phillips DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, La Trobe University, Bundoora, Victoria,
Australia.

Nitrogen mustard (bis(2-chloroethyl) methylamine, HN2) inhibited the binding of
upstream factors Sp1 and AP2 to their consensus sequences. At concentrations
where 50% of the consensus sequence DNA contained at least one lesion, HN2
inhibited formation of the Sp1 complex by 37% (40 microM HN2) and the AP2 complex
by 40% (50 microM HN2). The binding of the TATA binding protein (TBP) to the TATA
element was also inhibited by HN2, whereas sulphur mustard and the monofunctional
sulphur mustard 2-chloroethyl ethyl sulphide (CEES) resulted in a disproportional
extent of inhibition with respect to the level of alkylation. The level of
alkylation of the TBP oligonucleotide varied significantly at 100 microM drug,
with 80, 42 and 15% of HN2, sulphur mustard and CEES, respectively. However, this
level of alkylation inhibited formation of the TBP-DNA complex by 70, 70 and 45%,
respectively. This differential sensitivity of transcription factors to
mustard-induced DNA damage therefore appears to reside dominantly in the
stereochemical differences between the specific mustard lesions.

PMID: 10227578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Lipid Res. 1999 May;40(5):870-80.

Transcription factors Sp1 and AP-2 mediate induction of acid sphingomyelinase
during monocytic differentiation.

Langmann T(1), Buechler C, Ries S, Schaeffler A, Aslanidis C, Schuierer M, Weiler
M, Sandhoff K, de Jong PJ, Schmitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsmedizin, Klinikum der
Universität Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany.

Cells from the human monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 differentiate towards a
macrophage-like phenotype when stimulated with phorbol 12-myristate -13- acetate 
(PMA), 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D3, and various other agents. We demonstrate here
that the expression of the lysosomal enzyme acid sphingomyelinase (ASM; E.C.
3.1.4.12) is induced during this process and is strongly elevated in
differentiated THP-1 cells, as well as in differentiated human mononuclear
phagocytes. Using Northern blotting, RNase protection assay, and nuclear run-on
analyses, we show that the up-regulation of ASM expression is regulated mainly at
the level of transcription and that new protein synthesis is required for
enhanced ASM activity. This cell-type specific induction by PMA treatment was
further investigated with respect to transcriptional control. A series of 5'
deletion derivatives of the upstream regulatory region were used in transient
transfection assays to identify promoter elements required for basal and
inducible gene expression. A PMA responsive element was localized to a region
between -319 and -219 bp upstream of the initiation codon and co-transfections
with transcription factor expression plasmids for AP-2 and Sp1 resulted in
augmented ASM promoter activity, which was abolished when the binding sites for
these two factors were deleted. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and
supershift assays we demonstrate that this region is specifically bound by Sp1
and AP-2. These factors are present in nuclear extracts prepared from both
induced and uninduced THP-1 cells. However, the intensity of the complex formed
appeared to increase when nuclear extracts from PMA-treated cells were used. From
these studies, we conclude that a concerted action of the transcription factors
AP-2 and Sp1 is essential for the up -regulation of ASM expression during the
process of macrophage differentiation.

PMID: 10224156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Endocrinology. 1999 May;140(5):2100-9.

Multiple elements and protein factors coordinate the basal and cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate-induced transcription of the lutropin receptor gene in rat
granulosa cells.

Chen S(1), Shi H, Liu X, Segaloff DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa College of
Medicine, Iowa City 52242, USA.

The expression of the lutropin receptor (LHR) in granulosa cells is a complex
phenomenon under the hormonal control of FSH and estradiol. Using primary
cultures of granulosa cells from immature female rats pretreated with
diethylstilbestrol (a compound with estrogen-like activity), the role of FSH in
LHR induction was studied. Previous studies from our laboratory have shown that
FSH or 8-bromo-cAMP addition to these cells causes a marked increase in the rate 
of transcription of the rat LHR (rLHR) gene. The present studies were undertaken 
to compare the properties of the rLHR gene in undifferentiated vs. differentiated
rat granulosa cells as a means of determining those elements that confer basal
activity and cAMP responsiveness. Our studies show that the proximal 155 bp
(relative to the translational initiation codon) of the 5'-flanking region of
rLHR gene represent a minimal promoter that accounts for the basal expression of 
this receptor in rat granulosa cells. A major domain located between nucleotides 
(nt) -90 and -120, with another one possibly being between nt -120 and -155,
induced activation of basal transcriptional activity. An inhibitory domain was
observed to lie between nt -186 and -1375. Our data further show that multiple
elements within the 2.1 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the rLHR gene are
involved in the 8-bromo-cAMP-induced expression of the LHR gene. Of these, the
three Sp1-binding sites within the proximal portion of the 5'-flanking region
appear to be important for both basal as well as cAMP-induced rLHR gene
transcription.

PMID: 10218960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Arthritis Rheum. 1999 Apr;42(4):710-8.

Inhibition of tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced prostaglandin E2 production by 
the antiinflammatory cytokines interleukin-4, interleukin-10, and interleukin-13 
in osteoarthritic synovial fibroblasts: distinct targeting in the signaling
pathways.

Alaaeddine N(1), Di Battista JA, Pelletier JP, Kiansa K, Cloutier JM,
Martel-Pelletier J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montréal, and Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of the antiinflammatory cytokines
interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-10, and IL-13 on tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha)-induced prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) release in the cellular signaling
cascade on human osteoarthritis (OA) synovial fibroblasts.
METHODS: Human OA synovial fibroblasts were cultured to explore the impact of
IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 on TNFalpha binding to TNF receptors (TNFR), soluble TNFR 
(sTNFR), cytoplasmic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2), and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2)
production, and on the binding activity of the transcription factors nuclear
factor kappaB (NF-kappaB), CCAAT-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), activator
protein 2 (AP-2), and cyclic AMP response element-binding protein (CREB).
RESULTS: IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 at 5 ng/ml dramatically reduced TNFalpha-induced 
PGE2 release by approximately 90% (P < 0.0001). IL-4 up-regulated the level of
TNFalpha-induced TNFR by 47% (P < 0.06), while IL-10 down-regulated it by 71% (P 
< 0.02); IL-13 had no effect. Although statistical significance was not reached, 
all 3 cytokines up-regulated the basal level of sTNFR-55. IL-4 and IL-10, while
not altering the basal level of sTNFR-75, significantly increased the
TNFalpha-stimulated release of sTNFR-75. IL-4, IL-10, and IL-13 reduced the
TNFalpha-induced COX-2 level, and IL-4 and IL-10 reduced the cPLA2 level. IL-4
had no effect on TNFalpha up-regulation of NF-kappaB, and a slight decrease was
noted with IL-10 and IL-13 at the highest concentration used (5 ng/ml). IL-4 and 
IL-13 decreased the TNFa-induced C/EBP accumulation in a dose-dependent manner,
while IL-10 up-regulated its basal level. AP-2 and CREB were not induced by
TNFalpha.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that these antiinflammatory cytokines reversed
the TNFalpha-induced release of PGE2 by OA synovial fibroblasts, by acting at
various levels of the TNFa-dependent signaling cascade. These data shed new light
on the mechanisms by which these cytokines reduce inflammatory processes.

PMID: 10211885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Br J Cancer. 1999 Apr;79(11-12):1679-84.

DT-diaphorase activity in NSCLC and SCLC cell lines: a role for fos/jun
regulation.

Kepa JK(1), Ross D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Cancer Center,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA.

To assess the potential differential lung tumour expression of NAD(P)H:quinone
reductase (NQO1), the human (h) NQO1 promoter was characterized in gene transfer 
studies. A deletion panel of 5' flanking hNQO1 promoter constructs was made and
tested in transient transfection assays in NSCLC and SCLC cell lines. The largest
hNQO1 construct (-1539/+115) containing the antioxidant response element (ARE),
exhibited robust levels of reporter activity in the NSCLC (H460, H520, and A549) 
cell lines and expression was over 12 to 77-fold higher than the minimal
(-259/+115) promoter construct. In contrast, there was little difference in
promoter activity between the largest and minimal promoter construct in the SCLC 
(H146, H82 and H187) cell lines. Deletion of the sites for NFkappaB and AP-2 and 
the XRE did not significantly affect hNQO1 promoter activity in either the NSCLC 
or SCLC cell lines. Robust promoter activity in NSCLC lines was mediated by a 359
bp segment of the proximal promoter that contained a canonical AP-1 binding site,
TGACTCAG, within the ARE. Gel supershift assays with various specific Fos/Jun
antibodies identified Fra1, Fra2 and Jun B binding activity in NSCLC cells to a
promoter fragment (-477 to -438) spanning the AP-1 site, whereas SCLC do not
appear to express functional Fra or Jun B. These results suggest a possible role 
for AP-1 activity in the differential expression of hNQO1 in NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC2362807
PMID: 10206277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 13;257(2):533-7.

Isolation and characterization of a genomic region upstream from the ovine
Na+/d-glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) cDNA.

Wood IS(1), Allison GG, Shirazi-Beechey SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Brownlow Hill, L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

d-Glucose and non-metabolisable analogues of D-glucose regulate the expression of
intestinal SGLT1 at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. In
order to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the ovine intestinal SGLT1 gene, we have isolated an upstream
element of about 1 kb in size. This DNA fragment contains a TATA box motif, 48 bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site and includes transcription factor
binding sites for HNF-1 and AP-2. We have shown that the ovine SGLT1 promoter
fragment can drive the transcription of a reporter gene when transfected into the
epithelial cell lines STC-1 and LLC-PK1, which endogenously express SGLT1.
Deletion analyses of the promoter indicate that -66/+21 bp proximal sequence
directs the highest level of reporter gene activity. There are one and possibly
two sites of transcriptional suppression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 13;257(2):516-22.

Epithelial-cell-specific transcriptional regulation of human
Galbeta1,3GalNAc/Galbeta1,4GlcNAc alpha2,3-sialyltransferase (hST3Gal IV) gene.

Taniguchi A(1), Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toho University, 2-2-1, Miyama, Funabashi, 
Chiba, 274-8510, Japan. taniaki@phar.toho-u.ac.jp

The mRNA expression of the sialyltransferase genes is regulated in a cell type
specific manner. We show here the epithelium cell-specific transcriptional
regulation of the human Galbeta1, 3GalNAc/Galbeta1, 4 GlcNAc
alpha2,3-sialyltransferase gene (hST3Gal IV). Using a luciferase assay, we
identified a functional DNA portion within hST3Gal IV genomic DNA that confers an
epithelial cell line specific enhancer, located in nucleotide number (nt) -520 to
-420 within the B3 promoter. This element contains two sequences similar to AP2
recognition motifs. Co-transfection with an AP2 expression vector stimulated the 
enhancer activity of nt -520 to -420 element eight-fold compared with that using 
parental vector. Site-directed mutagenesis of AP2 sites showed that two AP2
motifs are essential for enhancer activity in HeLa cells. These results suggest
that AP2 plays a critical role in the epithelium-cell specific transcriptional
regulation of the hST3Gal IV gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Apr 15;364(2):241-6.

Transcription factor AP-2 mRNA and DNA binding activity are constitutively
expressed in SV40-immortalized but not normal human lung fibroblasts.

Huang Y(1), Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, 52242, USA.

Large T antigen (LT) expressed by the oncogenic DNA virus SV40 transforms cells
by interacting with and perturbing the normal function of several important
cellular proteins including P53, RB, c-MYC, and AP-2. AP-2 binds to regulatory
elements within the SV40 enhancer and is therefore of particular interest for
mechanisms relating to viral transcription, replication, and packaging. LT
antigen has been previously shown to inhibit transcription factor AP-2 from
binding to its cognate cis-element in DNA in vitro, and this is believed to occur
through a direct physical interaction between the LT and AP-2 proteins. Recently 
LT and AP-2 were shown to interact at the protein level in vivo and this
interaction appeared to mediated by the RB protein. Although LT inhibited AP-2
DNA binding in vitro, the effects of LT on AP-2 expression and DNA binding
activity in vivo have not been previously reported. We report here that
transcription factor AP-2alpha is constitutively expressed in SV40-transformed
cells compared to their normal cell counterparts. The overexpression of AP-2alpha
in SV40 transformed cells occurred at the levels of mRNA, protein, and DNA
binding activity. The increase in AP-2 DNA binding in vivo was particularly
interesting since previous studies in vitro would have predicted that AP-2 DNA
binding should be decreased in the presence of LT. AP-2 is a plieotropic
regulator of gene expression, activating some and repressing others. Thus,
increased cellular AP-2 activity may be an important downstream effector for the 
transforming ability of SV40.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10190980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 9;274(15):9969-75.

Transcriptional regulation of the Schizosaccharomyces pombe malic enzyme gene,
mae2.

Viljoen M(1), Volschenk H, Young RA, van Vuuren HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Stellenbosch, Stellenbosch 7600,
South Africa. mv4@maties.sun.ac.za

The NAD-dependent malic enzyme from Schizosaccharomyces pombe catalyzes the
oxidative decarboxylation of L-malate to pyruvate and CO2. Transcription of the
S. pombe malic enzyme gene, mae2, was studied to elucidate the regulatory
mechanisms involved in the expression of the gene. No evidence for
substrate-induced expression of mae2 was observed in the presence of 0.2%
L-malate. However, transcription of mae2 was induced when cells were grown in
high concentrations of glucose or under anaerobic conditions. The increased
levels of malic enzyme may provide additional pyruvate or assist in maintaining
the redox potential under fermentative conditions. Deletion and mutation analyses
of the 5'-flanking region of the mae2 gene revealed the presence of three novel
negative cis-acting elements, URS1, URS2, and URS3, that seem to function
cooperatively to repress transcription of the mae2 gene. URS1 and URS2 are also
present in the promoter region of the S. pombe malate transporter gene,
suggesting co-regulation of their expression. Furthermore, two positive
cis-acting elements in the mae2 promoter, UAS1 and UAS2, show homology with the
DNA recognition sites of the cAMP-dependent transcription factors ADR1, AP-2, and
ATF (activating transcription factor)/CREB (cAMP response element binding).

PMID: 10187772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Gene. 1999 Mar 18;229(1-2):11-9.

Activation of the mouse inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor type 1 promoter by 
AP-2.

Ohkawa N(1), Konishi Y, Shimada M, Makino Y, Yoshikawa S, Mikoshiba K, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiba University, Yayoi-cho
Inage-Ku, Chiba, 263-8522, Japan.

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor (IP3R) functions as a Ca2+ channel that
increases the intracellular Ca2+ upon binding to inositol trisphosphates. IP3R is
expressed ubiquitously and consists of a multigene family. Since the type 1 IP3R 
(IP3R1) is highly expressed in the cerebellar Purkinje cells and moderately in
hippocampus in the mammalian central nervous system (CNS), it is regarded as a
neural member of this gene family. In this work, we investigated transcriptional 
regulation of the mouse ip3r1 gene. A DNaseI footprinting assay demonstrated that
a sequence from -95 to -75, designated as box-II, was a binding site for a
cerebellum-enriched factor. A consensus sequence for AP-2 was located in box-II. 
An electrophoretic mobility shift assay with anti-AP-2 antibody revealed that
AP-2 is capable of binding to box-II. Deletion analysis of box-II showed that
flanking sequences beside the box-II motif were required for the stable binding. 
We demonstrated by transient luciferase assay that exogenously expressed AP-2
activated box-II-dependent transcription. Moreover, we showed that endogenous
AP-2 induced by retinoic acid also activated transcription via box-II in P19
cells. In-situ hybridization of the mouse brain revealed that AP-2 was
predominantly expressed in the cerebellar Purkinje cells and hippocampal CA1
region, where IP3R1 is also highly expressed. From these observations, AP-2
binding to box-II is thought to be responsible for IP3R1 gene regulation in the
CNS.

PMID: 10095099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Dyn. 1999 Mar;214(3):195-206.

Differential expression of AP-2alpha and AP-2beta in the developing chick retina:
repression of R-FABP promoter activity by AP-2.

Bisgrove DA(1), Godbout R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute,
Edmonton, Canada.

Retinal fatty acid binding protein (R-FABP) is the avian counterpart of murine
brain FABP implicated in glial cell differentiation and neuronal cell migration. 
R-FABP is highly expressed in the undifferentiated retina and brain of chick
embryos. We have previously shown by in vitro studies that the AP-2 transcription
factor binds to a consensus AP-2 binding site in the R-FABP promoter region.
Based on the expression pattern of AP-2 in the developing retina and on
mutational analysis of the AP-2 binding site in DNA transfection experiments, we 
proposed that AP-2 could be involved in the down-regulation of R-FABP
transcription. Here, we describe the cDNA isolation of two members of the AP-2
family expressed in the chick retina, AP-2alpha and AP-2beta. We show that R-FABP
mRNA and the AP-2 factors are expressed in mutually exclusive patterns in the
differentiating retina: whereas AP-2alpha and AP-2beta are selectively expressed 
either in amacrine, or in amacrine and horizontal cells, respectively, R-FABP
mRNAis found in Muller glial cells and/or bipolar cells. Furthermore, a decrease 
in R-FABP-dependent expression is obtained upon cotransfection of primary retinal
cultures with AP-2 expression vectors and a CAT reporter construct. The early and
cell-specific expression of AP-2alpha and AP-2beta in the developing retina
suggest a role for this transcription factor family in the early steps of
amacrine and horizontal cell differentiation. Repression of the R-FABP gene in
these cells may be an important component of their developmental program.

PMID: 10090146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Feb 4;1449(1):50-62.

Purification and characterization of TEF1, a transcription factor that controls
the human transforming growth factor-alpha promoter.

Wang D(1), Kudlow JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, University
of Alabama at Birmingham, 756 Diabetes Research and Education Building, 1808
Seventh Avenue S., Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) is a member of the epidermal growth 
factor family. It activates signal transduction pathways leading to cell
proliferation through the interaction with cell surface epidermal growth factor
receptor. The overexpression of TGF-alpha has been found in many types of cancers
and is thought to be involved in the genesis and maintenance of these tumors.
Recent results also implicate this growth factor in the development of certain
diabetic complications, such as atherosclerosis. The function of TGF-alpha can be
tightly controlled at the level of transcription of its gene. We have previously 
characterized the proximal TGF-alpha promoter and identified two neighboring
regulatory elements that appeared to cooperate with each other in the regulation 
of TGF-alpha transcription. The transcription factor that functions through the
distal element was identified as AP-2, a protein that was found to be induced by 
the oncoprotein, Ras. However, what factor binds and controls the proximal
regulatory element (PRE) is still unclear. Here, we report the purification and
preliminary characterization of the PRE-binding transcription factor TEF1 by
sequence-specific DNA-affinity chromatography from rat kidney nuclear extracts.
The purified TEF1 migrates on the SDS-PAGE at a molecular mass of about 36 kDa.
It specifically interacts with the PRE and was able to strongly activate
transcription from the TGF-alpha promoter in HeLa cell nuclear extracts in an in 
vitro transcription assay. The UV cross-linking experiment confirmed that this 36
kDa protein is indeed the protein that specifically binds the PRE. We also show
that the spacing between the AP-2 and the TEF1 sites in the TGF-alpha promoter
has little effect on the transcription from the TGF-alpha promoter. The
purification of TEF1 furthers our understanding of how TGF-alpha expression is
regulated and may help us understand the upstream signaling events that lead to
the elevated expression of this growth factor.

PMID: 10076050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Radiat Res. 1999 Mar;151(3):300-9.

Proto-oncogene mRNA levels and activities of multiple transcription factors in
C3H 10T 1/2 murine embryonic fibroblasts exposed to 835.62 and 847.74 MHz
cellular phone communication frequency radiation.

Goswami PC(1), Albee LD, Parsian AJ, Baty JD, Moros EG, Pickard WF, Roti Roti JL,
Hunt CR.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation Oncology Center, Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, USA.

This study was designed to determine whether two differently modulated
radiofrequencies of the type generally used in cellular phone communications
could elicit a general stress response in a biological system. The two
modulations and frequencies studied were a frequency-modulated continuous wave
(FMCW) with a carrier frequency of 835.62 MHz and a code division multiple-access
(CDMA) modulation centered on 847.74 MHz. Changes in proto-oncogene expression,
determined by measuring Fos, Jun, and Myc mRNA levels as well as by the
DNA-binding activity of the AP1, AP2 and NF-kappaB transcription factors, were
used as indicators of a general stress response. The effect of radiofrequency
exposure on proto-oncogene expression was assessed (1) in exponentially growing
C3H 10T 1/2 mouse embryo fibroblasts during their transition to plateau phase and
(2) during transition of serum-deprived cells to the proliferation cycle after
serum stimulation. Exposure of serum-deprived cells to 835.62 MHz FMCW or 847.74 
MHz CDMA microwaves (at an average specific absorption rate, SAR, of 0.6 W/kg)
did not significantly change the kinetics of proto-oncogene expression after
serum stimulation. Similarly, these exposures did not affect either the Jun and
Myc mRNA levels or the DNA-binding activity of AP1, AP2 and NF-kappaB in
exponential cells during transit to plateau-phase growth. Therefore, these
results suggest that the radiofrequency exposure is unlikely to elicit a general 
stress response in cells of this cell line under these conditions. However,
statistically significant increases (approximately 2-fold, P = 0.001) in Fos mRNA
levels were detected in exponential cells in transit to the plateau phase and in 
plateau-phase cells exposed to 835.62 MHz FMCW microwaves. For 847.74 MHz CDMA
exposure, the increase was 1.4-fold (P = 0.04). This increase in Fos expression
suggests that expression of specific genes could be affected by radiofrequency
exposure.

PMID: 10073668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Development. 1999 Apr;126(7):1483-94.

Regulation of Hoxa2 in cranial neural crest cells involves members of the AP-2
family.

Maconochie M(1), Krishnamurthy R, Nonchev S, Meier P, Manzanares M, Mitchell PJ, 
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. r-krumlauf@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Hoxa2 is expressed in cranial neural crest cells that migrate into the second
branchial arch and is essential for proper patterning of neural-crest-derived
structures in this region. We have used transgenic analysis to begin to address
the regulatory mechanisms which underlie neural-crest-specific expression of
Hoxa2. By performing a deletion analysis on an enhancer from the Hoxa2 gene that 
is capable of mediating expression in neural crest cells in a manner similar to
the endogenous gene, we demonstrated that multiple cis-acting elements are
required for neural-crest-specific activity. One of these elements consists of a 
sequence that binds to the three transcription factor AP-2 family members.
Mutation or deletion of this site in the Hoxa2 enhancer abrogates reporter
expression in cranial neural crest cells but not in the hindbrain. In both cell
culture co-transfection assays and transgenic embryos AP-2 family members are
able to trans-activate reporter expression, showing that this enhancer functions 
as an AP-2-responsive element in vivo. Reporter expression is not abolished in an
AP-2(alpha) null mutant embryos, suggesting redundancy with other AP-2 family
members for activation of the Hoxa2 enhancer. Other cis-elements identified in
this study critical for neural-crest-specific expression include an element that 
influences levels of expression and a conserved sequence, which when multimerized
directs expression in a broad subset of neural crest cells. These elements work
together to co-ordinate and restrict neural crest expression to the second
branchial arch and more posterior regions. Our findings have identified the
cis-components that allow Hoxa2 to be regulated independently in rhombomeres and 
cranial neural crest cells.

PMID: 10068641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Feb;29(2):488-98.

AML and Ets proteins regulate the I alpha1 germ-line promoter.

Xie XQ(1), Pardali E, Holm M, Sideras P, Grundström T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) class switch recombination of B lymphocytes 
preferentially targets unrearranged IgH genes that have already been rendered
transcriptionally active. Transcription of the germ-line IgH genes is controlled 
by intervening (I) regions upstream of their switch regions. The I alpha1
promoter activates transcription of the human germ-line C alpha1 gene for IgA1
and mediates the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 responsiveness of this
locus. Here we show that the I alpha1 promoter contains several binding sites for
the AML/PEBP2/CBF family of transcription factors and that AML and Ets proteins
are major regulators of the basal and TGF-beta-inducible promoter activity. Our
data constitute a starting point for studies to elucidate the molecular mechanism
by which TGF-beta regulates IgA production.

PMID: 10064064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biochem J. 1999 Mar 15;338 ( Pt 3):799-806.

Dual role for transcription factor AP-2 in the regulation of the major fetal
promoter P3 of the gene for human insulin-like growth factor II.

Rietveld LE(1), Koonen-Reemst AM, Sussenbach JS, Holthuizen PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School of Developmental
Biology, Utrecht University, Stratenum, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

The human insulin-like growth factor II (IGF-II) gene contains four promoters
that are differentially active during cell growth and development. Promoter 3
(P3) is the most active promoter in fetal and non-hepatic adult tissues. In
addition to its expression during development, P3 is also the major promoter in
many tumour tissues and IGF-II-expressing cell lines. Here we show that AP-2 has 
a dual function in P3 regulation in vivo as well as in vitro. In cells expressing
low levels of endogenous AP-2, AP-2 overexpression activates P3, whereas P3
promoter activity is inhibited in cells containing abundant AP-2. Four potential 
AP-2-binding sites were identified in footprinting studies with recombinant AP-2.
One of these AP-2-binding sites is located within the previously identified
element P3-4 that contains two adjacent binding sites for IGF-II promoter-binding
proteins IPBP3 and IPBP4/5. By applying binding competition assays and mutational
analysis it is shown that AP-2 interferes with IPBP3 binding and transactivation 
in vivo as well as in vitro. Furthermore, AP-2 can bind additional elements in
the proximal P3 promoter that also contribute to AP-2-mediated transactivation as
shown by transient transfection assays. From these results we conclude that AP-2 
is an important regulator in vivo and in vitro of IGF-II P3 activity.

PMCID: PMC1220119
PMID: 10051455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. FEBS Lett. 1999 Feb 5;444(1):27-31.

Transcription factor AP-2 activity is modulated by protein kinase A-mediated
phosphorylation.

García MA(1), Campillos M, Marina A, Valdivieso F, Vázquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Spain.

We recently reported that APOE promoter activity is stimulated by cAMP, this
effect being mediated by factor AP-2 [Garcia et al. (1996) J. Neurosci. 16,
7550-7556]. Here, we study whether cAMP-induced phosphorylation modulates the
activity of AP-2. Recombinant AP-2 was phosphorylated in vitro by protein kinase 
A (PKA) at Ser239. Mutation of Ser239 to Ala abolished in vitro phosphorylation
of AP-2 by PKA, but not the DNA binding activity of AP-2. Cotransfection studies 
showed that PKA stimulated the effect of AP-2 on the APOE promoter, but not that 
of the S239A mutant. Therefore, cAMP may modulate AP-2 activity by PKA-induced
phosphorylation of this factor.

PMID: 10037142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1999 Feb 19;65(1):124-8.

Decrease with age in methylcytosines in the promoter region of receptor for
advanced glycated end products (RAGE) gene in autopsy human cortex.

Tohgi H(1), Utsugisawa K, Nagane Y, Yoshimura M, Ukitsu M, Genda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Iwate Medical University, 19-1 Uchimaru, Morioka,
Iwate 020-8505, Japan.

Changes with age in the methylation status of cytosines in the promoter region of
the receptor for advanced glycated end products (RAGE) in autopsy human cortex
were investigated, using the bisulfite method, polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
and direct sequencing of PCR products. The total number of methylcytosines
significantly decreased with age. While the number of methylated cytosines at CpG
dinucleotides was stable throughout adult life, that at sites other than CpG
dinucleotides significantly decreased with age in cases >/=70 years old. Of 13
transcription factor binding sites, cytosines in CpG doublets in NF-IL6 and SP-1 
binding sites were methylated in all cases, suggesting that these sites are
repressed throughout adulthood. In contrast, the number of methylcytosines in
AP-2 or SP-1 binding sites located at CpC, CpA, or CTG was significantly lower or
at least tended to be lower in cases >/=70 years than <70 years old. These
reductions in the number of methylcytosines at transcription factor binding sites
may increase expression of RAGE, which may in turn play a role in aging of the
brain.

Copyright 1999 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 10036314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Cell Biochem. 1999 Jan 1;72(1):25-34.

Identification of a cis-acting element in the rat alpha-fetoprotein gene and its 
specific binding proteins in F9 cells during retinoic acid-induced
differentiation.

Chen H(1), Dong JM, Liu Y, Chiu JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington 05405, USA.

Mouse F9 embryonic teratocarcinoma stem cells can be induced to differentiate
into visceral endoderm. Following retinoic acid (RA) treatment, alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP), a differentiation marker, is expressed and secreted. The mechanism by
which RA regulates AFP expression during differentiation is not clear. The
relatively late induction of AFP indicates that the AFP gene may not be a primary
target of RA activity during F9 cell differentiation. In this study, a CAT
reporter plasmid containing the rat AFP 5'-regulatory region (-7040 to +7)
adjacent to the CAT gene (pAFPCAT) was stably transfected into F9 cells and used 
to delineate a cis-acting element which associates with AFP gene activation.
Similar spatial and temporal expression patterns between the transcriptional
activity of the recombinant AFP gene and the endogenous AFP gene demonstrate that
this stably transfected F9 system can be used to dissect both cis-elements and
trans-acting factors responsible for RA-induced AFP expression. Using a series of
deletion mutants of the pAFPCAT, the region between -2611 to -1855 was found to
be important in AFP-induction. Subsequent analysis identified a functional
sequence (-1905 to -1891, 5'-ACTAAAATGGAGACT-3') that differentially binds
nuclear proteins from undifferentiated and differentiated F9 cells. This
sequence, designed as differentiation-associated sequence (DAS) for its unique
binding of a nuclear protein (DAP-II) that appears during RA-induced F9
differentiation, acts as a regulatory protein factor in AFP gene activation.

PMID: 10025664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 19;274(8):4702-14.

Transactivation of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor gene through
a novel promoter motif bound with an activator protein-2alpha-related factor.

Allgayer H(1), Wang H, Wang Y, Heiss MM, Bauer R, Nyormoi O, Boyd D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

The urokinase receptor overexpressed in invasive cancers promotes laminin
degradation. The current study was undertaken to identify cis elements and
trans-acting factors activating urokinase receptor expression through a
footprinted (-148/-124) region of the promoter containing putative activator
protein-2- and Sp1-binding motifs. Mobility shifting experiments using nuclear
extract from a high urokinase receptor-expressing cell line (RKO) indicated that 
Sp1, Sp3, and a factor similar to, but distinct from, activator protein-2alpha
bound to this region. Mutations preventing the binding of the activator protein
2alpha-related factor diminished urokinase receptor promoter activity. In RKO
cells, the expression of a negative regulator of activator protein-2 function
diminished urokinase receptor promoter activity, protein, and laminin
degradation. Conversely, urokinase receptor promoter activity in low urokinase
receptor-expressing GEO cells was increased by activator protein-2alphaA
expression. Although using GEO nuclear extract, little activator
protein-2alpha-related factor bound to the footprinted region, phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate treatment, which induces urokinase receptor expression,
increased complex formation. Mutations preventing the activator
protein-2alpha-related factor and Sp1/Sp3 binding reduced urokinase receptor
promoter stimulation by this agent. Thus, the constitutive and phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate-inducible expression of the urokinase receptor is
mediated partly through trans-activation of the promoter via a sequence
(-152/-135) bound with an activator protein-2alpha-related factor.

PMID: 9988707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Gene. 1998 Dec 28;225(1-2):77-87.

Cloning, sequencing and characterization of the rat hereditary hemochromatosis
promoter: comparison of the human, mouse and rat HFE promoter regions.

Sánchez M(1), Queralt R, Bruguera M, Rodés J, Oliva R.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Institut de Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Casanova 143, 08036,
Barcelona, Spain.

We have cloned and sequenced 1398bp of the rat HFE gene promoter region. The
alignment of the rat promoter HFE sequence with the HFE promoter sequence from
human and mouse detected several highly conserved sequences present at
orthologous or heterologous positions in the three species. Subsequent analysis
of the conserved promoter sequences identified the presence of 10 novel
transcription elements present in the promoter regions of the human, mouse and
rat HFE genes (GATA, NF-IL6, AP1, AP2, CREB, PEA3, gamma-IRE, GFI1, HNF-3beta,
HFH2). Different gel retardation analyses performed with rat-liver nuclear
extracts have confirmed the presence of factors binding to some of these
transcription elements. This represents the first data concerning the
identification of potential transcriptional elements of the HFE promoter in these
three species. The expression pattern of the transcription factors corresponding 
to the novel elements identified in the HFE promoter is consistent with the
potential role of the HFE promoter in the transcription regulation and function
of the HFE gene. Knowledge of the identified conserved elements in the HFE
promoter from human, mouse and rat provides the basis for subsequent in-vitro or 
in-vivo studies leading to identification of the detailed mechanisms involved in 
the regulation of the iron metabolism and the design of potential future
alternative therapies.

PMID: 9931446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 14;18(2):543-50.

Genomic acute myeloid leukemia-associated inv(16)(p13q22) breakpoints are tightly
clustered.

van der Reijden BA(1), Dauwerse HG, Giles RH, Jagmohan-Changur S, Wijmenga C, Liu
PP, Smit B, Wessels HW, Beverstock GC, Jotterand-Bellomo M, Martinet D,
Mühlematter D, Lafage-Pochitaloff M, Gabert J, Reiffers J, Bilhou-Nabera C, van
Ommen GJ, Hagemeijer A, Breuning MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University, Sylvius Laboratories, Leiden,
The Netherlands.

The inv(16) and related t(16;16) are found in 10% of all cases with de novo acute
myeloid leukemia. In these rearrangements the core binding factor beta (CBFB)
gene on 16q22 is fused to the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain gene (MYH11) on
16p13. To gain insight into the mechanisms causing the inv(16) we have analysed
24 genomic CBFB-MYH11 breakpoints. All breakpoints in CBFB are located in a 15-Kb
intron. More than 50% of the sequenced 6.2 Kb of this intron consists of human
repetitive elements. Twenty-one of the 24 breakpoints in MYH11 are located in a
370-bp intron. The remaining three breakpoints in MYH11 are located more
upstream. The localization of three breakpoints adjacent to a V(D)J recombinase
signal sequence in MYH11 suggests a V(D)J recombinase-mediated rearrangement in
these cases. V(D)J recombinase-associated characteristics (small nucleotide
deletions and insertions of random nucleotides) were detected in six other cases.
CBFB and MYH11 duplications were detected in four of six cases tested.

PMID: 9927211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 7;18(1):93-102.

Mutations in the promoter reveal a cause for the reduced expression of the human 
manganese superoxide dismutase gene in cancer cells.

Xu Y(1), Krishnan A, Wan XS, Majima H, Yeh CC, Ludewig G, Kasarskis EJ, St Clair 
DK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology and Department of Neurology, University of
Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0305, USA.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) has been shown to play an important role
in preventing the development of cancer. MnSOD activity is reduced in many
transformed cells and tumor tissues. We previously showed that the reduced level 
of MnSOD activity in cancer cells was not due to a defect in the primary
structure of MnSOD protein, but rather was due to defects in gene expression. To 
elucidate the cause for the reduced expression of human MnSOD in cancer, we
investigated the nucleotide sequence in the regulatory region of the MnSOD gene
in a normal human cell line and various human tumor cell lines. A DNA fragment
spanning 3.4 kb 5' flanking region of the MnSOD gene isolated from a normal human
genomic DNA library was used to determine the DNA sequence of MnSOD promoter. PCR
primers were used for amplification of the 3.4 kb 5' flanking region of the human
MnSOD gene in cancer cells. Sequence analysis identified three heterozygous
mutations in the proximal region of the promoter in five human tumor cell lines. 
These mutations, clustered around the GC-rich region of the human MnSOD promoter,
change the binding pattern of AP-2 and lead to a reduction in transcription
activity using a luciferase reporter assay system. These results suggest that the
reduced level of MnSOD expression in some tumor cells is, at least in part, due
to a defect in the DNA sequence of the promoter region.

PMID: 9926924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Virology. 1999 Jan 20;253(2):219-29.

A distal element in the HPV-11 upstream regulatory region contributes to promoter
repression in basal keratinocytes in squamous epithelium.

Zhao W(1), Chow LT, Broker TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, 35294-0005, USA.

In benign squamous lesions and in organotypic epithelial cultures, the human
papillomavirus (HPV) E6 and E7 genes are transcriptionally up-regulated in
differentiated, spinous keratinocytes. We previously identified sequence elements
in the enhancer-promoter regions of HPV types 18 and 11 important for this
promoter regulation by using the bacterial LacZ reporter gene in stratified raft 
cultures of primary human keratinocytes (PHKs) or in submerged, proliferating
cultures acutely transduced with recombinant retroviruses. Notably, mutations in 
the promoter-proximal Sp1, Oct1, and AP1 sites each significantly reduce reporter
activity in differentiated cells, indicating that the bound factors are
transcription transactivators. In the present study, we performed further
mutagenesis on distal motifs in the HPV-11 regulatory region in PHKs in submerged
and raft cultures. Mutations in an AP2-like site, three individual NF-1 sites, or
five NF-1 sites collectively reduced promoter activity slightly in differentiated
cells. A mutation in a putative glucocorticoid response element had no
discernable effect in the presence or the absence of dexamethasone. However,
mutations in a C/EBP binding site, especially the distal site, strikingly
up-regulated reporter gene expression, particularly in basal and lower spinous
cells, implicating bound protein as a transcription repressor. Collectively,
these results demonstrate that the overall differentiation-dependent
papillomaviral gene expression observed in vivo and in vitro involves promoter
repression in the lower strata and activation in the upper, differentiated
strata.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9918880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Dec 30;253(3):707-11.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the mouse ceramide glucosyltransferase 
gene.

Ichikawa S(1), Ozawa K, Hirabayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cellular Glycobiology, Frontier Research Program, The Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Saitama, Japan.
ichikawa@postman.riken.go.jp

Ceramide glucosyltransferase (glucosylceramide synthase, GlcT-1, EC 2.4.1.80)
catalyzes the first step in glycosphingolipid synthesis, the transfer of glucose 
from UDP-glucose to ceramide. The product, glucosylceramide, serves as a core
structure for over 300 species of glycosphingolipids. The enzyme is a key
regulatory factor controlling intracellular levels of ceramide and
glycosphingolipids. We have cloned the gene for mouse ceramide
glucosyltransferase, Ugcg. The gene spans approximately 32 kb and is composed of 
9 exons and 8 introns. The promoter region was found to lack TATA and CAAT boxes 
but contains Spl binding sites, which are indicators of typical housekeeping
genes. In addition to these general transcription factor binding sites, the
motifs for AhR, NF-kappaB, AP-2 and GATA-1 binding sites were found.

PMID: 9918791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Dev Biol. 1999 Feb 1;206(1):46-62.

AP-2alpha transcription factor is required for early morphogenesis of the lens
vesicle.

West-Mays JA(1), Zhang J, Nottoli T, Hagopian-Donaldson S, Libby D, Strissel KJ, 
Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, New England Medical Center and Tufts University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, 02111, USA.

AP-2 transcription factors are a family of retinoic acid-responsive genes, which 
are involved in complex morphogenetic processes. In the current study, we
determine the requirement for AP-2alpha in early morphogenesis of the eye by
examining the nature of the ocular defects in AP-2alpha null and chimeric mice.
AP-2alpha null embryos exhibited ocular phenotypes ranging from a complete lack
of eyes (anophthalmia) to defects in the developing lens involving a persistent
adhesion of the lens to the overlying surface ectoderm. Two genes involved in
lens development and differentiation, Pax6 and MIP26 were also misexpressed.
AP-2alpha mutants also exhibited defects in the optic cup consisting of
transdifferentiation of the dorsal retinal pigmented epithelium into neural
retina and the absence of a defined ganglion cell layer. Newly generated chimeric
embryos consisting of a population of AP-2alpha-/- and AP-2alpha+/+ cells exhibit
ocular defects similar to those seen in the knockout embryos. Immunolocalization 
of AP-2 proteins (alpha, beta, and gamma) to the normal developing eye revealed
both unique and overlapping expression patterns, with AP-2alpha expressed in a
number of the ocular tissues that exhibited defects in the mutants, including the
developing lens where AP-2alpha is uniquely expressed. Together these findings
demonstrate a requirement for AP-2alpha in early morphogenesis of the eye.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9918694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Oncogene. 1998 Dec 24;17(25):3331-40.

Death associated proteins (DAPs): from gene identification to the analysis of
their apoptotic and tumor suppressive functions.

Levy-Strumpf N(1), Kimchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel.

The process of apoptosis (programmed cell death) has become the subject of
intensive and extensive research over the past few years. Various approaches are 
being used to identify and study genes which function as positive mediators of
apoptosis. Here, we address a novel approach of gene cloning aimed at isolating
intracellular death promoting genes by utilizing a functional screen. This
method, called TKO, was based on transfection of cells with an anti-sense cDNA
library, followed by the selection of transfectants which survived in the
continuous presence of a killing cytokine-interferon-gamma. It led to the
identification of five novel apoptotic genes and to the finding that a known
protease-cathepsin D, is actively recruited to the death process. The five novel 
apoptotic genes (named DAP genes for: Death Associated Proteins) code for
proteins which display a diverse spectrum of biochemical activities. The list
comprises a novel type of calcium/calmodulin-regulated kinase which carries
ankyrin repeats and a death domain (DAP-kinase), a nucleotide-binding protein
(DAP-3), a small proline-rich cytoplasmic protein (DAP-1), and a novel homolog of
the eIF4G translation initiation factor (DAP-5). Extensive studies proved that
these genes are critical for mediating cell death initiated by interferon-gamma, 
and in some of the tested cases also cell death induced by Fas/APO-1, TNF-alpha, 
and a detachment from extracellular matrix. Moreover, one of these genes,
DAP-kinase, was recently found to display strong tumor suppressive activities,
coupling the control of apoptosis to metastasis. The advantage of functional
approaches of gene cloning is that they select the relevant rate limiting genes
along the death pathways in a complete unbiased manner. As a consequence, novel
targets and unpredicted mechanisms emerged. A few examples illustrating this
important point will be discussed. One relates to the
calcium/calmodulin-dependent DAP-kinase, which is localized to the actin
microfilaments. It was found that the correct localization of DAP-kinase to the
microfilament network was critical for the execution of the apoptotic process,
and more specifically for the disruption of the stress fibers--a typical hallmark
of apoptosis. Another important breakthrough step in our understanding of
apoptotic processes relates to the identification and analysis of the DAP-5 gene.
The structure/ function features of this novel translation regulator resemble the
proteolytically cleaved eIF4G which appears in cells upon infection with some RNA
viruses and which directs cap-independent translation. Thus, the rescue of DAP-5 
highlighted the importance of regulation of protein translation in certain
apoptotic systems. Finally, the isolation of cathespin D by our method suggests
that lysosomal proteases are recruited during apoptosis, in addition to the well 
known caspase family of proteases, and that a unique pattern of regulation
affecting the processing of this protease takes place. The major challenge now is
to analyse how these diverse DAP gene activities constitute biochemical
pathway(s) leading to programmed cell death, and what is their functional
position with respect to other known positive mediators and suppressors of
apoptosis such as the Bcl2 and caspase family members.

PMID: 9916995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Feb 1;27(3):866-74.

PolyADP-ribose polymerase is a coactivator for AP-2-mediated transcriptional
activation.

Kannan P(1), Yu Y, Wankhade S, Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Rammelkamp Center for Education and Research, MetroHealth Campus, Case Western
Reserve University,2500 MetroHealth Drive, Cleveland, OH 44109, USA.
pkannan@research.mhmc.org

Overexpression of transcription factor AP-2 has been implicated in the
tumorigenicity of the human teratocarcinoma cell lines PA-1 that contain an
activated ras oncogene. Here we show evidence that overexpression of AP-2
sequesters transcriptional coactivators which results in self-inhibition. We
identified AP-2-interacting proteins and determined whether these proteins were
coactivators for AP-2-mediated transcription. One such interacting protein is
polyADP-ribose polymerase (PARP). PARP suppresses AP-2 self-inhibition and
enhances AP-2 activity in PA-1 cells indicating that it is a coactivator for
AP-2-transcription. PARP significantly restores AP-2 transcriptional activity in 
ras oncogene-transformed cells suggesting that it might suppress transformation
in these cells. Another AP-2-interacting protein, RAP74, a subunit of
transcription factor TFIIF, does not affect AP-2-mediated transcriptional
activation alone or in the presence of RAP30, the other subunit of TFIIF. RAP74
also fails to relieve AP-2-mediated transcriptional self-interference and
cross-interference. These studies suggest that the interaction between AP-2 and
RAP74 may have functions other than activation of AP-2-mediated transcription.

PMCID: PMC148259
PMID: 9889285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1999 Jan 1;361(1):7-16.

Identification of two repressor elements in the mouse alpha 2(I) collagen
promoter.

Miao K(1), Potter JJ, Anania FA, Rennie-Tankersley L, Mezey E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, 21205-2195, USA.

We recently identified three areas of Sp1 binding located between -568 and -453
of the 5' flanking region of the murine alpha2(I) collagen promoter which are
necessary for optimal activity. We now identify two additional regions of Sp1
binding located at -371 to -351 (region 4) and at -690 to -613 (region 5), which 
when mutated increased promoter activity in transfected rat hepatic stellate
cells indicating they contain negative regulatory elements. AP-2 bound to region 
4 while YY1 bound most strongly to region 5. AP-2 decreased Sp1 binding to region
4 and had a dual effect on Sp1 binding to region 5 decreasing and increasing Sp1 
binding at low and high concentrations of AP-2, respectively. YY1 enhanced Sp1
binding to both regions. AP-2 inhibited or enhanced the stimulatory effect of a
transfected Sp1 expression vector on the alpha2(I) collagen promoter in
Drosophila cells at low or high AP-2 expression, respectively. YY1 enhanced or
inhibited the activation of the promoter by low or high Sp1 expression,
respectively. This study identifies two negative regulatory elements in the
murine alpha2(I) collagen promoter and shows that AP-2 and YY1 interact with Sp1 
at these sites and can inhibit the activating action of Sp1.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1791-800.

Identification and characterization of the cis-acting elements of the human CD155
gene core promoter.

Solecki D(1), Wimmer E, Lipp M, Bernhardt G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine, State
University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

The CD155 protein is the founding member of a new group of related molecules
within the immunoglobulin superfamily sharing a V-C2-C2 domain structure and
significant amino acid identity. We have recently isolated the promoter of the
CD155 gene so that we may determine the transcription factors that regulate its
expression and possibly gain insight into the cell biology of this gene. Here we 
report the mapping of three cis-elements within the CD155 core promoter,
designated FPI, II, and III. The results of linker scanning mutagenesis suggest
that all three of these cis-elements are required in varying degrees for the
promoter activity of the core promoter fragment. The relative contribution of
each region ranked in the following order: III > II > I. Interestingly, footprint
and electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that FPIII binding activity is
much reduced in a human cell line that does not express CD155. Additionally,
protein binding to FPI and FPII was also investigated. DNase I footprinting using
recombinant hAP-2alpha indicated that this transcription factor bound to both the
FPI and FPII regions of the CD155 core promoter fragment. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and supershift analysis confirmed the binding of AP-2 from 
crude nuclear extracts to FPI and to FPII. Lastly, cotransfection of the CD155
promoter with an AP-2alpha expression vector indicates that overexpression of
AP-2alpha modulated the promoter activity of a CD155 promoter construct.

PMID: 9880562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Mech Dev. 1998 Aug;76(1-2):191-5.

DAP-2, the Drosophila homolog of transcription factor AP-2.

Monge I(1), Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Zurich, Winterhurerstr. 190, 8057
Zurich, Switzerland.

Transcription factor AP-2 is essential for craniofacial, nervous system, and limb
development in the mouse. We report here the cloning and expression pattern
analysis of DAP-2, the Drosophila homolog of AP-2 family genes. DAP-2 is
expressed in discrete regions of procephalic neuroectoderm, the brain, ventral
nerve cord, and maxillary segment during Drosophila embryogenesis, and in the
brain, optic lobes, ventral nerve cord, antenno-maxillary complex, and antennal
and leg imaginal disks in third instar larvae. Protein sequence conservation and 
parallels between the embryonic expression patterns of DAP-2 and mammal ian AP-2 
family genes indicate that transcription factor AP-2 has been structurally and
functionally conserved during metazoan evolution.

PMID: 9867351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Jan 15;27(2):470-8.

RAV1, a novel DNA-binding protein, binds to bipartite recognition sequence
through two distinct DNA-binding domains uniquely found in higher plants.

Kagaya Y(1), Ohmiya K, Hattori T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology and Genetics and Department of Bioresources,
School of Bioresources, Mie University, 1515 Kamihama-cho, Tsu 514-8507, Japan.

We have cloned and characterized two novel DNA binding proteins designated RAV1
and RAV2 from Arabidopsis thaliana. RAV1 and RAV2 contain two distinct amino acid
sequence domains found only in higher plant species. The N-terminal regions of
RAV1 and RAV2 are homologous to the AP2 DNA-binding domain present in a family of
transcription factors represented by the Arabidopsis APETALA2 and tobacco EREBP
proteins, while the C-terminal region exhibits homology to the highly conserved
C-terminal domain, designated B3, of VP1/ABI3 transcription factors. Binding site
selection assays using a recombinant glutathione S-transferase fusion protein
have revealed that RAV1 binds specifically to bipartite recognition sequences
composed of two unrelated motifs, 5'-CAACA-3' and 5'-CACCTG-3', separated by
various spacings in two different relative orientations. Analyses using various
deletion derivatives of the RAV1 fusion protein show that the AP2 and B3-like
domains of RAV1 bind autonomously to the CAACA and CACCTG motifs, respectively,
and together achieve a high affinity and specificity of binding. From these
results, we suggest that the AP2 and B3-like domains of RAV1 are connected by a
highly flexible structure enabling the two domains to bind to the CAACA and
CACCTG motifs in various spacings and orientations.

PMCID: PMC148202
PMID: 9862967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):899-908.

Coactivator PC4 mediates AP-2 transcriptional activity and suppresses ras-induced
transformation dependent on AP-2 transcriptional interference.

Kannan P(1), Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)MetroHealth Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44109, USA.

ras oncogene-transformed PA-1 human teratocarcinoma cells have abundant AP-2 mRNA
but, paradoxically, little AP-2 transcriptional activity. We have previously
shown that overexpression of AP-2 in nontumorigenic variants of PA-1 cells
results in inhibition of AP-2 activity and induction of tumorigenicity similar to
that caused by ras transformation of PA-1 cells. Evidence indicated the existence
of a novel mechanism of inhibition of AP-2 activity involving sequestering of
transcriptional coactivators. In this study, we found that PC4 is a positive
coactivator of AP-2 and can restore AP-2 activity in ras-transformed PA-1 cells. 
Relative to vector-transfected ras cell lines, ras cell lines stably transfected 
with and expressing the PC4 cDNA have a diminished growth rate and exhibit a loss
of anchorage-independent growth, and they are unable to induce the formation of
tumors in nude mice. These data suggest that a transcriptional coactivator, like 
a tumor suppressor, can have a growth-suppressive effect on cells. Our
experiments are the first to show that ras oncogenes and oncogenic transcription 
factors can induce transformation through effects on the transcription machinery 
rather than through specific programs of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC83947
PMID: 9858613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):194-204.

Transcriptional regulation of the AP-2alpha promoter by BTEB-1 and AP-2rep, a
novel wt-1/egr-related zinc finger repressor.

Imhof A(1), Schuierer M, Werner O, Moser M, Roth C, Bauer R, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, D-93042
Regensburg, Germany.

AP-2 transcription factors have been suggested to exert key regulatory functions 
in vertebrate embryonic development, in tumorigenicity of various cancer cell
types, and in controlling cell cycle and apoptotic effector genes. In this study,
we investigated transcriptional regulation of the AP-2alpha gene promoter
mediated by an autoregulatory element (referred to as A32) with a core consensus 
AP-2 binding site at position -336 relative to the mRNA initiation site. AP-2 and
multiple different nuclear proteins in HeLa and Neuro2A cell extracts form
specific bandshifts with the A32 element. By screening a mouse brain cDNA
expression library, we isolated two different cDNAs encoding the transcription
factor BTEB-1 and a novel zinc finger protein, AP-2rep. AP-2rep reveals a modular
structure with homology to transcription factors of the wt-1/egr-1-family.
AP-2rep, BTEB-1, and AP-2 interact in a mutually exclusive manner with
overlapping binding sites in the A32 element. Transfection studies revealed that 
BTEB-1 is a strong activator of AP-2alpha promoter activity, whereas
cotransfected AP-2alpha resulted in moderate autoactivation of promoter activity.
In contrast, AP-2rep confers strong transcriptional repression to the AP-2alpha
gene, and we observed an excellent correlation between induction of AP-2rep mRNA 
expression and downregulation of AP-2alpha mRNA during development of the kidney.
In summary, we have identified multiple transcription factors and cloned from an 
expression library a novel zinc finger silencing factor, AP-2rep, mediating
positive and negative regulation of AP-2alpha expression through a set of
overlapping cis-regulatory promoter elements.

PMCID: PMC83878
PMID: 9858544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Dec;111(6):1172-7.

Different frequency of gene targeting events by the RNA-DNA oligonucleotide among
epithelial cells.

Santana E(1), Peritz AE, Iyer S, Uitto J, Yoon K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

A unique hybrid oligonucleotide composed of both RNA and DNA has been shown to
correct a point mutation in a site-specific and inheritable manner in
extrachromosomal and chromosomal targets. In order to develop new gene
therapeutics for skin, we tested two oligonucleotides that were shown to create a
point mutation in alkaline phosphatase and beta-globin genes in several
epithelial cell types. Highly transformed epithelial cells (HeLa) exhibited a
conversion frequency of 5% by both RNA-DNA oligonucleotides. In comparison, other
immortalized epithelial cells (HaCaT) or human primary keratinocytes did not show
any detectable level of gene conversion by the restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis, indicating less than 1% conversion frequency. The
concentration of the oligonucleotide in the nuclei of HeLa cells was similar to
that of HaCaT or human primary keratinocytes measured by a radiolabeled or a
fluorescein-conjugated oligonucleotide. Moreover, the RNA-DNA oligonucleotide
exhibited a prolonged stability in the nucleus. Thus, neither uptake nor nuclear 
stability of the oligonucleotide appears to be a limiting factor in gene
targeting events under our experimental conditions. These results indicate that
the frequency of gene targeting varies among different cells, suggesting that
cellular recombination and DNA repair activities may be important.

PMID: 9856835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Eur J Biochem. 1998 Nov 15;258(1):123-31.

Transcriptional regulation of the tissue-type plasminogen-activator gene in human
endothelial cells: identification of nuclear factors that recognise functional
elements in the tissue-type plasminogen-activator gene promoter.

Costa M(1), Shen Y, Maurer F, Medcalf RL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University, Department of Medicine, Box Hill Hospital, Victoria,
Australia.

The gene encoding human tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) is regulated in 
a cell-type-specific manner. Previous studies in non-endothelial cells have
indicated that basal and phorbol ester mediated induction is controlled by a cAMP
response element (CRE) referred to as the tPACRE, and an activating protein 2
(AP-2)-like site. The classification of the AP-2-like site was assigned on the
basis of its sequence homology, but has been shown in some cell systems to be
recognised by promoter-specific transcription factor-1 (Sp-1). Here, we have
investigated the transcriptional regulation of the t-PA gene in endothelial cells
and addressed the functional roles of the tPACRE and the Sp-1/AP-2-like sites.
5'-RACE experiments indicate that the t-PA gene uses two transcription initiation
sites in these cells with the downstream site being preferred. Functional
analyses of the t-PA promoter using reporter-gene constructs transfected into
C11STH endothelial cells demonstrate that the first 410 bp of the t-PA promoter
confers an increase in reporter-gene activity on treatment with 4beta-phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Mutagenesis of either the tPACRE or the Sp-1/AP-2 
site weakens both basal and inducible expression, while disruption of both sites 
renders the promoter completely unresponsive. Using supershift assays, we
identify the predominant tPACRE-binding proteins in nuclear extracts prepared
from both C11STH cells and primary umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) as
activating transcription factor 2, CREB (cAMP-responsive-element-binding
protein), CREM (cAMP response element modulator) and c-jun. Treatment of cells
with PMA results in a selective recruitment of jun-D to the tPACRE, while Sp-1
was identified as the major transcription factor that recognises the AP-2-like
site. Based on this data and previous reports, we have reassigned this as a
Sp-1-binding site. Finally, the identification of specific endothelial-derived
t-PACRE-binding proteins suggests an integral role for these factors in the
regulation of t-PA gene expression in human endothelial cells.

PMID: 9851700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cancer Res. 1998 Dec 1;58(23):5466-72.

Expression of AP-2 transcription factors in human breast cancer correlates with
the regulation of multiple growth factor signalling pathways.

Turner BC(1), Zhang J, Gumbs AA, Maher MG, Kaplan L, Carter D, Glazer PM, Hurst
HC, Haffty BG, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Therapeutic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

The AP-2 transcription factors are required for normal growth and morphogenesis
during mammalian development. Previous in vitro studies have also indicated that 
the AP-2 family of proteins may be involved in the etiology of human breast
cancer. The AP-2 genes are expressed in many human breast cancer cell lines, and 
critical AP-2-binding sites are present in both the ERBB-2 (HER2/neu) and
estrogen receptor promoters. We have now characterized immunological reagents
that enable specific AP-2 family members, including AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma, to
be detected in human breast cancer epithelium. Data obtained with these reagents 
demonstrate that whereas AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma are both present in benign
breast epithelia, there is a significant up-regulation of AP-2gamma expression in
breast cancer specimens (P = 0.01). There was also a significant correlation
between the presence of the AP-2alpha protein and estrogen receptor expression (P
= 0.018) and between specimens containing both AP-2alpha/AP-2gamma proteins and
ERBB-2 expression (P = 0.003). Furthermore, we detected an association (P = 0.04)
between the expression of AP-2gamma and the presence of an additional signal
transduction molecule implicated in breast cancer, the insulin-like growth factor
I receptor. Analysis of the proximal promoter of the insulin-like growth factor I
receptor revealed a novel AP-2-binding site. Thus, AP-2 proteins may directly
regulate the transcription of this growth factor receptor. Taken together, these 
data strongly support a role for the AP-2 gene family in the control of cell
growth and differentiation in breast cancer.

PMID: 9850080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Blood. 1998 Dec 15;92(12):4677-90.

Cloning of the promoter region of human endoglin, the target gene for hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 1.

Ríus C(1), Smith JD, Almendro N, Langa C, Botella LM, Marchuk DA, Vary CP,
Bernabéu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Consejo
Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

Endoglin (CD105) is a cell surface component of the transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta) receptor complex highly expressed by endothelial cells.
Mutations in the endoglin gene are responsible for the hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia type 1 (HHT1), also known as Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome (OMIM
187300). This is an autosomal dominant vascular disorder probably caused by a
haploinsufficiency mechanism displaying low levels of the normal protein. To
understand the mechanisms underlying the regulated expression of endoglin, a
genomic DNA clone containing 3.3 kb of the 5'-flanking sequence of the human
endoglin gene has been isolated. The 5'-flanking region of the endoglin gene
lacks consensus TATA and CAAT boxes, but contains two GC-rich regions and
consensus motifs for Sp1, ets, GATA, AP-2, NFkappaB, and Mad, as well as
TGF-beta-, glucocorticoid-, vitamin D-, and estrogen-responsive elements. As
determined by primer extension and 5' RACE experiments, a cluster of
transcriptional start sites was found to be located 350 bp upstream from the
translation initiation codon. To analyze the endoglin promoter activity, the
upstream -400/+341 fragment was fused to the luciferase gene and transient
transfections were conducted in several cell types. This construct displayed a
tissue-specific activity in human and bovine endothelial cells. Analysis of
various deletion constructs showed the existence of a basal promoter region
within the -81/+350 fragment as well as major transcriptional regulatory elements
within the -400/-141 fragment. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrated
the specific interaction of a member of the ets family with a consensus motif
located at position -68. A promoter construct mutated at this ets sequence showed
a much reduced activity as compared with the wild-type construct, supporting the 
involvement of this ets motif in the basal activity of the promoter. The endoglin
promoter exhibited inducibility in the presence of TGF-beta1, suggesting possible
therapeutic treatments in HHT1 patients, in which the expression level of the
normal endoglin allele might not reach the threshold required for its function.
Isolation and characterization of the human endoglin promoter represents an
initial step in elucidating the controlled expression of the endoglin gene.

PMID: 9845534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;17(11):921-30.

Transcriptional regulation of the 5' proximal promoter of the human manganese
superoxide dismutase gene.

Yeh CC(1), Wan XS, St Clair DK.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536, USA.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is a primary antioxidant enzyme critical
for maintaining normal cell function and for survival. Previously, we cloned the 
entire MnSOD gene, including a 0.782-kb 5' DNA sequence, from a human embryonic
lung fibroblast cell line. Sequence analysis indicates that the promoter of the
human MnSOD gene is TATA-less and CAAT-less, and the DNA sequence immediately
upstream from the transcription start site is GC rich. To study the function and 
regulation of the human MnSOD promoter, we cloned a 257-bp sequence (P7)
containing the transcription start site and the 5' GC-rich region. Consensus
analysis and DNase I footprinting assay indicated that P7 contains multiple Sp1- 
and AP-2-binding sites. Deletions of the P7 sequence diminished the promoter
activity and decreased the response to Sp1 protein. The first three Sp1 consensus
sites were required for high promoter activity in mammalian cells and enhanced
promoter activity in Drosophila Schneider Line 2 (SL2) cells. In the SL2 cells,
Sp1 activated the P7 activity in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast,
cotransfections with AP-2 expression vector marginally increased P7 activities in
human hepatocarcinoma HepG2 cells. The results suggest that Sp1 is an important
regulator for the transcriptional activities of P7, whereas AP-2 is a minor
activator for P7 and competes with Sp1 for binding sites which may downregulate
P7 function.

PMID: 9839801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 11;273(50):33702-7.

Genomic organization and regulation of expression of the lectin-like oxidized
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX-1) gene.

Nagase M(1), Abe J, Takahashi K, Ando J, Hirose S, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Fourth Department of Internal Medicine, University of Tokyo School of
Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 112-0015, Japan.

Lectin-like oxidized low-density lipoprotein receptor (LOX-1) is a recently
identified receptor for oxidized low-density lipoprotein, one of the major
atherogenic substances. Although LOX-1 was reported to be expressed abundantly in
endothelial cells, including atheromatous lesions, the regulation of LOX-1 gene
has not yet been clarified. In the present study, we isolated the rat LOX-1 gene 
and investigated the regulation of gene expression. The rat LOX-1 gene was
encoded by a single copy gene spanning over 19 kilobases and consisted of eight
exons. Exon boundaries correlated well with the functional domain boundaries of
the receptor protein. The promoter region contained putative TATA and CAAT boxes 
and multiple cis-elements such as NF-kappaB, AP-1 and AP-2 sites, and a shear
stress response element. Northern blot analysis revealed that LOX-1 gene
expression was up-regulated 9-fold by shear stress, 21-fold by
lipopolysaccharide, and 4-fold by tumor necrosis factor-alpha, in cultured
vascular endothelial cells. LOX-1 was also expressed in macrophages but not in
vascular smooth muscle cells. These data provide important information for
elucidating the molecular mechanisms of LOX-1 gene regulation and suggest a role 
for LOX-1 in the pathophysiology of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 9837956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Biomol NMR. 1998 Oct;12(3):459-60.

Complete heteronuclear NMR resonance assignments and secondary structure of core 
binding factor beta (1-141).

Huang X(1), Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville 22906-0011, USA.

PMID: 9835054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 4;273(49):32966-72.

Delineation of the oligomerization, AP-2 binding, and synprint binding region of 
the C2B domain of synaptotagmin.

Chapman ER(1), Desai RC, Davis AF, Tornehl CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine, Madison,
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

Biochemical and genetic studies indicate that synaptotagmin I functions as a Ca2+
sensor during synaptic vesicle exocytosis and as a membrane receptor for the
clathrin adaptor complex, AP-2, during endocytosis. These functions involve the
interaction of two conserved domains, C2A and C2B, with effector proteins. The
C2B domain mediates Ca2+-triggered synaptotagmin oligomerization, binds AP-2 and 
is important for the interaction of synaptotagmin with Ca2+ channels. Here, we
report that these are conserved biochemical properties: Ca2+ promoted the
hetero-oligomerization of synaptotagmin I with synaptotagmins III and IV, and all
three synaptotagmin isoforms bound the synprint region of the alpha1B subunit of 
N-type Ca2+ channels. Using chimeric and truncated C2 domains, we defined a
common region of C2B that mediates oligomerization and AP-2 binding. Within this 
region, two adjacent lysine residues were identified that were critical for
synaptotagmin oligomerization, AP-2, and synprint binding. Competition
experiments demonstrated that the synprint fragment was an effective inhibitor of
synaptotagmin oligomerization and also blocked binding of synaptotagmin to AP-2. 
In a model for the structure of C2B, the common effector binding site localized
to a putative Ca2+-binding loop and a concave region formed by two beta-strands. 
These studies provide the first structural information regarding C2B target
protein recognition and provide the means to selectively disrupt
synaptotagmin-effector interactions for functional studies.

PMID: 9830048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 1998 Dec 4;273(49):32957-65.

A synergistic interaction of transcription factors AP2 and YB-1 regulates
gelatinase A enhancer-dependent transcription.

Mertens PR(1), Alfonso-Jaume MA, Steinmann K, Lovett DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Administration Medical
Center/University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

The matrix metalloproteinase gelatinase A plays a central role in several
critical physiologic processes, including angiogenesis, tumor
invasion/metastasis, and chronic inflammation. We demonstrate that high level
gelatinase A expression is mediated by a unique interaction of two
developmentally regulated transcription factors, AP2 and YB-1, within a discrete 
40-base pair enhancer element (RE-1) located in the 5'-flanking region of the
gelatinase A gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay studies and
immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed a direct interaction of AP2 with this
binding sequence in the form of AP2.YB-1 heteromeric complexes. Binding of
AP2.YB-1 complexes to the RE-1 sequence results in the formation of extended
single-stranded DNA regions and may stabilize DNA conformational changes.
Overexpression of YB-1 and AP2 proteins by gelatinase A synthesizing hepatoma
HepG2 cells induced a synergistic increase in the RE-1-mediated transcription of 
nearly 160-fold. Thus, the transcription of gelatinase A is subject to a
previously unrecognized interplay of double (AP2) and single-stranded (YB-1) DNA 
binding transcription factors to yield a highly regulated pattern of gene
expression.

PMID: 9830047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 27;273(48):31644-7.

Regulation of RNA polymerase II-dependent transcription by poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation
of transcription factors.

Oei SL(1), Griesenbeck J, Schweiger M, Ziegler M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Freie Universität Berlin-Dahlem, Thielallee 63,
D-14195 Berlin, Germany.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl) transferase (ADPRT) is a nuclear protein that modifies proteins
by forming and attaching to them poly(ADP-ribose) chains. Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation 
represents an event of major importance in perturbed cell nuclei and participates
in the regulation of fundamental processes including DNA repair and
transcription. Although ADPRT serves as a positive cofactor of transcription,
initiation of its catalytic activity may cause repression of RNA polymerase
II-dependent transcription. It is demonstrated here that ADPRT-dependent
silencing of transcription involves ADP-ribosylation of the TATA-binding protein.
This modification occurs only if poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is initiated before
TATA-binding protein has bound to DNA and thereby prevents formation of active
transcription complexes. Specific DNA binding of other transcription factors
including Yin Yang 1, p53, NFkappaB, Sp1, and CREB but not c-Jun or AP-2 is
similarly affected. After assembly of transcription complexes initiation of
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation does not influence DNA binding of transcription factors.
Accordingly, if bound to DNA, transcription factors are inaccessible to
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. Thus, poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation prevents binding of
transcription factors to DNA, whereas binding to DNA prevents their modification.
Considering its ability to detect DNA strand breaks and stimulate DNA repair, it 
is proposed that ADPRT serves as a molecular switch between transcription and
repair of DNA to avoid expression of damaged genes.

PMID: 9822623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Intervirology. 1998;41(2-3):103-9.

The A enhancer of polyomavirus: protein-protein interactions for the differential
early and late promoter function under nonreplicating conditions.

Shivakumar CV(1), Das GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Texas Health Center at Tyler, Tex., 
75710, USA.

The A enhancer of the polyomavirus early promoter is a 110-bp domain located in
the late region and it contains the major late RNA initiation site. The 'core' of
this enhancer binds several cellular proteins, including proteins PEA1, PEA2 and 
PEA3. Another element, NF-D/YY1, is also located in this enhancer. The A enhancer
is known to stimulate the early promoter, contains auxiliary elements for
replication and serves as the initiator for late transcription. It may also be
involved in early-to-late switch. We were interested in investigating how the
A-core- and NF-D-binding proteins regulate early and late promoter activity under
nonreplicating conditions and how the protein-protein interactions affect the
function of the individual elements. By point mutational analysis, we show that, 
except for PEA1, all other proteins activate the early and late promoters
differentially under nonreplicating conditions. All three core-binding proteins, 
and the protein bound to the NF-D site, are activators and have a combinatorial
effect on early promoter activity. On late transcription, only PEA1 acts
positively and inactivation of the NF-D site is without any effect. In contrast, 
PEA2 and PEA3 have a repressor-like activity under nonreplicating conditions,
indicating that these two proteins might be involved in repressing late
transcription, probably early in infection. By increasing the spacing between two
consecutive elements, we further show that protein-protein interaction is
important for enhancer function. Transactivation of the early promoter was
affected by mutations in all four protein-binding sites. Responsiveness of these 
factors in regard to the late promoter was parallel to their intrinsic promoter
strength. The effects of middle and large T antigens are parallel for both the
early and the late promoter, suggesting that the pathway(s) for transactivation
function of these oncoproteins may overlap downstream. This study with cloned
viral promoter will be reflective of situations in vivo, at least partially,
under nonreplicating conditions.

PMID: 9820844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Dec;18(12):7432-43.

The leukemic protein core binding factor beta (CBFbeta)-smooth-muscle myosin
heavy chain sequesters CBFalpha2 into cytoskeletal filaments and aggregates.

Adya N(1), Stacy T, Speck NA, Liu PP.

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenesis and Development Section, Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch,
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The fusion gene CBFB-MYH11 is generated by the chromosome 16 inversion associated
with acute myeloid leukemias. This gene encodes a chimeric protein involving the 
core binding factor beta (CBFbeta) and the smooth-muscle myosin heavy chain
(SMMHC). Mouse model studies suggest that this chimeric protein CBFbeta-SMMHC
dominantly suppresses the function of CBF, a heterodimeric transcription factor
composed of DNA binding subunits (CBFalpha1 to 3) and a non-DNA binding subunit
(CBFbeta). This dominant suppression results in the blockage of hematopoiesis in 
mice and presumably contributes to leukemogenesis. We used transient-transfection
assays, in combination with immunofluorescence and green fluorescent
protein-tagged proteins, to monitor subcellular localization of CBFbeta-SMMHC,
CBFbeta, and CBFalpha2 (also known as AML1 or PEBP2alphaB). When expressed
individually, CBFalpha2 was located in the nuclei of transfected cells, whereas
CBFbeta was distributed throughout the cell. On the other hand, CBFbeta-SMMHC
formed filament-like structures that colocalized with actin filaments. Upon
cotransfection, CBFalpha2 was able to drive localization of CBFbeta into the
nucleus in a dose-dependent manner. In contrast, CBFalpha2 colocalized with
CBFbeta-SMMHC along the filaments instead of localizing to the nucleus. Deletion 
of the CBFalpha-interacting domain within CBFbeta-SMMHC abolished this CBFalpha2 
sequestration, whereas truncation of the C-terminal-end SMMHC domain led to
nuclear localization of CBFbeta-SMMHC when coexpressed with CBFalpha2. CBFalpha2 
sequestration by CBFbeta-SMMHC was further confirmed in vivo in a knock-in mouse 
model. These observations suggest that CBFbeta-SMMHC plays a dominant negative
role by sequestering CBFalpha2 into cytoskeletal filaments and aggregates,
thereby disrupting CBFalpha2-mediated regulation of gene expression.

PMCID: PMC109324
PMID: 9819429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Clin Oncol. 1998 Nov;16(11):3584-91.

Downregulation of transcription factor AP-2 predicts poor survival in stage I
cutaneous malignant melanoma.

Karjalainen JM(1), Kellokoski JK, Eskelinen MJ, Alhava EM, Kosma VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kuopio University Hospital, Finland.
jari.karjalainen@uku.fi

PURPOSE: The transcription factor, activator protein (AP)-2, a 52-kd DNA-binding 
protein, is suggested to inhibit tumor growth through the activation of p21. To
test this hypothesis, we analyzed AP-2 and p21 protein expressions in stage I
cutaneous malignant melanomas to clarify their significance with regard to tumor 
progression and survival.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A consecutive series of 369 clinical stage I cutaneous
malignant melanoma patients were investigated using immunohistochemistry. The
detected expression levels were correlated with each other, with
clinicopathologic data, and with melanoma survival.
RESULTS: The loss of AP-2 expression was significantly associated with low p21
expression (P=.007), high tumor thickness (P=.001), high Clark's level (P=.046), 
high tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) category (P=.006), recurrent disease (P=.001),
and male sex (P=.03). Tumor thickness, Clark's level, TNM category, bleeding,
AP-2 index, and sex were all important predictors of both recurrence-free
survival (RFS) and overall survival (OS) of melanoma in this order. In Cox's
multivariate analysis, high tumor thickness (P=.0001), low AP-2 index (P=.0153), 
and bleeding (P=.0143) predicted poor RFS. Poor OS was predicted by high tumor
thickness (P=.0008) and bleeding (P=.0092).
CONCLUSION: The loss of AP-2 expression seems to be associated with malignant
transformation and tumor progression in cutaneous malignant melanoma. This
tumor-suppressive action of AP-2 may be mediated through p21 regulation.
Furthermore, decreased AP-2 expression is independently associated with elevated 
risk of subsequent metastatic behavior of stage I cutaneous malignant melanoma.

PMID: 9817279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Nov 10;95(23):13714-9.

AP-2-null cells disrupt morphogenesis of the eye, face, and limbs in chimeric
mice.

Nottoli T(1), Hagopian-Donaldson S, Zhang J, Perkins A, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, Yale University,
266 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

The homozygous disruption of the mouse AP-2 gene yields a complex and lethal
phenotype that results from defective development of the neural tube, head, and
body wall. The severe and pleiotropic developmental abnormalities observed in the
knockout mouse suggested that AP-2 may regulate several morphogenic pathways. To 
uncouple the individual developmental mechanisms that are dependent on AP-2, we
have now analyzed chimeric mice composed of both wild-type and AP-2-null cells.
The phenotypes obtained from these chimeras indicate that there is an independent
requirement for AP-2 in the formation of the neural tube, body wall, and
craniofacial skeleton. In addition, these studies reveal that AP-2 exerts a major
influence on eye formation, which is a critical new role for AP-2 that was masked
previously in the knockout mice. Furthermore, we also have uncovered an
unexpected influence of AP-2 on limb pattern formation; this influence is
typified by major limb duplications. The range of phenotypes observed in the
chimeras displays a significant overlap with those caused by teratogenic levels
of retinoic acid, strongly suggesting that AP-2 is an important component of the 
mechanism of action of this morphogen.

PMCID: PMC24885
PMID: 9811866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Virol. 1998 Dec;72(12):10218-21.

Equine infectious anemia virus Gag polyprotein late domain specifically recruits 
cellular AP-2 adapter protein complexes during virion assembly.

Puffer BA(1), Watkins SC, Montelaro RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

We have identified an interaction between the equine infectious anemia virus
(EIAV) late assembly domain and the cellular AP-2 clathrin-associated adapter
protein complex. A YXXL motif within the EIAV Gag late assembly domain was
previously characterized as a sequence critical for release of assembling
virions. We now show that this YXXL sequence interacts in vitro with the AP-50
subunit of the AP-2 complex, while the functionally interchangeable late assembly
domains carried by the Rous sarcoma virus p2b protein and human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 p6 protein, which utilize PPPY and PTAPP L domains, respectively, do
not bind AP-50 in vitro. In addition, EIAV late domain mutants containing
mutations that have previously been shown to abrogate budding also exhibit marked
decreases in AP-50 binding efficiencies. A role for AP-2 complex in viral
assembly is supported by immunofluorescence analysis of EIAV-infected equine
dermal cells demonstrating specific colocalization of the alpha adaptin subunit
of AP-2 with the EIAV p9 protein at sites of virus budding on the plasma
membrane. These data provide strong evidence that EIAV utilizes the cellular AP-2
complex to accomplish virion assembly and release.

PMCID: PMC110572
PMID: 9811764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Cell Sci. 1998 Dec;111 ( Pt 23):3487-96.

Regulation of a hair follicle keratin intermediate filament gene promoter.

Dunn SM(1), Keough RA, Rogers GE, Powell BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Adelaide, Waite Campus, Glen
Osmond, South Australia 5064, Australia.

During hair growth, cortical cells emerging from the proliferative follicle bulb 
rapidly undergo a differentiation program and synthesise large amounts of hair
keratin proteins. To identify some of the controls that specify expression of
hair genes we have defined the minimal promoter of the wool keratin intermediate 
filament gene K2.10. The region of this gene spanning nucleotides -350 to +53 was
sufficient to direct expression of the lacZ gene to the follicle cortex of
transgenic mice but deletion of nucleotides -350 to -150 led to a complete loss
of promoter activity. When a four base substitution mutation was introduced into 
the minimal functional promoter at the binding site for lymphoid enhancer factor 
1 (LEF-1), promoter activity in transgenic mice was decreased but specificity was
not affected. To investigate the interaction of trans-acting factors within the
minimal K2.10 promoter we performed DNase I footprinting analyses and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. In addition to LEF-1, Sp1, AP2-like and
NF1-like proteins bound to the promoter. The Sp1 and AP2-like proteins bound
sequences flanking the LEF-1 binding site whereas the NF1-like proteins bound
closer to the transcription start site. We conclude that the LEF-1 binding site
is an enhancer element of the K2.10 promoter in the hair follicle cortex and that
factors other than LEF-1 regulate promoter tissue- and
differentiation-specificity.

PMID: 9811563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Oncogene. 1998 Nov 5;17(18):2287-93.

AML1(-/-) embryos do not express certain hematopoiesis-related gene transcripts
including those of the PU.1 gene.

Okada H(1), Watanabe T, Niki M, Takano H, Chiba N, Yanai N, Tani K, Hibino H,
Asano S, Mucenski ML, Ito Y, Noda T, Satake M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Cancer Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

The AML1 and PEBP2beta/CBFbeta genes encode the DNA-binding and non-binding
subunits, respectively, of the heterodimeric transcription factor, PEBP2/CBF.
Targeting each gene results in an almost identical phenotype, namely the complete
lack of definitive hematopoiesis in the fetal liver on embryonic day 11.5
(E11.5). We examined and compared the expression levels of various
hematopoiesis-related genes in wild type embryos and in embryos mutated for AML1 
or PEBP2beta/CBFbeta. The RNAs were prepared from the yolk sacs of E9.5 embryos, 
from the aorta-gonad- mesonephros regions of E11.5 embryos and from the livers of
E11.5 embryos and RT-PCR was performed to detect various gene transcripts.
Transcripts were detected for most of the hematopoiesis-related genes that encode
transcription factors, cytokines and cytokine receptors, even in tissues from
homozygously targeted embryos. On the other hand, PU.1 transcripts were never
detected in any tissue of AML1(-/-) or PEBP2beta/CBFbeta(-/-) embryos. In
addition, transcripts for the Vav, flk-2/flt-3, M-CSF receptor, G-CSF receptor
and c-Myb genes were not detected in certain tissues of the (-/-) embryos. The
results suggest that the expression of a particular set of hematopoiesis-related 
genes is closely correlated with the PEBP2/CBF function.

PMID: 9811459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Histol Histopathol. 1998 Oct;13(4):1225-31.

Molecular changes in human melanoma metastasis.

Luca MR(1), Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030, USA.

The molecular changes associated with the transition of melanoma cells from
radial growth phase to vertical growth phase (metastatic phenotype) are not well 
defined. Our recent studies have demonstrated that the two tumor suppressor
genes, p53 and p16/CDKN2, do not play a major role in the acquisition of the
metastatic phenotype in human melanoma. Mutations in p53 are infrequent and do
not correlate with the metastatic potential of human melanoma cells while
p16/CDKN2 abnormalities are frequent, but are not pre-requisite for the
acquisition of the metastatic phenotype. On the other hand, the tyrosine-kinase
receptor c-KIT and the cell adhesion molecule MCAM/MUC-18 play active roles in
the progression of human melanoma. Metastatic melanoma cells overexpress MCAM and
do not express the c-KIT receptor. Enforced c-KIT expression in metastatic cells 
significantly inhibited their growth and metastatic potential in nude mice.
Furthermore, exposure of c-KIT-positive melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo to
stem cell factor (SCF), the ligand for c-KIT, triggered apoptosis of these cells 
but not of normal melanocytes. Ectopic expression of MCAM into primary cutaneous 
melanoma cells enhanced their tumorigenicity and metastatic ability in vivo. We
found that both genes, c-KIT and MCAM, are regulated by the transcription factor 
AP-2 and that metastatic melanoma cells do not express AP-2. We therefore propose
that loss of AP-2 might be a crucial event in the progression of human melanoma.

PMID: 9810513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Lipid Res. 1998 Nov;39(11):2125-34.

Transcriptional regulation of lysosomal acid lipase in differentiating monocytes 
is mediated by transcription factors Sp1 and AP-2.

Ries S(1), Büchler C, Langmann T, Fehringer P, Aslanidis C, Schmitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Regensburg, D-93042 Regensburg, Germany.

Human lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is a hydrolase required for the cleavage of
cholesteryl esters and triglycerides derived from plasma lipoproteins. It is
shown here that during monocyte to macrophage differentiation, the expression of 
LAL-mRNA is induced. This induction is dependent on protein kinase C activity and
protein synthesis. The cell type-specific increase in LAL expression is further
investigated in the THP-1 cell line with respect to transcriptional regulation.
The human monocytic leukemia cell line THP-1 differentiates into macrophage-like 
cells when treated with phorbol esters. In order to determine the cis-acting
elements necessary for both basal and phorbol 12-myristate-13 acetate
(PMA)-enhanced promoter activity, we performed deletion analysis and reporter
gene assays. A PMA responsive element has been identified between -182 bp and
-107 bp upstream of the major transcription start site. Gel mobility shift assays
demonstrated that binding of Sp1 and AP-2 to the LAL promoter is increased by PMA
in THP-1 cells. Co-transfections with expression plasmids for Sp1 and AP-2
further emphasized the important role of these transcription factors in both
basal and PMA-enhanced LAL expression. Our data suggest that differentiation
dependent increase of lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) expression in THP-1 cells is
mediated by a concerted action of Sp1 and AP-2.

PMID: 9799798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Gene. 1998 Sep 14;217(1-2):165-76.

Functional identification of the promoter of the gene encoding the Rhesus monkey 
beta-amyloid precursor protein.

Song W(1), Lahiri DK.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical Neurobiology, Institute of Psychiatric Research, Department
of Psychiatry, 791 Union Drive, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Misregulation of the transcription of the beta-amyloid precursor protein
(betaAPP) gene is implicated in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Here we characterize the 5'-flanking region, the first exon and intron of the
betaAPP gene of the Rhesus monkey (rhbetaAPP). For functional analysis, transient
transfection in PC12 cells was performed with a series of 5'-deletion constructs 
(fused with a reporter gene), that extended as far upstream as -7900 down to
-1bp. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase/promoter fusion assays showed that both
-7900/+104 and -75/+104-bp regions possessed strong promoter activity. However,
-2542/+104bp had the strongest promoter activity, whereas -204/+104bp showed a
major reduction in activity and -47/+104bp showed almost a complete loss of
activity. A region from -75 to +104bp was essential for minimal basic promoter
activity because mutation at the activating site of an upstream stimulator factor
(USF) within this region abolished the promoter activity. The very upstream
region (-5529/-3416bp) displayed a negative effect on promoter activity. Two
blocks of the sequence, 641bp (-1131 /-490) and 105bp (-309/-204), acted as
positive regulators for promoter activity. Another 61-bp block (-204/-143) acted 
as a negative regulator. Gel shift assay indicated that the -249-242-bp region
contains a binding domain for the AP-2 transcription factor. No second promoter
or bidirectional promoter was observed. A region spanning the first exon and part
of the first intron (+99 to +6800bp) acted as a negative regulator. These results
suggest that a region of -75 to +104bp, which contains the pyrimidine-rich
initiator element, the 5'-untranslated region and the binding site for USF,
constitute the minimal promoter element and that interactions between multiple
positive and negative elements, the USF and initiator element are crucial for
transcription of the TATA-less betaAPP promoter.

PMID: 9795200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1998 Oct 30;61(1-2):154-61.

Phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene expression: synergistic activation by
Egr-1, AP-2 and the glucocorticoid receptor.

Wong DL(1), Siddall BJ, Ebert SN, Bell RA, Her S.

Author information: 
(1)Nancy Pritzker Laboratory, MSLS Building, Room P106, Department of Psychiatry 
and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305-5485, USA. ms.dlw@forsythe.stanford.edu

The gene encoding the epinephrine synthesizing enzyme, phenylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase (PNMT), is transcriptionally activated by Egr-1, AP-2, and
the glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Stimulation by AP-2 requires its synergistic
interaction with an activated GR. The present studies show that the GR also
cooperates with Egr-1 or the combination of Egr-1 and AP-2 to activate the PNMT
promoter. Together Egr-1, AP-2, and the GR can induce PNMT promoter-mediated
luciferase reporter gene expression beyond the sum of their independent
contributions as well as synergistically activate the endogenous PNMT gene
leading to marked increases in PNMT mRNA. Examination of the effects of mutation 
of the AP-2 or Egr-1 binding sites on PNMT promoter activation by DEX and the
factor binding to the remaining intact site or by all three transcriptional
activators showed changes in luciferase reporter gene expression which suggest
that DNA structure may be altered thereby reducing or enhancing synergistic
activation. It also appears that the -165 bp Egr-1 site may not be critical for
the synergism observed between Egr-1, AP-2 and the GR. When the glucocorticoid
response element (GRE) within the PNMT promoter was mutated, PNMT promoter
activation by Egr-1 and DEX, AP-2 and DEX or all three showed both inhibition and
enhancement, even when the GRE was completely eliminated. These observations
indicate that induction of PNMT gene transcription may occur either through GR
interaction with other transcriptional proteins after binding to its cognate GRE 
or through direct protein-protein interaction in the absence of GRE binding.
While the mechanisms by which Egr-1 and the GR and Egr-1, AP-2 and the GR
function cooperatively to stimulate PNMT promoter activity remain to be
elucidated, this synergistic stimulation of the PNMT promoter by these factors
may provide important in vivo and in vitro regulatory control of the PNMT gene.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9795195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4591-8.

A mouse carrying genetic defect in the choice between T and B lymphocytes.

Tokoro Y(1), Sugawara T, Yaginuma H, Nakauchi H, Terhorst C, Wang B, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Japan.

Transgenic mice with human CD3epsilon gene have been shown to exhibit early
arrest of T cell development in the thymus. The present study shows that, instead
of T cells, B cells are generated in the thymus of a line, tg epsilon26, of the
human CD3epsilon transgenic mice. The accumulation of mature B cells in the
thymus was found only in tg epsilon26 mice, not in other human CD3epsilon
transgenic mouse lines or other T cell-deficient mice, including CD3-epsilon
knockout mice and TCR-beta/TCR-delta double knockout mice. Hanging drop-mediated 
transfer into 2-deoxyguanosine-treated thymus lobes showed that lymphoid
progenitor cells rather than thymus stromal cells were responsible for abnormal B
cell development in tg epsilon26 thymus, and that tg epsilon26 fetal liver cells 
were destined to become B cells in normal thymus even in the presence of normal
progenitor cells undergoing T cell development. These results indicate that
lymphoid progenitor cells in tg epsilon26 mice are genetically defective in
thymic choice between T cells and B cells, generating B cells even in normal
thymus environment. Interestingly, tg epsilon26 thymocytes expressed GATA-3 and
TCF-1, but not LEF-1 and PEBP-2alpha, among T cell-specific transcription factors
that are involved in early T cell development, indicating that GATA-3 and TCF-1
expressed during thymocyte development do not necessarily determine the cell fate
into T cell lineage. Thus, tg epsilon26 mice provide a novel mouse model in that 
lineage choice between T and B lymphocytes is genetically defective.

PMID: 9794386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 24;17(12):1517-25.

Transcriptional regulation of osteopontin gene in vivo by PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 and
ETS1 in the skeletal tissues.

Sato M(1), Morii E, Komori T, Kawahata H, Sugimoto M, Terai K, Shimizu H, Yasui
T, Ogihara H, Yasui N, Ochi T, Kitamura Y, Ito Y, Nomura S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Japan.

Osteopontin (Opn) and polyoma enhancer-binding protein (PEBP) 2alphaA/core
binding factor (CBFA) 1 have been suggested to play important roles in
ossification. The overlapping localization of opn and PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 mRNA, and
the marked decrease of opn mRNA expression in PEBP2alphaA knockout mice,
indicated that the transcription of opn gene was controlled by PEBP2alphaA. In
the present study, we determined the direct regulation of PEBP2alphaA on the opn 
promoter activity. Opn promoter activity was markedly enhanced by PEBP2alphaA and
ETS1 in a synergistic manner. The synergistic effect was diminished when either
the PEBP2alphaA or ETS1 binding site was mutated, or the spatial arrangement of
these sites was mutated by a 4-nt insertion. The distance between these sites was
important for transactivation but not protein-DNA binding. The direct interaction
between PEBP2alphaA and ETS1 was depended on protein-DNA binding. These results
suggested that the specific spatial arrangement of both sites and direct
interaction between PEBP2alphaA and ETS1, were essential for promoter function.
Furthermore, endogenous opn mRNA was decreased with the introduction of dominant 
negative PEBP2alphaA to MC3T3/E1 cells expressing endogenous PEBP2alphaA, ETS1
and opn. These findings suggest that PEBP2alphaA and ETS1 cooperate in vivo to
regulate expression of the opn gene in the skeletal tissue. Cell type-specific
regulation of Opn gene expression will also be discussed.

PMID: 9794229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Oncogene. 1998 Oct 15;17(15):1911-22.

Cloning and characterization of the Drosophila homologue of the AP-2
transcription factor.

Bauer R(1), McGuffin ME, Mattox W, Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The AP-2 family of transcription factors (AP-2alpha, AP-2beta and AP-2gamma) is
temporally and spatially regulated in mammals and has also been implicated in
oncogenesis. Here we report the isolation of genomic and cDNA clones encoding the
Drosophila homologue of AP-2, designated DAP-2. The predicted amino acid sequence
exhibits 42-45% overall identity with the vertebrate AP-2 proteins. A sequence of
107 amino acids within the DNA binding and dimerization domain of the vertebrate 
AP-2 proteins is highly conserved (90-92%) with the DAP-2 homologue. An in vitro 
translation product of DAP-2 cDNA binds specifically to AP-2 consensus binding
sites. DAP-2 was also shown to be functionally conserved in vivo because
transient transfection of a DAP-2 expression plasmid activated transcription
through AP-2 binding sites in both mammalian and Drosophila cell lines. DAP-2 is 
expressed during early embryogenesis and DAP-2 transcripts are also detected in
the adult. Whole-mount in situ hybridizations demonstrated that DAP-2 is
expressed initially at stage 9 of Drosophila embryonic development and that DAP-2
transcripts are detected in regions of the brain, eye-antennal disc, optical
lobe, antenno-maxillary complex, and in a subset of cells of the ventral nerve
cord. The cloning of DAP-2 and the identification of the DAP-2 expression pattern
during embryogenesis provides a starting point to address the function of AP-2
during differentiation and development in a well understood model system.

PMID: 9788434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Genomics. 1998 Sep 1;52(2):173-85.

Genomic organization and partial duplication of the human alpha7 neuronal
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene (CHRNA7).

Gault J(1), Robinson M, Berger R, Drebing C, Logel J, Hopkins J, Moore T, Jacobs 
S, Meriwether J, Choi MJ, Kim EJ, Walton K, Buiting K, Davis A, Breese C,
Freedman R, Leonard S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado, 80262, USA.

The human alpha7 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor gene (HGMW-approved
symbol CHRNA7) has been characterized from genomic clones. The gene is similar in
structure to the chick alpha7 gene with 10 exons and conserved splice junction
positions. The size of the human gene is estimated to be larger than 75 kb. A
putative promoter 5' of the translation start in exon 1 has been cloned and
sequenced. The promoter region lacks a TATA box and has a high GC content (77%). 
Consensus Sp1, AP-2, Egr-1, and CREB transcription factor binding sites appear to
be conserved between bovine and human genes. The alpha7 nAChR gene was found to
be partially duplicated, with both loci mapping to the chromosome 15q13 region. A
yeast artificial chromosome contig was constructed over a genetic distance of 5
cM that includes both alpha7 loci and the region between them. Four novel exons
are described, located in genomic clones containing the partially duplicated
gene. The duplicated sequences, including the novel exons, are expressed in human
brain.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9782083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Nov 1;26(21):4837-45.

Identification of AP-2 as an interactive target of Rb and a regulator of the G1/S
control element of the hamster histone H3.2 promoter.

Wu F(1), Lee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the USC/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center,University of Southern California School of Medicine,
1441 Eastlake Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Previous studies have established that a 32 bp cis -regulatory region, referred
to as the H3core spanning -241 to -210 of the hamster histone H3.2 promoter, is
critical for its G1/S-phase induction of transcription. Here we report that the
transcription factor AP-2 is a major component of the protein complex which
interacts with the H3core from hamster nuclear extracts. In search of the control
mechanism(s) whereby AP-2 can mediate cell cycle regulation of the histone H3.2
promoter, we found that AP-2 can physically interact with the retinoblastoma (Rb)
tumor suppressor protein in vitro , and when over-expressed, can also associate
with Rb in vivo . Importantly, in contrast to the majority of Rb binding
proteins, the C-terminal domain of Rb alone is sufficient for its interaction
with AP-2. Using a reporter gene system linking tandem copies of the H3core to a 
heterologous minimal promoter, we demonstrated that over-expression of AP-2
proteins results in transactivation of the reporter gene through the H3core in a 
sequence-specific but orientation-independent manner. Additionally, this
stimulative effect was suppressed by co-expression of Rb. Thus, AP-2, through its
physical and functional interaction with Rb, may contribute to the cell cycle
regulation of its target genes.

PMCID: PMC147932
PMID: 9776742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6767-76.

Characterization of novel parent-specific epigenetic modifications upstream of
the imprinted mouse H19 gene.

Szabó PE(1), Pfeifer GP, Mann JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
California 91010, USA.

Genomic imprinting results in parent-specific monoallelic expression of a small
number of genes in mammals. The identity of imprints is unknown, but much
evidence points to a role for DNA methylation. The maternal alleles of the
imprinted H19 gene are active and hypomethylated; the paternal alleles are
inactive and hypermethylated. Roles for other epigenetic modifications are
suggested by allele-specific differences in nuclease hypersensitivity at
particular sites. To further analyze the possible epigenetic mechanisms
determining monoallelic expression of H19, we have conducted in vivo
dimethylsulfate and DNase I footprinting of regions upstream of the coding
sequence in parthenogenetic and androgenetic embryonic stem cells. These cells
carry only maternally and paternally derived alleles, respectively. We observed
the presence of maternal-allele-specific dimethylsulfate and DNase I footprints
at the promoter indicative of protein-DNA interactions at a CCAAT box and at
binding sites for transcription factors Sp1 and AP-2. Also, at the boundary of a 
region further upstream for which existent differential methylation has been
suggested to constitute an imprint, we observed a number of strand-specific
dimethylsulfate reactivity differences specific to the maternal allele, along
with an unusual chromatin structure in that both strands of maternally derived
DNA were strongly hypersensitive to DNase I cutting over a distance of 100
nucleotides. We therefore reveal the existence of novel parent-specific
epigenetic modifications, which in addition to DNA methylation, could constitute 
imprints or maintain monoallelic expression of H19.

PMCID: PMC109260
PMID: 9774690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Oncogene. 1998 Sep 10;17(10):1261-70.

AP-2 may contribute to IGF-II overexpression in rhabdomyosarcoma.

Zhang L(1), Zhan S, Navid F, Li Q, Choi YH, Kim M, Seth P, Helman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Section, Pediatric Oncology Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1928, USA.

The human insulin-like growth factor II gene is regulated in a
development-dependent manner and is not expressed in most adult tissues. However,
high levels of insulin-like growth factor II mRNA are detected in many human
tumors including rhabdomyosarcoma, an embryonal tumor of skeletal muscle origin. 
In this study, we demonstrate that the developmentally regulated transcription
factor AP-2 is expressed at higher levels in human fetal skeletal muscle and
rhabdomyosarcoma cells compared to human adult skeletal muscle. Endogenous
insulin-like growth factor II mRNA derived from the P3 as well as transfected P3 
promoter activity were modestly and consistently increased to the same extent
following treatment of the rhabdomyosarcoma cell line RD with forskolin, a
compound implicated in AP-2 transactivation. This effect of AP-2 on increased
transcriptional activity was confirmed by nuclear run-on assays. Expression of
AP-2B, a dominant-negative inhibitor of AP-2, suppressed the P3 promoter activity
in AP-2 expressing RD cells. Furthermore, five AP-2 protected regions
corresponding to six AP-2 specific binding sites were detected in the
insulin-like growth factor II P3 promoter. These data together suggest that AP-2 
may contribute to the high expression of IGF-II in rhabdomyosarcoma cells.

PMID: 9771969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1998 Aug;52(4):453-8.

Further characterization of the 5'-flanking promoter region of the human
beta1-adrenergic receptor gene.

Okawa Y(1), Adachi A, Ino M, Nagumo S, Matsui H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan.

Further characterization of the 5'-flanking promoter region of the human
beta1-adrenergic receptor (AR) gene was attempted. The transcription initiation
sites, determined by the primer extension and the rapid amplification of the
5'-cDNA end, are multiple in a spanning about 30 nucleotides (-289 to -261
relative to the translation start site). There exist inverted CCAAT boxes,
multiple binding sites for transcription factor Sp1 and AP-2 nearby transcription
initiation sites, however, this region lacks a typical TATA box. In order to
localize the regulatory region for the basal transcription of the human beta1-AR 
gene, a variety of 5'-flanking sequence/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene fusion constructs was prepared and transiently expressed in HeLa
cells. Functional analyses reveal negatively (-3813 to -2925 and -1772 to -796)
as well as positively (-2925 to -1772) regulatory regions, in addition to the
region (-796 to -87) being necessary for the basic expression of the human
beta1-AR gene.

PMID: 9766698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 16;273(42):27331-8.

Transcription factor AP-2gamma regulates murine adenosine deaminase gene
expression during placental development.

Shi D(1), Kellems RE.

Author information: 
(1)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of Biochemistry, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Trophoblast cells are specialized extra-embryonic cells present only in eutherian
mammals. They play a major role in the implantation and placentation processes.
To understand better the molecular mechanisms that control the development and
function of trophoblast cells, we sought to identify the transcription factors
that regulate murine adenosine deaminase (ADA) gene expression in the placenta.
Here we report a detailed characterization of a placenta-specific footprinting
region (FP1) in the Ada placental regulatory element. The sequence of FP1 was
mapped by DNase I footprinting and was found to match a consensus AP-2
transcription factor-binding site. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
demonstrated that FP1 interacted with AP-2-like proteins. Further analysis using 
AP-2 antibody confirmed that AP-2 protein was indeed present in the placenta and 
bound to FP1. Mutation at the AP-2 site in FP1 abolished the ability of the Ada
placental regulatory element to bind AP-2 proteins and failed to target
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene expression to placentas in
transgenic mice, indicating that AP-2 is required for Ada expression in the
placenta. In addition, RNase protection assays demonstrated that AP-2gamma was
the predominant AP-2 family member expressed in the placenta. In situ
hybridization analysis revealed that AP-2gamma expression was enriched in the
trophoblast lineage throughout development, suggesting that AP-2gamma may be
critical for trophoblast development and differentiation.

PMID: 9765260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Neurosci. 1998 Oct 15;18(20):8247-60.

Noradrenergic-specific transcription of the dopamine beta-hydroxylase gene
requires synergy of multiple cis-acting elements including at least two
Phox2a-binding sites.

Kim HS(1), Seo H, Yang C, Brunet JF, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University
of Tennessee, College of Medicine, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

Dopamine beta-hydroxylase (DBH) catalyzes the conversion of dopamine to
noradrenaline and is selectively expressed in noradrenergic and adrenergic
neurons and neuroendocrine cells. Recent data from this laboratory showed that a 
paired-like homeodomain (HD) protein, Phox2a, interacts with the HD-binding site 
residing within a composite promoter of the human DBH gene, designated domain IV,
in a cell-specific manner and directly controls noradrenergic-specific DBH
promoter activity. In this report, we demonstrate that three additional
protein-binding sites (i.e., domains I, II, and III) between domain IV and the
TATA box are critical for intact DBH promoter activity in noradrenergic cells and
that they activate DBH transcription in a highly concerted manner. Transient
transfection assays of mutant DBH reporter constructs indicated that domain I was
active in every cell line tested, whereas domain III was preferentially active in
DBH-positive cells. Remarkably, mutation of domain II was associated with
inactivation of DBH promoter activity exclusively in DBH-positive cell lines,
defining it as another noradrenergic-specific promoter element. The cell-specific
profile of the promoter function of these sequence motifs was further supported
by in vitro DNA-binding studies and Southwestern analysis. Furthermore,
competition and antibody supershift assays show that transcription factors Sp1
and AP2 are the cognate nuclear factors interacting with domains I and III,
respectively. Parallel evidence indicates that domain II is another
Phox2a-binding site, demonstrating at least two binding sites for this factor in 
the upstream DBH promoter. Strikingly, four tandem copies of domain II increased 
the promoter activity of a minimal DBH promoter by 100- to 200-fold in
DBH-positive cell lines without compromising cell specificity. Cotransfection of 
Phox2a-expression vector dramatically increased the activity of the multiple
domain II promoter only in DBH-negative cell lines, confirming that domain II is 
responsive to Phox2a. Collectively, this study emphasizes a critical role of
Phox2a as well as its functional synergism with other transcription factors
(e.g., CREB, AP2, and Sp1) in transcriptional activation of the DBH gene.

PMID: 9763470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Dev Biol. 1998 Oct 1;202(1):125-35.

A novel alternative spliced variant of the transcription factor AP2alpha is
expressed in the murine ocular lens.

Ohtaka-Maruyama C(1), Hanaoka F, Chepelinsky AB.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Physiology Laboratory, the Institute for Chemical and Physical
Science (RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, 351-01, Japan.

The AP2alpha gene encodes a transcription factor containing a basic,
helix-span-helix DNA-binding/dimerization domain, which is developmentally
regulated and retinoic acid inducible. Recent reports about AP2alpha null mice
indicate that AP2alpha plays an important role in embryogenesis, especially in
craniofacial development and midline fusion. Ocular development is also affected 
in these null mice. As AP2alpha may be involved in transcriptional regulation in 
the lens, it was important to examine the expression of the AP2alpha gene in the 
lens. Four AP2alpha mRNA variants have been previously isolated from whole mouse 
embryos. Variants 1, 3, and 4 are transcriptional activators that are transcribed
from different promoters and variant 2 is a repressor lacking the activation
domain encoded by exon 2. Using in situ-PCR, we found that AP2alpha is expressed 
in the lens epithelia but not in the lens fibers. RT-PCR analysis of lens mRNA
with amplimers specific for each variant revealed that AP2alpha variants 1, 2,
and 3 are expressed in newborn mouse lenses. However, variant 4 is not expressed 
in the lens. In this report we characterized a novel isoform, which we named
variant 5, expressed in the lens and kidney. Variant 5, which is generated by
alternative splicing, may function as a repressor due to the partial deletion of 
the proline-rich transactivation domain encoded by exon 2. This is the first
molecular characterization of AP2alpha gene expression in the lens. Our results
indicate that two activator and two repressor AP2alpha isoforms may play a role
in regulating gene expression in the lens.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9758708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 29;95(20):11863-8.

The PEBP2betaMYH11 fusion created by Inv(16)(p13;q22) in myeloid leukemia impairs
neutrophil maturation and contributes to granulocytic dysplasia.

Kogan SC(1), Lagasse E, Atwater S, Bae SC, Weissman I, Ito Y, Bishop JM.

Author information: 
(1)G. W. Hooper Foundation, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-0552, USA. skogan@cgl.ucf.edu

Chromosomal translocations involving the genes encoding the alpha and beta
subunits of the Pebp2/Cbf transcription factor have been associated with human
acute myeloid leukemia and the preleukemic condition, myelodysplasia.
Inv(16)(p13;q22) fuses the gene encoding the beta subunit of Pebp2 to the MYH11
gene encoding a smooth muscle myosin heavy chain (Smmhc). To examine the effect
of the inv(16)(p13;q22) on myelopoiesis, we used the hMRP8 promoter element to
generate transgenic mice expressing the Pebp2betaSmmhc chimeric fusion protein in
myeloid cells. Neutrophil maturation was impaired in PEBP2betaMYH11 transgenic
mice. Although the transgenic mice had normal numbers of circulating neutrophils,
their bone marrow contained increased numbers of immature neutrophilic cells,
which exhibited abnormal characteristics. In addition, PEBP2betaMYH11 inhibited
neutrophilic differentiation in colonies derived from hematopoietic progenitors. 
Coexpression of both PEBP2betaMYH11 and activated NRAS induced a more severe
phenotype characterized by abnormal nuclear morphology indicative of granulocytic
dysplasia. These results show that PEBP2betaMYH11 can impair neutrophil
development and provide evidence that alterations of Pebp2 can contribute to the 
genesis of myelodysplasia.

PMCID: PMC21731
PMID: 9751756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):25903-14.

Gelatinase B/lacZ transgenic mice, a model for mapping gelatinase B expression
during developmental and injury-related tissue remodeling.

Mohan R(1), Rinehart WB, Bargagna-Mohan P, Fini ME.

Author information: 
(1)Vision Research Laboratories, New England Medical Center, and the Departments 
of Ophthalmology, Anatomy, and Cell Biology, Tufts University School of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) drive normal tissue remodeling and are
implicated in a wide range of pathologies. Although MMP activity is controlled at
multiple levels, the primary regulation of MMP activity is transcriptional. The
transcriptional promoter elements required for MMP gene expression in cultured
cells have been defined, but this has not been extended to the in vivo situation.
In this paper, we show that the DNA sequences between -522 and +19 of the rabbit 
gelatinase B gene (MMP-9) (as characterized in the transgenic mouse line 3445)
constitute a minimal promoter that drives appropriate developmental and
injury-induced reporter gene expression in transgenic mice. We further show that 
the expression and activity of three transcription factors (NF-kappaB, AP-2, and 
Sp1) that control the activity of the gelatinase B promoter are selectively
induced in the epithelium migrating to heal a wound. Although promoter activity
parallels expression of the endogenous gene in cell cultures, we show by several 
criteria that cell cultures cannot model many aspects of promoter regulation in
vivo. This study reveals that the transgenic mouse line 3445 might be a useful
model for investigating the regulation of gelatinase B expression in vivo and for
identifying and characterizing new drugs that can control gelatinase B gene
transcription.

PMID: 9748266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. FEBS Lett. 1998 Aug 14;433(1-2):119-24.

Structure and organization of the cardiotoxin genes in Naja naja sputatrix.

Lachumanan R(1), Armugam A, Tan CH, Jeyaseelan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore.

We report the genomic structure, organization and the presence of multiple
isoforms of the gene encoding cardiotoxins (CTX) of Naja naja sputatrix. The
cardiotoxin gene consists of six CTX isoforms, each (2.2 kb) having three exons
and two introns. Two possible transcription initiation sites as well as consensus
TATA boxes and transcription factor binding motifs, AP-2, NFIL-6/C/EBP, NF-kappaB
and PuF have been identified in the 5'-region of the gene. The CTX gene isoforms 
show nucleotide variations at specific segments in exon 2 and exon 3, which
correspond to the functional domains in the three-finger loop structure of the
cardiotoxin molecule. The diverse functions of cardiotoxins together with our
findings suggest that the cardiotoxin gene isoforms may have evolved under
adaptive pressure through a positive Darwinian selection process.

PMID: 9738945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Gene. 1998 Jul 3;214(1-2):25-33.

Structure of the mouse gene for the serine protease inhibitor neuroserpin (PI12).

Berger P(1), Kozlov SV, Krueger SR, Sonderegger P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Zurich, Winterhurerstrasse 190,
CH-8057 Zurich, Switzerland.

Neuroserpin (PI12), initially identified as an axonally secreted protein in
cultured chicken dorsal root ganglion neurons, belongs to the serpin family of
the serine protease inhibitors and is mainly expressed by neurons of both the
developing and the adult nervous system. Here we report on the cloning and
structural characterization of the neuroserpin gene of the mouse. The murine
neuroserpin gene spans over more than 55kb and consists of nine exons. The
positions and phases of the exonintron borders are completely conserved between
neuroserpin and its nearest homologues, protease nexin-1 and plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1. A single transcription initiation site, which is
colocalized with a potential initiation (Inr) sequence, has been determined by
primer extension and RNase protection. Sequence analysis revealed a TATA-less
promoter with a CAAT box and several sites for the general transcription factor
Sp1 and the neuron-specific transcription factor AP-2.

PMID: 9729122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Sep 1;70(3):297-303.

Magnetic field activation of protein-DNA binding.

Lin H(1), Han L, Blank M, Head M, Goodman R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University Health Sciences, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

The mechanisms involved in sensing, signaling, and coordinating changes resulting
from magnetic field-induced stress show substantial similarities to those of heat
shock, e.g., magnetic field-induced heat shock 70 gene (HSP70) expression
involves heat shock factor (HSF) activation and heat shock element binding.
However, an additional requirement for transactivation of HSP70 expression by
magnetic fields is the binding of Myc protein, indicating that additional
elements and/or pathways are involved in the induction of HSP70 expression by
magnetic fields. To investigate the possible participation of additional genetic 
elements in magnetic field-induced HSP70 expression, we examined both magnetic
field exposure and heat shock on protein-DNA binding of the transcription factors
HSF, AP-1, AP-2, and SP-1 in four human cell lines. The binding sites for these
transcription factors are present in the HSP70 promoter. AP-1 binding activity,
normally not increased by heat shock, was increased by magnetic fields; heat
shock induced an increase only in HSF binding. Although intersecting and
converging signaling pathways could account for the multiplicity of elements
involved in magnetic field-induced HSP70 transcription, direct interaction of
magnetic fields with DNA is also a possible mechanism. Because magnetic fields
penetrate the cell, they could well react with conducting electrons present in
the stacked bases of the DNA.

PMID: 9706866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 13;17(6):699-708.

The chimeric protein, PEBP2 beta/CBF beta-SMMHC, disorganizes cytoplasmic stress 
fibers and inhibits transcriptional activation.

Tanaka Y(1), Fujii M, Hayashi K, Chiba N, Akaishi T, Shineha R, Nishihira T,
Satomi S, Ito Y, Watanabe T, Satake M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Sendai, Japan.

The chromosomal inversion 16(p13;q22) associated with human acute myeloid
leukemia generates the chimeric PEBP2 beta/CBF beta-SMMHC gene. The PEBP2
beta/CBF beta portion of the chimeric polypeptide harbors most of the amino acid 
sequence of the PEBP2 beta/CBF beta protein, the non-DNA binding subunit of the
heterodimeric transcription factor, PEBP2/CBF, whereas the SMMHC portion of the
chimera consists of the rod domain of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain
molecule. In this study we examined the subcellular localization of the chimeric 
protein and its effect both on stress fibers and transcriptional activation by
transfecting cDNA into tissue culture cells. The localization of the chimera was 
investigated by immunocytochemical staining of cells and was found to be both
cytoplasmic and nuclear. One aspect of the effect of expression of the chimera
was a drastic alteration of cell morphology. The cells appeared elongated and
possessed long cytoplasmic processes. Double fluorescent labeling revealed
disorganization of the stress fibers and an altered F-actin staining pattern in
the transfected cells. Studies using a deletion mutant showed that both the PEBP2
beta/CBF beta and SMMHC domains are necessary for the induction of the
morphological alteration. A significant proportion of the chimeric protein was
retained in the cytoskeleton after detergent extraction of the cells and could be
recuperated as a membrane fraction, suggesting that this is one of the probable
sites of action of the PEBP2 beta/CBF beta-SMMHC protein. Another effect of the
chimeric protein was inhibition of transcriptional activation dependent on the
PEBP2/CBF binding DNA sequence. However, deregulation of PEBP2/CBF site dependent
transcription by itself was not sufficient to induce cell morphological changes. 
Taken together, these results indicate that the PEBP2 beta/CBF beta-SMMHC
chimeric protein acts at two levels, at the level of stress fiber organization
and at the level of transcriptional activation. We suggest that the action of
PEBP2 beta/CBF beta-SMMHC depends to a great extent on whether it is located in
the cytoplasm or in the nucleus.

PMID: 9715271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Aug 19;249(2):307-12.

Redox modulation of AP-2 DNA binding activity in vitro.

Huang Y(1), Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Radiation and Free Radical Biology Graduate Program, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa, 52242, USA.

Transcription factor AP-2 plays a critical role in regulating gene expression
during vertebrate development and cellular differentiation. We report here that
AP-2 DNA binding in vitro can be reversibly modulated by redox conditions and
that thioredoxin is a potent stimulator of AP-2 DNA binding. Our studies indicate
that oxidation of recombinant human AP-2 with diamide or hydrogen peroxide
inhibits its DNA binding activity to synthetic AP-2 oligodeoxynucleotides. The
inhibitory effect of diamide on AP-2 DNA binding was dose-dependent and was
reversible by addition of reducing agents beta-mercaptoethanol, dithiothreitol,
and thioredoxin. Immunoblot assays indicated that treatment with oxidants caused 
a change in migration of the AP-2 protein in nonreducing gels and that this
effect was also reversible by treatment of the oxidized AP-2 with reducing
agents. These data suggest a mechanism by which the oxidation state of conserved 
cysteine residues in the AP-2 DNA binding domain may contribute to its DNA
binding activity. AP-2 joins a group of other transcription factors whose
functions are regulated in part by their redox states.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9712692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Plant Cell. 1998 Aug;10(8):1391-406.

Two transcription factors, DREB1 and DREB2, with an EREBP/AP2 DNA binding domain 
separate two cellular signal transduction pathways in drought- and
low-temperature-responsive gene expression, respectively, in Arabidopsis.

Liu Q(1), Kasuga M, Sakuma Y, Abe H, Miura S, Yamaguchi-Shinozaki K, Shinozaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Resources Division, Japan International Research Center for
Agricultural Sciences (JIRCAS), Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries,
2-1 Ohwashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8686, Japan.

Plant growth is greatly affected by drought and low temperature. Expression of a 
number of genes is induced by both drought and low temperature, although these
stresses are quite different. Previous experiments have established that a
cis-acting element named DRE (for dehydration-responsive element) plays an
important role in both dehydration- and low-temperature-induced gene expression
in Arabidopsis. Two cDNA clones that encode DRE binding proteins, DREB1A and
DREB2A, were isolated by using the yeast one-hybrid screening technique. The two 
cDNA libraries were prepared from dehydrated and cold-treated rosette plants,
respectively. The deduced amino acid sequences of DREB1A and DREB2A showed no
significant sequence similarity, except in the conserved DNA binding domains
found in the EREBP and APETALA2 proteins that function in ethylene-responsive
expression and floral morphogenesis, respectively. Both the DREB1A and DREB2A
proteins specifically bound to the DRE sequence in vitro and activated the
transcription of the b-glucuronidase reporter gene driven by the DRE sequence in 
Arabidopsis leaf protoplasts. Expression of the DREB1A gene and its two homologs 
was induced by low-temperature stress, whereas expression of the DREB2A gene and 
its single homolog was induced by dehydration. Overexpression of the DREB1A cDNA 
in transgenic Arabidopsis plants not only induced strong expression of the target
genes under unstressed conditions but also caused dwarfed phenotypes in the
transgenic plants. These transgenic plants also revealed freezing and dehydration
tolerance. In contrast, overexpression of the DREB2A cDNA induced weak expression
of the target genes under unstressed conditions and caused growth retardation of 
the transgenic plants. These results indicate that two independent families of
DREB proteins, DREB1 and DREB2, function as trans-acting factors in two separate 
signal transduction pathways under low-temperature and dehydration conditions,
respectively.

PMCID: PMC144379
PMID: 9707537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Anticancer Res. 1998 Jul-Aug;18(4A):2591-7.

PKC-dependent modulation of IkB alpha-NFkB pathway in low metastatic B16F1 murine
melanoma cells and in highly metastatic BL6 cells.

La Porta CA(1), Comolli R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Physiology and Biochemistry, University of Milan, Italy.
Caterina.LaPorta@unimi.it

Protein Kinase C (PKC) is a family of at least 11 closely related isoforms with
different modality of activation, and intracellular and tissue distribution. The 
aim of the present work was to analyse the effect of treatment with 0.1 microM
TPA as well as treatment with specific inhibitors of individual PKC isoenzymes
(Gö6976 for c-PKC alpha and beta isoforms and BIM for c-PKCs and n-PKCs
isoforms), on the NF-kB/IkB alpha pathway in the low and high metastatic B16F1
and BL6 murine melanoma cells. The DNA-binding activity of the transcription
factors AP1, AP2, CREB and OTC was also considered. Different modality of
activation for NF-kB and AP1 was demonstrated in the two cell lines with the
possible specific involvement of c-PKCs isoforms. In fact, in the high metastatic
BL6 cells the long-term treatment for 24 hours with TPA, with no c-PKC activation
or the inhibition with Gö6976 as well as with BIM, induced an increased NF-kB and
AP1 DNA-binding activity. In contrast, in the low metastatic B16F1 cells the
short-term treatment with TPA, induced the activation of c-PKCs isoforms, and
enhanced NF-kB and AP1 DNA-binding activity. No significant changes were
demonstrated for AP2, CREB and OTC DNA-binding activity in both cell lines.

PMID: 9703914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. EMBO J. 1998 Aug 3;17(15):4358-69.

Loss of AP-2 results in downregulation of c-KIT and enhancement of melanoma
tumorigenicity and metastasis.

Huang S(1), Jean D, Luca M, Tainsky MA, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030. USA.

Expression of the tyrosine kinase receptor, c-KIT, progressively decreases during
local tumor growth and invasion of human melanomas. We have previously shown that
enforced c-KIT expression in highly metastatic cells inhibited tumor growth and
metastasis in nude mice. Furthermore, the ligand for c-KIT, SCF, induces
apoptosis in human melanoma cells expressing c-KIT under both in vitro and in
vivo conditions. Here we show that loss of c-KIT expression in highly metastatic 
cells correlates with loss of expression of the transcription factor AP-2. The
c-KIT promoter contains three binding sites for AP-2 and EMSA gels demonstrated
that AP-2 protein binds directly to the c-KIT promoter. Transfection of wild-type
AP-2 into c-KIT-negative A375SM melanoma cells activated a c-KIT promoter-driven 
luciferase reporter gene, while expression of a dominant-negative AP-2B in
c-KIT-positive Mel-501 cells inhibited its activation. Endogenous c-KIT mRNA and 
expression of proteins were upregulated in AP-2-transfected cells, but not in
control cells. In addition, re-expression of AP-2 in A375SM cells suppressed
their tumorigenicity and metastatic potential in nude mice. These results
indicate that the expression of c-KIT is highly regulated by AP-2 and that
enforced AP-2 expression suppresses tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of
human melanoma cells, possibly through c-KIT transactivation and SCF-induced
apoptosis. Therefore, loss of AP-2 expression might be a crucial event in the
development of malignant melanoma.

PMCID: PMC1170769
PMID: 9687504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Dev Biol. 1998 Jul 1;199(1):93-110.

Ventral and lateral regions of the zebrafish gastrula, including the neural crest
progenitors, are established by a bmp2b/swirl pathway of genes.

Nguyen VH(1), Schmid B, Trout J, Connors SA, Ekker M, Mullins MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, USA.

A bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathway is implicated in
dorsoventral patterning in Xenopus. Here we show that three genes in the
zebrafish, swirl, snailhouse, and somitabun, function as critical components
within a BMP pathway to pattern ventral regions of the embryo. The dorsalized
mutant phenotypes of these genes can be rescued by overexpression of bmp4, bmp2b,
an activated BMP type I receptor, and the downstream functioning Smad1 gene.
Consistent with a function as a BMP ligand, swirl functions cell nonautonomously 
to specify ventral cell fates. Chromosomal mapping of swirl and cDNA sequence
analysis demonstrate that swirl is a mutation in the zebrafish bmp2b gene.
Interestingly, our analysis suggests that the previously described
nonneural/neural ectodermal interaction specifying the neural crest occurs
through a patterning function of swirl/bmp2b during gastrulation. We observe a
loss in neural crest progenitors in swirl/bmp2b mutant embryos, while somitabun
mutants display an opposite, dramatic expansion of the prospective neural crest. 
Examination of dorsally and ventrally restricted markers during gastrulation
reveals a successive reduction and reciprocal expansion in nonneural and neural
ectoderm, respectively, in snailhouse, somitabun, and swirl mutant embryos, with 
swirl/bmp2b mutants exhibiting almost no nonneural ectoderm. Based on the
alterations in tissue-specific gene expression, we propose a model whereby
swirl/bmp2b acts as a morphogen to specify different cell types along the
dorsoventral axis.

PMID: 9676195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Oncol Res. 1998;10(2):85-98.

Differential transactivation of human metallothionein-IIa in cisplatin-resistant 
and -sensitive cells.

Yang YY(1), Robbins PD, Lazo JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA
15261, USA.

Cells with acquired anticancer drug resistance frequently exhibited broad
cross-resistance to other anticancer agents. Increased human metallothionein
(hMT) IIa transcription has been found in some cells with acquired resistance to 
cisplatin (CP). A panel of 5'hMT-IIa promoter deletions linked to the
chloramphenicol acetyl transferase ((5'-hMT-IIaCAT) were used to demonstrate that
certain cis-elements are important for the increased hMT-IIa transcription in
CP-resistant cells (SCC25/CP) compared to CP-sensitive cells (SCC25). We further 
identified trans-acting factor differences between SCC25 and SCC25/CP cells using
gel mobility shift assays. Significant increases in binding of specific factors
to the -286 to -160 and -96 to -51 region were seen in CP-resistant SCC25/CP
cells compared to sensitive SCC25 cells. Using cross-competition and super gel
shift analyses, we identified enhanced Spl and AP-2 binding activity in SCC25/CP 
cells. By Western blot analysis and immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated that the
level of Spl was unchanged between the two cells types whereas AP-2 was elevated 
twofold in SCC25/CP cells. Our results indicated that the selection of
CP-resistant phenotype in SCC25/CP was accompanied by increased Spl and AP-2 DNA 
binding activities, which are likely not only to enhance hMT-IIa transcription
but could also alter expression of other genes responsible for a broader
anticancer drug cross-resistance. Thus, altered trans-acting factors could
account for the complex cross-resistant phenotype found in some anticancer
drug-resistant cells.

PMID: 9666516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Gene. 1998 Jul 17;215(1):203-12.

Characterization and functional analysis of the porcine lactoferrin gene
promoter.

Wang SR(1), Lin J, Cheng IC, Lin TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan,
ROC.

Lactoferrin, a ferric binding glycoprotein found in milk, can possibly prevent
microbial infection of the mammary gland and gastrointestinal tract. To define
the regulation of the porcine lactoferrin gene (pLTF), we cloned its 5'-flanking 
region from a porcine liver genomic library and analyzed the 5' upstream region
of approx. 4kb, two exons, and an intron. The transcription start site was
localized by primer extension to residue G, which is 41 nucleotides upstream from
the ATG start codon. The pLTF 5'-flanking region possesses several putative
cis-acting regulatory elements found in both housekeeping and inducible genes; to
define their function, they were inserted into a chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter construct. The region up to -156 sufficed for basic
promoter activity, whereas the region up to -780 was required for maximal
promoter activity in porcine testis cells (STcells), kidney cells (PK15 cells)
and human mammary epithelial cells (HBL-100 cells). Detailed analysis of this
proximal region by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
reveals that the ubiquitous factors SP1, AP2 and the mammary gland-specific
factor (MGF) might play significant roles in regulating the transcription of the 
pLTF gene.

PMID: 9666128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18165-72.

p42/p44 MAP kinase module plays a key role in the transcriptional regulation of
the vascular endothelial growth factor gene in fibroblasts.

Milanini J(1), Viñals F, Pouysségur J, Pagès G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, CNRS-UMR 6543, Université de Nice, Parc Valrose, 06108
Nice, France.

Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF) is a potent mitogen for vascular
endothelial cells that has been implicated in tumor neovascularization. We show
that, in hamster fibroblasts (CCL39 cells), VEGF mRNAs are expressed at low
levels in serum-deprived or exponentially growing cells, whereas it is rapidly
induced after stimulation of quiescent cells with serum. CCL39 derivatives,
transformed with Polyoma virus or with active members of the p42/p44
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway, Gly/Val point mutant of Ras at
position 12 (Ras-Val12), MKK1 in which Ser218 and Ser222 were mutated to Asp
(MKK1-SS/DD)), express very high levels of VEGF mRNA. To analyze the contribution
of the p42/p44MAP kinase in this induction, we used the CCL39-derived cell line
(Raf-1:ER) expressing an estradiol-activable Raf-1. We show a time and an
estradiol dose-dependent up-regulation of VEGF mRNA clearly detectable after 2 h 
of stimulation. The induction of VEGF mRNA in response to conditioned activation 
of Raf-1 is reverted by an inhibitor of MKK1, PD 098059, highlighting a specific 
role for the p42/p44 MAP kinase pathway in VEGF expression. Interestingly,
hypoxia has an additive effect on VEGF induction in CCL39 cells stimulated by
serum or in Raf-1:ER cells stimulated by estradiol. In contrast to VEGF, the
isoforms VEGF-B and VEGF-C are poorly regulated by growth and oncogenic factors. 
We have identified a GC-rich region of the VEGF promoter between -88 and -66 base
pairs which contains all the elements responsible of its up-regulation by
constitutive active Ras or MKK1-SS/DD. By mutation of the putative binding sites 
and electrophoretic mobility supershift experiments, we showed that the GC-rich
region constitutively binds Sp1 and AP-2 transcription factors. Furthermore,
following activation of the p42/p44 MAP kinase module, the binding of Sp1 and
AP-2 is increased in the complexes formed in this region of the promoter.
Altogether, these data suggest that hypoxia and p42/p44 MAP kinase independently 
play a key role in the regulation of the VEGF expression.

PMID: 9660776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Gene. 1998 Jul 3;214(1-2):77-86.

Identification and functional analysis of the mouse lens filensin gene promoter.

Masaki S(1), Kamachi Y, Quinlan RA, Yonezawa S, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human 
Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi 480-0392, Japan.

Filensin (also called CP94; CP95; CP97; 115kDa protein) is a component of the
lens-specific beaded filament which is believed to be functionally important in
lens fiber cell differentiation and in maintaining lens fiber cell conformation
and transparency. A 17.2kb fragment containing the 5'-upstream sequence of the
filensin gene was isolated. S1-mapping analysis determined the transcription
start point (tsp; +1) which locates at 94base pairs upstream from the initiating 
ATG on the filensin gene. In addition to a major tsp, a minor tsp (-136) was
observed. DNA sequence of the fragment around the tsp (-2144 to +155) was
identified. Analysis of the DNA sequence of the promoter region around tsp
revealed two motifs with sequence homology to Sox2 and Maf recognition sequences 
in addition to one GATA-1 site, two Sp1 binding sites, and three AP-2 binding
motifs. No TATA-box or CCAAT-motif was found around the tsp region. A series of
sequentially deleted fragments of (-2144 to +40) were fused to firefly luciferase
reporter plasmid pGL2 and tested for activity in chicken embryonic lens explants.
A minimal promoter region for mouse filensin of (-70 to +40) was identified. The 
lens-specific promoter activity was detected using lens explants cultured within 
12h after dissection. The activity was remarkably enhanced by culture in the
presence of 5ng/ml of basic fibroblast growth factor. Each one of the Sp1 and
AP-2 binding motifs was localized to the fragment of (-27 to +40) using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays. These are the first data to identify the
basic elements to the 5'-upstream sequences of the filensin gene, namely the tsp 
and the minimal filensin promoter.

PMID: 9651486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Neurosci. 1998 Jul 15;18(14):5311-21.

The neural cell adhesion molecule L1 interacts with the AP-2 adaptor and is
endocytosed via the clathrin-mediated pathway.

Kamiguchi H(1), Long KE, Pendergast M, Schaefer AW, Rapoport I, Kirchhausen T,
Lemmon V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.

Cell-cell interactions mediated via cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are
dynamically regulated during nervous system development. One mechanism to control
the amount of cell surface CAMs is to regulate their recycling from the plasma
membrane. The L1 subfamily of CAMs has a highly conserved cytoplasmic domain that
contains a tyrosine, followed by the alternatively spliced RSLE (Arg-Ser-Leu-Glu)
sequence. The resulting sequence of YRSL conforms to a tyrosine-based sorting
signal that mediates clathrin-dependent endocytosis of signal-bearing proteins.
The present study shows that L1 associates in rat brain with AP-2, a clathrin
adaptor that captures plasma membrane proteins with tyrosine-based signals for
endocytosis by coated pits. In vitro assays demonstrate that this interaction
occurs via the YRSL sequence of L1 and the mu 2 chain of AP-2. In L1-transfected 
3T3 cells, L1 endocytosis is blocked by dominant-negative dynamin that
specifically disrupts clathrin-mediated internalization. Furthermore, endocytosed
L1 colocalizes with the transferrin receptor (TfR), a marker for
clathrin-mediated internalization. Mutant forms of L1 that lack the YRSL do not
colocalize with TfR, indicating that the YRSL mediates endocytosis of L1. In
neurons, L1 is endocytosed preferentially at the rear of axonal growth cones,
colocalizing with Eps15, another marker for the clathrin endocytic pathway. These
results establish a mechanism by which L1 can be internalized from the cell
surface and suggest that an active region of L1 endocytosis at the rear of growth
cones is important in L1-dependent axon growth.

PMCID: PMC1226881
PMID: 9651214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nihon Rinsho. 1998 Jun;56(6):1430-4.

[CBFA1/PEBP2 alpha A].

[Article in Japanese]

Komori T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Osaka University Medical School, PRESTO, Japan
Science and Technology Corporation.

A transcription factor, Cbfa1/Pebp2 alpha A, which belongs to runt-domain gene
family, is preferentially expressed in the osteoblast lineage. Cbfa1/Pebp2 alpha 
A-deficient mice lacked both intramembranous and endochondral ossification
completely. The differentiation of osteoblast was blocked, and the maturational
disturbance of osteoclasts was also observed in the mutant mice. Further, the
Cbfa1/Pebp2 alpha A expression in nonosteoblastic cells induced osteoblastic
markers in vitro. These data demonstrate that Cbfa1 is an essential transcription
factor for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation. Heterozygously mutated 
mice in the Cbfa1/Pebp2 alpha A locus showed the similar phenotype with
cleidocranial dysplasia, which is an autosomal inherited disease. And the
mutations of CBFA1/PEBP2 alpha A locus were identified in the patients with
cleidocranial dysplasia.

PMID: 9648460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4252-61.

Cytoplasmic sequestration of the polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2
(PEBP2)/core binding factor alpha (CBFalpha) subunit by the leukemia-related
PEBP2/CBFbeta-SMMHC fusion protein inhibits PEBP2/CBF-mediated transactivation.

Kanno Y(1), Kanno T, Sakakura C, Bae SC, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Kyoto 606, Japan.

The polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2)/core binding factor (CBF) is 
a transcription factor composed of two subunits, alpha and beta. The gene
encoding the beta subunit is disrupted by inv(16), resulting in the formation of 
a chimeric protein, beta-SMMHC, which is associated with acute myelogenous
leukemia. To understand the effect of beta-SMMHC on PEBP2-mediated
transactivation, we used a luciferase assay system in which contribution of both 
the alpha and beta subunits was absolutely required to activate transcription.
Using this system, we found that the minimal region of the beta subunit required 
for transactivation resides between amino acid 1 and 135, which is known to
dimerize with the alpha subunit. In contrast, beta-SMMHC, despite having this
minimal region for dimerization and transactivation, failed to support
transcription with the alpha subunit. Furthermore beta-SMMHC blocked the
synergistic transcription achieved by PEBP2 and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
alpha. By using a construct in which the PEBP2 alpha subunit was fused to the
glucocorticoid receptor ligand binding domain, we demonstrated that coexpressed
beta-SMMHC tightly sequestered the alpha subunit in the cytoplasm and blocked
dexamethasone-dependent nuclear translocation of the alpha subunit. Thus, the
result suggess that beta-SMMHC inhibits PEBP2-mediated transcription via
cytoplasmic sequestration of the alpha subunit. Lastly proliferation of ME-1
cells that harbor inv(16) was blocked by an antisense oligonucleotide
complementary to the junction of the chimeric mRNA, suggesting that beta-SMMHC
contributes to leukemogenesis by blocking the differentiation of myeloid cells.

PMCID: PMC109009
PMID: 9632809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4197-208.

Two domains unique to osteoblast-specific transcription factor Osf2/Cbfa1
contribute to its transactivation function and its inability to heterodimerize
with Cbfbeta.

Thirunavukkarasu K(1), Mahajan M, McLarren KW, Stifani S, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Osf2/Cbfa1, hereafter called Osf2, is a member of the Runt-related family of
transcription factors that plays a critical role during osteoblast
differentiation. Like all Runt-related proteins, it contains a runt domain, which
is the DNA-binding domain, and a C-terminal proline-serine-threonine-rich (PST)
domain thought to be the transcription activation domain. Additionally, Osf2 has 
two amino-terminal domains distinct from any other Runt-related protein. To
understand the mechanisms of osteoblast gene regulation by Osf2, we performed an 
extensive structure-function analysis. After defining a short Myc-related nuclear
localization signal, a deletion analysis revealed the existence of three
transcription activation domains and one repression domain. AD1 (for activation
domain 1) comprises the first 19 amino acids of the molecule, which form the
first domain unique to Osf2, AD2 is formed by the glutamine-alanine (QA) domain, 
the second domain unique to Osf2, and AD3 is located in the N-terminal half of
the PST domain and also contains sequences unique to Osf2. The transcription
repression domain comprises the C-terminal 154 amino acids of Osf2. DNA-binding, 
domain-swapping, and protein interaction experiments demonstrated that
full-length Osf2 does not interact with Cbfbeta, a known partner of Runt-related 
proteins, whereas a deletion mutant of Osf2 containing only the runt and PST
domains does. The QA domain appears to be responsible for preventing this
heterodimerization. Thus, our results uncover the unique functional organization 
of Osf2 by identifying functional domains not shared with other Runt-related
proteins that largely control its transactivation and heterodimerization
abilities.

PMCID: PMC109004
PMID: 9632804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4165-76.

The capacity of polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2alphaB (AML1/Cbfa2) to
stimulate polyomavirus DNA replication is related to its affinity for the nuclear
matrix.

Chen LF(1), Ito K, Murakami Y, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan.

The nuclear matrix is thought to play an important role in the DNA replication of
eukaryotic cells, although direct evidence for such a role is still lacking. A
nuclear matrix-associated transcription factor, polyomavirus (Py) enhancer
binding protein 2alphaB1 (PEBP2alphaB1) (AML1/Cbfa2), was found to stimulate Py
replication through its cognate binding site. The minimal replication activation 
domain (RAD) was identified between amino acid (aa) 302 and aa 371 by using a
fusion protein containing the GAL4 DNA binding domain (GAL4-RAD). In addition,
the region showed affinity for the nuclear matrix and, on the basis of
competition studies, binding activity for one or more proteins involved in the
initiation of Py DNA replication. A leukemogenic chimeric protein,
AML1/ETO(MTG8), which does not contain this region of PEBP2alphaB1/AML1, was also
localized in the nuclear matrix fraction and competed for nuclear matrix
association with PEBP2alphaB1 and GAL4-RAD. Moreover, AML1/ETO inhibited Py DNA
replication stimulated by PEBP2alphaB1 and GAL4-RAD. The inhibition was specific 
for replication mediated by PEBP2alphaB1 and GAL4-RAD, and proportional to the
degree of loss of these activators from the nuclear matrix, suggesting a
requirement for nuclear matrix targeting in the stimulation of Py DNA replication
by RAD. These results are the first to suggest a molecular link between the
initiation of DNA replication and the nuclear matrix compartment.

PMCID: PMC109001
PMID: 9632801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):3647-58.

RB and c-Myc activate expression of the E-cadherin gene in epithelial cells
through interaction with transcription factor AP-2.

Batsché E(1), Muchardt C, Behrens J, Hurst HC, Crémisi C.

Author information: 
(1)CJF INSERM 94-02, Université René Descartes, 75270 Paris cedex 06, France.

E-cadherin plays a pivotal role in the biogenesis of the first epithelium during 
development, and its down-regulation is associated with metastasis of carcinomas.
We recently reported that inactivation of RB family proteins by simian virus 40
large T antigen (LT) in MDCK epithelial cells results in a mesenchymal conversion
associated with invasiveness and a down-regulation of c-Myc. Reexpression of RB
or c-Myc in such cells allows the reexpression of epithelial markers including
E-cadherin. Here we show that both RB and c-Myc specifically activate
transcription of the E-cadherin promoter in epithelial cells but not in NIH 3T3
mesenchymal cells. This transcriptional activity is mediated in both cases by the
transcription factor AP-2. In vitro AP-2 and RB interaction involves the
N-terminal domain of AP-2 and the oncoprotein binding domain and C-terminal
domain of RB. In vivo physical interaction between RB and AP-2 was demonstrated
in MDCK and HaCat cells. In LT-transformed MDCK cells, LT, RB, and AP-2 were all 
coimmunoprecipitated by each of the corresponding antibodies, and a mutation of
the RB binding domain of the oncoprotein inhibited its binding to both RB and
AP-2. Taken together, our results suggest that there is a tripartite complex
between LT, RB, and AP-2 and that the physical and functional interactions
between LT and AP-2 are mediated by RB. Moreover, they define RB and c-Myc as
coactivators of AP-2 in epithelial cells and shed new light on the significance
of the LT-RB complex, linking it to the dedifferentiation processes occurring
during tumor progression. These data confirm the important role for RB and c-Myc 
in the maintenance of the epithelial phenotype and reveal a novel mechanism of
gene activation by c-Myc.

PMCID: PMC108947
PMID: 9632747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 26;273(26):16501-8.

Loss of AP-2 results in up-regulation of MCAM/MUC18 and an increase in tumor
growth and metastasis of human melanoma cells.

Jean D(1), Gershenwald JE, Huang S, Luca M, Hudson MJ, Tainsky MA, Bar-Eli M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

MCAM/MUC18 is a cell-surface glycoprotein of 113 kDa, originally identified as a 
melanoma antigen, whose expression is associated with tumor progression and the
development of metastatic potential. We have previously shown that enforced
expression of MCAM/MUC18 in primary cutaneous melanoma led to increased tumor
growth and metastatic potential in nude mice. The mechanism for up-regulation of 
MCAM/MUC18 during melanoma progression is unknown. Here we show that
up-regulation of MCAM/MUC18 expression in highly metastatic cells correlates with
loss of expression of the transcription factor AP-2. The MCAM/MUC18 promoter
contains four binding sites for AP-2, and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
gels demonstrated that the AP-2 protein bound directly to the MCAM/MUC18
promoter. Transfection of AP-2 into highly metastatic A375SM melanoma cells
(AP-2-negative and MCAM/MUC18-positive) inhibited MCAM/MUC18 promoter-driven
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene in a dose-dependent manner.
MCAM/MUC18 mRNA and protein expression were down-regulated in AP-2-transfected
but not in control cells. In addition, re-expression of AP-2 in A375SM cells
inhibited their tumorigenicity and metastatic potential in nude mice. These
results indicate that the expression of MCAM/MUC18 is regulated by AP-2 and that 
enforced AP-2 expression suppresses tumorigenicity and metastatic potential of
human melanoma cells, possibly by down-regulating MCAM/MUC18 gene expression.
Since AP-2 also regulates other genes that are involved in the progression of
human melanoma such as c-KIT, E-cadherin, MMP-2, and p21(WAF-1), we propose that 
loss of AP-2 is a crucial event in the development of malignant melanoma.

PMID: 9632718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Blood. 1998 May 15;91(10):3943-51.

CD95 (APO-1/Fas) mutations in childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Beltinger C(1), Kurz E, Böhler T, Schrappe M, Ludwig WD, Debatin KM.

Author information: 
(1)Sektion Hämatologie/Onkologie, Universitäts-Kinderklinik, Heidelberg, Germany.

CD95 (APO-1/Fas)-mediated apoptosis is pivotal in normal lymphocyte homeostasis
and mutations of CD95 cause a benign autoimmune lymphoproliferation syndrome
(ALPS) in humans and mice. However, tumors only rarely develop in these patients,
and no CD95 mutations have yet been directly implicated in tumorigenesis. We
therefore examined 81 de novo childhood T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemias
(T-ALL) including 54 steroid-poor responders, 10 relapsed T-ALL, and 10 leukemic 
T-cell lines, for the presence of CD95 mutations using single-strand confirmation
polymorphism and sequence analysis. In leukemic blasts and normal T cells of one 
patient, a heterozygous mutation in exon 3 of CD95 causing a 68Pro --> 68Leu
change associated with decreased CD95-mediated apoptosis was found. In leukemic
blasts and normal T cells of a second patient, a homozygous mutation in the
promoter of CD95 causing disruption of a consensus sequence for AP-2 binding
without decreasing constitutive CD95 expression was detected. No large intragenic
alterations of CD95 were found, no homozygous loss was detected in the cell
lines, and no CD95 mutations were detected in the relapses. The data presented
here show that CD95 mutations occur in some T-ALL and may be of biological
importance.

PMID: 9573033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Neurosci Res. 1998 Jun 1;52(5):618-24.

Presenilin-1 mutation alters NGF-induced neurite outgrowth, calcium homeostasis, 
and transcription factor (AP-1) activation in PC12 cells.

Furukawa K(1), Guo Q, Schellenberg GD, Mattson MP.

Author information: 
(1)Sanders-Brown Research Center on Aging, and Department of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington 40536-0230, USA.

Mutations in the presenilin-1 (PS-1) gene are responsible for many cases of
autosomal dominant early-onset inherited Alzheimer's disease (AD). PS-1 is
expressed in neurons where it is localized primarily to the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER); the normal function of PS-1 and its pathogenic mechanism in AD are not
known. We now report that expression of an AD-linked human PS-1 mutation (L286V) 
in PC12 cells results in aberrant differentiation responses to nerve growth
factor (NGF). The extent of neurite outgrowth during a 10-day period of exposure 
to NGF was significantly reduced in lines stably expressing mutant PS-1. NGF
induced a prolonged elevation of intracellular calcium levels which was
significantly enhanced in cells expressing mutant PS-1. Induction of DNA binding 
activity of the transcription factor AP-1 by NGF was markedly suppressed in cells
expressing mutant PS-1. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that a PS-1
mutation alters cellular signaling systems associated with NGF-induced
differentiation in PC12 cells. Altered responsivity to neurotrophic factors could
play a role in the pathogenesis of neuritic degeneration and cell death in human 
carriers of PS-1 mutations.

PMID: 9632318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jun 9;95(12):6722-7.

An interplay between TATA box-binding protein and transcription factors IIE and
IIA modulates DNA binding and transcription.

Yokomori K(1), Verrijzer CP, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 401
Barker Hall, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-3202, USA.

The basal transcription factor IIE (TFIIE) is thought to be one of the last
factors to be assembled into a preinitiation complex (PIC) at eukaryotic
promoters after RNA polymerase II and TFIIF have been incorporated. It was shown 
that a primary function of TFIIE is to recruit and cooperate with TFIIH in
promoter melting. Here, we show that the large subunit of TFIIE (E56) can
directly stimulate TBP binding to the promoter in the absence of other basal
factors. The zinc-finger domain of E56, required for transcriptional activity, is
critical for this function. In addition, the small subunit of TFIIE (E34)
directly contacts DNA and TFIIA and thus providing a second mechanism for TFIIE
to help binding of a TBP/IIA complex to the promoter, the first critical step in 
the PIC assembly. These studies suggest an alternative PIC assembly pathway in
which TFIIE affects both TBP and TFIIH functions during initiation of RNA
synthesis.

PMCID: PMC22611
PMID: 9618479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jun 5;273(23):14099-106.

Cot kinase activates tumor necrosis factor-alpha gene expression in a cyclosporin
A-resistant manner.

Ballester A(1), Velasco A, Tobeña R, Alemany S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, CSIC, Facultad Medicina Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Arturo Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Cot kinase is a protein serine/threonine kinase, classified as a
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase, implicated in T lymphocyte
activation. Here we show that an increase in Cot kinase expression promotes tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) production in Jurkat T cells stimulated by
soluble anti-CD3 or by low concentrations of phorbol 12,13-dibutyrate (PDBu) and 
calcium ionophore. Overexpression of Cot kinase in Jurkat cells activates
TNF-alpha gene expression. Cot kinase promotes TNF-alpha promoter activation to a
similar extent as calcium ionophore and PDBu or soluble anti-CD28 and PDBu.
Neither phorbol esters nor calcium ionophore can replace Cot kinase on TNF-alpha 
promoter-driven transcription. Expression of a dominant negative form of Cot
kinase inhibits TNF-alpha promoter activation induced by stimulation with either 
calcium ionophore and PDBu, soluble anti-CD28 and PDBu, or soluble anti-CD3 and
PDBu. TNF-alpha promoter-driven transcription by Cot kinase is partially mediated
by MAPK/ERK kinase and is cyclosporin A-resistant. Cot kinase increases at least 
the AP-1 and AP-2 response elements. These data indicate that Cot kinase plays a 
critical role in TNF-alpha production.

PMID: 9603908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cell Biochem. 1998 Jun 15;69(4):392-413.

Transcriptional induction of cyclooxygenase-2 gene by okadaic acid inhibition of 
phosphatase activity in human chondrocytes: co-stimulation of AP-1 and CRE
nuclear binding proteins.

Miller C(1), Zhang M, He Y, Zhao J, Pelletier JP, Martel-Pelletier J, Di Battista
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The involvement of serine/threonine protein phosphatases in signaling pathways
that control the expression of the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) gene in human
chondrocytes was examined. Okadaic acid (OKA), an inhibitor of protein
phosphatases 1 (PP-1) and 2A (PP-2A), induced a delayed, time-dependent increase 
in the rate of COX-2 gene transcription (runoff assay) resulting in increased
steady-state mRNA levels and enzyme synthesis. The latter response was dose
dependent over a narrow range of 1-30 nmol/L with declining expression and
synthesis of COX-2 at higher concentrations due to cell toxicity. The delayed
increase in COX-2 mRNA expression was accompanied by the induction of the
proto-oncogenes c-jun, junB, junD, and c-fos (but not FosB or Fra-1). Increased
phosphorylation of CREB-1/ATF-1 transcription factors was observed beginning at 4
h and reached a zenith at 8 h. Gel-shift analysis confirmed the up-regulation of 
AP-1 and CRE nuclear binding proteins, though there was little or no OKA-induced 
nuclear protein binding to SP-1, AP-2, NF-kappaB or NF-IL-6 regulatory elements. 
OKA-induced nuclear protein binding to 32P-CRE oligonucleotides was abrogated by 
a pharmacological inhibitor of protein kinase A (PKA), KT-5720; the latter
compound also inhibited OKA-induced COX-2 enzyme synthesis. Calphostin C (CalC), 
an inhibitor of PKC isoenzymes, had little effect in this regard. Inhibition of
12P-CRE binding was also observed in the presence of an antibody to CREB-binding 
protein (265-kDa CBP), an integrator and coactivator of cAMP-responsive genes.
The binding to 32P-CRE was unaffected in the presence of excess radioinert AP-1
and COX-2 NF-IL-6 oligonucleotides, although a COX-2 CRE-oligo competed very
efficiently. 32P-AP-1 consensus sequence binding was unaffected by incubation of 
chondrocytes with KT-5720 or CalC, but was dramatically diminished by excess
radioinert AP-1 and CRE-COX-2 oligos. Supershift analysis in the presence of
antibodies to c-Jun, c-Fos, JunD, and JunB suggested that AP-1 complexes were
composed of c-Fos, JunB, and possibly c-Jun. OKA has no effect on total cellular 
PKC activity but caused a delayed time-dependent increase in total PKA activity
and synthesis. OKA suppressed the activity of the MAP kinases, ERK1/2 in a
time-dependent fashion, suggesting that the Raf-1/MEKK1/MEK1/ERK1,2 cascade was
compromised by OKA treatment. By contrast, OKA caused a dramatic increase in
SAPK/JNK expression and activity, indicative of an activation of
MEKK1/JNKK/SAPK/JNK pathway. OKA stimulated a dose-dependent activation of CAT
activity using transfected promoter-CAT constructs harboring the regulatory
elements AP-1 (c-jun promoter) and CRE (CRE-tkCAT). We conclude that in primary
phenotypically stable human chondrocytes, COX-2 gene expression may be controlled
by critical phosphatases that interact with phosphorylation dependent (e.g., MAP 
kinases:AP-1, PKA:CREB/ATF) signaling pathways. AP-1 and CREB/ATF families of
transcription factors may be important substrates for PP-1/PP-2A in human
chondrocytes.

PMID: 9620167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 24;273(17):10530-7.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and promoter analysis of the mouse
Crp2/SmLim gene. Preferential expression of its promoter in the vascular smooth
muscle cells of transgenic mice.

Yet SF(1), Folta SC, Jain MK, Hsieh CM, Maemura K, Layne MD, Zhang D, Marria PB, 
Yoshizumi M, Chin MT, Perrella MA, Lee ME.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Biology Laboratory, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Several members of the LIM protein family have important roles in development and
differentiation. We recently isolated a rat cDNA encoding a new member of this
family, CRP2/SmLIM, that contains two LIM domains and is expressed preferentially
in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC). To study the molecular mechanisms that
regulate VSMC-specific transcription of the Crp2/SmLim gene, we cloned the cDNA
and gene of mouse Crp2/SmLim. Mouse Crp2/SmLim is a single copy gene of six exons
and five introns spanning approximately 20 kilobases of genomic DNA. By 5'-rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends and S1 nuclease protection assay, we determined that
the transcription start site is an A residue 80 base pairs 5' of the translation 
initiation codon. A TATA-like sequence is located 27 base pairs 5' of the
transcription start site, and there are potential cis-acting elements (GATA, Sp1,
AP-2, E box, CCAC box, and GArC motif) in the 5'-flanking sequence. In transient 
transfection assays in rat aortic smooth muscle cells in primary culture, 5
kilobases of the Crp2/SmLim 5'-flanking sequence generated a high level of
luciferase reporter gene activity. By deletion analysis and gel mobility shift
assay, we found that the region between bases -74 and -39 of this 5 kilobase DNA 
fragment binds Sp1 and confers basal promoter activity in the Crp2/SmLim gene. In
vitro, the 5-kilobase fragment was active in multiple cell types. In vivo,
however, the 5-kilobase fragment directed high level expression of the lacZ
reporter gene preferentially in the VSMC of transgenic mice, indicating the
presence of VSMC-specific element(s) in this fragment.

PMID: 9553112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Neurochem. 1998 Jun;70(6):2286-95.

Glucocorticoid-dependent action of neural crest factor AP-2: stimulation of
phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase gene expression.

Ebert SN(1), Ficklin MB, Her S, Siddall BJ, Bell RA, Ganguly K, Morita K, Wong
DL.

Author information: 
(1)Nancy Pritzker Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Stanford University School of Medicine, California 94305-5485, USA.

AP-2 is a vertebrate transcription factor expressed in neural crest cells and
their derivative tissues, including the adrenal medulla, where epinephrine is
produced. AP-2 is shown to stimulate expression of the gene encoding the
epinephrine biosynthetic enzyme phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase (PNMT).
However, stimulation of the PNMT gene by AP-2 requires glucocorticoids and
appears to be mediated through the interaction of AP-2 with activated type II
glucocorticoid receptors. Mutation of AP-2 and/or glucocorticoid receptor binding
elements within the PNMT promoter disrupts the ability of AP-2 and
glucocorticoids to induce PNMT promoter activity. These findings suggest, in the 
case of PNMT, that AP-2 stimulates gene expression through a novel
glucocorticoid-dependent mechanism.

PMID: 9603193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1998 May;56(1-2):57-65.

Cloning and characterization of the presenilin-2 gene promoter.

Pennypacker KR(1), Fuldner R, Xu R, Hernandez H, Dawbarn D, Mehta N, Perez-Tur J,
Baker M, Hutton M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of South Florida,
Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Mutations in the presenilin-2 (PS-2) have been shown to cause early onset
Alzheimer's disease (AD) in a series of families known as the Volga Germans and
in an unrelated Italian kindred. Expression of the PS-2 gene is regulated during 
AD, aging, development and brain injury. Although expressed primarily in neurons,
enhanced levels of PS-2 have been reported in astrocytes activated by neuronal
damage. Understanding the regulation of the PS-2 gene may thus provide an insight
into its role in AD. We have isolated a 3635 bp DNA fragment that contains 2934
bp of DNA sequence upstream from the PS-2 gene. Primer extension analysis was
used to map three major transcriptional start sites within the PS-2 gene. The
promoter sequence, upstream of each transcriptional start site, does not contain 
TATA or CAAT boxes but does contain several GC rich sites (Sp-1 and AP-2). A
reporter gene construct containing the PS-2 promoter (PS2P, -2934 to +702)
transfected into M17 cells drives basal transcription to 20% of the levels of the
SV-40 viral promoter. Addition of NGF to PC-12 cells was found to upregulate the 
PS2P promoter and an NGF-responsive element was localized by deletional analysis 
between -403 and +13 within the promoter. Since the PS-2 gene has multiple start 
sites and the upstream sequence is GC rich with no TATA box, the PS-2 promoter is
consistent with the GC class of 'housekeeping' genes.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9602061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. EMBO J. 1998 Apr 15;17(8):2148-55.

Dileucine-based sorting signals bind to the beta chain of AP-1 at a site distinct
and regulated differently from the tyrosine-based motif-binding site.

Rapoport I(1), Chen YC, Cupers P, Shoelson SE, Kirchhausen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School and The Center for Blood
Research.

In previous work, we showed that peptides from endocytosed proteins containing
the tyrosine YXXphi sorting motif are recognized by the mu 2 subunit of AP-2, the
plasma membrane clathrin adaptor protein complex. This interaction is activated
by phosphoinositide lipids that are phosphorylated at the D-3 position of the
inositol ring, and is also enhanced by the formation of clathrin-AP-2 coats.
Here, we describe the detection of a specific interaction between peptides
containing a second sorting motif, the dileucine motif, and AP-1, the clathrin
adaptor complex responsible for sorting proteins at the trans-Golgi network
(TGN). Surprisingly, the site of dileucine binding is the beta1 subunit, not mu
1. A YXXphi-containing peptide from a protein trafficked within the TGN does bind
to mu 1, however. Phosphatidylinositol 3,4-diphosphate and 3,4, 5-triphosphate
did not activate the interaction between dileucine-containing peptides and AP-1
but instead inhibited it, and clathrin-AP-1 coat formation did not alter the
interaction. Thus, there are at least two physically separate binding sites for
sorting signals on APs, which are also regulated independently.

PMCID: PMC1170559
PMID: 9545228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1998 Feb;34(2):170-3.

The presence of transcription factors in fetal bovine sera.

Knepper PA(1), Mayanil CS, Goossens W, McLone DC, Hayes E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Oculo-Cerebrospinal Investigation, Children's Memorial Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

Three sources of fetal bovine serum (FBS) were fractionated by ammonium sulfate
precipitation and by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
(SDS-PAGE), transferred to Immobilon-P membranes, immunoblotted with a panel of
transcription factor antibodies, and detected by enhanced chemiluminescence. Nine
transcription factors were detected--ATF-2, SRE-ZBP, GATA-2, TFIID, Ets-1/Ets-2, 
E2F-1, Oct-2, p53, and AP-2; four transcription factors were not detected--Myo D,
CREB, Sp2, and Wilms' tumor. The results indicated the presence of varying
amounts of several transcription factors in three commercial sources and may
represent heretofore unrecognized factors influencing cell culture.

PMID: 9542656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):8638-45.

A region from the medium chain adaptor subunit (mu) recognizes leucine- and
tyrosine-based sorting signals.

Bremnes T(1), Lauvrak V, Lindqvist B, Bakke O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Division of Biology, University of Oslo,
0316 Oslo, Norway.

Tyrosine-based sorting signals in the cytosolic tails of membrane proteins have
been found to bind directly to the medium chain subunit (mu) of the adaptor
complexes AP-1 and AP-2. For the leucine-based signals, an interaction with AP-1 
and AP-2 has been reported, but no specific interacting subunit has been
demonstrated. After searching for molecules interacting with the leucine-based
sorting signals within the cytosolic tail of the major histocompatibility complex
class II-associated invariant chain using a phage display approach, we identified
phage clones with homology to a conserved region of the AP-1 and AP-2 mu chains. 
To investigate the relevance of these findings, we have expressed regions of
mouse mu1 and mu2 chains on phage gene product III and investigated the binding
to tail sequences from various transmembrane proteins with known endosomal
targeting signals. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent binding assays showed that these
phages specifically recognized peptides containing functional leucine- and
tyrosine-based sorting signals, suggesting that these regions of the mu1 and mu2 
chains interact with both types of sorting signals.

PMID: 9535838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 31;95(7):3467-71.

Derepression of the C/EBPalpha gene during adipogenesis: identification of
AP-2alpha as a repressor.

Jiang MS(1), Tang QQ, McLenithan J, Geiman D, Shillinglaw W, Henzel WJ, Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

During adipogenesis, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) serves as 
a pleiotropic transcriptional activator of adipocyte genes. Previously, we
identified dual repressive elements in the C/EBPalpha gene and a putative
transacting factor (C/EBPalpha undifferentiated protein, or CUP) expressed by
preadipocytes, but not adipocytes, that bind to these elements. In the present
investigation, CUP was purified 17,000-fold from nuclear extracts of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes. Amino acid sequence and mass spectral analysis of tryptic peptides
derived from purifed CUP (molecular mass approximately 50 kDa) revealed that the 
repressor is (or contains) an isoform of the transcription factor, AP-2alpha.
Electrophoretic mobility shift and Western blot analysis on purified CUP and
preadipocyte nuclear extracts confirmed the identity of CUP as AP-2alpha. Both
AP-2alpha protein and CUP binding activity are expressed by preadipocytes and
then decrease concomitantly during differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes into
adipocytes. Consistent with a repressive role of AP-2alpha/CUP, an AP-2alpha1
expression vector, cotransfected with a C/EBPalpha promoter-reporter construct
into 3T3-L1 adipocytes, inhibited reporter gene transcription. Taken together
with previous results, these findings suggest that in preadipocytes the
C/EBPalpha gene is repressed by AP-2alpha/CUP, which, upon induction of
differentiation, is down-regulated, allowing expression of the gene.

PMCID: PMC19859
PMID: 9520389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2444-54.

Intrinsic transcriptional activation-inhibition domains of the polyomavirus
enhancer binding protein 2/core binding factor alpha subunit revealed in the
presence of the beta subunit.

Kanno T(1), Kanno Y, Chen LF, Ogawa E, Kim WY, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Japan.

A member of the polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2/core binding factor
(PEBP2/CBF) is composed of PEBP2 alphaB1/AML1 (as the alpha subunit) and a beta
subunit. It plays an essential role in definitive hematopoiesis and is frequently
involved in the chromosomal abnormalities associated with leukemia. In the
present study, we report functionally separable modular structures in PEBP2
alphaB1 for DNA binding and for transcriptional activation. DNA binding through
the Runt domain of PEBP2 alphaB1 was hindered by the adjacent carboxy-terminal
region, and this inhibition was relieved by interaction with the beta subunit.
Utilizing a reporter assay system in which both the alpha and beta subunits are
required to achieve strong transactivation, we uncovered the presence of
transcriptional activation and inhibitory domains in PEBP2 alphaB1 that were only
apparent in the presence of the beta subunit. The inhibitory domain keeps the
full transactivation potential of full-length PEBP2 alphaB1 below its maximum
potential. Fusion of the transactivation domain of PEBP2 alphaB1 to the yeast
GAL4 DNA-binding domain conferred transactivation potential, but further addition
of the inhibitory domain diminished the activity. These results suggest that the 
activity of the alpha subunit as a transcriptional activator is regulated
intramolecularly as well as by the beta subunit. PEBP2 alphaB1 and the beta
subunit were targeted to the nuclear matrix via signals distinct from the nuclear
localization signal. Moreover, the transactivation domain by itself was capable
of associating with the nuclear matrix, which implies the existence of a
relationship between transactivation and nuclear matrix attachment.

PMCID: PMC110624
PMID: 9566865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Z Ernahrungswiss. 1998;37 Suppl 1:75-9.

Localization of somatostatin receptor subtype mRNA in the rat gastrointestinal
tract and regulation of SSTR1 gene expression.

Schäfer J(1), Baumeister H, Lorenz A, Meyerhof W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, German Institute of Human Nutrition and
University of Potsdam, Potsdam-Rehbrücke, FRG.

Somatostatin and its receptors are widely distributed in the central nervous
system and peripheral tissues including those of the gastrointestinal tract (GI
tract). The expression patterns of the five known SSTR genes have been analysed
in detail by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction amplifications and
in situ hybridizations using tissues dissected from different parts of rat
stomach and gut. While SSTR1 mRNA is present at relatively high amounts
throughout the gastrointestinal tract, the levels of SSTR2, 3 and 4 mRNAs vary in
different regions and SSTR5 mRNA has not been detected. In situ hybridizations
revealed the presence of SSTR3 mRNA in enterocytes and in neurons of the
myenteric and submucous plexus. These findings are consistent with a role of
SSTR3 in the observed somatostatin-mediated inhibition of acetylcholine release
from myenteric neurons and of secretomotor neuron activity in the submucous
plexus. Sequence analyses of the SSTR1 gene promoter revealed the absence of the 
canonical TATA and CAAT motifs and the presence of a variety of potential binding
sites for transcriptional regulators. Among these are binding sites for GCF,
AP-2, AP-4, response elements for somatostatin (SOM-RE), epidermal growth factor 
(EGF-RE) and cytocines (GAS and NFIL) as well as for tissue-specific factors such
as Pit-1 (pituitary) and IDX-1 (pancreatic cells). Mobility shift assays have
confirmed that nuclear proteins of pancreatic RIN1046-38 and pituitary GH3 tumour
cells bind to oligonucleotides containing the overlapping Pit-1 and IDX-1 binding
sites. Thus, the Pit-1/IDX-1 sites may be critical for the activation of the
SSTR1 gene in these cell-types.

PMID: 9558732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1998 Mar 27;273(13):7675-83.

Genomic structure and promoter activity of the mouse polysialic acid synthase
(mST8Sia IV/PST) gene.

Takashima S(1), Yoshida Y, Kanematsu T, Kojima N, Tsuji S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Glycobiology, Frontier Research Program, The Institute
of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Wako, Saitama 351-01, Japan.

The mouse gene encoding ST8Sia IV/PST, one of two polysialic acid synthases, was 
isolated and characterized. The mST8Sia IV/PST gene was found to comprise over 60
kilobases and to be composed of five exons. Primer extension analysis revealed
that transcription started from 333 nucleotides upstream of the translational
initiation site. Transfection with nested deletion mutants of the 5'-flanking
region fused to the luciferase reporter gene revealed that the promoter activity 
of the -107/+145 region was correlated with the gene expression of mST8Sia IV/PST
in embryonal carcinoma P19 and neuroblastoma F11 cells. This proximal promoter
region lacks an apparent TATA box but has putative binding sites for
transcription factors Sp1 and NF-Y (CCAAT binding protein) at nucleotide
positions -66/-57 and -47/-37, respectively. Individual deletions and mutations
of the inverted Sp1 binding site or inverted NF-Y binding site caused significant
reduction of the promoter activity, indicating that each binding site was
involved in essential transcription control. Mobility shift assaying also
revealed that Sp1 and NF-Y in a nuclear extract of P19 cells bind to the promoter
region of the mST8Sia IV/PST gene. Deletion of the region from -60 to -40, which 
contains parts of both the Sp1 and NF-Y binding sites, completely abolished the
promoter activity, suggesting that both Sp1 and NF-Y are synergetically involved 
in transcription regulation of the mST8Sia IV/PST gene in P19 and F11 cells.
Although the overall structures of the two polysialic acid synthase genes (ST8Sia
II/STX and IV/PST) are very similar, there is no extensive sequence homology
between the 5'-flanking regions of the ST8Sia II/STX and IV/PST genes, suggesting
that these two genes are expressed under different regulatory systems.

PMID: 9516473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Cell Biochem. 1998 May 1;69(2):221-31.

Induction of stress response and differential expression of 70 kDa stress
proteins by sodium fluoride in HeLa and rat brain tumor 9L cells.

Cheng TJ(1), Chen TM, Chen CH, Lai YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

We herein demonstrate that sodium fluoride (NaF) acts as a stress response
inducer on HeLa and 9L rat brain tumor cells. NaF is only slightly cytotoxic, and
inhibitory to Ser/Thr-phosphatases but not to Tyr-phosphatases in both cell
lines. After treatment with 5 mM NaF for 2 h, the phosphorylation levels of
vimentin and an alkali-resistant 65-kDa phosphoprotein were enhanced, a common
phenomenon detected in cells under a variety of stress conditions. Under an
identical treatment protocol, in which the cells were treated with 5 mM NaF for 2
h and then allowed to recover under normal growing conditions for up to 12 h, NaF
differentially induced the cytoplasmic/nuclear heat-shock protein70s (including
both the inducible and the constitutively expressed members of this protein
family) in HeLa cells and the endoplasmic reticulum residing heat-shock protein70
(the glucose-regulated protein with an apparent molecular weight of 78 kDa) in 9L
cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using probes containing
well-characterized regulatory elements revealed the activation of the heat-shock 
factor in HeLa but not in 9L cells; this is in good agreement with the stress
protein induction pattern. Additional differential induction of binding
activities toward EMSA probes individually containing NF-KB, AP-2, and CRE-like
elements were detected in NaF-treated cells. The possible involvement of these
binding sites as well as the corresponding factors in the stress response are
discussed.

PMID: 9548569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Gene. 1998 Feb 16;208(1):17-24.

Cloning and characterization of the promoter for the human complement factor I
(C3b/C4b inactivator) gene.

Minta JO(1), Fung M, Turner S, Eren R, Zemach L, Rits M, Goldberger G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular, Molecular Pathology, Medical Sciences Building,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. joe.minta@utoronto.ca

Complement factor I is a serine proteinase that regulates the classical and
alternative pathways of complement by cleaving C3b and C4b and preventing the
assembly of C3 and C5 convertase enzymes. In order to understand the regulation
of factor I gene expression in liver cells, 4kb of the 5' flanking region of the 
gene was cloned, and the 1474-bp 3'-end was sequenced and shown to contain a
number of transcription factor consensus sequences. A major and two minor
transcription start sites were identified, respectively, at 152, 178, and 198bp
upstream of the translation start site by primer extension analysis. The
transcriptional activity of the 1474-bp fragment was analyzed by fusion of 5'
deletion constructs to a cat-encoding gene expression vector and transient
transfections into Hep G2 cells. A 273-bp fragment located at -112 to +161
relative to the major transcription start site was sufficient for promoter
activity. The 3' fragment spanning +3 to +161 and containing a TATA-like element 
did not demonstrate promoter activity, suggesting that the core promoter resides 
in a 115-bp sequence located between -112 and +3. This region contains an
Inr-like element overlapping the major cap site and a CTF-NF1 element, two
potential CCAAT boxes and an AP-2 element partially overlapping an Sp-1 site.
Thus, factor I promoter may belong to the TATA-less Inr-driven class II promoters
whose transcription is regulated by Sp-1. The transcriptional activity of the
1474-bp 5' flanking fragment was upregulated by PMA, IL-6 and TNF-alpha,
suggesting that factor I may be an acute phase reactant.

PMID: 9479036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 1998 Feb 27;273(9):5026-32.

Regulation of the mouse cartilage-derived retinoic acid-sensitive protein gene by
the transcription factor AP-2.

Xie WF(1), Kondo S, Sandell LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Washington and Veterans
Administration Puget Sound Health Care Systems, Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

The expression of cartilage-derived retinoic acid-sensitive protein (CD-RAP) is
initiated at the beginning of chondrogenesis and continues throughout the
cartilage development. In chondrocytes, CD-RAP is down-regulated by retinoic
acid. To understand the molecular mechanism underlying this regulation and the
cell-specific expression, the deletion constructs of the mouse CD-RAP promoter
were transfected into chondrocytes and a melanoma cell line. The results revealed
a domain that demonstrated high levels of expression specifically in
chondrocytes. In this functional domain, we show that a cis-acting element,
5'-GCCTGAGGC-3', binds to the trans-acting factor protein AP-2. Mutation of the
AP-2 site on the CD-RAP promoter led to decreased transcription in C5.18
chondrocytes, indicating that this site may act as an activator of transcription.
In contrast, increased concentration of AP-2, stimulated by retinoic acid, led to
decreased transcription of the CD-RAP promoter, an effect that was abolished by
mutation of the AP-2 binding site. The effect of AP-2 was further examined by
co-transfection of C5.18 and HepG2 cells with the CD-RAP promoter constructs and 
an AP-2 expression plasmid. In a dose-dependent manner, cotransfection with AP-2 
elevated and then decreased CD-RAP promoter activity. Taken together, these
results suggest that AP-2 is involved in the biphasic regulation of CD-RAP
transcription.

PMID: 9478951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Gene. 1998 Jan 30;207(2):177-86.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and expression of the chicken heme
oxygenase-1 gene in transfected primary cultures of chick embryo liver cells.

Lu TH(1), Lambrecht RW, Pepe J, Shan Y, Kim T, Bonkovsky HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester 
01655, USA. Tze.Lu@ummed.edu

Using chick heme oxygenase-1 (cHO-1) cDNA as a probe, three independent clones
were identified from screening a lambda FixII chick genomic library. Genomic
Southern blots using this cDNA probe or a cHO-1 5' specific probe showed that
cHO-1 is a single-copy gene. Based on restriction enzyme analysis, Southern
blots, polymerase chain reaction analysis and DNA sequencing, it was confirmed
that the three overlapping clones isolated cover the entire cHO-1 gene, as well
as approximately 10 kb of the flanking regions on both ends. As with mammalian
HO-1x, cHO-1 has five exons and four introns. Computer analysis of the DNA
sequence obtained identified consensus sequences corresponding to numerous
transcription factor recognition elements. These include AP-1, AP-2, NF-kB,
C/EBP, c-Myc and a metal-responding element identified in the promoter region,
and two Sp-1 elements in intron 1. Transient expression studies in transfected
primary cultures of chick embryo liver cells showed that a CAT reporter gene
construct containing 2.8 kb of the cHO-1 promoter region responded to sodium
arsenite, H2O2, transition metals and 12-0-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate, but
not to heme. Studies with deletion mutants, consisting of various lengths of the 
cHO-1 promoter region, indicated that there are two regions important for sodium 
arsenite induction, one located between residues -1642 and -1293, and the second 
located in the first 263 base pairs of the cHO-1 promoter. DNA binding studies by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that nuclear protein isolated from
primary cultures of chick embryo liver cells bound to the oligonucleotide probe
containing an AP-1 element identified at -1573 to -1580. In addition, such
binding was increased by cobalt or sodium arsenite treatment.

PMID: 9511760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Immunol. 1998 Mar 15;160(6):2862-71.

Gene structure, promoter characterization, and basis for alternative mRNA
splicing of the human CD58 gene.

Wallich R(1), Brenner C, Brand Y, Roux M, Reister M, Meuer S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Heidelberg, Germany.
reinhard.wallich@urz.uni-heidelberg.de

The 60-kDa lymphocyte function-associated Ag-3 (LFA-3/CD58), a highly
glycosylated adhesion molecule that serves as ligand for the T cell-restricted
glycoprotein CD2, is encoded by a gene at the human chromosome locus 1p13. We
have elucidated the exon-intron organization of the entire human CD58 gene,
including approximately 2.5 kilobases (kb) of 5'-flanking DNA. Four overlapping
genomic clones, spanning approximately 65 kb, contained the entire approximately 
1-kb coding sequence of CD58 and consisted of six separate exons, which varied
from 72 to 294 bp in size. At least two different CD58 mRNA precursors can be
generated from the human gene as a result of alternative choice of one of the two
acceptor splice sites located within exon 5. DNA sequence analysis of about 2.5
kb of 5'-flanking sequence of the CD58 gene indicated the absence of a CAAT box. 
However, potential binding sites for the transcriptional activators AP-2, GATA,
PU.1, and Sp-1 are present. Two consensus TATAA elements, located approximately
2.4 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site, have been identified. The
2.5-kb CD58 promoter sequence displayed functional activity in transient
transfection assays in the hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2. Comparing
the response of CD58 promoter-driven luciferase plasmids to several cytokines and
other agents suggests that the CD58 promoter is regulated by up-regulatory,
enhancer-like and down-regulatory, silencer-like elements. Further analysis of
this region should allow researchers to gain insight into the molecular
mechanisms by which this gene is regulated, e.g., during inflammatory responses.

PMID: 9510189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1998 Jan;44(1):51-8.

Prolactin-induced expression of TATA-less cyclin D3 gene is mediated by Sp1 and
AP2.

Yang M(1), Nomura H, Hu Y, Kaneko S, Kaneko H, Tanaka M, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Mie University Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

The TATA-less cyclin D3 gene is stimulated by prolactin (PRL) in rat Nb2
T-lymphocytes. DNA mobility shift assay and luciferase transfection analysis
revealed that the gene has a potential promoter region, two enhancer domanins and
a silencer region. The promoter region possessed three Sp1 sites and two AP2
sites, and both enhancer regions had one AP2 binding site each. Analysis using
oligonucleotide probes and purified AP2 protein has suggested that the expression
of rat cyclin D3 gene is promoted by Sp1 and AP2 factors.

PMID: 9503147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Blood. 1998 Mar 1;91(5):1688-99.

The AML1/ETO(MTG8) and AML1/Evi-1 leukemia-associated chimeric oncoproteins
accumulate PEBP2beta(CBFbeta) in the nucleus more efficiently than wild-type
AML1.

Tanaka K(1), Tanaka T, Kurokawa M, Imai Y, Ogawa S, Mitani K, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

AML1, a gene on chromosome 21 encoding a transcription factor, is disrupted in
the (8;21)(q22;q22) and (3;21)(q26;q22) chromosomal translocations associated
with myelogenous leukemias; as a result, chimeric proteins AML1/ETO(MTG8) and
AML1/Evi-1 are generated, respectively. To clarify the roles of AML1/ETO(MTG8)
and AML1/Evi-1 in leukemogenesis, we investigated subcellular localization of
these chimeric proteins by immunofluorescence labeling and subcellular
fractionation of COS-7 cells that express these chimeric proteins. AML1/ETO(MTG8)
and AML1/Evi-1 are nuclear proteins, as is wild-type AML1. Polyomavirus enhancer 
binding protein (PEBP)2beta(core binding factor [CBF]beta), a heterodimerizing
partner of AML1 that is located mainly in the cytoplasm, was translocated into
the nucleus with dependence on the runt domain of AML1/ETO(MTG8) or AML1/Evi-1
when coexpressed with these chimeric proteins. When a comparable amount of
wild-type AML1 or the chimeric proteins was coexpressed with PEBP2beta(CBFbeta), 
more of the cells expressing the chimeric proteins showed the nuclear
accumulation of PEBP2beta(CBFbeta), as compared with the cells expressing
wild-type AML1. We also showed that the chimeric proteins associate with
PEBP2beta(CBFbeta) more effectively than wild-type AML1. These data suggest that 
the chimeric proteins are able to accumulate PEBP2beta(CBFbeta) in the nucleus
more efficiently than wild-type AML1, probably because of the higher affinities
of the chimeric proteins for PEBP2beta(CBFbeta) than that of wild-type AML1.
These effects of the chimeric proteins on the cellular distribution of
PEBP2beta(CBFbeta) possibly cause the dominant negative properties of the
chimeric proteins over wild-type AML1 and account for one of the mechanisms
through which these chimeric proteins contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 9473235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Endocrinology. 1998 Mar;139(3):1389-400.

Isolation and characterization of the 5'-flanking regulatory region of the human 
natriuretic peptide receptor C gene.

Yanaka N(1), Kotera J, Omori K.

Author information: 
(1)Lead Generation Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Osaka, Japan.

Phenotypic modulation of vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) plays a central role
in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Natriuretic peptide receptor-C (NPR-C) is
highly expressed in vascular SMCs in the experimental arteriosclerotic neointimal
area as well as in cultured SMCs, suggesting that increased expression of the
NPR-C gene is related to the phenotypic alteration of vascular SMCs. To elucidate
the molecular mechanisms and to identify the essential DNA sequences in NPR-C
gene expression, a genomic clone containing over 8 kilobases of the 5'-flanking
region of the human NPR-C gene has been isolated. Sequence analysis revealed that
a number of putative regulatory elements including unusual tandem repeated
AP-2-like sequences were observed in the 5'-flanking region. Primer extension and
ribonuclease protection analyses revealed that transcription of the human NPR-C
gene starts from two major regions. Promoter analysis using deletion constructs
in human cells, highly producing NPR-C transcripts, showing that the region (from
- 33 to + 13 relative to the transcription start point) had a potential promoter 
activity suggested that the region from -33 to + 13, containing a pyrimidine-rich
stretch composed of four CTTTTT-repeated sequences, is sufficient for the
proximal promoter activity. Moreover, three distinct DNA sequences surrounding
the transcription start site (P1, from -60 to -33; P2, from + 14 to +40; P3, from
+41 to +66) were revealed to be functional as a cis-acting positive enhancer, and
a nuclear protein(s) from the human cells was demonstrated to specifically bind
to the sequences, respectively. However, promoter analysis has shown that the P2 
and P3 sequences could not activate the human NPR-C promoter in a synergistic
manner. On the basis of deoxyribonuclease I footprinting analysis showing that a 
DNA element from +48 to +60 within the P3 sequence is preferentially protected,
the P3 sequence appears to contain a potential regulatory element involved in
NPR-C gene expression. The present study demonstrated the structure of the
5'-regulatory region of the human NPR-C gene and multiple cis-acting positive
sequences closely located around the transcription start points with an important
role in regulation of human NPR-C gene expression.

PMID: 9492076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Endocrinology. 1998 Mar;139(3):1054-66.

A CACCC box in the proximal exon 2 promoter of the rat insulin-like growth factor
I gene is required for basal promoter activity.

Wang X(1), Talamantez JL, Adamo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio 78284-7760, USA.

The insulin-like growth factor I gene is transcribed from two promoter regions,
resulting in alternative first exons in insulin-like growth factor I messenger
RNAs. A previous study showed that the sequence from -73 to +44 (where +1 is the 
first nucleotide in the exon 2 transcription initiation cluster) contained an
active exon 2 promoter, and that sequences between -73 and -36 were required for 
promoter activity. In the current study, the roles of two putative cis-acting
elements within the -73 to +44 region in basal exon 2 promoter activity were
evaluated using mutagenesis and nuclear protein-DNA binding assays. Mutation of
the CCCCACCC sequence at position -53 to GAAATCCC resulted in a complete loss of 
promoter activity in transient transfection assays in GH3, OVCAR-3, C6, and
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. A -73/+24 exon 2 promoter-luciferase construct
had partial promoter activity. Mutation of a putative initiator motif surrounding
the major exon 2 start site did not alter the activity of this construct. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, a 32P-labeled oligomer extending from -73 
to +44 in the exon 2 promoter was specifically bound by GH3 cell nuclear
extracts. A 32P-labeled oligomer which extended from -63 to -37 in the exon 2
promoter was specifically bound by GH3 and OVCAR-3 cell nuclear extracts. These
unlabeled oligomers inhibited the binding of a labeled -236/+44 exon 2 promoter
fragment to OVCAR-3 nuclear extracts. Mutation of the CCCCACCC sequence prevented
the unlabeled -73/+44 oligomer from inhibiting the binding of the -236/+44
fragment. An unlabeled oligomer containing a consensus activating protein-2
(AP-2)-binding site inhibited labeled -236/+44, -73/+44, and -63/-37 exon 2
promoter binding with a much lower affinity than did the respective unlabeled
oligomers. Purified AP-2 protein did not bind to the exon 2 promoter fragment,
nor did anti-AP-2 antibody alter the binding. Cotransfection of AP-2 expression
vector did not significantly increase exon 2 promoter activity. On the other
hand, an oligomer containing a consensus Sp1-binding site inhibited labeled
-63/-37 exon 2 promoter binding by GH3 cell nuclear extracts with an affinity
similar to that of the unlabeled -63/-37 oligomer. A mutation in the Sp1-binding 
site in this same oligomer resulted in a complete loss of binding affinity.
Purified Sp1 bound to the -63/-37 exon 2 promoter oligomer. Addition of
polyclonal antibody to Sp1 resulted in a partial supershift of the complex formed
between GH3 cell and OVCAR-3 cell nuclear extracts and the labeled -63/-37
oligomer. However, in Drosophila Schneider cells, which are an experimental model
for studying the ability of Sp1 to activate transcription, the -73/+44 exon 2
promoter construct was not stimulated by cotransfection with an Sp1 expression
plasmid. UV cross-linking studies indicated that proteins of approximate
molecular mass 125, 76, 47, and 38 kDa are bound to the proximal (-236/+44) exon 
2 promoter region. It is concluded that the CCCCACCC sequence at -53 is required 
for exon 2 promoter activity. Moreover, specific binding of nuclear proteins to
the proximal exon 2 promoter region requires the CCCCACCC sequence. Sequences
downstream of the exon 2 initiation site from +24 to +44 are required for full
promoter activity. However, the putative initiator surrounding the major
transcription start site at +1 does not appear to be important for the strength
of the proximal promoter. The CCCCACCC sequence at -53 appears to be a CACCC box,
which binds zinc finger transcription factors of the Kruppel family such as Sp1, 
although protein factors in addition to Sp1 are required to activate exon 2
transcription through the -73/+44 proximal promoter region.

PMID: 9492038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Feb 13;243(2):463-70.

Transcriptional regulation of human adrenomedullin gene in vascular endothelial
cells.

Ishimitsu T(1), Miyata A, Matsuoka H, Kangawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan.

Adrenomedullin (AM) is a recently identified vasodilator peptide produced in
cardiovascular organs such as the heart, vascular wall, kidney and lung. Because 
plasma levels of AM are not different between various portions of the
cardiovascular system, vascular cells are supposed to be the main source of
circulating AM. To elucidate the regulatory mechanism of human AM gene
expression, functional elements of 5'-flanking region of AM gene were studied in 
human aortic endothelial cells (HAEC). Northern blot analysis revealed
considerable AM mRNA expression in cultured HAEC, and 2 transcription start sites
were recognized at 21 and 25 bp downstream from the TATA box. The 1534 bp
5'-flanking region DNA inserted in the luciferase vector showed significant
promoter activity when transfected into HAEC using liposome. Serial deletion of
the inserted 5'-flanking region DNA length resulted in reduction in promoter
activity by 41% between 110 and 90 bp and further reduction by 42% between 66 and
29 bp. The 19 bp DNA fragment without TATA box had almost no promoter activity.
Gel shift assay revealed presence of HAEC nuclear proteins specifically bound to 
nuclear factor for interleukin-6 expression (NF-IL6) consensus sequence existing 
from -85 to -93 bp of the AM gene 5'-flanking region and activator protein 2
(AP-2) consensus sequence clustered from -33 to -68 bp. Furthermore, mutation of 
NF-IL6 consensus sequence in the 5'-flanking region resulted in 42% reduction in 
the expression of luciferase activity. These findings suggest that NF-IL6 and
AP-2 sites in the promoter region are the functional elements in the
transcriptional regulation of human AM gene in vascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 9480831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 30;273(5):3003-12.

Eps15R is a tyrosine kinase substrate with characteristics of a docking protein
possibly involved in coated pits-mediated internalization.

Coda L(1), Salcini AE, Confalonieri S, Pelicci G, Sorkina T, Sorkin A, Pelicci
PG, Di Fiore PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, 20141
Milan, Italy.

eps15R was identified because of its relatedness to eps15, a gene encoding a
tyrosine kinase substrate bearing a novel protein-protein interaction domain,
called EH. In this paper, we report a biochemical characterization of the eps15R 
gene product(s). In NIH-3T3 cells, three proteins of 125, 108, and 76 kDa were
specifically recognized by anti-eps15R sera. The 125-kDa species is a bona fide
product of the eps15R gene, whereas p108 and p76 are most likely products of
alternative splicing events. Eps15R protein(s) are tyrosine-phosphorylated
following epidermal growth factor receptor activation in NIH-3T3 cells
overexpressing the receptor, even at low levels of receptor occupancy, thus
behaving as physiological substrates. A role for eps15R in clathrin-mediated
endocytosis is suggested by its localization in plasma membrane-coated pits and
in vivo association to the coated pits' adapter protein AP-2. Finally, we
demonstrate that a sizable fraction of eps15R exists in the cell as a complex
with eps15 and that its EH domains exhibit binding specificities that are
partially distinct from those of eps15. We propose that eps15 and eps15R are
multifunctional binding proteins that serve pleiotropic functions within the
cell.

PMID: 9446614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jan 15;26(2):407-14.

Overlapping Sp1 and AP2 binding sites in a promoter element of the lens-specific 
MIP gene.

Ohtaka-Maruyama C(1), Wang X, Ge H, Chepelinsky AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The MIP gene, the founder of the MIP family of channel proteins, is specifically 
expressed in fiber cells of the ocular lens and expression is regulated
temporally and spatially during development. We previously found that a DNA
fragment containing 253 bp of 5'-flanking sequence and 42 bp of exon 1 of the
human MIP gene contains regulatory elements responsible for lens-specific
expression of the MIP gene. In this report we have analyzed the function of
overlapping Sp1 and AP2 binding sites present in the MIP promoter. Using DNase I 
footprinting analysis we found that purified Sp1 and AP2 transcription factors
interact with several domains of the human MIP promoter sequence -253/+42.
Furthermore, addition of purified Sp1 to Drosophila nuclear extracts activates in
vitro transcription from the MIP promoter -253/+42. This promoter activity is
competed by oligonucleotides containing domains footprinted with Sp1. Using
promoter-reporter gene ( CAT ) constructs we found that the sequence -39/-70
contains a cis regulatory element essential for promoter activity in transient
assays in lens cells. EMSA analysis showed that lens nuclear extracts contain
factors that bind to the MIP 5'-flanking sequence containing overlapping Sp1 and 
AP2 binding domains at positions -37/-65. Supershift experiments with lens
nuclear extracts indicated that Sp3 is also able to interact with this regulatory
element, suggesting that Sp1 and Sp3 may be involved in regulation of
transcription of the MIP gene in the lens.

PMCID: PMC147274
PMID: 9421492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Bone. 1998 Feb;22(2):87-92.

Expression of the PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 gene is regulated by BMP4/7 heterodimer 
and its overexpression suppresses type I collagen and osteocalcin gene expression
in osteoblastic and nonosteoblastic mesenchymal cells.

Tsuji K(1), Ito Y, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Japan.

PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 is one of the transcription regulators that belong to the 
PEBP2/AML family. The knockout mice, where the gene encoding
PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 was inactivated, showed no osteogenesis, indicating the
critical role of this transcription factor in osteoblastic differentiation
(Komori, Y. et al. Cell 89:755-764; 1997). The aim of this study is to examine
the regulation of PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 expression in skeletal (MC3T3E1,
ROS17/2.8) and nonskeletal (C3H10T1/2, C2C12, NIH3T3) cell lines. The basal
levels of PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 were time dependent and were increased during
culture in ROS17/2.8 by day 2, remaining similar during cultures in other types
of cells. Treatment with a 100-ng/mL BMP4/7 heterodimer enhanced the expression
of PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 mRNA levels in MC3T3E1 and C2C12 cells, whereas BMP2
did not significantly alter PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 mRNA levels in both skeletal
and nonskeletal cells. The PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 mRNA level in ROS17/2.8 cells
was relatively high on day 2, and was not further enhanced by treatment with
BMP4/7. In contrast to the reported type I collagen gene upregulation by the
overexpression of Osf2/CBFA1, which differs from PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 by
containing a unique 87 amino acid sequence at its amino terminal end,
overexpression of PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 suppressed type I collagen mRNA levels
in MC3T3E1, C2C12, and C3H10T1/2 cells and suppressed osteocalcin mRNA levels in 
ROS17/2.8 cells. The osteopontin mRNA level was enhanced by overexpression of
PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 in MC3T3E1, while the level was similar in ROS17/2.8 cells
and was suppressed in C2C12 cells. These data indicate that
PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 is one of the targets of BMP4/7 and participates in the
regulation of the expression of genes related to osteoblast phenotype. The
overexpression study suggests that PEBP2alphaA/AML3/CBFA1 and Osf2/CBFA1 may have
a different function in the regulation of the expression of the genes related to 
the osteoblast phenotype.

PMID: 9477230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Feb 4;243(1):307-16.

Identification of a novel AP-2 consensus DNA binding site.

Gee MS(1), Sarkisian CJ, el-Deiry WS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine and Genetics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Activator Protein (AP)-2 is a transcription factor that is required for mouse
development. AP-2 activates expression of positive and negative growth regulators
including erbB-2 and p21 WAF1/CIP1. Induction of p21 has been correlated with
cell cycle and growth inhibition of human cancer cells. Because several
endogenous AP-2 binding sites do not fit the known consensus sequences well, we
sought to define AP-2's interaction with DNA more precisely. Using Cyclic
Amplification and Selection of Targets (CAST'ing) of random oligonucleotide
sequences and recombinant human AP-2 protein, we identified 17 novel AP-2 binding
sites. Mobility shift assays showed significant AP-2 binding of the novel sites
as compared to p21, erbB-2 and hMtIIa sites. Several sites that bound with high
specificity and affinity did not fit known AP-2 consensus sequences. A sequence
comparison based on several of the novel sequences yielded a putative consensus
binding sequence of 5'-TAGAAAGNYCYNG-3'. These DNA binding sites may help
identify novel targets of AP-2 and aid in further understanding AP-2 function.

PMID: 9473523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Leukoc Biol. 1998 Feb;63(2):153-68.

Myeloid-specific gene expression.

Clarke S(1), Gordon S.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

The mononuclear phagocytes are recruited from bone marrow precursors to most
tissues of the body, particularly during inflammation or immune stimulation. This
combination of accessibility as stem cells and heterogenity of tissue locations
makes the myeloid cell potentially important as a carrier of therapeutic agents. 
Understanding the regulation of transcription in myeloid cells is necessary for
any future design of tissue-specific gene targeting vectors, particularly if
there are inherent size limitations. Identified members of the C/EBP,
Runt/PEBP2/CBF, and Ets families of transcription factors are critical for
myeloid-specific gene expression and may have myeloid-restricted expression or
myeloid-specific regulation in the hematopoietic system. AP-1, Sp1, and Myb
appear to be important for myeloid-restricted expression in some cases. In
addition, factors involved in the up-regulation of the level of gene expression
when macrophages are activated by agents such as interferon-gamma and bacterial
products have been identified. Some of the sequences to which these transcription
factors bind in myeloid-restricted genes have been tested in cell lines and in
transgenic mice and it is now possible to make an attempt to describe the
characteristics of a myeloid-specific promoter.

PMID: 9468274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 9;94(25):13571-5.

Repression of transcription mediated by dual elements in the CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein alpha gene.

Tang QQ(1), Jiang MS, Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

During adipocyte differentiation, the expression of C/EBPalpha is activated,
which in turn serves to transcriptionally activate numerous adipocyte genes. A
previous search for cis elements that regulate transcription of the C/EBPalpha
gene led to the identification of a potential repressive element within the
proximal 5' flanking region of the gene. Nuclear extracts from 3T3-L1
preadipocytes, but not adipocytes, were found to contain a factor, CUP
(C/EBPalpha undifferentiated protein), that binds to this site (the CUP-1 site). 
In the present investigation, we show that C/EBPalpha promoter-luciferase
constructs containing both the proximal 5' flanking and the entire 5'
untranslated regions of the gene exhibit an expression pattern during adipocyte
differentiation comparable to that of the endogenous C/EBPalpha gene. Mutation of
the CUP-1 site in these constructs had little effect on reporter gene expression;
however, when this mutation was combined with deletion of the 5' untranslated
region, reporter gene expression by preadipocytes was dramatically up-regulated. 
Consistent with this finding, a second CUP binding site (the CUP-2 site) was
identified in the 5' untranslated region. Although mutation of either CUP element
in constructs containing both the 5' flanking and 5' untranslated region had
little effect on reporter gene transcription, mutation of both CUP elements
markedly activated transcription. Thus, it appears that dual CUP regulatory
elements repress transcription of the C/EBPalpha gene prior to induction of the
adipocyte differentiation program.

PMCID: PMC28347
PMID: 9391067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Arch Dermatol Res. 1997 Nov;289(12):705-8.

The promoter of the HaCaT keratinocyte differentiation-related gene keratin 4
contains a functional AP-2 binding site.

Wanner R(1), Zhang J, Dorbic T, Mischke D, Henz BM, Wittig B, Rosenbach T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, UKBF, FU Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. rw@zedat.fu-berlin.de

The nuclear transcription factor AP-2 appears to be a key regulator mediating
programmed gene expression during embryonic morphogenesis and adult cell
differentiation. AP-2 has also been considered to be involved in epidermal gene
regulation, but its precise role is not yet defined. The level of AP-2
transcripts increases during culturing of HaCaT keratinocytes preceding the
expression of the differentiation-related gene keratin 4 (K4). The current study 
was aimed at investigating whether AP-2 transactivates K4 transcription. We
cloned and sequenced the promoter region of K4 and found, in addition to
canonical sequences, an AP-2 consensus site in the vicinity of the
transcriptional start. In order to provide functional evidence for a regulation
of K4 transcription by AP-2, we cloned various parts, which did or did not
contain the AP-2 site of the K4 upstream sequence, into Cat reporter plasmids.
These constructs were ballistically transfected into differentiating HaCaT
keratinocytes. The determination of the resulting Cat activity revealed that the 
AP-2 site in the vicinity of the transcriptional start was functional for K4
transcription. Thus, the role of AP-2 in the process of keratinocyte
differentiation appears to be considerable. In addition, further regulatory
elements were found to be necessary for full transcription of K4.

PMID: 9452892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Diabetologia. 1997 Dec;40(12):1461-9.

The human hexokinase II gene promoter: functional characterization and detection 
of variants among patients with NIDDM.

Malkki M(1), Laakso M, Deeb SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA.

Hexokinase II (HKII) plays an important role in facilitating glucose uptake by
skeletal muscle, heart, and adipose tissue in response to insulin. We have cloned
and sequenced the proximal promoter region of the human HKII gene, determined the
transcription start sites and screened the 2.0 kb of the proximal 5' flanking
region for variants in non-insulin-dependent diabetic patients and control
subjects. We found three variants in this region, one in the 5' untranslated
region (G-->C at +217) and two in the promoter region (T-->G at -1043 and G-->A
at -1159). The allele frequencies of these variants did not differ between the
diabetic and control subjects and these variants are not associated with insulin 
resistance. Various segments of the human HKII promoter were tested for driving
expression of the luciferase reporter gene. The proximal 500 bp and 400 bp of the
promoter were sufficient to drive maximal activity in adipocyte (3T3F442A) and
myocyte (C2C12F3) cell lines, respectively. This region of the promoter is
GC-rich and contains eight consensus binding sites for the transcription factor
Sp-1, five for AP-2, two putative response elements for each of insulin and
cyclic AMP. The proximal 175 bases of the promoter retained only 7-15% of maximal
activity. Sequence elements located between positions -304 and -215 accounted for
approximately 80% of the basal HKII promoter. In addition, the region between
-215 and -184 contains a negative regulatory element for expression in 3T3F442A
but not in C2C12F3 cells.

PMID: 9447955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 23;273(4):2480-7.

Overexpression, purification, and biophysical characterization of the
heterodimerization domain of the core-binding factor beta subunit.

Huang X(1), Crute BE, Sun C, Tang YY, Kelley JJ 3rd, Lewis AF, Hartman KL, Laue
TM, Speck NA, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire 03755, USA.

Core-binding factors (CBF) are heteromeric transcription factors essential for
several developmental processes, including hematopoiesis. CBFs contain a
DNA-binding CBF alpha subunit and a non-DNA binding CBF beta subunit that
increases the affinity of CBF alpha for DNA. We have developed a procedure for
overexpressing and purifying full-length CBF beta as well as a truncated form
containing the N-terminal 141 amino acids using a novel glutaredoxin fusion
expression system. Substantial quantities of the CBF beta proteins can be
produced in this manner allowing for their biophysical characterization. We show 
that the full-length and truncated forms of CBF beta bind to a CBF alpha DNA
complex with very similar affinities. Sedimentation equilibrium measurements show
these proteins to be monomeric. Circular dichroism spectroscopy demonstrates that
CBF beta is a mixed alpha/beta protein and NMR spectroscopy shows that the
truncated and full-length proteins are structurally similar and suitable for
structure determination by NMR spectroscopy.

PMID: 9442100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biol Chem. 1997 Nov;378(11):1259-65.

Toxic and signaling effects of photochemically or chemically generated singlet
oxygen in biological systems.

Briviba K(1), Klotz LO, Sies H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie I, Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.

Singlet oxygen, generated photochemically or chemically, has damaging effects on 
biomolecules and exerts genotoxic, virucidal and cytotoxic effects. This is of
relevance for biological systems because singlet oxygen can be produced
photochemically as a result of the irradiation of endogenous or exogenously
applied photosensitizers with visible or ultraviolet light, or in dark reactions,
e.g. by stimulated phagocytes during the so-called oxidative burst. In addition, 
there is increasing evidence that singlet oxygen has pronounced effects on
cellular signaling events leading to the induced expression of a variety of
proteins. A novel observation is the activation of transcription factor AP-2 and 
cellular signaling cascades comprising the activation of c-Jun-N-terminal kinases
(JNK/SAPK) and the NF-kappaB system.

PMID: 9426185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Biol Chem. 1997 Nov;378(11):1231-6.

Ultraviolet A radiation-induced expression of human genes: molecular and
photobiological mechanisms.

Grether-Beck S(1), Buettner R, Krutmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Increased gene expression as a consequence of environmental stress is typically
observed in mammalian cells upon exposure to ultraviolet (UV) radiation. In
previous years the cis- and trans-acting genetic elements responsible for gene
induction by short wavelength UVC (< 280nm) and intermediate wavelength UVB (280 
- 320 nm) radiation have been well characterized. More recently, progress has
also been made in understanding the mechanisms by which long wavelength UVA (320 
- 400 nm) radiation induces transcriptional activation of human genes. From these
studies it is now known that the photobiological as well as the molecular
mechanisms involved in UVA radiation-induced gene expression differ from those
previously identified for UVB- or UVC-induced gene expression. In particular, the
reactive oxygen species singlet oxygen was found to serve as the primary effector
in UVA radiation-induced gene expression by inducing a signal transduction
cascade that depends on activation of transcription factor AP-2. These studies
indicate a previously unrecognized role of AP-2 in the mammalian stress response.

PMID: 9426182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Dec 18;241(2):535-40.

Cloning and structural analysis of the cDNA and the gene encoding the murine type
1 sigma receptor.

Seth P(1), Leibach FH, Ganapathy V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta 30912-2100, USA.

We have isolated a mouse cDNA which codes for a functional type 1 sigma receptor.
The functional identity of the cDNA was established by expressing the cDNA in
mammalian cells and measuring the cDNA-induced binding of haloperidol. Using this
cDNA as the probe, we have isolated a murine genomic clone which contains the
type 1 sigma receptor gene in its entirety. We have sequenced the gene
completely, deduced the exon-intron organization and analyzed the promoter region
sequence for transcription factor binding sites. The gene (approximately 7 kbp)
is TATA-less but contains CCAATC and GC boxes immediately upstream of the
transcription start site. The gene consists of 4 exons and 3 introns. The
5'-flanking region contains putative binding sites for AP-1, AP-2, GATA-1 and
steroid receptors.

PMID: 9425306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Pharmacol. 1997 Dec;52(6):1019-26.

Both the cyclic AMP response element and the activator protein 2 binding site
mediate basal and cyclic AMP-induced transcription from the dominant promoter of 
the rat alpha 1B-adrenergic receptor gene in DDT1MF-2 cells.

Gao B(1), Chen J, Johnson C, Kunos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298, USA. bgao@hsc.vcu.edu

cAMP markedly increases alpha 1B adrenergic receptor (alpha 1B-AR) expression in 
FRTL-5 and PC C13 rat thyroid cells, DDT1MF-2 smooth muscle cells, primary rat
hepatocytes, and K9 rat liver cells. Here, we used DDT1MF-2 cells to evaluate
further the mechanisms by which cAMP stimulates alpha 1B-AR expression. Receptor 
binding assays, Northern blotting, and nuclear run-on analyses demonstrated that 
forskolin (1 microM) in the presence of isobutylmethylxanthine (0.25 mM)
increased alpha 1B-AR numbers, mRNA level, and gene transcription rate by 2.3 +/-
0.2-, 2.5 +/- 0.3-, and 3.5 +/- 0.2-fold over control, respectively. Dibutyryl
cAMP (1 mM) plus isobutylmethylxanthine (0.25 mM) also enhanced alpha 1B-AR
density by 2.7 +/- 0.1-fold over control. Further experiments demonstrated that
the induction of alpha 1B-AR by forskolin requires new protein synthesis and is
protein kinase A dependent. In DDT1MF-2 cells transfected with alpha 1B-AR gene
P2 promoter/CAT constructs, both forskolin and dibutyryl cAMP significantly
increased P2 promoter activity. The P2 promoter region of the rat alpha 1B-AR
gene (-813 to -432) contains a cAMP response element (CRE) (-444 to -437) and an 
AP2 binding site (-647 to -638). Mutations in either one of these elements alone 
led to a decrease in both basal and cAMP-induced P2 promoter activity. Mutations 
in both elements caused a further inhibition of basal transcription and a
complete block of cAMP-induced P2 promoter activity. Direct binding of purified
activator protein 2 (AP2) to the AP2 element in the P2 promoter was reported
previously. Gel mobility shift and super-shift assays using liver nuclear
extracts from either rat liver or DDT1MF-2 cells demonstrated that the CRE in the
alpha 1B-AR gene bound CRE binding protein. These data indicate that both the CRE
and the AP2 element in the P2 promoter contribute to basal as well as
cAMP-induced transcription of the alpha 1B-AR gene in DDT1MF-2 cells.

PMID: 9415711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Pathol. 1997 Nov;183(3):305-10.

Correlation of MIB-1 antigen expression with transcription factors Skn-1, Oct-1, 
AP-2, and HPV type in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia.

Hietala KA(1), Kosma VM, Syrjänen KJ, Syrjänen SM, Kellokoski JK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kuopio, Department of Clinical Pathology and Forensic Medicine, 
Finland.

Recently, interest in transcription factor coding genes has emerged in many human
diseases. Transcription factors, responding both to extracellular and to
intracellular signals, exercise an important regulatory control over the
proliferation and differentiation of cells. During the development of CIN
(cervical intraepithelial neoplasia) lesions, normal regulation of the cell cycle
seems to be disturbed. Transcription factors have been shown in vitro to be
intimately involved in the expression of HPV (human papillomavirus) early genes, 
which affect the development of cervical precancer lesions. To test the relevance
of in vitro findings in clinical samples, the expression of transcription factors
Skn-1, Oct-1, and AP-2 was analysed in 31 normal cervical epithelial samples and 
in 55 CIN lesions. The results were correlated with the HPV status and cell
proliferation activity of the squamous epithelium as measured by MIB-1 antibody. 
MIB-1 staining is an applicable marker of CIN, correlating strongly with the CIN 
grade (P < 0.001). The presence of HPV DNA did not accelerate the cell
proliferation rate or change significantly the immunoreactivity of Skn-1, Oct-1, 
or AP-2 antibodies. The staining patterns of these transcription factors were
significantly influenced only by the CIN grade. Transcription factors generally
showed weaker expression in the dysplastic samples, although the nuclear staining
of AP-2 increased markedly (P = 0.046) in the superficial layer of the CIN III
samples. These findings suggest that changes in the expression of transcription
factors may be important in studying the proliferative activity of CIN lesions.

PMID: 9422986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Am J Physiol. 1997 Nov;273(5 Pt 1):C1441-8.

Regulation of tPA in endothelial cells exposed to cyclic strain: role of CRE,
AP-2, and SSRE binding sites.

Sumpio BE(1), Chang R, Xu WJ, Wang XJ, Du W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery (Vascular), Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

We have previously reported that exposure of cultured bovine aortic endothelial
cells (EC) to 10% average strain resulted in an increase in tissue plasminogen
activator (tPA) mRNA, immunoreactive tPA protein, and tPA activity in the medium.
The present study was designed to examine the regulation of tPA gene expression
in EC by cyclic strain. We performed a functional analysis of the tPA promoter by
transfecting bovine aortic EC with a 1.4-kilobase (kb) construct of the human tPA
promoter coupled to chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. We found that subjecting
the EC to 10% average strain (and not 6% average strain) resulted in a 2.6-fold
increase in activity of the 1.4-kb tPA promoter by 4 h. Analysis of deletion
mutants of the promoter transfected into EC demonstrated a 60% drop-off in
activity between position -145 and -105. Deoxyribonuclease I protection analysis 
of the segment downstream of position -196 suggested involvement of activator
protein-2 (AP-2) and adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate-responsive element
(CRE)-like binding sites, which was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. Site-directed mutants of either the AP-2 or CRE-like regions resulted in 
a 65% decrease in activity compared with the wild type. Double mutations
abolished basal transcription and any strain-induced activity. A shear stress
responsive element (SSRE) binding site is present at -945, but site-directed
mutants did not show any drop in activity compared with wild type by cyclic
strain. These studies demonstrate that cyclic strain regulates tPA gene
transcription in bovine aortic EC and that this transcriptional activation is
dependent on factors that are similar to those activated with phorbol ester.

PMID: 9374627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 21;272(47):29538-45.

Partitioning of proteins into plasma membrane microdomains. Clustering of mutant 
influenza virus hemagglutinins into coated pits depends on the strength of the
internalization signal.

Fire E(1), Brown CM, Roth MG, Henis YI, Petersen NO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiochemistry, The George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, 
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

Internalization of membrane proteins involves their recruitment into plasma
membrane clathrin-coated pits, with which they are thought to interact by binding
to AP-2 adaptor protein complexes. To investigate the interactions of membrane
proteins with coated pits at the cell surface, we applied image correlation
spectroscopy to measure directly and quantitatively the clustering of influenza
hemagglutinin (HA) protein mutants carrying specific cytoplasmic internalization 
signals. The HA system enables direct comparison between isolated internalization
signals, because HA itself is excluded from coated pits. The studies presented
here provide, for the first time, a direct quantitative measure for the degree of
clustering of membrane proteins in coated pits at the cell surface. The degree of
clustering depended on the strength of the internalization signal and on the
integrity of the clathrin lattices and correlated with the internalization rates 
of the mutants. The clustering of the HA mutants fully correlated with their
ability to co-precipitate alpha-adaptin from whole cells, the first such
demonstration for a membrane protein that is not a member of the epidermal growth
factor receptor family. Furthermore, both the clustering in coated pits and the
co-precipitation with alpha-adaptin were dramatically reduced in the cold,
suggesting that low temperature can interfere with the sorting of proteins into
coated pits. In addition to the specific results reported here, the general
applicability of the image correlation spectroscopy approach to study any process
involving the clustering or oligomerization of membrane receptors at the cell
surface is discussed.

PMID: 9368015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Genomics. 1997 Nov 15;46(1):120-6.

Mouse connexin40: gene structure and promoter analysis.

Seul KH(1), Tadros PN, Beyer EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

A family of related connexin genes encodes the subunit gap junction proteins that
form intercellular channels in different tissues. Connexin40 (Cx40) is one of
these proteins, and it exhibits limited expression only in a few cells of the
cardiovascular system. To begin to analyze Cx40 expression, we isolated a 3.3-kb 
rat Cx40 cDNA by hybridization screening of a bacteriophage library prepared from
BWEM cells and isolated corresponding mouse genomic clones from a bacterial
artificial chromosome library. Restriction mapping, sequencing, and comparison to
the rat cDNA showed that the mouse Cx40 gene contained a short first exon, an
11.4-kb intron, and a second exon containing the complete coding region and
3'-UTR. Exon I contained only 1 base that differed between rat and mouse. Primer 
extension experiments yielded a single band and confirmed the position of the
transcriptional start site. We obtained 1.2 kb of sequence 5' of the
transcriptional start site and 400 bp 3' of exon I. Exon I was closely preceded
by a consensus TATA box. The flanking sequences contained a number of potential
transcription factor binding sites (including AP-1, AP-2, SP1, TRE, and p53). To 
identify transcriptional regulatory elements in the Cx40 promoter region, a
series of DNA deletion fragments flanking exon I was prepared, subcloned adjacent
to a luciferase reporter gene, and used for transient transfections of BWEM, SHM,
and N2A cells. The resulting luciferase activity determinations suggested that an
area of 300 bp 5' of the transcription start site acted as a basal promoter for
Cx40 and that there was a strong negative regulatory element in the region from
+100 to +297.

PMID: 9403066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1997 Oct 3;49(1-2):165-74.

Transcriptional activation of human choline acetyltransferase by AP2- and
NGF-induced factors.

Quirin-Stricker C(1), Mauvais C, Schmitt M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Chimie Biologique, U184/INSERM, LGME/CNRS, Faculté de Médecine,
Strasbourg, France.

ChAT (choline acetyltransferase) is the enzyme responsible for acetylcholine
synthesis and is specifically expressed in cholinergic neurons. To further
characterize the transcriptional regulation of the hCHAT (human ChAT) gene by
NGF, we examined the effects upon ChAT promoter activity of a family of
transcription factors which are activated by NGF and several extracellular
stimuli and encoded by immediate-early genes. These include NGFI-A (Egr1,
zif268), NGFI-C (Egr2), Krox-20 and NGFI-B (Nurr77). Two fragments of the hChAT
gene were used for functional analysis carrying 944 bp (P1) and 4000 bp (P1 + P2)
of the 5' flanking region in front of the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
reporter gene. They were transiently co-transfected with NGFI-A, NGFI-C, Krox-20 
and NGFI-B expression vectors in NG108-15, SN6 and COS-1 cells. CAT activity
after transfection of the p4000 ChAT-CAT reporter into both neuronal cell lines
(NG108-15 and SN6 cells) was increased up to 5-fold in the presence of
co-transfected NGFI-A and up to 5- and 12-fold after co-transfection of NGFI-C
expression vector in NG108-15 and SN6 cells, respectively. In NG108-15 cells,
dbcAMP excerted a strong enhancing activity on the transactivation properties of 
NGFI-C while this was not observed when cells were transfected with NGFI-A. These
trans-activation effects were specific for neuronal cells. When NG108-15 cells
were treated with dbcAMP in the presence of H89, a specific PKA inhibitor, the
increase of transcriptional activity of NGFI-C was abolished, indicating that a
signalling transduction mechanism through PKA plays a role in NGFI-C-induced
trans-activation. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays showed that the sequence 
GCCCGGGGAG (NGFRE) located 1205 bp upstream of the first coding ATG (E1) can bind
NGFI-A but not NGFI-C. Several possibilities explaining the observed results are 
discussed. Finally, transfections of ChAT-CAT reporters including the P1 + P2
region or a minimal ChAT enhancer present in the P2 region in front of a
heterologous promoter indicated the presence of a regulatory element which
conferred AP2-dependent trans-activation with homologous as well as with
heterologous promoter constructs.

PMID: 9387876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Cell Physiol. 1997 Nov;173(2):275-8.

Molecular mechanisms of melanoma metastasis.

Bar-Eli M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030, USA.

The molecular changes associated with the transition of melanoma cells from
radial growth phase to vertical growth phase (metastatic phenotype) are not very 
well defined. Expression of the tyrosine-kinase receptor c-KIT progressively
decreases during local tumor growth and invasion of human melanomas. To provide
direct evidence that c-KIT plays a role in metastasis of human melanoma, we
transfected the c-KIT gene into c-KIT-negative, highly metastatic human melanoma 
cells and subsequently analyzed their tumorigenic and metastatic potential in
nude mice. Enforced c-KIT expression significantly inhibited tumor growth and
metastasis. Exposure of c-KIT-positive melanoma cells in vitro and in vivo to
stem cell factor (SCF), the ligand for c-KIT, triggered apoptosis of these cells 
but not of normal melanocytes. These results suggest that the loss of c-KIT
receptor may allow malignant melanoma cells to escape SCF/c-KIT-mediated
apoptosis, thus contributing to tumor growth and eventually metastasis. The
expression of c-KIT and other genes associated with malignant melanoma (such as
MCAM/MUC18) is highly regulated by the transcription factor AP-2. The AP-2
protein is not expressed in malignant melanoma cells. Therefore, loss of AP-2
expression might be a crucial event in the progression of human melanoma.

PMID: 9365536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Neurosci Res. 1997 Oct 1;50(1):23-31.

Differential regulation of D2 receptor gene expression by transcription factor
AP-1 in cultured cells.

Wang J(1), Miller JC, Friedhoff AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Milahuser Laboratories, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA.
wangj@is2.nyu.edu

The role of the transcription factor AP-1 in regulating D2 receptor
transcriptional activity was investigated in D2 receptor expressing neuroblastoma
cells, NB41A3, and in non-D2 receptor expressing CHO cells. Deletion of a region 
containing the putative AP-1 binding site resulted in a significant reduction in 
the activity in CHO cells; while the activity in NB41A3 cells was increased
suggesting that the AP-1 site may differentially regulate D2 gene expression in
these distinct cell types. However, both cell lines were found to express
significant and similar levels of the transcription factors AP-1. Analysis of
phosphorylated proteins in each of the cell lines provided evidence that AP-1 is 
phosphorylated in NB41A3 cells, but not in CHO cells. This result suggests that
differential regulation of D2 gene expression may be related to AP-1
phosphorylation.

PMID: 9379490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Gene. 1997 Sep 15;197(1-2):19-28.

The 5'-upstream region of the rat phospholipase C-beta 3 gene contains two
critical Sp1 sites and an HIV Inr-like element.

Kang JS(1), Lee HB, Rhee SG, Park K, Yoo OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon, South Korea.

The 5'-upstream region of the rat phospholipase C-beta 3 gene (PLC-beta 3) has
been cloned and characterized. Sequence analysis of the 5'-upstream region showed
that it contains a GC-rich region (-166 to +1: 79%) and multiple binding sites
for the transcription factors Sp1, AP-1 and AP-2, but does not contain a
canonical TATA box. Primer extension analysis of total RNA isolated from rat
glial cell C6Bul revealed that single transcription start point (tsp) is located 
at an initiator (Inr) element similar to that found in the HIV promoter. Gel
mobility shift and competitive mobility shift assays indicated that this Inr
element forms a DNA-protein complex with the HIV Inr-binding protein, LBP-1/CP2
or a homologue. In order to localize functional elements of the 5'-upstream
region of the rat PLC-beta 3 gene, 5'-deletion fragments were cloned into a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter vector. Transient transfection
analyses of the 5'-deletion mutants identified a crucial promoter element located
at -128 to -14. Supershift mobility assays, site-directed mutagenesis and DNase I
footprints indicated that Sp1 binds to three GC boxes within the sequence between
-128 and -14 of the PLC-beta 3 promoter. Transient transfection analyses of
promoter constructs containing site-specific mutation(s) of these three GC boxes 
demonstrated that two GC boxes, located proximal to the tsp, are important
elements for normal promoter activity.

PMID: 9332346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):5935-45.

Involvement of AP-2 in regulation of the R-FABP gene in the developing chick
retina.

Bisgrove DA(1), Monckton EA, Godbout R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cross Cancer Institute and University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada.

Little is known regarding the molecular pathways that underlie the retinal
maturation process. We are studying the regulation of the retinal
fatty-acid-binding protein (R-FABP) gene, highly expressed in retinal precursor
cells, to identify DNA regulatory elements and transcriptional factors involved
in retinal development. Although the upstream sequence of the R-FABP gene is
extremely GC rich, CpG methylation in this region is not implicated in the
regulation of this gene because the 5' flanking DNA remains unmethylated with
tissue differentiation when there is a dramatic decrease in R-FABP transcript
levels. Using a combination of DNase I hypersensitivity experiments, gel shift
assays, and DNase I footprinting, we have found three sites of DNA-protein
interaction within 205 bp of 5' flanking DNA in the undifferentiated retina and
four sites in the differentiated retina. DNA transfection analysis indicates that
the first two footprints located within 150 bp of 5' flanking DNA are required
for high levels of transcription in primary undifferentiated retinal cultures.
The first footprint includes a putative TATA box and Spl binding sites while the 
second footprint contains a consensus AP-2 DNA binding site. Supershift
experiments using antibodies to AP-2 and methylation interference experiments
indicate that an AP-2-like transcription factor present in both
late-proliferative-stage retina and differentiated retina binds to the upstream
region of the R-FABP gene. A combination of data including the expression profile
of AP-2 during retinal development and DNA transfection analysis using constructs
mutated at critical residues within the AP-2 binding site suggests that AP-2 is a
repressor of R-FABP transcription.

PMCID: PMC232441
PMID: 9315651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Oncogene. 1997 Sep;15(11):1315-27.

CBF beta-SMMHC, expressed in M4Eo AML, reduced CBF DNA-binding and inhibited the 
G1 to S cell cycle transition at the restriction point in myeloid and lymphoid
cells.

Cao W(1), Britos-Bray M, Claxton DF, Kelley CA, Speck NA, Liu PP, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Division of Pediatric Oncology, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

CBF beta-SMMHC is expressed from the inv(16) chromosome in M4Eo AML. Mice lacking
CBF subunits or expressing the CBF beta-SMMHC or AML1-ETO oncoproteins failed to 
develop definitive hematopoiesis. To investigate these effects on hematopoiesis, 
we expressed CBF beta-SMMHC from the metallothionein promoter, in both 32D cl3
myeloid cells and Ba/F3 B-lymphoid cells. Addition of zinc increased CBF
beta-SMMHC levels more than tenfold, with higher levels evident in Ba/F3 lines.
Levels obtained in 32D cl3 cells were similar to those of endogenous CBF beta.
Indirect immunofluorescence revealed zinc-inducible speckled, nuclear staining in
Ba/F3 cells and diffuse nuclear staining in 32D cl3 cells. CBF beta-SMMHC reduced
endogenous CBF DNA-binding fivefold in both cell types, increased cell generation
time 1.9-fold, on average, in 32D cl3 cells and 1.5-fold in Ba/ F3 cells and
decreased tritiated thymidine incorporation into DNA correspondingly. CBF
beta-SMMHC increased the proportion of cells in G1 1.7-fold, on average, in 32D
cl3 and Ba/F3 cells, and decreased the proportion of cells in S phase by a
similar degree. CBF beta-SMMHC induced a marked increase in hypophosphorylated
Rb, but did not alter IL-3 Receptor alpha or beta subunit levels. Neither
apoptosis nor 32D differentiation was induced by zinc in IL-3 in these lines.
Induction of CBF beta-SMMHC in 32D cl3 cells did not inhibit their
differentiation to neutrophils or their expression of myeloperoxidase mRNA in
G-CSF, and did not produce an eosinophilic phenotype. Additional, proliferative
genetic changes in M4eo AMLs might potentiate inhibition of differentiation by
CBF beta-SMMHC by allowing its increased expression.

PMID: 9315100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 1997 Oct 3;272(40):25176-83.

Genomic organization of human and mouse genes for vascular endothelial growth
factor C.

Chilov D(1), Kukk E, Taira S, Jeltsch M, Kaukonen J, Palotie A, Joukov V, Alitalo
K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular/Cancer Biology Laboratory, Haartman Institute, PL21 (Haartmaninkatu 
3), University of Helsinki, Helsinki 00014, Finland.

We report here the cloning and characterization of human and mouse genes for
vascular endothelial growth factor C (VEGF-C), a newly isolated member of the
vascular endothelial growth factor/platelet-derived growth factor (VEGF/PDGF)
family. Both VEGF-C genes comprise over 40 kilobase pairs of genomic DNA and
consist of seven exons, all containing coding sequences. The VEGF homology domain
of VEGF-C is encoded by exons 3 and 4. Exons 5 and 7 encode cysteine-rich motifs 
of the type C6C10CRC, and exon 6 encodes additional C10CXCXC motifs typical of a 
silk protein. A putative alternatively spliced rare RNA form lacking exon 4 was
identified in human fibrosarcoma cells, and a major transcription start site was 
located in the human VEGF-C gene 523 base pairs upstream of the translation
initiation codon. The upstream promoter sequences contain conserved putative
binding sites for Sp-1, AP-2, and NF-kappaB transcription factors but no TATA
box, and they show promoter activity when transfected into cells. The VEGF-C gene
structure is thus assembled from exons encoding propeptides and distinct
cysteine-rich domains in addition to the VEGF homology domain, and it shows both 
similarities and distinct differences in comparison with other members of the
VEGF/PDGF gene family.

PMID: 9312130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Gene. 1997 Aug 22;195(2):121-6.

Cloning and characterization of the human mitochondrial
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase gene.

Boukaftane Y(1), Mitchell GA.

Author information: 
(1)Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Ste-Justine, Université de Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

We report the characterization of lambda and P1 phage clones containing the
entire human mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase (mHS) gene.
The human mHS locus (HMGCS2) on chromosome 1p12-13 spans 25 kb and contains 10
exons. Exon 1 contains most of the mitochondrial leader, consistent with a recent
hypothesis of the evolution of the ketogenic pathway. By primer extension and
cDNA amplification (RACE-PCR) we localized the transcription start point (tsp) to
60 bp upstream of the initiation codon. Nine blocks of conserved sequence were
identified by comparing the 5' flanking regions of the mHS genes of human and
rat. The 5' flanking region contains potential binding sites for TATA-binding
protein, Sp1, nuclear factor 1 (NF1), CAAT-box binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 and 5 (HNF1, HNF5) and activator proteins 1 and 2
(AP1, AP2).

PMID: 9305755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 15;188(2):248-66.

Chicken transcription factor AP-2: cloning, expression and its role in outgrowth 
of facial prominences and limb buds.

Shen H(1), Wilke T, Ashique AM, Narvey M, Zerucha T, Savino E, Williams T,
Richman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of British Columbia, 2199 Wesbrook Mall,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, Canada.

Embryonic facial development in chick embryos involves a sequential activation of
genes that control differential growth and patterning of the beak. In the present
study we isolate one such gene, the transcription factor, AP-2, that is known to 
be expressed in the face of mouse embryos. The protein sequence of chick
AP-2alpha is 94% homologous to human and mouse AP-2. Wholemount in situ
hybridization with a probe for chick AP-2 identifies expression from primitive
streak stages up to stage 28. The most striking expression patterns in the head
are during neural crest cell migration when AP-2 transcripts follow closely the
tracts previously mapped for neural crest cells. Later, expression in the facial 
mesenchyme is strongest in the frontonasal mass and lateral nasal prominences and
is downregulated in the maxillary and mandibular prominences. Once limb buds are 
visible, high expression is seen in the distal mesenchyme but not in the apical
ectodermal ridge. The expression patterns of AP-2 in stage 20 embryos suggested
that the gene may be important in "budding out" of facial prominences and limb
buds. We implanted beads soaked in retinoic acid in the right nasal pit of stage 
20 embryos resulting in a specific inhibition of outgrowth of the frontonasal
mass and lateral nasal prominences. AP-2 expression was completely down-regulated
in the lateral nasal within 8 hr of bead application. In addition, the normal
up-regulation of AP-2 in the frontonasal mass did not occur following
retinoic-acid treatment. There was an increase in programmed cell death around
the right nasal pit that accompanied the down-regulation of AP-2. Prominences
whose morphogenesis were not affected by retinoic acid did not have altered
expression patterns. We removed the apical ectodermal ridge in stage 20 limb buds
and found that AP-2 expression was partially downregulated 4 hr following ridge
removal and completely downregulated 8 hr following stripping. Application of an 
FGF-4 soaked bead to the apex of the limb bud maintained AP-2 expression. Thus
AP-2 is involved in outgrowth and could be regulated by factors such as FGFs that
are present in the ectoderm of both the face and limb.

PMID: 9268573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Oncogene. 1997 Aug 7;15(6):677-83.

The protooncogene product, PEBP2beta/CBFbeta, is mainly located in the cytoplasm 
and has an affinity with cytoskeletal structures.

Tanaka Y(1), Watanabe T, Chiba N, Niki M, Kuroiwa Y, Nishihira T, Satomi S, Ito
Y, Satake M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

The Pebpb2/Cbfb gene encodes the non-DNA binding beta subunit of the
heterodimeric transcription factor, PEBP2/CBF, and has been implicated in a
subtype of human acute myeloid leukemia, as well as being indispensable for the
development of definitive hematopoiesis in the murine fetal liver. By examining a
subcellular localization of the PEBP2beta/CBFbeta protein in tissue culture
cells, we could reveal an additional aspect of the protein other than to be a
subunit of a transcription factor. Immunoblot and immunocytochemical staining
showed that PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was mostly present in the cytoplasm. This
PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was free from its DNA-binding partner, the alpha subunit of
PEBP2/CBF, as judged by the electrophoretic mobility shift assays. Furthermore, a
significant amount of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was retained in the cytoskeleton
preparation after detergent extraction of the cells and was found by double
immunofluorescence to colocalize with the F-actin on stress fibers and the
vinculin in membrane processes. Thus, the present study extends PEBP2beta/CBFbeta
to be a cytoskeleton-affinitive as well as nuclear protein. The implications of
these results are discussed.

PMID: 9264408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Genes Dev. 1997 Aug 1;11(15):1938-48.

Enhanced apoptotic cell death of renal epithelial cells in mice lacking
transcription factor AP-2beta.

Moser M(1), Pscherer A, Roth C, Becker J, Mücher G, Zerres K, Dixkens C, Weis J, 
Guay-Woodford L, Buettner R, Fässler R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Germany.

Expression of AP-2 transcription factors has been detected previously in
embryonic renal tissues. We show here that AP-2beta -/- mice complete embryonic
development and die at postnatal days 1 and 2 because of polycystic kidney
disease. Analyses of kidney development revealed that induction of epithelial
conversion, mesenchyme condensation, and further glomerular and tubular
differentiation occur normally in AP-2beta-deficient mice. At the end of
embryonic development expression of bcl-X(L), bcl-w, and bcl-2 is down-regulated 
in parallel to massive apoptotic death of collecting duct and distal tubular
epithelia. Addressing the molecular mechanism we show that transfection of AP-2
into cell lines in vitro strongly suppresses c-myc-induced apoptosis pointing to 
a function of AP-2 in programming cell survival during embryogenesis. The
position of the human AP-2beta gene was identified at chromosome 6p12-p21.1,
within a region that has been mapped for autosomal recessive polycystic kidney
disease (ARPKD). Sequence analyses of ARPKD patients and linkage analyses using
intragenic polymorphic markers indicate that the AP-2beta gene is located in
close proximity to but distinct from the ARPKD gene.

PMCID: PMC316415
PMID: 9271117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;9(4):519-26.

The role of lipid signaling in constitutive membrane traffic.

Roth MG(1), Sternweis PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas 75235-9038, USA. mroth@biochem.swmed.edu

Several lines of evidence indicate that enzymes that modify membrane lipids
function in the regulation of constitutive membrane traffic. Recent evidence
suggests that specific phosphatidylinositides may regulate the activity of
proteins with diverse functions in membrane transport, such as dynamin, the
clathrin-associated AP-2 complex, and proteins that stimulate guanine nucleotide 
exchange on ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs). ARF proteins activate a
phospholipase D that produces phosphatidic acid from phosphatidylcholine, and
this may be essential for the formation of certain types of transport vesicles or
may be constitutive vesicular transport to signal transduction pathways.

PMID: 9261058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1997 Aug;9(4):488-95.

Linking cargo to vesicle formation: receptor tail interactions with coat
proteins.

Kirchhausen T(1), Bonifacino JS, Riezman H.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

How soluble cargo molecules concentrate into budding vesicles is the subject of
intensive current research. Clathrin-based vesiculation from the plasma membrane 
and the trans-Golgi network constitutes the best described system that supports
this sorting process. Soluble ligands bind to specific transmembrane receptors
which have been shown to interact directly with clathrin adaptor complexes,
components of clathrin coats. At the same time, these clathrin adaptors
facilitate clathrin coat assembly and probably regulate the recruitment of the
rest of the coat components. Recent studies have looked at both the interaction
of receptor tails with adaptors and the assembly of the clathrin coat. Progress
has also been made in elucidating how soluble cargo molecules may be concentrated
for exit from the endoplasmic reticulum.

PMID: 9261055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Cancer Res. 1997 Aug 1;57(15):3272-80.

Prognostic significance of HER2 and HER4 coexpression in childhood
medulloblastoma.

Gilbertson RJ(1), Perry RH, Kelly PJ, Pearson AD, Lunec J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, The Medical School, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom.

Recent in vitro studies of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) family
have revealed complex signaling interactions involving the production of
ligand-mediated heterodimers synergistic for the transformation of cells in
vitro. In a series of 70 patients with childhood medulloblastoma, we have used
immunohistochemistry and Western blotting analysis to investigate the expression 
patterns of all four EGFR family members (EGFR, HER2, HER3, and HER4) and
heregulin-alpha, a ligand for the HER3 and HER4 receptors. The majority of cases 
expressed two or more receptor proteins; coexpression of the HER2 and HER4
receptors occurred in 54%. Expression of the ligand heregulin-alpha was detected 
in 31% of tumors. To investigate whether coexpression results in receptor
heterodimerization, we have also performed immunoprecipitation analysis of
protein extracts from primary tumors, and we demonstrate various patterns of
receptor interaction including between HER2 and HER4. In multivariate 25-year
survival analysis with clinicopathological disease features, no individual
receptor or heregulin-alpha achieved significance. In contrast, when considered
together in the multivariate model, coexpression of HER2 and HER4 demonstrated
independent prognostic significance (P = 0.006). These data suggest the
hypothesis that HER2-HER4 receptor heterodimerization is of particular biological
significance in this disease, and this report is the first to demonstrate
potential clinical significance of EGFR family heterodimerization in human
cancer. Finally, we have also analyzed expression of the AP-2 transcription
factor implicated in the positive regulation of HER2 and HER3 gene transcription 
in malignant cells and reveal an association between AP-2 expression and not only
HER2 and HER3, but also HER4 levels in medulloblastoma primary tumors.

PMID: 9242460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3417-25.

The proximal promoter region of the gene encoding human 17beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 1 contains GATA, AP-2, and Sp1 response elements: analysis of 
promoter function in choriocarcinoma cells.

Piao YS(1), Peltoketo H, Vihko P, Vihko R.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu and Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Oulu,
Finland.

The 5'-flanking region from -78 to +9 in the HSD17B1 gene serves as a promoter,
and an HSD17B1 silencer element is located in position -113 to -78. In the
present studies, we have characterized three regulatory elements in the proximal 
5'-flanking regions of the gene, using electrophoretic mobility shift assays and 
reporter gene analysis. First, nuclear factors recognized by antibodies against
Sp1 and Sp3 were found to bind the Sp1 motif in the region from -52 to -43.
Mutation of the Sp1-binding site decreased the promoter activity to 30% in JEG-3 
cells and to 60% in JAR cells, suggesting that binding to the Sp1 motif has a
substantial role in the complete functioning of the HSD17B1 promoter. Second, the
binding of AP-2 to its motif in the region from -62 to -53 led to reduced binding
of Sp1 and Sp3, and furthermore, mutation of the AP-2 element increased promoter 
activity to 260% in JEG-3 cells. The data thus implied that AP-2 can repress the 
function of the HSD17B1 promoter by preventing binding to the Sp1 motif. Finally,
GATA factors, GATA-3 in particular, were demonstrated to bind their cognate
sequence in the HSD17B1 silencer region, and mutations introduced into the
GATA-binding site increased transcriptional activity to the level seen in
constructs not containing the silencer element. Thus, GATA-3 seems to prevent
transcription in the constructs, and hence, the GATA motif also may operate as a 
negative control element for HSD17B1 transcription.

PMID: 9231796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 17;15(3):367-71.

The cDNA cloning of the transcripts of human PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 mapped to
6p12.3-p21.1, the locus for cleidocranial dysplasia.

Zhang YW(1), Bae SC, Takahashi E, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Japan.

PEBP2/CBF is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of alpha and beta
subunits. There are at least three closely related genes, PEBP2alphaA/Cbfa1,
AML1/PEBP2alphaB/Cbfa2 and PEBP2alphaC/Cbfa3, encoding the alpha subunit and one 
beta subunit encoding gene. Structural alterations of AML1 and the beta subunit
gene by chromosome translocations are frequently associated with several types of
human leukemia. Structural changes of any of these gene products would have
potential to affect the function of others. In this study, we isolated the human 
PEBP2alphaA cDNA by which we mapped the gene to 6p12.3-p21.1. Human chromosome
6p21 is the locus for cleidocranial dysplasia, an autosomal dominant bone
disease. Recent gene disruption study revealed that PEBP2alphaA/Cbfa1 plays an
essential role in osteogenesis (Komori et al., Cell, 1997, in press). Therefore, 
a close relationship between human PEBP2alphaA/CBFA1 and this bone disease is
strongly implicated.

PMID: 9233771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jul 15;247(2):503-10.

Regulation of human interstitial collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-1)
promoter activity by fibroblast growth factor.

Aho S(1), Rouda S, Kennedy SH, Qin H, Tan EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Jefferson Medical College,
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) is a pleiotropic factor that is implicated 
in tissue remodeling. The growth factor is capable of up-regulating the
expression of the interstitial collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase-1 or MMP-1) 
gene. In this study, the full-length human MMP-1 promoter, spanning 4.3 kb, was
sequenced and the regulatory control of its activity by bFGF was examined in
NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Several regulatory sequences, including five activator
protein-1 (AP-1), five activator protein-2 (AP-2), five glucocorticoid-response
elements and multiple ets/polyoma enhancer-binding 3 elements, were identified.
Deletion constructs were prepared and transiently transfected into fibroblast
cultures incubated with and without bFGF. The results showed that bFGF enhanced
the activity of the deletion promoter fragments and the full-length MMP-1
promoter by sixfold or more in the cell cultures. Stimulation of the MMP-1
promoter activity by bFGF was reflected in substantial increase of the
collagenase mRNA levels. A bFGF-responsive element appeared to be the AP-1
consensus sequence. Mutation of the first AP-1 site resulted in major reduction
of the basal level of the MMP-1 promoter activity, supporting the notion that the
AP-1 consensus sequence is essential for the constitutive expression of the MMP-1
gene. Furthermore, bFGF induction of the activity of the promoter constructs
containing a mutant AP-1 site was essentially absent, suggesting that the
regulatory element is necessary for the induction of the promoter activity by the
growth factor. Thus, bFGF up-regulates MMP-1 gene expression in NIH3T3
fibroblasts via induction of its promoter activity that is dependent on an AP-1
consensus sequence.

PMID: 9266691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 1997 Jul;84(1):40-4.

Pigmented peripheral nerve sheath tumor of the oral cavity with expression of
AP-2 beta and c-RET: a case report.

Dammer R(1), Stavenow J, Held P, Schröder J, Niederdellmann H, Hofstädter F,
Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, University of Regensburg Medical School, 
Germany.

Pigmented peripheral nerve sheath tumor of the oral cavity is a rare lesion and
may be difficult to distinguish clinically from true melanocytic tumors. We
report a case of pigmented peripheral nerve sheath tumor with a high degree of
melanocytic differentiation and describe its histologic and ultrastructural
features. Immunohistochemistry and polymerase chain reaction findings support the
neural crest origin of the tumor. The clinical course of our case indicates that 
local recurrence may be a significant problem in pigmented peripheral nerve
sheath tumor.

PMID: 9247948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Dairy Sci. 1997 Jul;80(7):1389-97.

Polymorphisms of bovine beta-lactoglobulin promoter and differences in the
binding affinity of activator protein-2 transcription factor.

Lum LS(1), Dovc P, Medrano JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of California, Davis 95616-8521, USA.

Differential production of the two most common allelic variants of
beta-lactoglobulin (LG), beta-LG A and beta-LG B, has been observed using PAGE.
This study evaluated 733 bp of the beta-LG promoter region and 92 bp of the first
exon for possible polymorphisms using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis and
nucleotide sequence analysis. Within this region, 13 single nucleotide
substitution polymorphisms were detected. Twelve polymorphisms were allele
specific, and one appeared to be polymorphic only for the B allele. Several
potential binding sites for transcription factors were found within the promoter 
sequence. This study investigated the role of the G to C transversion within a
consensus binding site for activator protein-2 at position-430 bp upstream from
the transcription initiation site. Using the DNase-I footprint assay, we
confirmed the functional importance of this point mutation and showed different
binding affinities of activator protein-2 for both alleles. We discuss the
possible regulatory role of activator protein-2 in the transcriptional regulation
of the beta-LG gene and propose the activator protein-2 transcription factor as a
modulator of gene expression of beta-LG.

PMID: 9241601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jul;8(7):773-8.

Transcriptional defects underlie loss of E-cadherin expression in breast cancer.

Ji X(1), Woodard AS, Rimm DL, Fearon ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109-0638, USA.

Decreased expression of E-cadherin (E-cad), a calcium-dependent cell adhesion
molecule, has been seen in many different epithelial cancers. Although somatic
mutations in the E-cad gene have been identified in a small subset of tumors, in 
the majority of cancers, the mechanisms underlying loss of E-cad expression are
poorly understood. We have cloned the human E-cad promoter and defined its
critical components in functional assays. In eight human breast cancer cell
lines, there was a striking correlation between endogenous E-cad gene expression 
and E-cad promoter activity observed following the introduction of reporter gene 
constructs into the lines. These and other observations suggest that defects in
trans-acting pathways regulation E-cad expression are the primary basis for the
loss of its expression in most breast cancers. The results have significant
implications for understanding the gene expression differences that underlie
tumor heterogeneity and progression events in breast and other epithelial
cancers.

PMID: 9218871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Endocrinology. 1997 Jul;138(7):2856-62.

Bovine insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3: organization of the
chromosomal gene and functional analysis of its promoter.

Erondu NE(1), Toland B, Boes M, Dake B, Moser DR, Bar RS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Endocrinology Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine,
The University of Iowa and Veterans Administration Medical Center, Iowa City
52246, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3), the major IGFBP in the
circulation, is synthesized by the vascular endothelium in vivo and has been
shown to be an important modulator of the physiological effects of IGF. IGFBP-3
is regulated by a number of growth factors/cytokines to which the vascular
endothelium is exposed, including IGF-I stimulation and TGF-beta1 inhibition of
IGFBP-3 in cultured endothelial cells. To understand the mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation of IGFBP-3, we have cloned the bovine IGFBP-3 gene and
begun the functional analysis of its promoter. Southern analysis indicated a
single copy gene. The gene spanned approximately 10 kb and was divided into five 
exons, the fifth containing the 3' untranslated region. The transcription start
site was 137 bp upstream of the initiation codon and a TATA box was located 26 bp
5' to this CAP site. No CAAT box was present but a GC rich sequence element,
containing two overlapping putative AP-2 binding elements, was located 5' to the 
TATA box. Transient transfection studies with a series of 5' truncated luciferase
reporter constructs were conducted in primary cultures of bovine aorta
endothelial cells. Results of the transfection studies indicated that 1) nearly
80% of the maximal basal promoter activity was retained within the first 130 bp
of the 5' flanking sequence; 2) this region responded to IGF-I, despite lacking
the TTF-1/TTF-2 (thyroid specific transcription factors) binding elements that
are required for IGF-I stimulation of thyroglobulin synthesis. These binding
elements have also been suggested to be involved in IGF-I regulation of IGFBP-3
transcription, thus, implying the existence of novel cis-acting elements that
mediate the IGF-I stimulation of bovine endothelial cell IGFBP-3 mRNA synthesis; 
3) deletion of the GC rich sequence element resulted in a 60% reduction in basal 
promoter activity as well as loss of the IGF-1 stimulatory effect; 4) the
TGF-beta1 mediated inhibition of IGFBP-3 transcription required sequence
element(s) beyond 1.5 kb of its promoter.

PMID: 9202228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Jun 24;94(13):6746-51.

Identification of a nuclear matrix targeting signal in the leukemia and
bone-related AML/CBF-alpha transcription factors.

Zeng C(1), van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Meyers S, Sun W, Shopland L, Lawrence JB,
Penman S, Lian JB, Stein GS, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School and
Cancer Center, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Transcription factors of the AML (core binding factor-alpha/polyoma enhancer
binding protein 2) class are key transactivators of tissue-specific genes of the 
hematopoietic and bone lineages. Alternative splicing of the AML-1 gene results
in two major AML variants, AML-1 and AML-1B. We show here that the
transcriptionally active AML-1B binds to the nuclear matrix, and the inactive
AML-1 does not. The association of AML-1B with the nuclear matrix is independent 
of DNA binding and requires a nuclear matrix targeting signal (NMTS), a 31 amino 
acid segment near the C terminus that is distinct from nuclear localization
signals. A similar NMTS is present in AML-2 and the bone-related AML-3
transcription factors. Fusion of the AML-1B NMTS to the heterologous GAL4-(1-147)
protein directs GAL4 to the nuclear matrix. Thus, the NMTS is necessary and
sufficient to target the transcriptionally active AML-1B to the nuclear matrix.
The loss of the C-terminal domain of AML-1B is a frequent consequence of the
leukemia-related t(8;21) and t(3;21) translocations. Our results suggest this
loss may be functionally linked to the modified interrelationships between
nuclear structure and gene expression characteristic of cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC21229
PMID: 9192636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Jun 15;65(4):501-12.

Transforming growth factor-beta 1 regulation of bone sialoprotein gene
transcription: identification of a TGF-beta activation element in the rat BSP
gene promoter.

Ogata Y(1), Niisato N, Furuyama S, Cheifetz S, Kim RH, Sugiya H, Sodek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, Nihon University School of Dentistry at Matsudo,
Chiba, Japan.

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) increases steady-state mRNA levels of 
several extracellular matrix proteins in mineralized connective tissues. Bone
sialoprotein (BSP) is a major constituent of the bone matrix, thought to initiate
and regulate the formation of mineral crystals. To determine the molecular
pathways of TGF-beta 1 regulation of bone proteins, we have analyzed the effects 
of the TGF-beta 1 on the expression of the BSP in the rat osteosarcoma cell line 
(ROS 17/2.8). TGF-beta 1 at 1 ng/ml, increased BSP mRNA levels in ROS 17/2.8
cells approximately 8-fold: the stimulation was first evident at 3 hr, reached
maximal levels at 12 hr and slowly declined thereafter. Since the stability of
the BSP mRNA was not significantly affected by TGF-beta 1, and nuclear "run-on"
transcription analyses revealed only a approximately 2-fold increase in the
transcription of the BSP gene, most of the increase in BSP mRNA appeared to
involve a nuclear post-transcriptional mechanism. Moreover, the effects of
TGF-beta 1 were indirect, since the increase in BSP mRNA was abrogated by
cycloheximide (28 micrograms/ml). To identify the site of transcriptional
regulation by TGF-beta 1, transient transfection analyses were performed using
BSP gene promoter constructs linked to a luciferase reporter gene. Constructs
that included nt -801 to -426 of the promoter sequence were found to enhance
transcriptional activity approximately 1.8-fold in cells treated with TGF-beta 1.
Within this sequence, approximately 500 nt upstream of the transcription start
site, a putative TGF-beta activation element (TAE) was identified that contained 
the 5'-portion of the nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) canonical sequence (TTGGC)
overlapping a consensus sequence for activator protein-2 (AP-2). The
functionality of the TAE was shown by an increased binding of a nuclear protein
from TGF-beta 1 stimulated cells in gel mobility shift assays and from the
attenuation of TGF-beta 1-induced luciferase activity when cells were
co-transfected with a double-stranded TAE oligonucleotide. Competition gel
mobility shift analyses revealed that the nuclear protein that binds to the TAE
has similar properties to, but is distinct from, NF-1 nuclear protein. These
studies have therefore identified a TGF-beta activation element (TAE) in the rat 
BSP gene promoter that mediates the stimulatory effects of TGF-beta 1 on BSP gene
transcription.

PMID: 9178100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 13;272(24):15405-12.

Regulation of the human chorionic gonadotropin alpha- and beta-subunit promoters 
by AP-2.

Johnson W(1), Albanese C, Handwerger S, Williams T, Pestell RG, Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Northwestern
University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Production of the placental hormone, chorionic gonadotropin (CG), increases
dramatically as cytotrophoblasts fuse to form syncytiotrophoblasts. The CG alpha-
and beta-promoters are both responsive to cAMP, although the kinetics of cAMP
stimulation are different. In an effort to understand the mechanisms of
coordinate induction of these genes, AP-2 binding sites were identified in the
promoter regions of the alpha and CGbeta genes. AP-2 bound to the upstream
regulatory element (-186 to -156 base pairs (bp)) in the alpha-promoter and to
several different regions of the CGbeta promoter, including footprints 2 and 4B
(FP2, -311 to -279 bp; FP4B, 221 to -200 bp). AP-2 antibodies induced supershifts
of these complexes, confirming the identity of the protein-DNA complex. In JEG-3 
cells, which contain abundant AP-2, mutations in these CGbeta AP-2 sites reduced 
basal activity and decreased cAMP stimulation. In AP-2-deficient Hep-G2 cells,
co-transfection of AP-2 stimulated expression of the CGbeta promoter 10-20-fold, 
and the alpha-promoter was induced by 3-6-fold. Mutations that eliminate AP-2
binding to CGbeta FP4B reduced AP-2 stimulation by more than 80%, whereas
mutations in FP2 reduced AP-2 stimulation by less than 50%. Analyses of AP-2
mutants revealed a requirement for the DNA binding/dimerization domain and the
amino-terminal proline-rich and acid-rich transactivation domains for stimulation
of the CGbeta promoter. Primary cultures of placental cytotrophoblasts were
differentiated into syncytiotrophoblasts in vitro to examine AP-2 expression by
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. AP-2 mRNA levels increased by
day 2 and continued to rise in parallel with a marked increase in alpha and
CGbeta gene expression. We conclude that both the alpha and CGbeta promoters
contain binding sites for AP-2 and suggest that this transcription factor
provides a mechanism for coordinating the induction of these genes during
placental cell differentiation.

PMID: 9182571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jun 9;235(1):253-8.

Expression of transcription factors in keratoconus, a cornea-thinning disease.

Whitelock RB(1), Li Y, Zhou LL, Sugar J, Yue BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Illinois at
Chicago College of Medicine, 60612, USA.

Transcription factors are known to regulate gene transcription through the
recognition and binding of specific DNA sequences in the promoter or enhancer
regions of many genes. Keratoconus is a cornea-thinning disease in which
upregulated expression of degradative enzymes and downregulated expression of
protease inhibitors have been demonstrated. In view of the alteration in gene
expression for multiple proteins, five common transcription factors, AP1, AP2,
CREB, Sp1, and NF-kappa B were examined for their possible roles in keratoconus. 
Immunostaining experiments and Western blotting showed that Sp1 exhibited
enhanced expression in keratoconus corneas. Increased binding of Sp1 consensus
sequence oligonucleotides with nuclear extracts from the epithelium of
keratoconus corneas was also seen by gel mobility shift assays. This is believed 
to be a first demonstration connecting Sp1 alteration to a human disease. The
elevated Sp1 expression may contribute to the enzyme and inhibitor abnormalities 
found in keratoconus corneas.

PMID: 9196072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 6;272(23):14914-20.

Activation of NF-kappaB by antineoplastic agents. Role of protein kinase C.

Das KC(1), White CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
Colorado 80206, USA.

Paclitaxel can induce tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and interleukin-1 gene
expression, similar to lipopolysaccharides. Since lipopolysaccharide-induced
expression of TNF is related to activation of NF-kappaB, we determined whether
NF-kappaB could be activated by paclitaxel. In the human lung adenocarcinoma cell
line A549, paclitaxel activated NF-kappaB in a dose-dependent manner with maximal
activation after 2-4 h. Since paclitaxel could up-regulate TNF and interleukin-1 
secretion and subsequent NF-kappaB activation could be caused by these cytokines,
the effect of two other groups of anticancer drugs including vinca alkaloids
(vinblastine and vincristine) and anthracyclines (daunomycin and doxorubicin),
neither of which induce TNF or interleukin-1 gene expression, were examined. Like
paclitaxel, vinblastine, vincristine, daunomycin, and doxorubicin each caused
activation of NF-kappaB. Therefore, it is unlikely that activation of NF-kappaB
caused by these agents or by paclitaxel is mediated via cytokine up-regulation.
Furthermore, actinomycin D and cycloheximide, inhibitors of transcription and
translation, respectively, did not inhibit paclitaxel-induced NF-kappaB
activation. Several other transcription factors such as AP-1, AP-2, CREB, SP-1,
or TFIID were not activated by antineoplastic agents demonstrating specificity of
NF-kappaB activation. The involvement of both subunits in the NF-kappaB DNA
binding complex was demonstrated by its abrogation by anti-p65 and by supershift 
by anti-p50 antibodies. Since protein phosphorylation is implicated in the
activation of NF-kappaB, the effect of anticancer drugs on protein kinase C
activity was measured. Vincristine, daunomycin, and paclitaxel significantly
increased protein kinase C activity, and vinblastine and doxorubicin caused
similar trends. Following treatment with antineoplastics (1-4 h), cytoplasmic
IkappaBalpha degradation occurred concomitantly with translocation of p65 to the 
nucleus. Specific protein kinase C inhibitors (bisindolylmaleimide (GF109203X)
and calphostin C) blocked the activation of NF-kappaB by each compound. Hence,
protein kinase C activation may contribute to NF-kappaB activation by
antineoplastic agents.

PMID: 9169462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jun 6;272(23):14497-500.

Redox regulation of the DNA binding activity in transcription factor PEBP2. The
roles of two conserved cysteine residues.

Akamatsu Y(1), Ohno T, Hirota K, Kagoshima H, Yodoi J, Shigesada K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology,
Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-01,-Japan.

Transcription factor PEBP2/CBF consists of a DNA binding subunit, alpha, and a
regulatory subunit, beta. The alpha subunit has an evolutionarily conserved
128-amino acid region termed "Runt domain" that is responsible for both DNA
binding and heterodimerization with the beta subunit. The Runt domain in all
mammalian submembers of the alpha subunit contains two conserved cysteine
residues, and its DNA binding activity undergoes redox regulation. To investigate
the mechanism of this redox regulation, we performed site-directed mutagenesis of
the two conserved cysteines in the Runt domain of the mouse PEBP2alphaA homolog. 
Substitution of Cys-115 to serine resulted in a partially impaired DNA binding,
which remained highly sensitive to a thiol-oxidizing reagent, diamide.
Conversely, the corresponding substitution of Cys-124 caused an increased DNA
binding concomitant with an increased resistance to diamide. In contrast,
substitution of either cysteine to aspartate was destructive to DNA binding to
marked extents. These results have revealed that both Cys-115 and Cys-124 are
responsible for the redox regulation in their own ways with low and high
oxidizabilities, respectively. We have also found that two cellular
thiol-reactive proteins, thioredoxin and Ref-1, work effectively and
synergistically for activation of the Runt domain. Interestingly, the beta
subunit further enhanced the activation by these proteins and reciprocally
prevented the oxidative inactivation by diamide. These findings collectively
suggest the possibility that the Runt domain's function in vivo could be
dynamically regulated by the redox mechanism with Trx, Ref-1, and the beta
subunit as key modulators.

PMID: 9169404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Br J Haematol. 1997 Jun;97(3):656-8.

Myelomonoblastic leukaemia cells carrying the PEBP2beta/MYH11 fusion gene are
CD34, c-KIT+ immature cells.

Osato M(1), Asou N, Okubo T, Nishimura S, Yamasaki H, Era T, Suzushima H, Kawano 
F, Matsuoka R, Oka H, Bae SC, Ito Y, Takatsuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Kumamoto University School of
Medicine, Japan.

To clarify the aspects affected by the PEBP2beta/MYH11 fusion gene involved in
the inv(16), we analysed immunophenotypes in myelomonoblastic leukaemias. We
found high expressions of CD34 and c-KIT antigens in myelomonoblastic cells from 
all patients carrying this fusion gene, including two with M4 and one CML blastic
phase, in contrast to those with M4 without the fusion gene. These findings
indicate that immunophenotyping is useful for detecting a leukaemia with the
fusion gene in myelomonoblastic leukaemias and that the PEBP2beta/MYH11 gene is
involved in immature cells expressing CD34 and c-KIT antigens.

PMID: 9207416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochem J. 1997 Jun 1;324 ( Pt 2):611-7.

Transcriptional activity of the human tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases 1
(TIMP-1) gene in fibroblasts involves elements in the promoter, exon 1 and intron
1.

Clark IM(1), Rowan AD, Edwards DR, Bech-Hansen T, Mann DA, Bahr MJ, Cawston TE.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Research Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, CB2 2QQ, U.K.

The active forms of all of the matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are inhibited by 
a family of specific inhibitors, the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases
(TIMPs). Inhibition represents a major level of control of MMP activity. A
detailed knowledge of the mechanisms controlling TIMP gene expression is
therefore important. We have isolated a genomic clone of the human TIMP-1 gene. A
3 kbp XbaI fragment has been sequenced; this fragment contains 1718 bp 5'
flanking sequences, exon 1, a 929 bp intron 1 and part of exon 2. Computer
analysis reveals 10 consensus sequences for Sp1, six for activating protein 1
(AP-1), six for polyoma enhancer A3 (PEA3), 12 for AP-2 and five CCAAT boxes. The
region hybridizing with a murine TIMP-1 promoter fragment has been subcloned and 
analysed further. RNase protection identifies six transcription start points,
making exon 1 up to 48 bp in length. Transient transfection of
promoter-chloramphenicol O-acetyltransferase reporter constructs into primary
human connective tissue fibroblasts shows that a 904 bp fragment that hybridizes 
to a murine TIMP-1 promoter fragment contains a functional promoter. Constructs
of -738/+95 to -194/+21 are inducible with serum or phorbol ester to a similar
extent to the endogenous TIMP-1 gene. These results and further mapping with 5'
deletion mutants from the -738/+95 region have demonstrated that an AP-1 site at 
-92/-86 is essential for basal expression of the gene. Point mutations within
this region have further confirmed the role of this site, along with a more minor
role for a neighbouring PEA3 site, in basal expression. Deletions from the 3' end
also implicate a region across the exon 1/intron 1 boundary and especially +21 to
+58 in basal expression. The +21/+58 region contains a putative binding site for 
the transcription factor leader-binding protein 1 (LBP-1). Gel-shift analysis
shows that protein binds specifically to this region, but competition studies
suggest that it is unlikely to be LBP-1.

PMCID: PMC1218473
PMID: 9182725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3210-9.

Activation of an enhancer on the syndecan-1 gene is restricted to fibroblast
growth factor family members in mesenchymal cells.

Jaakkola P(1), Vihinen T, Määttä A, Jalkanen M.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, BioCity, Finland.

Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) induce a variety of biological effects on
different cell types. They activate a number of genes, including immediate-early 
genes, such as the transcription factors Fos and Jun, which are also common
targets for other tyrosine kinase receptor-activating growth factors. Here we
describe a secondary far-upstream enhancer on the syndecan-1 gene that is
activated only by members of the FGF family in NIH 3T3 cells, not by other
receptor tyrosine kinase-activating growth factors (e.g., epidermal growth
factor, platelet-derived growth factor, insulin-like growth factor, or serum).
This FGF-inducible response element (FiRE) consists of a 170-bp array of five DNA
motifs which bind two FGF-inducible Fos-Jun heterodimers, one inducible
AP-2-related protein, a constitutively expressed upstream stimulatory factor, and
one constitutive 46-kDa transcription factor. Mutational analysis showed that
both AP-1 binding motifs are required, but not sufficient, for FiRE activation.
Moreover, agents such as 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, okadaic acid, or
forskolin, which are known to activate AP-1 complexes and AP-1-driven promoters, 
fail to activate FiRE. However, FiRE can be activated by the tyrosine kinase
phosphatase inhibitor orthovanadate. Taken together, this data implies a
differential activation of growth factor-initiated signaling on AP-1-driven
regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC232174
PMID: 9154820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3056-64.

Regulation of K3 keratin gene transcription by Sp1 and AP-2 in differentiating
rabbit corneal epithelial cells.

Chen TT(1), Wu RL, Castro-Munozledo F, Sun TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016, USA.

Rabbit corneal epithelial cells cultured in the presence of 3T3 feeder cells
undergo biochemical differentiation, as evidenced by their initial expression of 
K5 and K14 keratins characteristic of basal keratinocytes, followed by the
subsequent expression of K3 and K12 keratin markers of corneal epithelial
differentiation. Previous data established that mutations of an Sp1 site in a DNA
element, E, that contains overlapping Sp1 and AP-2 motifs reduce K3 gene promoter
activity by 70% in transfection assays. We show here that Sp1 activates while
AP-2 represses the K3 promoter. Although undifferentiated corneal epithelial
basal cells express equal amounts of Sp1 and AP-2 DNA-binding activities, the
differentiated cells down-regulate their Sp1 activity slightly but their AP-2
activity drastically, thus resulting in a six- to sevenfold increase in the
Sp1/AP-2 ratio. This change coincides with the activation and suppression of the 
differentiation-related K3 gene and the basal cell-related K14 keratin gene,
respectively. In addition, we show that polyamines, which are present in a high
concentration in proliferating basal keratinocytes, can inhibit the binding of
Sp1 to its cognate binding motif but not that of AP-2. These results suggest that
the relatively low Sp1/AP-2 ratio as well as the polyamine-mediated inhibition of
Sp1 binding to the E motif may account, in part, for the suppression of the K3
gene in corneal epithelial basal cells, while the elevated Sp1/AP-2 ratio may be 
involved in activating the K3 gene in differentiated corneal epithelial cells.
Coupled with the previous demonstration that AP-2 activates the K14 gene in basal
cells, the switch of the Sp1/AP-2 ratio during corneal epithelial differentiation
may play a role in the reciprocal expression of the K3 and K14 genes in the basal
and suprabasal cell layers.

PMCID: PMC232158
PMID: 9154804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Jun 1;65(3):308-24.

Effects of TPA, bryostatin 1, and retinoic acid on PO-B, AP-1, and AP-2 DNA
binding during HL-60 differentiation.

Davis AF(1), Meighan-Mantha RL, Riegel AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Georgetown University School of Medicine,
Washington, DC 20007, USA.

PO-B was originally characterized as a transcriptional regulatory factor of the
pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene; however, it has become increasingly clear that 
this protein may be active in tissues outside the pituitary, since it is present 
in diverse cell types, including differentiated HL-60 promyelocytic leukemia
cells. We previously showed that PO-B DNA-binding is progressively induced during
differentiation of promyelomonocytic leukemic HL-60 cells to the macrophage-like 
lineage (with phorbol esters). We now report that PO-B DNA-binding in HL-60 cells
is similarly induced during differentiation to the granulocytic lineage (with
either retinoic acid or dimethylsulfoxide). Either a genetic or pharmacologic
blockade of HL-60 differentiation prohibited these inductive effects. These
studies have prompted our interest in the dynamics of other transcription factor 
changes during HL-60 differentiation. Of these, we observed that another
transcription factor (AP-1) is also robustly induced at the DNA-binding level
during macrophage-like HL-60 differentiation, but not during granulocytic
differentiation. Conversely, the DNA-binding of the transcription factor AP-2 was
slightly reduced by TPA-induced HL-60 differentiation but unchanged during
granulocyte differentiation. From these data, we conclude that the induction of
PO-B DNA binding is a general marker of HL-60 myelomonocytic differentiation, but
that qualitative aspects of the induction of additional distinct transcription
factors, such as AP-1, may contribute to lineage-specific determinants of cell
fate.

PMID: 9138088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 30;272(22):14244-50.

Transcription factor AP-2 controls transcription of the human transforming growth
factor-alpha gene.

Wang D(1), Shin TH, Kudlow JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, The
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294, USA.

The epidermal growth factor receptor is vital for normal development and plays a 
role in oncogenesis. The level of activation of this receptor by transforming
growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) is controlled, in part, by the rate of
transcription of the TGF-alpha gene. In the characterization of the proximal
TGF-alpha promoter by DNase I footprinting, a 43-base pair element (-88 to -130
relative to the transcription start site), designated TalphaRE I, was found that 
was specifically protected by nuclear proteins from human mammary carcinoma
MDA468 cells. TalphaRE I was essential for the maximal expression of the
TGF-alpha gene as indicated by deletion and mutagenesis analyses. TalphaRE I
consists of two cis-acting elements, a proximal regulatory element (PRE, -89 to
-103) and a distal regulatory element (DRE, -121 to -128). Both elements were
able to form specific complexes with protein from MDA468 cell nuclear extracts
and are necessary for the full activity of the entire 1.1-kilobase pair TGF-alpha
promoter. Competition and antibody studies determined that the DRE contains a
binding site for the transcription factor AP-2, while the protein that binds to
the PRE has yet to be identified. When linked upstream to the heterologous herpes
simplex thymidine kinase promoter, the TalphaRE I enhanced transcription up to
11-fold in MDA468 cells. Cotransfection of an AP-2 expression vector was able to 
activate transcription from the TalphaREI-TK construct in a DRE-dependent manner.
These results further our understanding of how TGF-alpha transcription is
regulated.

PMID: 9162057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Oncogene. 1997 May 29;14(21):2543-52.

Differentiation dependent expression and distinct subcellular localization of the
protooncogene product, PEBP2beta/CBFbeta, in muscle development.

Chiba N(1), Watanabe T, Nomura S, Tanaka Y, Minowa M, Niki M, Kanamaru R, Satake 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

The Pebpb2/Cbfb gene encodes the non-DNA binding subunit of the heterodimeric
transcription factor, PEBP2/CBF. To examine the expression of the
PEBP2beta/CBFbeta protein in vivo, we carried out immunohistochemistry using the 
tissues from adult mice as well as embryos. Although PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was
detected in various tissues to various degrees, interesting features of
expression were observed in the skeletal myogenic cells. Here PEBP2beta/CBFbeta
was found mainly to occur as cytoplasmic staining and the intensity of this
staining increased depending on the differentiation stage of the cells. In the
undifferentiated myoblasts PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was undetectable, whereas moderate
levels of PEBP2beta/ CBFbeta were detected in the elongated and aligned myocytes.
PEBP2beta/CBFbeta appeared to accumulate further when the cells fused to each
other to become multinucleated myotubes. Once the muscle fibers were established,
PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was relocated onto or around the Z-lines. PEBP2beta/CBFbeta was
also detected in the cytoplasm of cardiac myocytes and in the smooth muscle cells
of the digestive tract. In all the above, the skeletal myotubes were the only
case that showed both nuclear and cytoplasmic staining of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta.
Thus, we could show differentiation dependent pattern of PEBP2beta/CBFbeta
expression in muscle development and establish PEBP2beta/CBFbeta to be a
cytoplasmic as well as nuclear protein in vivo.

PMID: 9191054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 27;94(11):5697-702.

Hematopoiesis in the fetal liver is impaired by targeted mutagenesis of a gene
encoding a non-DNA binding subunit of the transcription factor, polyomavirus
enhancer binding protein 2/core binding factor.

Niki M(1), Okada H, Takano H, Kuno J, Tani K, Hibino H, Asano S, Ito Y, Satake M,
Noda T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging, and
Cancer, Tohoku University, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980, Japan.

The Pebpb2 gene encodes a non-DNA binding subunit of the heterodimeric
transcription factor, polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2/core binding factor
(PEBP2/CBF), and is rearranged in inversion of chromosome 16 associated with
human acute myeloid leukemia. To investigate its physiological function, Pebpb2
was mutated by a targeting strategy to generate a null mutant. The homozygous
mutation in mice proved lethal in embryos around embryonic day 12.5, apparently
due to massive hemorrhaging in the central nervous system. In addition,
definitive hematopoiesis in the liver was severely impaired. The observed
phenotype was indistinguishable from that reported for homozygous disruption of
AML1, which encodes a DNA binding subunit of PEBP2/CBF. Thus, the results
indicate that the two subunits function together as a heterodimeric PEBP2/CBF in 
vivo and that PEBP2/CBF plays an essential role in the development of definitive 
hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC20841
PMID: 9159135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Oncogene. 1997 May 8;14(18):2229-38.

Transcription factor AP2 is required for expression of the rat transforming
growth factor-alpha gene.

Berkowitz EA(1), Hecht CP, Azizkhan JC, Chen X, Lee DC.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina School of
Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599, USA.

DNase I footprinting of the rat TGF alpha promoter in the presence of crude cell 
nuclear extract revealed three sites of protein-DNA interaction (Fp-A, Fp-B,
Fp-C) in the region from -222 to +73. Mutation of specific sites within the Fp-A 
and Fp-B regions reduced expression of a TGF alpha promoter-reporter gene (TGF
alphaLUC) from 50-90% in transiently transfected CHO cells, indicating the
importance of protein/DNA interactions at these sites. Since Fp-A contained a
perfect AP2 consensus sequence (5'-GCCNNNGGC-3') as its center, we investigated
the possibility that AP2 binding is important for TGF alpha promoter activity. A 
double-stranded oligonucleotide spanning Fp-A displayed a distinct mobility shift
in the presence of nuclear extract that was inhibited by an excess of known
functional AP2-binding sequence. Moreover, a similar mobility shift occurred in
the presence of purified AP2 protein, and the further addition of AP2 antibody
produced a supershifted complex. More refined DNase I footprinting of a smaller, 
oligonucleotide probe in the presence of purified AP2 protein revealed a
protected region that included the putative AP2 binding site. Additionally,
co-transfection of an AP2 expression vector increased TGF alphaLUC expression
25-fold in Drosophila Schneider cells. These various findings corroborate a role 
for AP2 in TGF alpha promoter activity. The Fp-B region contains a T5 motif that 
has been previously suggested to function as an atypical TATA box. An Fp-B
oligonucleotide displayed a specific gel mobility shift in the presence of a TATA
binding protein (TBP)-TFIIA complex, and the further addition of TBP antibody
produced a supershift. These results confirm that protein binding within Fp-B is 
functionally important, and they also indicate that the T5 motif functions as a
TBP binding site.

PMID: 9174059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 2;272(18):11959-67.

A 346-base pair region of the mouse gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase type II
promoter contains sufficient cis-acting elements for kidney-restricted expression
in transgenic mice.

Sepulveda AR(1), Huang SL, Lebovitz RM, Lieberman MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

The mouse gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) gene encodes seven distinct mRNAs
that are transcribed from seven separate promoters. Type II mRNA is the most
abundant in kidney. We have developed a cell line with features of renal proximal
tubular cells which expresses GGT mRNA types with a pattern similar to that of
mouse kidney. Because a 346-bp sequence from the type II promoter directed the
highest level of CAT activity in these cells, this region was used to drive the
expression of a beta-galactosidase reporter gene in transgenic mice. Two
transgenic mouse lines expressed beta-galactosidase limited to the renal proximal
tubules. Site-directed deletions within this 346-bp promoter region demonstrated 
that cis-elements containing the consensus binding sites for AP2, a
glucocorticoid response element (GRE)-like element, and the initiator region were
required for transcriptional activity and were not additive. Purified AP2 bound
and footprinted the AP2 consensus region, making it likely that transcription
from the GGT type II promoter is regulated in part by AP2. These data suggest
that transcription of the type II promoter requires multiple protein DNA
interactions involving at least an AP2 element, and probably a GRE-like element
and the initiator region.

PMID: 9115259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Apr 29;94(9):4342-7.

Identification of ERF-1 as a member of the AP2 transcription factor family.

McPherson LA(1), Baichwal VR, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The ERF-1 transcription factor was previously shown to be involved in the
regulation of estrogen receptor (ER) gene transcription in hormonally responsive 
breast and endometrial carcinomas. In this study we sought to identify the gene
for ERF-1. ERF-1 activates ER gene transcription by binding to the imperfect
palindrome CCCTGCGGGG within the promoter of the ER gene. ERF-1 protein was
purified from the ER-positive breast carcinoma cell line, MCF7, utilizing ion
exchange and DNA affinity chromatography. Peptide sequence analysis was used to
isolate a 2.7 kb cDNA clone from an MCF7 cDNA library. This cDNA encodes a
protein of 48 kDa previously identified as the AP2gamma transcription factor. By 
gel-shift analysis, in vitro synthesized ERF-1 comigrates with MCF7 native ERF-1 
complex and demonstrates identical sequence binding specificity as native ERF-1. 
In addition, AP2 polyclonal antisera supershifts both in vitro synthesized and
native ERF-1 complexes. These results show that ERF-1 is a member of the AP2
family of developmentally regulated transcription factors. Given the central role
of ER expression in breast carcinoma biology, ERF-1 is likely to regulate
expression of a set of genes characteristic of the hormonally-responsive breast
cancer phenotype.

PMCID: PMC20724
PMID: 9113991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Gene. 1997 Apr 21;189(2):209-12.

In vivo footprints are found in the Xenopus 63 kDa keratin gene promoter prior to
the appearance of mRNA.

Warshawsky D(1), Miller L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois, Chicago 60607-7060,
USA.

Previous work on the promoter region of the 63 kDa keratin gene demonstrated that
in vivo footprints did not change during the transition from low-level to
high-level transcription. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction and in 
vivo footprinting were used to determine if these DNA-protein interactions are
present before transcription begins. The results presented indicate that during
development, DNA-protein interactions are present in the promoter region of the
63 kDa keratin gene at stage 44, four days prior to the initial appearance of 63 
kDa keratin mRNA, at stage 48. Thus, the occupancy of these sites at stage 44 is 
not sufficient for transcription, but may have a role in 'poising' the keratin
promoter for the initiation of epidermal-specific transcription. The results
suggest that the developmental history of a gene may be important in regulating
its temporal and spatial expression.

PMID: 9168129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 11;272(15):10196-204.

A GT-rich sequence binding the transcription factor Sp1 is crucial for high
expression of the human type VII collagen gene (COL7A1) in fibroblasts and
keratinocytes.

Vindevoghel L(1), Chung KY, Davis A, Kouba D, Kivirikko S, Alder H, Uitto J,
Mauviel A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Type VII collagen is the major component of anchoring fibrils, structural
elements that stabilize the attachment of the basement membrane to the underlying
dermis. In this study, we have dissected the human type VII collagen gene
(COL7A1) promoter to characterize the cis-elements responsible for the expression
of the gene in cultured fibroblasts and keratinocytes. Using transient cell
transfections with various 5' end deletion COL7A1 promoter/chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene plasmid constructs, we determined that the region
between nucleotides -524 and -456, relative to the transcription start site, is
critical for high promoter activity in both cell types studied. Gel mobility
shift assays using several DNA fragments spanning this region identified a
GT-rich sequence between residues -512 and -505, necessary for the binding of
nuclear proteins to this region of the promoter. Point mutations abolished the
binding of nuclear proteins in gel shift assays and drastically diminished the
activity of the promoter in transient cell transfections. Supershift assays with 
antibodies against various transcription factors including Sp1, Sp3, c-Jun/AP-1, 
and AP-2, and competition experiments with oligonucleotides containing consensus 
sequences for Sp1 and AP-1 binding identified Sp1 as the transcription factor
binding to this region of the COL7A1 promoter. Indeed, recombinant human Sp1 was 
shown to bind the COL7A1 promoter GT-rich element but not its mutated form in gel
mobility shift assays. In addition, co-transfection of pPacSp1, an expression
vector for Sp1, together with the COL7A1 promoter/chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase construct into Sp1-deficient Drosophila Schneider SL2 cells
unequivocally demonstrated that Sp1 is essential for high expression of the
COL7A1 gene. These data represent the first in-depth analysis of the human COL7A1
promoter transcriptional control.

PMID: 9092567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Exp Med. 1997 Apr 7;185(7):1193-201.

Regulation of T cell receptor delta gene rearrangement by CBF/PEBP2.

Lauzurica P(1), Zhong XP, Krangel MS, Roberts JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina 27710, USA.

We have analyzed transgenic mice carrying versions of a human T cell receptor
(TCR)-delta gene minilocus to study the developmental control of VDJ
(variable/diversity/joining) recombination. Previous data indicated that a 1.4-kb
DNA fragment carrying the TCR-delta enhancer (E(delta)) efficiently activates
minilocus VDJ recombination in vivo. We tested whether the transcription factor
CBF/PEBP2 plays an important role in the ability of E(delta) to activate VDJ
recombination by analyzing VDJ recombination in mice carrying a minilocus in
which the deltaE3 element of E(delta) includes a mutated CBF/PEBP2 binding site. 
The enhancer-dependent VD to J step of minilocus rearrangement was dramatically
inhibited in three of four transgenic lines, arguing that the binding of
CBF/PEBP2 plays a role in modulating local accessibility to the VDJ recombinase
in vivo. Because mutation of the deltaE3 binding site for the transcription
factor c-Myb had previously established a similar role for c-Myb, and because a
60-bp fragment of E(delta) carrying deltaE3 and deltaE4 binding sites for
CBF/PEBP2, c-Myb, and GATA-3 displays significant enhancer activity in transient 
transfection experiments, we tested whether this fragment of E(delta) is
sufficient to activate VDJ recombination in vivo. This fragment failed to
efficiently activate the enhancer-dependent VD to J step of minilocus
rearrangement in all three transgenic lines examined, indicating that the binding
of CBF/PEBP2 and c-Myb to their cognate sites within E(delta), although
necessary, is not sufficient for the activation of VDJ recombination by E(delta).
These results imply that CBF/PEBP2 and c-Myb collaborate with additional factors 
that bind elsewhere within E(delta) to modulate local accessibility to the VDJ
recombinase in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2196263
PMID: 9104806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:299-302.

An acute myeloid leukemia gene, AML1, regulates transcriptional activation and
hemopoietic myeloid cell differentiation antagonistically by two alternative
spliced forms.

Tanaka T(1), Tanaka K, Ogawa S, Kurokawa M, Mitani K, Yazaki Y, Shibata Y, Hirai 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The AML1 gene on chromosome 21 is disrupted in the (8;21)(q22;q22) and
(3;21)(q26;q22) translocations associated with myelogenous leukemias and encodes 
a DNA-binding protein. From AML1 gene, two representative forms of proteins,
AML1a and AML1b, are produced by an alternative splicing. Both forms have
DNA-binding domain, but AML1a lacks a putative transcriptional activation domain 
which AML1b has. Here we demonstrate that AML1a, which solely has no effects as a
transcriptional regulator, dominantly suppresses transcriptional activation by
AML1b, and that AML1a exhibits the higher affinity for DNA-binding than AML1b.
Furthermore a dominant negative form of AML1, AML1a, totally suppressed
granulocytic differentiation otherwise induced by granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor when AML1a was overexpressed in 32Dc13 murine myeloid cells. Such
differentiation block by AML1a was canceled by the concomitant overexpression of 
AML1b. These data strongly suggest that a transcriptionally active form of AML1
is essential for the myeloid cell differentiation. In addition, we observed an
altered expression level of AML1 along with the myeloid differentiation in
several hemopoietic cell lines. In these cases, at least, the AML1 expression
level is a potential regulator for myeloid cell differentiation.

PMID: 9209372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Leukemia. 1997 Apr;11 Suppl 3:279-80.

The runt protein and its companion PEBP2: a close link between this transcription
factor and AML.

Ito Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University.

PMID: 9209364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 1997 Apr;17(2):235-43.

Sequence and functional analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse growth
inhibitory factor gene.

Watabe M(1), Gross S, Lawyer C, Brewer GJ, Mashimo T, Watabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine,
Southern Illinois University, Springfield 62702, USA.

1. The growth inhibitory factor (GIF) is a 68-amino acid protein which is capable
of inhibiting the growth of neuronal cells in vitro. 2. We have cloned and
sequenced the 5'-flanking region of the mouse GIF gene, which spans from the
transcriptional initiation site to the -1854 nucleotide. 3. This region contains 
sequences homologous to hgcs, SPE, and the JCV silencer domain that functions in 
a glial cell specific manner. This region also contains two metal responding
elements and putative binding sites for AP-1, AP-2, Sp-1, SP-2, NF-1, and CREB.
4. An analysis of the reporter plasmids containing the various regions of the
5'-flanking sequence revealed that the region indeed functioned in a
tissue-specific manner in glial cells and that the region between -328 and 175 is
responsible for suppression, while the region between -175 and -49 is involved in
the activation of gene expression.

PMID: 9140700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Endocrinology. 1997 Apr;138(4):1528-36.

Characterization of the rat insulin-like growth factor I gene promoters and
identification of a minimal exon 2 promoter.

Wang X(1), Yang Y, Adamo ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio 78284-7760, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) promoter activity was characterized in C6,
GH3, OVCAR-3, and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Maximal exon 1 promoter
activity was present in the region extending from -133 to +362 (where +1 is the
first transcription start site). Promoter activity was higher in the +75/+362
fragment, which contains exon 1 transcription start sites 3 and 4, than in the
-133/+74 fragment, which contains exon 1 transcription start sites 1 and 2.
Promoter activity was also observed in constructs containing sequences from -133 
to +192, which includes start sites 1, 2, and 3. Inclusion of sequences upstream 
of -133 inhibited exon 1 proximal promoter activity in a cell type-specific
manner. Exon 2 promoter activity was observed in all cell lines with a construct 
containing 73 bp of 5'-flanking sequence and 44 bp of exon 2. Exon 2 promoter
activity was abolished when only 36 bp of 5'-flanking sequence and 44 bp of exon 
2 were present, suggesting that an essential minimal promoter element(s) is
contained within the -73 to -36 region. A putative CACCC box was observed within 
this region at -53. Upstream sequence regulated exon 2 promoter activity in a
cell type-specific manner. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed a
single specifically bound band when the +75/+362 fragment of the exon 1 promoter 
was used with nuclear extracts from C6 and GH3 cells. Multiple specifically bound
bands with slower mobility were observed when the -236/+44 exon 2 promoter
fragment was incubated with C6, GH3, CHO, and OVCAR-3 cell nuclear extracts. The 
exon 1 and exon 2 promoter regions were able to inhibit each other's binding in
electrophoretic mobility shift assay using GH3 cell and OVCAR-3 cell nuclear
extracts, respectively. Oligonucleotides containing consensus activating
protein-1 (AP-1) and AP-3 sequences inhibited exon 1 promoter binding by GH3 cell
nuclear extracts. AP-2 and AP-3 sites inhibited exon 2 promoter binding. Our data
suggest that the sequence surrounding and including start site 3 in exon 1
functions as a minimal independent promoter. The minimal exon 2 promoter is
contained within the 73 bp upstream and 44 bp downstream of the transcription
start site cluster. These minimal promoters contain similar and distinct elements
that are important for basal transcription. Upstream sequences may contain cell
type-specific silencer elements.

PMID: 9075712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Apr 1;25(7):1458-66.

Cloning and partial characterization of the mouse glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate 
amidotransferase (GFAT) gene promoter.

Sayeski PP(1), Wang D, Su K, Han IO, Kudlow JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFAT) is the enzyme that is rate
limiting in the synthesis of glucosamine and hexosamines. Glucosamine has been
proposed to contribute to the glucotoxicity of diabetes. Evidence that the gene
encoding GFAT is transcriptionally regulated prompted us to clone and
characterize its promoter. The position of the mouse GFAT promoter relative to
the translational start site was located by primer extension and found to be 149 
bp upstream of the translational start site. A 1.9 kb SacI fragment of the GFAT
gene was found to contain the promoter and 88 bp of sequence downstream of the
transcriptional start site. This promoter segment could drive expression of a
luciferase reporter gene, could confer correct transcriptional initiation to the 
reporter and could confer the EGF-responsiveness previously observed in the
native gene. The mouse GFAT promoter lacks a canonical TATA box and has several
GC boxes within a highly GC-rich region. Deletional analysis of the promoter
indicated that a proximal element extending to -120 relative to the
transcriptional start site could confer reporter expression at a level of 57% of 
the 1.9 kb construct. Detailed analysis of this proximal region by DNase I
footprinting, electrophoretic mobility shift assays and site-directed mutagenesis
indicated that Sp1 binds to three elements in this proximal promoter segment and 
plays a vital role in regulation of transcription from this gene.

PMCID: PMC146605
PMID: 9060444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8498-504.

Exon/intron organization, chromosome localization, alternative splicing, and
transcription units of the human apolipoprotein E receptor 2 gene.

Kim DH(1), Magoori K, Inoue TR, Mao CC, Kim HJ, Suzuki H, Fujita T, Endo Y, Saeki
S, Yamamoto TT.

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku University Gene Research Center, Sendai 981, Japan.

Apolipoprotein E receptor 2 is a recently identified receptor that resembles low 
and very low density lipoprotein receptors. Isolation and characterization of
genomic clones encoding human apolipoprotein E receptor 2 revealed that the gene 
spans approximately 60 kilobases and contains 19 exons. The positions of the
exon/intron boundaries of the gene are almost identical to those of low and very 
low density lipoprotein receptors. Fluorescent in situ hybridization of human
chromosomes revealed that the gene is located on chromosome 1p34. Isolation of a 
cDNA encoding a variant receptor and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction indicate the presence of multiple variants with different numbers of
cysteine-rich repeats in the binding domain of the receptor. We also found a
variant receptor lacking a 59-amino acid insertion in the cytoplasmic domain. The
transcription start site was mapped to the position 236 base pairs upstream of
the AUG translation initiator codon by primer extension analysis. Sequence
inspection of the 5'-flanking region revealed potential DNA elements: AP-2, GC
factor, PEA3, and Sp1. The minimal promoter region and a region required for
nerve growth factor inducibility in PC12 cells were also determined.

PMID: 9079678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cancer Res. 1997 Mar 15;57(6):1180-7.

Gene structure, promoter activity, and chromosomal location of the DR-nm23 gene, 
a related member of the nm23 gene family.

Martinez R(1), Venturelli D, Perrotti D, Veronese ML, Kastury K, Druck T, Huebner
K, Calabretta B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

DR-nm23 cDNA was cloned recently by differential screening of a cDNA library
derived from chronic myelogenous leukemia-blast crisis primary cells. It is
highly homologous to the putative metastasis suppressor nm23-H1 gene and the
closely related nm23-H2 gene. When overexpressed in the myeloid precursor 32Dcl3 
cell line, it inhibited granulocyte colony-stimulating factor-stimulated
granulocytic differentiation and induced apoptosis. We have now found that the
expression of DR-nm23 is not restricted to hematopoietic cells but is also
detected in an array of solid tumor cell lines, including carcinoma of the
breast, colon, and prostate, as well as the glioblastoma cell line T98G. We have 
also isolated both the gene and its 5'-flanking region and found that DR-nm23
localizes on chromosome 16q13. The gene consists of six exons and five introns.
When fused in-frame to the nucleotide sequence for the green fluorescent protein 
and transfected in SAOS-2 cells, it generates a protein of the predicted size
that localizes to the cytoplasm. The 5'-flanking region of DR-nm23 does not
contain a canonical TATA box or a CAAT box, but it is G+C rich and contains two
binding sites for the developmentally regulated transcription factor activator
protein 2 (AP-2). Transient expression assays of DR-nm23 promoter-chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase constructs demonstrated that the segment from nucleotides -1028
to +123 has the highest activity in hematopoietic K562 cells and in TK-ts13
hamster fibroblasts. Moreover, AP-2 induced a 3-fold transactivation of the
DR-nm23 5'-flanking segment from nucleotides -1676 to +123 and interacted
specifically with oligomers containing putative AP-2 binding sites (-936 to -909,
and -548 to -519) as indicated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
Furthermore, nuclear run-on assays from high and low DR-nm23-expressing cells
(K562 and CCRF-CEM, respectively) revealed similar transcription rates.
Therefore, the regulation of the DR-nm23 gene expression might involve other
mechanisms occurring at posttranscriptional and/or translational levels.

PMID: 9067290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Matrix Biol. 1997 Mar;15(8-9):519-26.

The AP-1 site and MMP gene regulation: what is all the fuss about?

Benbow U(1), Brinckerhoff CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP) gene expression occurs under tightly regulated
mechanisms that lead to cell and tissue-specific expression of the individual
genes. Despite this differential expression, there exists a high degree of
similarity among the cis-acting elements in the MMP promoters. The Activator
Protein-1 (AP-1) site at approximately -70 bp upstream of the transcriptional
start site has long been thought to play a dominant role in the transcriptional
activation of the MMP promoters, particularly in response to stimulation with
phorbol myristate acetate (PMA). However, more recent data indicate that basal
transcription, as well as transactivation by PMA, cytokines, and growth factors
requires the specific interaction of AP-1 with other cis-acting elements.
Particularly important are PEA3 sites, located either adjacent to this AP-1 site 
or more distally. On the otherhand, the AP-1 site plays a dominant role in
repression of MMPs by transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), retinoids and
glucocorticoids, although some AP-1 independent mechanisms may also contribute.
While the AP-1 site is involved in tissue-specific expression of MMPs, the
presence of one or more AP-2 elements appears critical. Thus, the AP-1 site,
alone, does not regulate transcription of MMPs. Rather, there is an essential
interaction with other cis-acting sequences in the promoters and with certain
transcription factors that bind to these sequences. Together, these complex
interactions control the transcription of the MMPs in response to particular
inducers and repressors.

PMID: 9138284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Genes Dev. 1997 Mar 1;11(5):640-53.

ALY, a context-dependent coactivator of LEF-1 and AML-1, is required for TCRalpha
enhancer function.

Bruhn L(1), Munnerlyn A, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of California, San Francisco
94143-0414, USA.

LEF-1 is a transcription factor that participates in the regulation of the T-cell
receptor alpha (TCR alpha) enhancer by facilitating the assembly of multiple
proteins into a higher order nucleoprotein complex. The function of LEF-1 is
dependent, in part, on the HMG domain that induces a sharp bend in the DNA helix,
and on an activation domain that stimulates transcription only in a specific
context of other enhancer-binding proteins. With the aim of gaining insight into 
the function of context-dependent activation domains, we cloned ALY, a novel
LEF-1-interacting protein. ALY is a ubiquitously expressed, nuclear protein that 
specifically associates with the activation domains of LEF-1 and AML-1 (CBF
alpha2, PEBP2 alpha(B), which is another protein component of the TCR alpha
enhancer complex. In addition, ALY can increase DNA binding by both LEF-1 and AML
proteins. Overexpression of ALY stimulates the activity of the TCR alpha enhancer
complex reconstituted in transfected nonlymphoid HeLa cells, whereas
down-regulation of ALY by anti-sense oligonucleotides virtually eliminates TCR
alpha enhancer activity in T cells. Similar to LEF-1, ALY can stimulate
transcription in the context of the TCR alpha enhancer but apparently not when
tethered to DNA through an heterologous DNA-binding domain. We propose that ALY
mediates context-dependent transcriptional activation by facilitating the
functional collaboration of multiple proteins in the TCR alpha enhancer complex.

PMID: 9119228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Neurochem. 1997 Mar;68(3):909-16.

Enhanced expression of amyloid precursor protein in response to dibutyryl cyclic 
AMP is not mediated by the transcription factor AP-2.

Bourbonnière M(1), Shekarabi M, Nalbantoglu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, McGill Center for Studies in Aging, 
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The gene for amyloid precursor protein (APP) is expressed almost ubiquitously,
with high levels of mRNA being detected in brain. The basal expression level of
the APP gene can be modulated by physiological stimuli, and in this report we
demonstrate that the second messenger cyclic AMP can regulate APP mRNA through
transcriptional mechanisms. Northern blot analysis showed a 1.8-fold increase in 
steady-state levels of APP mRNA when the neuroblastoma x glioma hybrid cell line 
NG108-15 was treated with dibutyryl cyclic AMP. Although the upstream sequences
of the APP gene do not contain a canonical cyclic AMP response element, transient
transfection assays in NG108-15 cells using different portions of the APP
promoter showed an increase in reporter gene activity mediated by sequences
located between -303 to -204 and -488 to -2991. Cotransfection assays carried out
in HepG2 cells with AP-2, a cyclic AMP-regulated transcription factor, failed to 
activate the APP promoter through the AP-2 consensus sequence (GCCNNNCGG) located
at position -205. Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis revealed that the AP-2 
binding activity present in HeLa nuclear extracts fails to recognize the APP AP-2
consensus sequence. We conclude that increases in cyclic AMP levels can lead to
an up-regulation of APP gene transcription through at least two different regions
of the APP promoter. This increase does not involve the AP-2 consensus sequence
present in the APP promoter located at position -205, and, moreover, this
putative site is not recognized by the transcription factor AP-2.

PMID: 9048735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. EMBO J. 1997 Feb 17;16(4):750-9.

Transforming growth factor-alpha-induced transcriptional activation of the
vascular permeability factor (VPF/VEGF) gene requires AP-2-dependent DNA binding 
and transactivation.

Gille J(1), Swerlick RA, Caughman SW.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum der Dermatologie, Klinikum der J.W. Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt,
Germany.

The endothelial cell-specific mitogen vascular permeability factor/vascular
endothelial growth factor (VPF/VEGF) represents a central regulator of cutaneous 
angiogenesis. Increased VPF/VEGF expression has recently been reported in
psoriatic skin and healing wounds, both conditions in which transforming growth
factor-alpha (TGF alpha) and its ligand, the epidermal growth factor receptor,
are markedly up-regulated. Since TGF alpha strongly induces VPF/VEGF synthesis in
keratinocytes, TGF alpha-mediated VPF/VEGF expression is likely to play a
significant role in the initiation and maintenance of increased vascular
hyperpermeability and hyperproliferation in skin biology. The objectives of the
present studies were to determine the molecular mechanisms responsible for TGF
alpha-induced transcriptional activation of the VPF/VEGF gene. We have identified
a GC-rich TGF alpha-responsive region between -88 bp and -65 bp of the VPF/VEGF
promoter that is necessary for constitutive and TGF alpha-inducible
transcriptional activation. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays, this region
binds Sp1-dependent protein complexes constitutively and an additional TGF
alpha-inducible protein complex that is distinct from Sp1 protein. Both AP-2 and 
Egr-1 transcription factors were detected as components of the TGF
alpha-inducible protein complex in supershift EMSA studies. In co-transfection
studies, an AP-2 but not an Egr-1 expression vector activated VPF/VEGF
transcription, thus indicating that AP-2 protein is functionally important in TGF
alpha-induced VPF/VEGF gene expression. By clarifying regulatory mechanisms that 
are critical for angiogenic processes in the skin, these studies may form the
basis for new therapeutic strategies to modulate VPF/VEGF expression in cutaneous
inflammation and wound healing.

PMCID: PMC1169676
PMID: 9049304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Blood. 1997 Feb 15;89(4):1260-9.

Characterization of the human platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1
promoter: identification of a GATA-2 binding element required for optimal
transcriptional activity.

Gumina RJ(1), Kirschbaum NE, Piotrowski K, Newman PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Research Institute, The Blood Center of Southeastern Wisconsin,
Milwaukee 53201-2178, USA.

Platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1) is a 130-kD member of the
Ig gene superfamily that is expressed on platelets, endothelial cells, and
certain leukocyte subsets. To examine the factors controlling vascular-specific
expression of PECAM-1, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of the PECAM-1 gene and
analyzed its transcriptional activity. 5'-Rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(5'-RACE) analysis showed that transcription initiation occurred at several
closely spaced nearby sites originating approximately 204 bp upstream from the
translation start site. Analysis of the sequence immediately upstream from the
transcription initiation site (TIS) showed no canonical TATA or CAAT elements,
however an initiator element commonly found in TATA-less promoters encompassed
the TIS. 5'-serially truncated PECAM-1 promoter segments cloned in front of a
luciferase reporter drove transcription in both a lineage- and
orientation-specific manner. Putative cis-acting control elements present within 
a 300-bp core promoter included two ets sites, an Sp1 site, tandem E-box domains,
two GATA-associated sites (CACCC), an AP-2 binding site, and a GATA element at
-24. Mutational analysis showed that optimal transcriptional activity required
the GATA sequence at position -24, and gel-shift assays further showed that the
GATA-2 transcription factor, but not GATA-1, bound to this region of the PECAM-1 
promoter. Understanding the cis- and transacting factors that regulate the
tissue-specific expression of PECAM-1 should increase our understanding of the
mechanisms by which vascular-specific gene expression is achieved.

PMID: 9028949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Gene. 1997 Feb 7;185(2):285-90.

Cloning and characterization of the 5' flanking region of the stem cell factor
gene in rat Sertoli cells.

Jiang C(1), Hall SJ, Boekelheide K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Brown University, Providence,
RI 02912, USA.

In order to elucidate the molecular basis of stem cell factor (SCF, or steel
factor/kit ligand) expression in Sertoli cells of rat testis, 1.5 kb of the 5'
flanking region of the SCF gene was isolated and characterized. The
transcriptional start point (tsp) was identified by primer extension assay and a 
rapid amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) assay. A TATA box was found 29 base pairs
(bp) upstream from the tsp, and a number of transcription factor consensus
sequences, including several AP2 and Spl sites, were identified. The
transcriptional activity of the 1.5 kb 5' flanking region was analyzed by
deletion constructs using a firefly luciferase-encoding gene (luc) expression
vector transiently transfected into primary rat Sertoli cells and other SCF
positive and negative cell lines. For all the cells and cell lines examined, a
-119 bp to +43 bp fragment including the tsp was sufficient for SCF promoter
activity, and the core promoter activity was not significantly changed by
inclusion of upstream sequences as far as -1461 bp. These results indicate that
additional sites outside of this promoter region are needed to define the
cell-specific regulatory elements of SCF expression. The transcriptional
activities of all SCF deletion constructs treated with cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) and forskolin were increased two- to threefold,
indicating that SCF transcription in Sertoli cells is regulated by a
cAMP-dependent pathway in the proximal promoter region.

PMID: 9055828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Feb 4;94(3):1035-40.

Arabidopsis thaliana CBF1 encodes an AP2 domain-containing transcriptional
activator that binds to the C-repeat/DRE, a cis-acting DNA regulatory element
that stimulates transcription in response to low temperature and water deficit.

Stockinger EJ(1), Gilmour SJ, Thomashow MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, Michigan State University, East Lansing 
48824, USA.

Recent efforts have defined a cis-acting DNA regulatory element in plants, the
C-repeat/dehydration responsive element (DRE), that stimulates transcription in
response to low temperature and water deficit. Here we report the isolation of an
Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA that encodes a C-repeat/DRE binding factor, CBF1
(C-repeat/DRE Binding Factor 1). Analysis of the deduced CBF1 amino acid sequence
indicates that the protein has a molecular mass of 24 kDa, a potential nuclear
localization sequence, and a possible acidic activation domain. CBF1 also has an 
AP2 domain, which is a DNA-binding motif of about 60 aa present in the
Arabidopsis proteins APETALA2, AINTEGUMENTA, and TINY; the tobacco ethylene
response element binding proteins; and numerous other plant proteins of unknown
function. The transcript levels for CBF1, which appears to be a single or low
copy number gene, did not change appreciably in plants exposed to low temperature
or in detached leaves subjected to water deficit. Binding of CBF1 to the
C-repeat/DRE was demonstrated in gel shift assays using recombinant CBF1 protein 
expressed in Escherichia coli. Moreover, expression of CBF1 in yeast was found to
activate transcription of reporter genes containing the C-repeat/DRE as an
upstream activator sequence but not mutant versions of the DNA element. We
conclude that CBF1 can function as a transcriptional activator that binds to the 
C-repeat/DRE DNA regulatory element and, thus, is likely to have a role in cold- 
and dehydration-regulated gene expression in Arabidopsis.

PMCID: PMC19635
PMID: 9023378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Neuroscience. 1997 Feb;76(3):821-7.

An AP-2 binding sequence within exon 1 of human and porcine choline
acetyltransferase genes enhances transcription in neural cells.

Baskin F(1), Li YP, Hersh LB, Davis RM, Rosenberg RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
at Dallas, 75235, U.S.A.

The gene for choline acetyltransferase, synthesizing acetylcholine, is induced by
several neurotrophic factors. A role for AP-2 in enhancing this transcription and
limiting it to neural cells is strongly suggested. Previous studies demonstrated 
that base pairs +465-727 within the untranslated exon 1 of the porcine gene
enhanced the expression of a reporter gene transfected into PC-12 cells. Deletion
and mutation experiments indicate that base pairs +465-472 (CCGCGGGG) in the
porcine gene, or +307-314 (CCTCGGGG) in the human sequence, were necessary and
sufficient for increased gene expression in cholinergic or adrenergic but not
liver cells. Constructs containing active sequences, but not inactive mutated
sequences, specifically bind nuclear proteins from neuroblastoma cells, but not
liver cells, in gel shift experiments. The human and porcine sequences are in
agreement with an AP-2 consensus binding sequence, a nuclear transcription factor
expressed only in cells derived from the neural crest. Gel shift experiments
using recombinant AP-2 confirm this identification. AP-2 antibody further
retarded the mobility of these DNA-nuclear extract or DNA-AP-2 complexes. These
results support the importance of this AP-2 binding sequence in enhancing and
limiting choline acetyltransferase expression in neural cells.

PMID: 9135054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mamm Genome. 1997 Feb;8(2):90-3.

Structural organization and expression of the gene for the mouse GM2 activator
protein.

Bertoni C(1), Appolloni MG, Stirling JL, Li SC, Li YT, Orlacchio A, Beccari T.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di Perugia, Italy.

The GM2 activator protein is an essential component for the degradation of GM2
ganglioside by hexosaminidase A in vivo. Mutations in the human gene coding for
the GM2 activator protein cause the AB variant of GM2-gangliosidosis, a condition
that is clinically indistinguishable from Tay-Sachs disease. To understand better
factors affecting the expression of the GM2 activator protein gene (Gm2a) in
mouse tissues, we have determined its exon-intron organization and analyzed its
promoter region. Gm2a is about 14 kb, has four exons, and the 5' flanking region 
contains a CAAT box, Sp1 binding sites, AP-1, AP-2 sites, and a pair of IRE
sites. A 1.2-kb fragment upstream from the initiation codon was shown to have
promoter activity in NIH 3T3 cells. Similarities between the elements present in 
Gm2a and Hexa promoters might in part explain their similar expression patterns
in mouse tissues. The different levels of GM2 activator protein mRNA in liver,
kidney, brain, and testis are not owing to the use of different transcription
start sites, because a single start site was found 50 bp upstream from the
initiation codon in each these tissues. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
variation in the GM2 activator protein mRNA expression during mouse development. 
Gm2a was mapped to Chromosome (Chr) 11, where it co-segregated with Csfgm.

PMID: 9060405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;16(2):145-52.

A negative regulatory region containing a glucocorticosteroid response element
(nGRE) in the human interleukin-1beta gene.

Zhang G(1), Zhang L, Duff GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics & the Metabolic Research Unit, University of
California San Francisco, 94143-0978, USA.

Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1beta) is one of the most important inflammatory mediators
in human inflammatory and immunological diseases. The regulation of human
IL-1beta gene expression has been studied for several years, and a few regulatory
elements have been discovered in the promoter region. However, little is known
about negative regulation of IL-1beta expression at the transcriptional level,
which may play an important role in anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive
effects. We have identified a negative regulatory element located in the region
between -685 and -395. Within this region, a 19-bp nuclear factor binding site
(-570 to -552) was characterized by DNase I footprinting and electromobility
shift assay. A consensus sequence for a negative glucocorticoid response element 
(nGRE) and a transcription activator protein-2 binding site were noted within
this footprint. Functional studies showed a 2.5-fold increase in promoter
activity when this 19-bp binding site was deleted in the reporter constructs
IL-1beta/CAT and IL-1beta/SV40 promoter/CAT. Dexamethasone (10(-8) M) repressed
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) production by 75% in the wild-type
fragment but not in a deletion mutant lacking the 19-bp site. A protein of about 
150 kD that bound to this negative regulatory sequence was identified by UV
cross-linking. This is the first description of a negative regulatory region
responsive to glucocorticoids in a cytokine gene.

PMID: 9052735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Gene. 1997 Jan 31;185(1):111-7.

A simple screening for mutant DNA binding proteins: application to murine
transcription factor PEBP2alpha subunit, a founding member of the Runt domain
protein family.

Akamatsu Y(1), Tsukumo S, Kagoshima H, Tsurushita N, Shigesada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute for Virus Research,
Kyoto University, Syogoin, Sakyo-ku, Japan.

Mouse transcription factor PEBP2 (polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein (2) is
composed of two distinct subunits alpha and beta. The alpha subunit has an
ability to bind the specific DNA sequences, which is enhanced by formation of a
heterodimer with the beta subunit. The DNA binding and heterodimerization
activities of the alpha subunit are both localized within a 128-amino-acid (aa)
region termed as the Runt domain for its homology to the Drosophila segmentation 
gene runt. To characterize the molecular determinants for these activities, the
Runt domain was randomly mutagenized and produced in E. coli as a secreted form. 
Using E. coli culture supernatant, the DNA binding and heterodimerization of
mutant Runt domains were analyzed by gel retardation assay. Nine randomly picked 
single-aa substitution mutants showed various functional alterations in DNA
binding and heterodimerization either separately or simultaneously. This
observation suggests that the structure of Runt domain is highly ordered and is
quite sensitive to modulations in its primary structure. The method presented
here provides a simple and quick method to characterize a large number of mutant 
DNA binding proteins.

PMID: 9034321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jan 13;230(2):413-8.

Analysis of the promoter region of the human VEGF-related factor gene.

Silins G(1), Grimmond S, Egerton M, Hayward N.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Cancer Fund Research Unit, Joint Experimental Oncology Program,
Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Herston, Australia. gintS@qimr.edu.au

We have characterised the promoters of the human and murine VRF (vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) related factor) gene. A series of deletions were
made of a 553-bp region 5' of the VRF initiation codon and were used in a
luciferase reporter gene assay to determine the minimal promoter of the VRF gene.
The region between base pairs -443 and -195 was sufficient to mediate
transcription in lymphocytes and the region between -550 and -443 enhanced this
promoter activity. Primer extension studies identified two regions of
transcription initiation, both of which are preceded by Sp1, AP-2 and Egr-1
transcription factor binding sites. The VRF promoter is similar to VEGF in that
it is associated with a CpG island, contains sites for Sp1 and AP-2, and lacks a 
TATA box. However, it has marked differences in that the promoter contains Egr-1 
sites and lacks both hypoxia-inducible factor-1 and AP-1 sites. These data may
indicate that expression of these two growth factors is regulated by different
physiological stimuli.

PMID: 9016794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jan 3;272(1):174-81.

A novel transcription factor regulates expression of the vacuolar H+-ATPase B2
subunit through AP-2 sites during monocytic differentiation.

Lee BS(1), Krits I, Crane-Zelkovic MK, Gluck SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Renal Division, George M. O'Brien Center for Kidney and
Urological Diseases, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

During monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation, the cellular content of vacuolar
H+-ATPase (V-ATPase) increases more than 4-fold. We have shown previously that
amplified expression of the B2 subunit of the V-ATPase occurs solely by increased
transcription, and that the 5'-untranslated region of the B2 gene, containing
multiple consensus binding sites for the transcription factors AP-2 and Sp1, is
required for this expression. The present study demonstrates that AP-2 binding
sequences are essential for increased transcription from the B2 promoter during
monocyte-macrophage differentiation and that AP-2, expressed exogenously in THP-1
and other cells, activates transcription from the B2 promoter. In mobility shift 
assays, a nuclear factor from THP-1 and U-937 cells was identified that binds to 
several AP-2 response elements within the B2 promoter, but does not react with
AP-2 antibodies, and has a DNA sequence binding affinity profile that differs
from AP-2. These findings suggest that a novel AP-2-like transcription factor is 
responsible for V-ATPase B subunit amplification during monocyte differentiation.

PMID: 8995244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. DNA Seq. 1997;8(1-2):71-6.

Genomic structure of human cystatin A.

Yamazaki M(1), Ishidoh K, Kominami E, Ogawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

Cystatin A is a cysteine proteinase inhibitor with a molecular mass of 11 kDa,
and is located mainly in the keratohyaline granules of the stratum granulosum and
the cornified envelope of the stratum corneum in the epidermis. In this study, we
demonstrated the genomic structure of this proteinase inhibitor in which there
were three exons of 111 bp, 102 bp and 226 bp in length, while the lengths of the
1st and 2nd intron were approximately 14 Kbp and 4 Kbp, respectively. The
conserved sequence of QVVAG was encoded in the 2nd exon and was not inserted by
any introns. There were binding sites for SP-1 and AP-2 in the promoter region
and an AP-1 binding site in the 1st intron. The successful amplification of each 
exon of cystatin A may possibly contribute to the detection of the genomic
abnormality of some skin disorders e.g. keratinization disorder, chronic
bacterial infection or photophobia.

PMID: 9522124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Oncol Res. 1997;9(4):205-11.

Induction of proto-oncogenes during 3-deazaadenosine-stimulated differentiation
of 3T3-L1 fibroblasts to adipocytes: mimicry of insulin action.

Zeng G(1), Dave JR, Chiang PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Medical College of
Virginia, Richmond 23298-0614, USA.

3-Deazaadenosine (DZA) mimicked the molecular action of insulin in the induction 
of 3T3-L1 fibroblasts to differentiate into adipocytes. The molecular effects of 
DZA were compared with insulin, which served as a positive control, on the
expression of proto-oncogenes during the initial stage of differentiation of
3T3-L1 fibroblasts. Treatment of confluent 3T3-L1 fibroblasts with DZA or insulin
produced a rapid but-transient expression of mRNA for proto-oncogenes c-fos and
c-jun within 30-60 min. The mRNA of c-myc increased for 2 h and then decreased 4 
h after treatment. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed a heightened
increase in the appearance of transcription factors AP-1 and AP-2. The increase
was detectable as early as 1 h after the treatment with either DZA or insulin and
was maintained for 6 h. 3T3-L1 cells stably transfected with the promotor of
c-fos linked to a CAT reporter gene showed an increase in CAT activity in
response to DZA in a time- and dose-dependent manner. In cells stably transfected
with antisense c-fos, neither DZA nor insulin was able to induce a
differentiation response. The early transcription of c-fos, c-jun, and c-myc
proto-oncogenes and the increased expression of transcription factors AP-1 and
AP-2, induced by DZA and insulin, appear to be crucial events in the
differentiation of the 3T3-L1 fibroblasts to adipocytes.

PMID: 9268991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Free Radic Biol Med. 1997;23(2):314-20.

Transcriptional inhibition of manganese superoxide dismutase (SOD2) gene
expression by DNA methylation of the 5' CpG island.

Huang Y(1), Peng J, Oberley LW, Domann FE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) enzyme activity and SOD2 gene expression
have often been reported to decrease during the development of cancer. SOD2 has
also been implicated as a candidate tumor suppressor gene for human malignant
melanoma. Genomic DNA methylation patterns are also known to change during
carcinogenesis and serve as a mechanism for tumor suppressor gene inactivation.
We hypothesized that decreased SOD2 gene expression in some malignant cell
populations may be due, at least in part, to methylation of upstream
transcriptional regulatory sequences in the SOD2 gene. To test this hypothesis we
transfected methylated and unmethylated SOD/2-CAT promoter-reporter constructs in
cells known to express the SOD2 gene. Our results indicate that methylation of
specific cytokines in the SOD2 5' flanking region is sufficient to repress
transcriptional activity of the SOD2 promoter by at least 50%. Moreover, we show 
that this transcriptional repression was likely mediated by inhibition of AP-2
DNA binding and transactivation from a methylated AP-2 binding site in the SOD2
promoter. DNA methylation may provide a mechanism for transcriptional
inactivation of the SOD2 gene during the development of some cancers.

PMID: 9199894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Neuroscience. 1997 Jan;76(2):441-8.

Ketanserin selectively blocks acute stress-induced changes in NGFI-A and
mineralocorticoid receptor gene expression in hippocampal neurons.

Olsson T(1), Hakånsson A, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Umeå University Hospital, Sweden.

Serotonin and glucocorticoids interact at the hippocampus to alter neuronal
function. Serotonin and antidepressant drugs increase glucocorticoid receptor and
mineralocorticoid receptor gene expression in hippocampal neurons over a few
days. The effects of serotonin are mediated via ketanserin-sensitive "serotonin-2
type" receptors and induction of cyclic AMP, although the subsequent molecular
mechanisms are unclear. Recently, we have shown that chronic environmental
manipulations which induce glucocorticoid receptor gene expression in specific
hippocampal subfields of the rat are associated with congruent induction of the
transcription factor NGFI-A (zif268, krox24, egr-1) and repression of AP-2; both 
factors may bind to the glucocorticoid receptor gene promoter. However, any
relationship between serotonin and these transcription factors is unknown. Here, 
we show that acute restraint stress, which causes serotonin release at the
hippocampus, induces hipppocampal NGFI-A, but represses activator protein-2 and
mineralocorticoid receptor gene expression within 90 min. These changes are
sustained for 4 h, but not 12 h. Ketanserin attenuates the stress-induced rise in
NGFI-A and fall in mineralocorticoid receptor gene expression, and partly also
the fall in AP-2 messenger RNA expression. These data suggest that restraint
stress, acting via serotonin release and ketanserin-sensitive serotonin
receptors, produces rapid, transient and specific changes in transcription factor
gene expression in hippocampal neurons. Any link between these effects and the
control of glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor expression with chronic 
serotonin or antidepressant treatment remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 9015328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Dev Dyn. 1997 Jan;208(1):115-24.

Comparative analysis of AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta gene expression during murine
embryogenesis.

Moser M(1), Rüschoff J, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Germany.

Transcription factor AP-2 has been identified as playing important roles during
embryonic development of the neural tube, neural crest derivatives, skin, and
urogenital tissues. Recently, we isolated a second AP-2 transcription factor,
AP-2 beta, which is 76% homologous to the previously known AP-2 alpha gene, and
showed that both genes are coexpressed in murine embryos at day 13.5 and 15.5
post coitum (pc). In the current study, we used specific cRNA probes to study
comparatively AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta expression by in situ hybridization of
murine embryonic tissue sections. Our results reveal that expression of both
genes starts at day 8 pc in the lateral head mesenchyme and extraembryonic
trophoblast. The expression pattern was identical until day 10 pc but diverged
significantly during later stages of development. From day 11 forward, specific
expression patterns of AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta mRNA were observed. Specific AP-2
beta signals were detected in the midbrain, sympathetic ganglia, adrenal medulla,
and cornea. Specific AP-2 alpha signals were present in the limb buds, dorsal
root ganglia, tooth germs, and Moll's and Meibom's glands. In contrast,
expression of both genes occurred in skin, facial mesenchyme, spinal cord,
cerebellum, and renal tubular epithelia. Our results indicate that both genes are
expressed with different temporal and spatial patterns during embryonic
development.

PMID: 8989526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Nat Genet. 1997 Jan;15(1):78-82.

AP2 inhibits cancer cell growth and activates p21WAF1/CIP1 expression.

Zeng YX(1), Somasundaram K, el-Deiry WS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine and Genetics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

The 52-kD Activator Protein (AP2) is a DNA-binding transcription factor
implicated in signalling terminal differentiation. Profound developmental
abnormalities have been recently observed in AP2-null mice. The molecular events 
by which AP2 promotes differentiation or development are, however, unknown.
Increased expression of the universal cell cycle inhibitor p21WAF1/CIP1 occurs in
growth-arrested terminally differentiating cells. In a search for cellular
factors that could activate p21 during phorbol ester (TPA)-induced
differentiation, we identified AP2 as a regulator of p21 expression. Mutagenesis 
of an AP2 DNA-binding site within a p21 promoter-luciferase reporter inhibited
its activation by either AP2 transfection or TPA stimulation. Endogenous p21
protein levels were elevated and DNA synthesis was inhibited in AP2 versus
control vector-transfected cells. Overexpression of AP2 in HepG2 human
hepatoblastoma and SW480 human colon adenocarcinoma cells inhibited cell division
and stable colony formation. These results link the differentiation-associated
factor AP2 to negative cell cycle and growth control, possibly through p21
activation.

PMID: 8988173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 20;271(51):33074-82.

Functional dissection of the alpha and beta subunits of transcription factor
PEBP2 and the redox susceptibility of its DNA binding activity.

Kagoshima H(1), Akamatsu Y, Ito Y, Shigesada K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology,
Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan.
kshigesa@virus.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The mouse transcription factor PEBP2 is a heterodimer of two subunits: a DNA
binding subunit alpha and its partner subunit beta. The alpha subunit shares a
region of high homology, termed the Runt domain, with the products of the
Drosophila melanogaster segmentation gene runt and the human acute myeloid
leukemia-related gene AML1. To study the molecular basis for the DNA binding and 
heterodimerization functions of this factor, we constructed series of deletions
of the alpha and beta subunits and examined their activities by electrophoretic
mobility shift and affinity column assays. The minimal functional region of the
alpha subunit for DNA binding and dimerization was shown to coincide with the
Runt domain. On the other hand, the region of the beta subunit required for
heterodimerization was localized to the N-terminal 135 amino acids. Furthermore, 
it was found that the DNA binding activity of the Runt domain is regulated by a
reduction/oxidization (redox) mechanism and that its reductively activated state,
which is extremely labile, is stabilized by the beta subunit. These findings add 
a new layer to the mechanism and significance of the regulatory interplay between
the two subunits of PEBP2.

PMID: 8955155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Immunol. 1996 Dec 15;157(12):5411-21.

Cloning of the human platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 promoter and
its tissue-specific expression. Structural and functional characterization.

Almendro N(1), Bellón T, Rius C, Lastres P, Langa C, Corbí A, Bernabéu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center of Biological Investigations, High Council of
Scientific Investigations, Madrid, Spain.

Platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 (PECAM-1; CD31) is a cell adhesion 
molecule involved in transendothelial migration and expressed by hemopoietic and 
endothelial cells. To understand the mechanisms underlying its regulated
expression, a genomic clone containing 1555 bp of the 5'-flanking region and the 
first exon of the human PECAM-1 gene has been isolated. The 5'-flanking region of
the PECAM-1 gene lacks a consensus TATA box, but contains consensus motifs for
Sp1, EGR1, ets, helix-loop-helix (HLH) box, GATA, AP-2, C/EBP, YY1, CCACC, LyF-1,
imperfect octamer, heptamer, high mobility group proteins (HMG) box, and nuclear 
factor-kappaB, as well as shear stress-, retinoic acid-, glucocorticoid-, and
acute phase-responsive elements, and an Alu sequence. Successive 5' to 3' or 3'
to 5' deletions revealed tissue-specific promoter activity within the two
contiguous 0.22-kb NheI/BglII and 0.44-kb BglII/PstI fragments. The
transcriptional activity displayed by the 0.22-kb NheI/BglII fragment was
specific for the myeloid lineage, whereas the promoter activity of the 0.44-kb
BglII/PstI fragment was apparently restricted to endothelial cells. The
transcriptional activity of the 0.22-kb NheI/BglII fragment was confirmed by 5'
RACE (rapid amplification of 5' cDNA ends) and S1 nuclease protection experiments
that revealed previously unidentified transcription start sites. The 0.22-kb
NheI/BglII promoter exhibited PMA inducibility in myeloid cells and contained a
PMA-responsive element recognized by Sp1 and EGR-1 transcription factors.
Isolation and characterization of the human PECAM-1 promoter represent an initial
step in elucidating the controlled expression of the PECAM-1 gene.

PMID: 8955189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Dec 10;93(25):14586-91.

Activation of transcription factor AP-2 mediates UVA radiation- and singlet
oxygen-induced expression of the human intercellular adhesion molecule 1 gene.

Grether-Beck S(1), Olaizola-Horn S, Schmitt H, Grewe M, Jahnke A, Johnson JP,
Briviba K, Sies H, Krutmann J.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Photodermatology, Department of Dermatology,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

UVA radiation is the major component of the UV solar spectrum that reaches the
earth, and the therapeutic application of UVA radiation is increasing in
medicine. Analysis of the cellular effects of UVA radiation has revealed that
exposure of human cells to UVA radiation at physiological doses leads to
increased gene expression and that this UVA response is primarily mediated
through the generation of singlet oxygen. In this study, the mechanisms by which 
UVA radiation induces transcriptional activation of the human intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) were examined. UVA radiation was capable of inducing
activation of the human ICAM-1 promoter and increasing ICAM-1 mRNA and protein
expression. These UVA radiation effects were inhibited by singlet oxygen
quenchers, augmented by enhancement of singlet oxygen life-time, and mimicked in 
unirradiated cells by a singlet oxygen-generating system. UVA radiation as well
as singlet oxygen-induced ICAM-1 promoter activation required activation of the
transcription factor AP-2. Accordingly, both stimuli activated AP-2, and deletion
of the putative AP-2-binding site abrogated ICAM-1 promoter activation in this
system. This study identified the AP-2 site as the UVA radiation- and singlet
oxygen-responsive element of the human ICAM-1 gene. The capacity of UVA radiation
and/or singlet oxygen to induce human gene expression through activation of AP-2 
indicates a previously unrecognized role of this transcription factor in the
mammalian stress response.

PMCID: PMC26177
PMID: 8962096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 6;271(49):31269-76.

Characterization of an NF-1/CTF family member as a functional activator of the
mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat 5' enhancer.

Kusk P(1), John S, Fragoso G, Michelotti J, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Receptor Biology and Gene Expression, NCI, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-5055, USA. hagerg@dce41.nci.nih.gov

The long terminal repeat of the mouse mammary tumor virus restricts virus
expression primarily to the mammary epithelium. The extreme 5' end of the long
terminal repeat contains an enhancer that has been associated with
tissue-specific expression of the virus. A total of six functional cis-acting
elements have been identified in the enhancer. Although proteins binding to these
elements have been reported, only one has been identified; this factor, mp5, is
identical or closely related to the transcription factor AP-2
(Mellentin-Michelotti, J., John, S., Pennie, W. D., Williams, T., and Hager, G.
L. (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 31983-31990). The other factors are hitherto
unidentified and poorly described. We report here the characterization of another
of the six elements, previously referred to as the F3 site (Mink, S., Hartig, E.,
Jennewein, P., Doppler, W., and Cato, A. C. (1992) Mol. Cell Biol. 12,
4906-4918). We show that the F3 binding activity and AP-2 act synergistically to 
enhance mouse mammary tumor virus-directed transcription, but only in the
presence of glucocorticoid hormone. The F3 element has an NF-1-like half-site,
but the activity recognizing this element has binding characteristics distinct
from the NF-1/CTF family as well as the rest of the CCAAT-binding proteins. We
conclude that the F3 activity represents a new member of the NF-1/CTF family.

PMID: 8940131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;135(6 Pt 2):1801-14.

AP-2-containing clathrin coats assemble on mature lysosomes.

Traub LM(1), Bannykh SI, Rodel JE, Aridor M, Balch WE, Kornfeld S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Coat proteins appear to play a general role in intracellular protein trafficking 
by coordinating a membrane budding event with cargo selection. Here we show that 
the AP-2 adaptor, a clathrin-associated coat-protein complex that nucleates
clathrin-coated vesicle formation at the cell surface, can also initiate the
assembly of normal polyhedral clathrin coats on dense lysosomes under
physiological conditions in vitro. Clathrin coat formation on lysosomes is
temperature dependent, displays an absolute requirement for ATP, and occurs in
both semi-intact cells and on purified lysosomes, suggesting that clathrin-coated
vesicles might regulate retrograde membrane traffic out of the lysosomal
compartment.

PMCID: PMC2133961
PMID: 8991092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Dec;26(12):3170-8.

Characterization of the expression and gene promoter of CD22 in murine B cells.

Andersson KB(1), Draves KE, Magaletti DM, Fujioka S, Holmes KL, Law CL, Clark EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195-7242, USA.

CD22 is a B cell-restricted surface molecule which may play an important role in 
interactions between B cells and other cells and in regulating signals through
the B cell receptor (BCR) complex. Here we have examined whether the mouse is a
suitable in vivo model for studying CD22 functions. In primary and secondary
lymphoid organs of adult mice CD22 is on all mature B cells, including resting
IgM+IgD+ B cells, IgG+ HSA(lo) memory B cells, syndecan+ plasma cells and CD5+ B 
cells, but it is not on immature IgM+IgD- B cells. Biochemical analysis revealed 
that murine CD22 is associated with the IgM receptor in some, but not all, CD22+ 
B leukemic and lymphoma cell lines; as with human CD22, murine CD22 is rapidly
phosphorylated on tyrosine after ligation of the BCR. In the CD22- murine pro-B
cell line, FEMCL, CD22 expression was inducible by treatment with phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate. A genomic fragment of the cd22b allele containing 1.3 kb
5' of exon 1 was sequenced in order to identify potential DNA regulatory elements
in the CD22 promoter region. Consensus sequences for transcription factor binding
sites including PU.1, AP-1, AP-2, C/EBP and SP-1 were present, but no classical
TATA elements or initiator motifs were evident at relevant positions. The 1.3-kb 
promoter fragment 5' of exon 1 was sufficient for directing basal promoter
activity in B and T cells. There was no significant sequence similarity between
the murine and human cd22 gene promoters, although both contain repetitive
elements and Sp-1 and AP1 binding sites. Thus, murine CD22 shares a number of
features with human CD22 and the mouse provides a suitable model system for
elucidating the function of CD22 in vivo.

PMID: 8977319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Dec;10(12):1549-60.

Characterization of the human mineralocorticoid receptor gene 5'-regulatory
region: evidence for differential hormonal regulation of two alternative
promoters via nonclassical mechanisms.

Zennaro MC(1), Le Menuet D, Lombès M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 246, Institut Féderatif de Recherche Cellules Epithéliales Faculté de
Médecine Xavier Bichat, Paris, France.

The mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) is a ligand-dependent transcription factor
involved in the regulation of sodium homeostasis. Two distinct mRNA isoforms of
the human MR (hMR) differing in their untranslated 5'-ends have recently been
identified, suggesting the existence of alternative promoters. To eludicate the
regulatory mechanisms controlling hMR gene expression, we have isolated and
characterized approximately 15 kb of hMR 5'-flanking region. Various deletion
mutants of regions located immediately upstream of the untranslated exons 1 alpha
and 1 beta (P1: 1 kb and P2: 1.7 kb, respectively) were inserted into a
luciferase reporter gene and used in transient transfection experiments in CV-1
and human differentiated renal H5 cells. Both regions were shown to possess
significant functional promoter activity, more pronounced in renal cells,
although P1 directed higher levels of basal transcription. Cotransfection
experiments with hMR or human glucocorticoid receptor (hGR) revealed that, while 
both promoters were glucocorticoid inducible, only the distal P2 promoter was
stimulated by aldosterone in a dose- and hMR-dependent manner. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that hMR and hGR are able to synergistically activate the P2
promoter, consistent with cooperativity between the two transduction pathways.
Mineralocorticoid induction was localized to a region between -318 and +123 bp of
P2. This region does not contain any consensus hormone responsive element, and
direct binding of hMR to this DNA sequence was not observed, indicating that
mineralocorticoid-induced transcriptional enhancement is mediated by nonclassical
mechanisms. On the other hand, Sp1 and AP-2 bind to definite sequences on both
promoters, suggesting that they represent important regulators of hMR promoter
activity. Our results indicate that hMR gene expression is under the control of
complex regulatory mechanisms involving alternative promoters and differential
hormonal control, which might allow tissue-specific modulation of aldosterone
action.

PMID: 8961265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Neuroscience. 1996 Dec;75(3):757-75.

Dopaminergic regulation of AP-1 transcription factor DNA binding activity in rat 
striatum.

Huang KX(1), Walters JR.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1406, USA.

Dopaminergic modulation of the DNA binding activity of AP-1, Sp1, CREB and AP-2
transcription factors was examined in rat striatal nuclear extracts by gel shift 
assay. AP-1 binding was selectively increased in the striatum following depletion
of dopamine by 6-hydroxydopamine-induced lesion of the nigrostriatal pathway or
after reserpine treatment. The D1 agonist SKF 38393 dose-dependently increased
AP-1 binding; this effect was significantly increased in reserpine-treated rats
and even more markedly enhanced in denervated striatum. The D2/D3 agonist
quinpirole, administered alone, did not affect striatal activator protein-1
binding; in combination, quinpirole and SKF 38393 acted synergistically in normal
and reserpine-treated rats but not in 6-hydroxydopamine-lesioned rats, suggesting
that mechanisms underlying D1-D2/D3 interactions are altered after dopamine
denervation. Most, but not all, of the changes in AP-1 binding activity observed 
in this study are consistent with changes in levels of Fos/Jun family proteins
observed after similar treatments. These results support the hypothesis that D1
receptor stimulation activates striatonigral neurons and modulates expression of 
AP-1-related genes in these neurons, while D2 receptor stimulation mediates tonic
inhibition of AP-1 expression and activity in the striatopallidal neurons.
Moreover, the findings provide evidence that the loss of dopaminergic input to
the striatum, as occurs in Parkinson's disease, induces long-lasting alterations 
in the regulation of striatal gene expression which may contribute to the
disease's progress.

PMID: 8951871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Endocrinology. 1996 Dec;137(12):5407-14.

Human stem cell factor promoter deoxyribonucleic acid sequence and regulation by 
cyclic 3',5'-adenosine monophosphate in a Sertoli cell line.

Taylor WE(1), Najmabadi H, Strathearn M, Jou NT, Liebling M, Rajavashisth T,
Chanani N, Phung L, Bhasin S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Molecular Medicine, Charles R. Drew
University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles, California 90059, USA.

Stem cell factor (SCF) gene expression is regulated by FSH in testicular Sertoli 
cells. Many functions of FSH are mediated through the second messenger cAMP. We
show that cAMP activates transcription of the human SCF promoter in a Sertoli
cell line. The human SCF promoter was cloned in cosmid vector pWE15, and its DNA 
sequence was determined for the promoter region extending 2.3 kilobase pairs
upstream from the translation start site at +184 bp. The in vivo messenger RNA
(mRNA) start site, by primer-extension studies, was located in exon 1 at +109 bp 
in human testis mRNA, and at +99 bp in mouse SF7 Sertoli cell line or GC1 germ
cell line mRNA. To test which regions of the SCF promoter are necessary for
regulation by cAMP, a series of 5'-end deletions of this region were cloned onto 
the luciferase reporter gene in plasmid pXP1. The SCF promoter region was fused
to luciferase downstream (at +120) from its +109 mRNA start site, extending
upstream a variable distance to BstXI (-162), BamHI (-313), Bgl2 (-853), or XbaI 
(-2185). The shortest of these fragments extending only to -162 bp, contains
possible SP1 and AP-2 elements. When mouse Sertoli SF7 or human JEG.3 cell lines 
were transfected with these plasmids, all of the mutants were regulated by
8Br-cAMP or forskolin, as expected for the SCF gene, whereas FSH and TPA had no
effect. In the shortest promoter deletion -162, luciferase expression from SF7
cells in serum-free media was at a moderate basal level, but it was induced in
six h about 2-fold by 8Br-cAMP, and over 7-fold by forskolin (an adenylate
cyclase activator) to high levels, similar to the SV40 positive control promoter.
In SCF-luc plasmids extending to -853 or -2185, luciferase expression was still
inducible by 8Br-cAMP and forskolin to high levels, but basal promoter activity
was repressed to levels over 15-fold lower, in both the absence or presence of
testosterone in the media for SF7 cells. The distal portion of the human SCF
promoter (between -313 and -853, and also -853 and -2185) inhibits the basal
level of transcription, while the proximal region (5' of -162) can mediate
activation by cAMP.

PMID: 8940364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Neurosci. 1996 Dec 1;16(23):7550-6.

Transcription factor AP-2 regulates human apolipoprotein E gene expression in
astrocytoma cells.

García MA(1), Vázquez J, Giménez C, Valdivieso F, Zafra F.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid, Spain.

Apolipoprotein E (apoE), one of the major plasma lipoproteins, also is expressed 
in a variety of cell types, including the glial cells of the nervous system. apoE
is involved in processes of degeneration and regeneration after nerve lesions as 
well as in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Glial synthesis of apoE 
is activated in response to injury both in the peripheral and central nervous
system. We now report that the activity of the proximal apoE promoter in
astrocytes is upregulated by cAMP and retinoic acid, which act synergistically.
Sequence analysis of the apoE promoter indicated the presence of several AP-2
consensus sequences that could mediate the stimulatory effect of cAMP and
retinoic acid. The possible functional role of AP-2 was examined by
cotransfection of AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells with an apoE promoter construct and 
a human AP-2 expression construct. Cotransfection with AP-2 significantly
elevated apoE promoter activity. DNase I footprinting technique revealed the
existence of two binding sites for recombinant AP-2 in regions from -48 to -74
and from -107 to -135 of the apoE promoter. Mutations in these regions markedly
impaired the trans-stimulatory effect of AP-2. These results indicate the
existence of functional AP-2 sites in the promoter region of apoE that could
contribute to the complex regulation of this gene in developmental, degenerative,
and regenerative processess of the nervous system.

PMID: 8922411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cell Immunol. 1996 Nov 25;174(1):99-105.

Prostaglandin E2 induction of binding activity to CRE and AP-2 elements in human 
T lymphocytes.

Micali A(1), Medici N, Sottile A, Venza M, Venza I, Nigro V, Puca GA, Teti D.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Generale, Universita degli Studi di Messina, Italy.

Prostaglandins of the E series are immunomodulatory agents which exert inhibitory
as well as stimulatory effects on a variety of immune responses. Since it is
known that PGE2 is able to increase cAMP levels, we investigated whether it can
affect gene expression through the activation of the transcription factors which 
bind enhancer elements in the promoter regions of cAMP-regulated genes. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we demonstrated that a short treatment of
human T lymphocytes with PGE2 induces specific binding activity to CRE and AP-2, 
but not AP-1, DNA elements. Since the okadaic acid, a potent protein phosphatase 
inhibitor, prolongs the induction of the binding activity, phosphorylation events
are likely to occur. This activity seems to be due to increased cAMP levels
because forskolin and IBMX mimic the effects of PGE2. More interestingly,
transfection experiments with CRE-CAT plasmide show that PGE2 activates the
transcription of a CRE-containing promoter. These data support the positive role 
for PGE2 on some immune functions.

PMID: 8929459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cell. 1996 Nov 15;87(4):697-708.

The CBFbeta subunit is essential for CBFalpha2 (AML1) function in vivo.

Wang Q(1), Stacy T, Miller JD, Lewis AF, Gu TL, Huang X, Bushweller JH, Bories
JC, Alt FW, Ryan G, Liu PP, Wynshaw-Boris A, Binder M, Marín-Padilla M, Sharpe
AH, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

The CBFbeta subunit is the non-DNA-binding subunit of the heterodimeric
core-binding factor (CBF). CBFbeta associates with DNA-binding CBFalpha subunits 
and increases their affinity for DNA. Genes encoding the CBFbeta subunit (CBFB)
and one of the CBFalpha subunits (CBFA2, otherwise known as AML1) are the most
frequent targets of chromosomal translocations in acute leukemias in humans. We
and others previously demonstrated that homozygous disruption of the mouse Cbfa2 
(AML1) gene results in embryonic lethality at midgestation due to hemorrhaging in
the central nervous system and blocks fetal liver hematopoiesis. Here we
demonstrate that homozygous mutation of the Cbfb gene results in the same
phenotype. Our results demonstrate that the CBFbeta subunit is required for
CBFalpha2 function in vivo.

PMID: 8929538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 15;271(46):28727-30.

Eps15 is a component of clathrin-coated pits and vesicles and is located at the
rim of coated pits.

Tebar F(1), Sorkina T, Sorkin A, Ericsson M, Kirchhausen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA. Alexander.Sorkin@USHSC.edu

Eps15, a phosphorylation substrate of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor 
kinase, has been shown to bind to the alpha-subunit of the clathrin-associated
protein complex AP-2. Here we report that in cells, virtually all Eps15 interacts
with the cytosol and membrane-bound forms of AP-2. This association is not
affected by the treatment of cells with EGF. Immunofluorescence microscopy
reveals nearly absolute co-localization of Eps15 with AP-2 and clathrin, and
analysis by immunoelectron microscopy shows that the localization of
membrane-associated Eps15 is restricted to the profiles corresponding to
endocytic coated pits and vesicles. Unexpectedly, Eps15 was found at the edge of 
forming coated pits and at the rim of budding coated vesicles. This asymmetric
distribution is in sharp contrast to the localization of AP-2 that shows an even 
distribution along the same types of clathrin-coated structures. These findings
suggest several possible regulatory roles of Eps15 during the formation of coated
pits.

PMID: 8910509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Nov 12;228(2):524-9.

Promoter analysis of a human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase.

Ciaccio PJ(1), Walsh ES, Tew KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA. RAHPJC@RohmHaas.com

The 5' flanking region of a human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DDH) gene was
isolated and sequenced from bp +124 to -1161. It contains putative binding sites 
for liver specific factors including NF-IL6 and HNF-5 sites and AP-1, AP-2 and NF
kappa B-like sites. Sequence analysis identified this gene as a type II DDH.
Reporter analysis of deletion constructs transfected in HepG2 cells identified
negative regulatory regions and a minimal promoter (-104 to +65) containing two
AP-2 sites in tandem.

PMID: 8920946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Biol Chem. 1996 Nov 8;271(45):28458-62.

Selective transcription factor induction in retinal pigment epithelial cells
during photoreceptor phagocytosis.

Ershov AV(1), Lukiw WJ, Bazan NG.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center and Department of Ophthalmology, Louisiana State
University Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, USA. nbazan@lsumc.edu

Expression of early response genes during rod outer segment phagocytosis by
normal Long Evans and Royal College of Surgeons-rdy+p+ rats and by dystrophic
Royal College of Surgeons-p+ rat retinal pigment epithelial cells was studied in 
primary cell culture. Northern analysis revealed that the abundance of zif-268
(egr-1), c-fos, and tis-1 (NGF1-B) mRNA was rapidly and transiently increased in 
normal retinal pigment epithelial cells during rod outer segment phagocytosis but
not during phagocytosis of latex particles. No increase in gene expression was
found in Royal College of Surgeons-p+ dystrophic retinal pigment epithelial cells
challenged with rod outer segments. As shown by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, a prominent short term increase in the intensity of the gel-shifted band
was detected using nuclear protein extracts derived from rod outer
segment-challenged, control retinal pigment epithelial cells and zif-268, AP-1,
AP-2, or tis-1 consensus oligonucleotides. No such increase was detected when
using nuclear factor kappaB consensus oligonucleotide or when the early response 
gene prostaglandin H synthase-2 mRNA was measured over the time course studied.
The results suggest that in retinal pigment epithelial cells, rod outer
segment-specific phagocytosis is accompanied by the selective expression of early
response genes coding for transcription factors. The specific pattern of the
induction of these transcription factors is predicted to modulate the expression 
of gene cascades.

PMID: 8910472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Nature. 1996 Nov 7;384(6604):6-7.

'Ambition and impatience' blamed for fraud.

Macilwain C.

PMID: 8900256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. EMBO J. 1996 Nov 1;15(21):5789-95.

Sequence requirements for the recognition of tyrosine-based endocytic signals by 
clathrin AP-2 complexes.

Boll W(1), Ohno H, Songyang Z, Rapoport I, Cantley LC, Bonifacino JS, Kirchhausen
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We recently determined that fusion proteins containing tyrosine-based endocytic
signals bind to the mu 2 subunit of AP-2, the complex that drives clathrin coat
formation and mediates endocytosis from the plasma membrane. Here we analyze the 
selectivity of peptide recognition by mu 2 and by AP-2 using combinatorial
selection methods and surface plasmon resonance. Both mu 2 and AP-2 are shown to 
interact with various sequences of the form tyrosine-polar-polar-hydrophobic
(Yppø) found on receptors that follow the clathrin pathway. The optimal sequence 
for interaction with mu 2 and with AP-2 has tyrosine as an anchor and prefers
arginine at position Y + 2 and leucine at position Y + 3. In contrast, no
preferred sequence is detected surrounding the Yppø signal, indicating that
recognition of the Yppø endocytic signal does not require a prefolded structure. 
We conclude that sorting into the endocytic pathway is governed by a surprisingly
simple interaction between the mu 2 chain and a tyrosine-containing tetrapeptide 
sequence.

PMCID: PMC452326
PMID: 8918456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Oct 29;93(22):12359-63.

Absence of fetal liver hematopoiesis in mice deficient in transcriptional
coactivator core binding factor beta.

Sasaki K(1), Yagi H, Bronson RT, Tominaga K, Matsunashi T, Deguchi K, Tani Y,
Kishimoto T, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Core binding factor beta (CBF beta) is considered to be a transcriptional
coactivator that dimerizes with transcription factors core binding factor alpha 1
(CBFA1), -2, and -3, and enhances DNA binding capacity of these transcription
factors. CBF beta and CBFA2, which is also called acute myeloid leukemia 1 gene, 
are frequently involved in chromosomal translocations in human leukemia. To
elucidate the function of CBF beta, mice carrying a mutation in the Cbfb locus
were generated. Homozygous mutant embryos died between embryonic days 11.5-13.5
due to hemorrhage in the central nervous system. Mutant embryos had primitive
erythropoiesis in yolk sac but lacked definitive hematopoiesis in fetal liver. In
the yolk sac of mutant embryos, no erythroid or myeloid progenitors of definitive
hematopoietic origin were detected, and the expression of flk-2/flt-3, the marker
gene for early precursor cells of definitive hematopoiesis, was absent. These
data suggest that Cbfb is essential for definitive hematopoiesis in liver,
especially for the commitment to early hematopoietic precursor cells.

PMCID: PMC37996
PMID: 8901586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 18;271(42):26062-6.

Genomic organization and the 5' flanking region of the gamma subunit of the human
amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel.

Thomas CP(1), Doggett NA, Fisher R, Stokes JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA 52242-1081, USA.

The amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) complex is made up of at
least three different subunits alpha, beta, and gamma, which are developmentally 
regulated, selectively expressed, and variously up-regulated by steroid hormones.
To understand mechanisms involved in regulation of the gamma subunit, we have
determined the structure of the human gammaENaC gene. By 5' rapid amplification
of cDNA ends, primer extension analysis, and nuclease protection assay, we
identified transcription start sites in human brain, kidney, and lung. A human
genomic library was screened and overlapping cosmid clones that span
approximately 50 kilobases and contain the hgammaENaC gene were identified. The
5'-untranslated region is 141 bases long, and the translation start codon is
contained within the second exon. The human gene spans at least 35 kilobases. The
5' end of the gene including portions of 5' flanking genomic DNA and the first
intron are G + C rich and contain several CpG dinucleotides, consistent with a
CpG island. The 5' flanking region contains no CCAAT or TATA-like elements but
does contain two GC boxes as well as several putative transcription factor
binding sites including AP-2, Sp1, CRE, PEA-3, and NF-IL6. This is the first
description of the structural organization and the 5' flanking region of a member
of the epithelial sodium channel complex.

PMID: 8824247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 18;271(42):25994-8.

Suppression of stellate cell type I collagen gene expression involves AP-2
transmodulation of nuclear factor-1-dependent gene transcription.

Chen A(1), Beno DW, Davis BH.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Section, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The regulation of collagen gene expression was studied in culture-activated rat
hepatic stellate cells, the fibrogenic effector cell involved in hepatic
fibrogenesis. Treatment of cells with a 5-lipoxygenase-specific inhibitor caused 
a reduction in alphaI(I) collagen mRNA transcript abundance, which suggested that
leukotriene production was involved in maintaining the activated cell's high
level of collagen mRNA production. The underlying mechanism involved a decrease
in collagen gene transcription. Suppression of gene transcription was localized
to an nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) binding domain in the proximal promoter and an AP-2
binding domain adjacent to it. Gel retardation assays demonstrated that an
increase in AP-2 binding adjacent to the NF-1 site was likely to be the
transmodulator responsible for the suppression of the NF-1-dependent gene
expression. The data suggest that post-translational alterations in AP-2 activity
are responsible for this unappreciated mechanism of regulating the collagen gene.

PMID: 8824237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Oncogene. 1996 Oct 17;13(8):1701-7.

A family of AP-2 proteins regulates c-erbB-2 expression in mammary carcinoma.

Bosher JM(1), Totty NF, Hsuan JJ, Williams T, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Transcription Laboratory, ICRF Oncology Unit, Hammersmith Hospital,
London, UK.

The proto-oncogene c-erbB-2 is overexpressed in 25-30% of breast cancers through 
increased transcription and amplification of the gene. We have previously
described a factor, OB2-1 which upregulates c-erbB-2 transcription and which is
closely related to the developmentally regulated transcription factor, AP-2.
Further analysis of affinity purified OB2-1 has now shown that it is in fact a
combination of proteins from three AP-2-related genes, the previously described
AP-2alpha gene and two new human family members, AP-2beta and AP-2gamma whose
cloning and characterisation are described here. All three AP-2 proteins show a
high degree of homology and are capable of binding to the c-erbB-2 promoter as
homo- or heterodimers. The three proteins can also activate a c-erbB-2 reporter
construct, but AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma are 3-4 times more active in this regard
than AP-2beta. In addition both AP-2alpha and AP-2gamma are expressed at elevated
levels in the majority of c-erbB-2 overexpressing mammary tumour lines examined. 
Mechanisms which may have led to the increased AP-2 levels in these cells are
discussed.

PMID: 8895516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 11;271(41):25498-505.

Structure and characterization of the human tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases-2 gene.

Hammani K(1), Blakis A, Morsette D, Bowcock AM, Schmutte C, Henriet P, DeClerck
YA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90054-0700, USA.

We report here the characterization of the human tissue inhibitor of
metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP-2) gene. The gene is 83 kilobase pairs (kb) long with 
exon-intron splicing sites located in preserved positions among the three members
of the TIMP family. A 2.6-kb genomic DNA fragment flanking the 5'-end of the gene
contains several regulatory elements including five Sp1, two AP-2, one AP-1, and 
three PEA-3 binding sites. Despite the presence of a complete AP-1 consensus at
position -281, the promoter did not respond to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate treatment. However,
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate response was generated by insertion of a
similar AP-1 consensus at position -71, indicating the importance of the
positioning of this motif. The promoter contains a typical CpG island; however,
methylation of this island did not seem to influence gene expression. Analysis of
the 3'-end of the gene revealed that the two mRNAs for TIMP-2 (1.2 and 3.8 kb)
differ by the selection of their polyadenylation signal sites, but selection of
these sites does not affect RNA stability. In summary, the TIMP-2 gene has
several features observed in housekeeping genes, and differs significantly from
TIMP-1 and TIMP-3 genes. These differences are likely to explain the specific
roles that these inhibitors play in the regulation of matrix metalloproteinases.

PMID: 8810321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Oct;10(10):1227-37.

Dexamethasone stimulation of rat insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
promoter activity involves multiple cis-elements.

Suh DS(1), Zhou Y, Ooi GT, Rechler MM.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892,
USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) modulates the mitogenic
actions of IGF-I and IGF-II. Dexamethasone increases IGFBP-1 mRNA abundance and
gene transcription in rat liver and in H4-II-E rat hepatoma cells. A
glucocorticoid response element (GRE) located at nucleotide (nt) -91/-77 is
required for dexamethasone to stimulate rat IGFBP-1 promoter activity in
transient transfection assays in H4-II-E cells. Mutagenesis of nt -108/-99 (the
M4 region of the insulin response element), however, decreased
dexamethasone-stimulated promoter activity despite the presence of an intact GRE,
suggesting that regulatory sites in addition to the GRE were required for optimal
dexamethasone stimulation. To identify these sites, we introduced 5'-deletion and
substitution mutations into rat IGFBP-1 promoter fragments coupled to a
luciferase reporter gene and transfected these constructs into H4-II-E cells.
Three sites are required for optimal basal promoter activity: a site (nt -62/-50)
that binds the liver-enriched transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
(HNF-1), the M4 site, and a putative binding site for transcription factor AP-2
(nt -293/-286). The HNF-1 and M4 sites and an upstream site (nt -252/-236) are
also involved in dexamethasone stimulation under some, but not all,
circumstances. Mutation of either the HNF-1 site or the M4 site decreased
dexamethasone stimulation by more than 80% in constructs whose 5'-end was at nt
-92, -135, or -235 but not if the 5' -end was at nt -278 or -327. These results
suggest that the nt -278/-236 region can compensate for the loss of the HNF-1
site or the M4 site but that the HNF-1 and M4 sites do not compensate for each
other in constructs whose 5'-end was at nt -135 or -235, which lack the nt
-278/-236 region. The site within the nt -278/-236 region was localized to nt
-252/-236 by deoxyribonuclease I protection and transfection assays. Thus,
several cis-elements in the rat IGFBP-1 promoter cooperate, in varying
combinations, with the low-affinity GRE to allow optimal dexamethasone-stimulated
promoter activity.

PMID: 9121490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Bioessays. 1996 Oct;18(10):785-8.

Craniofacial defects in AP-2 null mutant mice.

Morriss-Kay GM(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Dept of Physiology, Denver
80262, USA.

AP-2 is a recent significant addition to the list of transcription factors that
have been demonstrated by targeted gene disruption to be essential for normal
development. Two recent reports of AP-2 null mutant mice indicate that AP-2 holds
a key position in the network of genes and proteins controlling developmental
pattern and morphogenesis, and that it is particularly important for development 
of the cranial region and for midline fusions.

PMID: 8885715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Virology. 1996 Oct 1;224(1):206-13.

Activation of the HTLV-I long terminal repeat by the hepatitis B virus X protein.

Marriott SJ(1), Lee TH, Slagle BL, Butel JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Virology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA. susanm@bcm.tmc.edu

The human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) Tax protein and the hepatitis B
virus (HBV) X protein have each been shown to activate transcription of their
respective viral promoters as well as a subset of cellular gene promoters. Here
we show that the HTLV-I long terminal repeat (LTR) is responsive to HBV X
transactivation. Maximum levels of X-mediated transactivation of the LTR were
8-fold. An X-responsive-region (XRR) of the LTR is located between nucleotides
-355 and -276 and contains an AP-2 binding site, a previously recognized
X-responsive element. We demonstrated that Tax and X synergize to activate
transcription from the HTLV-I LTR, although the AP-2 binding site was not
required for this synergy. These results raise the possibility that the HBV X
protein may affect the level of HTLV-I gene expression in co-infected
individuals.

PMID: 8862415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Sep 24;226(3):645-9.

Quantitative analysis of the transcription factor AP2 binding to DNA by atomic
force microscopy.

Nettikadan S(1), Tokumasu F, Takeyasu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210,
USA.

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) allows to study the molecular structure of
biological macromolecules with nm to A resolutions without crystallization. We
show here the applicability of AFM in the quantitative analysis of the molecular 
mechanisms of DNA/protein interaction: (i) Protein-binding sites can be mapped
over a few kilobases of target DNA. (ii) Multimerization state of DNA-binding
proteins can be determined simply by measuring the sizes of proteins bound to the
DNA. These features are significant advantages over the capabilities provided by 
conventional techniques in biochemistry and molecular and structural biology.

PMID: 8831670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 20;271(38):23154-60.

Identification of a functional determinant of differentiation-dependent
expression in the involucrin gene.

LaPres JJ(1), Hudson LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern
University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Involucrin is an integral component of the cornified envelope which is a
characteristic feature of the differentiated keratinocyte. Involucrin expression 
is tightly linked to the onset of differentiation and first expressed in the
immediate suprabasal layers of the epidermis. We have identified a
transcriptional response element within the distal 5'-flanking region of the
involucrin gene which contributes to differentiation-dependent expression.
Deletion of this site impairs differentiation-dependent promoter activity in
transient transfection analysis, and conversely, this region imparts
differentiation-dependent expression to a heterologous promoter. The identified
site bears sequence similarity to several AP2-like response elements identified
in keratinocyte-specific genes and binds a protein complex (keratinocyte
differentiation factor, KDF-1) which is distinct from AP2 by several criteria.
The migration of KDF-1 is distinct from AP2 in electrophoretic mobility shift
assays, KDF-1 is antigenically unrelated to AP2 since AP2 specific antibodies do 
not supershift the KDF-1-DNA complex and KDF-1 is poorly competed by
oligonucleotides representing consensus AP2 recognition sequences. In addition,
the KDF-1 complex is not detected in nuclear extracts derived from human dermal
fibroblasts or an enriched population of basal keratinocytes. These findings
provide insights to the underlying basis of differentiation-dependent expression 
of a keratinocyte specific gene.

PMID: 8798509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Transplantation. 1996 Sep 15;62(5):653-8.

Cytomegalovirus modulates interleukin-6 gene expression.

Geist LJ(1), Dai LY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Iowa School of Medicine, Iowa City
52242, USA.

Complications after lung transplantation include the development of rejection and
an increased incidence of infection, particularly with cytomegalovirus (CMV).
Several recent studies have suggested that interleukin (IL)-6 may be used to
detect both infection and rejection after lung transplantation. In addition, IL-6
may play a role in the development of bronchiolitis obliterans after
transplantation. Because CMV is also associated with the development of
bronchiolitis obliterans after transplantation, we determined whether CMV induces
IL-6 gene expression. We demonstrated that CMV infection increased both IL-6
protein and mRNA in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We also demonstrated that
the CMV immediate early 1 gene product increased expression of the IL-6 promoter.
This effect of the CMV immediate early 1 gene product was dependent upon the
presence of specific transcription factor binding sites in the IL-6 promoter.
These studies demonstrate that CMV may be an important cofactor in the
development of rejection and infection after transplantation through its effects 
on IL-6.

PMID: 8830832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Biochem Mol Biol Int. 1996 Sep;40(1):43-51.

Identification of an AP-2 element in the -323 to -285 region of the TNF-alpha
gene.

Kroeger KM(1), Abraham LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia.

We have identified a region of the human TNF-alpha promoter between nucleotides
-323 and -285, capable of influencing transcriptional activity. This region
encompasses the -308 polymorphism and contains a 10 bp sequence homologous to the
consensus binding site of activator protein-2 (AP-2). Protein complexes derived
from U937 and Jurkat cells were found to bind to this element. Competitive EMSA
using a consensus AP-2 oligonucleotide indicated that AP-2 may be involved.
Functional assays demonstrate that this region can repress activity of a
heterologous promoter in the Jurkat T-cell line, but act as an inducible enhancer
of transcription in U937 cells.

PMID: 8886268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Genomics. 1996 Sep 1;36(2):296-304.

Human gene encoding prostacyclin synthase (PTGIS): genomic organization,
chromosomal localization, and promoter activity.

Yokoyama C(1), Yabuki T, Inoue H, Tone Y, Hara S, Hatae T, Nagata M, Takahashi
EI, Tanabe T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
Suita, Osaka, 565, Japan.

The prostacyclin synthase gene isolated from human genomic libraries (PTGIS)
consists of 10 exons spanning approximately 60 kb. All the splice donor and
acceptor sites conform to the GT/AG rule. Genomic Southern blot and fluorescence 
in situ hybridization analyses revealed that the human prostacyclin synthase gene
is present as a single copy per haploid genome and is localized on chromosome
20q13. 11-q13.13. The 1.5-kb sequence of the 5'-upstream of the translational
initiation site contained both GC-rich and pyrimidine-rich regions and consensus 
sequences of the transcription factor recognition sites such as Sp1, AP-2, the
interferon-gamma response element, GATA, NF-kappaB, the CACCC box, and the
glucocorticoid response element. The core binding sequence (GAGACC) of the shear 
stress responsive element was also found in the 5'-flanking region of the gene.
The major product of the primer extension analysis suggested that the
transcription of the gene started from the positions around 49 bp upstream of the
translational initiation codon. Transient transfection experiments using human
aortic and bovine arterial endothelial cells demonstrated that the GC-rich region
(positions -145 to -10) possessed a significant promoter activity. The 6-kb
downstream sequence of the translational termination codon contained multiple
polyadenylation signals, Alu repeat sequences, and the consensus sequence of the 
primate-repetitive DNA element, MER1. Two sizes of the prostacyclin synthase
mRNAs (approximately 6 and 3.3 kb) were detected with the human aorta and lung.
RNA blot hybridization analysis using the 3'-untranslated region as probe
indicated that the sizes of the 3'-flanking regions were different in the major
6-kb and minor 3.3-kb mRNAs.

PMID: 8812456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Leukemia. 1996 Sep;10(9):1479-85.

The gene product of CBFB-MYH11.

Claxton D(1), Xie QS, Patel S, Deisseroth AB, Kornblau S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, USA.

The inversion(16)(p13;q22) gives rise to chimeric transcripts CBFB-MYH11. To date
however, no reports have described the full length coding sequence cloned from
patient material or the protein product derived from transcripts. We describe
here the cloning and sequencing of the coding region of the fusion gene (type A) 
from patient cells. The sequence is identical to the included portions of the
normal constituent transcripts. We report the study of CBFB and CBFB-MYH11
protein using two anti-CBFB antisera. Twenty-two cases of inv(16) leukemia and a 
number of other cases of AML were examined. The predicted 70 kDa type A or 95 kDa
type D CBFB-MYH11 peptide was detected in 20/22 cases of inv(16) AML. CBFB was
expressed as a 21 kDa protein in all samples studied, including hematopoietic
cell lines of all major lineages.

PMID: 8751466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Int Immunol. 1996 Aug;8(8):1205-11.

The genomic structure and chromosomal localization of the mouse STAT3 gene.

Shi W(1), Inoue M, Minami M, Takeda K, Matsumoto M, Matsuda Y, Kishimoto T, Akira
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Osaka University, Japan.

A variety of cytokines induce the tyrosine phosphorylation of signal transducers 
and activators of transcription (STATs). Activation of the same STAT proteins by 
distinct cytokines and activation of different STAT proteins by each cytokine are
thought to contribute to redundancy and pleiotropy of cytokine actions
respectively. STAT3 is rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated in response to IL-6,
ciliary neurotrophic factor, oncostatin M, leukemia inhibitory factor, IL-11,
granulocyte colony stimulation factor and epidermal growth factor. In this report
we have isolated and characterized the mouse genomic structure of STAT3. The
mouse STAT3 gene consisted of 24 exons which spanned > 37 kb. The structure of
the mouse STAT3 gene was almost identical to that of the human STAT2 gene,
including the number and size of exons, indicating that the exon-intron
organization had already been accomplished before these two genes duplicated, and
then these genes evolved to respond to different ligands. By molecular linkage
analysis with interspecific backcross mice the STAT3 gene mapped at 1.4 cM
proximal to D11Mit59 on mouse chromosome 11. The promoter region contained
potential regulatory elements such as GATA, NF-IL-6, PEBP2, Sp-1, AP-2 binding
sites, cAMP response element, CAAT box and E-box. Transient expression of
constructs harboring the 5' flanking region of the STAT3 gene fused to the
luciferase gene showed that a 160 bp sequence upstream of the transcription start
site conferred a basal and an IL-6-inducible promoter activity.

PMID: 8918689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Circ Res. 1996 Aug;79(2):277-85.

Characterization of the endothelium-specific murine vascular endothelial growth
factor receptor-2 (Flk-1) promoter.

Rönicke V(1), Risau W, Breier G.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Physiologische und Klinische Forschung, Bad Nauheim,
Germany.

Flk-1, a high-affinity signaling receptor for vascular endothelial growth factor 
(VEGF), is strongly and specifically expressed on endothelial cells during
embryonic development of the vascular system and during tumor angiogenesis.
Disruption of Flk-1 gene function has recently been shown to prevent completely
endothelial cell differentiation during murine embryonic development. To gain
insights into the mechanisms that regulate the endothelium-specific Flk-1
expression, we have isolated the 5'-flanking region of the murine Flk-1 gene.
RNase protection and primer extension analyses revealed a single transcriptional 
start site located 299 bp upstream from the translational start site in an
initiator-like pyrimidine-rich sequence. The 5'-flanking region is rich in GC
residues and lacks a typical TATA or CAAT box. A luciferase reporter construct
containing a fragment from nucleotides -1900 to +299 showed strong
endothelium-specific activity in transfected bovine aortic endothelial cells.
Deletion analyses revealed that endothelium-specific Flk-1 expression is
stimulated by the 5'-untranslated region of the first exon, which contains an
activating element between nucleotides +137 and +299. In addition, two
endothelium-specific negative regulatory elements were identified between
nucleotides -4100 and -623. Two strong general activating elements were present
in the region between nucleotides -96 and -37, which contains one potential NF
kappa B and three potential AP-2 binding sites. This study shows that Flk-1
expression in endothelial cells is mainly regulated by an endothelium-specific
activating element in the long 5'-untranslated region of the first exon and by
negative regulatory elements located further upstream.

PMID: 8756005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Aug;16(8):4128-36.

Induction of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma during the
conversion of 3T3 fibroblasts into adipocytes is mediated by C/EBPbeta,
C/EBPdelta, and glucocorticoids.

Wu Z(1), Bucher NL, Farmer SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

The differentiation of 3T3 preadipocytes into adipocytes is accompanied by a
transient induction of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta expression in response to
treatment of the cells with methylisobutylxanthine (MIX) and dexamethasone (DEX),
respectively. In this report, we demonstrate that peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) expression in 3T3-L1
preadipocytes is induced by MIX and DEX, suggesting that C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta
may be involved in this process. Using a tetracycline-responsive expression
system, we have recently shown that the conditional ectopic expression of
C/EBPbeta in NIH 3T3 fibroblasts (beta2 cells) in the presence of DEX activates
the synthesis of peroxisome PPARgamma mRNA. Subsequent exposure of these cells to
PPAR activators stimulates their conversion into adipocytes; however, neither the
expression of C/EBPbeta nor exposure to DEX alone is capable of inducing
PPARgamma expression in the beta2 cell line. We find that unlike the case for 3T3
preadipocytes, C/EBPdelta is not induced by DEX in these 3T3 fibroblasts and
therefore is not relaying the effect of this glucocorticoid to the PPARgamma
gene. To define the role of glucocorticoids in regulating PPARgamma expression
and the possible involvement of C/EBPdelta, we have established an additional set
of NIH 3T3 cell lines expressing either C/EBPdelta alone (delta23 cells) or
C/EBPdelta and C/EBPbeta together (beta/delta39 cells), using the
tetracycline-responsive system. Culture of these cells in tetracycline-deficient 
medium containing DEX, MIX, insulin, and fetal bovine serum shows that the
beta/delta39 cells express PPARgamma and aP2 mRNAs at levels that are almost
equivalent to those observed in fully differentiated 3T3-L1 adipocytes. These
levels are approximately threefold higher than their levels of expression in the 
beta2 cells. Despite the fact that these beta/delta39 cells produce abundant
amounts of C/EBPbeta and C/EBPdelta (in the absence of tetracycline), they still 
require glucocorticoids to attain maximum expression of PPARgamma mRNA.
Furthermore, the induction of PPARgamma mRNA by exposure of these cells to DEX
occurs in the absence of ongoing protein synthesis. The delta23 cells, on the
other hand, are not capable of activating PPARgamma gene expression when exposed 
to the same adipogenic inducers. Finally, attenuation of ectopic C/EBPbeta
production at various stages during the differentiation process results in a
concomitant inhibition of PPARgamma and the adipogenic program. These data
strongly suggest that the induction of PPARgamma gene expression in
multipotential mesenchymal stem cells (NIH 3T3 fibroblasts) is dependent on
elevated levels of C/EBPbeta throughout the differentiation process, as well as
an initial exposure to glucocorticoids. C/EBPdelta may function by synergizing
with C/EBPbeta to enhance the level of PPARgamma expression.

PMCID: PMC231409
PMID: 8754811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 15;24(14):2849-56.

Functional interaction between a RARE and an AP-2 binding site in the regulation 
of the human HOX A4 gene promoter.

Doerksen LF(1), Bhattacharya A, Kannan P, Pratt D, Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030, USA.

HOX A genes are induced in a temporal fashion after retinoic acid (RA) treatment 
in non-N-ras-transformed PA-1 human teratcarcinoma cells. However, In
N-ras-transformed PA-1 cells, RA-Induced expression of HOX A genes is delayed.
The mRNA for the transcriptional activator AP-2 is overexpressed in these
ras-transformed cells, but AP-2 transcriptional activity is inhibited relative to
non ras-transformed PA-1 cells. Constitutive expression of AP-2 mimics the effect
of ras by transforming cells and inhibiting differentiation in culture. We
analyzed 4 kb of the human HOX A4 gene promoter and identified seven putative
AP-2-binding sites in the DNA sequence. Transcription assays with variably sized 
HOX A4 promoter reporter constructs revealed that a 365 bp region of the
promoter, -2950 to -3315 relative to the mRNA start, controls RA responsiveness
and ras-mediated inhibition of HOX A4 activity. This region contains an AP-2
binding site and a RARE. Elimination of the AP-2 site by site-directed
mutagenesis demonstrated that the AP-2 site is involved in RA-mediated
transcriptional activation of the human HOX A4 promoter in combination with the
RA receptor response element (RARE). In N-ras-transformed cells, low HOX A4
promoter activity results from ras inhibition of AP-2 transactivation.

PMCID: PMC146022
PMID: 8759021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jul 12;271(28):16870-6.

A conserved cysteine residue in the runt homology domain of AML1 is required for 
the DNA binding ability and the transforming activity on fibroblasts.

Kurokawa M(1), Tanaka T, Tanaka K, Hirano N, Ogawa S, Mitani K, Yazaki Y, Hirai
H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113, Japan.

The AML1 gene encodes DNA-binding proteins that contain the runt homology domain 
and is found at the breakpoints of t(8;21), t(3;21), and t(12;21) translocations 
associated with myelogenous leukemias. AML1 heterodimerizes with
PEBP2beta/CBFbeta, resulting in the enhanced affinity with DNA. The runt homology
domain is responsible for binding with DNA and heterodimerizing with
PEBP2beta/CBFbeta. AML1 is suggested to perform a pivotal role in myeloid cell
differentiation, whereas it can cause neoplastic transformation when
overexpressed in fibroblasts. In this study, we demonstrated that the reducing
reagent, dithiothreitol (DTT), markedly enhances the DNA binding of AML1
expressed in COS7 cells. Oxidation by diamide or modification by N-ethylmaleimide
of the free sulfhydryl residues inhibited the interaction of AML1 with DNA. The
diamide effect was reversible with excess of DTT, whereas DTT could not restore
the DNA binding of AML1 treated with N-ethylmaleimide. Site-directed mutagenesis 
of the amino acid residue 72, a highly conserved cysteine in the runt homology
domain of AML1, to serine almost completely abolished DNA binding without
altering the interaction with PEBP2beta/CBFbeta. This substitution also impaired 
transactivation through the consensus DNA sequence and transformation of
fibroblasts induced by AML1b. These data indicate an essential role of the
conserved cysteine residue in DNA binding of AML1, and it is possible that the
redox state of AML1 could contribute to the regulation of its function.

PMID: 8663420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Mech Ageing Dev. 1996 Jul 5;88(1-2):111-24.

Alterations in transcription factor-binding activities to fibronectin promoter
during aging of vascular endothelial cells.

Kumazaki T(1), Mitsui Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Bioscience and Human Technology, Agency of Industrial
Science and Technology, Ibaraki, Japan.

Previously, we showed that the expression of the fibronectin (FN) gene is
enhanced during aging of human endothelial cells and fibroblasts. To elucidate
the mechanism, we explored binding proteins to the FN promoter. The promoter
contains sites for the general transcription factors: CAAT-binding transcription 
factor (CTF), promoter-specific transcription factor-1 (Sp1), and transcription
factor-IID (TFIID). The promoter also contains sites for inducible transcription 
factors, cAMP-responsive element (CRE)-binding protein (CREB), and Activator
protein 2 (AP-2). We synthesized 10 different oligonucleotides for these and
other potential transcription factor-binding sites. Using these oligonucleotides,
we searched for binding proteins in young and old endothelial cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift and supershift assays. Our results showed that
AP-1 decreased with aging, but Sp1 and CREB1 were unaffected. However, decreased 
binding activities to CRE at positions -170 and -415 were shown in old cells.
This could be explained by the decrease of AP-1 because these CREs bound not only
CREB1 but also AP-1. Moreover, we observed that the binding activities of TFIID, 
CTF, and binding proteins to -40, -120 and -260 regions increased. These
differential changes may cause the enhancement of FN expression in senescent
cells.

PMID: 8803927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Jul 1;24(13):2597-605.

Comparative and functional analysis of the AP2 promoter indicates that conserved 
octamer and initiator elements are critical for activity.

Creaser PC(1), D'Argenio DA, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520-8103, USA.

AP-2 is a developmentally-regulated transcription factor expressed in ectodermal 
cell lineages. The AP-2 protein is essential for neural tube, craniofacial and
body wall morphogenesis and has been implicated in oncogenesis. Here we report
the isolation of the AP-2 promoter from human, mouse and chicken. The initiation 
sites for the human gene have been mapped in a variety of cell lines, including
several derived from breast tumours. Initiation occurs just upstream of an
IR3-like repetitive element, present in the human and mouse genes, but absent in 
chicken. The cis-acting elements responsible for promoter activity in human HeLa 
cells have been mapped both in vivo and in vitro. The proximal promoter contains 
binding sites for transcription factors AP-2, NF-1 and octamer proteins, but
lacks a TATA box motif. Functional analysis demonstrates that the octamer binding
site is the critical component of basal promoter activity. In addition, the
promoter relies on an initiator element for efficient start site utilization.
There is an excellent correlation between the requirement for the initiator and
octamer elements in transcription assays and the conservation of these cis-acting
sequences between chicken, mouse and human.

PMCID: PMC145978
PMID: 8692702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Leukemia. 1996 Jul;10(7):1127-33.

Expression pattern of WT1 and GATA-1 in AML with chromosome 16q22 abnormalities.

Patmasiriwat P(1), Fraizer GC, Claxton D, Kantarjian H, Saunders GF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, USA.

WT1 is a tumor suppressor gene that can repress transcription of many
growth-factor and growth-factor receptor genes. We quantitated WT1 expression
levels in 62 acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) samples and found that 82% strongly
expressed WT1. WT1 expression levels are highest in the undifferentiated and
granulocytic French-American-British (FAB) subclasses and lower in the monocytic 
subclasses. WT1 was strongly expressed in normal CD34+ bone marrow (BM) stem
cells but only weakly or not expressed in normal mature blood cells. This
suggests that WT1 gene expression is associated with immature cells, which have
high proliferative capacities. Previous studies of WT1 gene regulation showed
that GATA-1 may regulate WT1 expression. To understand the relationship between
WT1 and GATA-1 expression in leukemia, we examined the expression pattern of
GATA-1 in the cells described above. Overall, AML samples expressed significant
amounts of both WT1 and GATA-1. However, AML samples with 16q22 abnormalities,
presumably interrupting the core binding factor (CBF) beta gene expressed lower
than normal levels of GATA-1 but high levels of WT1. Our data suggest that the
transcription factor CBF beta may be important for GATA-1 gene regulation. Thus, 
WT1 expression varied in different FAB subclasses, and GATA-1 expression was
strongly affected by the presence of chromosome 16q22 abnormalities.

PMID: 8683991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Genomics. 1996 Jul 1;35(1):262-4.

Chromosomal mapping of the human and mouse homologues of two new members of the
AP-2 family of transcription factors.

Williamson JA(1), Bosher JM, Skinner A, Sheer D, Williams T, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cytogenetics Laboratory, ICRF, Lincoln's Inn Fields, London, WC2A 3PX,
United Kingdom.

The AP-2 transcription factor has been shown to play an important role in the
development of tissues of ectodermal origin and has also been implicated in
mammary oncogenesis. It has recently been found that AP-2 is encoded by a family 
of related genes, AP-2alpha, AP-2beta, and AP-2gamma. As a further step in
understanding the role each of these genes has in development, we have used
fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the chromosomal locations of the mouse 
and human homologues of the newly isolated AP-2beta and AP-2gamma genes. Tcfap2b 
and Tcfap2c map to mouse chromosomes 1A2-4 and 2H3-4, respectively, while TFAP2B 
and TFAP2C map to human chromosomes 6p12 and 20q13.2, the latter being a region
that is frequently amplified in breast carcinoma.

PMID: 8661133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 28;271(26):15787-95.

Transcriptional regulation of the human biglycan gene.

Ungefroren H(1), Krull NB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University of Hamburg, 20246 Hamburg, Federal Republic
of Germany.

The small leucine-rich proteoglycan biglycan is involved in several physiological
and pathophysiological processes through the ability of its core protein to
interact with other extracellular matrix molecules and transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta). To learn more about the regulation of biglycan core
protein expression, we have cloned and sequenced 1218 base pairs from the
5'-flanking region of the human biglycan gene, demonstrated functional promoter
activity, and investigated the molecular mechanisms through which various agents 
modulate its transcriptional activity. Sequencing revealed the presence of
several cis-acting elements including multiple AP-2 sites and interleukin-6
response elements, a NF-kappaB site, a TGF-beta negative element, and an E-box.
The TATA and CAAT box-lacking promoter possesses many features of a
growth-related gene, e.g. a GC-rich immediate 5' region, many Sp1 sites, and the 
use of multiple transcriptional start sites. Transient transfections of the tumor
cell lines MG-63, SK-UT-1, and T47D with various biglycan 5'-flanking
region-luciferase reporter gene constructs showed that the proximal 78 base pairs
are sufficient for full promoter activity. Several agents among them
interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha. were capable of altering biglycan
promoter activity. However, in MG-63 cells, TGF-beta1 failed to increase either
activity of the biglycan promoter constructs or specific transcription from the
endogenous biglycan gene. Since TGF-beta1 also did not alter the stability of
cytoplasmic biglycan mRNA as determined from Northern analysis after inhibition
of transcription with 5,6-dichloro-1beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole, an as yet 
unidentified nuclear post-transcriptional mechanism was considered responsible
for the TGF-beta effect in this cell type. These results might help to elucidate 
the molecular pathways leading to pathological alterations of biglycan expression
observed in atherosclerosis, glomerulonephritis, and fibrosis.

PMID: 8662974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jun 25;223(3):666-9.

AP-2 gene expression and modulation by retinoic acid during keratinocyte
differentiation.

Wanner R(1), Zhang J, Henz BM, Rosenbach T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Virchow Clinic, Humboldt University, Berlin, FRG.
rw@fub46.zedat.fu-berlin.de

The transcription factor AP-2 has been suggested to participate in keratinocyte
gene regulation, but its precise role in the processes of keratinocyte
proliferation and differentiation is largely unknown. We here report on an
increase of AP-2 transcripts in proliferating HaCaT keratinocytes preceding the
expression and upregulation of the differentiation-related genes keratin 4 (K4)
and Ah-receptor (AhR), but a decrease of AP-2 transcript levels during the
process of keratinocyte differentiation. Continuous treatment of the keratinocyte
cell cultures with retinoic acid (RA) resulted in a premature downregulation of
AP-2 mRNA levels, and the transcripts of K4 and AhR remained at basal levels.
Furthermore, addition of RA to already differentiated cells failed to exert any
effect on K4- and AhR-mRNA levels. The data suggest a role for AP-2 as an
intermediate factor in the pathway of RA action in keratinocyte differentiation, 
explaining both the downregulation of K4 and AhR transcript levels in
proliferative keratinocytes and the loss of RA effects in already differentiated 
cells. It appears thus that AP-2 plays a pivotal role at the onset of
differentiation in still proliferating keratinocytes.

PMID: 8687453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Jun 15;225(2):338-47.

AP-2.2: a novel AP-2-related transcription factor induced by retinoic acid during
differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Oulad-Abdelghani M(1), Bouillet P, Chazaud C, Dollé P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, Strasbourg, France. igbmc@igbmc.u-strasbg.fr

A 2.8-kb cDNA encoding a new transcription factor (AP-2.2) has been cloned from
mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma cells, in which the corresponding mRNA begins to
accumulate 30 min after retinoic acid (RA) addition. The predicted protein is 449
amino acids long and exhibits approximately 65% overall identity with other
AP-2-related proteins (human AP-2, mouse AP-2alpha and beta). A
96-amino-acid-long sequence, which is almost fully conserved between all these
proteins, corresponds to the previously characterized human AP-2 DNA binding
domain. Expression of AP-2.2 in Escherichia coli generated a protein that formed 
a specific complex with the AP-2 recognition site GCCN3GGC. AP-2.2 activated
transcription from a reporter gene containing an AP-2 DNA binding site and acted 
synergistically with RARalpha to activate transcription from the CRABPII gene
promoter. Transcriptional activation required the AP-2.2 amino-terminal region
that contains a domain rich in proline and glutamine residues. The pattern of
AP-2.2 expression in adult tissues, which is distinct from that of AP-2alpha, is 
essentially restricted to male and female gonads, to most if not all the squamous
epithelia, and to several exocrine glands.

PMID: 8660922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 14;271(24):14519-25.

The genomic structure of the rat corticotropin releasing factor receptor. A
member of the class II G protein-coupled receptors.

Tsai-Morris CH(1), Buczko E, Geng Y, Gamboa-Pinto A, Dufau ML.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Molecular Endocrinology, Endocrinology and Reproduction Research
Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4510, USA.

Isolation and structural characterization of the rat corticotropin releasing
factor receptor (CRFR) gene was performed to determine the exon/intron
organization of the coding region and the potential for splice variants. The CRFR
gene contains 13 exons and 12 introns, and the positions of the exon/intron
junctions are similar to those of other Class II G protein-coupled receptor genes
including the parathyroid hormone and glucagon receptors. The promoter resides
within 593 base pairs of the initiation codon and the major transcriptional start
site at nucleotide -238. This domain does not possess a TATA box but contains
multiple Sp1 and AP-2 sites upstream and downstream of the major transcriptional 
start site. Intron junctions were identified in the extracellular, transmembrane 
(TM), and cytoplasmic (C) domains of the CRFR, giving the potential for
differential signal transduction by splice variants. CRFR cDNAs derived from rat 
Leydig cell mRNA included the pituitary Form A, which spans exons 1-13, and two
splice variants with deletion of exon 3 or exons 7, 11, and 12. An evolutionary
link between the intronless TM/C module of the glycoprotein hormone receptors and
the intron-containing TM/C module of the CRFR is suggested by the common position
of the luteinizing hormone receptor Form D alternate acceptor splice site and the
CRFR intron 12.

PMID: 8662941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1996 Jun;41(8 Suppl):997-1007.

[Function of the PEBP2/CBF/AML1 genes].

[Article in Japanese]

Satake M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

PMID: 8741619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;15(6):453-9.

Cloning and chromosomal mapping of bovine interleukin-2 receptor gamma gene.

Yoo J(1), Stone RT, Solinas-Toldo S, Fries R, Beattie CW.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, Roman L. Hruska U.S. Meat Animal Research Center (MARC), Clay
Center, NE 68933-0166, USA.

Interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R) gamma chain, a member of the cytokine receptor
superfamily, forms a high-affinity receptor with IL-2R alpha and beta chains that
plays an important role in interleukin-2 (IL-2) signal transduction. We have
cloned and characterized the bovine IL-2Rgamma gene and corresponding cDNA.
Bovine IL-2Rgamma is a single-copy gene that contains 8 exons and spans
approximately 3.8 kb. The promoter region lacks conventional TATA and CCAAT
consensus sites, but contains several regulatory elements that are recognition
sites for the GATA binding proteins, AP-1 and AP-2. Physical assignment by
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) placed the bovine IL-2Rgamma gene on
chromosome Xq23.

PMID: 8672241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Leukemia. 1996 Jun;10(6):984-90.

DNA-binding domain of AML1, expressed in t(8;21) and t(3;21) myeloid leukemias,
inhibits PEBP2/CBF DNA-binding but is not sufficient to transform 32D cl3 myeloid
cells.

Britos-Bray M(1), Sacchi N, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Division of Pediatric Oncology, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

Truncated AML1 proteins are predicted to be expressed from out-of-frame AML1
transcripts present in myeloid leukemia cells harboring t(8;21) and t(3;21). To
test whether these proteins, consisting of almost exclusively an N-terminal AML1 
DNA-binding domain, interfere with myeloid differentiation we expressed a similar
truncated AML1 protein in 32D cl3 myeloid cells. In all clones examined, the
ectopically expressed truncated AML1 protein prevented binding of endogenous
PEBP2/CBFs to DNA, possibly by interacting with all available CBF beta subunits. 
However, compared to control clones, the 32D cl3 clones expressing truncated AML1
remained IL-3 dependent for survival, proliferated similarly in low and high
concentrations of IL-3, and differentiated similarly upon transfer to G-CSF.
Thus, truncated AML1 proteins may contribute to myeloid leukemogeneis by
inhibiting PEBP2/CBF activities, although contributions from other oncoproteins
are likely required as well.

PMID: 8667656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 17;271(20):12111-6.

The ear of alpha-adaptin interacts with the COOH-terminal domain of the Eps 15
protein.

Benmerah A(1), Bégue B, Dautry-Varsat A, Cerf-Bensussan N.

Author information: 
(1)Développement Normal et Pathologique de Système Immunitaire, INSERM U429,
Paris, France.

The role of Eps15 in clathrin-mediated endocytosis is supported by two
observations. First, it interacts specifically and constitutively with the plasma
membrane adaptor AP-2. Second, its NH2 terminus shows significant homology to the
NH2 terminus of yeast End3p, necessary for endocytosis of alpha-factor. To gain
further insight into the role of Eps15-AP-2 association, we have now delineated
their sites of interactions. AP-2 binds to a domain of 72 amino acids (767-739)
present in the COOH terminus of Eps15. This domain contains 4 of the 15 DPF
repeats characteristic of the COOH-terminal domain of Eps15 and shares no
homology with known proteins, including the related Epsl5r protein. Precipitation
of proteolytic fragments of AP-2 with Eps15-derived fusion proteins containing
the binding site for AP-2 showed that Eps15 binds specifically to a 40-kDa
fragment corresponding to the ear of alpha-adaptin, a result confirmed by
precipitation of Eps15 by alpha-adaptin-derived fusion proteins. Our data
indicate that this specific part of AP-2 binds to a cellular component and
provide the tools for investigating the functions of the association between AP-2
and Eps15.

PMID: 8662627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Nature. 1996 May 16;381(6579):238-41.

Neural tube, skeletal and body wall defects in mice lacking transcription factor 
AP-2.

Zhang J(1), Hagopian-Donaldson S, Serbedzija G, Elsemore J, Plehn-Dujowich D,
McMahon AP, Flavell RA, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

The retinoic acid-inducible transcription factor AP-2 is expressed in epithelial 
and neural crest cell lineages during murine development. AP-2 can regulate
neural and epithelial gene transcription, and is associated with overexpression
of c-erbB-2 in human breast-cancer cell lines. To ascertain the importance of
AP-2 for normal development, we have derived mice containing a homozygous
disruption of the AP-2 gene. These AP-2-null mice have multiple congenital
defects and die at birth. In particular, the AP-2 knockout mice exhibit
anencephaly, craniofacial defects and thoraco-abdominoschisis. Skeletal defects
occur in the head and trunk region, where many bones are deformed or absent.
Analysis of these mice earlier in embryogenesis indicates a failure of cranial
neural-tube closure and defects in cranial ganglia development. We have shown
that AP-2 is a fundamental regulator of mammalian craniofacial development.

PMID: 8622766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Nature. 1996 May 16;381(6579):235-8.

Transcription factor AP-2 essential for cranial closure and craniofacial
development.

Schorle H(1), Meier P, Buchert M, Jaenisch R, Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142,
USA.

During closure of the neural tube in the mouse, transcription factor AP-2 is
expressed in ectoderm and in neural-crest cells migrating from the cranial neural
folds. Cranial neural crest cells provide patterning information for craniofacial
morphogenesis, generate most of the skull bones, and together with placodal
ectoderm, form the cranial ganglia. To study the role of AP-2 during
embryogenesis, we undertook a targeted mutagenesis of the AP-2 gene in the mouse.
Here we report that AP-2(-/-) mice died perinatally with cranio-abdominoschisis
and severe dismorphogenesis of the face, skull, sensory organs and cranial
ganglia. Failure of cranial closure between 9 and 9.5 days postcoitum coincided
with increased apoptosis in the midbrain, anterior hindbrain and proximal
mesenchyme of the first branchial arch, but did not involve loss of expression of
twist or Pax-3, two other regulatory genes known to be required for cranial
closure.

PMID: 8622765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 May 6;222(1):155-63.

Basal regulatory promoter elements of the hsp27 gene in human breast cancer
cells.

Oesterreich S(1), Hickey E, Weber LA, Fuqua SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Division of Oncology, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio 78248, USA.

The small human heat shock protein hsp27 has been shown to play important roles
in diverse cellular processes such as actin polymerization, thermotolerance,
growth, and chemotherapeutic drug resistance. Two breast cancer cell lines MCF-7 
and MDA-MB-231 were used as a model to study the molecular mechanisms important
for basal hsp27 promoter transcriptional activity. A genomic clone containing 1.1
kb of the hsp27 promoter was sequenced and the regulatory elements were
characterized. The first 200 bp within this 5'-flanking region holds the majority
of the transcriptional activity, according to transient transfection assays using
a series of hsp27 promoter deletion fragments in luciferase reporter vectors. The
basal activity of this fragment is largely confined to a G/C-rich region
containing overlapping SP1 and AP2 transcription factor binding sites.

PMID: 8630062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. DNA Cell Biol. 1996 May;15(5):377-85.

Genomic organization and chromosomal mapping of the bovine Fas/APO-1 gene.

Yoo J(1), Stone RT, Kappes SM, Toldo SS, Fries R, Beattie CW.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, Roman L. Hruska U.S. Meat Animal Research Center (MARC), Clay
Center, NE 68933, USA.

The cell-surface protein Fas (APO-1) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNFR) superfamily and transduces apoptosis following binding of Fas
ligand or exposure to certain anti-Fas antibodies. We have isolated the bovine
Fas (bFas) gene and determined its genomic organization and chromosomal location.
Our data indicate that bFas is a single-copy gene that contains 9 exons and spans
approximately 31.5 kb. The 5'-flanking region lacks conventional TATA and CCAAT
elements, but contains several putative regulatory elements, including multiple
copies of Sp1, AP-2, E-box, and N-box consensus sites. Linkage analysis of two
(CA) dinucleotide repeat microsatellites within intron 1 and physical assignment 
by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) placed the bFas gene on bovine
chromosome 26. Collectively, these data provide a basis for understanding the
regulatory mechanisms that control bFas gene expression.

PMID: 8924212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Eur J Biochem. 1996 May 1;237(3):532-8.

Differential binding of cAMP-responsive-element (CRE)-binding protein-1 and
activating transcription factor-2 to a CRE-like element in the human tissue-type 
plasminogen activator (t-PA) gene promoter correlates with opposite regulation of
t-PA by phorbol ester in HT-1080 and HeLa cells.

Costa M(1), Medcalf RL.

Author information: 
(1)Monash University Department of Medicine, Victoria, Australia.

The human tissue-type plasminogen activator gene (t-PA) is induced by the phorbol
ester, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), in HeLa cells. Previous studies in 
transfected HeLa cells identified two cis-acting regulatory elements within the
t-PA gene promoter responsible for both constitutive and PMA-inducible
expression. One element differs from the consensus cAMP response element (CRE) by
a single nucleotide substitution (referred to in this report as t-PACRE) and
another which bears similarity to the AP-2 recognition sequence. In HT-1080
fibrosarcoma cells, t-PA mRNA levels are expressed at higher constitutive levels 
and are suppressed by PMA. Nuclear run-on transcription experiments indicate that
PMA-mediated suppression of t-PA in these cells is associated with a decrease in 
t-PA gene template activity. We designed experiments to determine whether nuclear
t-PACRE or AP-2-like binding proteins were differentially expressed in HeLa and
HT-1080 cells and, accordingly, if these could be correlated with the opposite
effect of PMA on t-PA expression. Band shift analyses indicated that the
migration profiles of HeLa and HT-1080 nuclear proteins interacting with the
AP-2-like site were indistinguishable; however, those produced with the t-PACRE
binding site were qualitatively and quantitatively distinct. The distribution of 
t-PACRE binding proteins in these cells was investigated in a supershift assay
using specific antibodies against members of the fos/jun and CRE-binding protein 
(CREB)/activating transcription factor (ATF) families. In HT-1080 cells, CREB-1
was the most prominent t-PACRE-binding activity detected and was greatly
increased in cells treated with PMA. In contrast, CREB-1 activity was absent in
HeLa cells, but antibodies specific for ATF-2 produced a marked supershifted
complex which was unaffected by PMA treatment. Since CREB-1 can repress
transcription of other target genes (including c-jun) via association with
identical cis-acting CRE-like sequences, we suggest that the mechanism for the
transcriptional down-regulation of t-PA by PMA in HT-1080 cells requires CREB-1
binding to the t-PACRE while ATF-2, by associating with the same site, plays a
role in PMA-mediated induction of t-PA in HeLa cells.

PMID: 8647095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cancer Lett. 1996 Apr 19;102(1-2):101-6.

Elevated binding to URE/PEBP2 during the late stages of NNK and
benzo[a]pyrene-induced carcinogenesis in A/J mice.

Fuchs SY(1), Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, NY
10595, USA.

To provide better understanding about alterations in transcription factor
activities during the promotion and progression stages of lung carcinogenesis we 
have utilized the A/J mice lung tumor model in which two potent lung carcinogens,
4-(methyl-nitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone (NNK) and benzo[a]pyrene (BaP),
were co-administered. Nuclear proteins prepared from lung, brain, kidney, liver
and colon of the A/J mice, 19 weeks after the last carcinogen administration, as 
well as from their respective non-treated controls, were tested for their binding
to polyoma enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2) target sequence and UV-responsive
element (URE). PEBP2 represents a newly identified family of transcription
factors that was shown to play a role in cellular differentiation and
transformation. URE is similar to CRE and AP1 target sequences, to which the
members of ATF/AP1 transcriptional factors family bind. We demonstrate here that 
there is a marked increase in binding to both PEBP2 and URE sequences in lung,
liver, kidney and brain of the treated mice. Such binding appears to be dependent
on the mode of carcinogen administration as it was better noticed in the
intragastric injected group than in the intraperitoneal group. Taken together,
our findings suggest that increased binding to the URE and PEBP2 target sequence 
reflects changes in transcriptional activities which occur at late stages of lung
carcinogenesis in a fashion which appear to depend on mode of carcinogen
administration.

PMID: 8603357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Genomics. 1996 Apr 15;33(2):292-7.

Structure and organization of the human neuronatin gene.

Dou D(1), Joseph R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Hospital & Health Sciences Center,
Detroit, Michigan 48202, USA.

Neuronatin is a brain-specific human gene that we recently isolated and observed 
to be selectively expressed during brain development. In this report, the genomic
structure and organization of human neuronatin is described. The human gene spans
3973 bases and contains three exons and two introns. Based on primer extension
analysis, a single cap site is located 124 bases upstream from the methionine
(ATG) initiation codon, in good context, GAACCATGG. The promoter contains a
modified TATA box, CATAAA (-27), and a modified CAAT box, GGCGAAT (-59). The
5'-flanking region contains putative transcription factor binding sites for SP-1,
AP-2 (two sites), delta-subunit, SRE-2, NF-A1, and ETS. In addition, a 21-base
sequence highly homologous to the neural restrictive silence element that governs
neuron-specific gene expression is observed at -421. Furthermore, SP-1 and AP-3
binding sites are present in intron 1. All splice donor and acceptor sites
conformed to the GT/AG rule. Exon 1 encodes 24 amino acids, exon 2 encodes 27
amino acids, and exon 3 encodes 30 amino acids. At the 3'-end of the gene, the
poly(A) signal, AATAAA, poly(A) site, and GT cluster are observed. The neuronatin
gene is expressed as two mRNA species, alpha and beta, generated by alternative
splicing. The alpha-form contains all three exons, whereas in the beta-form, the 
middle exon has been spliced out. The third nucleotide of all frequently used
codons, except threonine, of neuronatin is either G or C, consistent with codon
usage expected for Homo sapiens. This information about the structure of the
human neuronatin gene will help in understanding the significance of this gene in
brain development and human disease.

PMID: 8660979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Apr 2;93(7):3088-93.

Repression of a matrix metalloprotease gene by E1A correlates with its ability to
bind to cell type-specific transcription factor AP-2.

Somasundaram K(1), Jayaraman G, Williams T, Moran E, Frisch S, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Lurie Cancer Center, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Adenovirus E1A 243-amino acid protein can repress a variety of enhancer -linked
viral and cellular promoters. This repression is presumed to be mediated by its
interaction with and sequestration of p3OO, a transcriptional coactivator. Type
IV 72-kDa collagenase is one of the matrix metalloproteases that has been
implicated in differentiation, development, angiogenesis, and tumor metastasis.
We show here that the cell type-specific transcription factor AP-2 is an
important transcription factor for the activation of the type IV 72-kDa
collagenase promoter and that adenovirus E1A 243-amino acid protein represses
this promoter by targeting AP-2. Glutathione S-transferase-affinity
chromatography studies show that the E1A protein interacts with the DNA
binding/dimerization region of AP-2 and that the N-terminal amino acids of E1A
protein are required for this interaction. Further, E1A deletion mutants which do
not bind to p3OO can repress this collagenase promoter as efficiently as the
wildtype E1A protein. Because the AP-2 element is present in a variety of viral
and cellular enhancers which are repressed by E1A, these studies suggest that E1A
protein can repress cellular and viral promoter/enhancers by forming a complex
with cellular transcription factors and that this repression mechanism may be
independent of its interaction with p3OO.

PMCID: PMC39766
PMID: 8610173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Apr 1;237(1):25-34.

Structure of the 5'-flanking regulatory region of the mouse gene encoding the
clearance receptor for atrial natriuretic peptide.

Yanaka N(1), Kotera J, Taguchi I, Sugiura M, Kawashima K, Omori K.

Author information: 
(1)Lead Generation Research Laboratory, Tanabe Seiyaku Co. Ltd., Osaka, Japan.

A full-length cDNA, encoding the mouse atrial natriuretic peptide clearance
receptor (ANP-CR), was isolated from a mouse lung cDNA library. The deduced amino
acid sequence of the mouse ANP-CR, showing a typical tripartite organization
which lacks a guanylyl cyclase domain, was extremely well conserved compared with
the ANP-CR homologs. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the
regulation of mouse ANP-CR gene expression and to define the essential DNA
sequences for the transcriptional activity, a genomic clone containing over 9 kb 
of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse ANP-CR gene has been isolated from a mouse
genomic library. Sequence analysis revealed that the 2.3-kb region upstream from 
an ATG codon of the mouse ANP-CR gene contained a number of putative regulatory
elements; TATA box, CAAT box, cAMP response element, AP-1 and two shear stress
responsive elements. Additionally, an unusual feature was the presence of the
tandem-repeated AP-2-like elements, which were closely overlapped with SP-1
element. Promoter analysis using deletion plasmids in mouse Balb/3T3 cells,
highly producing ANP-CR mRNA, demonstrated that deletion of the sequence from
-144 to +46 relative to the transcription start point caused a dramatic decrease 
of the transcriptional activity and that the TATA box at -269 was not essential
for the basal transcriptional activity. Primer extension analysis indicated that 
transcription of the mouse ANP-CR gene starts from at least two major sites,
suggesting that the sequence from -144 to +46, which was shown to involve a novel
sequence composed of tandem-repeated TATA-box-like elements, contained promoter
sequences. Furthermore, cis-acting negative elements were shown to be situated in
three regions (from -1178 to -708, from -707 to -625 and from -248 to -145) of
the mouse ANP-CR gene promoter.

PMID: 8620881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 29;271(13):7781-7.

Structural and functional characterization of the human CD36 gene promoter:
identification of a proximal PEBP2/CBF site.

Armesilla AL(1), Calvo D, Vega MA.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain.

CD36 is a cell surface glycoprotein composed of a single polypeptide chain, which
interacts with thrombospondin, collagens type I and IV, oxidized low density
lipoprotein, fatty acids, anionic phospholipids, and erythrocytes parasitized
with Plasmodium falciparum. Its expression is restricted to a few cell types,
including monocyte/macrophages. In these cells, CD36 is involved in phagocytosis 
of apoptotic cells, and foam cell formation by uptake of oxidized low density
lipoprotein. To study the molecular mechanisms that control the transcription of 
the CD36 gene in monocytic cells we have isolated and analyzed the CD36 promoter.
Transient expression experiments of 5'-deletion fragments of the CD36 promoter
coupled to luciferase demonstrated that as few as 158 base pairs upstream from
the transcription initiation site were sufficient to direct the monocyte-specific
transcription of the reporter gene. Within the above region, the fragment
spanning nucleotides -158 to -90 was required for optimal transcription in
monocytic cells. Biochemical analysis of the region -158/-90 revealed a binding
site for transcription factors of the polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein
2/core-binding factor (PEBP2/CBF) family at position -103. Disruption of the
PEBP2/CBF site markedly diminished the role of the PEBP2/CBF factors in the
constitutive transcription of the CD36 gene. The involvement of members of the
PEBP2/CBF family in chromosome translocations associated with acute myeloid
leukemia, and in the transcriptional regulation of the myeloid-specific genes
encoding for myeloperoxidase, elastase, and the colony-stimulating factor
receptor, highlights the relevance of the regulation of the CD36 gene promoter in
monocytic cells by members of the PEBP2/CBF family.

PMID: 8631821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 22;271(12):6666-71.

Promoter-dependent and -independent activation of insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-5 gene expression by prostaglandin E2 in primary rat osteoblasts.

McCarthy TL(1), Casinghino S, Mittanck DW, Ji CH, Centrella M, Rotwein P.

Collaborators: McCarthy TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Plastic Surgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8041, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) action is mediated by high affinity cell surface
IGF receptors and modulated by a family of secreted IGF binding proteins
(IGFBPs). IGFBP-5, the most conserved of six IGFBPs characterized to date,
uniquely potentiates the anabolic actions of IGF-I for skeletal cells. In
osteoblasts, IGFBP-5 production is stimulated by prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), a local
factor that mediates certain effects induced by parathyroid hormone, cytokines
such as interleukin-1 and transforming growth factor-beta, and mechanical strain.
In this study, we show that transcriptional and post-transcriptional events
initiated by PGE2 collaborate to enhance IGFBP-5 gene expression in primary fetal
rat osteoblast cultures. PGE2 treatment stimulated up to a 7-fold rise in
steady-state levels of IGFBP-5 mRNA throughout 32 h of incubation. Analysis of
nascent IGFBP-5 mRNA suggested that PGE2 had only a modest stimulatory effect on 
IGFBP-5 gene transcription, and transient transfection studies with IGFBP-5
promoter-reporter genes confirmed that PGE2 enhanced promoter activity by
approximately 2-fold. Similar stimulatory effects were seen with forskolin. A DNA
fragment with only 51 base pairs of the 5'-flanking sequence retained hormonal
responsiveness, which may be mediated by a binding site for transcription factor 
AP-2 located at positions -44 to -36 in the proximal IGFBP-5 promoter. Incubation
of osteoblasts with the mRNA transcriptional inhibitor
5,6-dichloro-1-beta-D-ribofuranosylbenzimidazole demonstrated that PGE2 enhanced 
IGFBP-5 mRNA stability by 2-fold, increasing the t1/2 from 9 to 18 h. The effects
of PGE2 on steady-state IGFBP-5 transcripts were abrogated by preincubating cells
with cycloheximide, indicating that the effects of PGE2 on both gene
transcription and mRNA stability required ongoing protein synthesis. Therefore,
both promoter-dependent and -independent pathways converge to enhance IGFBP-5
gene expression in response to PGE2 in osteoblasts.

PMID: 8636084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Biochem Pharmacol. 1996 Mar 22;51(6):771-8.

AP-2-mediated regulation of human NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) gene
expression.

Xie T(1), Jaiswal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA. 19111, 
USA.

NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) is a flavoprotein that catalyzes
two-electron reduction and detoxification of quinones. We have shown previously
that twenty-four base pairs of the human Antioxidant Response Element (hARE)
mediate basal and xenobiotic-induced expression of the NQO1 gene [Li and Jaiswal,
J Biol Chem 267: 15097-15104, 1992]. In the present report, we have characterized
a second cis-element, AP-2, at nucleotide position -157 of the human NQO1 gene
promotor that regulates basal and cAMP-induced transcription of the NQO1 gene.
The NQO1 gene AP-2 mediated expression of the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase 
(CAT) gene and the binding of nuclear proteins to the AP-2 element were observed 
in HeLa (AP-2 positive) cells but not in human hepatoblastoma Hep-G2 (AP-2
deficient) cells, indicating the involvement of transcription factors AP-2 in the
regulation of NQO1 gene expression. Affinity purification of nuclear protein that
binds to the NQO1 gene AP-2 DNA element and western analysis revealed that AP-2
indeed binds to the NQO1 gene AP-2 element and regulates its expression HeLa
cells. The involvement of AP-2 in the regulation of NQO1 gene expression was
confirmed by the observation that cDNA-derived AP-2 protein in Hep-G2 cells
increased in NQO1 gene AP-2 but not mutant AP-2 mediated expression of CAT gene
in Hep-G2 cells.

PMID: 8602872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Reprod Dev. 1996 Mar;43(3):290-7.

Promoter mapping of the mouse Tcp-10bt gene in transgenic mice identifies
essential male germ cell regulatory sequences.

Ewulonu UK(1), Snyder L, Silver LM, Schimenti JC.

Author information: 
(1)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Transgenic mice were generated to localize essential promoter elements in the
mouse testis-expressed Tcp-10 genes. These genes are expressed exclusively in
male germ cells, and exhibit a diffuse range of transcriptional start sites,
possibly due to the absence of a TATA box. A series of transgene constructs
containing different amounts of 5' flanking DNA revealed that all sequences
necessary for appropriate temporal and tissue-specific transcription of Tcp-10
reside between positions -1 to -973. All transgenic animals containing these
sequences expressed a chimeric transgene at high levels, in a pattern that
paralleled the endogenous genes. These experiments further defined a 227 bp
fragment from -746 to -973 that was absolutely essential for expression. In a
gel-shift assay, this 227-bp fragment bound nuclear protein from testis, but not 
other tissues, to yield two retarded bands. Sequence analysis of this fragment
revealed a half-site for the AP-2 transcription factor recognition sequence. Gel 
shift assays using native or mutant oligonucleotides demonstrated that the
putative AP-2 recognition sequence was essential for generating the retarded
bands. Since the binding activity is testis-specific, but AP-2 expression is not 
exclusive to male germ cells, it is possible that transcription of Tcp-10
requires interaction between AP-2 and a germ cell-specific transcription factor.

PMID: 8868241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):932-42.

Drosophila homologs of the proto-oncogene product PEBP2/CBF beta regulate the
DNA-binding properties of Runt.

Golling G(1), Li L, Pepling M, Stebbins M, Gergen JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, State University of New York at
Stony Brook, 11794-5215, USA.

The Drosophila runt gene is the founding member of the Runt domain family of
transcriptional regulators. Mammalian Runt domain genes encode the alpha subunit 
of the heterometric DNA-binding factor PEBP2/CBF. The unrelated PEBP2/CBF beta
protein interacts with the Runt domain to increase its affinity for DNA. The
conserved ability of the Drosophila Runt protein to respond to the stimulating
effect of mammalian PEBP2/CBF beta indicated that flies were likely to have a
homologous beta protein. Using the yeast two-hybrid system to isolate cDNAs for
Runt-interacting proteins, we identified two Drosophila genes, referred to as
Brother and Big-brother, that have substantial sequence homology with PEBP2/CBF
beta. Yeast two-hybrid experiments as well as in vitro DNA-binding studies
confirmed the functional homology of the Brother, Big-brother, and PEBP2/CBF beta
proteins and demonstrated that the conserved regions of the Runt and Brother
proteins are required for their heterodimeric interaction. The DNA-bending
properties of Runt domain proteins in the presence and absence of their partners 
were also examined. Our results show that Runt domain proteins bend DNA and that 
this bending is influenced by Brother protein family members, supporting the idea
that heterodimerization is associated with a conformational change in the Runt
domain. Analysis of expression patterns in Drosophila embryos revealed that
Brother and Big-brother are likely to interact with runt in vivo and further
suggested that the activity of these proteins is not restricted to their
interaction with Runt.

PMCID: PMC231075
PMID: 8622696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Cancer Res. 1996 Feb 15;56(4):779-82.

High levels of AP-2-binding activity in cell lines infected with human T-cell
leukemia virus type I: possible enhancement of AP-2 binding by human T-cell
leukemia virus type I tax.

Mori N(1), Prager D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of
California-Los Angeles School of Medicine 90048, USA.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I) is the etiological agent for adult
T-cell leukemia and tropical spastic paraparesis/HTLV-I-associated myelopathy.
Recently, the transcription factor AP-2 has been demonstrated to be capable of
activating gene expression from HTLV-I long terminal repeat. To determine whether
changes occur in the levels of AP-2-binding activity in HTLV-I-infected cell
lines, we compared the levels of AP-2 binding of nuclear extracts obtained from
HTLV-I-infected T-cell lines with those of nuclear extracts obtained from
uninfected T-cell lines. High levels of AP-2-binding activity were observed in
HTLV-I-infected cell lines (MT-2, HUT-102, and SLB-1) using the mobility shift
assay. In contrast, in the uninfected cell lines (Jurkat, HUT-78, and MLA 144),
AP-2-binding activity was obviously low compared with that in the HTLV-I-infected
cell lines. HTLV-I transactivator protein tax activates expression of both viral 
and cellular genes. We have demonstrated further that introduction of the tax
gene into Jurkat cells stimulated AP-2-binding activity. These results indicate
that HTLV-I-infected T cells exhibit constitutive AP-2-binding activity, and that
tax may increase the DNA binding activity of AP-2.

PMID: 8631013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Gene. 1996 Feb 12;168(2):279-80.

Comparison of the human genomic structure of the Runt domain-encoding
PEBP2/CBFalpha gene family.

Ahn MY(1), Bae SC, Maruyama M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Japan.

We cloned the human cDNA corresponding to the cDNA (PEBP2alphaB-451) encoding the
mouse polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein 2alphaB-451, representing a major
splice variant from acute myeloid leukemia gene 1 (AML1). Genomic DNA clones of
AML1 were also isolated and the exon/intron structure was determined.
Furthermore, we determined and compared the genomic structures of three mammalian
Runt domain-containing genes, PEBP2alphaA,AML/PEBE2alphaB and PEBP2alphaC.

PMID: 8654962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 9;271(6):3033-8.

Activation of epidermal growth factor receptor gene transcription by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate is mediated by activator protein 2.

Johnson AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Division of Basic Sciences, NCI, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

The response of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor gene to phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) was analyzed using nuclei and nuclear extracts
prepared from PMA-treated KB cells. Transient transfection assays and nuclear
run-off experiments showed that PMA increased EGF receptor gene transcription.
Cell-free transcription with promoter mutants revealed that the region of the
promoter containing nucleotides -150 to -16 was sufficient for PMA inducibility. 
A promoter fragment containing nucleotides -167 to -105 showed increased binding 
of a factor present in extracts prepared from PMA-treated cells. When this factor
was partially purified by column chromatography, it showed specific PMA-dependent
binding to an EGF receptor promoter fragment. This binding was competed by an
SV40 fragment containing binding sites for Sp1, AP1, and AP2. Purified AP2 was
used in DNase I footprinting experiments to show that this factor can bind to the
EGF receptor promoter. Oligonucleotides corresponding to the AP2 binding sites
found in the EGF receptor promoter showed the ability to bind AP2 and compete for
the binding of a factor induced by PMA treatment. The addition of AP2 to nuclear 
extract resulted in increased transcription from the EGF receptor promoter. These
results demonstrate that AP2 can activate EGF receptor gene expression and may
mediate the PMA response of this gene.

PMID: 8621697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jan 26;271(4):2307-12.

Identification of an inverted CCAAT box motif in the fatty-acid synthase gene as 
an essential element for modification of transcriptional regulation by cAMP.

Rangan VS(1), Oskouian B, Smith S.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Oakland Research Institute, California 94609, USA.

The antagonistic effect of cAMP on the insulin-induced expression of fatty acid
synthase (FAS) in liver could be mimicked in vitro using H4IIE hepatoma cells,
both by measuring the response of the endogenous FAS gene and by assaying
expression of transfected reporter genes containing promoter elements of the FAS 
gene. 5'-Deletion analysis and replacement mutagenesis revealed that an essential
element required for cAMP antagonism of the insulin effect is an inverted CCAAT
box located between nucleotides -99 and -92. DNase I foot-printing and gel shift 
analysis revealed that this region can bind a protein present in nuclei of liver 
and spleen, organs that express high and undetectable levels of FAS,
respectively. This protein is not a CCAAT/enhancerbinding protein, C/EBP. Thus,
the FAS gene appears unusual in that the sequence element required for
transcriptional regulation by cAMP is neither a cAMP response element (CRE) nor a
binding site for AP-1, AP-2, or C/EBP. These results suggest that essential to
the regulation of FAS transcription by cAMP is the interaction of an inverted
CCAAT box motif with a constitutively produced trans-acting factor that either
itself undergoes modification in response to cAMP or associated with a protein
that is produced or modified by cAMP exposure.

PMID: 8567694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Genomics. 1996 Jan 15;31(2):234-7.

Physical and genetic localization of the gene encoding the AP-2 transcription
factor to mouse chromosome 13.

Warren G(1), Gordon M, Siracusa LD, Buchberg AM, Williams T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

Transcription factors are a major determinant of developmental fate. The
chromosomal localization of the genes encoding these proteins provides important 
information that can link them to known genetic abnormalities. Here, we report
the mapping of the mouse gene for transcription factor AP-2, a protein that has
been implicated in human oncogenesis. Using FISH, we have mapped the gene
encoding the transcription factor AP-2, Tcfap2, to mouse Chromosome 13A5-B1. We
have also extended this analysis by placing Tcfap2 on the mouse genetic map, and 
we discuss the candidate mouse mutations that map in the vicinity of this
transcription factor.

PMID: 8824807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Connect Tissue Res. 1996;35(1-4):15-21.

The osteocalcin gene promoter provides a molecular blueprint for regulatory
mechanisms controlling bone tissue formation: role of transcription factors
involved in development.

Lian JB(1), Stein GS, Stein JL, Van Wijnen A, McCabe L, Banerjee C, Hoffmann H.

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Department of Cell Biology,
Worcester 01655, USA.

Characterization of regulatory sequences and their cognate binding factors in the
bone-specific osteocalcin (OC) gene promoter has provided insight into mechanisms
that control expression of the gene under diverse biological conditions. We
present evidence for AP-1 motifs and two multipartite conserved regulatory
sequences, the OC Box I (nt-99 to-76) and a site designated OC Box II (nt-136
to-130) in contributing to developmental and tissue-specific expression of
osteocalcin. OC Box I is characterized by a homeodomain binding site and OC Box
II is a recognition sequence for AML-1 (also called PEBP2 alpha), a runt
homology-related DNA binding protein. Functional activity of the elements was
established in osseous and non-osseous cell lines and is in part related to the
binding of osteoblast-specific complexes which enhance OC transcription. The
contribution of several elements and binding of multiple classes of transcription
factors to independent elements in both these domains serve to illustrate the
complexity of control required for tissue-specific OC expression.

PMID: 9084639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Connect Tissue Res. 1996;35(1-4):7-14.

Study of osteoblast-specific expression of one mouse osteocalcin gene:
characterization of the factor binding to OSE2.

Ducy P(1), Geoffroy V, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

In an attempt to understand the mechanisms of osteoblast-specific expression, we 
analyzed the promoter of the mouse osteocalcin gene 2, an osteoblast-specific
gene. In this promoter, using a combination of DNA transfection experiments and
DNA binding assays, we have identified two osteoblast-specific cis-acting
elements called OSE1 and OSE2. Inspection of OSE2 DNA sequence and site-specific 
mutagenesis allowed us to define a core sequence for OSE2. This core sequence is 
identical to the DNA binding site of the PEBP2 alpha transcription factors, the
mouse homologues of the Drosophila Runt protein. Here we show that OSF2, the
factor present in osteoblast nuclear extracts and binding to OSE2, is
immunologically related to the PEBP2 alpha transcription factors. In DNA
cotransfection experiment, a human homologue of PEBP2 alpha transcription factor 
increases the activity of a short osteocalcin promoter through its binding to
OSE2. Thus, this study presents evidence that OSF2 is a member of the PEBP2 alpha
family of transcription factors.

PMID: 9084638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Mol Biol Rep. 1996;23(1):59-70.

Transcription factor regulation of epidermal keratinocyte gene expression.

Eckert RL(1), Welter JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH 44106-4970, USA.

The epidermis is a tissue that undergoes a very complex and tightly controlled
differentiation program. The elaboration of this program is generally flawless,
resulting in the production of an effective protective barrier for the organism. 
Many of the genes expressed during keratinocyte differentiation are expressed in 
a coordinate manner; this suggests that common regulatory models may emerge. The 
simplest model envisions a 'common regulatory element' that is possessed by all
genes that are regulated together (e.g., involucrin and transglutaminase type 1).
Studies to date, however, have not identified any such elements and, if anything,
the available studies suggest that appropriate expression of each gene is
achieved using sometime subtly and sometime grossly different mechanisms. Recent 
studies indicate that a variety of transcription factors (AP1, AP2, POU domain.
Sp1, STAT factors) are expressed in the epidermis and, in many cases, multiple
members of several families are present (e.g., AP1 and POU domain factors). The
simultaneous expression of multiple members of a single transcription factor
family provides numerous opportunities for complex regulation. Some studies
suggest that specific members of these families interact with specific
keratinocyte genes. The best studied of these families in epidermis is the AP1
family of factors. All of the known AP1 factors are expressed in epidermis [52]
and each is expressed in a specific spatial pattern that suggests the potential
to regulate multiple genes. It will be important to determine the role of each of
these members in regulating keratinocyte gene expression. Finally, information is
beginning to emerge regarding signal transduction in keratinocytes. Some of the
early events in signal transduction have been identified (e.g., PLC and PKC
activation, etc.) and some of the molecular targets of these pathways (e.g., AP1 
transcription factors) are beginning to be identified. Eventually we can expect
to elucidation of all of the steps between the interaction of the stimulating
agent with its receptor and the activation of target gene expression.

PMID: 8983019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mech Dev. 1996 Jan;54(1):83-94.

AP-2.2, a novel gene related to AP-2, is expressed in the forebrain, limbs and
face during mouse embryogenesis.

Chazaud C(1), Oulad-Abdelghani M, Bouillet P, Décimo D, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, C.U. de Strasbourg.

Using a differential subtractive hybridization cloning procedure we have recently
identified the AP-2.2 gene as a novel early retinoic acid-induced gene in murine 
P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. We have also shown that the AP-2.2 protein, which 
is highly related to the AP-2 transcription factor, can activate transcription
when bound to an AP-2 consensus binding site [Oulad-Abdelghani et al. (1995) Mol.
Cell. Biol., submitted]. We report here the in situ hybridization pattern of
expression of AP-2.2 transcripts during mouse embryogenesis. At 7.5 days
post-coitum, AP-2.2 transcripts were detected in the boundary region between
neural plate and surface ectoderm, as well as in extra-embryonic tissues. By
8.0-8.5 gestational days, AP-2.2 transcripts appeared to be expressed in
premigratory and migrating neural crest cells. Over the following days, the
AP-2.2 gene displayed region-restricted expression in the facial mesenchyme,
especially around the embryonic mouth cavity and the nasal cavities, as well as
in the surface ectoderm, nasal and oral epithelia. AP-2.2 RNA was also
specifically expressed in the presumptive cortical region of the forebrain
vesicles. AP-2.2 transcripts were restricted to the distal mitotic area (the
'progress zone') of the limb buds and of the genital bud. AP-2.2 expression also 
appeared to be specific for primordial germ cells in the genital ridges. Thus,
the AP-2.2 gene is expressed in several embryonic areas whose development can be 
affected by retinoids, such as the forebrain, face and limb buds.

PMID: 8808408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Physiol. 1996 Jan;270(1 Pt 2):H259-66.

Regulation of NHE-1 promoter in mammalian myocardium.

Yang W(1), Dyck JR, Wang H, Fliegel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada.

The Na+/H exchanger (NHE-1) is an integral membrane protein responsible for
intracellular pH regulation in the myocardium and other tissues. The NHE-1
isoform is universally distributed in mammalian cells. We examined regulation of 
a 1.1-kb fragment of the NHE-1 promoter in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. Deletion 
of most of the promoter up to an AP-2 site reduced activity 75%. Further deletion
of the promoter or mutation of the AP-2 site reduced or eliminated activity
almost completely. Gel mobility shift assay showed that purified AP-2 protein or 
AP-2-like protein from nuclear extracts of isolated myocytes can bind to DNA of
the NHE-1 protein. External acidosis did not cause increased transcription from
the promoter. Removal of serum from the medium reduced activity of the NHE-1
promoter. The elements responsible for activation of the promoter by serum were
contained within both the 1.1-kb and AP-2-containing region. The results show
that the cis-acting putative AP-2 site and the presence of serum are important in
NHE-1 expression, whereas external acidosis had no direct effect on the promoter.

PMID: 8769760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Virus Res. 1996 Jan;40(1):65-74.

The adenoviral transcription factor, E1A 13S, trans-activates the human tumor
necrosis factor-alpha promoter.

Rhoades KL(1), Golub SH, Economou JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UCLA School of Medicine 90024, USA.

The 1311 bp TNF-alpha promoter region fused to a luciferase reporter vector was
used in a transient transfection system to study the regulation of TNF-alpha
promoter activity by E1A 13S in the U937 macrophage cell line and the MLA 144 T
cell line. Co-transfections of the TNF-alpha promoter with an E1A expression
vector resulted in a strong trans-activation of the promoter in both cell lines. 
Sequential truncation of the promoter mapped the E1A responsive region to
sequences contained between -120 bp and the transcription start site. Truncation 
to -95 bp caused a dramatic 87% reduction of E1A activation in MLA 144 cells and 
further truncation to -36 bp caused a complete loss of E1A activation. In U937
cells, each truncation lowered E1A responsiveness but activity was never
completely abolished. Site-directed mutagenesis of putative cis-acting sequences 
in the TNF-alpha promoter identified the AP-1 site as important for E1A
trans-activation in the U937 cell line; the AP-2 and CRE sites also appeared to
contribute to a lesser degree. In contrast, only the CRE mutation caused a
reduction in E1A induced activity in the MLA 144 cell line. Co-transfection of
the E1A expression vector with expression vectors for the cellular transcription 
factors AP-1, AP-2 and CREB indicated that none of these transcription factors
showed any co-operativity with E1A. Thus, cis-acting sequences which contribute
to E1A trans-activation of the TNF-alpha promoter have been delineated.

PMID: 8725122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 1996;122(5):266-74.

Structural alterations in the transcription factor PEBP2/CBF linked to four
different types of leukemia.

Ito Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, 
Japan.

Polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2), also called core binding factor 
(CBF), is a heterodimer composed of the alpha and the beta subunits. Structural
alterations of each of the two subunits generated by recurrent chromosome
translocations/inversion are associated with acute myeloid leukemia or acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Chimeric proteins containing a part of either the alpha
or beta subunits have a potential to affect the transcriptional regulation
through the PEBP2/CBF site. Structure and function of PEBP2/CBF and possible
mechanisms of leukemogenesis caused by the chimeric proteins are summarized.

PMID: 8609149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;211:289-98.

Transforming properties of the leukemic inv(16) fusion gene CBFB-MYH11.

Hajra A(1), Liu PP, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Transfer, National Center for Human Genome Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PMID: 8585960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;211:149-57.

Regulation of immature myeloid cell differentiation by PEBP2/CBF, Myb, C/EBP and 
Ets family members.

Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Division, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

PMID: 8585945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 29;270(52):30973-9.

A PEBP2 alpha/AML-1-related factor increases osteocalcin promoter activity
through its binding to an osteoblast-specific cis-acting element.

Geoffroy V(1), Ducy P, Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

To identify osteoblast-specific cis-acting elements and trans-acting factors, we 
initiated an analysis of the promoter of a mouse osteocalcin gene, an
osteoblast-specific gene. In this promoter, we identified two osteoblast-specific
cis-acting elements (Ducy, P. and Karsenty, G. (1995) Mol. Cell. Biol. 15,
1858-1869). The sequence of one of these elements, OSE2, is identical to the
DNA-binding site of the PEBP2 alpha/AML-1 transcription factors, the mammalian
homologues of the Drosophila Runt protein. Here we show, using nuclear extracts, 
recombinant protein, and a specific antiserum against AML-1 proteins in
DNA-binding assays, that one member of this family, AML-1B, binds specifically to
OSE2 and is immunologically related to OSF2, the factor present in osteoblast
nuclear extracts that binds to OSE2. By DNA cotransfection experiments, we also
demonstrate that AML-1B can increase the activity of a short osteocalcin promoter
through its binding to OSE2. Lastly, the different mobilities of osteoblast
nuclear extract-DNA complexes compared with T-cell nuclear extract-DNA complexes,
along with the inability of OSF2 to be upregulated by retinoic acid, unlike the
other PEBP2 alpha factors, suggest that OSF2 is a new member of this family of
transcription factors. Thus, this study demonstrates that AML-1B can increase
gene expression of an osteoblast-specific gene through its binding to an
osteoblast-specific cis-acting element and presents evidence that OSF2 is a
member of the PEBP2 alpha/AML-1 family of transcription factors.

PMID: 8537354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genomics. 1995 Nov 20;30(2):224-32.

Structure, organization, and transcription units of the human
alpha-platelet-derived growth factor receptor gene, PDGFRA.

Kawagishi J(1), Kumabe T, Yoshimoto T, Yamamoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Tohoku University Gene Research Center, Sendai, Japan.

Isolation and characterization of genomic clones encoding human alpha-platelet
derived growth factor receptor (HGMW-approved symbol PDGFRA) revealed that the
gene spans approximately 65 kb and contains 23 exons. The 5'-untranslated region 
of the mRNA is encoded by exon 1, and a large intron of 23 kb separates exon 2
encoding the translation initiator codon AUG and the signal sequence. The
locations of exon/intron boundaries in the extracellular immunoglobulin-like
domains, the transmembrane domain, the two cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains,
and the kinase insertion domain are very similar to those in c-kit and macrophage
colony stimulating factor-1 receptor genes. The transcription start site was
mapped to a position 393 bp upstream of the AUG translocation initiator codon by 
S1 mapping and primer extension analysis. The 5'-flanking region of the gene
lacks a typical TATA box but contains a typical CCAAT box and GATA motifs. This
region also contains potential sites for AP-1, AP-2, Oct-1, Oct-2, and Sp1. The
5'-flanking region of the gene was fused to the luciferase reporter gene, and
transcription units of the gene were determined.

PMID: 8586421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Nov 11;23(21):4502-9.

Tissue-specific in vivo protein-DNA interactions at the promoter region of the
Xenopus 63 kDa keratin gene during metamorphosis.

Warshawsky D(1), Miller L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois at Chicago 60607,
USA.

The Xenopus 63 kDa keratin gene is developmentally regulated and is expressed
only in the epidermis. Full activation of the 63 kDa keratin gene requires two
regulatory steps, the first independent and the second dependent on the thyroid
hormone triiodothyronine (T3). Sequence analysis of a genomic clone of the 63 kDa
keratin gene identified potential AP2 and SP1 binding sites upstream of the
transcription initiation site. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays using
purified or enriched proteins, as well as HeLa nuclear extract in conjunction
with AP2- and SP1-specific antibodies, have been used to demonstrate that human
AP2 and SP1 bind elements upstream of the transcription initiation site. In vivo 
footprinting with ligation mediated PCR revealed several footprints, within 350
bp upstream of the transcription initiation site, including those at the AP2 and 
SP1 sites, that are unique to epidermal cells which express the keratin gene.
These footprints were absent in blood cells and XL177 cells which do not express 
the gene. Comparison of footprints between cells which express the 63 kDa keratin
gene at low or high levels showed that the same binding sites are occupied,
indicating that these sites are required for basal as well as T3-induced
expression of the 63 kDa keratin gene.

PMCID: PMC307410
PMID: 7501476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Nov 11;23(21):4378-82.

Sulphur mustards inhibit binding of transcription factor AP2 in vitro.

Gray PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Aeronautical and Maritime Research Laboratory, Defence Science and Technology 
Organisation, Melbourne, Australia.

The bifunctional sulphur mustard (bis-(2-chloroethyl)sulphide, HD) and its
monofunctional analogue (2-chloroethyl ethyl sulphide, CEES) are both vesicants. 
In this study, both mustards were shown to rapidly alkylate the AP2 consensus
binding sequence incorporated in a 26mer oligonucleotide. The reaction was
essentially complete within 10 min under the conditions employed in this study
and -95% of the oligonucleotides were alkylated at least once using 500 microM HD
and 1 mM CEES. Progressive alkylation of the consensus sequence was parallelled
by a decrease in transcription factor binding. Under reaction conditions which
alkylated approximately 95% of the oligonucleotides at least once, the binding of
cloned human AP2 was reduced by 93 and 76% by HD and CEES, respectively, compared
with control values. The interference with binding is a result of alkylation of
the DNA and not damage to the transcription factor by mustard or its hydrolysis
products. Interference with transcription factor binding would be expected to
have a profound influence on the ability of the cell to function normally and to 
respond to DNA damage and may contribute significantly to the skin damage
produced by these compounds.

PMCID: PMC307393
PMID: 7501459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 10;270(45):26986-92.

The mouse p44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1) gene. Genomic organization and structure of the 5'-flanking regulatory 
region.

Pagès G(1), Stanley ER, Le Gall M, Brunet A, Pouysségur J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biochimie, CNRS UMR134, Nice, France.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) or extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
are ubiquitous kinases conserved from fungi to mammals. Their activity is
regulated by phosphorylation on both threonine and tyrosine, and they play a
crucial role in the regulation of proliferation and differentiation. We report
here the cloning of the murine p44 MAP kinase (extracellular signal-regulated
kinase 1) gene, the determination of its intron/exon boundaries, and the
characterization of its promoter. The gene spans approximately eight kilobases
(kb) and can be divided into nine exons and eight introns, each coding region
exon containing from one to three of the highly conserved protein kinase domains.
Primer extension analysis reveals the existence of two major start sites of
transcription located at -183 and -186 base pairs (bp) as well as four discrete
start sites for transcription located at -178, -192, -273, and -292 bp of the
initiation of translation. However, the start site region lacks TATA-like
sequences but does contain initiator-like sequences proximal to the major start
sites obtained by primer extension. 1 kb of the promoter region has been
sequenced. It contains three putative TATA boxes far upstream of the main start
sites region, one AP-1 box, one AP-2 box, one Malt box, one GAGA box, one half
serum-responsive element, and putative binding sites for Sp1 (five), GC-rich
binding factor (five), CTF-NF1 (one), Myb (one), p53 (two), Ets-1 (one), NF-IL6
(two), MyoD (two), Zeste (one), and hepatocyte nuclear factor-5 (one). To
determine the sites critical for the function of the p44 MAPK promoter, we
constructed a series of chimeric genes containing variable regions of the
5'-flanking sequence of p44 MAPK gene and the coding region for luciferase.
Activity of the promoter, measured by its capacity to direct expression of a
luciferase reporter gene, is strong, being comparable with the activity of the
Rous sarcoma virus promoter. Progressive deletions of the approximately 1 kb
(-1200/-78) promoter region allowed us to define a minimal region of 186 bp
(-284/-78) that has maximal promoter activity. Within this context, deletion of
the AP-2 binding site reduces by 30-40% the activity of the promoter. Further
deletion of this minimal promoter that removes the major start sites (-167/-78)
surprisingly preserves promoter activity. This result implicates a major role of 
this region that contains the Sp1 sites.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7592946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Am J Physiol. 1995 Nov;269(5 Pt 1):L588-602.

Activation of NF-kappa B and elevation of MnSOD gene expression by thiol reducing
agents in lung adenocarcinoma (A549) cells.

Das KC(1), Lewis-Molock Y, White CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Center for Immunology and
Respiratory Medicine, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

The effect of reducing agents, including N-acetylcysteine (NAC), dithiothreitol
(DTT), and 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME) on nuclear transcription factor-kappa B
(NF-kappa B) activation and manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) expression was
investigated in a pulmonary adenocarcinoma (A549) cell line. NAC, DTT, and 2-ME
each activated the transcription factor NF-kappa B and increased steady-state
levels of MnSOD mRNA and enzyme activity in these cells. In addition, NAC, DTT,
and 2-ME increased chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) activity in cells
transfected with a construct containing the CAT gene under the control of the rat
MnSOD promoter. SOD and catalase (500 U/ml) plus ethanol (1 mM) did not inhibit
activation of NF-kappa B or elevation of steady-state MnSOD mRNA levels by NAC,
DTT, or 2-ME. Controls in which comparable amounts of O2-. to those produced by
thiols were generated by hypoxanthine and xanthine oxidase, or in which H2O2 was 
added directly, had neither activated NF-kappa B nor elevated MnSOD mRNA. This
shows that reactive oxygen intermediates, which may be formed during
autooxidation, may not contribute to activation of NF-kappa B. Because the MnSOD 
promoter also contains potential binding sites for other transcription factors,
such as promoter-selective transcription factor-1 (SP-1), activator protein-1
(AP-1), AP-2, adenosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate-regulator element binding
factor (CREB), and transcription factor IID complex (TFIID), the effect of thiols
on their activation also were evaluated. In contrast to findings with NF-kappa B,
there was only minor activation of AP-1 by thiols, and none of the other
transcription factors were activated by thiols. AP-1 activation was inhibited by 
catalase (500 U/ml) plus SOD plus ethanol (1 mM). Addition of 700 microM H2O2
also activated AP-1, and catalase at 500 U/ml prevented this activation. This
indicates that H2O2 produced as a result of autooxidation of thiols can activate 
AP-1 but not NF-kappa B. Thus a close association between exposure to reducing
agents, activation of NF-kappa B, and elevation of MnSOD gene expression is
demonstrated.

PMID: 7491977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 27;270(43):25584-90.

Promoter structure and transcriptional activation of the murine TSG-14 gene
encoding a tumor necrosis factor/interleukin-1-inducible pentraxin protein.

Altmeyer A(1), Klampfer L, Goodman AR, Vilcek J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, New York University Medical Center, New York
10016, USA.

Human TNF-stimulated gene 14 (TSG-14) encodes a secreted 42-kDa glycoprotein that
shows significant homology to proteins of the pentraxin family, which includes
the acute phase reactants C-reactive protein and serum amyloid P component.
Levels of TSG-14 protein (also termed PTX-3) become elevated in the serum of mice
and humans after injection with bacterial lipopolysaccharide, but in contrast to 
conventional acute phase proteins, the bulk of TSG-14 synthesis in the intact
organism occurs outside the liver. In the present study we cloned and partially
sequenced murine genomic TSG-14 DNA. Analysis of the coding region predicts a
high degree of amino acid sequence homology between murine and human TSG-14 (88
and 75% identity in the first and second exons, respectively). The promoter of
the TSG-14 gene lacks consensus sequences for either a TATA box or CCAAT box.
Primer extension analysis and S1 nuclease protection assay revealed one major
transcription start site, situated within a consensus sequence for an initiator
element. Sequence analysis of a approximately 1.4-kilobase pair fragment of the
5'-flanking region of the TSG-14 gene revealed the presence of numerous potential
enhancer binding elements, including six NF-IL6-like sites, four AP-1, one AP-2, 
one NF-kB, two Sp1, two interferon-gamma-activated sites (GAS), one Hox-1.3, and 
five binding sites for Ets family members. Transfection of BALB/c 3T3 cells with 
promoter DNA fragments linked to the luciferase reporter gene revealed that the
5'-flanking region of the TSG-14 gene comprises elements that can mediate a basal
level of transcription and inducibility by TNF.

PMID: 7592730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 20;270(42):24844-51.

Transcription factor AP-2 regulates human insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-5 gene expression.

Duan C(1), Clemmons DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 27599,
USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 (IG-FBP-5) is an important modulator
of IGF actions. IG-FBP-5 mRNA is abundant in human fibroblasts and is regulated
by cAMP. To understand the molecular mechanism underlying this cell type-specific
expression and regulation, we isolated the 5'-flanking region of the human
IGFBP-5 gene and fused it to a promoter-less reporter plasmid encoding
luciferase. Transient transfection of the construct into fibroblasts displayed
both constitutive and cAMP-induced promoter activity in an orientation-specific
manner. Sequence analysis revealed the existence of distal and proximal consensus
AP-2 recognition sites located 5' from the TATA box. Both sequences bound
specifically to human AP-2 in vitro by gel shift mobility assay. The possible
role of AP-2 was examined by cotransfection of AP-2-deficient HepG2 cells with
the IGFBP-5 promoter construct and a human AP-2 expression construct.
Cotransfection with AP-2 significantly elevated IGFBP-5 promoter activity. This
trans-activation was IGFBP-5 promoter and AP-2 specific. In AP-2 abundant
fibroblasts, expression of AP-2B, a dominant-negative inhibitor of AP-2,
suppressed IGFBP-5 promoter activity. In HepG2 cells, AP-2B alone had no
significant effect, but the AP-2-induced activation of promoter activity was
inhibited by AP-2B in a dose-dependent manner. The relative functional importance
of the putative AP-2 binding sites was examined using a number of deletion
mutants and point mutations. When the first two distal CCCCACCC-like putative
AP-2 sites were deleted or mutated, there was no change in AP-2-induced
trans-activation. Deletion or mutation of the proximal GCCNNNGGC-like sequences, 
however, abolished the AP-2-induced activation. These results suggest that AP-2
regulates the IGFBP-5 gene expression through the proximal GCCNNNGGC-like
sequences. This AP-2-mediated trans-activation contributes at least in part to
the constitutively high expression of IGFBP-5 in fibroblasts and to the cAMP
responsiveness of this gene.

PMID: 7559606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 13;270(41):24361-9.

The human synapsin II gene promoter. Possible role for the transcription factor
zif268/egr-1, polyoma enhancer activator 3, and AP2.

Petersohn D(1), Schoch S, Brinkmann DR, Thiel G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany.

Synapsin II is a neuron-specific phosphoprotein that selectively binds to small
synaptic vesicles in the presynaptic nerve terminal. Here we report the cloning
and sequencing of the 5'-flanking region of the human synapsin II gene. This
sequence is very GC-rich and lacks a TATA or CAAT box. Two major transcriptional 
start sites were mapped. A hybrid gene consisting of the Escherichia coli
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene under the control of 837 base pairs of the
synapsin II 5'-upstream region was transfected into neuronal and nonneuronal
cells. While reporter gene expression was low in neuroblastoma and non-neuronal
cells, high chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activities were monitored in PC12
pheochromocytoma cells. However, there was no correlation between reporter gene
expression in the transfected cells and endogenous synapsin II immunoreactivity. 
Using DNA-protein binding assays we showed that the transcription factors
zif268/egr-1, polyoma enhancer activator 3 (PEA3), and AP2 specifically contact
the synapsin II promoter DNA in vitro. Moreover, the zif268/egr-1 protein as well
as PEA3 were shown to stimulate transcription of a reporter gene containing
synapsin II promoter sequences. In the nervous system, zif268/egr-1 functions as 
a "third messenger" with a potential role in synaptic plasticity. PEA3 is
expressed in the brain and its activity is regulated by proteins encoded from
non-nuclear oncogenes. We postulate that zif268/egr-1 and PEA3 couple
extracellular signals to long-term responses by regulating synapsin II gene
expression.

PMID: 7592648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Biol Chem. 1995 Oct 6;270(40):23511-9.

Transcription factor repression and activation of the human acetylcholinesterase 
gene.

Getman DK(1), Mutero A, Inoue K, Taylor P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0636, USA.

Acetylcholinesterase in man is encoded by a single gene, ACHE, located on
chromosome 7q22. In this study, the transcription start sites and major DNA
promoter elements controlling the expression of this gene have been characterized
by structural and functional studies. Immediately upstream of the first
untranslated exon of the gene are GC-rich sequences containing consensus binding 
sites for several transcription factors, including Sp1, EGR-1 and AP2. In vitro
transcription studies and RNase protection analyses of mRNA isolated from human
NT2/D1 teratocarcinoma cells reveal that two closely spaced transcription cap
sites are located at a consensus initiator (Inr) element similar to that found in
the terminal transferase gene. Transient transfection of mutant genes shows that 
removal of three bases of this initiator sequence reduces promoter activity by
98% in NT2/D1 cells. In vitro transcription studies and transient transfection of
a series of 5' deletion mutants of the ACHE promoter linked to a luciferase
reporter show an Sp1 site at -71 to be essential for promoter activity. Purified 
Sp1 protein protects this site from DNase cleavage during in vitro footprinting
experiments. A conserved AP2 consensus binding site, located between the GC box
elements and the Inr, is protected by recombinant AP2 protein in DNase
footprinting experiments, induces a mobility shift with AP2 protein and
AP2-containing cell extracts, and fosters inhibition of transcription by AP2 as
measured by transient transfection in mouse and human cell lines and in in vitro 
transcription reactions. These results indicate that AP2 functions as a repressor
of human ACHE and mouse Ache transcription.

PMID: 7559515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1995 Oct;15(10):887-95.

Characterization of protein complexes formed on the repressor elements of the
human tumor necrosis factor alpha gene.

Fong CW(1), Siddiqui AH, Mark DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Chemotherapeutics and Molecular Genetics, Merck
Research Laboratories, Rahway, NJ 07065, USA.

Human tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) is an important cytokine
responsible for pleiotropic effects in vivo. The expression of TNF-alpha is under
both positive and negative regulation. Previously we showed that a 108 bp region 
(-280 to -172) in the TNF-alpha promoter represses TNF-alpha transcription in
U937 cells. We also demonstrated that a smaller region of the promoter spanning
base pairs -254 and -230 is sufficient for repressor function. This 25 bp
TNF-alpha repressor site (TRS) contains a 10 bp sequence homologous to the
binding site of activator protein AP-2, yet it does not bind the AP-2 protein. In
this study, we demonstrate that this 10 bp core sequence is an essential element 
for the repressor function of the TRS. Using gel retardation analysis with the
108 bp repressor element and the TRS as probes, multiple specific DNA binding
complexes have been identified from U937 nuclear extracts. The complexes B, C,
and D on the 108 bp probe and the three major complexes on the 25 bp TRS probe
are also present in Jurkat and Mono Mac 6 cells, and their abundance in these
cell lines seems to correlate with their postulated repressor function. We have
demonstrated that the major TRS binding proteins, with estimated MWs of 30-60 kD,
copurify on a heparin agarose column and on a DNA affinity column conjugated with
the 10 bp core sequence.

PMID: 8564711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Virol. 1995 Oct;69(10):6038-46.

Both viral E2 protein and the cellular factor PEBP2 regulate transcription via E2
consensus sites within the bovine papillomavirus type 4 long control region.

Jackson ME(1), Campo MS.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, Beatson Laboratories, Bearsden,
Glasgow, Scotland.

The bovine papillomavirus type 4 (BPV4) long control region (LCR) contains three 
consensus binding sites, E2(1), E2(2), and E2(3) (ACCN6GGT), for the viral E2
transcription factor and a fourth degenerate site, dE2 (ATCN6GGT), which lies 3
bp upstream of E2(3). The E2(2) site was found to bind the cellular transcription
factor PEBP2, and mutations at this site reduced basal promoter activity by as
much as 60%, indicating an important role for PEBP2 in LCR function. Mutation of 
the E2(3) or dE2 site slightly decreased basal promoter activity, but the
cellular proteins binding these sites have not yet been characterized. E2 protein
was found to have considerable influence upon LCR promoter activity in primary
bovine palate keratinocytes. Thus, when high levels of BPV1 E2 were present,
almost complete repression of the BPV4 LCR was observed, whereas smaller amounts 
of BPV1 or BPV4 E2 led to transactivation. Mutational analysis indicated that
E2(1) and dE2 mediated transactivation by E2, whereas E2(2) and E2(3) were
responsible for repression by E2. In vitro complexes of binding sites E2(1) and
E2(2) with E2 protein demonstrated much greater stability than complexes formed
by the E2(3) and dE2 sites. These data suggest that the four E2 sites in the BPV4
LCR each perform different functions in the control of transcription and that
competition between cellular transcription factors and viral E2 proteins is
essential in regulating the level of viral gene expression during papilloma
development.

PMCID: PMC189500
PMID: 7666508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Oct 1;233(1):18-26.

Organization of the human N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V gene.

Saito H(1), Gu J, Nishikawa A, Ihara Y, Fujii J, Kohgo Y, Taniguchi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka University Medical School, Suita, Japan.

UDP-N-acetylglucosamine: alpha-6-D-mannoside
beta-1,6-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GlcNAc transferase V), which
catalyzes the transfer of N-acetylglucosamine from UDP-N-acetylglucosamine to
alpha-6-D-mannoside, is an important enzyme regulating the branch formation in
complex-type, N-linked oligosaccharides. It has been reported that the enzymic
activity of GlcNAc transferase V increases after viral transformation and the
enzymic product is closely related to the metastasis of tumors. We previously
reported the purification, cDNA cloning and chromosomal mapping of human GlcNAc
transferase V. In this study, we describe the isolation of genomic clones
encoding human GlcNAc transferase V and the structure of the gene. The human
GlcNAc transferase V gene is divided into 17 exons, and the open reading frame is
encoded by exons 2-17, spanning 155 kb. Analysis of the 5'-untranslated regions
of mRNAs from various cells showed multiple sequences depending on the cell
types. The promoter region of the GlcNAc transferase V gene was characterized by 
searching for any consensus sequences matching those for transcription-factor
binding. The consensus sequences for a TATA box, AP-1, AP-2, and some other
transcription factors were found in the 5'-upstream region of exon 1, and
consensus sequences for LF-A1, HNF1-HP1, liver-restricted transcription factors
and other factors were also found in intron 1. Chloramphenicol acetyltransferase 
fusion plasmids with either the 5'-upstream region of exon 1 or intron 1 were
constructed and transfected into COS-1 cells. Promoter activities of both DNA
fragments were detected, indicating that transcription starts within this region.
These data suggest that the human GlcNAc transferase V gene employs a multiple
promoter system for its transcription, and gene expression may therefore be
regulated in tissue-specific and cell-type-specific manners.

PMID: 7588744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Sep 25;214(3):1130-7.

Calpain inhibitor-induced apoptosis in human prostate adenocarcinoma cells.

Zhu W(1), Murtha PE, Young CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic/Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Although it has been shown that calpains may play a positive role in causing
apoptosis of T cells, we report here that, on the contrary, the inhibition of
calpain-like activities can induce apoptosis in human prostate cancer cells. Two 
calpain inhibitors were used to test growth response on prostate cancer cells and
showed remarkable cytotoxicity. The cytotoxicity was due to apoptosis as judged
by large genomic DNA fragmentation, chromatin condensation and nuclear
fragmentation. Furthermore, using gel band shift assays we have demonstrated that
calpain inhibitor 1 causes a prolonged elevation of AP-1 protein activity in
human prostate cancer cells. The elevation of AP-1 activity appears to be
specific, because calpain inhibitor 1 only stimulates AP-1 but not AP-2 and SP-1 
activities. We postulate that the sustained increase in AP-1 activity may be
involved in apoptosis induced in prostate cells by calpain inhibitors. Our study 
thus suggests that calpain-like activity may be a potentially therapeutic target 
for cancer.

PMID: 7575520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Blood. 1995 Sep 15;86(6):2449-50.

Novel CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcripts and alternative splicing in acute myeloid
leukemia with inversion of chromosome 16.

Novak M, Laczika K, Mitterbauer M, Purtscher B, Scheidel-Petrovic A, Lechner K,
Jaeger U, Haas OA.

Comment in
    Blood. 1996 Mar 15;87(6):2605.

Comment on
    Blood. 1995 May 1;85(9):2289-302.

PMID: 7662994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Sep;15(9):4980-9.

Overexpression of core-binding factor alpha (CBF alpha) reverses cellular
transformation by the CBF beta-smooth muscle myosin heavy chain chimeric
oncoprotein.

Hajra A(1), Liu PP, Speck NA, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Transfer, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Retraction in
    Hajra A, Liu PP, Speck NA, Collins FS. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Dec;16(12):7185.

A fusion between the transcription factor core-binding factor beta (CBF beta;
also known as PEBP2 beta) and the tail region of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain
(SMMHC) is generated by an inversion of chromosome 16 [inv(16) (p13q22)]
associated with the M4Eo subtype of acute myeloid leukemia. We have previously
shown that this CBF beta-SMMHC chimeric protein can transform NIH 3T3 cells and
that this process requires regions of the chimeric protein necessary for
association with the CBF alpha subunit. In this study, we show that NIH 3T3 cells
overexpressing murine Cbf alpha 2 (also known as Aml1) cannot be transformed by
CBF beta-SMMHC and that overexpression of Cbf alpha 2 in cells previously
transformed by CBF beta-SMMHC reverts the cells to a less transformed phenotype. 
Cbf alpha 2 overexpression does not cause any gross morphological changes to NIH 
3T3 cells but does result in increased CBF activity, as indicated by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and transactivation of reporter constructs.
Cells transformed by CBF beta-SMMHC lack normal CBF-DNA complexes and have
decreased levels of transactivation. Reversion of CBF beta-SMMHC transformation
by Cbf alpha 2 is associated with a restoration of normal CBF-DNA complexes and
transactivation activity. A Cbf alpha 2 mutant lacking transactivation properties
does not transform cells when overexpressed, nor does it protect cells from CBF
beta-SMMHC transformation. These results suggest that CBF beta-SMMHC interferes
with the normal function of CBF and that this interference is necessary but not
sufficient for cellular transformation.

PMCID: PMC230745
PMID: 7651416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Immunol. 1995 Sep 1;155(5):2477-86.

Organization, regulatory sequences, and alternatively spliced transcripts of the 
mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) gene.

Sampaio SO(1), Li X, Takeuchi M, Mei C, Francke U, Butcher EC, Briskin MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305,
USA.

The mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule-1 (MAdCAM-1) is expressed
selectively at venular sites of lymphocyte extravasation into mucosal lymphoid
tissues and lamina propria, where it directs local lymphocyte trafficking.
MAdCAM-1 is a multifunctional type l transmembrane adhesion molecule comprising
two distal lg domains involved in alpha 4 beta 7 integrin binding, a mucin-like
region able to display L-selectin-binding carbohydrates, and a membrane-proximal 
lg domain homologous to lgA. We show in this work that the MAdCAM-1 gene is
located on chromosome 10 and contains five exons. The signal peptide and each one
of the three lg domains are encoded by a distinct exon, whereas the
transmembrane, cytoplasmic tail, and 3'-untranslated region of MAdCAM-1 are
combined on a single exon. The mucin-like region and the third lg domain are
encoded together on exon 4. An alternatively spliced MAdCAM-1 mRNA is identified 
that lacks the mucin/lgA-homologous exon 4-encoded sequences. This short variant 
of MAdCAM-1 may be specialized to support alpha 4 beta 7-dependent adhesion
strengthening, independent of carbohydrate-presenting function. Sequences 5' of
the transcription start site include tandem nuclear factor-kappa B sites; AP-1,
AP-2, and signal peptide-1 binding sites; and an estrogen response element. Our
findings reinforce the correspondence between the multidomain structure and
versatile functions of this vascular addressin, and suggest an additional level
of regulation of carbohydrate-presenting capability, and thus of its importance
in lectin-mediated vs alpha 4 beta 7-dependent adhesive events in lymphocyte
trafficking.

PMID: 7650378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Circ Res. 1995 Sep;77(3):466-74.

Characterization of 5' end of human thromboxane receptor gene. Organizational
analysis and mapping of protein kinase C--responsive elements regulating
expression in platelets.

D'Angelo DD(1), Davis MG, Houser WA, Eubank JJ, Ritchie ME, Dorn GW 2nd.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cincinnati Medical Center, OH 45267-0542, USA.

Platelet thromboxane receptors are acutely and reversibly upregulated after acute
myocardial infarction. To determine if platelet thromboxane receptors are under
transcriptional control, we isolated and characterized human genomic DNA clones
containing the 5' flanking region of the thromboxane receptor gene. The
exon-intron structure of the 5' portion of the thromboxane receptor gene was
determined initially by comparing the nucleotide sequence of the 5' flanking
genomic clone with that of a novel human uterine thromboxane receptor cDNA that
extended the mRNA 141 bp further upstream than the previously identified human
placental cDNA. A major transcription initiation site was located in three human 
tissues approximately 560 bp upstream from the translation initiation codon and
380 bp upstream from any previously identified transcription initiation site. The
thromboxane receptor gene has neither a TATA nor a CAAT consensus site. Promoter 
function of the 5' flanking region of the thromboxane receptor gene was evaluated
by transfection of thromboxane receptor gene promoter/chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase (CAT) chimera plasmids into platelet-like K562 cells.
Thromboxane receptor promoter activity, as assessed by CAT expression, was
relatively weak but was significantly enhanced by phorbol ester treatment.
Functional analysis of 5' deletion constructs in transfected K562 cells and gel
mobility shift localized the major phorbol ester-responsive motifs in the
thromboxane receptor gene promoter to a cluster of activator protein-2 (AP-2)
binding consensus sites located approximately 1.8 kb 5' from the transcription
initiation site. These studies are the first to determine the structure and
organization of the 5' end of the thromboxane receptor gene and demonstrate that 
thromboxane receptor gene expression can be regulated by activation of protein
kinase C via induction of an AP-2-like nuclear factor binding to upstream
promoter elements. These findings strongly suggest that the mechanism for
previously described upregulation of platelet thromboxane receptors after acute
myocardial infarction is increased thromboxane receptor gene transcription in
platelet-progenitor cells.

PMID: 7641319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Br J Haematol. 1995 Sep;91(1):104-8.

Detection of CBFB/MYH11 transcripts in patients with inversion and other
abnormalities of chromosome 16 at presentation and remission.

Tobal K(1), Johnson PR, Saunders MJ, Harrison CJ, Liu Yin JA.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary.

The pericentric inversion of chromosome 16 [inv(16)(p13q22)] and
t(16;16)(p13;q22) are chromosomal rearrangements frequently associated with AML
FAB type M4Eo resulting in the production of a fusion gene CBFB/MYH11. We studied
17 patients with a chromosome 16 abnormality (eight M4Eo, two M1, one M2, three
M4 without abnormal eosinophils, three MDS) for the presence of CBFB/MYH11
transcripts using an RT-PCR technique. 10 AML patients with inv(16) tested RT-PCR
positive (eight at presentation, one in remission, one in remission and relapse).
Three of these patients were originally reported by cytogenetic analysis to have 
del(16q22) but the positive RT-PCR results prompted a cytogenetic re-examination,
resulting in the correction of the reports to inv(16). We show that although
inv(16) is closely associated with AML M4Eo, it can also be detected in cases of 
AML M4 without abnormal eosinophils. Three cases of MDS with inv(16) were also
RT-PCR positive. Four patients with other chromosome 16 abnormalities were RT-PCR
negative. Four AML patients with inv(16) were studied in remission. All were
RT-PCR positive, including one patient in remission for 108 months and one 22
months post allogeneic bone marrow transplant. In the latter two remission
patients, RT-PCR evaluation was positive in bone marrow (BM) but not in
peripheral blood, suggesting that BM may be the more informative. We conclude
that this technique is valuable in the accurate molecular classification of AML, 
particularly as treatment options may be influenced by such information. Though
RT-PCR is highly sensitive in detecting CBFB/MYH11 fusion transcripts during
remission, monitoring of minimal residual disease in patients with inv(16)
remains to be established.

PMID: 7577615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Development. 1995 Sep;121(9):2779-88.

Cloning and characterization of a second AP-2 transcription factor: AP-2 beta.

Moser M(1), Imhof A, Pscherer A, Bauer R, Amselgruber W, Sinowatz F, Hofstädter
F, Schüle R, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Germany.

AP-2 has been characterized previously as a unique 52 x 10(3) M(r) transcription 
activator encoded by a single gene that is expressed in a restricted pattern
during embryonic morphogenesis of the peripheral nervous system, face, skin and
nephric tissues. Here we report the isolation of genomic and cDNA clones encoding
for a second AP-2 related transcription factor, designated AP-2 beta. AP-2 beta
binds specifically to a series of well-characterized AP-2 binding sites,
consensus to the sequence G/CCCN3GGC, and transactivates transcription from a
reporter plasmid under the control of an AP-2-dependent promoter. A C-terminal
domain known to mediate homodimerization of the previously cloned AP-2 alpha
transcription activator is highly conserved and sufficient to mediate interaction
between the two proteins. Northern blot and in situ hybridizations revealed that 
the two genes are expressed in murine embryos between days 9.5 and 19.5 p.c.
Coexpression of both mRNAs was detected in many tissues at day 13.5 and 15.5 of
embryogenesis but some regions of the developing brain and face including the
primordium of midbrain and the facial mesenchyme differed in their expression
pattern of AP-2 genes. AP-2 alpha and AP-2 beta signals in the central and
peripheral nervous system overlapped with regions of developing sensory neurons. 
In adult tissues AP-2 alpha expression was found mainly in the skin, eye and
prostate and AP-2 beta expression in the kidney. In summary, our analyses of
embryonic and adult mice demonstrate that two different AP-2 transcription
factors are specifically expressed during differentiation of many neural,
epidermal and urogenital tissues.

PMID: 7555706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Sep;220(1):171-7.

Polyomavirus middle T selective action on cytokeratin 14 gene expression in liver
nonparenchymal epithelial cells.

Royal I(1), Grenier A, Mailhot D, Marceau N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de
Québec, Canada.

We reported recently that liver nonparenchymal epithelial cells (LECs) constitute
a small population of cells scattered throughout biliary structures and the
Glisson's capsule, containing the unusual cytokeratin (CK) pair CK8/CK14 (Blouin 
et al., Differentiation, 1992, 52, 45). The transfection of polyomavirus middle T
oncogene (MT) into the LEC line T51B leads to the loss of their CKs, due to a
down-regulation of CK14 gene expression (Royal et al., Cell Growth Differ., 1992,
3, 589). In the present work, we examined CK gene expression at both mRNA and
protein levels following polyomavirus small T oncogene (ST), MT, or large T
oncogene (LT) transfection of T51B cells, MT transfection of rat hepatic cell
lines containing different subsets of CKs, and MT transfection of rat
keratinocytes. Immunofluorescence staining revealed that MT indeed induced an
inhibition of CK14 gene expression and a loss of CK8/CK14 intermediate filaments 
(IFs) in liver cells, whereas ST and LT had no effect. Moreover, CK14 was the
only CK gene whose expression was inhibited in MT-containing hepatic cells, in
the sense that the expression of the CK7, CK8, CK18, and CK19 genes was not
affected. Two-dimensional SDS-PAGE of the Triton-resistant cytoskeletal proteins 
and Northern blotting of the CK mRNA content confirmed these findings. The
transfer of the MT oncogene into the keratinocytes did not result in the loss of 
CK5/CK14 IFs nor the inhibition of CK14 gene expression. These results show that 
the polyomavirus oncogene action on CK gene expression is restricted to an MT
effect on CK14 in rat LECs.

PMID: 7545128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Neurosci Lett. 1995 Aug 25;196(3):181-4.

Induction of transcription factor AP2 mRNA expression in rat primary afferent
neurons during acute inflammation.

Donaldson LF(1), McQueen DS, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Western General Hospital, University of Edinburgh, UK.

We have examined immediate early gene mRNA expression, using in situ
hybridisation in innervating dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons following
peripheral adjuvant injection. Neuronal expression of mRNAs encoding NGFI-A
(nerve growth factor-induced), NGFI-B, c-jun, jun D and jun B was undetectable in
untreated controls and was unchanged following adjuvant injection. AP-2 mRNA was 
expressed in the majority of DRG neurons in untreated controls and was
significantly increased (217 +/- 43% control) 1 h after adjuvant injection. AP2
mRNA levels returned to control values by 2 h post-injection. AP-2 may form part 
of the early transcriptional response that induces neuropeptide gene expression
in DRG after adjuvant injection.

PMID: 7501278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Aug 11;23(15):3041-9.

Regulation of transcription of the human erythropoietin receptor gene by proteins
binding to GATA-1 and Sp1 motifs.

Chin K(1), Oda N, Shen K, Noguchi CT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Biology, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erythropoietin (Epo), the primary regulator of the production of erythroid cells,
acts by binding to a cell surface receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitors. We
used deletion analysis and transfection assays with reporter gene constructs to
examine the transcription control elements in the 5' flanking region of the human
EpoR gene. In erythroid cells most of the transcription activity was contained in
a 150 bp promoter fragment with binding sites for transcription factors AP2, Sp1 
and the erythroid-specific GATA-1. The 150 bp hEpoR promoter exhibited high and
low activity in erythroid OCIM1 and K562 cells, respectively, reflecting the high
and low levels of constitutive hEpoR expression. The GATA-1 and Sp1 binding sites
in this promoter lacking a TATA sequence were necessary for a high level of
transcription activation. Protein-DNA binding studies suggested that Sp1 and two 
other CCGCCC binding proteins from erythroid and non-erythroid cells could bind
to the Sp1 binding motif. By increasing GATA-1 levels via co-transfection, we
were able to transactivate the hEpoR promoter in K562 cells and non-erythroid
cells, but not in the highly active OCIM1 cells, although GATA-1 mRNA levels were
comparable in OCIM1 and K562. Interestingly, when we mutated the Sp1 site,
resulting in a marked decrease in hEpoR promoter activity, we could restore
transactivation by increasing GATA-1 levels in OCIM1 cells. These data suggest
that while GATA-1 can transactivate the EpoR promoter, the level of hEpoR gene
expression does not depend on GATA-1 alone. Rather, hEpoR transcription activity 
depends on coordination between Sp1 and GATA-1 with other cell-specific factors, 
including possibly other Sp1-like binding proteins, to provide high level,
tissue-specific expression.

PMCID: PMC307147
PMID: 7659529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biomed Sci. 1995 Aug;2(3):203-226.

Multiple Tandemly Repeated Binding Sites for the YY1 Repressor and Transcription 
Factors AP-1 and SP-1 Are Clustered within Intron-1 of the Gene Encoding the
IE110 Transactivator of Herpes simplex Virus Type 1.

Gu W(1), Huang Q, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Md., USA.

Expression of the IE110 (ICP0) transactivator protein of HSV appears to be
critical for reactivation from the latent state and occurs at immediate-early
times during the lytic cycle under the control of an upstream divergent
enhancer-promoter region that contains multiple Oct and Sp-1 binding sites
overlapping with VP16 response elements. Surprisingly, the large 800-bp first
intron of the HSV-1 IE110 gene also proved to have a complex repetitive
organization encompassing multiple transcription factor binding sites within four
distinct domains. DNaseI footprinting studies revealed that 13 of 17 copies of a 
15-bp repeated element represented high-affinity binding sites for the cellular
YY1 repressor protein. Between 4 and 7 of these sites are direct tandem repeats
and the rest are interpersed with three repeated AT-rich motifs and a dyad
symmetry region containing two strong AP-1 binding sites and an adjacent SP-1
binding site on each arm. Several of the YY1 sites also bound weakly to SRF. The 
intron also contains four clustered purine/pyrimidine tracts of between 16 and 23
bp long. Both the AP-1/AP-2/SP-1 dyad protein binding region and, to a lesser
extent, the YY1 tandem-repeat cluster conferred responsiveness to TPA when placed
upstream of a heterologous promoter in transient expression assays. The
functional significance of the HSV-1 IE110 intron region is unknown as yet, but
the novel arrangement of tandemly repeated YY1 sites has the potential to produce
structural bending and transcriptional attenuation effects. Interestingly, few of
these transcription factor binding motifs are conserved in the equivalent IE110
intron of HSV-2, and the domain appears to represent a unique alternative control
region that is specific for HSV-1. Copyright 1995 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11725057  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


33. J Neurochem. 1995 Aug;65(2):510-6.

Transcription factor AP-2 regulates expression of the dopamine beta-hydroxylase
gene.

Greco D(1), Zellmer E, Zhang Z, Lewis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Expression of the gene encoding the neurotransmitter biosynthetic enzyme dopamine
beta-hydroxylase (DBH) is regulated in a tissue-specific pattern, and
transcription is influenced by environmental stimuli. Using the promoter proximal
region of the rat DBH gene and nuclear extracts from SHSY-5Y neuroblastoma cells,
a DNA-protein complex was identified that is competitive with oligonucleotides
containing the recognition site of transcription factor AP-2. DNase footprint
analysis identified an AP-2 binding site between -136 and -115 of the DBH
promoter. Mutation of that AP-2 site results in a sevenfold reduction of basal
reporter gene expression, but second messenger-stimulated activity is retained.
Cotransfection of an AP-2 expression vector and a DBH promoter-reporter construct
into cultured cells results in a sixfold stimulation of reporter gene expression,
demonstrating the ability of AP-2 to trans-activate the DBH promoter. These
results identify a new regulatory element on the rat DBH gene and suggest that
the AP-2 site plays a role in maintaining basal levels of DBH transcription.

PMID: 7616204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Virol. 1995 Aug;69(8):4941-9.

Transactivation of the Moloney murine leukemia virus and T-cell receptor
beta-chain enhancers by cbf and ets requires intact binding sites for both
proteins.

Sun W(1), Graves BJ, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire
03755, USA.

The Moloney murine leukemia virus (Mo-MLV) enhancer contains binding sites (LVb
and LVc) for the ets gene family of proteins and a core site that binds the
polyomavirus enhancer-binding protein 2/core-binding factor (cbf) family of
proteins. The LVb and core sites in the Mo-MLV enhancer contribute to its
constitutive activity in T cells. All three binding sites (LVb, LVc, and core)
are required for phorbol ester inducibility of the Mo-MLV enhancer. Adjacent
binding sites for the ets and cbf proteins likewise constitute a phorbol ester
response element within the human T-cell receptor beta-chain (TCR beta) enhancer 
and contribute to constitutive transcriptional activity of the TCR beta enhancer 
in T cells. Here we show that the CBF alpha subunit encoded by the mouse Cbfa2
gene (the murine homolog of human AML1) and three ets proteins, Ets-1, Ets-2, and
GA-binding protein (GABP), transactivate both the Mo-MLV and mouse TCR beta
enhancer in transient-expression assays. Moreover, we show that transactivation
by Cbf alpha 2 requires both intact ets and cbf binding sites. Transactivation by
Ets-1, Ets-2, and GABP likewise requires intact binding sites for ets proteins
and CBF. Supportive biochemical analyses demonstrate that both proteins can bind 
simultaneously to a composite enhancer element. These findings suggest that ets
and cbf proteins cooperate in vivo to regulate transcription from the Mo-MLV and 
TCR beta enhancers.

PMCID: PMC189309
PMID: 7609063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jul 26;212(3):879-86.

The NF-kappa B-like site in the TNF-alpha repressor element is essential for its 
repressor function.

Fong CL(1), Mark DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Chemotherapeutics and Molecular Genetics, Merck
Research Laboratories, Rahway, NJ 07065, USA.

We have previously identified a repressor element in the TNF-alpha promoter (-280
to -172) by deletion analysis. When this 108 bp repressor element was placed in
front of a heterologous promoter containing an NF-kappa B binding site, less
repression was observed. When this element was dimerized and placed in front of
the positive element (-125 to -102) of the TNF-alpha promoter, instead of
repression, activation was observed. There is an NF-kappa B-like site in the 108 
bp repressor region (-211 to -202) and our gel retardation analysis showed that
this site and a known NF-kappa B binding site both could compete for one of the
specific protein complexes formed on the 108 bp probe. To test the functionality 
of this NF-kappa B-like site, we mutagenized the critical GGGG sequence to ATCC. 
Contrary to our prediction, such a mutation blocked the repressor function of the
108 bp element. This suggests that the NF-kappa B-like site is an essential
sequence for the repressor function of the 108 bp repressor element.

PMID: 7626125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Jul 25;1263(1):25-34.

Multiple protein complexes, including AP2 and Sp1, interact with a specific site 
within the rat preprotachykinin-A promoter.

Quinn JP(1), McAllister J, Mendelson S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Brain Metabolism Unit, Royal Edinburgh Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.

We demonstrate that there is a unique AP2 binding site in the rat
preprotachykinin-A promoter (rPPT) spanning -865 to -47. AP2 is a transcription
factor whose expression in sensory neurons has been correlated with rPPT
expression in these cells. This binding site is adjacent to an element we
previously identified as binding a single stranded DNA binding protein which was 
also present in sensory neurons. These two complexes encompass a region which we 
had proposed might form a stem-loop structure, allowing binding of the single
stranded DNA binding protein to the DNA. Here using electrophoretic mobility
shift analysis we demonstrate that the DNA region corresponding to the putative
stem-loop structure is bound by a variety of transcription factors, including in 
addition to AP2 the ubiquitous Sp1. DNase 1 footprint analysis demonstrates that 
binding to this domain by the proteins recognising the double-stranded form of
the cis acting element is mutually exclusive. A promoter fragment containing this
domain demonstrated a DNase 1 footprint over the 5' region of the stem-loop
structure. Competition of the binding for this element by an oligonucleotide
corresponding to the stem-loop structure removed the 5' footprint and exposed a
new footprint over the 3' region of the stem-loop structure and extending for
several base pairs. This change in protection observed with DNase 1 digestion
also correlated with changes of the DNase 1 pattern at specific locations 3' of
the proposed stem-loop structure. These changes correlated with two DNA sequences
which were homologous to one another and to a region within the proposed
stem-loop structure. Our results indicate that AP2 could regulate rPPT gene
expression by a variety of mechanisms.

PMID: 7632730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem J. 1995 Jul 15;309 ( Pt 2):453-9.

Differential activation of heat-shock and oxidation-specific stress genes in
chemically induced oxidative stress.

Tacchini L(1), Pogliaghi G, Radice L, Anzon E, Bernelli-Zazzera A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Patologia Generale dell'Università degli Studi di Milano, Centro
di Studio sulla Patologia Cellulare del CNR, Italy.

Post-ischaemic reperfusion increases the level of the major heat-shock (stress)
protein hsp 70 and of its mRNA by transcriptional mechanisms, and activates the
binding of the heat-shock factor HSF to the consensus sequence HSE. In common
with CoCl2 treatment, post-ischaemic reperfusion increases the level of haem
oxygenase mRNA, an indicator of oxidative stress, but CoCl2 does not seem to
induce the expression of the hsp 70 gene [Tacchini, Schiaffonati, Pappalardo,
Gatti and Bernelli-Zazzera (1993) Lab. Invest. 68, 465-471]. Starting from these 
observations, we have now studied the expression of two genes of the hsp 70
family and of other possibly related genes under conditions of oxidative stress. 
Three different chemicals, which cause oxidative stress by various mechanisms and
induce haem oxygenase, enhance the expression of the cognate hsc 73 gene, but do 
not activate the inducible hsp 70 gene. Expression of the other genes that have
been studied seems to vary in intensity and/or time course, in relation to the
particular mechanism of action of any single agent. The pattern of induction of
the early-immediate response genes c-fos and c-jun observed during oxidative
stress differs from that found in post-ischaemic reperfused livers.
Oxidative-stress-inducing agents do not promote the binding of HSF to its
consensus sequence HSE, such as occurs in heat-shock and post-ischaemic
reperfusion, and fail to activate AP-1 (activator protein 1). With the possible
exception of Phorone, the oxidative stress chemically induced in rat liver
activates NFkB (nuclear factor kB) and AP-2 (activator protein 2) transcription
factors.

PMCID: PMC1135753
PMID: 7626009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Blood. 1995 Jul 15;86(2):607-16.

Positive and negative regulation of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor promoter activity by AML1-related transcription factor, PEBP2.

Takahashi A(1), Satake M, Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, Bae SC, Lu J, Maruyama M, Zhang YW,
Oka H, Arai N, Arai K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

The granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) gene promoter
contains a consensus sequence for the polyomavirus enhancer binding-protein 2
(PEBP2) transcription factor, which consists of alpha and beta subunits. There
are at least two genes, alpha A and alpha B, encoding the alpha subunit. alpha B 
is the mouse homologue of human AML1 gene detected at the breakpoints of t(8;21) 
and t(3;21) myeloid leukemias. We examined alpha A1 (an alpha A-gene product) and
alpha B1 and alpha B2 (two alpha B-encoded isomers) for their effects on the
GM-CSF promoter. PEBP2 alpha A1, alpha B1, and alpha B2 proteins bound the PEBP2 
site within the mouse GM-CSF promoter. PEBP2 alpha A1 and alpha B1 enhanced the
expression of the GM-CSF promoter-driven reporter plasmid in unstimulated and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate/phytohemagglutinin-stimulated human Jurkat T
cells. In contrast, the promoter activity was suppressed by alpha B2.
Coexpression of alpha B1 and alpha B2 showed that the promoter activity could be 
determined by the alpha B1/alpha B2 ratio. Jurkat cell extract contained PEBP2
site-binding protein(s) that cross-reacted with antimouse alpha A1 antibodies.
Northern blot analysis indicated the expression of human PEBP2 alpha A, alpha B
(AML1), and beta genes in Jurkat cells. Although further studies are required to 
determine the precise role of PEBP2 in the GM-CSF promoter activity, the present 
findings suggested the importance of the relative ratio of different PEBP2
isoforms in regulating the levels of the promoter activity.

PMID: 7605990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jul 7;270(27):16378-84.

Overexpression of phospholipase C-gamma 1 in colorectal carcinomas is associated 
with overexpression of factors that bind its promoter.

Lee SJ(1), Lee SD, Park JG, Kim CM, Ryu SH, Suh PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Korea.

The 5'-upstream sequence of the phospholipase C-gamma 1 (PLC-gamma 1) gene
contains several transcriptional regulatory regions. We have studied one of the
regions (-551 to -480, named GPE1) which exhibits a strong positive regulatory
activity. GPE1 stimulated the transcription when fused to heterologous TATA
element in an orientation-dependent manner. The region between -536 and -470 was 
identified as the protein binding site in GPE1 by the DNase I footprinting
method. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays with several competitors revealed
three protein binding sites in this region, designated as GES1, GES2, and GES3.
The binding sites were -535 GGAGGGGGCG -524, -512 TGTCACTCA -504, and -491
CAATCCA -485, respectively. Mutational analyses suggested that GPE1 binding
proteins cooperate with each other to activate the transcription of the PLC-gamma
1 gene. Additionally, immunoblot analyses revealed that the level of PLC-gamma 1 
expression was considerably higher in 9 of 11 colorectal carcinomas than in
adjacent normal colorectal tissues. In 7 of 9 cases of colorectal carcinomas
which express higher level of PLC-gamma 1, the DNA binding activities to GES1,
GES2, and GES3 sites also increased when compared with normal tissues. These
results suggest that the GPE1 binding proteins might be attributed to the
elevated expression of PLC-gamma 1 in colorectal carcinomas and may play
important roles in proliferation of colorectal carcinoma cells.

PMID: 7608208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Gene. 1995 Jul 4;159(2):245-8.

Cloning, mapping and expression of PEBP2 alpha C, a third gene encoding the
mammalian Runt domain.

Bae SC(1), Takahashi E, Zhang YW, Ogawa E, Shigesada K, Namba Y, Satake M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

PEBP2/CBF is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of alpha and beta
subunits. Previously, we reported two distinct mouse genes, PEBP2 alpha A and
PEBP2 alpha B, which encode the alpha subunit. PEBP2 alpha B is the homologue of 
human AML1, encoding the acute myeloid leukemia 1 protein. AML1 and human
PEBP2/CBF beta were detected independently at the breakpoints of two
characteristic chromosome translocations observed frequently in two subtypes of
acute myeloid leukemia. The PEBP2 alpha proteins contain a 128-amino-acid (aa)
region highly homologous to the Drosophila melanogaster segmentation gene runt.
The evolutionarily conserved region, named the Runt domain, harbors DNA-binding
and heterodimerizing activities. In this study, we identified the third
Runt-domain-encoding gene, PEBP2 alpha C, which maps to 1p36.11-p36.13 in the
human chromosome and encodes a 415-aa protein. PEBP2 alpha C forms a heterodimer 
with PEBP2 beta, binds to the PEBP2 site and transactivates transcription,
similar to PEBP2 alpha A and PEBP2 alpha B.

PMID: 7622058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Cell Physiol. 1995 Jul;164(1):26-34.

Regulation of AP-3 enhancer activity during hematopoietic differentiation.

Adler V(1), Kraft AS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294,
USA.

Phorbol ester treatment of the human leukemic cell line U937 induces macrophage
differentiation over 24-48 hr. This differentiation is mediated by the activation
and/or repression of specific gene transcription by proteins, enhancer binding
factors, that bind to the DNA upstream of the start site of transcription. We
find that differentiation of U937 cells induced by phorbol esters and bryostain
1, activators of protein kinase C, and the phosphatase inhibitor, okadaic acid,
stimulates transcription from an enhancer sequence which contains multimerized
AP-3 binding sequences but not from one that contains multimerized AP-2 binding
motifs. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) demonstrate that AP-3 DNA
binding activity peaks at 24 hr, remains elevated for 24 hr, and then decreases
thereafter. Southwestern blotting demonstrates that the AP-3 enhancer sequence
binds to a 48 kDa protein present in these leukemic cells. Because the
AP-3-oligomer also contains an overlapping NF-kappa B-like site, the role of
NK-kappa B proteins in regulating transcription from this multimerized
oligonucleotide was investigated. Transfection of U937 cells with NF-kappa B
family members demonstrated activation of AP-3-mediated transcription by rel A
but little effect induced by NFKB1 and c-rel. It is unlikely, however, that
phorbol ester-induced transcription from this AP-3 sequence is solely mediated by
this NF-kappa B family member since treatment of U937 cells with antisense rel A 
oligodeoxynucleotides did not block phorbol ester-mediated transcription from the
AP-3 site. These data demonstrate that AP-3, but not AP-2 sequences, functions to
activate mRNA transcription during phorbol ester-induced hematopoietic
differentiation and suggests a complex interaction between NF-kappa B and AP-3
proteins in the regulation of this enhancer element.

PMID: 7790394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Jul 1;231(1):104-14.

Characterization and transcriptional activity of the mouse biliary glycoprotein 1
gene, a carcinoembryonic antigen-related gene.

Nédellec P(1), Turbide C, Beauchemin N.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University Montreal, Canada.

The mouse biliary glycoprotein 1 gene (bgp1) encodes several multifunctional
glycoprotein isoforms. These glycoproteins represent members of the
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) family which belongs to the immunoglobulin
superfamily. The Bgp1 glycoproteins function as cell adhesion molecules and
receptors for the mouse hepatitis viruses. In contrast to CEA, whose
overexpression has been correlated with cancer progression, the human and mouse
Bgp proteins are generally down-regulated upon tumor formation. In this study, we
report on the mouse bgp1 gene organization and transcriptional activation. We
have isolated phage and cosmid clones encompassing the entire bgp1 coding region.
This gene consists of nine exons, some of which are subjected to alternative
splicing producing a minimum of four splice variants. A comparison of the murine 
bgp1 proximal promoter with the human BGP and mouse cea10/bgp3 genes revealed
sequence conservation of 66% and 95%, respectively. RNase protection assays and
primer extension analyses indicated that the mouse bgp1 transcriptional start
site is positioned 240 nucleotides upstream of the ATG translational initiation
codon, which is 140 nucleotides further upstream than in any other CEA family
member. The bgp1 promoter is transcriptionally active in reporter gene activation
in vitro transfection studies and in vivo using a bgp1-containing cosmid clone.
We identified three putative AP-2 or AP-2-like sites and an upstream stimulatory 
factor (USF) recognition sequence within the proximal mouse bgp1 promoter region 
at positions similar to those used by the human BGP promoter region. These data
suggest that the regulation of the mouse and human BGP genes may follow some
common spatial and temporal expression. Interestingly, the bgp1 proximal promoter
and coding region are also well conserved throughout evolution.

PMID: 7628460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jun 26;211(3):1023-30.

Increased expression of AML1 during retinoic-acid-induced differentiation of U937
cells.

Tanaka K(1), Tanaka T, Ogawa S, Kurokawa M, Mitani K, Yazaki Y, Hirai H.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The AML1 gene on chromosome 21 is disrupted in the (8;21)(q22;q22) and
(3;21)(q26;q22) translocations associated with myelogenous leukemias and encodes 
a DNA binding protein. From the AML1 gene, three proteins, AML1a, AML1b and
AML1c, are produced by alternative splicings. We previously showed that AML1 is
potentially involved in myeloid cell differentiation. Here we analyzed the
expression of AML1 in myeloid cell lines. It was revealed that AML1b and AML1c
are the major AML1 proteins in these cell lines and that prior to morphological
and functional differentiation, their expressions increase in U937 cells when
treated with all-trans retinoic acid. These data suggest that the expression of
AML1 is associated with myeloid cell differentiation.

PMID: 7598688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 May 25;210(3):966-73.

Characterization of the human PCBD gene encoding the bifunctional protein
pterin-4 alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor for the
transcription factor HNF-1 alpha.

Thöny B(1), Neuheiser F, Blau N, Heizmann CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

The human pterin-4 alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD)/dimerization cofactor
for the transcription factor HNF-1 alpha is a bifunctional protein proposed to be
involved in entirely different biochemical functions. We previously established
the complete amino acid sequence for the human liver PCD and subsequently
isolated its corresponding cDNA. Using this cDNA as a probe, we isolated and
determined the complete nucleotide sequence and flanking regions of the single
human PCBD gene. The protein coding region of the gene is about 5 kb in length
and contains 4 exons. We also defined the messenger RNA 5'-end by reverse
transcription of the cap structure, thus allowing to analyze the promoter
organization. Within the 5'-flanking sequence, potential regulatory regions
include consensus binding sites for transcription factor Sp1, an AP-1, and
several AP-2 binding sites; however, the 5' upstream region lacks both a proximal
TATA and CAAT box promoter element.

PMID: 7763270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 9;92(10):4497-501.

Inhibition of AP-1 binding and transcription by gold and selenium involving
conserved cysteine residues in Jun and Fos.

Handel ML(1), Watts CK, deFazio A, Day RO, Sutherland RL.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Division, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, New
South Wales, Australia.

Gold(I) salts and selenite, which have diverse therapeutic and biological
effects, are noted for their reactivity with thiols. Since the binding of Jun-Jun
and Jun-Fos dimers to the AP-1 DNA binding site is regulated in vitro by a redox 
process involving conserved cysteine residues, we hypothesized that some of the
biological actions of gold and selenium are mediated via these residues. In
electrophoretic mobility-shift analyses, AP-1 DNA binding was inhibited by
gold(I) thiolates and selenite, with 50% inhibition occurring at approximately 5 
microM and 1 microM, respectively. Thiomalic acid had no effect in the absence of
gold(I), and other metal ions inhibited at higher concentrations, in a rank order
correlating with their thiol binding affinities. Cysteine-to-serine mutants
demonstrated that these effects of gold(I) and selenite require Cys272 and Cys154
in the DNA-binding domains of Jun and Fos, respectively. Gold(I) thiolates and
selenite did not inhibit nonspecific protein binding to the AP-1 site and were at
least an order of magnitude less potent as inhibitors of sequence-specific
binding to the AP-2, TFIID, or NF1 sites compared with the AP-1 site. In
addition, 10 microM gold(I) or 10 microM selenite inhibited expression of an
AP-1-dependent reporter gene, but not an AP-2-dependent reporter gene. These data
suggest a mechanism regulating transcription factor activity by inorganic ions
which may contribute to the known antiarthritic action of gold and cancer
chemoprevention by selenium.

PMCID: PMC41971
PMID: 7753832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Chem. 1995 May 5;270(18):10420-7.

Specific activation of the Na+/H+ exchanger gene during neuronal differentiation 
of embryonal carcinoma cells.

Dyck JR(1), Fliegel L.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Group in the Molecular Biology of Membranes, Faculty 
of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

We examined the regulation of the Na+/H+ exchanger gene during differentiation of
the P19 mouse embryonal carcinoma cells. Treatment of P19 cells with retinoic
acid induces the development of neurons, astroglia, and microglia cells. Upon
retinoic acid-induced differentiation of P19 cells, there was an early and rapid 
10-fold increase in NHE1 transcription. A proximal cis-acting AP-2 site of the
NHE1 promoter was sufficient for stimulation of transcription of the gene by
differentiation. Bandshift experiments demonstrated that in retinoic acid-treated
cells there was an elevated level of AP-2 transcription factor binding to the
AP-2 consensus site of the Na+/H+ exchanger gene. In the differentiation
defective mutant RAC65, the effect of differentiation on Na+/H+ exchanger gene
expression was reduced by 60%. Examination of Na+/H+ exchanger activity showed
that retinoic acid-treated P19 cells recovered from an acid load at a rate
approximately three times greater than untreated cells. The increases in gene
expression and protein activity preceded major changes in cell morphology,
suggesting that the initiation of differentiation is linked to NHE1 gene
expression. Our findings show for the first time that the NHE1 gene is activated 
early in cell differentiation and that this activation may play an important role
in the process of neuronal cell differentiation.

PMID: 7737975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dev Biol. 1995 May;169(1):1-14.

Alternative mRNAs encode multiple isoforms of transcription factor AP-2 during
murine embryogenesis.

Meier P(1), Koedood M, Philipp J, Fontana A, Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology II, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Transcription factor AP-2 has been implicated as an important regulator of gene
expression during vertebrate embryogenesis. We report here the cDNA cloning and
analysis of mouse embryonic mRNA splice variants encoding four AP-2 isoforms.
Isoform 1 is the homolog of the previously known human (HeLa) AP-2. The three new
AP-2 isoforms all share the same DNA binding/dimerization domain as isoform 1 but
either lack the proline-rich transcriptional activation domain encoded by exon 2 
(isoform 2) or have different amino-termini encoded by two previously unknown
alternative first coding exons for AP-2 (isoforms 3 and 4). All four AP-2 mRNA
variants are present at significant levels between Days 11.5 and 17.5 of mouse
embryogenesis. Variants 1, 3, and 4 show qualitatively but not quantitatively
similar restricted expression patterns in 8.5-12.5 dpc embryos examined by in
situ hybridization. At mid-embryogenesis, variant 3 is the major AP-2 mRNA
species in the nervous system and in total embryo RNA but is less prevalent than 
variants 1 and 4 in the epidermis. The four mRNAs are all induced, although
unequally, during differentiation of P19 cells into neural cell types and by cAMP
stimulation of primary astrocytes. Variants 1-3 are coexpressed in different
ratios in HeLa cells and in three human glioblastoma cell lines. These findings
reveal that transcriptional regulation by AP-2 is likely to be more complex than 
previously assumed given the potential for multiple AP-2 homo- and heterodimeric 
DNA binding forms.

PMID: 7750631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Blood. 1995 May 1;85(9):2289-302.

Molecular pathogenesis of the chromosome 16 inversion in the M4Eo subtype of
acute myeloid leukemia.

Liu PP(1), Hajra A, Wijmenga C, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Transfer, National Center for Human Genome Research, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Blood 1997 Mar 1;89(5):1842.

Comment in
    Blood. 1995 Sep 15;86(6):2449-50.

PMID: 7727763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem Soc Trans. 1995 May;23(2):226S.

Nerve growth factor regulation of a late response gene--neuropeptide Y.

Holliday N(1), Balbi D, Pance A, Allen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Cambridge.

PMID: 7672246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 21;270(16):9558-63.

Interleukin (IL)-10 inhibits nuclear factor kappa B (NF kappa B) activation in
human monocytes. IL-10 and IL-4 suppress cytokine synthesis by different
mechanisms.

Wang P(1), Wu P, Siegel MI, Egan RW, Billah MM.

Author information: 
(1)Schering-Plough Research Institute, Kenilworth, New Jersey 07033, USA.

Our previous studies in human monocytes have demonstrated that interleukin
(IL)-10 inhibits lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated production of inflammatory
cytokines, IL-1 beta, IL-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha by
blocking gene transcription. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA), 
we now show that, in monocytes stimulated with LPS or TNF alpha, IL-10 inhibits
nuclear stimulation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF kappa B), a transcription
factor involved in the expression of inflammatory cytokine genes. Several other
transcription factors including NF-IL-6, AP-1, AP-2, GR, CREB, Oct-1, and Sp-1
are not affected by IL-10. This selective inhibition by IL-10 of NF kappa B
activation occurs rapidly and in a dose-dependent manner and correlates well with
IL-10's cytokine synthesis inhibitory activity in terms of both kinetics and dose
responsiveness. Furthermore, compounds such as tosylphenylalanyl chloromethyl
ketone and pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate that are known to selectively inhibit NF
kappa B activation block cytokine gene transcription in LPS-stimulated monocytes.
Taken together, these results suggest that inhibition of NF kappa B activation
may be an important mechanism for IL-10 suppression of cytokine gene
transcription in human monocytes. IL-4, another cytokine that inhibits cytokine
mRNA accumulation in monocytes, shows little inhibitory effect on LPS-induced NF 
kappa B activation. Further examination reveals that, unlike IL-10, IL-4 enhances
mRNA degradation and does not suppress cytokine gene transcription. These data
indicate that IL-10 and IL-4 inhibit cytokine production by different mechanisms.

PMID: 7721885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genes Dev. 1995 Apr 15;9(8):995-1008.

Assembly and function of a TCR alpha enhancer complex is dependent on
LEF-1-induced DNA bending and multiple protein-protein interactions.

Giese K(1), Kingsley C, Kirshner JR, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0414, USA.

In this study we examine the molecular basis for the synergistic regulation of
the minimal TCR alpha enhancer by multiple proteins. We find that reconstitution 
of TCR alpha enhancer function in nonlymphoid cells requires expression of the
lymphoid-specific proteins LEF-1, Ets-1 and PEBP2 alpha (CBF alpha), and a
specific arrangement of their binding sites in the enhancer. We show that Ets-1
cooperates with PEBP2 alpha to bind adjacent sites at one end of the enhancer,
forming a ternary complex that is unstable by itself. Stable occupancy of the
Ets-1- and PEBP2 alpha-binding sites in a DNase I protection assay was found to
depend on both a specific helical phasing relationship with a nonadjacent
ATF/CREB-binding site at the other end of the enhancer and on LEF-1. The HMG
domain of LEF-1 was found previously to bend the DNA helix in the center of the
TCR alpha enhancer. We now show that the HMG domain of the distantly related SRY 
protein, which also bends DNA, can partially replace LEF-1 in stimulating
enhancer function in transfection assays. Taken together with the observation
that Ets-1 and members of the ATF/CREB family have the potential to associate in 
vitro, these data suggest that LEF-1 can coordinate the assembly of a specific
higher-order enhancer complex by facilitating interactions between proteins bound
at nonadjacent sites.

PMID: 7774816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Apr 15;229(2):575-82.

The gene and pseudogenes of rat S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase.

Merta A(1), Aksamit RR, Kasir J, Cantoni GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of General and Comparative Biochemistry, National Institute of
Mental Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4094, USA.

Two rat liver genomic DNA libraries constructed in lambda DASH and lambda Charon 
4A were screened for sequences with similarity to S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine
(AdoHcy) hydrolase cDNA. Of 36 clones purified, two contained the AdoHcy
hydrolase gene sequence and 34 contained pseudogene sequences. The AdoHcy
hydrolase gene, which has been sequenced in its entirety, spans approximately 15 
kb and consists of 10 exons. Primer extension and S1 experiments show that
transcription is initiated from two major initiation sites located at positions
-63 and -62 from the starting codon and from several minor sites. The promoter
region is located in a CpG island, sequence TATTTAAA is present 23 bases upstream
from the transcription start site, and an inverted CCAAT box is located 285 bp
upstream from the transcription start site. Other potential transcription-factor 
binding sites including SP1, AP-2, GRE and Oct-1 sites were identified in the
5'-flanking region. Several different processed pseudogenes were found and
analyzed.

PMID: 7744082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Apr 15;229(2):455-64.

The cea10 gene encodes a secreted member of the murine carcinoembryonic antigen
family and is expressed in the placenta, gastrointestinal tract and bone marrow.

Keck U(1), Nédellec P, Beauchemin N, Thompson J, Zimmermann W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunobiology, University of Freiburg, Germany.

Although members of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) family have been shown to 
convey cell adhesion in vitro, their location in some tissues contradicts such a 
function. As a basis for investigating their in vivo functions, we are
characterizing the mouse CEA family. This paper describes the structure and
expression of a new murine family member, cea10. Two full-length cDNA clones were
isolated from a mouse colon library, whose deduced protein sequence comprises two
immunoglobulin variable-like N-domains, directly followed by a short C-terminal
domain indicating that this molecule is secreted. Although this domain
organization suggests a closer relationship to the murine pregnancy-specific
glycoproteins (PSG), which form a subgroup within the CEA family, sequence
comparisons place Cea10 within the CEA subgroup. Overlapping cosmid clones
containing the complete cea10 locus were mapped and the exons determined. No
A2-like exon, characteristic for all other members of the murine CEA family,
could be found. Sequences of the promoter and the first exon showed remarkably
high similarity to the corresponding regions of bgp1 and bgp2, two other members 
of the murine CEA subgroup. Consensus sequences for two transcription factors
(USF and an AP-2-like factor) that bind to the human BGP gene promoter were also 
present in the cea10 promoter and possibly convey expression of these genes in
epithelial cells. RNase protection assays revealed transcriptional activity of
cea10 in the colon and early placenta (10.5-12.5-day embryos) and to a lower
extent in the small intestine, cecum, stomach, salivary glands and bone marrow.
As some other CEA family members are deregulated in tumors, we quantified the
expression levels of Cea10 transcripts in colonic mucosa and in adenomatous
polyps of Min/+ mice. No differences in the steady-state levels of Cea10 mRNA
could be found, suggesting that the Cea10 protein does not play a role in early
tumor development. Taken together, Cea10 combines characteristic features of both
CEA and PSG subgroup members in its structure and expression pattern.

PMID: 7744068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 14;270(15):8514-20.

Transcriptional analysis of acetylcholine receptor alpha 3 gene promoter motifs
that bind Sp1 and AP2.

Yang X(1), Fyodorov D, Deneris ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106-4975, USA.

In this study, we performed an analysis of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor alpha 3 subunit gene promoter region, -238/+47, to identify cis and
trans elements that are important for basal activity in PC12 cells. Sequence
analyses of the alpha 3 promoter and footprint assays revealed an Sp1 binding
site between -79 and -57 (termed the alpha 3 GA motif) and an AP2 binding site
between -30 and -7. Using mobility shift analysis, we found that PC12 cell
extracts contain proteins that specifically bind to the alpha 3 GA motif and are 
immunologically related to Sp1. Mutation of the alpha 3 GA motif, which prevented
binding of Sp1, resulted in a 75% decrease in promoter activity. Mutation of the 
AP2 site resulted in only a minor loss of promoter activity, which is consistent 
with the lack of AP2 binding activity in PC12 extracts. In Drosophila Schneider
line 2 (S2) cell cotransfection assays, Sp1 activated the alpha 3 promoter in a
GA motif-dependent manner. Furthermore, multimerization of the GA motif upstream 
of the beta-globin TATA box conferred Sp1 responsiveness. Our results indicate
that Sp1 can activate transcription through direct interaction with the alpha 3
GA motif and that this motif plays a major role in alpha 3 promoter basal
activity in PC12 cells.

PMID: 7721749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Neurosci Lett. 1995 Apr 14;189(2):113-6.

Transcription factor AP-2 gene expression in adult rat hippocampal regions:
effects of environmental manipulations.

Olsson T(1), Mohammed AK, Donaldson LF, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, Scotland, UK,
Umeå University Hospital, S-901 85 Umeå, Sweden.

Environmental enrichment increases glucocorticoid receptor expression in
hippocampal pyramidal neurons, but the molecular mechanisms are unknown. Several 
transcription factors are expressed in hippocampal neurons where they respond to 
environmental stimuli. In this study 12 adult male rats (n = 6 in each group)
were exposed to enriched or isolated environment for 30 days. The expression of
AP-2 mRNA, studied by in situ hybridization, was attenuated by environmental
enrichment in the CA2 and CA3 subfields of the hippocampus. AP-2 may be involved 
in the environmental effect of glucocorticoid receptor gene expression in these
neurons.

PMID: 7609914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Genomics. 1995 Apr 10;26(3):571-9.

Structure of the leukemia-associated human CBFB gene.

Hajra A(1), Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Transfer, National Center for Human Genome Research,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Retraction in
    Hajra A, Collins FS. Genomics. 1996 Nov 15;38(1):107.

We have determined the structure of the human CBFB gene, which encodes the beta
subunit of the heterodimeric transcription factor core binding factor (CBF). This
gene becomes fused to the MYH11 gene encoding smooth muscle myosin heavy chain by
an inversion of chromosome 16 that occurs in the M4Eo subtype of acute myeloid
leukemia. The CBFB gene contains 6 exons and spans 50 kb. The gene is highly
conserved in animal species as distant as Drosophila, and the exon boundaries are
in locations identical to those of the murine Cbfb homologue. The CBFB promoter
region has typical features of a housekeeping gene, including high G+C content,
high frequency of CpG dinucleotides, and lack of canonical TATA and CCAAT boxes. 
This gene has a single transcriptional start site, 345 nucleotides upstream of
the beginning of the coding region. The human and mouse CBFB promoters show
conservation of several transcriptional regulatory sequence motifs, including
binding sites for Sp1, Ets family members, and Myc, but do not contain any CBF
binding sites. The 5' end of the human CBFB gene also contains a highly
polymorphic, transcribed CGG repeat that is not present in the murine homologue.

PMID: 7607682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. EMBO J. 1995 Apr 3;14(7):1508-19.

Transcriptional activation by Myc is under negative control by the transcription 
factor AP-2.

Gaubatz S(1), Imhof A, Dosch R, Werner O, Mitchell P, Buettner R, Eilers M.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg (ZMBH), Germany.

The Myc protein binds to and transactivates the expression of genes via E-box
elements containing a central CAC(G/A)TG sequence. The transcriptional activation
function of Myc is required for its ability to induce cell cycle progression,
cellular transformation and apoptosis. Here we show that transactivation by Myc
is under negative control by the transcription factor AP-2. AP-2 inhibits
transactivation by Myc via two distinct mechanisms. First, high affinity binding 
sites for AP-2 overlap Myc-response elements in two bona fide target genes of
Myc, prothymosin-alpha and ornithine decarboxylase. On these sites, AP-2 competes
for binding of either Myc/Max heterodimers or Max/Max homodimers. The second
mechanism involves a specific interaction between C-terminal domains of AP-2 and 
the BR/HLH/LZ domain of Myc, but not Max or Mad. Binding of AP-2 to Myc does not 
preclude association of Myc with Max, but impairs DNA binding of the Myc/Max
complex and inhibits transactivation by Myc even in the absence of an overlapping
AP-2 binding site. Taken together, our data suggest that AP-2 acts as a negative 
regulator of transactivation by Myc.

PMCID: PMC398238
PMID: 7729426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 31;270(13):7320-9.

Transcriptional regulation of the vacuolar H(+)-ATPase B2 subunit gene in
differentiating THP-1 cells.

Lee BS(1), Underhill DM, Crane MK, Gluck SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Renal Division, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Monocyte-macrophage differentiation was used as a model system for studying gene 
regulation of the human vacuolar H(+)-ATPase (V-ATPase). We examined mRNA levels 
of various V-ATPase subunits during differentiation of both native monocytes and 
the cell line THP-1, and found that transcriptional and post-transcriptional
mechanisms could account for increases in cell V-ATPase content. From nuclear
runoff experiments, we found that one subunit in particular, the B2 isoform (Mr =
56,000), was amplified primarily by transcriptional means. We have begun to
examine the structure of the B2 subunit promoter region. Isolation and sequencing
of the first exon and 5'-flanking region of this gene reveal a TATA-less promoter
with a high G + C content. Primer extension and ribonuclease protection analyses 
indicate a single major transcriptional start site. We transfected
promoter-luciferase reporter plasmids into THP-1 cells to define sequences that
mediate transcriptional control during monocyte differentiation. We found that
sequences downstream from the transcriptional start site were sufficient to
confer increased expression during THP-1 differentiation. DNase I footprinting
and sequence analysis revealed the existence of multiple AP2 and Sp1 binding
sites in the 5'-untranslated and proximal coding regions.

PMID: 7706273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genomics. 1995 Mar 20;26(2):272-80.

Isolation of the human genomic brain-2/N-Oct 3 gene (POUF3) and assignment to
chromosome 6q16.

Atanasoski S(1), Toldo SS, Malipiero U, Schreiber E, Fries R, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital of Zurich, Department of Internal Medicine, Switzerland.

N-Oct 3 is a human POU domain transcription factor that binds to the octamer
sequence ATGCAAAT. The protein is expressed in the central nervous system during 
development and in adult brain. We have isolated and characterized genomic clones
encoding the human N-Oct 3 gene (HGMW-approved symbol POUF3). Comparison of the
structure of these clones with the N-Oct 3 cDNA revealed that POUF3 is an
intronless gene. Sequencing of 650 bp of the promoter region showed 84% sequence 
identity of POUF3 with its murine homologue, the brain-2 (designated brn-2) gene.
Whereas both POUF3 and brn-2 lack a TATA box, consensus sequences for AP-2, GCF, 
and SP1 transcription factors were identified within the highly conserved
5'-flanking region. These sequences may play a crucial role for the
tissue-specific transcription activation of the POUF3 gene. Southern blotting and
in situ hybridization localized the human POUF3 gene to chromosome 6q16.

PMID: 7601453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Mar 14;1261(1):90-8.

Ultraviolet irradiation and c-jun over-expression regulates replication of
polyoma sequences in WOP cells through a PEBP2 binding site.

Rutberg SE(1), Fuchs SY, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, NY
10595.

Mouse fibroblast cells (WOP) express permissive factors which support polyoma DNA
replication. However, electroporation into WOP cells of a mammalian expression
vector that encodes the c-jun cDNA results in repression of polyoma DNA
replication in a dose-dependent manner. In previous studies we have shown that
UV-irradiation is capable of mediating a similar effect on polyoma DNA
replication. When c-jun over-expression was combined with ultraviolet
(UV)-irradiation, polyoma DNA replication decreased further. The repression of
replication mediated by c-jun appears to be mediated by factor(s) that bind to
PEBP4/2 target sequences as oligomers bearing the PEBP2/4 target site were
capable of restoring polyoma DNA replication when added to UV-treated or c-jun
over-expressing cells. The binding to the PEBP2/4 is partially dependent on the
availability of AP-1 proteins, since an AP-1 target sequence can efficiently
compete one of the three complexes formed with the PEBP2 target site. PEPB2
sequences do not, however, affect binding to the AP1 site. The effect of PEBP2 on
polyoma replication is not dependent on the adjacent AP-1 site since PEBP2 could 
restore replication of polyomavirus which is mutated at the AP-1 sequence. A
similar replication pattern was noted in a deletion mutant of polyoma which lacks
PEBP4, yet, contains an intact PEBP2 binding sequence, suggesting that PEBP2 is
the principle target for mediating repression of polyoma DNA replication.

PMID: 7893765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Mar 14;92(6):2046-50.

Analysis of the human guanylin gene and the processing and cellular localization 
of the peptide.

Hill O(1), Kuhn M, Zucht HD, Cetin Y, Kulaksiz H, Adermann K, Klock G, Rechkemmer
G, Forssmann WG, Mägert HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lower Saxony Institute for Peptide Research, Hannover, Germany.

The complete cell biological analysis of human guanylin, a recently discovered
regulatory peptide, is offered in this investigation: (i) the nucleotide sequence
of the gene, (ii) the isolation and characterization of its circulating molecular
form, and (iii) its localization in enterochromaffin cells of the gut. As
determined by molecular cloning, DNA sequencing, and comparison with the known
cDNA sequence, the approximately 2.6-kbp large gene consists of three exons
interrupted by two introns. The putative promoter region contains a TTTAAAA
sequence motif and several potential binding sites for transcription factors such
as AP-1, AP-2, Sp 1, and glucocorticoid receptors. The isolated hormonal form of 
guanylin is a 94-amino acid peptide with a molecular mass of 10.3 kDa. Western
blot analysis of RP-HPLC fractions from blood plasma confirms this molecular
form. Thus, guanylin is synthesized by gut enterochromaffin cells as a prohormone
of 115 amino acids and is processed to the molecular form of 94 amino acids
circulating in the blood.

PMCID: PMC42420
PMID: 7892222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 1995 Mar 10;154(2):243-7.

Genomic organization and promoter sequence of a gene encoding a rat
liver-specific type-I transport protein.

Simonson GD(1), Iwanij V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul
55108, USA.

We report the isolation and characterization of a rat gene (designated TI-LTP)
encoding a liver-specific cell-surface glycoprotein that belongs to the type-I
transporter family. This gene, including 5' and 3' flanking domains, was cloned
from a rat lambda DASH genomic library and its nucleotide sequence was
determined. TI-LTP is a single-copy gene which spans over 6 kb, and contains nine
introns ranging in size from 90 bp to over 1.8 kb. Two transcription start points
were located using a nuclease S-1 protection assay. The TI-LTP promoter (pTI-LTP)
lacks a canonical TATA-box element, but does contain five TAGA elements. Several 
putative transcription-factor-binding sites were identified in the pTI-LTP,
including activator protein 2 (AP-2) sites and a peroxisome proliferator response
element (PPRE).

PMID: 7890171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Gene. 1995 Mar 10;154(2):219-23.

Characterization of the 5' flanking region and gene encoding the mouse
interferon-gamma receptor.

Raval P(1), Obici S, Russell SW, Murphy WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Wilkinson Laboratory, University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas City
66160-7184, USA.

The purpose of this investigation was to characterize the gene that encodes the
receptor for mouse interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma R), including determination of its
size, intronic boundaries and its transcription start points (tsp). The mouse
IFN-gamma R gene is 22-kb long, with six introns that range in size from approx. 
1 to 7 kb. The first six exons encode the extracellular and transmembrane (TM)
domains of the protein, while the last exon of about 1 kb encodes most of the
intracellular domain. No canonical TATA box can be found in the 5' flanking
sequence of the gene, and primer extension analysis indicates multiple tsp. In
addition, the gene's 5' promoter region was sequenced to identify candidate
responsive elements that might regulate expression of the gene. Among the
putative regulatory motifs identified by computer-assisted analysis are multiple 
SP1 and AP-2 sites, an NF1 and CCAAT box, as well as a potential cyclic
AMP-responsive element (CRE).

PMID: 7890167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Clin Invest. 1995 Mar;95(3):1140-50.

Blood pressure regulates platelet-derived growth factor A-chain gene expression
in vascular smooth muscle cells in vivo. An autocrine mechanism promoting
hypertensive vascular hypertrophy.

Negoro N(1), Kanayama Y, Haraguchi M, Umetani N, Nishimura M, Konishi Y, Iwai J, 
Okamura M, Inoue T, Takeda T.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka City University Medical School,
Japan.

To clarify the role of PDGF A-chain in hypertensive vascular hypertrophy of
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs), we studied levels of PDGF A-chain gene
expression and transcription factors related to the gene in vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs) of SHRs in vivo. RNase protection assay and in situ
hybridization showed that PDGF A-chain mRNA levels in VSMCs of SHRs were twofold 
higher than in those of normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats. Gel retardation assays
showed that levels of Sp1 and AP-2 in VSMCs of SHRs were twofold more abundant
than in those of Wistar-Kyoto rats. Treatment with four pharmacologically
different species of antihypertensive drugs for 2 wk decreased the levels of both
PDGF A-chain mRNA and Sp1, but not AP-2 level in VSMCs of SHRs with regression of
aortic hypertrophy, indicating that increases in levels of both PDGF A-chain mRNA
and Sp1 in VSMCs of SHRs were associated with high blood pressure. These results 
suggest that high blood pressure is a stimulus which upregulates PDGF A-chain
gene expression in VSMCs of SHRs, resulting in an autocrine enhancement in
hypertensive vascular hypertrophy, and that the activation of the gene may be
mediated through increases in Sp1 in these cells.

PMCID: PMC441451
PMID: 7883963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cell Immunol. 1995 Mar;161(1):125-31.

Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor and interleukin-4 differentially
regulate the human tumor necrosis factor-alpha promoter region.

Rhoades KL(1), Cai S, Golub SH, Economou JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UCLA School of Medicine 90024.

Regulation of TNF-alpha promoter activity by IL-2, IFN-gamma, GM-CSF, and IL-4
was examined in the U937 macrophage cell line and the MLA 144 T cell line. Using 
a transient transfection system, the full-length TNF-alpha promoter was examined 
for response to these cytokine signals. Only GM-CSF was able to consistently
induce a twofold activation of the TNF-alpha promoter in the U937 cell line.
GM-CSF activation of the promoter region was further analyzed using a series of
5' truncations and site mutations of the AP-1, AP-2, and CRE sites of the
promoter. The GM-CSF activation mapped to the region contained within the 95 base
pairs upstream from the transcription start site (TSS) with the AP-2 site as a
putative cis-acting sequence. IL-4 profoundly inhibited both basal and phorbol
ester-induced TNF-alpha promoter activity as well as protein production. Promoter
inhibition by IL-4 required the 95-bp basal promoter sequence.

PMID: 7867077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1662-70.

Expression of the Runt domain-encoding PEBP2 alpha genes in T cells during thymic
development.

Satake M(1), Nomura S, Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, Takahama Y, Hashimoto Y, Niki M,
Kitamura Y, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

The PEBP2 alpha A and PEBP2 alpha B genes encode the DNA-binding subunit of a
murine transcription factor, PEBP2, which is implicated as a T-cell-specific
transcriptional regulator. These two related genes share the evolutionarily
conserved region encoding the Runt domain. PEBP2 alpha B is the murine
counterpart of human AML1, which is located at the breakpoints of the 8;21 and
3;21 chromosome translocations associated with acute myeloid leukemia. Northern
(RNA) blots of various adult mouse tissues revealed that the levels of expression
of both genes were most prominent in the thymus. Furthermore, transcripts of
PEBP2 alpha A and mouse AML1/PEBP2 alpha B were detected in T lymphocytes in the 
thymuses from day 16 embryos and newborns, as well as 4-week-old adult mice, by
in situ hybridization. The expression of the genes persisted in peripheral lymph 
nodes of adult mice. The transcripts were detected in all the CD4- CD8-, CD4+
CD8+, CD4+ CD8-, and CD4- CD8+ cell populations. The results indicated that both 
genes are expressed in T cells throughout their development, supporting the
notion that PEBP2 is a T-cell-specific transcription factor. Transcripts of mouse
AML1/PEBP2 alpha B were also detected in day 12 fetal hematopoietic liver and in 
the bone marrow cells of newborn mice. The implication of mouse AML1/PEBP2 alpha 
B expression in hematopoietic cells other than those of T-cell lineage is
discussed in relation to myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC230390
PMID: 7862157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1651-61.

Subcellular localization of the alpha and beta subunits of the acute myeloid
leukemia-linked transcription factor PEBP2/CBF.

Lu J(1), Maruyama M, Satake M, Bae SC, Ogawa E, Kagoshima H, Shigesada K, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Each of the two human genes encoding the alpha and beta subunits of a
heterodimeric transcription factor, PEBP2, has been found at the breakpoints of
two characteristic chromosome translocations associated with acute myeloid
leukemia, suggesting that they are candidate proto-oncogenes. Polyclonal
antibodies against the alpha and beta subunits of PEBP2 were raised in rabbits
and hamsters. Immunofluorescence labeling of NIH 3T3 cells transfected with PEBP2
alpha and -beta cDNAs revealed that the full-size alpha A1 and alpha B1 proteins,
the products of two related but distinct genes, are located in the nucleus, while
the beta subunit is localized to the cytoplasm. Deletion analysis demonstrated
that there are two regions in alpha A1 responsible for nuclear accumulation of
the protein: one mapped in the region between amino acids 221 and 513, and the
other mapped in the Runt domain (amino acids 94 to 221) harboring the DNA-binding
and the heterodimerizing activities. When the full-size alpha A1 and beta
proteins are coexpressed in a single cell, the former is present in the nucleus
and the latter still remains in the cytoplasm. However, the N- or C-terminally
truncated alpha A1 proteins devoid of the region upstream or downstream of the
Runt domain colocalized with the beta protein in the nucleus. In these cases, the
beta protein appeared to be translocated into the nucleus passively by binding to
alpha A1. The chimeric protein containing the beta protein at the N-terminal
region generated as a result of the inversion of chromosome 16 colocalized with
alpha A1 to the nucleus more readily than the normal beta protein. The
implications of these results in relation to leukemogenesis are discussed.

PMCID: PMC230389
PMID: 7862156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Blood. 1995 Mar 1;85(5):1313-22.

Detection of the chromosome 16 CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcript in myelomonocytic
leukemias.

Poirel H(1), Radford-Weiss I, Rack K, Troussard X, Veil A, Valensi F, Picard F,
Guesnu M, Leboeuf D, Melle J, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, CHU Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Karyotypic detection of chromosomal 16 abnormalities classically associated with 
AML M4Eo can be difficult. Characterization of the two genes involved in the
inv(16)(p13q22), CBF beta and MYH11, has allowed the detection of fusion
transcripts by reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We have 
analyzed CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcripts by RT-PCR in myelomonocytic leukemias,
with or without eosinophilia, to determine whether their presence correlates with
morphology. Fifty-three cases (11 AML M4Eo; 1 AML M4 with atypical abnormal
eosinophils (AML M4 "Eo"); 29 AML M4; 8 AML M5; 3 CMML; and 1 AML M2 with
eosinophilia) were analyzed. All 11 typical AML M4Eo were CBF beta-MYH11
positive. The single case of AML M4 with distinctive eosinophil abnormalities was
negative by karyotype, RT-PCR and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH). Three
of 29 (10%) AML M4 without abnormal eosinophils were CBF beta-MYH11 positive, 1
of which did not show any apparent chromosome 16 abnormalities by classical
metaphase analysis (2 not tested). Both cases tested also showed MYH11 genomic
rearrangement. None of the other leukemias were RT-PCR positive. Follow-up of
three patient showed residual positivity in apparent complete remission. These
data show that CBF beta-MYH11 fusion transcripts occur not only in the vast
majority of typical AML M4Eo, but also in approximately 10% of AML M4 without
eosinophilic abnormalities, a much higher incidence than the sporadic reports of 
chromosome 16 abnormalities in AML M4 would suggest. Taken together with the
detection of CBF beta-MYH11 transcripts in the absence of apparent chromosome 16 
abnormalities by classical banding techniques, these data show that additional
screening by either RT-PCR or FISH should be performed in all AML M4, regardless 
of morphologic features, to allow accurate evaluation of the prognostic
importance of this fusion transcript.

PMID: 7858261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Blood. 1995 Mar 1;85(5):1246-53.

The murine interleukin-3 receptor alpha subunit gene: chromosomal localization,
genomic structure, and promoter function.

Miyajima I(1), Levitt L, Hara T, Bedell MA, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)DNAX Research Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Palo Alto.

The interleukin-3 receptor (IL-3R) is composed of alpha and beta subunits,
members of the class I cytokine receptor family. Here we describe isolation and
characterization of the chromosomal gene for the mouse IL-3R alpha subunit
(mIL-3R alpha). Whereas the human IL-3R alpha gene is tightly linked with the
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor alpha subunit (GM-CSFR 
alpha) gene in the pseudoautosomal region of the X and Y chromosomes, the mIL-3R 
alpha gene (II3ra) is located in the proximal region of mouse chromosome 14,
separated from the mouse GM-CSFR alpha gene, which is on chromosome 19. The
mIL-3R alpha gene spans about 10 kb and is divided into 12 exons. All the
exon-intron boundaries possess the splicing junction consensus sequences
(5'GT-AG3'), and the whole genomic structure is similar to those of the
previously reported class I cytokine receptor genes. There are two major
transcription initiation sites that are located at 215 and 188 nucleotides
upstream of the initiator codon. The promoter region is GC-rich and contains
potential binding sites for GATA, Ets, c-myb,, Sp1, Ap-2, and G-C boxes, but not 
a typical TATA or CAAT sequence. A fusion gene containing 0.8 kb of the 5'
noncoding sequence linked to the firefly luciferase gene directed the
transcription in mouse mast cells but not in fibroblasts or T cells, suggesting
that this promoter functions in a cell type-specific manner. Further sequential
deletion of the 5' region suggests two potential regulatory regions for
transcription of the mIL-3R alpha gene.

PMID: 7858255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 1995 Feb 24;270(8):3757-64.

Characterization of the human tryptophan hydroxylase gene promoter.
Transcriptional regulation by cAMP requires a new motif distinct from the
cAMP-responsive element.

Boularand S(1), Darmon MC, Ravassard P, Mallet J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, de la Neurotransmission, et des
Processus Neurodégénératis, C.N.R.S. Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

We isolated and sequenced 2,117 nucleotides of the promoter region of the human
tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) gene. Transient transfection in pinealocyte cultures
and PC12 cells was used to investigate the human TPH (hTPH) gene promoter
activity and its regulation by the cAMP signaling pathway. A region of 2,117 base
pairs upstream of the transcription initiation site of the hTPH gene efficiently 
directed the transcription of a luciferase reporter gene but not in a
cell-specific manner. The hTPH promoter activity was significantly enhanced by a 
cyclic AMP analog in the two cell types. Deletion analysis showed that the
promoter region from -73 to +2 is sufficient to direct cAMP-dependent
transcription, although it does not contain a motif exhibiting a significant
identity to the cAMP-responsive element (CRE) or AP-2 binding site. Following
site-directed mutagenesis of the region between -73 and -51, an inverted CCAAT
box motif was identified as essential for cAMP inducibility of the hTPH promoter.
This sequence between -73 and -51 alone allowed cAMP enhancement of transcription
when fused to a heterologous promoter. Additionally, electrophoretic mobility
shift assays showed that a specific protein-DNA complex is formed between an
oligonucleotide corresponding to the inverted CCAAT box motif and nuclear
proteins from pinealocytes treated or not treated with cAMP. Thus cAMP
responsiveness of hTPH gene expression is mediated by a cis-acting element, which
shares strong identity with an inverted CCAAT box and which binds to a
constitutively produced nuclear factor.

PMID: 7876116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Development. 1995 Feb;121(2):561-8.

Identification of a germ-cell-specific transcriptional repressor in the promoter 
of Tctex-1.

O'Neill MJ(1), Artzt K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Texas, Austin 78712, USA.

The Tctex-1 gene family maps to the t complex of the mouse and consists of four
copies on chromosome 17 in both wild-type and t-haplotypes. Tctex-1 mRNA is
eightfold overexpressed in male and female germ cells in t-haplotype compound
heterozygotes (tx/ty). In order to determine the cause of this aberrant
expression and the role of this gene family in spermatogenesis and oogenesis it
was subjected to extensive molecular analysis. We find that Tctex-1 protein is
present in sperm tails and oocytes and that it is present at equal levels in
wild-type and t-haplotype testis. Surprisingly, the excess message in
t-haplotypes is not translated. Sequence analysis of the gene family reveals that
one copy in t-haplotypes has a mutated start codon. This same copy is deleted for
a protein-binding motif in its promoter. This motif, GIM (Germ cell Inhibitory
Motif) has strong homology to the Xenopus AP-2-binding site but does not appear
to be a binding site for mammalian AP-2. A factor(s) present in testis and ovary,
but absent in other mouse tissues binds specifically to this site. Transfection
assays using Tctex-1 promoter constructs suggest that GIM functions as a
transcriptional repressor. The possible role of Tctex-1 in t complex transmission
ratio distortion and sterility is discussed.

PMID: 7768192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurosci Res. 1995 Feb 1;40(2):177-88.

Characterization of the rat light neurofilament (NF-L) gene promoter and
identification of NGF and cAMP responsive regions.

Reeben M(1), Neuman T, Palgi J, Palm K, Paalme V, Saarma M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Estonian Academy of Sciences, Tallinn.

We have isolated a genomic DNA clone covering the coding and 14 kb upstream
region of the rat light neurofilament (NF-L) gene and sequenced 2.3 kb of its
promoter. DNase I hypersensitive sites have been mapped in PC12 cells. For
functional analysis of the NF-L promoter, constructs carrying 38, 97, 407, 564,
650, 1,099, 1,660, 2,003 base pairs (bp) upstream region in front of the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene were tested for their
capability to direct CAT expression after transient transfection into various
cell lines. Similar CAT activities were recorded both in rat pheochromocytoma
(PC12) and mouse neuroblastoma N115 cells and also in several nonneural cell
lines (HeLa, C127, NIH 3T3). Regions responsible for the basic promoter activity 
were located between -407 and +75 bp from the transcription initiation site. The 
NGF-responsive element was located between -38 and +75 bp, and sequence -97 to
-38 was found to contain a functional cAMP-responsive element. In PC12 cells in
which nerve growth factor (NGF) induces neurite outgrowth and NF-L transcription,
NF-L promoter-driven CAT expression was stimulated up to 12-fold within three
days of NGF treatment, whereas epidermal growth factor (EGF) had no effect. Rat
NF-L promoter contained Sp1, AP-2 and CGCCCCCGC elements. In PC12 cells, NGF
transiently induced the binding of transcription factors to the
deoxyoligonucleotide probes containing the binding sites of these elements. The
role of these factors in NF-L gene transcriptional induction by NGF in PC12 cells
is discussed.

PMID: 7745611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jan 31;92(3):744-7.

The developmentally regulated transcription factor AP-2 is involved in c-erbB-2
overexpression in human mammary carcinoma.

Bosher JM(1), Williams T, Hurst HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Transcription Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund Oncology Unit,
Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Overexpression of the c-erbB-2/HER2 protooncogene in breast carcinoma is
controlled not only by the degree of amplification of the gene but also at the
level of gene transcription. Thus, whether or not the gene is amplified, the
activity of the c-erbB-2 promoter is enhanced in overexpressing cells through the
binding of an additional transcription factor, OB2-1, whose activity is increased
in these lines. Here we describe further characterization of OB2-1 and show that 
it is identical to the developmentally regulated transcription factor AP-2.
Functional assays confirm that AP-2 is able to regulate c-erbB-2 expression in
mammary-derived cell lines. Furthermore, although AP-2 is barely detectable in
cells with the low c-erbB-2 expression phenotype, protein levels are clearly
elevated in a panel of c-erbB-2-overexpressing lines. These findings demonstrate 
an important role for this transcription factor in human cancer.

PMCID: PMC42696
PMID: 7846046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Jan 26;206(3):935-41.

Characterization of the proximal promoter region of the rat somatostatin receptor
gene, SSTR4.

Xu Y(1), Bruno JF, Berelowitz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, SUNY at Stony Brook, NY 11794.

In the present study, the putative promoter region of rSSTR4 gene has been cloned
and characterized. Primer extension and RNAase protection analysis reveals the
existence of multiple transcriptional initiation sites, the five major ones
mapping between -126 and -18 relative to the ATG initiation codon. Sequence
analysis reveals that the region lacks TATA and CCAAT promoter elements,
possesses a high GC content and contains a number of potential SP1 binding sites.
In addition, potential AP-2, GCF, and PuF binding sites and an octimer motif were
also identified. Thus, the promoter of rSSTR4 shows similar features to promoters
of highly regulated growth factor receptors and oncogenes. The potential role
these transcriptional binding sites play in regulating rSSTR4 expression is
currently being investigated.

PMID: 7832807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 20;270(3):1375-81.

Activation of the Na+/H+ exchanger gene by the transcription factor AP-2.

Dyck JR(1), Silva NL, Fliegel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Canada.

We have isolated and characterized regions important for expression of the mouse 
Na+/H+ exchanger gene. A 1.1-kilobase fragment upstream of the 5'-untranslated
region contains specific DNA motifs characteristic of promoter and enhancer
elements including a TATA box, two CAAT boxes, an SP-1 site, a cyclic AMP
response element-binding site, and an AP-2-like site. This 1.1-kilobase fragment 
directs transcription of a luciferase reporter gene in mouse fibroblasts (NIH
3T3) and human Hep G2 cells. Deletion or mutation of an AP-2-like site 100 base
pairs from the start site of transcription resulted in loss of most of the
reporter plasmid activity. In addition, cotransfection of an AP-2 expression
plasmid and the mouse promoter/luciferase plasmid increased the amount of Na+/H+ 
exchanger-directed transcription in AP-2-deficient Hep G2 cells. Moreover,
mobility shift analysis indicated that a putative AP-2-binding site is capable of
binding purified AP-2 protein and a specific protein from nuclear extracts of NIH
3T3 cells. The results show that the transcription factor AP-2 may play an
important role in regulation of transcription of the mouse Na+/H+ exchanger gene.

PMID: 7836405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr. 1995;5(3-4):337-64.

A new transcription factor family associated with human leukemias.

Speck NA(1), Terryl S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

The proteins known as the polyoma enhancer binding protein 2 or core-binding
factor (PEBP2/CBF) are heterodimeric transcription factors that contain a
DNA-binding subunit (CBF alpha), and a subunit that does not bind DNA
independently (CBF beta). PEBP2 and CBF were identified independently as proteins
that regulate transcription of viral and cellular enhancers, and also as proteins
whose genes are disrupted by chromosomal abnormalities in human leukemias. This
review traces the history of the discovery of the PEBP2 and CBF protein family
and describes the biochemical properties of the normal and oncogenic forms of
these proteins.

PMID: 8834230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Prog Growth Factor Res. 1995;6(2-4):131-40.

Dexamethasone stimulation of rat insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) promoter activity involves the interaction of multiple transcription
factors.

Suh DS(1), Zhou Y, Ooi GT, Rechler MM.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1758, USA.

Using an improved procedure for transient transfection of H4-II-E rat hepatoma
cells, we characterized the cis elements in the proximal promoter of the rat
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (rat IGFBP-1) gene that are required
for basal (unstimulated) and dexamethasone-stimulated promoter activity. Three
sites are required for optimal basal promoter activity: an AP-2 site (nt -286 to 
-293), the M4 region of the insulin response element (nt -108 to -99), and a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) site (nt -62 to -50). In addition to the
glucocorticoid response element (nt -91 to -77), participation of two of three
accessory sites is required for optimal stimulation by dexamethasone: the M4 and 
HNF-1 sites, and a third site located between nt -252 and -236. Further study
will focus on how the interactions of tissue-specific and hormonally-responsive
transcription factors are integrated.

PMID: 8817654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 1994 Dec 16;269(50):31983-90.

The 5' enhancer of the mouse mammary tumor virus long terminal repeat contains a 
functional AP-2 element.

Mellentin-Michelotti J(1), John S, Pennie WD, Williams T, Hager GL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, NCI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) retrovirus causes mammary adenocarcinomas in
mice by proviral insertion near members of the wnt family of proto-oncogenes,
leading to their deregulation and cellular transformation. The 5' end of the MMTV
long terminal repeat (LTR) has been implicated in tissue-specific activation of
these genes. In this study, we characterize an enhancer element (Ban2; -1075 to
-978) at the 5' end of the MMTV LTR. We show that this enhancer is 5-fold more
active in a murine mammary carcinoma cell line (34i) than in a fibroblast cell
line (NIH3T3), and is inactive in the liver carcinoma cell line HepG2.
Mutagenesis of the enhancer reveals four cis-acting elements that are required
for maximal activity. DNA-binding proteins that interact with each of the four
elements have been identified. One of these factors, designated mp5, is either
identical to, or closely related to, the transcription factor AP-2. The mp5/AP-2 
DNA binding activity co-migrates with recombinant AP-2 and is supershifted by
anti-AP-2 antibodies. We also show that the lack of enhancer activity in HepG2
cells results from the absence of AP-2 protein in these cells. Co-transfection of
an AP-2 expression vector restores the activity of this enhancer in HepG2 cells, 
and requires an intact mp5-binding site.

PMID: 7989375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Dec 15;226(3):751-64.

Genomic cloning and sequence analyses of the bovine alpha-, beta A- and beta
B-inhibin/activin genes. Identification of transcription factor AP-2-binding
sites in the 5'-flanking regions by DNase I footprinting.

Thompson DA(1), Cronin CN, Martin F.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Centre, University College Dublin, Belfield, Ireland.

Inhibins and activins are dimeric peptide hormones that regulate the circulating 
levels of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH). In turn, FSH stimulates inhibin
gene expression in the ovarian follicle; studies to date suggest that this effect
is mediated by cAMP and that a cAMP-responsive element, identified in the
5'-flanking region of the alpha-inhibin gene, at least partially effects this
response. To explore further the transcriptional regulation of the
inhibin/activin genes, we have isolated and sequenced the 5'-flanking regions of 
the bovine alpha-, beta A- and beta B-inhibin/activin subunit genes and have
analysed these regions by primer-extension analysis and DNase I footprinting with
the transcription factor AP-2. Analyses indicated that all three gene promoter
regions have a number of AP-2-binding sites that are resistant to competition by 
poly(dI-dC), suggesting that cAMP may control the inhibin/activin ratio by
operating through alternative signal-transduction pathways or that
inhibin/activin gene expression may be controlled by signals operating through
the protein kinase C pathway. A comparison of the DNA sequences protected by AP-2
against DNase I digestion revealed a consensus AP-2-binding site of
5'-GSCCCDSS-3', where S represents a base pairing involving three (C or G)
hydrogen bonds and D represents any base other than C. The nucleotide sequences
of the bovine beta-subunit structural genes also are reported.

PMID: 7813465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Dec 15;205(2):1217-25.

Regulation of mouse UBF gene by multiple growth-related control elements.

Nishimura T(1), Hanada K, Maeda Y, Song CZ, Hisatake K, Muramatsu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Tokyo Faculty of Medicine, Japan.

Transcription of the mouse Upstream Binding Factor (mUBF) gene, that encodes one 
of the essential transcription factors for ribosomal DNA transcription, starts
from several nucleotides. Neither typical TATA-box nor CCAAT-box is found
upstream of the transcription initiation site. In the promoter region, there are 
eight GC-boxes, eight AP-2 binding consensus sequences, four cAMP response
elements, and several serum response element equivalent sequences. These elements
appear to play a positive role for the regulation of the mUBF gene as a whole.
Among serum response elements, members located between -1182 and -343 are indeed 
responsive to serum, suggesting their important role in the high expression of
mUBF under cell growth conditions.

PMID: 7802653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Dec 1;226(2):377-84.

Promoter function of the human glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase gene depends on 
two GC boxes that are cell specifically controlled.

Philippe M(1), Larondelle Y, Lemaigre F, Mariamé B, Delhez H, Mason P, Luzzatto
L, Rousseau GG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Molecular Biology, Louvain University Medical School,
Brussels, Belgium.

Human glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase is expressed in all cells by a
housekeeping gene whose regulatory 5'-flanking sequence includes at least nine GC
boxes. By transient transfection of HeLa and HepG2 cells with constructs
containing glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase gene regions linked to a reporter
gene, we have now delineated the core promoter and have located upstream
stimulatory and inhibitory sequences. By mutational analysis, we demonstrate that
the activity of the core promoter requires two out of seven GC boxes. We show
that stimulatory protein 1 (Sp1)-related factors and activator protein 2
(AP-2)-related proteins bind to these two boxes in band-shift experiments. One
point mutation that affects the binding of only the Sp1-related factors to one or
both boxes causes a marked decrease of promoter activity in HepG2 cells but not
in HeLa cells. We conclude that (a) two out of many seemingly redundant GC boxes 
are necessary to drive a G+C-rich housekeeping promoter; (b) factors that bind to
GC boxes may exert cell-type-specific regulation of housekeeping gene promoter
activity; (c) point mutations in the promoter of the glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase gene can inhibit its transcription.

PMID: 8001555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):8085-95.

Identification of a region which directs the monocytic activity of the
colony-stimulating factor 1 (macrophage colony-stimulating factor) receptor
promoter and binds PEBP2/CBF (AML1).

Zhang DE(1), Fujioka K, Hetherington CJ, Shapiro LH, Chen HM, Look AT, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

The receptor for the macrophage colony-stimulating factor (or colony-stimulating 
factor 1 [CSF-1]) is expressed from different promoters in monocytic cells and
placental trophoblasts. We have demonstrated that the monocyte-specific
expression of the CSF-1 receptor is regulated at the level of transcription by a 
tissue-specific promoter whose activity is stimulated by the
monocyte/B-cell-specific transcription factor PU.1 (D.-E. Zhang, C.J.
Hetherington, H.-M. Chen, and D.G. Tenen, Mol. Cell. Biol. 14:373-381, 1994).
Here we report that the tissue specificity of this promoter is also mediated by
sequences in a region II (bp -88 to -59), which lies 10 bp upstream from the
PU.1-binding site. When analyzed by DNase footprinting, region II was protected
preferentially in monocytic cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
confirmed that region II interacts specifically with nuclear proteins from
monocytic cells. Two gel shift complexes (Mono A and Mono B) were formed with
separate sequence elements within this region. Competition and supershift
experiments indicate that Mono B contains a member of the polyomavirus
enhancer-binding protein 2/core-binding factor (PEBP2/CBF) family, which includes
the AML1 gene product, while Mono A is a distinct complex preferentially
expressed in monocytic cells. Promoter constructs with mutations in these
sequence elements were no longer expressed specifically in monocytes.
Furthermore, multimerized region II sequence elements enhanced the activity of a 
heterologous thymidine kinase promoter in monocytic cells but not other cell
types tested. These results indicate that the monocyte/B-cell-specific
transcription factor PU.1 and the Mono A and Mono B protein complexes act in
concert to regulate monocyte-specific transcription of the CSF-1 receptor.

PMCID: PMC359347
PMID: 7969146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):8051-7.

AML1 is expressed in skeletal muscle and is regulated by innervation.

Zhu X(1), Yeadon JE, Burden SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol 1995 Feb;15(2):1136.

Although most skeletal muscle genes are expressed at similar levels in
electrically active, innervated muscle and in electrically inactive, denervated
muscle, a small number of genes, including those encoding the acetylcholine
receptor, N-CAM, and myogenin, are expressed at significantly higher levels in
denervated than in innervated muscle. The mechanisms that mediate electrical
activity-dependent gene regulation are not understood, but these mechanisms are
likely to be responsible, at least in part, for the changes in muscle structure
and function that accompany a decrease in myofiber electrical activity. To
understand how muscle activity regulates muscle structure and function, we used a
subtractive-hybridization and cloning strategy to identify and isolate genes that
are expressed preferentially in innervated or denervated muscle. One of the genes
which we found to be regulated by electrical activity is the recently discovered 
acute myeloid leukemia 1 (AML1) gene. Disruption and translocation of the human
AML1 gene are responsible for a form of acute myeloid leukemia. AML1 is a
DNA-binding protein, but its normal function is not known and its expression and 
regulation in skeletal muscle were not previously appreciated. Because of its
potential role as a transcriptional mediator of electrical activity, we
characterized expression of the AML1 gene in innervated, denervated, and
developing skeletal muscle. We show that AML1 is expressed at low levels in
innervated skeletal muscle and at 50- to 100-fold-higher levels in denervated
muscle. Four AML1 transcripts are expressed in denervated muscle, and the
abundance of each transcript increases after denervation. We transfected C2
muscle cells with an expression vector encoding AML1, tagged with an epitope from
hemagglutinin, and we show that AML1 is a nuclear protein in muscle. AML1
dimerizes with core-binding factor beta (CBF beta), and we show that CGF beta is 
expressed at high levels in both innervated and denervated skeletal muscle. PEBP2
alpha, which is structurally related to AML1 and which also dimerizes with CBF
beta, is expressed at low levels in skeletal muscle and is up-regulated only
weakly by denervation. These results are consistent with the idea that AML1 may
have a role in regulating gene expression in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC359343
PMID: 7969143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Eur J Immunol. 1994 Dec;24(12):3057-62.

Structure of the human APO-1 gene.

Behrmann I(1), Walczak H, Krammer PH.

Author information: 
(1)Tumorimmunology Program/Division of Immunogenetics, German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg.

APO-1/Fas (CD95) is a type 1 transmembrane protein that belongs to the tumor
necrosis factor/nerve growth factor receptor family characterized by
cysteine-rich extracellular domains. Cross-linking of APO-1 mediates apoptosis in
a variety of cells. In the present study we report the isolation and
characterization of the human APO-1 gene spanning approximately 25 kb of human
chromosome 10. The gene consists of nine exons (25 bp to > 1.44 kb) separated by 
eight introns (152 bp to approximately 12 kb). The boundaries of exon 2 to 5
encoding the extracellular region do not match the boundaries of the three APO-1 
protein subdomains. Exon structure and functional protein domains correspond for 
exon 6 encoding the transmembrane region and for exon 9 encoding the "death
domain". By a polymerase chain reaction-based approach we localized major
transcriptional start sites in human spleen cells 77 and 73 nucleotides upstream 
of the translation initiation codon of the human APO-1 gene. Minor initiation
sites were found at positions -128, -111, -91, and -74. The 5' flanking sequence 
of the human APO-1 gene is GC rich, contains a high number of CpG dinucleotides
and lacks a consensus TATA box. Consensus binding sites for the transcription
factors Sp1, AP-1, AP-2, GAF, NF-kappa B, and NF-AT were found. The elucidation
of the human APO-1 gene structure will facilitate the study of its involvement in
various diseases such as in autoimmunity.

PMID: 7528667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Nov 30;205(1):612-7.

Characterization of the gene for human neutrophil-activating peptide 78 (ENA-78).

Corbett MS(1), Schmitt I, Riess O, Walz A.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor Kocher Institute, University of Bern, Switzerland.

The genomic DNA for ENA-78 has been obtained from a human chromosome 4
flow-sorted cosmid library. Three out of 25,000 screened single colonies yielded 
the same 2.2-kB EcoRI ENA-78 gene fragment. A similar size fragment was observed 
on genomic southern blots, suggesting the presence of a single ENA-78 gene. The
transcriptional start site was localized using a 5' RACE protocol on first strand
cDNA prepared from stimulated alveolar type-II epithelial cell (A549) poly(A)
mRNA. The ENA-78 gene contains four exons and three introns and the open reading 
frame of 342 nucleotides encodes for a protein of total 114 amino acids. The 5'
flanking region contains potential binding sites for several nuclear factors such
as AP-2, NF-kappa B, and interferon regulatory factor-1.

PMID: 7999089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Nov 30;205(1):6-11.

5'-flanking region surrounding a human cytosolic phospholipase A2 gene.

Morri H(1), Ozaki M, Watanabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Research Development Corporation of Japan (JRDC), Osaka.

The 5'-flanking region and the first four exons of a gene encoding human
cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2) were isolated from a human lambda EMBL3
genomic library and sequenced. The 5'-flanking region is characterized by CA
repeats, one of microsatellites. The analysis of the 5'-flanking region with
transcription factor database suggests the existence of the transcription factor 
binding sites such as NF-kappa B, NF-IL6, AP-1, AP-2, and PEA3. These factors are
well known to be induced or activated by the reagents (tumor necrosis factor
alpha, interleukin-1, epidermal growth factor, and phorbol myristate acetate)
reported as the inducers of a cPLA2 gene.

PMID: 7999086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Nov 22;91(24):11723-7.

Growth inhibition and induction of differentiation of t(8;21) acute myeloid
leukemia cells by the DNA-binding domain of PEBP2 and the AML1/MTG8(ETO)-specific
antisense oligonucleotide.

Sakakura C(1), Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, Satake M, Bae SC, Takahashi A, Ogawa E, Hagiwara
A, Takahashi T, Murakami A, Makino K, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

The translocation from chromosome 8 to chromosome 21, t(8;21), associated with
acute myeloid leukemia results in production of an AML1/MTG8(ETO) fusion
transcript. The product of the AML1 gene contains an evolutionarily conserved
128-amino acid region referred to as the "Runt domain," which is necessary for
binding to DNA at the PEBP2 site. A fragment of the AML1 protein containing
mainly the Runt domain and the antisense oligonucleotide complementary to the
fusion transcript strongly inhibited the growth and induced differentiation of
cell lines derived from acute myeloid leukemia containing t(8;21). These results 
indicate that the transcriptional regulation through the PEBP2 site is critically
important for growth and differentiation of t(8;21) leukemic cells and that the
product of the chimeric gene is responsible for the maintenance of the leukemic
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC45304
PMID: 7972130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 18;269(46):28620-8.

The rabbit gene for 92-kDa matrix metalloproteinase. Role of AP1 and AP2 in cell 
type-specific transcription.

Fini ME(1), Bartlett JD, Matsubara M, Rinehart WB, Mody MK, Girard MT, Rainville 
M.

Author information: 
(1)MGH/Harvard Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown 02129.

We isolated the rabbit gene for the 92-kDa matrix metalloproteinase, gelatinase
B, and sequenced 1802 contiguous bases covering the first three exons and 522
bases of DNA upstream of the start site for transcription. The DNA between bases 
-519 and +19 is sufficient to drive expression of a reporter gene in early
passage cultures of corneal fibroblasts or primary cultures of corneal epithelial
cells. Basal activity of the gelatinase B promoter in fibroblasts is lower than a
collagenase promotor of 1800 base pairs, but activity of both promotors is
similarly stimulated by treatment of transfected cells with phorbol 12-myristate 
13-acetate, and stimulation is enhanced by co-treatment with transforming growth 
factor-beta. In contrast, basal activity of the gelatinase B promotor in
epithelial cells is higher than the collagenase promotor. Deletion analysis
demonstrated that sequences upstream of base -330 confer cell type-specific
activity to the gelatinase B promotor. Site-directed mutagenesis revealed that an
AP1-like element within this region is specifically utilized by fibroblasts. This
region also contains elements that confer the capacity for activation by AP2, a
transcription factor found to be expressed by corneal epithelial cells but not by
corneal fibroblasts. In contrast, AP2 does not activate the collagenase promotor.
These results provide a molecular basis for the unique cell type-specific
expression pattern of gelatinase B as compared to other matrix
metalloproteinases.

PMID: 7961810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Neurosci Lett. 1994 Nov 7;181(1-2):35-8.

Identification of an AP-1-like sequence in the promoter region of calcyclin, a
S-100-like gene. Enhancement of binding during retinoic acid-induced
neuroblastoma cell differentiation.

Bottini F(1), Mazzocco K, Abbondi T, Tonini GP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Oncology, G. Gaslini Children's Hospital, Genoa, Italy.

The promoter region of genes involved in cell growth and differentiation is bound
by specific transcription factors which regulate its expression. Our previous
study showed that the calcyclin gene, which belongs to the large family of
Ca2+-binding proteins, is differently expressed in SK-N-BE(2)C and LA-N-5
neuroblastoma cell lines. We analysed the region upstream the transcription
initiation site of the gene before and during retinoic acid (RA)-induced
differentiation. Gel-shift analysis showed that the -161,-135 untranslated region
is bound by an AP-1-like protein both in SK-N-BE(2)C and LA-N-5 cells.
Competition assay demonstrated that AP-2,AP-3 and NF1 transcription factors did
not bind in the same region. Calcyclin mRNA is induced in RA-treated LA-N-5 cells
and reaches maximal expression at 96 h, suggesting that its gene is involved in
cell differentiation. Gel-shift analysis shows a strong signal of binding after
96 h of RA treatment. Our results indicate that RA induces an increase in the
binding protein or improves its affinity for the AP-1-like region during neuronal
differentiation. These preliminary data suggest that the calcyclin gene is
involved in neuronal pathway differentiation and that AP-1-like binding sequence 
could be one of the gene regions that is under transcriptional factor control
during cell differentiation.

PMID: 7898765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Growth Differ. 1994 Nov;5(11):1235-41.

Arsenate perturbation of human keratinocyte differentiation.

Kachinskas DJ(1), Phillips MA, Qin Q, Stokes JD, Rice RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis
95616-8588.

Treatment of cultured malignant human keratinocytes with sodium arsenate greatly 
suppressed expression of involucrin, a specific marker of keratinocyte
differentiation. This action was primarily attributable to inhibition of
involucrin transcription according to message run-on and stability measurements. 
Involucrin was suppressed in nontumorigenic keratinocytes as well, although the
efficacy of suppression was less dramatic in cells derived from clinically normal
epidermis. Several transition metal oxyanions (vanadate, molybdate, and
tungstate) also substantially suppressed involucrin expression, but okadaic acid 
was ineffective. Immunoblotting detected marked increases in tyrosine
phosphorylation of several proteins as a consequence of arsenate treatment of the
cultures, while mobility shift analysis revealed a dramatic loss of DNA binding
by the transcription factor AP2. These findings support a proposed role for
altered levels of protein tyrosine phosphorylation in keratinocyte
differentiation. They also suggest that arsenate perturbs the differentiation
program in target cells by altering this phosphorylation level and transcription 
factor activity.

PMID: 7848924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Virol. 1994 Oct;68(10):6820-3.

Transcription factor AP-2 regulates human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gene
expression.

Perkins ND(1), Agranoff AB, Duckett CS, Nabel GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor 48109-0650.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) gene expression is regulated by an
enhancer region composed of multiple potential cis-acting regulatory sites. Here,
we describe binding sites for the transcription factor AP-2 in the HIV-1 long
terminal repeat which modulate HIV enhancer function. One site is embedded within
the two previously described kappa B elements, and a second site is detected
further downstream. DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
experiments demonstrated that AP-2 binds to the site between the kappa B
elements. Interestingly, AP-2 and NF-kappa B bind to this region in a mutually
exclusive manner. Mutations which disrupt this AP-2-binding site lower basal
levels of transcription but do not affect NF-kappa B-mediated induction by tumor 
necrosis factor alpha in Jurkat T leukemia cells.

PMCID: PMC237111
PMID: 8084021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 1994 Oct;165(2):602-14.

Cell type-specific regulation of expression of transcription factor AP-2 in
neuroectodermal cells.

Philipp J(1), Mitchell PJ, Malipiero U, Fontana A.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital of Zurich, Department of Internal Medicine, Switzerland.

AP-2 is a cell type-specific DNA-binding transcription factor that regulates
selected target genes in vertebrate organisms. Here we investigated cell
type-specific expression and regulation of AP-2 in neuroectodermal cell lineages.
During retinoic acid (RA)-mediated differentiation of P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells into neuroectodermal cell types that include immunohistochemically defined 
neurons and astrocytes, we observed a strong induction of AP-2 transcripts and
protein. In contrast, AP-2 mRNA was not induced in P19 cells which undergo
mesoendodermal differentiation in response to 1% dimethylsulfoxide or low
concentrations of RA, respectively. The potential of both neurons and astrocytes 
to express AP-2 was ascertained by using cerebellar neurons and astrocytes
derived from newborn mice. Unlike these types of cells, microglial cells do not
express AP-2. Dibutyryl cyclic AMP further enhanced levels of AP-2 transcripts in
both P19 astrocytes and primary astrocytes which also respond to agents elevating
intracellular cAMP (noradrenaline, isoproterenol, forskolin). The cAMP-dependent 
induction of AP-2 could be blocked by inhibitors of protein kinase A. In contrast
to its action in P19 cells, RA had no effect on AP-2 mRNA levels in primary
astrocytes. Our results indicate that AP-2 may play a role as a retinoic
acid-sensitive regulator during differentiation of neurons and glia from an
embryonic neural precursor. Furthermore, AP-2 may be involved in gene
transcription in both mature neurons and astrocytes.

PMID: 7958425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):24321-7.

Activation of nuclear factor kappa B and oncogene expression by
12(R)-hydroxyeicosatrienoic acid, an angiogenic factor in microvessel endothelial
cells.

Laniado-Schwartzman M(1), Lavrovsky Y, Stoltz RA, Conners MS, Falck JR, Chauhan
K, Abraham NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

12(R)-Hydroxy-5,8,14(Z,Z,Z)-eicosatrienoic acid (12(R)-HETrE) is an arachidonic
acid metabolite formed by the corneal epithelium of several species, porcine
leukocytes, and human and rat epidermal cells. It is a potent, stereospecific
proinflammatory and angiogenic factor and its synthesis is increased manyfold in 
inflamed tissues, e.g. cornea and skin. It is possible that the angiogenic
activity of 12(R)-HETrE is due to a direct mitogenic effect on microvessel
endothelial cells via yet to be elucidated cellular and molecular mechanisms. In 
the present study, we demonstrated the ability of 12(R)-HETrE to stimulate the
growth of quiescent endothelial cells in a time- and concentration-dependent
manner with a maximal effect at 0.1 nM. This effect was highly stereospecific
since its enantiomer, 12(S)-HETrE, had no effect within the same concentration
range. Northern blot analysis and transient transfection experiments with
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs of oncogene promoter regions
demonstrated significant increases over control (0.5% fetal calf serum) in
c-myc-, c-jun, and c-fos mRNA levels and expression in cells treated with 0.1 nM 
12(R)-HETrE. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay of nuclear protein extracts
from cells treated with 12(R)-HETrE with specific radiolabeled oligonucleotides
corresponding to known transcriptional binding sites, including AP-1, AP-2, SP1, 
TRE, NF kappa B, TFIID, OKT1, CREB, CTF/NF1, and GRE demonstrated a markedly
rapid and specific increase in the binding activity of NF kappa B and to a lesser
extent, AP-1. No significant increase was observed in the binding of other
transcription factors assayed as compared to control (untreated) cells. Since the
protooncogenes (c-fos, c-jun, and c-myc) are immediate early response genes that 
are implicated in the process of cell proliferation and differentiation, and
activation of certain transcription factors, in particular NF kappa B, is
associated with the immediate response of the cell to an injury, we propose that 
12(R)HETrE's mitogenic and angiogenic activities are mediated, in part, via the
activation of NF kappa B and expression of these protooncogenes.

PMID: 7523372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. DNA Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;13(8):865-74.

PEBP2--a modulator of polyoma DNA replication.

Rutberg SE(1), Dolan LR, Ronai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Carcinogenesis Program, American Health Foundation, Valhalla, NY
10595.

Previously, we have shown that integrated copies of polyoma DNA can be induced to
replicate in rat fibroblasts (H3 cells) exposed to a DNA-damaging agent. In the
current study, we demonstrate that UV-irradiation of mouse fibroblasts (WOP
cells), transiently transfected with polyoma DNA, results in repression of
polyoma replication. Cotransfection of oligomers representing wild-type but not
mutated forms of the PEBP2 target sequence restored levels of viral replication
indicating a role of PEBP2 binding proteins in mediating this effect. DNA-binding
assays revealed that a different subset of complexes was formed with the PEBP2
target sequence when nuclear proteins from sham and UV-irradiated WOP and H3
cells were compared, suggesting that the activities of PEBP2 binding proteins are
differentially regulated upon UV-irradiation in these two cell types. The ability
of PEBP2 to modulate polyoma replication following UV-irradiation in WOP cells
suggests a potential role of PEBP2 proteins in the cellular response to DNA
damage.

PMID: 8068209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Aug;14(8):5558-68.

PEBP2/CBF, the murine homolog of the human myeloid AML1 and PEBP2 beta/CBF beta
proto-oncoproteins, regulates the murine myeloperoxidase and neutrophil elastase 
genes in immature myeloid cells.

Nuchprayoon I(1), Meyers S, Scott LM, Suzow J, Hiebert S, Friedman AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland 21287.

The myeloperoxidase (MPO) and neutrophil elastase genes are expressed
specifically in immature myeloid cells. The integrity of a polyomavirus enhancer 
core sequence, 5'-AACCACA-3', is critical to the activity of the murine MPO
proximal enhancer. This element binds two species, myeloid nuclear factors 1
alpha and 1 beta (MyNF1 alpha and -beta), present in 32D cl3 myeloid cell nuclear
extracts. The levels of the MyNF1s increase during early 32D cl3 cell
granulocytic differentiation. Both MyNF1 alpha and -beta supershift with an
antiserum raised by using a peptide derived from the N terminus of polyomavirus
enhancer-binding protein 2/core-binding factor (PEBP2/CBF) alpha subunit. The
specific peptide inhibits these supershifts. In vitro-translated PEBP2/CBF
DNA-binding domain binds the murine MPO PEBP2/CBF site. An alternate PEBP2/CBF
consensus site, 5'-GACCGCA-3', but not a simian virus 40 enhancer core sequence, 
5'-TTCCACA-3', binds the MyNF1s in vitro and activates a minimal murine
MPO-thymidine kinase promoter in vivo. The murine neutrophil elastase gene 100-bp
5'-flanking sequences contain several functional elements, including potential
binding sites for PU.1, C/EBP, c-Myb, and PEBP2/CBF. The functional element
5'-GGCCACA-3' located at positions -66 to 72 differs from the PEBP2/CBF consensus
(5'-PuACCPuCA-3') only by an A-to-G transition at position 2. This DNA element
binds MyNF1 alpha and -beta weakly. The N terminis of two PEBP2/CBF alpha subunit
family members, PEBP2 alpha A and PEBP2 alpha B (murine AML1), are nearly
identical, and 32D c13 cl3 cells contain both corresponding mRNAs. Since t(8;21),
t(3;21), and inv(16), associated with myeloid leukemias, disrupt subunits of
PEBP2/CBF, we speculate that the resulting oncoproteins, AML1-ETO, AML1-EAP,
AML1-Evi1, and CBF beta-MYH11, inhibit early myeloid differentiation.

PMCID: PMC359075
PMID: 8035830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Leuk Lymphoma. 1994 Aug;14(5-6):395-400.

Hypercalcemia, parathyroid hormone-related protein expression and human T-cell
leukemia virus infection.

Prager D(1), Rosenblatt JD, Ejima E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California
90048.

Adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) associated with HTLV-1 infection is characterized by 
the development of hypercalcemia in over two thirds of patients. Dysregulation of
cellular gene transcription by viral proteins is an emerging paradigm for
molecular pathogenesis of disease. A recent example is the parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP) gene, which has been implicated in the
hypercalcemia of ATL, and is transactivated by the HTLV-1 tax and HTLV-11 tax
proteins. PTHrP is expressed at high levels in leukemia cells derived from ATL
patients, as well as in asymptomatic HTLV-1 positive carriers. This article
reviews the interaction of the HTLV-1 transcriptional regulator tax with the
PTHrP promoter. Tax mediates its effects on PTHrP via cellular transcription
factors AP-2 and AP-1, and transactivation via an AP-2 motif represents a novel
interaction of tax with a cellular transcription factor.

PMID: 7812198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Jul 15;223(2):529-41.

Transcriptional control of the human biliary glycoprotein gene, a CEA gene family
member down-regulated in colorectal carcinomas.

Hauck W(1), Nédellec P, Turbide C, Stanners CP, Barnett TR, Beauchemin N.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Biliary glycoprotein (BGP) isoantigens are derived by alternative splicing from a
single gene and are the human homologs of rat C-CAM and the mouse Bgp species.
These glycoproteins represent a family of cell-adhesion molecules. The mouse Bgp 
isoforms also act as receptors for the hepatitis viral capsid-protein. BGP is a
member of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family, which belongs to the
immunoglobulin supergene family, yet it displays restricted expression patterns
and unique functions. Since the loss or reduced expression of BGP is associated
with human colorectal carcinomas, the elements in its upstream regulatory region 
were analyzed. A cluster of transcriptional initiation sites and the minimal
promoter, located within 150 bp upstream of the major transcriptional start site,
were active in human colon carcinoma and hepatoma cells. Unlike the CEA gene, BGP
gene transcription was not modulated by a silencer region; repetitive elements in
the BGP upstream region were not involved in activation or repression.
Footprinting experiments identified two cis-acting elements and mobility-shift
assays demonstrated that these elements bound several transcription factors,
among them, USF, HNF-4 and an AP-2-like factor. In cotransfection experiments,
both the USF and HNF-4 transcription factors transactivate the BGP gene promoter 
and compete for the same regulatory element. The Sp1 transcription factor, shown 
to be involved in CEA gene transcriptional regulation, does not bind to the BGP
gene promoter. We, therefore, propose that the relative distributions and
interactions of these transcription factors mediate distinct transcriptional
regulation of the BGP gene in colon and liver; this regulation could be distorted
during the oncogenic process.

PMID: 8055923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jun 21;91(13):5987-91.

Identification of binding sites for transcription factors NF-kappa B and AP-2 in 
the promoter region of the human heme oxygenase 1 gene.

Lavrovsky Y(1), Schwartzman ML, Levere RD, Kappas A, Abraham NG.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University Hospital, New York, NY 10021.

Heme oxygenase (HO) is the rate-limiting enzyme in heme catabolism and its
activity is induced by many agents, including its substrate heme, heavy metals,
UV radiation, and other injurious oxidant conditions. We examined the presence of
several regulatory elements in the promoter region of the human HO-1 gene which
could possibly account for its induction in response to diverse agents or
influences. Heme treatment increased both HO activity and HO-1 mRNA in the human 
erythroleukemic cell line K562. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays of nuclear 
protein extracts from heme-treated and control cells with specific
oligonucleotide probes containing binding sites for known transcription factors, 
including AP-1, AP-2, Sp1, NF-kappa B, CTF/NF1, TFIID, OKT1, and CREB, and
oligonucleotides containing serum-, metal-, and glucocorticoid-responsive
elements demonstrated a specific and marked increase in the NF-kappa B and AP-2
transcription factors and, to a lesser extent, an increase in AP-1. No
significant increase in other transcription factors over the control, untreated
cells was observed. DNase I footprint assays using purified transcription factors
revealed the presence of NF-kappa B and AP-2 binding sites in the proximal part
of the promoter region of the human HO-1 gene. Moreover, nucleotide sequence
analysis of the HO-1 promoter region showed that the protected regions
encompassed NF-kappa B and AP-2 consensus binding sites. The presence of
regulatory sequences for the binding of transcription factors such as NF-kappa B 
and AP-2, whose activation is associated with the immediate response of the cell 
to an injury, may be an indication of the important role which HO-1 may play in
defense mechanisms against tissue injury.

PMCID: PMC44122
PMID: 8016102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 3;269(22):15460-8.

Transcriptional regulation of the human neuropeptide Y gene by nerve growth
factor.

Minth-Worby CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
48109-0606.

Neuropeptide Y (NPY) is the most ubiquitously expressed peptide in the mammalian 
nervous system. Transcription of the NPY gene in PC12 cells is regulated by a
number of agents, including the neurotrophic peptide nerve growth factor (NGF).
In this paper, we define the cis-acting promoter elements which respond to NGF
and characterize the trans-acting factors which interact with these sequences.
The NGF-responsive elements of the NPY gene lie between nucleotides -87 and -36. 
At least four proteins interact with this promoter region. One of these proteins 
interacts with a CT-rich sequence centered at position -51, which closely abuts a
binding site for transcription factor AP-2 centered at position -63. Two newly
characterized factors bind between positions -87 and -58. These proteins are
expressed in a tissue-specific manner and, together with the other binding
activities, modulate the transcriptional activity of the NPY gene. These results 
suggest that the concerted interplay of these proteins, in response to NGF,
increases the transcriptional activity of the NPY gene.

PMID: 8195188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Genes Dev. 1994 Jun 1;8(11):1258-69.

N-ras oncogene causes AP-2 transcriptional self-interference, which leads to
transformation.

Kannan P(1), Buettner R, Chiao PJ, Yim SO, Sarkiss M, Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University of Texas, M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030.

Genetic alterations in elements of normal signal transduction mechanisms are
known to be oncogenic events often resulting in aberrant activation of programs
of gene transcription. We have investigated the effect of N-ras oncogene-induced 
tumorigenic transformation on the transcription factor AP-2. N-ras
oncogene-induced transformation of human teratocarcinoma cells PA-1 results in
sixfold elevated AP-2 mRNA levels. However, the level of AP-2-mediated
trans-activation is dramatically inhibited in these cells. We show here that the 
high-level expression of AP-2 ultimately results in transcriptional
"self-interference". The activation domain of AP-2, when fused to the DNA-binding
domain of GAL4, is sufficient for self-interference. Non-N-ras PA-1 cells
constitutively expressing AP-2 or GAL4-AP-2 fusion protein from an SV40 promoter 
exhibit reduced AP-2-mediated transcriptional activation, inhibition of
differentiation, and promotion of anchorage-independent growth, properties that
are similar to N-ras-transformed PA-1 cells. Thus, AP-2 is placed in the N-ras
signal transduction pathway, and many of the biological effects of N-ras can be
accomplished by overexpression of AP-2. This is the first evidence that
inhibition of the activity of a transcription factor by self-interference
contributes to a physiological process.

PMID: 7926729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Gene. 1994 May 16;142(2):285-90.

Characterization of a 142-bp fragment of the murine c-fos oncogene promoter
upstream of the SIF-binding element.

Lavrovsky Y(1), Abraham NG, Levere RD, Lavrovsky V, Schwartzman ML, Kappas A.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

We previously reported that in transformed mouse sarcoma cells of spontaneous
origin and in revertants transfected with a fos-cat fusion, the 600-bp c-fos
promoter region provides chloramphenicol acetyltransferase activity. In the
present study, we investigated the binding of transcriptional factor protein(s)
to a region (-503 to -361) upstream of the sis (platelet-derived growth
factor)-inducible factor (SIF)-binding element. Gel electrophoresis retardation
(GER) assay clearly demonstrated the appearance of strong binding activity to a
newly described fragment in the 142-bp region studied. Further analysis using
synthetic oligodeoxyribonucleotides and GER defined a binding region of 30 bp
(AvaI-AvaII) from -503 to -472 that partially overlaps with a region known to
bind fos promoter binding site 2 (FBS2). DNase I footprint analysis discovered a 
novel sequence in the upstream region of the c-fos promoter to which protein(s)
in nuclear extracts from various mouse and human cells bind. This factor(s) is
not identical to most known transcriptional factors present in the promoter
region of nuclear oncogenes. A proximal part of this fragment is very
conservative and contains several AP-2-like-binding sites.

PMID: 8194766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 May 11;22(9):1675-80.

The promoter of the Xwnt-5C gene contains octamer and AP-2 motifs functional in
Xenopus embryos.

Kuiken GA(1), Bertens PJ, Peterson-Maduro J, Veenstra GJ, Koster JG, Destrée OH.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Xwnt-5C gene is expressed in Xenopus embryos from the early gastrula stage
onwards. The transcription of Xwnt-5C is regulated differentially with respect to
transcript size, timing and localization. To gain insight into the generation of 
the Xwnt-5C expression pattern, we started to analyze the transcriptional
regulation of this gene. We isolated Xwnt-5C genomic DNA sequences. By
microinjection of chimaeric reporter constructs into Xenopus embryos we
demonstrate that the upstream region contains a promoter functional in vivo. Of
the several putative binding sites for trans-acting factors, present in a minimal
promoter fragment, some have been studied in more detail. Mutations in an octamer
motif and in an AP-2 consensus sequence interfere with the activity of the
Xwnt-5C minimal promoter. In vitro binding assays with extracts from gastrula
stage Xenopus embryos show that the octamer motif of the Xwnt-5C promoter can
bind several Octamer binding factors, one of which is Oct1.

PMCID: PMC308048
PMID: 8202371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3242-52.

PEBP2 alpha B/mouse AML1 consists of multiple isoforms that possess differential 
transactivation potentials.

Bae SC(1), Ogawa E, Maruyama M, Oka H, Satake M, Shigesada K, Jenkins NA, Gilbert
DJ, Copeland NG, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University.

A murine transcription factor, PEBP2, is composed of two subunits, alpha and
beta. There are two genes in the mouse genome, PEBP2 alpha A and PEBP2 alpha B,
which encode the alpha subunit. Two types of the alpha B cDNA clones, alpha B1
and alpha B2, were isolated from mouse fibroblasts and characterized. They were
found to represent 3.8- and 7.9-kb transcripts, respectively. The 3.8-kb RNA
encodes the previously described alpha B protein referred to as alpha B1, while
the 7.9-kb RNA encodes a 387-amino-acid protein, termed alpha B2, which is
identical to alpha B1 except that it has an internal deletion of 64 amino acid
residues. Both alpha B1 and alpha B2 associate with PEBP2 beta and form a
heterodimer. The alpha B2/beta complex binds to the PEBP2 binding site two- to
threefold more strongly than the alpha B1/beta complex does. alpha B1 stimulates 
transcription through the PEBP2 site about 40-fold, while alpha B2 is only about 
25 to 45% as active as alpha B1. Transactivation domain is located downstream of 
the 128-amino-acid runt homology region, referred to as the Runt domain. Mouse
chromosome mapping studies revealed that alpha A, alpha B, and beta genes are
mapped to chromosomes 17, 16, and 8, respectively. The last two genes are
syntenic with the human AML1 on chromosome 21q22 and PEBP2 beta/CBF beta on 16q22
detected at the breakpoints of characteristic chromosome translocations of the
two different subtypes of acute myeloid leukemia. These results suggest that
previously described chimeric gene products, AML1/MTG8(ETO) and AML1-EAP
generated by t(8;21) and t(3;21), respectively, lack the transactivation domain
of AML1.

PMCID: PMC358691
PMID: 8164679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Apr 25;22(8):1413-20.

The genomic structure of the human AP-2 transcription factor.

Bauer R(1), Imhof A, Pscherer A, Kopp H, Moser M, Seegers S, Kerscher M, Tainsky 
MA, Hofstaedter F, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Germany.

The transcription factor AP-2 is encoded by a gene located on chromosome 6 near
the HLA locus. Here we describe the genomic organization of the AP-2 gene
including an initial characterization of the promoter. We have mapped two mRNA
initiation sites, the entire exon-intron structure and located two
polyadenylation sites. The mature AP-2 mRNA is spliced from 7 exons distributed
over a region of 18 kb genomic DNA. A recently cloned inhibitory AP-2 protein is 
generated by alternative usage of a C-terminal exon. The proline-rich
transactivation motif is encoded by a single exon within the N-terminal region in
contrast to the complex DNA binding and dimerization motif which involves amino
acid residues located on four different exons. The sites of mRNA initiation are
located 220 and 271 bases upstream from the ATG translation start site. Although 
the promoter contains no canonical sequence motifs for basal transcription
factors, such as TATA-, CCAAT- or SP-1 boxes, it mediates cell-type-specific
expression of a CAT reporter gene in PA-1 human teratocarcinoma cells and is
inactive in murine F9 teratocarcinoma cells. We demonstrate that the promoter of 
the AP-2 gene is subject to positive autoregulation by its own gene product. A
consensus AP-2 binding site is located at position -622 with respect to the ATG. 
This site binds specifically to bacterially expressed AP-2 as well as to multiple
proteins, including AP-2, present in PA-1 and HeLa cell nuclear extracts. A
partial AP-2 promoter fragment including the AP-2 consensus binding site is
approximately 5-fold transactivated by cotransfection of an AP-2 expression
plasmid.

PMCID: PMC307999
PMID: 8190633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Biol Chem. 1994 Apr 15;269(15):11065-72.

Structure, genomic organization, and expression of the human interleukin-8
receptor B gene.

Sprenger H(1), Lloyd AR, Lautens LL, Bonner TI, Kelvin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunoregulation, National Cancer Institute, Frederick
Cancer Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702.

Two distinct receptors for the chemoattractant interleukin-8 (designated IL-8RA
and -B) have been cloned recently. The receptors are expressed almost exclusively
on neutrophils and myelomonocytic cell lines. In an attempt to understand the
tissue-specific expression and to identify transcriptional regulatory elements we
have cloned, sequenced, and characterized the human IL-8RB gene. The gene
consists of 3 exons, interrupted by two introns of 3 and 5.4 kilobases (kb). A
1065-base pair open reading frame is encoded entirely in the third exon. A 1.4-kb
3'-untranslated region contains clustered AU-rich elements, similar to those
described for genes regulated by altering mRNA stability. The start site of
transcription was mapped by a modified rapid amplification of cDNA ends technique
and revealed an unexpectedly long 5'-untranslated region of 423 base pairs. A
TATA box equivalent was found in the 5'-flanking region 20 nucleotides upstream
of the start of the first exon. The promoter was separated from the
ATG-initiation codon by 8.75 kb. Comparison of the IL-8RB promoter with the
promoter region of the receptor for another chemoattractant ligand, the bacterial
peptide f-Met-Leu-Phe, revealed 3 novel but conserved motifs occupying similar
positions. The immediate 5'-flanking region was GC-rich with 3 SP-1-like and 2
AP-2 sites identified in close proximity to the transcription start site. This
essential promoter region was found to be responsible for constitutive
expression, inducible by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and controlled by 
silencer elements located further upstream between positions -779 and -118.

PMID: 7512557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Radiat Res. 1994 Apr;138(1 Suppl):S47-51.

Alterations in transcription factor binding in radioresistant human melanoma
cells after ionizing radiation.

Sahijdak WM(1), Yang CR, Zuckerman JS, Meyers M, Boothman DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology (K4/626), University of Wisconsin-Madison 53792.

We analyzed alterations in transcription factor binding to specific, known
promoter DNA consensus sequences between irradiated and unirradiated
radioresistant human melanoma (U1-Mel) cells. The goal of this study was to begin
to investigate which transcription factors and DNA-binding sites are responsible 
for the induction of specific transcripts and proteins after ionizing radiation
(Boothman et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90, 7200, 1993). Transcription
factor binding was observed using DNA band-shift assays and oligonucleotide
competition analyses. Confluence-arrested U1-Mel cells were irradiated (4.5 Gy)
and harvested at 4 h. Double-stranded oligonucleotides containing known
DNA-binding consensus sites for specific transcription factors were used.
Increased DNA-binding activity after ionizing radiation was noted with
oligonucleotides containing the CREB, NF-kappa B and Sp1 consensus sites.
Increased DNA binding activity after ionizing radiation was noted with
oligonucleotides containing the CREB, NF-kappa B and Sp1 consensus sites. No
changes in protein binding to AP-1, AP-2, AP-3 or CTF/NF1, GRE or Oct-1 consensus
sequences were noted. X-ray activation of select transcription factors, which
bind certain consensus sites in promoters, may cause specific induction or
repression of gene transcription.

PMID: 8146325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Proc Biol Sci. 1994 Feb 22;255(1343):125-32.

The connexin43 gene is responsive to oestrogen.

Yu W(1), Dahl G, Werner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami, School 
of Medicine, Florida 33101.

Connexin43 is the major protein of gap junctions in heart and smooth muscle
including the myometrium. Molecular cloning of the connexin43 gene reveals a
similar organization to that exhibited by other connexin genes: the 5'
untranslated region is interrupted by an 8.5 kilobase intron. The promoter region
preceding the first exon contains a TATA box and AP-1 and AP-2 sites. In
addition, a series of half-palindromic oestrogen response elements is present in 
this region. When this promoter is linked to the reporter gene luciferase, it
drives the expression of luciferase constitutively in HeLa cells transfected with
this luciferase-connexin43 promoter fusion construct. When the same cells are
cotransfected with oestrogen receptor cDNA, an upregulation of luciferase
expression by oestrogen occurs in a cell-specific manner.

PMID: 8165225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Feb 11;22(3):376-82.

A proline-rich transcriptional activation domain in murine HOXD-4 (HOX-4.2).

Rambaldi I(1), Kovàcs EN, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

The product of the murine Hoxd-4 (Hox-4.2) gene is a transcription factor that
acts upon an autoregulatory element in Hoxd-4 upstream sequences (1). Using this 
activity as an assay in transient transfections of P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC)
cells, we performed a mutational analysis to map functional domains in the HOXD-4
protein. The importance of the homeodomain was shown by a single amino acid
change in this region that abolished activity. Deletion analysis revealed that
many evolutionarily conserved regions outside of the homeodomain were dispensable
for activation in our assay. Fusions to the GAL4 DNA-binding domain mapped a
transcriptional activation function to the HOXD-4 proline-rich N-terminus. The
proline-rich transcription factor AP2 squelched activation by HOXD-4 and by
GAL4/HOXD-4 N-terminus fusion proteins. Together, these results suggest that
HOXD-4 harbors a transcriptional activation domain of the proline-rich type.

PMCID: PMC523592
PMID: 7907418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 7;269(1):493-502.

Identification of a DNA-binding protein (keratinocyte transcriptional protein-1) 
recognizing a keratinocyte-specific regulatory element in the 230-kDa bullous
pemphigoid antigen gene.

Tamai K(1), Li K, Uitto J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107.

We have recently cloned and characterized the entire human 230-kDa bullous
pemphigoid antigen gene, which is expressed at a relatively high level in the
basal keratinocytes. A putative AP2 binding sequence (KRE2), identified in the
position -1786 to -1778, was cloned in front of a heterologous thymidine kinase
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct, and transient transfections of
normal human keratinocytes indicated a marked enhancement of the promoter
activity. Normal human keratinocyte nuclear extracts contained a protein,
designated as keratinocyte transcriptional protein-1 (KTP-1), which complexed
with the KRE2 oligomer when examined by gel mobility shift assays. This protein
was not detected in human skin fibroblast or HeLa cell nuclear extracts that did,
however, contain AP2. UV cross-linking studies and Southwestern analyses
suggested that KTP-1 binds to DNA as a single polypeptide of approximately 110
kDa. These data suggest that KTP-1 is a DNA-binding protein clearly distinct from
AP2, and this protein may be responsible for the basal keratinocyte-specific
expression of the bullous pemphigoid antigen gene.

PMID: 8276841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1994 Jan;10(1):113-21.

Identification and functional characterization of the bovine manganous superoxide
dismutase promoter.

Meyrick B(1), Magnuson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN
36232-2650.

Manganous superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) gene expression is stimulated by
endotoxin, tumor necrosis factor, and interleukin-1, agents thought to cause
cellular damage through intracellular generation of reactive oxygen species. To
study the molecular mechanisms underlying the induction of MnSOD mRNA by these
stimuli, we cloned a bovine MnSOD cDNA and used it to isolate the promoter region
of the bovine MnSOD gene. A 14 kb genomic DNA fragment (lambda BS1) containing
the first and second exons and 5' flanking region of the gene was characterized. 
The transcription start site was determined by primer extension and S1 nuclease
protection assays and found to be 88 bp upstream of the translation initiation
codon. The sequence of approximately 1 kb of DNA upstream of the start site was
determined and examined for potential regulatory elements. DNA immediately
upstream of the transcription start site was GC-rich and contained two AP-2 and
eight Sp-1 consensus sequences. It did not contain either a CCAAT or TATA box. A 
956 bp fragment of this DNA fragment was transcriptionally active when fused to a
luciferase reporter gene and transfected into both bovine pulmonary artery
endothelial and hamster insulinoma tumor cells. Transfection analysis of three
additional deletion mutants, whose 5' end-points were -317, -182, and -70 bp,
respectively, showed a step-like reduction in transfection efficiency, suggesting
the presence of regulatory elements throughout this DNA fragment that contribute 
to transcriptional activity of the MnSOD promoter. Despite the high homology of
the bovine MnSOD cDNA to other mammalian MnSODs, the promoter sequences of bovine
and rat MnSOD genes showed a virtual lack of similarity.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT
250 WORDS)

PMID: 8292376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Hepatology. 1994 Jan;19(1):23-31.

The hepatitis B virus preS2/St transactivator utilizes AP-1 and other
transcription factors for transactivation.

Lauer U(1), Weiss L, Lipp M, Hofschneider PH, Kekulé AS.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany.

Integrated hepatitis B virus DNA cloned from hepatitis B virus-associated
hepatocellular carcinoma frequently contains 3'-truncated middle surface genes
(preS2/St), which were recently found to have a transcriptional transactivator
function. Because preS2/St, among others, is able to transactivate the promoters 
of the cellular oncogenes c-myc and c-fos, it has been speculated that integrated
preS2/St genes might contribute to hepatitis B virus-associated liver
carcinogenesis. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of target gene
stimulation by preS2/St. It was found that deletion of a fragment containing the 
binding site for transcription factor AP-1 (Jun-Fos) substantially decreases
inducibility of the human c-myc promoter by preS2/St. A subsequent investigation 
of AP-1 activation by preS2/St revealed the following: (a) insertion of
multimeric AP-1 binding sites confers inducibility to an otherwise unstimulatable
test promoter; (b) transactivation of AP-1 sites is dramatically increased when
Jun and Fos are overexpressed by cotransfected expression plasmids; and (c)
inhibitors of AP-1 activation also impair transactivation by preS2/St. Besides
AP-1, preS2/St was also able to utilize the unrelated transcription factors
NF-kappa B and AP-2 for transactivation, suggesting that the gene product of
preS2/St acts indirectly through one or several general cellular pathways rather 
than as a bona fide transcription factor. Because AP-1 conveys induction of a
large panel of tumor-relevant genes, its preS2/St-dependent activation implies a 
possible causative role in hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 8276360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1994 Jan;48(1):69-79.

In vitro interaction of uterine estrogen receptor with the estrogen response
element present in the 3'-flanking region of the murine c-fos protooncogene.

Hyder SM(1), Stancel GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Medical School, Houston 77225.

Estradiol treatment rapidly stimulates transcription of the c-fos protooncogene
in the rodent uterus, and transfection analysis previously identified an estrogen
response element (ERE) in the 3'-flanking region of the murine gene with the
sequence GGTCAnnnCAGCC. We now report that endogenous estrogen receptor (ER)
obtained from either mouse or rat uterus binds to this 3'-ERE. Unoccupied
receptor, receptor occupied with estradiol and receptor occupied with the
antiestrogen tamoxifen all bind to this element, and the binding of receptor
exhibits strict sequence specificity. By using a competition binding assay, the
affinity of the ER for the c-fos-ERE is estimated to be approximately an order of
magnitude less than the affinity for the consensus ERE (GGTCAnnnTGACC) found in
the Xenopus and chicken vitellogenin genes. Differences in the electrophoretic
mobilities of the c-fos and vitellogenin EREs bound to the ER in band-shift
assays also suggest subtle structural differences in the two complexes. Mutations
in either half-site of the c-fos-ERE destroy ER binding, suggesting that the
receptor binds to this sequence as either a homo- or heterodimer. The 3'-fos-ERE 
region exhibits some homologies to both AP1 and AP2 consensus sites, but neither 
AP1-like proteins present in uterine extracts nor recombinant AP2 bind this
protooncogene sequence. The finding that the ERE present in the 3'-region of the 
murine c-fos gene interacts with receptors present in the mouse and rat uterus
supports a role for this element in the physiological regulation of c-fos
expression in the uterus by estrogens.

PMID: 8136308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1994;59:547-53.

Acute myeloid leukemia with Inv (16) produces a chimeric transcription factor
with a myosin heavy chain tail.

Liu P(1), Seidel N, Bodine D, Speck N, Tarlé S, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Transfer, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

PMID: 7587111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1994;78:38-42.

[Molecular cloning of a new AP-2 transcription factor, AP-2beta, and its function
in cell differentiation].

[Article in German]

Buettner R(1), Moser M, Pscherer A, Imhof A, Bauer R, Hofstaedter F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universität Regensburg.

Transcription factor AP-2 has been previously shown to play an important function
in embryonal development and cell differentiation. We have investigated the
possibility that AP-2 function in embryonic development is exerted by a multigene
family of AP-2 related transcription factors. Here we describe the molecular
cloning of such an AP-2 related gene, AP-2 beta, and prove that it encodes for a 
functional transcription factor. In situ hybridizations of murine embryo sections
revealed a temporally restricted and tissue-specific expression pattern that
indicates a function of AP-2 beta in the development of the midbrain in the
differentiation of sensory neurons for taste, olfaction and palpation.

PMID: 7534010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Genet. 1994;15(4):356-65.

Upregulation of AP-2 in the skin of Xenopus laevis during thyroid hormone-induced
metamorphosis.

French RP(1), Warshawsky D, Tybor L, Mylniczenko ND, Miller L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Illinois, Chicago 60680.

During amphibian metamorphosis dramatic changes occur in the morphogenesis and
differentiation of the epidermis. Concurrently with these changes, the 63 kDa
keratin gene is upregulated from low basal levels to high levels. What makes
these processes unique is that they are controlled by triiodothyronine (T3) and
can be duplicated in cultures of purified epidermal cells. Since there is a 2 day
lag period between the addition of T3 and the upregulation of keratin gene
expression and terminal differentiation, recent studies have focused on
identifying the genes activated during the lag period. We assume that the
transcription factors required for upregulation of the keratin gene are induced
by T3 during the lag period, and therefore we have cloned the keratin gene so
that promoter analyses can be conducted. S1 mapping assays have shown that the
same transcription start sites are used during premetamorphosis when the keratin 
gene is basally expressed, during metamorphosis when it is T3-upregulated, and in
the adult epidermis where it is expressed independently of T3. During the early
part of the lag period TR beta and AP-2 mRNA levels are upregulated in the
epidermis by T3. The transcription factor AP-2 is expressed at high levels in the
skin of premetamorphic larvae and induced about fivefold by T3 but is not induced
in an epithelial cell line (XL-177). Since the keratin mRNA, AP-2 mRNA, and other
genes induced during the lag period are expressed in premetamorphic larvae it
appears that T3 functions by upregulating the expression of genes previously
activated by a T3-independent process. This preprogramming may account for the
tissue specificity of T3 action during metamorphosis.

PMID: 7523015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 1;90(23):11356-60.

Identification of the promoter and a transcriptional enhancer of the gene
encoding L-CAM, a calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecule.

Sorkin BC(1), Jones FS, Cunningham BA, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

L-CAM is a calcium-dependent cell adhesion molecule that is expressed in a
characteristic place-dependent pattern during development. Previous studies of
ectopic expression of the chicken L-CAM gene under the control of heterologous
promoters in transgenic mice suggested that cis-acting sequences controlling the 
spatiotemporal expression patterns of L-CAM were present within the gene itself. 
We have now examined the L-CAM gene for sequences that control its expression and
have found an enhancer within the second intron of the gene. A 2.5-kb Kpn I-EcoRI
fragment from the intron acted as an enhancer of a simian virus 40 minimal
promoter driving a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter gene and
produced 14.0-fold induction of CAT activity in MDCK cells. To narrow down the
region responsible for enhancer activity and to determine whether the enhancer
could function in a cell type-specific manner, a number of smaller restriction
fragments from the intron were tested for activity in two chicken cell lines, the
LMH hepatoma line, which produces high levels of L-CAM, and the SL-29 fibroblast 
line, which produces little, if any, L-CAM. Four L-CAM enhancer plasmids
containing shorter segments derived from the intron showed enhanced CAT activity 
levels (between 9.4- and 16.5-fold) in extracts from transfected LMH cells but
not from SL-29 cells. DNA sequence analysis of the L-CAM enhancer region revealed
putative binding sites for the transcription factors SP1, E2A, and AP-2. In
addition, LE-9, the smallest L-CAM enhancer segment (310 bp), contained a
consensus binding site for the liver-enriched POU-homeodomain transcription
factor, HNF-1. Tests of upstream sequences showed that a 630-bp fragment,
corresponding to nearly the entire intergenic region between L-CAM and its
neighboring CAM gene, K-CAM, could function as a promoter. In combination with
the L-CAM enhancer, this fragment directed cell type-specific expression of the
CAT reporter gene in LMH cells at a level comparable to that observed with
enhancer constructs using the simian virus 40 minimal promoter. These combined
observations define a promoter and an enhancer for the chicken L-CAM gene. They
raise the possibility that these cis-acting regulatory sequences may be
instrumental in directing specific place-dependent expression of the L-CAM gene
in the chicken.

PMCID: PMC47981
PMID: 8248253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Semin Cancer Biol. 1993 Dec;4(6):369-75.

Molecular basis of the t(8;21) translocation in acute myeloid leukaemia.

Ohki M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Radiobiology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

The t(8;21) translocation is one of the most frequent chromosomal abnormalities
in acute myeloid leukaemia and results in gene fusion between AML1 on chromosome 
21 and MTG8 (= ETO or CDR) on chromosome 8. AML1 contains a region of sequence
homology to the Drosophila runt gene and the mouse polyomavirus enhancer binding 
protein PEBP2 alpha gene. The rearrangement occurs within a specific intron of
the AML1 gene and results in the formation of a chimaeric protein with the
consistent feature that the region of sequence homology of AML1 is fused with
almost the entire MTG8 protein. MTG8 (ETO, CDR) is predicted to be a
transcription activation factor from its sequence with zinc-finger motifs and
proline-rich domains. Thus the rearrangement is a fusion between two probable
transcription activation factors.

PMID: 8142622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;12(10):911-23.

Transcriptional regulators of expression of K#16, the disease-associated keratin.

Magnaldo T(1), Bernerd F, Freedberg IM, Ohtsuki M, Blumenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, NYU Medical Center, New York
10016.

In most malignant and benign skin diseases, the normal pattern of keratin
expression is altered. Among other phenotypic changes, the expression of
hyperproliferation- and activation-associated keratins K#16 and K#6 is induced.
Because the molecular mechanisms and the nuclear regulators involved in this
induction are unknown, we have characterized the transcriptional regulators of
expression of the keratin K#16 promoter. Our previous studies have shown that the
transcription of K#16 is strongly and specifically induced in epidermal
keratinocytes by epidermal growth factor (EGF), through the EGF-responsive
element (RE). In the present work, using an electrophoretic mobility-shift assay,
we have found several nuclear protein binding sites that have been identified as 
an Sp1 site, an AP2 site, the EGF-RE, and an enhancer element. The function of
each site was assessed in transfection assays using specific deletions. Both the 
Sp1 and EGF-RE sites are essential for K#16 promoter activity. The site that
functions as an independent enhancer, E, was found adjacent to and interacting
with a sequence recognized by the AP2 transcription factor. This knowledge of the
nuclear regulators of expression of the disease-associated K#16 keratin provides 
insight into the molecular parameters that might be important in skin diseases.

PMID: 7506038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Blood. 1993 Nov 1;82(9):2806-12.

Differential regulation of human B-lymphocyte tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNF-alpha) and lymphotoxin (TNF-beta) production by protein phosphatase 1 and 2A
inhibitor.

Xia HZ(1), Kannapell CC, Fu SM, Sung SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Virginia, Charlottesville.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and lymphotoxin (LT; TNF-beta) are major cytokines
produced by B lymphocytes. Stimulation by okadaic acid, a phosphatase 1 and 2A
inhibitor, markedly increased TNF mRNA accumulation and cytokine production. On
the other hand, the accumulation of LT mRNA was not affected by okadaic acid
despite structural and functional similarities between TNF and LT. The increase
in TNF mRNA accumulation was due to the stimulation of gene transcription and a
marked stabilization of this mRNA. The binding activities of the transcription
factors AP-1 and AP-2 and NF kappa B, which regulates TNF gene transcription,
were also stimulated by okadaic acid. In addition, okadaic acid was shown to
increase TNF production at the protein level. These results show the importance
of protein phosphatases in the regulation of cytokine production in B cells, and 
further identifies differences in the regulation of TNF-alpha and LT production.

PMID: 8219230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 1993 Nov;97(1-2):165-71.

Characterization of a corticotropin releasing hormone responsive region in the
murine proopiomelanocortin gene.

Bishop JF(1), Mouradian MM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

The most potent, physiologic activator of proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene
transcription is corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) and increased
intracellular cAMP is critical for this effect. The 5'-flanking region of the
murine POMC gene has several potential binding sites for regulatory proteins. To 
characterize the region between nucleotides -141 and -106, which includes a
TRE-like site and an adjacent AP-2 consensus sequence, and to study its role in
signal-transcription coupling, gel mobility shift assays and transient expression
of CAT chimeras were performed. In transient transfections of AtT-20 cells with
pCATp-141/-106, CRH treatment led to significant increases in CAT expression
compared with CRH treatment of cells transfected with the enhancerless vector.
However, no response to direct activation of cAMP dependent protein kinase or
protein kinase C was detected. Despite the high homology of the sequence
-137/-131 to the consensus AP-1 binding site (TRE), the nuclear factor(s) in
AtT-20 cells binding to this region appears to be different than authentic AP-1
since neither a competitor oligonucleotide having the authentic TRE sequence nor 
antibodies against Jun or Fos affected the gel shift pattern of a probe having
the -137/-131 sequence. We conclude that the -141 to -106 region of the murine
POMC gene contains a functional CRH responsive element and that second messenger 
systems that transduce the CRH signal to this element do not exert their actions 
solely through activation of PKA or PKC.

PMID: 8143900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Soc Trans. 1993 Nov;21(4):370S.

Analysis of transcription factor activation in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts.

Shellard L(1), Hamlett J, Pennington SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Liverpool.

PMID: 8131948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1993 Nov;84(11):1136-44.

Characterization of the promoter region of the human c-kit proto-oncogene.

Yamamoto K(1), Tojo A, Aoki N, Shibuya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Tokyo.

The c-kit proto-oncogene encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor for stem cell factor 
and plays a critical role in the growth and differentiation of various types of
cells including hematopoietic stem cells. To investigate the mechanisms of its
transcriptional regulation, we isolated the 5' flanking region of the human c-kit
gene and characterized its promoter activity in hematopoietic cells. Nucleotide
sequence analysis revealed that the 1.2 kb 5' flanking region lacked a typical
"TATA box," but had a relatively high G + C content and four potential
Sp1-binding sites. Putative binding sites for AP-2, basic helix-loop-helix
proteins, Ets-domain proteins, Myb and GATA-1 were also found. Primer extension
and S1 nuclease protection analyses of hematopoietic cells indicated that the
major transcription start sites are 62 bp and 58 bp upstream of the translation
start site. Essentially the same start sites were detected in non-hematopoietic
cells such as small cell lung carcinoma and glioblastoma: this single promoter in
c-kit is different from the multiple promoter system of c-fms, a c-kit-related
gene, in which at least two promoters are differently used in hematopoietic and
non-hematopoietic cells. An analysis of the c-kit 5' flanking region using the
bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene (CAT assay) in human
erythroleukemia HEL cells, which express the endogenous c-kit mRNA at high
levels, showed that a region from -180 to -22 is important for the expression of 
the c-kit gene. In addition, a negative regulatory element(s) is suggested to be 
involved in the regulation of the c-kit gene expression in mammals.

PMID: 7506248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Gene. 1993 Oct 15;132(2):227-36.

Cloning and sequence analysis of the rat tumor necrosis factor-encoding genes.

Kwon J(1), Chung IY, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham 35294.

We have isolated an approximately 22-kb TNF locus (encoding tumor necrosis
factor) from a rat genomic library and sequenced the 7105-bp fragment that
comprises the TNF-alpha and TNF-beta genes, including their flanking sequences.
The two genes are tandemly arranged with TNF-beta 5' to TNF-alpha and separated
by approximately 1.1 kb of intergenic space, and each gene consists of four exons
and three introns, similar to those of the other species examined thus far.
Comparison analysis showed that the rat TNF have high sequence homology with the 
mouse TNF (TNF-alpha, 86.5%; TNF-beta, 89.3%) and relatively low homology with
the human, rabbit, and porcine TNF. The upstream sequence of rat TNF-alpha
contains a number of sequence motifs implicated in the expression and regulation 
of eukaryotic genes, including binding sites for the transcription factors Sp-1, 
Ap-2, IFN.1 and NF-kappa B. The possible significance of potential regulatory
sequence elements found in the rat TNF-alpha in the context of transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms is discussed.

PMID: 8224868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Oct 15;196(1):336-41.

Novel regulatory sites of the human heme oxygenase-1 promoter region.

Lavrovsky Y(1), Schwartzman ML, Abraham NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.

Heme oxygenase is the rate-limiting enzyme in heme catabolism, the activity of
which is induced by several agents including its substrate heme, u.v. radiation
and other oxidant injurious conditions. Its biological function is to provide a
specific regulatory mechanism for control of the level of many heme proteins.
Using a computer-assisted approach, we examined the presence of different
regulatory elements on the human heme oxygenase-1 promoter region which could
possibly be involved in its regulation. We identified several NFkB and AP-2-like 
binding sites in the 5' untranslated region of the human heme oxygenase gene.
DNase I footprint analysis confirmed the presence of these two important
transcriptional sites. This study is the first to reveal the presence of NFkB and
AP-2 binding sites in the heme oxygenase-1 promoter region and thus suggests a
role for these transcriptional factors in the regulation of heme oxygenase-1
expression, a stress and heat shock protein, under injury conditions.

PMID: 8216309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Oct 11;21(20):4844.

The complete murine cDNA sequence of the transcription factor AP-2.

Moser M(1), Pscherer A, Bauer R, Imhof A, Seegers S, Kerscher M, Buettner R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Germany.

PMCID: PMC331516
PMID: 8233835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Sep 15;90(18):8514-8.

Genomic organization of the melanoma-associated glycoprotein MUC18: implications 
for the evolution of the immunoglobulin domains.

Sers C(1), Kirsch K, Rothbächer U, Riethmüller G, Johnson JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Munich, Germany.

The cell surface glycoprotein MUC18, a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily
and homologous to several cell adhesion molecules, is associated with tumor
progression and the development of metastasis in human malignant melanoma.
Immunohistochemical and Northern blot analysis revealed that expression of the
antigen is restricted to advanced primary and metastatic melanomas and to cell
lines of the neuroectodermal lineage. The genomic sequence encoding the cell
surface antigen spans approximately 14 kb and consists of 16 exons. The
organization of the gene, which is related to that of the neural cell adhesion
molecule N-CAM, shows a structure where each immunoglobulin-related domain is
encoded by more than one exon. Sequencing of the putative MUC18 promoter region
revealed a G + C-rich promoter lacking conventional TATA and CAAT boxes. Several 
motifs for binding of transcription factor Sp1 are present in the regulatory
region, and only a single transcription start site within a presumed initiator
sequence was identified. Sequence elements which might confer melanocyte-specific
expression were not detected. Instead, recognition sequences for the
transcription factors CREB, AP-2, and c-Myb, as well as CArG-box motifs, were
observed. These elements may contribute to the differential regulation of the
MUC18 gene in normal and malignant tissues and suggest a role for this putative
adhesion molecule in neural crest cells during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC47387
PMID: 8378324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Gene. 1993 Aug 25;130(2):225-32.

Partial characterization of a novel 'GGA' factor which binds to the osteonectin
promoter in bovine bone cells.

Ibaraki K(1), Robey PG, Young MF.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Research Branch, National Institute of Dental Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Osteonectin (On)/SPARC (secreted protein, acidic and rich in cysteine) is a
highly conserved extracellular matrix protein found in bone and other tissues
throughout vertebrate evolution. In previous studies, approximately 500 bp of DNA
5' to the transcription start point (tsp) and a part of exon 1, including
homopurine (Rn)/homopyrimidine (Yn)-rich sequences (the 'GGA box' and its
complements), was demonstrated to be important in upregulation of On gene
expression in a cell-specific manner. The purpose of this study was to decipher
the transcriptional regulation of On through its cis- and trans-acting elements. 
DNase I footprinting analysis indicated protein binding which may be related to
the transcriptional factors, AP2, SP1 and a novel 'GGA' factor which binds to the
3' end of the promoter (-286 to +43 to the tsp). Comparisons of footprinting
between nuclear extracts of bone (On-expressing) cells and Madin and Darby bovine
kidney (MDBK) (nonexpressing) cells indicate that 'GGA' factor binding to a
purine GGGGA/GGA-rich sequence is cell-type specific and therefore may be
involved in the cell-specific expression of this gene. From ultraviolet
(UV)-crosslinking experiments, this 'GGA' factor was demonstrated to be a single 
40-kDa protein.

PMID: 8359689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 1993 Aug 25;268(24):17811-9.

The site of cAMP action in the insulin induction of gene expression of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase is AP-2.

Park K(1), Kim KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana
47907-1153.

Insulin induction of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC) and differentiation of 30A5
preadipocytes into adipocytes requires a brief exposure of the cells to cAMP.
Using the techniques of DNase I footprinting, DNA band shift, and analysis of the
point and deletion mutations, a region from -113 to -95 has been identified as
the site through which cAMP sensitizes the cell for the response to insulin. One 
sequence-specific DNA-protein complex, b3, is formed in the DNA-mobility shift
assay when nuclear extract from 30A5 cells is mixed with the oligonucleotide
representing this region. Purified human AP-2 also generates the complex
corresponding to b3 with the same ACC PII probe or with the AP-2 consensus
sequence probe from SV40 promoter. Substitution of A for G in the sequence
GGGGCTGGG abolishes the formation of b3 sequence-specific complex. Stably
transfected 30A5 cells with the same mutations in the plasmid no longer respond
to insulin in spite of their exposure to cAMP. These results establish that the
21 base pair region in ACC promoter II and the binding of AP-2 protein to this
sequence are required for cAMP action. cAMP-dependent protein kinase
phosphorylates AP-2 both in vitro and in vivo and the phosphorylation of AP-2
does not affect its binding activity.

PMID: 8102369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Science. 1993 Aug 20;261(5124):1041-4.

Fusion between transcription factor CBF beta/PEBP2 beta and a myosin heavy chain 
in acute myeloid leukemia.

Liu P(1), Tarlé SA, Hajra A, Claxton DF, Marlton P, Freedman M, Siciliano MJ,
Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor 48109.

The pericentric inversion of chromosome 16 [inv(16)(p13q22)] is a characteristic 
karyotypic abnormality associated with acute myeloid leukemia, most commonly of
the M4Eo subtype. The 16p and 16q breakpoints were pinpointed by yeast artificial
chromosome and cosmid cloning, and the two genes involved in this inversion were 
identified. On 16q the inversion occurred near the end of the coding region for
CBF beta, also known as PEBP2 beta, a subunit of a heterodimeric transcription
factor regulating genes expressed in T cells; on 16p a smooth muscle myosin heavy
chain (SMMHC) gene (MYH11) was interrupted. In six of six inv(16) patient samples
tested, an in-frame fusion messenger RNA was demonstrated that connected the
first 165 amino acids of CBF beta with the tail region of SMMHC. The repeated
coiled coil of SMMHC may result in dimerization of the CBF beta fusion protein,
which in turn would lead to alterations in transcriptional regulation and
contribute to leukemic transformation.

PMID: 8351518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Aug 1;90(15):7312-6.

CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha) undifferentiated protein: a
developmentally regulated nuclear protein that binds to the C/EBP alpha gene
promoter.

Vasseur-Cognet M(1), Lane MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.

During differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes into adipocytes, transcription of 
the C/EBP alpha (CCA-AT/enhancer binding protein alpha) gene is activated. The
promoter of the C/EBP alpha gene contains a bipartite cis element with binding
sites for C/EBP alpha undifferentiated protein (CUP) and an Sp1-like GT box
binding protein. Binding of CUP to this element is markedly enhanced by its
interaction with the Sp1-like protein. CUP, purified approximately 100,000-fold
from HeLa cell nuclear extracts, appears to be composed of at least two types of 
subunit. Evidence is presented that a CUP-containing protein complex bridges
between the CUP/Sp1-like GT box element and a downstream cis element, which
contains a C/EBP binding site. During differentiation of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
into adipocytes, CUP activity or expression decreases as expression of C/EBP
alpha increases. It is suggested that bridging by the CUP-containing protein
complex may play a role in transcriptional regulation of the C/EBP alpha gene.

PMCID: PMC47127
PMID: 8346250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jul 15;90(14):6859-63.

PEBP2/PEA2 represents a family of transcription factors homologous to the
products of the Drosophila runt gene and the human AML1 gene.

Ogawa E(1), Maruyama M, Kagoshima H, Inuzuka M, Lu J, Satake M, Shigesada K, Ito 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

cDNAs representing the alpha subunit of polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2
(PEBP2; also called PEA2) were isolated. The products of the cDNAs are highly
homologous to that of Drosophila segmentation gene runt (run) for an N-proximal
128-amino acid region showing 66% identity. The run homology region encompasses
the domain capable of binding to a specific nucleotide sequence motif and of
dimerizing with the companion beta subunit. The human AML1 gene related to
t(8;21) acute myeloid leukemia also had a run homology region. Together with the 
beta subunit, which increases the affinity of the alpha subunit to DNA without
binding to DNA by itself, PEBP2 represents a newly discovered family of
transcription factor. The major species of PEBP2 alpha mRNA was expressed in
T-cell lines but not in B-cell lines tested. Evidence indicated that PEBP2
functions as a transcriptional activator and is involved in regulation of
T-cell-specific gene expression.

PMCID: PMC47032
PMID: 8341710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jul 5;268(19):14003-10.

Characterization of upstream activation elements essential for the expression of 
germ cell alkaline phosphatase in human choriocarcinoma cells.

Wada N(1), Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Expression of the germ cell alkaline phosphatase is a highly regulated process
tied to malignant transformation of the human placenta. Human choriocarcinoma
cells (malignant trophoblasts) express primarily the germ cell alkaline
phosphatase gene and only low or nondetectable levels of the placental alkaline
phosphatase normally found in the human placenta. Here, we show that nucleotides 
-156 to -1 region relative to the gene transcription start site (+1) contain
cis-acting DNA elements that direct germ cell alkaline phosphatase expression in 
choriocarcinoma cells. Within the minimal activator region, at least three
nuclear protein-binding sites, I (-63/-44), II (-87/-67), and III (-136/-103),
were identified by DNase I footprinting analysis. All three sites are GC-rich.
Sites I and II contain a sequence known to bind the transcription factor AP-2;
the AP-2 site in site II overlaps a consensus motif for the transcription factor 
Sp1. Gel retardation experiments showed that similar nuclear protein factor(s) in
JEG-3 choriocarcinoma cells bind to all three sites, with highest affinity to
sites I and II. Site-directed mutagenesis that prevents binding of nuclear
proteins to either site I or II, or both sites I and II, resulted in the loss of 
factor binding and reduced activator activity. The germ cell alkaline phosphatase
promoter that contains an intact binding site III but altered sites I and II had 
little activator activity, suggesting that protein-protein interaction is
important for germ cell alkaline phosphatase gene activation.

PMID: 8314767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Appl Environ Microbiol. 1993 Jul;59(7):2335-8.

Is an activator protein-2-like transcription factor involved in regulating gene
expression during nitrogen limitation in fungi?

Dhawale SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University Purdue University, Fort Wayne, Indiana 46805.

The upstream sequences of all published lignin peroxidase and manganese
peroxidase genomic clones from Phanerochaete chrysosporium were analyzed. This
analysis revealed the presence of putative activator protein-2 (AP-2) recognition
sequences in 11 of 15 lignin peroxidase genes. The lignin peroxidase clone GLG6
and the manganese peroxidase gene (mnp-1) have two copies of putative AP-2
sequence in the upstream region. Interestingly, the lignin peroxidase gene VLG4
of another white rot fungus, Trametes versicolor, and the nit-2 gene of
Neurospora crassa also contain putative AP-2-binding sequences. Since all of
these genes are regulated by nutrient nitrogen, I hypothesize that an AP-2-like
transcription factor may be involved in inducing gene expression during nitrogen 
limitation in fungi.

PMCID: PMC182281
PMID: 8357266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4174-85.

An alternatively spliced mRNA from the AP-2 gene encodes a negative regulator of 
transcriptional activation by AP-2.

Buettner R(1), Kannan P, Imhof A, Bauer R, Yim SO, Glockshuber R, Van Dyke MW,
Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Biology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030.

AP-2 is a retinoic acid-inducible and developmentally regulated activator of
transcription. We have cloned an alternative AP-2 transcript (AP-2B) from the
human teratocarcinoma cell line PA-1, which encodes a protein differing in the C 
terminus from the previously isolated AP-2 protein (AP-2A). This protein contains
the activation domain of AP-2 and part of the DNA binding domain but lacks the
dimerization domain which is necessary for DNA binding. Analysis of overlapping
genomic clones spanning the entire AP-2 gene proves that AP-2A and AP-2B
transcripts are alternatively spliced from the same gene. Both transient and
stable transfection experiments show that AP-2B inhibits AP-2 transactivator
function, as measured by an AP-2-responsive chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter plasmid. Furthermore, constitutive AP-2B expression in PA-1 cells causes
a retinoic acid-resistant phenotype, anchorage-independent growth in soft agar,
and tumorigenicity in nude mice, in a fashion similar to transformation of these 
cells by oncogenes. To determine the mechanism by which AP-2B exerts its
inhibitory function, we purified bacterially expressed AP-2A and AP-2B proteins. 
While bacterial AP-2B does not bind an AP-2 consensus site, it strongly inhibits 
binding of the endogenous AP-2 present in PA-1 cell nuclear extracts. However,
DNA sequence-specific binding of bacterially expressed AP-2A cannot be inhibited 
by bacterially expressed AP-2B. Therefore, inhibition of AP-2 activity by the
protein AP-2B may require an additional factor or modification supplied by
nuclear extracts.

PMCID: PMC359967
PMID: 8321221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jul;13(7):4077-86.

Cell-type-specific function of the C-type natriuretic peptide gene promoter in
rat anterior pituitary-derived cultured cell lines.

Ohta S(1), Shimekake Y, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Shionogi Research Laboratories, Shionogi & Co., Ltd., Osaka 553, Japan.

The promoter function of the human C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) gene in
various cultured cells was examined by transient transfection assays. The CNP
promoter functioned very effectively in GH3 cells, which originated from the
growth hormone-producing tumor of the rat anterior pituitary and somatomammotroph
phenotype, but functioned much less effectively in GH1 cells, another type of rat
pituitary-derived cell with a somatotroph phenotype, and rat primary cardiocytes.
The CNP promoter did not function at all in other cells, including AtT20 cells of
murine pituitary corticotroph origin. Functional analyses of the deleted
promoters with various 5' deletion breakpoints revealed the existence of at least
two negative and one positive regulatory regions. Within the positive regulatory 
region (positions -54 to -19), which conferred 90% of the promoter activity in
GH3 cells, two equipotent GC-rich cis elements (positions -49 to -45 and -40 to
-35) were identified. Both sites shared half of the promoter activity and binding
properties to the nuclear protein in GH3 cells. Rat anterior pituitary tissue
contained the binding protein of the identified cis element, which was identical 
or similar to that of GH3 cells. With Southwestern (DNA-protein) analysis, a
70-kDa specific binding protein distinct from known factors such as SP-1, AP-2,
and Pit-1 was identified in the nuclear extract of GH3 cells.

PMCID: PMC359957
PMID: 8321215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jun 25;268(18):13625-31.

Regulation of the alpha 1(I) collagen promoter via a transforming growth
factor-beta activation element.

Ritzenthaler JD(1), Goldstein RH, Fine A, Smith BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University Medical Center, Massachusetts.

A transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) activating element (TAE), with a
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1)-like sequence, was previously located 1.6 kilobases
upstream from the transcription start site in the alpha 1(I) collagen promoter
(Ritzenthaler, J. D., Goldstein, R. H., Fine, A., Lichtler, A., Rowe, D. W., and 
Smith, B. D. (1991) Biochem. J. 280, 157-162). Double-stranded TAE, but not NF-1 
consensus sequences, abrogated TGF-beta stimulation of co-transfected collagen
promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs. Mutations in non-NF-1
binding sites, located by methylation interference, eliminated activity of the
TAE oligonucleotide. However, TAE sequences failed to bind in vitro expressed
NF-1 protein, to compete for NF-1-binding proteins, and to bind with protein
which reacts with antibodies to NF-1 family of proteins. Within the TAE there was
an activator protein 2 (AP-2) binding site. Although AP-2 protein bound to TAE,
antibodies to AP-2 did not react with nuclear protein-TAE complexes. TAE bound to
a 34,000-Da protein on Southwestern analysis. However, the UV-cross-linked
TAE-nuclear protein complex was 82,000 Da. Finally, a dose-response study
demonstrated that TGF-beta increased TAE nuclear binding proteins at lower doses 
with a different response curve than NF-1 nuclear binding proteins. Taken
together these data demonstrated that TGF-beta functions in human lung
fibroblasts to activate collagen transcription through TAE sites by protein
complexes independent of NF-1 or AP-2 protein.

PMID: 8514794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Oncogene. 1993 Jun;8(6):1567-74.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) pX transactivates the c-fos promoter through multiple
cis-acting elements.

Avantaggiati ML(1), Natoli G, Balsano C, Chirillo P, Artini M, De Marzio E,
Collepardo D, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)I Clinica Medica, Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) X protein (pX) stimulates transcription regulated by 
cis-acting elements that control many viral and cellular genes, including the
c-myc and the c-fos proto-oncogenes. Using several c-fos promoter deletion
mutants, we found the serum-responsive element (SRE) located at -315, the
modified TPA-responsive element located at -296 (fos-AP-1 binding site, FAP) and 
the region spanning from nucleotide -220 to -120, which contains an NF1-like site
and several stretches of sequence homologous to the AP-2 consensus binding sites,
to be responsive to pX. pX does not modify the pattern of the retarded complexes 
bound to the SRE/FAP region which, in our system, appears to be occupied by
SRE-binding factors. The activation of the SRE does not involve complex formation
between SRE-binding factors and pX, it is not associated with an increase in
serum response factor binding to the SRE and it does not determine changes in SRE
mobility-shift pattern.

PMID: 8502480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. FEBS Lett. 1993 May 10;322(2):129-34.

Two different promoters direct expression of two distinct forms of mRNAs of human
platelet-activating factor receptor.

Mutoh H(1), Bito H, Minami M, Nakamura M, Honda Z, Izumi T, Nakata R, Kurachi Y, 
Terano A, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

The human platelet-activating factor (PAF) receptor gene exists as a single copy 
on chromosome 1. We identified two 5'-noncoding exons, each of which has distinct
transcriptional initiation sites. These exons are alternatively spliced to a
common splice acceptor site on a third exon that contains the total open reading 
frame to yield two different species of functional mRNA (Transcript 1 and 2).
Transcript 1 has consensus sequences for transcription factor NF-kappa B and
Sp-1, and the Initiator (Inr) sequence homologous to the murine terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase gene. Transcript 2 also contains consensus sequences 
for transcription factor AP-1, AP-2, and Sp-1. Transcripts 1 and 2 were both
detected in heart, lung, spleen, and kidney, whereas only Transcript 1 was found 
in peripheral leukocytes, a differentiated human eosinophilic cell line (EoL-1
cells), and brain. Existence of distinct promoters was thus suggested to play a
role in the regulatory control of PAF receptor gene expression in different human
tissues and cells.

PMID: 8387031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Virology. 1993 May;194(1):314-31.

Molecular cloning and characterization of PEBP2 beta, the heterodimeric partner
of a novel Drosophila runt-related DNA binding protein PEBP2 alpha.

Ogawa E(1), Inuzuka M, Maruyama M, Satake M, Naito-Fujimoto M, Ito Y, Shigesada
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Polyomavirus enhancer binding protein, PEBP2 (PEA2), is a heterodimer of two
distinct subunits, alpha and beta, of which the former directly binds to DNA and 
the latter acts auxiliary to enhance the DNA binding. Recent cloning studies has 
revealed that the alpha subunit is homologous to the products of the Drosophila
segmentation gene runt and the human AML1 gene, and that it functions as a major 
regulator for the T cell-specific gene expression. We have currently cloned cDNAs
for the beta subunit. The isolated cDNAs contain three isoforms that are presumed
to arise from alternative RNA splicing and encode polypeptides consisting of 187,
182, and 155 amino acids, respectively. These polypeptides neither show any
significant homology with known other proteins including the alpha subunit nor
have any known DNA-binding and dimerization domains. Thus, PEBP2, as the complex 
of these subunits, is thought to constitute an entirely novel category of
heteromeric transcriptional regulator together with the Runt and AML1 proteins.
Gel retardation assays of the cDNA-encoded proteins produced in an in vitro
translation system or in Escherichia coli demonstrated that the larger two beta
isoforms, but not the smallest one, can dimerize with the alpha subunit.
Furthermore, this heterodimerization was shown to cause a marked increase in the 
intrinsic DNA binding affinity of the alpha subunit.

PMID: 8386878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Bacteriol. 1993 May;175(9):2692-701.

Alterations of highly conserved residues in the regulatory domain of nitrogen
regulator I (NtrC) of Escherichia coli.

Moore JB(1), Shiau SP, Reitzer LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson 75083-0688.

Transcription of many nitrogen-regulated (Ntr) genes requires the phosphorylated 
form of nitrogen regulator I (NRI, or NtrC), which binds to sites that are
analogous to eukaryotic enhancers. A highly conserved regulatory domain contains 
the site of phosphorylation and controls the function of NRI. We analyzed the
effects of substitutions in highly conserved residues that are part of the active
site of phosphorylation of NRI in Escherichia coli. Fourteen substitutions of
aspartate 54, the site of phosphorylation, impaired the response to nitrogen
deprivation. Only one of these variants, NRI D-54-->E (NRI-D54E), could
significantly stimulate transcription from glnAp2, the major promoter of the
glnALG operon. Cells with this variant grew with arginine as a nitrogen source.
Experiments with purified components showed that unphosphorylated NRI-D54E
stimulated transcription. In contrast, substitutions at aspartate 11 were not as 
deleterious as those at aspartate 54. Finally, we showed that NRI-K103R, in which
arginine replaces the absolutely conserved lysine, is functionally active and
efficiently phosphorylated. This substitution appears to stabilize the
phosphoaspartate of NRI. The differences between our results and those from study
of homologous proteins suggest that there may be significant differences in the
way highly conserved residues participate in the transition to the activated
state.

PMCID: PMC204572
PMID: 8097516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 1993 Apr 15;268(11):8309-16.

Characterization of the promoter-regulatory region and structural organization of
E1 alpha gene (BCKDHA) of human branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase
complex.

Chuang JL(1), Cox RP, Chuang DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

We have isolated genomic clones containing the complete exon 1 and the
promoter-regulatory region of the E1 alpha gene (BCKDHA) of human branched-chain 
alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex. The cloning was achieved by amplification 
of a genomic library in the SRB (P2) host strain that allowed the replication of 
nonstandard DNA structures. The results of this and previous (Dariush, N.,
Fisher, C. W., Cox, R. P., and Chuang, D. T. (1991) FEBS Lett. 284, 34-38)
studies showed that the human E1 alpha gene contains 9 exons, and spans at least 
55 kilobases (kb). Exon 1 is 135 bp in length, and contains multiple
transcription initiation sites at bases +1, +18, and +22. The complete human E1
alpha cDNA is, therefore, 1,758 bp in length excluding the poly(A)+ tail, and has
27 nucleotides in the 5'-untranslated region. Sequencing of the 5'-flanking
region disclosed the absence of a canonical TATA-box in the vicinity of base -30.
Several sets of "CAAT" box-like sequences and Sp1 binding-sites are present. Also
present are copies of potential AP-2 binding, fat-specific element 1,
fat-specific element 2, glucocorticoid-responsive element, and cAMP-responsive
element sequences, as well as multiple sets of direct and inverted repeats. The
promoter-regulatory region was characterized using deletion constructs and the
luciferase reporter assay. The human hepatoma cells (Hep-G2) and Chinese hamster 
ovary (CHO) cell lines were used as hosts. The results obtained with Hep-G2 cells
indicate that the region for high level transcription is located between bases
-320 and -115. Extension of the 5'-end of the insert to beyond base -320 markedly
reduces promoter activity. The results strongly suggest the presence of
inhibitory elements in the region upstream of base -320. Assays in CHO cells show
that the region for high level transcription lies between bases -909 and -115.
The variation in the region for high level transcription in Hep-G2 and CHO cells 
may represent cell-type specific differences in the E1 alpha gene promoter
function.

PMID: 8463340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 5;268(7):4863-72.

Characterization of the gene for ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF) 2, a
developmentally regulated, selectively expressed member of the ARF family of
approximately 20-kDa guanine nucleotide-binding proteins.

Serventi IM(1), Cavanaugh E, Moss J, Vaughan M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) are a family of approximately 20-kDa guanine
nucleotide-binding proteins that stimulate the ADP-ribosyltransferase activities 
of cholera toxin in vitro and function in protein trafficking in vivo. The six
cloned mammalian ARFs can be grouped into three classes based on size and
sequence identity. ARF 2 is a class I ARF, whose approximately 2.6-kilobase mRNA 
exhibits species and tissue selective expression and is developmentally regulated
in rat brain. Here we report the sequence, structure, and functional promoter
region of the bovine ARF 2 gene, which was facilitated by constructing a
composite cDNA. The ARF 2 cDNA, constructed from a partial cDNA clone and
polymerase chain reaction-amplified fragments from reverse-transcribed poly(A)+
RNA, was approximately 2270 base pairs (bp) (minus the poly(A) tail). In the
3'-untranslated region, there are two potential polyadenylation signals, ATTAAA
and AATAAA, at positions 1064 and 2232, respectively, and two ATTTA motifs,
believed to signal mRNA degradation, at positions 2115 and 2165. The ARF 2 gene, 
represented in three overlapping genomic clones, spans approximately 20 kilobase 
pairs with five exons and four introns. Consensus sequences for guanine
nucleotide-binding and GTP hydrolysis are in separate exons, except for the NKXD 
sequence, which is divided by intron 4. There are multiple transcriptional
initiation sites. Transient transfection of embryonic trachea cells with deletion
constructs defined the functional promoter region to be within 400 bp upstream of
the most 5' site of transcription initiation. This 400-bp region lacks a
TATA-like sequence but contains six inverted CCAAT boxes, four potential
Sp1-binding sites, and a potential AP-2-binding site. Although the pattern of
expression of ARF 2 is unique among the ARFs, the structures of the class I ARF
genes are conserved among its members and across species.

PMID: 8444865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Oncogene. 1993 Mar;8(3):809-14.

Isolation of PEBP2 alpha B cDNA representing the mouse homolog of human acute
myeloid leukemia gene, AML1.

Bae SC(1), Yamaguchi-Iwai Y, Ogawa E, Maruyama M, Inuzuka M, Kagoshima H,
Shigesada K, Satake M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Breakpoints of the t(8;21) chromosome translocation in acute myeloid leukemia are
clustered within the human gene, AML1, located on chromosome 21 [Miyoshi, H.,
Shimizu, K., Maseki, N., Kaneko, Y. & Ohki, M. (1991). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 88, 10431-10434]. The product of AML1 has a region about 130 amino acids
long that is highly homologous to the Drosophila segmentation gene runt (runt
homology region). The cDNA isolated from mouse fibroblasts encoding the
alpha-subunit of polyomavirus enhancer binding protein 2 (PEBP2/PEA2) revealed
that it also has a runt homology region (E. Ogawa et al., submitted). In this
study, a different cDNA clone presumed to represent the mouse homolog of human
AML1 (PEBP2 alpha B) was isolated from a cDNA library derived from B cells. The
deduced amino acid sequence of PEBP2 alpha B is 99% identical to that of AML1 for
the first 241 residues, including the runt homology region, though their
sequences diverge thereafter. On the other hand, PEBP2 alpha B and PEBP2 alpha
share only 92% and 82% homologies at the amino acid and nucleotide levels
respectively, even for the runt homology region, indicating that these proteins
are encoded by distinct genes. While PEBP2 alpha is highly expressed in T-cell
lines but not in most of the B-cell lines and functions as an activator of
T-cell-specific genes, PEBP2 alpha B is expressed in both types of cells. A
possible functional relationship between PEBP2 alpha and PEBP2 alpha B is
discussed in relation to leukemogenic potential of AML1.

PMID: 8437866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Nature. 1993 Feb 25;361(6414):742-5.

Hepatitis B virus transactivator HBx uses a tumour promoter signalling pathway.

Kekulé AS(1), Lauer U, Weiss L, Luber B, Hofschneider PH.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 1993 Feb 25;361(6414):687-8.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) transactivator protein HBx is enigmatic in that it
stimulates a striking variety of promoters which do not share a common
cis-regulatory element. As it does not bind to DNA, it has been speculated that
HBx acts indirectly through cellular pathways. Under certain conditions HBx can
have an oncogenic potential, which may be relevant for HBV-associated liver
carcinogenesis, but until now the mechanism for transactivation and cell
transformation by HBx was unclear. We report here that HBx uses a complex signal 
transduction pathway for transactivation. An increase in the endogenous protein
kinase C (PKC) activator sn-1,2-diacylglycerol and the subsequent activation of
PKC give rise to activation of the transcription factor AP-1 (Jun-Fos). As a
result, HBx transactivates through binding sites for AP-1 and other PKC-dependent
transcription factors (AP-2, NF-kappa B), thereby explaining the as-yet
incomprehensible variety of HBx-inducible genes. As the PKC signal cascade also
mediates cell transformation by tumour-promoting agents, the mechanism presented 
here might account for the oncogenic potential of HBx.

PMID: 8441471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Feb 15;190(3):1045-52.

Cloning of the rat insulin- like growth factor binding protein-5 gene and DNA
sequence analysis of its promoter region.

Zhu X(1), Ling N, Shimasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Whittier Institute for Diabetes and
Endocrinology, La Jolla, California 92037.

To understand the regulation of the insulin-like growth factor binding protein-5 
(IGFBP-5) gene expression, we have cloned the IGFBP-5 gene from rat genomic
libraries and determined its genomic organization as well as the DNA sequence at 
the 5' flanking region of the gene. The rat IGFBP-5 gene spans at least 17
kilobases (kb) of the genome and contains 4 exons interrupted by 3 introns of
approximately 10, 0.6 and 0.7 kb, respectively. Southern blot analysis of the rat
chromosome DNA revealed a single copy gene for IGFBP-5 in the haploid genome.
Primer extension experiments demonstrated a single transcriptional start site
located at 772 nucleotides 5' of the ATG translational start codon. In addition
to a TATA box and a CAAT box, multiple putative cis-regulatory elements,
including an AP-1, an AP-2 and a binding site for progesterone receptor are
present in the promoter region. This finding suggests that the IGFBP-5 gene is
one of those that are expressed in a tissue-specific manner.

PMID: 7679898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Growth Factors. 1993;8(2):109-17.

Transcriptional regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor gene expression 
in ovarian bovine granulosa cells.

Garrido C(1), Saule S, Gospodarowicz D.

Author information: 
(1)University of California Medical Center, Cancer Research Institute, San
Francisco 94143-0128.

The expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in cultured bovine
granulosa cells has been studied. As shown by northern blot analysis, granulosa
cells express the VEGF gene. Analysis of the VEGF transcripts by the polymerase
chain reaction technique shows that granulosa cells express predominantly the
smallest VEGF coding forms (VEGF121 and VEGF164). Since in the promoter region of
the VEGF gene there are four potential AP-1 sites and two potential AP-2 sites we
have studied if TPA and forskolin could regulate VEGF gene expression. TPA
induces VEGF transcription in a time- and dose-dependent fashion. Maximal VEGF
mRNA levels are detected 6 h after TPA treatment. Induction apparently requires
de novo protein synthesis since it does not occur when translation is inhibited
by cycloheximide. Forskolin, a naturally occurring diterpene that activates
adenylylcyclase, also increases VEGF mRNA content in a time-dependent manner.
Induction does not require de novo protein synthesis and, in contrast to TPA,
induction is strongly potentiated by cycloheximide. Luteotrophic hormone, a known
activator of adenylylcyclase, also induces VEGF transcription. These results
imply that granulosa cells may be a source of VEGF which could play a role in the
angiogenic process associated with ovulation and corpus luteum formation.

PMID: 8466753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 Jan-Feb;12(1):63-72.

Promoter elements and transcriptional regulation of the acetylcholinesterase
gene.

Ekström TJ(1), Klump WM, Getman D, Karin M, Taylor P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla
92093-0636.

The 5' region of the acetylcholinesterase gene from the electric ray Torpedo
californica has been cloned and its cap site identified. The 5' untranslated
region is divided into two exons where a small exon extending between bp -22 to
-60 is alternatively spliced. Cap sites are defined at two positions, bp -138 and
-143. Twenty-one base pairs 5' of the -143 cap site a repeating TATA sequence is 
found. Further upstream in the gene consensus sequences for Sp1, AP1, and AP2
factors are evident. The promoter region of the acetylcholinesterase gene
enhances transcription of a luciferase reporter gene transfected into C2
myoblasts. However, increased transcription was not evident after C2 myoblasts
were induced to form myotubes. Cotransfection of this construct with c-Jun (AP1) 
and AP2 expression vectors shows marked increases of transcription rates in HepG2
and C2 cells. Protein kinase A elicited regulation of expression is also evident 
in quail fibroblasts. In gel retardation experiments both recombinant c-Jun (AP1)
and AP2 proteins bind to the appropriate Torpedo sequences. Cellular extracts
from the Torpedo electric organ exhibit AP2 binding activity. Thus, although all 
facets of specific regulation expected upon differentiation of mammalian muscle
cells were not evident, the 5'-flanking region from the Torpedo AChE gene
contains consensus sequences and functional promoter elements typical of
mammalian nerve and muscle systems.

PMID: 8422273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Carcinog. 1993;8(2):96-104.

Characterization of a nuclear factor, papilloma enhancer binding factor-1, that
binds the long control region of human papillomavirus type 16 and contributes to 
enhancer activity.

Cuthill S(1), Sibbet GJ, Campo MS.

Author information: 
(1)Beatson Institute for Cancer Research, CRC Beatson Laboratories, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.

Human papillomavirus type-16 (HPV-16) is an epitheliotropic DNA tumor virus
associated with the development of cervical carcinoma. The expression of HPV-16
early genes is driven by a cell-type-specific enhancer located in the long
control region of the viral genome. We identified an element within the HPV-16
minimal enhancer that has enhancer activity and binds a nuclear factor,
designated papillomavirus enhancer binding factor-1 (PEF-1). The element
(called-FP-F by us and fp5e by Gloss et al. (EMBO J 6:3735-3743, 1987)) was
originally identified as a footprint by DNase I protection experiments. The PEF-1
binding site is centered around a CCAAT box-like CCAAC element. Introduction of
A-->T transversions into the CCAAC element of fp5e abolished binding of PEF-1 and
concomitantly abolished enhancer function. fp5e resembles binding sites for the
transcriptional activators CTF/NF-1 and AP-2; however, we showed that neither of 
these factors interacted with this element. PEF-1 has an apparent molecular
weight of about 110 kDa, and we propose that it is a novel factor involved in the
transcriptional activation of HPV-16 gene expression.

PMID: 8397799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Agents Actions Suppl. 1993;44:219-23.

Comparative effects of gold on the interactions of transcription factors with
DNA.

Handel ML(1), Sivertsen S, Watts CK, Day RO, Sutherland RL.

Author information: 
(1)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst,
Sydney, Australia.

We have previously hypothesized that a mode of action of the anti-rheumatic gold 
salt, aurothiomalate (AuTM), is the inhibition of DNA binding by transcription
factors. Studies of the progesterone receptor (PR), which has a zinc finger
structure in the DNA binding domain, were consistent with this hypothesis (1).
Here we show that AuTM also markedly inhibits DNA binding by the transcription
factor AP-1 and has less potent effects for AP-2, NF-1 and TFIID.

PMID: 8372730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gene Expr. 1993;3(3):307-15.

On the role of AP2 in epithelial-specific gene expression.

Magnaldo T(1), Vidal RG, Ohtsuki M, Freedberg IM, Blumenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Ronald O. Perelman Department of Dermatology, New York University Medical
Center, New York 10016.

Transcription factor AP2 plays an important role in transcription of keratin
genes, and it has been suggested that AP2 confers epithelial specificity.
Promoters of keratin genes contain AP2 sites, usually within tight clusters of
binding sites for other nuclear transcription factors. The role of AP2 was
examined by in vitro gel shift analysis, AP2 binding site mutagenesis, and stable
and transient transfection experiments. Nonepithelial cells, such as GM10
fibroblasts and melanocytes, neither express keratin nor become phenotypically
epithelial when transfected with an AP2-expressing vector. However, in 3T3 and
HeLa cells, co-transfection of an AP2-expressing vector increases the level of
transcription from keratin gene promoters. This increase requires an intact AP2
binding site. Thus, the role of AP2 in keratin gene expression is quantitative
rather than qualitative. AP2 interacts with other transcription factors and may
convey extracellular regulatory signals to the transcription complex in the
promoters of keratin genes.

PMID: 7517240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Verh Dtsch Ges Pathol. 1993;77:271-5.

[AP-2: a nuclear effector of malignant transformation by ras oncogene].

[Article in German]

Buettner R(1), Bauer R, Imhof A, Tainsky MA, Hofstaedter F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie der Universität Regensburg.

We have applied a series of cell clones established from the human
teratocarcinoma cell line PA-1 to study the effect of malignant transformation by
ras-oncogenes on the regulation of cell growth and differentiation. A particular 
aim of this study was to identify nuclear gene-regulatory factors that are
affected by ras-transformation. We show that a key nuclear target of ras is the
transcription factor AP-2. AP-2 function is inhibited through the ras-controlled 
signal transduction cascade by at least two different mechanisms, i.e. inhibition
of an AP-2 coregulatory factor and by expression of an alternatively spliced
inhibitory AP-2 protein.

PMID: 7511296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. EMBO J. 1992 Dec;11(13):4961-8.

Different activation domains stimulate transcription from remote ('enhancer') and
proximal ('promoter') positions.

Seipel K(1), Georgiev O, Schaffner W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie II, Universität Zürich, Switzerland.

We reported previously that the lymphocyte-derived octamer transcription factor
2A (Oct-2A or OTF-2A) activated both natural immunoglobulin promoters and
synthetic promoters which contain the 'octamer' site, but was unable by itself to
stimulate transcription from a remote enhancer position. Here we examine a larger
set of transcription factors with respect to their proximal versus remote
activation. Since a transcription factor may contain more than one activation
domain, we have chosen to study the potential of individual activation domains in
the context of fusion proteins that contain the DNA binding domain of GALA. We
have identified at least two distinct functional classes of transcriptional
activation domains. 'Proximal' activation domains, exemplified by glutamine-rich 
domains of Oct-1, Oct-2A and Sp1, stimulate transcription only from a position
close to the TATA box, usually in response to a remote enhancer. 'General'
activation domains, derived from VP16, GAL4, p65 (NF-chi B), TFE3, ITF-1 and
ITF-2, can activate transcription from remote as well as proximal positions.
These domains contain many acidic amino acids and/or other features such as
clusters of serine and threonine. The proline-rich activation domains of AP-2 and
CTF/NF1 may represent a third class with considerable promoter activity and low
but significant enhancer activity. Furthermore, activation domains of both the
acidic and glutamine-rich types seem to have a modular structure, since
duplicated subdomains can substitute for the entire domain.

PMCID: PMC556974
PMID: 1464321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. FEBS Lett. 1992 Nov 9;312(2-3):179-82.

Loss of transcription factor AP-1 DNA binding activity during lymphocyte aging in
vivo.

Sikora E(1), Kaminska B, Radziszewska E, Kaczmarek L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology,
Warsaw, Poland.

The main feature of cellular senescence is cessation of cell proliferation.
Protooncogene c-fos, which is required for the cell to enter into DNA synthesis, 
is repressed in senescent fibroblasts. Diminished expression of c-fos and
impaired formation of AP-1, which is a complex of c-Fos and c-Jun proteins acting
as a transcription factor, was found in lymphocytes derived from old (> 18
months) mice and stimulated with Con A. There were no differences in c-jun
expression and formation of other transcription factors (AP-2 and AP-3) between
lymphocytes isolated from old and young mice.

PMID: 1426249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 1992 Nov 5;267(31):22102-7.

The regulation of the human tumor necrosis factor alpha promoter region in
macrophage, T cell, and B cell lines.

Rhoades KL(1), Golub SH, Economou JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, UCLA School of Medicine 90024.

The 1311-base pair human tumor necrosis factor (TNF) alpha promoter region was
fused to the luciferase (Luc) reporter gene and studied in a transient
transfection system in three TNF producing cell lines, the U937 macrophage cell
line, the MLA 144 T cell line, and the 729-6 B cell line. This full length
promoter construct can be induced by phorbol 13-myristate acetate (PMA) in each
of these cell types. Analysis of a series of 5'-truncations showed several peaks 
of basal and PMA induced activity suggesting the presence of several positive and
negative regulatory elements. A PMA responsive element was localized to a region 
between -95 and -36 bp relative to the transcription start site. Within this
region, single AP-2- and AP-1-like consensus sequences were noted. These AP-2 and
AP-1 sites were each modified with a double point mutation. A modest (20-50%)
reduction in TNF promoter activity was observed with the AP-2 site mutation.
However, mutation of the AP-1 site markedly diminished both the basal and
PMA-activated promoter activity. Also co-transfections of the wild-type promoter 
construct with an AP-1/c-jun expression vector resulted in augmented basal and
PMA-induced promoter activity.

PMID: 1429562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncogene. 1992 Oct;7(10):1999-2006.

The c-myb proto-oncogene product binds to but does not activate the promoter of
the DNA polymerase alpha gene.

Sudo T(1), Miyazawa H, Hanaoka F, Ishii S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Tsukuba Life Science Center, Institute of
Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), Ibarai, Japan.

The myb proto oncogene product (c-Myb) is a transcriptional regulator and its
expression and function are tightly linked to the cellular entry into S phase and
DNA synthesis. It has been shown [Venturelli, D., Travali, S. & Calabretta, B.
(1990). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 87, 5963-5967] that inhibition of T-cell
proliferation by a myb antisense oligomer is accompanied by down-regulation of
DNA polymerase alpha expression. To examine whether the transcription of the DNA 
polymerase alpha gene is directly regulated by c-Myb, we have identified and
characterized the 5' regulatory region of the human DNA polymerase alpha gene.
Two major and several minor transcription start sites were identified by nuclease
S1 mapping. DNA sequence analysis showed that the promoter region contains no
TATA box, one CCAAT box and putative Ap-1, AP-2 and E2F binding sites. In DNAase 
I footprinting, the bacterially expressed c-Myb protected six sites in the 5'
flanking region of the human DNA polymerase alpha gene. However, c-Myb did not
activate the DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter in a co-transfection assay. Our
results suggest that an unknown factor(s) is required for the c-Myb-induced
activation of the DNA polymerase alpha gene promoter, or c-Myb does not directly 
activate this promoter.

PMID: 1408140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Exp Med. 1992 Sep 1;176(3):897-901.

Stimulation of tumor necrosis factor alpha production in human monocytes by
inhibitors of protein phosphatase 1 and 2A.

Sung SJ(1), Walters JA, Fu SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond
23298.

The protein phosphatase 1 and 2A inhibitor, okadaic acid, has been shown to
stimulate many cellular functions by increasing the phosphorylation state of
phosphoproteins. In human monocytes, okadaic acid by itself stimulates tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) mRNA accumulation and TNF-alpha synthesis.
Calyculin A, a more potent inhibitor of phosphatase 1, has similar effects.
TNF-alpha mRNA accumulation in okadaic acid-treated monocytes is due to increased
TNF-alpha mRNA stability and transcription rate. The increase in TNF-alpha mRNA
stability is more remarkable in okadaic acid-treated monocytes than the mRNA
stability of other cytokines, such as interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1 alpha), IL-1
beta, and IL-6. Gel retardation studies show the stimulation of AP-1, AP-2, and
NF-kappa B binding activities in okadaic acid-stimulated monocytes. This increase
may correlate with the increase in TNF-alpha mRNA transcription rate. In addition
to the stimulation of TNF-alpha secretion by monocytes, okadaic acid appears to
modulate TNF-alpha precursor processing, as indicated by a marked increase in the
cell-associated 26-kD precursor. These results suggest that active basal
phosphorylation/dephosphorylation occurs in monocytes, and that protein
phosphatase 1 or 2A is important in regulating TNF-alpha gene transcription,
translation, and posttranslational modification.

PMCID: PMC2119347
PMID: 1324971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Aug;6(8):1285-98.

Identification and characterization of the chicken transforming growth
factor-beta 3 promoter.

Jakowlew SB(1), Lechleider R, Geiser AG, Kim SJ, Santa-Coloma TA, Cubert J, Sporn
MB, Roberts AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

The promoter regions of the three mammalian transforming growth factor-beta genes
(TGF-beta s 1, 2, and 3) have been recently cloned and characterized. The
sequences show little similarity, suggesting different mechanisms of
transcriptional control of these genes. To study differences in transcriptional
regulation of mammalian and avian TGF-beta, we have cloned and sequenced the
5'-flanking region of chicken TGF-beta 3. Characterization of this region showed 
a TATA box and cAMP-responsive element (CRE) and AP-2 binding site consensus
sequences starting at 12 and 28 base pairs, respectively, upstream from the TATA 
box. Moreover, four additional AP-2-like sites, 10 binding sites for the
transcription factor Sp1, as well as two AP-1-like sites were also identified.
Except for 32 base pairs of identity centered around the TATA box and CRE site
and four other relatively small regions of identity, the chicken TGF-beta 3
promoter was found to be structurally very different from the human TGF-beta 3
promoter. Promoter fragments were cloned into a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter plasmid to study functional activity. Basal transcriptional activity of 
the promoter was regulated in quail fibrosarcoma QM7 cells and in human
adenocarcinoma A375 cells by multiple upstream elements including the TATA, CRE, 
and AP-2 sites. As in the human TGF-beta 3 promoter, the CRE site showed
activation by forskolin, an effect which could be shown by expression of TGF-beta
3 mRNA in cultured chicken and quail cells as well. Our results indicate a
complex pattern of transcriptional regulation of the chicken TGF-beta 3 gene and 
suggest that differences in the regulation of expression of the genes for
mammalian and avian TGF-beta 3 may result in part from the unique structure of
their 5'-flanking regions.

PMID: 1406706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Biol Chem. 1992 Jul 25;267(21):15086-91.

Interaction of AP-1-, AP-2-, and Sp1-like proteins with two distinct sites in the
upstream regulatory region of the plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 gene mediates
the phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate response.

Descheemaeker KA(1), Wyns S, Nelles L, Auwerx J, Ny T, Collen D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Thrombosis and Vascular Research, University of Leuven, Belgium.

Phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate induces a 3- and 10-fold induction of
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) activity in HT1080 and HeLa cells,
respectively, following transient transfection of a 336-base pair plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) promoter fragment linked to a CAT reporter gene.
Substitution mutations in the regions encompassing nucleotides -78 to -69
(TGGGTGGGGC) or -61 to -54 (TGAGTTCA), but not in the regions -155 to -149
(TGCCTCA) or -84 to -76 (AGTGAGTGG) reduced this induction. Gel electrophoresis
of double-stranded -65 to -50 oligonucleotides of the PAI-1 promoter region and
nuclear extracts from Hela cells produced a gel shift pattern similar to that
obtained with a AP-1 consensus oligomer, and excess unlabeled AP-1 oligomer
reverted binding, suggesting that this region of the PAI-1 promoter is an
AP-1-like binding site. Gel electrophoresis of double-stranded -82 to -65
oligonucleotides with HeLa nuclear extracts revealed a gel shift pattern of three
bands; Sp1 consensus oligomer competed with the binding to two of these bands and
AP-2 consensus sequence oligomer with the binding to the third band. The -82 to
-65 oligomer also bound to purified AP-2 and Sp1 proteins. Southwestern blotting 
of HeLa nuclear extracts revealed that the labeled oligomer spanning region -82
to -65 bound to proteins with molecular masses of 52 and 72 kDa. Consensus AP-2
oligonucleotides competed for binding of the labeled -82 to -65 oligonucleotide
to the 52-kDa protein, but consensus Sp-1 oligonucleotides did not compete for
binding to the 72-kDa compound. The 72-kDa component binding to the -82 to -65
region may represent a new protein involved in transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 1634545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Gene. 1992 Jul 15;116(2):205-14.

Intragenic regulatory elements contribute to transcriptional control of the
neurofilament light gene.

Beaudet L(1), Charron G, Houle D, Tretjakoff I, Peterson A, Julien JP.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal General Hospital Research Institute, Quebec, Canada.

To date, no DNA regions involved in the neuron-specific expression of the
neurofilament light gene (NF-L) have been defined using transfection assays in
cultured cells. To identify those regulatory regions in the human NF-L gene, we
generated transgenic mice with a construct containing the basal NF-L promoter
(-292 to +15) fused to the cat gene and with three DNA fragments of 21.5, 7.6 and
4.9 kb each, including NF-L with different lengths of either 5'- or 3'-flanking
sequences. We show that the proximal NF-L 5' region (0.3 kb) constitutes a weak
promoter and that it lacks information to confer neural specificity. However,
appropriate expression in the nervous system occurred when this minimal promoter 
was combined with either 7.3 or 4.6 kb of NF-L sequences downstream from the
transcription start point. We conclude that the intragenic NF-L region contains
cis-acting elements conferring cell-type-specific regulation on the basal
activity of the NF-L promoter. Interestingly, AP-2 motifs were found within
homologously placed introns of all three NF genes, as well as in the promoter
regulatory regions of many neuronal genes. We propose that the acquisition of
introns by an ancestral intronless IF gene may have contributed to the emergence 
of a lineage of IF genes expressed in the nervous system.

PMID: 1634118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. EMBO J. 1992 Jul;11(7):2573-81.

Transcription factor AP-2 activates gene expression of HTLV-I.

Muchardt C(1), Seeler JS, Nirula A, Gong S, Gaynor R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas.

The HTLV-I LTR contains three conserved regulatory elements known as 21 base pair
repeats which are required for stimulation of gene expression by the
transactivator protein tax. Mutagenesis indicates that the 21 bp repeats can be
subdivided into three motifs, A, B and C, each of which influences the level of
tax activation. The A site in the 21 bp repeat has strong homology with
previously described binding sites for the transcription factor AP-2. We
demonstrated that AP-2 mRNA was present in T-lymphocytes and that cellular
factors from both non-transformed and transformed T-lymphocytes specifically
bound to the consensus motif for AP-2 in each 21 bp. To determine the role of
AP-2 in the regulation of the HTLV-I LTR gene expression, we used an AP-2 cDNA in
DNA binding and transient expression assays. Gel retardation and methylation
interference studies revealed that bacterially produced AP-2 bound specifically
and with high affinity to all three 21 bp repeats, and that it required the core 
sequence AGGC for specific binding. Binding of AP-2 prevented the subsequent
binding of members of the CREB/ATF family to an adjacent regulatory motif in the 
21 bp repeat. Transfection of an AP-2 expression construct into T-lymphocytes
activated gene expression from the HTLV-I LTR. At least two 21 bp repeats were
required for high levels of AP-2 activation and mutagenesis of the AP-2 consensus
binding sequences in the 21 bp repeats eliminate this activation.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMCID: PMC556732
PMID: 1628621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1992 Jul;83(7):714-22.

Differential expression of subspecies of polyomavirus and murine leukemia virus
enhancer core binding protein, PEBP2, in various hematopoietic cells.

Satake M(1), Inuzuka M, Shigesada K, Oikawa T, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University.

The core sequence of the enhancer of murine leukemia virus (MuLV) long terminal
repeat is highly conserved in a large number of MuLV strains and appears to play 
an essential role when SL3-3 or Moloney strains induce T cell lymphoma in mice.
We found by using the electrophoretic mobility shift assay that a polyomavirus
enhancer core-binding protein, PEBP2, bound to this core motif of MuLV. We also
noted that PEBP2 in several hematopoietic cell lines derived from B lymphocyte,
macrophage and myelocyte lineages migrated significantly faster than the
authentic PEBP2 detected in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Interestingly, PEBP2 detected in 
the cell lines of T lymphocyte lineage appeared to contain both types, which were
indistinguishable in electrophoretic mobility from those of NIH3T3 and of B
lymphocyte, macrophage and myelocyte lineages. The treatment of the nuclear
extract containing PEBP2 with phosphatase generated PEBP3, which is a
subcomponent of PEBP2 and retained the same DNA-binding specificity as PEBP2. The
altered mobility of hematopoietic cell-derived or T lymphocyte-derived PEBP2 was 
found to be due to the alteration of the mobility of PEBP3. Based on the distinct
mobility of PEBP2/3 of T lymphocytes from those of other hematopoietic cells, we 
discuss the implication of PEBP2 in MuLV-induced T cell leukemia and T
cell-specific gene expression.

PMID: 1325429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Oncogene. 1992 Jun;7(6):1201-6.

Identification and analysis of the ret proto-oncogene promoter region in
neuroblastoma cell lines and medullary thyroid carcinomas from MEN2A patients.

Itoh F(1), Ishizaka Y, Tahira T, Yamamoto M, Miya A, Imai K, Yachi A, Takai S,
Sugimura T, Nagao M.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

The human ret proto-oncogene (proto-ret), encoding a receptor tyrosine kinase, is
highly expressed in neuroblastomas, medullary thyroid carcinomas (MTCs) and
pheochromocytomas, which are all tumors of cells originating from the neural
crest. In studies on the transcription mechanism of proto-ret, we identified the 
transcription start site and the promoter region by chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) assay. A sequence upstream from the transcription start site
(-167 to +98 bp) showed definite promoter activity in both proto-ret
mRNA-positive neuroblastoma NB39-nu cells and proto-ret mRNA-negative HeLa cells.
The promoter sequence had a high GC content and contained four tandemly repeated 
GC boxes without a TATA box. Putative binding sequences for SP-1, AP-2 and
epidermal growth factor receptor-specific transcription factor (ETF) and also the
transcription-suppressing factor, GC factor (GCF), were found in the repeated GC 
box region. Southern blot analysis of DNAs of neuroblastoma cell lines and
primary MTCs showed that the high proto-ret expression in these tumors is not
caused by gross genetic changes in the promoter region, suggesting the possible
involvement of a region(s) other than the sequence from -167 to +98 bp or a minor
genetic change(s) in the promoter region.

PMID: 1350670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. FEBS Lett. 1992 May 18;302(3):269-73.

Structural analysis of the putative regulatory region of the rat gene encoding
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase.

Potvin F(1), Thibodeau J, Kirkland JB, Dandenault B, Duchaine C, Poirier GG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire du métabolisme du poly(ADP-ribose), Endocrinologie moléculaire,
Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada.

A lambda EMBL3 clone containing the first three exons along with part of the 4th 
exon of the rat poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase gene was isolated from a genomic DNA 
library. This clone also contains 6.6 kbp of upstream sequences. Nucleotide
sequence analysis of the proximal 5' 670 nucleotides flanking the major RNA start
site of the rat gene does not reveal significant global homology with the same
region of the human gene, but a series of short sequences are identical. Among
these sequences are found two putative Sp1 binding sites along with a
decanucleotide sequence responsible for the attachment of the transcription
factor AP-2.

PMID: 1601134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. New Biol. 1992 May;4(5):541-50.

Regulation of HTLV-I gene expression by tax and AP-2.

Muchardt C(1), Seeler JS, Gaynor RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX 75235.

The HTLV-I transactivator protein tax activates expression of both viral and
cellular genes. In addition it has been demonstrated to repress expression of the
DNA beta-polymerase gene. We wished to investigate potential interactions between
tax and the cellular transcription factor AP-2 which binds to distinct motifs in 
each of the three 21-bp repeat sequences in the HTLV-I LTR. First we demonstrate 
that AP-2 is capable of activating HTLV-I gene expression. Cotransfection
experiments reveal that AP-2 and tax are capable of inhibiting each other's
ability to activate HTLV-I gene expression. The mechanism of this inhibition was 
studied by gel retardation analysis using both bacterial and in vitro synthesized
AP-2 and tax proteins. These results indicate that tax inhibits the ability of
AP-2 to bind to the 21-bp repeat. Mutational analysis of both tax and AP-2
demonstrate that the amino termini of both proteins are potential sites of
interaction. These results are consistent with a model in which AP-2 and tax can 
potentially form protein complexes resulting in an altered ability of each factor
to modulate HTLV-I gene expression.

PMID: 1515417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1992 Mar 16;183(2):688-93.

Characterization of the promoter region of the murine fibroblast growth factor
receptor 1 gene.

Saito H(1), Kouhara H, Kasayama S, Kishimoto T, Sato B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Osaka University Hospital, Japan.

To obtain some clue for the regulatory mechanism by which fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) receptor 1 (FGFR 1) gene is expressed, we have cloned the promoter
region of this gene from genomic library of mouse FGF-responsive cell lines. The 
genomic clone isolated here includes the FGFR 1 gene from position -868 to +697
relative to transcription initiation site. Sequence analysis reveals the presence
of various consensus sequences for the binding sites of transcriptional factors
such as SP 1, GCF, Oct-I, AP 1 and AP 2, but the absence of TATA and CAAT
sequence motif. The transfection of this promoter-CAT constructs into NIH 3T3
cells demonstrates its promoter activity which is at least located between base
-106 and +104.

PMID: 1312839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Eur J Biochem. 1992 Feb 1;203(3):467-73.

Functional study of the human thyroid peroxidase gene promoter.

Abramowicz MJ(1), Vassart G, Christophe D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Interdisciplinary Research, Bruxelles, Belgium.

Structure/function relationships in the human thyroid peroxidase gene promoter
have been studied by deletion and mutation analyses and confronted with footprint
patterns obtained with thyroid nuclear extracts and the purified thyroid
transcription factor TTF-1. Crude nuclear extracts from dog thyroid primary
cultures were shown to contain a binding activity recognizing the -119 to -105
segment of the promoter (coordinates relative to the transcriptional start site).
Deletion, or site-directed mutagenesis of this segment dramatically reduced
transcriptional activity in transient expression experiments on gene fusions of
the thyroid peroxidase promoter and the growth hormone reporter. This binding
activity was increased in nuclear extracts from thyrocytes cultured in the
presence of the cAMP-agonist forskolin. A mutation that decreased the promoter
function in forskolin-stimulated thyrocytes resulted in weakening of the
corresponding footprint. The binding site displays no significant sequence
similarities with known cAMP-responsive elements. Mutagenesis of another region
of the promoter (-99 to -94) induced the binding of an additional factor,
resulting in a dramatically enhanced promoter activity. We show that the
thyroid-specific transcriptional factor TTF-1 is not directly involved in the
above-mentioned interactions and provide evidence suggesting that, in spite of
displaying a similar binding pattern to thyroperoxidase and thyroglobulin
promoters in vitro, TTF-1 plays a less important role in the former. Altogether, 
our data delineate the minimal thyroid peroxidase gene promoter in the human and 
identify the binding sites of two trans-activating factors, one of them being
potentially the mediator of a non-conventional cAMP control, independent of the
cAMP-responsive element and factor AP-2.

PMID: 1735431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Immunol Ser. 1992;56:3-34.

Genomic structure, induction, and production of TNF-alpha.

Spriggs DR(1), Deutsch S, Kufe DW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin, Madison.

The TNF gene is located in close proximity to the HLA-B locus in both humans and 
mouse. TNF has a high degree of sequence observation across species, and this is 
reflected in its relatively high cross-species activity. The 5' flanking region
of the TNF gene contains multiple potential regulatory sites, including consensus
sequences for the AP-1 and AP-2 sites, the cAMP-responsive element, and sequences
similar to the kappa B sequences found in immunoglobulin and cytokine regulatory 
elements. This sequence has been demonstrated to be responsive to LPS and TNF
stimulation. The 3' untranslated region contains a sequence element affecting
posttranslational control of TNF through mRNA stability and translation
efficiency. The functional importance and interactions of these regulatory
elements remain undefined. TNF is widely expressed in granulocytes, macrophages, 
fibroblasts, and epithelial cells. Induction of TNF can occur through a variety
of stimuli, including LPS, TPA, cytokines, calcium flux, and oxygen free-radical 
mechanisms. A common pathway for these diverse agents remains unknown. In human
monocytes, the regulation of TNF expression is regulated at both transcriptional 
and posttranscriptional levels. Experimental evidence suggests that phospholipase
A2 and the lipoxygenase pathway may be central in the process of TNF induction in
leukocytes. Down-regulation of TNF expression is better understood. The
inhibition of expression appears to result from high levels of cAMP, frequently
induced through the action of PGE2. TNF secretion is separately regulated and may
involve the action of G binding proteins.

PMID: 1550865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. DNA Cell Biol. 1992 Jan-Feb;11(1):43-50.

Cloning and characterization of the human insulin-like growth factor-I receptor
gene 5'-flanking region.

Mamula PW(1), Goldfine ID.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes and Endocrine Research, Mount Zion Medical Center,
University of California, San Francisco 94120.

The insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGFIR) is a membrane-bound
glycoprotein that mediates the action of insulin-like growth factors. The cDNAs
for the human IGFIR have been cloned and expressed, but the structures of the
gene and its promoter have not been elucidated. In this study, we isolated an
IGFIR promoter clone from a human chromosome 15 library. This clone contained the
promoter, first exon, and a portion of the first intron. Sequence analysis of the
5' region that contained the promoter revealed that it lacked both TATA and CAAT 
boxes. The promoter contained binding sites for the transcription factors Sp1,
AP-2, and the epidermal growth factor receptor transcription factor (ETF). Primer
extension analysis of IGFIR mRNA indicated the presence of a single transcription
start site 1,012 bp upstream from the ATG. When the putative promoter was ligated
into a promoterless CAT vector and transfected mto HEPG2 cells, CAT activity was 
expressed, indicating that promoter activity was contained in this fragment.
Other constructs containing the promoter and portions of the 5' untranslated
region were used in transfection studies, and indicated that the 5' untranslated 
regions may play a role in promoter activity. Comparison of the human IGFIR
promoter with that of the rat IGFIR promoter revealed significant sequence
homology. Comparison of the IGFIR promoter with that of the human insulin
receptor (IR) revealed structural similarities, although the arrangement of
promoter elements differed.

PMID: 1310858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6419-25.

Sequence specific protein binding to and activation of the TGF-beta 3 promoter
through a repeated TCCC motif.

Lafyatis R(1), Denhez F, Williams T, Sporn M, Roberts A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

We have previously characterized the TGF-beta 3 promoter and shown that the
activity of this promoter is highly variable in different cell types. Although
the promoter contains a proximal cAMP responsive element, which is critical to
basal and forskolin-induced promoter activity, this element is not responsible
for the variable, cell-specific regulation of the promoter. In this paper, we
identify a 25 base pair sequence in the proximal region of the TGF-beta 3
promoter that binds a novel DNA-binding protein. This region includes the
sequence T-CCCTCCCTCCC, (3 x TCCC), and mutation of these T-CCC repeats inhibits 
protein binding. Further, we show that in the cell line A375, which we have
previously shown expresses high levels of TGF-beta 3 mRNA, this region is
responsible for mediating high level TGF-beta 3 promoter activity. Immediately 3'
to the 3 x TCCC sequence is a consensus AP-2 binding site, however, we show that 
this region does not bind AP-2, and AP-2 does not transactivate the TGF-beta 3
promoter. Therefore, we provide strong evidence that high level expression of
TGF-beta 3 in A375 cells results from transactivation of the TGF-beta 3 promoter 
by a protein that binds to a repeated TCCC motif in the promoter and suggest that
this DNA-binding protein likely also regulates aspects of developmental and
tissue-specific expression of this cytokine.

PMCID: PMC329187
PMID: 1754378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Dec;7(3):175-83.

Comparative analysis of human and chicken transforming growth factor-beta 2 and
-beta 3 promoters.

Burt DW(1), Paton IR, Dey BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, AFRC Institute of Animal
Physiology and Genetics Research, Roslin, Midlothian.

The promoters for chicken transforming growth factor-beta 2 (TGF-beta 2) and
TGF-beta 3 were cloned and sequenced to study the regulation of these genes. The 
promoters are GC-rich and lie within CpG islands. Several putative DNA regulatory
sequence motifs were identified in the 5'-flanking regions, including matches to 
particular recognition sequences for several nuclear factors found in other
genes. A comparison of chicken and human TGF-beta 2 promoters revealed a 111 bp
conserved sequence surrounding the major transcription start site. Two regions of
sequence homology were detected in the 5'-flanking regions of chicken and human
TGF-beta 3 genes: an 86 bp sequence surrounding the major transcription start and
a 156 bp sequence in the 5'-untranslated region. No DNA sequence homology was
detected between TGF-beta 1, -beta 2 or -beta 3 promoters. The conserved region
near the major transcription start sites in both the TGF-beta 2 and TGF-beta 3
genes, however, does show some structural homology; both promoters contain short 
conserved sequences that resemble TATA box, cyclic AMP-responsive element and
AP-2 sequence motifs, cis-acting elements we believe may be important for
promoter activity.

PMID: 1840616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. DNA Cell Biol. 1991 Dec;10(10):723-34.

Molecular cloning and primary structure of the chicken transforming growth
factor-beta 2 gene.

Burt DW(1), Paton IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, AFRC Institute of Animal
Physiology and Genetics Research, Roslin, Midlothian, UK.

The chicken transforming growth factor-beta 2 (TGF-beta 2) gene and its flanking 
regions were cloned and characterized. The gene contains 7 exons and 6 introns
spanning about 70 kb. Primer extension analysis identified one major and two
minor starts of transcription. A comparison of the 5'-flanking regions for human 
and chicken TGF-beta 2 genes revealed limited sequence homology around the start 
of transcription, including conserved TATA-box, CRE, and AP-2 sequence motifs. A 
species comparison of the 5' untranslated region did not reveal any sequence
homology beyond the coding region. In contrast, the 3' untranslated region was
highly conserved, suggesting that this region may play an important role in the
expression of the TGF-beta 2 gene.

PMID: 1683775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1991 Nov 15;266(32):21362-7.

The SV40 core sequence functions as a repressor element in yeast.

Zhang-Keck ZY(1), Kibbe WA, Moye-Rowley WS, Parker CS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Chemistry, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

Our previous studies showed that the AP-1 recognition element (ARE) present
within the SV40 72-base pair (bp) enhancer will activate transcription in yeast
when placed upstream of a truncated CYC1 promoter. However, the AP-2/AP-3
recognition element (also known as the core sequence TGTGGAAAG) from the SV40
enhancer was not able to activate CYC1-dependent transcription. In this report,
we show that the core sequence, when cloned next to a yeast UAS (upstream
activation sequence), can inhibit the transcriptional stimulatory activity of the
UAS. We refer to this sequence as the upstream repressor element (URE) in yeast. 
Repression occurs in an orientation-independent fashion and irrespective of the
placement of the URE between the UAS and TATA box or upstream of both of these
elements. Furthermore, repression is seen when the URE is separated from the UAS 
by up to 214 bp. Interestingly, multiple copies of an activator site can overcome
this repression. Gel-shift analysis and URE-probed proteins blots indicate the
presence of two polypeptide chains capable of binding the URE in yeast. The
experimental evidence suggests that either the repression associated with the URE
sequence is mediated by a direct, one-to-one interaction between the proteins
recognizing the URE and GCRE, or alternatively, that there is a direct
interaction between the activator and repressor for a general transcription
factor.

PMID: 1657962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 1991 Nov;6(11):2077-83.

Structural and functional analysis of the regulatory sequences of the ets-1 gene.

Oka T(1), Rairkar A, Chen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pediatrics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston 77030.

The ets-1 gene is a human homolog of the oncogene v-ets of avian acute leukemia
virus E26. The ets-1 gene is preferentially expressed in lymphoid cells. To
understand the regulation of the ets-1 gene expression the regulatory sequences
of this gene were identified and isolated. The promoter is found to be
functioning in the lymphoid cell line Daudi and the erythromyeloid cell line K562
but not in the promyelocytic cell line HL60. Sequence analysis indicates that the
ets-1 promoter does not contain the TATA or CAT box. It contains multiple
transcription initiation sites in a tight cluster. The promoter contains one
binding site each for AP1 and AP2. It has one definitive and five presumptive
sp1-binding sites. In addition, the ets-1 promoter contains one ets-1
protein-binding site. Functional analysis has shown that c-jun enhances the
activity of the ets-1 promoter, whereas the combination of c-fos and c-jun
expressions has no synergistic effect. The expression of exogenous AP2 and ets-1 
also enhances the activity of the ets-1 promoter. These results suggest that the 
AP1, AP2 and ets-1 proteins have a positive regulatory effect. The presence of
the ets-1 protein-binding site indicates the existence of an autoregulatory
mechanism for the expression of the ets-1 gene. Our results suggested that the
presence of a negative regulatory element upstream of the region where most of
the positive regulators are located.

PMID: 1945412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Bone Miner Res. 1991 Oct;6(10):1127-36.

Expression of the osteonectin gene potentially controlled by multiple cis- and
trans-acting factors in cultured bone cells.

Dominguez P(1), Ibaraki K, Robey PG, Hefferan TE, Termine JD, Young MF.

Author information: 
(1)Bone Research Branch, National Institute of Dental Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

The cis-acting regulatory elements of the osteonectin gene have been studied
using a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) promoter assay in
osteonectin-expressing and nonexpressing cultured cells. When various stretches
of the promoter were transiently transfected into fetal bovine bone cells, a
positive element was detected in the DNA located between bases -504 and 11 (1
being the start of transcription) and a negative element between bases -900 and
-504. The positive element of the promoter also conferred preferential expression
of the gene, showing more activity in cells with higher levels of osteonectin
mRNA expression. A 1.2 kb fragment of intron 1 displayed a negative effect on CAT
expression when inserted 5' to the promoter. An additional regulatory element was
found in DNA encoding exon 1, which significantly influenced expression of the
gene in fetal bovine bone cells. Gel shift analysis using positive genomic
elements located 5' to the start of transcription indicated that one of the
nuclear proteins that interacts with the osteonectin promoter may be related to
the transcription factor AP2.

PMID: 1796760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Virol. 1991 Oct;65(10):5391-400.

PEA1 and PEA3 enhancer elements are primary components of the polyomavirus late
transcription initiator element.

Yoo W(1), Martin ME, Folk WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia 65212.

The circular polyomavirus genome is transcribed from divergent promoter regions. 
Early mRNAs are initiated from a transcription complex formed at a TATA motif,
the site of binding of transcription factor TFIID. Early transcription is
promoted at a distance by the viral enhancer, which includes DNA motifs bound by 
cellular proteins of the PEA1 and PEA3 families of transcription activators. In
contrast, the predominant viral late mRNAs are initiated within the viral
enhancer, which lacks a TATA motif, near the PEA1 and PEA3 DNA motifs. Here, we
demonstrate that these PEA1 and PEA3 binding sites are primary components of an
autonomous transcription initiator element (Inr). They cause transcription of
most polyomavirus late mRNAs and can direct the transcription of heterologous
reporter genes. Alternative roles of these DNA motifs as activators of early mRNA
transcription and as an initiator element for late mRNA transcription help
explain how polyomavirus gene expression is regulated during lytic growth and
provides a model for cellular transcription during development.

PMCID: PMC249020
PMID: 1654447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Immunol. 1991 Sep 15;147(6):2047-54.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha mRNA accumulation in human myelomonocytic cell lines.
Role of transcriptional regulation by DNA sequence motifs and mRNA stabilization.

Sung SJ(1), Walters JA, Hudson J, Gimble JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Medical College of Virginia, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298-0058.

The cytokine TNF mediates many of the pathologic signs of cachexia, inflammation,
and sepsis. The current work describes the regulation of TNF in human
myelomonocytic cell lines after PMA stimulation. The cell lines exhibit a low
level of constitutive TNF mRNA expression. Within 2 to 4 h of PMA exposure,
steady state levels of TNF mRNA are markedly elevated in all myelomonocytic cell 
lines studied. This rise is due to increased mRNA stability, which increased by
almost twofold, and to an overall increase in transcription, which rises by more 
than sixfold. At the level of the genomic TNF gene, a DNase I hypersensitive site
is detected within the TNF promoter between -200 to -100 bp relative to the
transcription initiation site. Although absent in nonexpressing erythroleukemia
cell lines, the DNase I site is present in uninduced myelomonocytic cell lines
and is not changed after PMA induction. The PMA induction of c-fos mRNA
correlated well with TNF gene induction; expression of genes encoding other
proteins in the AP-1 complex (junB and junD) were also induced by PMA. The
nuclear extracts from resting and induced ML-1 cells contain proteins binding
specifically to the AP-1, AP-2, and NF kappa B sequence located within the TNF
promoter. PMA induction increases the level of a number of specific binding
complexes relative to the resting cells. The regulatory mechanisms of the human
and murine TNF genes are discussed.

PMID: 1909740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 Sep 15;88(18):7948-52.

Transcription factor AP2 and its role in epidermal-specific gene expression.

Leask A(1), Byrne C, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell
Biology, University of Chicago, IL 60637.

The epidermis is a stratified squamous epithelium whose major
differentiation-specific products are keratins. To elucidate factors controlling 
keratinocyte-specific gene expression, we previously identified proximal and
distal regulatory elements that act synergistically to drive
keratinocyte-specific expression of the gene encoding human epidermal keratin
K14. Control by the proximal element is mediated by a transcription factor, KER1,
which is more abundant in nuclear extracts of keratinocytes than in extracts of
other cell types, including fibroblasts, lymphocytes, and simple epithelial
cells. In this report, we identify this factor as transcription factor AP2, shown
to be transcribed in cells of epidermal and neural crest lineages. Furthermore,
we demonstrate functional AP2 binding sites upstream from three additional
epidermal genes, suggesting that AP2 may be generally involved in epidermal gene 
regulation. Finally, although AP2 is necessary, it is not sufficient for
epidermal gene expression: a distal element contributes to tissue-specific
expression of the human keratin K14 gene as judged by its ability to enhance
expression of a heterologous promoter in keratinocytes but not in hepatoma cells.
These results imply that a combination of factors is likely to contribute to
epidermal-specific expression of the human keratin K14 gene.

PMCID: PMC52422
PMID: 1716766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Development. 1991 Sep;113(1):283-93.

Transcription factor AP-2 is tissue-specific in Xenopus and is closely related or
identical to keratin transcription factor 1 (KTF-1).

Snape AM(1), Winning RS, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

This paper identifies a new, developmental role for transcription factor AP-2 in 
the activation of amphibian embryonic epidermal keratin gene expression. Keratin 
transcription factor KTF-1 is shown by several criteria to be identical or
closely related to AP-2. KTF-1/AP-2 is shown to be tissue-specific from its first
transcription in Xenopus embryos, and restricted to a small number of adult
tissues, including skin. Epidermis-specific keratin transcription closely follows
specification of the embryonic ectoderm in Xenopus, and is subject to regulation 
by growth factors and embryonic induction. We further show that in mouse basal
keratinocytes, a KTF-1/AP-2-like factor is present and binds to a DNA sequence
previously shown to be important in the regulation of the keratin K14 gene, which
is actively expressed in these cells. Thus, the study of AP-2 and its role in the
regulation of keratin gene transcription should enhance our understanding of both
amphibian embryonic development and mammalian skin differentiation.

PMID: 1722450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 1991 Aug 25;266(24):16247-54.

Molecular mechanism of tissue-specific regulation of mouse renin gene expression 
by cAMP. Identification of an inhibitory protein that binds nuclear
transcriptional factor.

Horiuchi M(1), Nakamura N, Tang SS, Barrett G, Dzau VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5246.

Renin gene expression in the mouse kidney and submandibular gland (SMG) are
differentially regulated by cAMP. In this study, we examined the potential
molecular mechanism responsible for this tissue-specific regulation. 32P
end-labeled synthetic oligonucleotide containing mouse renin cAMP-responsive
element (CRE) was incubated with kidney nuclear extracts from either control or
cAMP-treated mice and analyzed by gel mobility shift assay. Our results
demonstrated that cAMP induced a nuclear protein which complexed with the CRE
oligonucleotide in a specific manner. This nuclear protein-DNA binding was
competed effectively by the oligonucleotide containing human chorionic
gonadotropin alpha-subunit CRE but not by the mouse renin DNA fragment from which
the CRE was deleted by site-directed mutagenesis. In contrast, no DNA-protein
complex formation could be detected when this [32P]CRE oligonucleotide was
incubated with the SMG nuclear extract from control or cAMP-treated mice.
However, CRE-binding protein complex formation was demonstrated in the SMG
nuclear extract when the incubation was performed in the presence of 0.8% sodium 
deoxycholate and 1.2% Nonidet P-40, detergents that dissociate protein-protein
complexes. Furthermore, in the absence of deoxycholate, we observed that SMG
nuclear extract attenuated the binding of the kidney CRE-binding protein to mouse
renin CRE in a dose-dependent manner and this inhibitory effect of SMG nuclear
extract disappeared in the presence of sodium deoxycholate. This inhibitory
nuclear protein in SMG is specific for CRE-binding protein since it does not
affect nuclear protein binding to synthetic DNA oligonucleotides of human
collagenase AP-1 and human metallothionein AP-2. Our data further suggest that
inhibitory nuclear protein is present in lower quantities in other extrarenal
tissues, i.e. testes, liver, brain, heart, but is not detectable in the kidney.
Taken together, these results suggest that the SMG and certain extrarenal tissues
contain nuclear trans-acting factor(s) that interact with CRE-binding protein,
thereby interfering with its binding to mouse renin CRE. The presence of this
inhibitory protein in the mouse SMG nucleus may contribute to the tissue-specific
regulation of the renin gene expression by cAMP.

PMID: 1651939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Genomics. 1991 Aug;10(4):1100-2.

Localization of the gene for the DNA-binding protein AP-2 to human chromosome
6p22.3-pter.

Gaynor RB(1), Muchardt C, Xia YR, Klisak I, Mohandas T, Sparkes RS, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.

A variety of cellular proteins bind to cellular and viral enhancer elements. One 
such factor, known as AP-2, is a 52-kDa transcription factor identified by its
interaction with the SV40 and metallothionein enhancers. In addition, it has been
found that AP-2 binds to the SV40 T-antigen. AP-2 activity is mediated by both
the state of cellular differentiation and changes in signal transduction
pathways, suggesting a potential role of AP-2 in the regulation of diverse
cellular processes. As part of an effort to examine the chromosomal organization 
of cellular genes encoding transcription factors, we report the mapping of the
gene encoding AP-2 to human chromosome 6p22.3-24 by analysis of somatic cell
hybrids and in situ hybridization to chromosomes.

PMID: 1916817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Aug;7(1):27-34.

The gene for the common alpha subunit of porcine pituitary glycoprotein hormone.

Kato Y(1), Ezashi T, Hirai T, Kato T.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Assay Center, Gunma University, Japan.

The gene for the common alpha subunit of the porcine anterior pituitary
glycoprotein hormones was cloned from a genomic library constructed in EMBL3. The
nucleotide sequence of the entire coding sequence of the porcine common
alpha-subunit gene was determined in addition to one intron and 1059 and 160 bp
of the 5'- and 3'-flanking regions respectively. Southern blot analysis of the
porcine genomic DNA indicated that the common alpha-subunit gene is present as a 
single copy. The transcriptional unit of the porcine common alpha subunit spanned
about 14 kb and contained four exons interrupted by three introns of about 11.5, 
1.2 and 0.4 kb. The short untranslated sequence in the first exon and the
location of the exon/intron junctions at amino acid residues +9/+10 and +71/+72
were highly conserved among the rat, human and bovine common alpha-subunit genes.
In the proximal portion of the 5'-flanking region, one TATA box and one CCAAT box
were present. A steroid-responsive element was not found up to 1059 bases
upstream from the transcription start site. The potential AP-1 and AP-2
factor-responsive elements were present at three and one positions respectively
in the 5'-flanking region. This feature suggests that hypothalamic
gonadotrophin-releasing hormone stimulates the expression of the common
alpha-subunit gene predominantly by a signal-transduction system, with the
protein kinase C cascade and factors AP-1 and AP-2 as mediators. The cyclic
AMP-responsive element was also present at two positions, but a single base
substitution was found in each sequence compared with the consensus
sequence.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1716437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3709-14.

Developmental regulation of transcription factor AP-2 during Xenopus laevis
embryogenesis.

Winning RS(1), Shea LJ, Marcus SJ, Sargent TD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

We have isolated a cDNA clone encoding the Xenopus homologue of the transcription
factor AP-2 (XAP-2). The predicted amino acid sequence derived from the Xenopus
cDNA shows very strong conservation with the amino acid sequence of human AP-2,
suggesting that this protein is evolutionarily conserved, at least among
vertebrates. This is further substantiated by the demonstration that an in vitro 
translation product of XAP-2 cDNA bound specifically to an AP-2 binding site from
the human MT-IIA gene. Northern blot analysis of Xenopus embryo RNA revealed the 
existence of three major XAP-2 mRNA species that were only detectable after the
midblastula transition (when embryonic transcription is activated), with peak
accumulation of the transcripts occurring during gastrulation. Therefore, in
contrast to other Xenopus transcription factors, XAP-2 is not maternally derived 
but arises exclusively from zygotic transcription. Unlike the situation in
cultured human teratocarcinoma (NT2) cells, retinoic acid treatment did not
induce XAP-2 mRNA in Xenopus embryos, even though the treatment had a pronounced 
morphogenetic effect on the embryos. Our results suggest that XAP-2 may play a
distinctive role during Xenopus embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC328402
PMID: 1852613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 Jun 28;177(3):1113-20.

Analysis of the human type I insulin-like growth factor receptor promoter region.

Cooke DW(1), Bankert LA, Roberts CT Jr, LeRoith D, Casella SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205.

We isolated genomic fragments containing the 5' region of the human type I
insulin-like growth factor receptor gene. A unique transcription start site was
identified, defining a 1038 bp 5'-untranslated region. No TATA or CCAAT elements 
were identified in the proximal 480 nucleotides of 5'-flanking region. The region
surrounding the transcription start site was similar to a recently described
"initiator" sequence. The 5'-flanking and 5'-untranslated regions were highly
GC-rich, with numerous potential Sp1 binding sites. A potential AP-2 binding site
was identified in the 5'-flanking region and a potential thyroid response element
was identified in the 5'-untranslated region. The 5' region of the human gene was
very similar to that of the rat gene, with conservation of many of the potential 
regulatory elements.

PMID: 1711844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jun 25;266(18):11947-54.

The human gene for vascular endothelial growth factor. Multiple protein forms are
encoded through alternative exon splicing.

Tischer E(1), Mitchell R, Hartman T, Silva M, Gospodarowicz D, Fiddes JC, Abraham
JA.

Author information: 
(1)California Biotechnology Inc., Mountain View 94043.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an apparently endothelial
cell-specific mitogen that is structurally related to platelet-derived growth
factor. By Northern blot and protein analyses, we show that VEGF is produced by
cultured vascular smooth muscle cells. Analysis of VEGF transcripts in these
cells by polymerase chain reaction and cDNA cloning revealed three different
forms of the VEGF coding region, as had been reported in HL60 cells. The three
forms of the human VEGF protein chain predicted from these coding regions are
189, 165, and 121 amino acids in length. Comparison of cDNA nucleotide sequences 
with sequences derived from human VEGF genomic clones indicates that the VEGF
gene is split among eight exons and that the various VEGF coding region forms
arise from this gene by alternative splicing: the 165-amino-acid form of the
protein is missing the residues encoded by exon 6, whereas the 121-amino-acid
form is missing the residues encoded by exons 6 and 7. Analysis of the VEGF gene 
promoter region revealed a single major transcription start, which lies near a
cluster of potential Sp1 factor binding sites. The promoter region also contains 
several potential binding sites for the transcription factors AP-1 and AP-2;
consistent with the presence of these sites, Northern blot analysis demonstrated 
that the level of VEGF transcripts is elevated in cultured vascular smooth muscle
cells after treatment with the phorbol ester
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate.

PMID: 1711045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jun 25;266(18):11417-20.

Activation of transcription in cell-free extracts by a novel cAMP-responsive
sequence from the bovine CYP17 gene.

Zanger UM(1), Lund J, Simpson ER, Waterman MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

An in vitro transcription system has been developed to study the transcriptional 
control of steroid hydroxylase gene expression in steroidogenic tissues using
upstream sequences of these genes in rabbit beta-globin promoter/reporter
constructs. Analysis of deletion mutants of the upstream region of the bovine
CYP17 (p45017 alpha) gene in whole cell extracts prepared from mouse Y1
adrenocortical cells revealed that sequences activating transcription in vitro
are identical to those previously identified in vivo, namely the novel
cAMP-responsive sequences crsI (-243 to -225 base pairs) and crsII (-80 to -40
base pairs). These sequences do not contain the known cAMP response elements, CRE
or AP-2. In similar extracts from nonsteroidogenic mouse SVT2 cells, crsI was
unable to activate transcription. Partially purified protein factor(s) binding to
crsI were prepared from Y1 extracts by crsI-specific DNA affinity chromatography.
This fraction activated transcription in vitro in SVT2 extracts only when crsI
was present in the template. This in vitro transcription system will permit
further investigation of crsI and its cognate factors and of the transcriptional 
regulation of the other steroid hydroxylase genes.

PMID: 1646805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Biochemistry. 1991 Jun 4;30(22):5590-7.

Interaction of assembly protein AP-2 and its isolated subunits with clathrin.

Prasad K(1), Keen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Fels Institute for Cancer Research, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140.

The clathrin assembly protein complex AP-2 is a multimeric subunit complex
consisting of two 100-115-kDa subunits known as alpha and beta and 50- and 16-kDa
subunits. The subunits have been dissociated and separated by ion-exchange
chromatography in 7.5 M urea. Fractions highly enriched in either the alpha or
beta subunit were obtained. The alpha fraction interacted with clathrin as
evidenced by its ability to bind to preassembled clathrin cages. It also reacted 
with dissociated clathrin trimers under conditions that favor assembly of coat
structures, but did not yield discrete clathrin polygonal lattices. The enriched 
beta fraction (containing small amounts of alpha) reacted with clathrin to yield 
intact coats with the incorporation of approximately equivalent amounts of alpha 
and beta subunits into the polymerized species; excess free beta subunit was
unreactive. The AP-2 complex was also completely dissociated in a highly
denaturing solvent, 6 M Gdn.HCl, and the constituent subunits of 100-115, 50, and
16 kDa were separated by gel filtration. In a coassembly assay with clathrin, the
clathrin polymerizing activity was exclusively associated with the 100-kDa
subunit fraction with stoichiometric incorporation of both alpha and beta
subunits of 100 kDa into the polymerized coats, and with no requirement for 50-
or 16-kDa subunits. These observations demonstrate that the assembly activity of 
the complex is associated with the alpha and beta subunits and suggest that both 
subunits, through independent interactions with clathrin, are required for
expression of complete lattice assembly activity.

PMID: 2036430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 May 11;19(9):2363-71.

Delineation of human papillomavirus type 18 enhancer binding proteins: the
intracellular distribution of a novel octamer binding protein p92 is cell cycle
regulated.

Royer HD(1), Freyaldenhoven MP, Napierski I, Spitkovsky DD, Bauknecht T, Dathan
N.

Author information: 
(1)Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Heidelberg, FRG.

The enhancer of human papillomavirus type 18 consists of two functionally
redundant domains, one is partially conserved between HPV18 and HPV16, both
mediate strong transcriptional enhancement. In contrast, short fragments of the
enhancer mediate low transcriptional enhancement, suggesting that there is
functional cooperation between HPV enhancer binding factors. Previously
interactions of the enhancer with NF-1, AP1 and steroid receptors were shown by
EMSA. Here we show by binding site blotting, that four novel sequence specific
proteins p110, p92, p42 and p40 bind to the enhancer. Nuclear proteins p110 and
p92 bind at repeated sites in the enhancer, proteins p42 and p40 only at one
site. Recognition sequences for p110 and p92 were identified in a TTGCTTGCATAA
sequence motif and consist of an overlapping p110 and p92 recognition site. The
specific interaction of p110 with G residues of this 12 nucleotide long sequence 
was demonstrated by a mutant recognition site. Single recognition sites for p42
and p40 were localized in the enhancer by the use of overlapping
oligonucleotides. In addition, electrophoretic mobility shift analysis identified
Oct-1 and AP2 interactions with the enhancer. The AP2 binding site was mapped to 
a AGGCACATATT motif. The p92 protein binds to enhancer oligonucleotides,
containing at least one copy of Oct-1 like recognition sequences, these
oligonucleotides also bind synthetic Oct-1 protein. During serum starvation or at
high saturation density, p92 moves from the nucleus into the cytoplasm.
Immunoblots of cytoplasmic extracts with anti-Oct-1 antisera showed, that p92 is 
a novel octamer binding factor, which is not immunologically related to the Oct-1
protein. The intracellular p92 distribution is regulated at the G0/G1 boundary of
the cell cycle, by nucleo-cytoplasmic translocation.

PMCID: PMC329444
PMID: 1645869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. FEBS Lett. 1991 Apr 9;281(1-2):191-5.

Interference with protein binding at AP2 sites by sequence-specific methylation
in the late E2A promoter of adenovirus type 2 DNA.

Hermann R(1), Doerfler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Germany.

Erratum in
    FEBS Lett 1991 Jul 29;286(1-2):238.

The in vitro methylation of the +6, +24, and -215 located 5'-CCGG-3' sequences in
the late E2A promoter of adenovirus type 2 (Ad2) DNA abrogates promoter function.
5-Methyldeoxycytidine (5-mC) at positions +6 and +24 in both or either of the two
DNA complements in the late E2A promoter abolishes the formation of a
high-molecular-mass DNA-protein complex that is essential for promoter function. 
The formation of this complex can be competed for by an oligodeoxyribonucleotide 
with a consensus AP2 sequence, but not by AP1, AP3, or CREB sequences. The AP2
sites comprise the +6 and +24 located 5'-CCGG-3' sequences in the late E2A
promoter; the AP1, AP3 and CREB sequences are in their immediate vicinity.
Methylation of either the +6 or the +24 5' -CCGG-3' sequence also compromises
formation of the DNA-protein complex. A 40 nucleotide pair
oligodeoxyribonucleotide encompassing the -215 5' -CCGG-3' site in the late E2A
promoter can also form DNA-protein complexes which is not affected by the
introduction of a 5-mC residue in the -215 position. The data suggest that the
AP2 protein together with other proteins is involved in the generation of a
transcription-activating complex with the late E2A promoter of Ad2 DNA, and the
formation of this complex is completely abolished when both the +6 and +24
5'-CCGG-3' sequences are methylated.

PMID: 1826660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Genes Dev. 1991 Apr;5(4):670-82.

Analysis of the DNA-binding and activation properties of the human transcription 
factor AP-2.

Williams T(1), Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley 94720.

The mammalian transcription factor AP-2 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding
protein expressed in neural crest lineages and regulated by retinoic acid. Here
we report a structure/function analysis of the DNA-binding and transcription
activation properties of the AP-2 protein. DNA contact studies indicate that AP-2
binds as a dimer to a palindromic recognition sequence. Furthermore,
cross-linking and immunoprecipitation data illustrate that AP-2 exists as a dimer
even in the absence of DNA. Examination of cDNA mutants reveals that the
sequences responsible for DNA binding are located in the carboxy-terminal half of
the protein. In addition, a domain mediating dimerization forms an integral
component of this DNA-binding structure. Expression of AP-2 in mammalian cells
demonstrates that transcriptional activation requires an additional
amino-terminal domain that contains an unusually high concentration of proline
residues. This proline-rich activation domain also functions when attached to the
heterologous DNA-binding region of the GAL4 protein. This study reveals that
although AP-2 shares an underlying modular organization with other transcription 
factors, the regions of AP-2 involved in transcriptional activation and DNA
binding/dimerization have novel sequence characteristics.

PMID: 2010091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Endocrinol. 1991 Apr;5(4):514-20.

Transcriptional regulation of the human transforming growth factor-alpha gene.

Raja RH(1), Paterson AJ, Shin TH, Kudlow JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham 35294.

We and others have previously reported that transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF
alpha) expression is hormonally responsive and its expression is coregulated with
that of its receptor [the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor]. The
5'-flanking region of the TGF alpha gene was characterized to determine whether
it could confer hormone responsiveness to a reporter gene (luciferase) in human
mammary carcinoma cells (MDA468). This segment of the gene is GC rich and
contains an element strikingly similar to the core element of the EGF receptor
gene that has been shown to mediate both basal and hormone-stimulated expression 
of the EGF receptor. We now report that a 313-basepair (bp) proximal element of
the TGF alpha 5'-flanking region (-373 to -59 relative to the TGF alpha
translation start codon) is capable of conferring responses to phorbol ester and 
EGF. This gene segment does not contain the EGF receptor gene homolog or
potential AP-2-binding sites, suggesting that these elements are not necessary
for basal and EGF- or phorbol ester-responsive TGF alpha gene expression. This
313-bp proximal element also confers proper transcriptional initiation to the
chimeric TGF alpha-luciferase reporter construct, indicating it is the TGF alpha 
promoter. A 1.1-kilobase segment of the TGF alpha 5'-flanking region also confers
retinoic acid, thyroid hormone, and glucocorticoid responsiveness despite the
absence of recognizable steroid hormone receptor-binding sites. These hormones
stimulate reporter expression 1.5- to 2-fold in a dose-dependent manner.
Extension of the 5'-flanking region to -3500 results in marked suppression of
reporter gene expression. These results indicate that the TGF alpha gene
5'-flanking sequence contains the elements responsible for hormonal
responsiveness of this gene and that these elements are distinct from those that 
regulate the expression of the EGF receptor gene.

PMID: 1922084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. DNA Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;10(2):93-104.

Structure of the bovine placental lactogen gene and alternative splicing of
transcripts.

Kessler MA(1), Schuler LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison.

Preliminary evidence for heterogeneity among bovine placental lactogen (bPL)
transcripts prompted characterization of additional cDNA clones and isolation of 
the bPL gene. Nucleotide replacements were detected among sequenced cDNAs
isolated from different animals at a total of 11 positions. Four of these predict
amino acid substitutions, which are generally conservative in nature. In
addition, truncated forms of bPL are predicted by the sequences of two cDNAs in
which alternative splicing is evident. In one case, exon III is deleted with no
effect on reading frame. However, in the other instance, a shifted reading frame 
resulting in a novel carboxyl terminus is generated by use of an alternative 5'
splice donor site within exon IV. Nuclease protection analysis demonstrated that 
these variant transcripts comprise about 13% of the total bPL mRNA present in the
midgestation placenta. Characterization of the bPL gene revealed that it is
similar in structure to other members of this gene family. Sequence analysis
demonstrated that the 5'-flanking region of the bPL gene has diverged
considerably from the bovine prolactin and growth hormone genes, but shares
homology with the previously characterized gene corresponding to bovine
prolactin-related cDNAI (bPRCI). Primer extension as well as nuclease protection 
analysis indicated that a single transcription start site was utilized in the
fetal placenta at midgestation. Exact matches to the consensus sequences for
response elements for thyroid hormone and transcription factor AP-2 were located 
50 and 70 bp, respectively, upstream from the transcription start site in cloned 
genomic 5'-flanking sequences. We conclude that the bovine placenta may express
more than a single placental lactogen product, raising the possibility of
alternative hormones with distinct biological properties, and that the bPL gene
may share regulatory elements with the gene for the distinct prolactin-related
product, bPRCI, based on similarities in the 5' regions of the corresponding
genes.

PMID: 2003877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Science. 1991 Mar 1;251(4997):1067-71.

Characterization of a dimerization motif in AP-2 and its function in heterologous
DNA-binding proteins.

Williams T(1), Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California, Berkeley 94720.

The mammalian transcription factor AP-2 is a retinoic acid inducible
sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that is developmentally regulated. In this 
report, the functional domains necessary for AP-2 DNA binding were studied. AP-2 
required a dimerization domain and an adjacent region of net basic charge to
achieve a sequence-specific protein:DNA interaction. The sequences responsible
for dimerization consisted of two putative amphipathic alpha helices separated by
a large intervening span region. This helix-span-helix (HSH) domain was unable to
bind DNA when separated from the basic region, but was still capable of
dimerization. The ability of the HSH domain to function as a module that promotes
DNA binding through dimerization was further demonstrated by attaching it to the 
heterologous basic region of the c-Jun proto-oncogene product. The resulting
chimeric protein specifically recognized an AP-1 DNA-binding site in the absence 
of an intact c-Jun leucine repeat and in a manner that was dependent on the
presence of a functional AP-2 dimerization domain.

PMID: 1998122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Oncogene. 1991 Feb;6(2):283-8.

Structure and expression of the murine hck gene.

Ziegler SF(1), Pleiman CM, Perlmutter RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Immunex Corporation, Seattle, WA 93101.

The hck gene encodes a src-like protein-tyrosine kinase that is expressed
predominantly in cells of myeloid origin. To examine the molecular basis of hck
expression, we have cloned and characterized the murine hck gene and defined a
set of transcriptional regulatory sequences. Transcripts from the hck gene have
heterogeneous 5' ends, with one major and several minor transcriptional start
sites. The promoter lacks a TATA-like sequence, but has three Sp-1 and two AP-2
binding sites. Constructs containing 2.5Kb or 0.6Kb of sequence 5' to the major
transcription start site were capable of directing expression of a reporter gene 
transfected into fibroblasts. Expression of the former construct, but not the
latter, was inducible with LPS. We conclude that LPS induction of hck
transcripts, previously demonstrated in myeloid cells, results from the presence 
of an LPS-responsive element located within the hck promoter.

PMID: 1705689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jan 5;266(1):419-26.

Isolation and partial characterization of the gene for goose fatty acid synthase.

Kameda K(1), Goodridge AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

Fatty acid synthase is regulated by diet and hormones, with regulation being
primarily transcriptional. In chick embryo hepatocytes in culture,
triiodothyronine stimulates accumulation of enzyme and transcription of the gene.
Since the 5'-flanking region of this gene is likely involved in hormonal
regulation of its expression, we have isolated and partially characterized an
avian fatty acid synthase gene. A genomic DNA library was constructed in a cosmid
vector and screened with cDNA clones that contained sequence complementary to the
3' end of goose fatty acid synthase mRNA. A genomic clone (approximately 35
kilobase pairs (kb] was isolated, and a 6.5-kb EcoRI fragment thereof contained
DNA complementary to the 3' noncoding region of fatty acid synthase mRNA.
Additional cosmid libraries were screened with 5' fragments of previously
isolated genomic clones, resulting in the isolation of five overlapping cosmid
DNAs. The entire region of cloned DNA spans approximately 105 kb. Exon-containing
fragments were identified by hybridization with end-labeled poly(A)+ RNA and by
hybridization of labeled exon-containing genomic DNA fragments to fatty acid
synthase mRNA. A new set of cDNA clones spanning approximately 3.2 kb was
isolated from a lambda-ZAP goose liver cDNA library using the 5'-most
exon-containing fragment of the 5'-most genomic DNA clone. This region of mRNA
contains a 5'-untranslated sequence and a continuous open reading frame which
includes a region that codes for the essential cysteine of the beta-ketoacyl
synthase domain. The entire fatty acid synthase gene spans about 50 kb. The 5' 15
kb of the gene contain 7 exons. S1 nuclease and primer extension analyses were
used to identify a single site for initiation of transcription, 174 nucleotides
upstream from the putative translation initiation codon. Putative "TATA" and
"CCAAT" boxes are located 28 and 60 base pairs (bp), respectively, upstream of
the site of initiation of transcription. The 5'-flanking 597 bp of DNA contains
G/C-rich sequences including several "GC" boxes corresponding to binding sites
for the nuclear transcription factor Sp1. Putative sites for AP-2, C/EBP, and the
triiodothyronine and glucocorticoid receptors also were found in this region. A
chimeric DNA, containing approximately 1.6 kb of 5'-flanking sequence and 139 bp 
of untranslated sequence of the goose fatty acid synthase gene ligated to the
bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase (CAT) gene, was transfected into
chick embryo hepatocytes in culture. Cells treated with triiodothyronine
contained increased chloramphenicol acetyltransferase and fatty acid synthase
activities.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1702426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Dev. 1991 Jan;5(1):105-19.

Transcription factor AP-2 is expressed in neural crest cell lineages during mouse
embryogenesis.

Mitchell PJ(1), Timmons PM, Hébert JM, Rigby PW, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of California, Berkeley 94720.

We have analyzed the expression pattern of transcription factor AP-2 in mouse
embryos to evaluate the potential of AP-2 as a regulator during vertebrate
development. A partial cDNA encoding AP-2 was isolated from a mouse embryo cDNA
library and used to prepare probes to measure AP-2 mRNA levels by RNase
protection and RNA in situ hybridization. Between 10.5 and 15.5 days of
embryogenesis, the relative abundance of AP-2 mRNA is greatest at 11.5 days and
declines steadily thereafter. RNA in situ hybridization analysis of embryos
between 8.5 and 12.5 days of gestation identified a novel expression pattern for 
AP-2. The principle part of this expression occurs in neural crest cells and
their major derivatives, including cranial and spinal sensory ganglia and facial 
mesenchyme. AP-2 is also expressed in surface ectoderm and in a longitudinal
column of the spinal cord and hindbrain that is contacted by neural crest-derived
sensory ganglia. Additional expression of AP-2 occurs in limb bud mesenchyme and 
in meso-metanephric regions. This embryonic expression pattern is spatially and
temporally consistent with a role for AP-2 in regulating transcription of genes
involved in the morphogenesis of the peripheral nervous system, face, limbs,
skin, and nephric tissues.

PMID: 1989904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jan;11(1):84-92.

Characterization of the mouse transforming growth factor-beta 1 promoter and
activation by the Ha-ras oncogene.

Geiser AG(1), Kim SJ, Roberts AB, Sporn MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

We have cloned and sequenced a mouse genomic transforming growth factor beta 1
(TGF-beta 1) DNA fragment that includes the 5' untranslated and regulatory
regions of the gene. High-sequence homology with the human TGF-beta 1 gene (66%
nucleotide identity in 2.7 kb of DNA upstream of the translational start site)
suggested evolutionary conservation of transcriptional regulation for TGF-beta 1.
The absence of TATA or CAAT box sequences but the presence of several Sp1-binding
and AP-2-like sequences in the promoter region was noted, as previously reported 
for the human gene. Two transcriptional initiation sites separated by 290 bp were
identified by S1 nuclease analysis; these corresponded to transcripts with 866
and 576 nucleotides of 5' untranslated leader sequence. S1 analysis of different 
mouse tissues indicated that the two transcripts were present in the same ratio
even though the total level of TGF-beta 1 mRNA transcripts varied between
tissues. Promoter activity adjacent to both transcriptional start sites was
demonstrated by using chloramphenicol acetyltransferase fusion genes assayed in
mouse AKR-2B fibroblast cells. Transcriptional activation of the promoter by the 
Ha-ras oncogene was also demonstrated. The minimal promoter constructs (113 and
104 bp 5' of the first and second transcriptional start sites, respectively) were
sufficient for induction by Ha-ras. These studies characterize the 5' structure
and basal promoter activity of the mouse TGF-beta 1 gene as well as the
transcriptional activation of TGF-beta 1 by the Ha-ras oncogene.

PMCID: PMC359593
PMID: 1986255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Ciba Found Symp. 1991;157:7-15; discussion 15-28.

Multiple forms of TGF-beta: distinct promoters and differential expression.

Roberts AB(1), Kim SJ, Noma T, Glick AB, Lafyatis R, Lechleider R, Jakowlew SB,
Geiser A, O'Reilly MA, Danielpour D, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892.

There are now five known distinct isoforms of TGF-beta with 64-82% identity. Of
these, only TGF-beta 1, 2 and 3 thus far have been demonstrated to be expressed
in mammalian tissues; TGF-beta 4 has been described only in chicken and TGF-beta 
5 only in frog. Although the biological activities of these five isoforms of
TGF-beta are indistinguishable in most in vitro assays their sites of synthesis
and localization in vivo are often distinct. Expression of the various isoforms
is differentially controlled both in vivo, as in development, and in vitro after 
treatment of cells with steroids, such as oestrogen or tamoxifen, or with
retinoids. To investigate the basis of these observations we have cloned and
characterized the promoters for the human TGF-beta 1, 2 and 3 genes. Significant 
differences have been found: whereas the TGF-beta 1 promoter has no TATAA box and
is regulated principally by AP-1 sites, both the TGF-beta 2 and 3 promoters have 
TATAA boxes as well as AP-2 sites and cAMP-responsive elements. Accordingly,
TGF-beta 1 gene expression is induced strongly by phorbol esters whereas that of 
TGF-beta 2 and 3 is induced by forskolin, an activator of adenylate cyclase.
Expression of TGF-beta 2 and 3 is often coordinately regulated in vivo in a
pattern distinct from that of TGF-beta 1.

PMID: 1906395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Cell Growth Differ. 1991 Jan;2(1):23-31.

Downstream sequences mediate induction of the mouse cathepsin L promoter by
phorbol esters.

Troen BR(1), Chauhan SS, Ray D, Gottesman MM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland
20892.

The major excreted protein (MEP) of mouse fibroblasts is the precursor to a
lysosomal acid protease (cathepsin L) whose synthesis is induced by malignant
transformation, growth factors, tumor promoters, and cyclic AMP. We have
previously cloned a functional gene for MEP from NIH 3T3 cells. When subcloned
into chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) expression vectors, both 4-kilobase
and 300 base pair fragments in the 5'-flanking region of the MEP gene confer CAT 
activity that is stimulated by cyclic AMP treatment but is not stimulated by
phorbol ester treatment of NIH 3T3 cells. These fragments confer constitutive
promoter activity that is comparable to that of the SV40 promoter. Primer
extension, using RNA from cells transiently transfected with MEP-CAT fusion
plasmids, demonstrates that phorbol ester treatment increases the amount of
transcript from constructs containing both the promoter and sequences downstream 
of the transcription initiation site, including the first three introns, but not 
from constructs containing only the 5'-flanking region of the MEP gene. Nuclear
run-off experiments confirm that the increase in endogenous MEP mRNA is mediated 
by increased transcription and not via relief of transcriptional attenuation.
Since both the MEP promoter, which contains three potential binding sites for the
AP-2 transcription factor, and the SV40 promoter, which contains both AP-1 and
AP-2 binding sites, fail to respond to 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate in
NIH 3T3 cells, these upstream motifs are not sufficient to confer phorbol ester
responsiveness in NIH 3T3 cells. These results suggest that the MEP gene is
regulated in a complex manner by sequences both upstream and downstream of the
transcription initiation site.

PMID: 1848774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Growth Factors. 1991;4(4):247-55.

Molecular cloning and structure of the human transforming growth factor-beta 2
gene promoter.

Noma T(1), Glick AB, Geiser AG, O'Reilly MA, Miller J, Roberts AB, Sporn MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Genomic DNA extending over 10 kb 5' of the transforming growth factor-beta 2
(TGF-beta 2) coding region was isolated from a human lung fibroblast lambda phage
library. A 5.6 kb Hind III fragment containing the 5'-untranslated region and
flanking sequences was subcloned and sequenced. S1 nuclease protection analysis
identified a transcriptional initiation site 1357 nucleotides 5' of the
methionine initiation codon (ATG). A "TATA box" consensus sequence was identified
30 bp from this transcriptional start site; however, consensus "CAT box"
sequences were not observed. Approximately 50 nucleotides of
homopurine-pyrimidine [d(GA.CT)50] sequence were identified in the
5'-untranslated region, as well as two short open reading frames of 5 and 45
amino acids. Several AP-1, AP-2, CRE and SP1-like DNA consensus sequence elements
were also identified surrounding the transcription initiation site. 5'-deletion
mutants of the promoter region were fused to the chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) gene and promoter activity of the isolated genomic DNA was
demonstrated in several cell lines. DNA constructs containing nucleotides between
-508 to +63 demonstrated high levels of promoter activity. However, sequences
between -778 and -508 nucleotides modulated this promoter activity in a manner
which was dependent upon the cell line utilized, suggesting that regulation of
TGF-beta 2 gene transcription may be dependent upon the cellular background. The 
TGF-beta 2 promoter is markedly different from the promoters that have been
recently characterized for TGF-beta 1 and TGF-beta 3.

PMID: 1764261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Recent Prog Horm Res. 1991;47:211-57; discussion 257-8.

Molecular biology of human renin and its gene.

Baxter JD(1), Duncan K, Chu W, James MN, Russell RB, Haidar MA, DeNoto FM, Hsueh 
W, Reudelhuber TL.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Unit, University of California, San Francisco.

This article describes investigations of several aspects of the molecular biology
of the human renin gene and the three-dimensional structure of renin and its
precursor, prorenin. Because of the importance of the RAS in hypertension, heart 
failure, renal failure, and possibly other disorders such as atherosclerosis, it 
is critical to understand the detailed control of this system. This control
involves regulation at the transcriptional level, folding of prorenin, sorting of
prorenin to a regulated pathway where it is proteolytically cleaved to renin and 
released in response to secretogogues, constitutive release of uncleaved
prorenin, and nonproteolytic activation of prorenin. Currently there is great
interest not only in the control of renin in the kidney, the sole source of
circulating renin, but also at extrarenal sites where RAS activity may regulate
cardiovascular functions. The renin gene was found to be expressed significantly 
in the renal juxtaglomerular cells and several other cell types. Most tissue
culture cells did not express the gene; exceptions were cultured SK-LMS-1 cells
and cAMP-stimulated human lung fibroblasts. Cultured human uterine-placental
cells expressed the human renin gene at levels higher than in other cell types
assessed. Renin mRNA had the same start site in the placental cells as the kidney
and was regulated by calcium ionophores and cAMP. Thus, these cells provide
primary nontransformed human cells to study the homologous human promoter.
Transfected renin promoters showed cell type-specific expression and cAMP
responsiveness in these cells in constructs containing as few as 102 bp of
5'-flanking DNA. DNA upstream from this appears to contain an inhibitory
element(s) that may have some tissue specificity in its distribution. The cAMP
response is not due to cAMP induction of a transcription factor that secondarily 
affects the renin promoter. A novel element may be involved, since the promoter
does not contain a CRE element that mediates many cAMP responses, and the cells
do not appear to respond to another known cAMP-responsive transcription factor,
AP-2. Studies with transfected vectors expressing a mutant cAMP-responsive
protein kinase A regulatory subunit suggest that cAMP is not responsible for
basal renin promoter activity in the placental cells. By contrast, cAMP induces
in essence gene activation in WI26VA4 transformed human lung fibroblasts in which
renin mRNA levels increase by up to 150-fold in response to forskolin. Thus, cAMP
may activate renin gene expression under certain circumstances and
tissue-specific renin gene expression may be directed by more than one
mechanism.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1745821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Neuroendocrinol. 1990 Dec 1;2(6):859-65. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2826.1990.tb00652.x.

Vasopressin Expression in Cultured Neurons is Stimulated by Cyclic AMP.

Ceding P(1), Schilling K, Schmale H.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiochemie und klinische Neurobiologie, Universitát Hamburg,
Martinistrasse 52, D-2000 Hamburg 20, FRG.

Abstract Vasopressin and oxytocin genes are expressed in mutually exclusive sets 
of magnocellular neurons in the hypothalamus. Cell specificity and regulation are
probably controlled by extra- and intracellular signals acting on one or the
other gene. In order to identify factors that regulate peptide expression, we
have used primary dissociated cultures derived from 14-day old foetal rats.
Vasopressin expression was monitored by combined immunocytochemistry and in situ 
hybridization. Treatment of cultures with forskolin and/or the phosphodiesterase 
inhibitor 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX), both of which result in elevated
intracellular cyclic AMP levels, increased the numbers of vasopressin-expressing 
cells up to 10-fold. The specific Vasopressin messenger ribonucleic acid
accumulation was verified quantitatively by ribonuclease protection assays.
Forskolin and IBMX did not change the levels of the general neuronal markers,
neuron-specific enolase and synaptophysin, suggesting that the effect of these
drugs was specific for vasopressin-expressing cells. The drugs were not mitogenic
for magnocellular neurons. Furthermore, their effect was not mediated
trans-synaptically, as the drugs were also effective in cultures grown in low
Ca(2+)/high Mg(2+) medium, as well as in cultures treated with either tetanus
toxin or tetrodotoxin. The presence of putative response elements for the
transcription factor AP-2 in the 5'promoter regions of all vasopressin genes
sequenced so far may provide the molecular basis of the observed cyclic AMP
effect. No such elements are present in the genes for oxytocin, the messenger
ribonucleic acid levels of which were not measurably affected by forskolin and
IBMX in our cultures.

PMID: 19215430  [PubMed]


202. Biochem J. 1990 Dec 1;272(2):493-7.

Characterization of the human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase gene.

Hoefsloot LH(1), Hoogeveen-Westerveld M, Reuser AJ, Oostra BA.

Author information: 
(1)MGC-Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

The gene coding for human lysosomal alpha-glucosidase was cloned and its
structure was determined. The gene is approx. 20 kb long, and contains 20 exons. 
The first exon is non-coding. The coding sequence of the putative catalytic site 
domain is interrupted in the middle by an intron of 101 bp. This intron is not
conserved in the highly similar region of the human and rabbit isomaltase genes. 
The promoter region was defined by a CAT assay and the start of the mRNA was
determined by primer extension. The promoter has features characteristic of a
'housekeeping' gene. The GC content is high (80%) and distinct TATA and CCAAT
motifs are lacking. Two potential binding sites for the AP-2 transcription factor
are present. Four potential Sp-1 binding sites are located downstream of the 5'
end of the mRNA.

PMCID: PMC1149727
PMID: 2268276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Dec;10(12):6524-32.

Positive and negative transcriptional elements of the human type IV collagenase
gene.

Frisch SM(1), Morisaki JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Dermatology Division), Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

Proteolysis by type IV collagenase (T4) has been implicated in the process of
tumor metastasis. The T4 gene is expressed in fibroblasts, but not in normal
epithelial cells, and its expression is specifically repressed by the E1A
oncogene of adenovirus. We present an investigation of the transcriptional
elements responsible for basal, E1A-repressible, and tissue-specific expression. 
5'-Deletion analysis, DNase I footprinting, and gel mobility shift assays
revealed a strong, E1A-repressible enhancer element, r2, located about 1,650 bp
upstream of the start site. This enhancer bound a protein with binding
specificity very similar to that of the transcription factor AP-2. A potent
silencer sequence was found 2 to 5 bp downstream of this enhancer. The silencer
repressed transcription from either r2 or AP-1 enhancer elements and in the
context of either type IV collagenase or thymidine kinase (tk) gene core
promoters; enhancerless transcription from the latter core promoter was also
repressed. Comprising the silencer were two contiguous, autonomously functioning 
silencer elements. Negative regulation of T4 transcription by at least two
factors was demonstrated. mcf-7 proteins specifically binding both elements were 
detected by gel mobility shift assays; a protein of approximately 185 kDa that
bound to one of these elements was detected by DNA-protein cross-linking. The
silencer repressed transcription, in an r2 enhancer-tk promoter context, much
more efficiently in T4-nonproducing cells (mcf-7 or HeLa) than in T4-producing
cells (HT1080), suggesting that cell type-specific silencing may contribute to
the regulation of this gene.

PMCID: PMC362929
PMID: 2174109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Dec;4(12):2039-51.

Cloning of the rat insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-2 gene and
identification of a functional promoter lacking a TATA box.

Brown AL(1), Rechler MM.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We have isolated clones encoding the rat insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein-2 (IGFBP-2) gene and determined its organization and nucleotide sequence.
The rat IGFBP-2 gene spans at least 8 kilobases and consists of four exons, each 
of which contains protein-coding sequences. The amino acid sequences of exons 1, 
3, and 4 are 32-50% identical to the corresponding exons of human IGFBP-1 and
IGFBP-3, and 87-91% identical to those of human IGFBP-2. The 18 cysteines in the 
mature binding proteins are conserved. Exon 2 shows negligible homology.
Primer-extended reverse transcription indicated that the 5' end of IGFBP-2 mRNA
is 151 nucleotides up-stream from the translation start site [designated
nucleotide (nt) -151]. Consistent with this result, IGFBP-2 mRNA protected a
genomic fragment terminating at approximately nt -148, as well as smaller
fragments. A 1260 nt fragment containing 1144 nt of 5' flanking region had
promoter activity when inserted in the correct orientation into a plasmid
containing a promoterless luciferase reporter gene and transiently transfected
into BRL-3A rat liver cells, which express IGFBP-2, but not when transfected into
H4-II-E cells, which do not express IGFBP-2. The IGFBP-2 gene lacks a TATA box
immediately up-stream from the transcription initiation site. It is GC rich (66% 
between nt -270 and +385) and contains GC boxes that might be recognized by
transcription factors Sp1 or ETF. The promoter region contains multiple direct
and indirect repeats. One direct repeat contains a variant Sp1 site (-158 to
-150) near the consensus Sp1 site at nt -138 to -130. The 5' flanking region also
contains motifs that might be recognized by transcription factors AP-1 (Jun/Fos),
AP-2, and liver factor B1. The role of these sites in basal and regulated
expression of the IGFBP-2 gene remains to be determined.

PMID: 1707131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 1990 Nov 5;265(31):19128-36.

Structural and functional characterization of the transforming growth factor beta
3 promoter. A cAMP-responsive element regulates basal and induced transcription.

Lafyatis R(1), Lechleider R, Kim SJ, Jakowlew S, Roberts AB, Sporn MB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemoprevention, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Transforming growth factor beta 3 (TGF-beta 3) has been cloned from humans,
chickens, pigs, and mice. Although the specific in vivo roles of this form of
TGF-beta are unknown, the pattern of embryonic and tissue-specific expression of 
TGF-beta 3 suggests that it is involved in embryogenesis and cell
differentiation. We have cloned and sequenced the TGF-beta 3 5'-flanking region
to study the transcriptional regulation of this gene. Characterization of the
5'-flanking region showed a 1104-base pair 5'-untranslated region, a TATA box 21 
bp upstream from the transcription start site, and cAMP-responsive element (CRE) 
and AP-2 binding site consensus sequences starting at 12 and 24 bp, respectively,
upstream from the TATA box. Promoter fragments were cloned into a chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter plasmid to study functional activity. Basal
transcriptional activity of the promoter was regulated by multiple upstream
elements including the CRE and the AP-2 site. The CRE was important for both
basal and forskolin induction of promoter activity. The TGF-beta 3 promoter was
found to be strikingly dissimilar to the TGF-beta 1 promoter. Since the TGF-beta 
s have activity in promoting or inhibiting proliferation and differentiation of
multiple cell types, it seems likely that the differential and tissue-specific
transcriptional regulation of these genes is of fundamental importance in the
induction and maintenance of differentiated cell types in various tissues.

PMID: 2146270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Neurochem. 1990 Oct;55(4):1180-8.

Cell-specific expression of the mouse glial fibrillary acidic protein gene:
identification of the cis- and trans-acting promoter elements for
astrocyte-specific expression.

Miura M(1), Tamura T, Mikoshiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Regulation, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan.

We have determined the whole promoter sequence and the transcriptional startpoint
of the mouse glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) gene and characterized the
promoter function. We found that the cis elements for astrocyte specific
expression are located within 256 bp from the transcription startpoint. We
defined by DNase I footprinting assay three trans-acting factor binding sites
(GFI, GFII, and GFIII) using brain or C6 astrocytoma nuclear extracts. GFI, GFII,
and GFIII have AP-2, NFI, and cyclic AMP-responsive element motifs, respectively.
Mutations in GFII drastically decreased the promoter activity. Base substitution 
in GFI and GFIII abolished the cell-specific expression, resulting in the GFAP
promoter expression even in some non-GFAP-producing cells.

PMID: 2398353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Oct;4(10):1564-71.

Clustered point mutation analysis of the rat prolactin promoter.

Iverson RA(1), Day KH, d'Emden M, Day RN, Maurer RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242.

To identify DNA regions important for basal and hormone-stimulated transcription 
of the rat PRL gene, a series of clustered point mutations were prepared within
the immediate 5' flanking region. DNA fragments representing the wild-type and 19
different linker-scanner mutations of the PRL gene were each linked to a
luciferase marker gene, and the DNA constructs were transferred into GH3
pituitary tumor cells by electroporation. Luciferase activity was determined 24 h
after transfection in extracts from control cells or cells treated with 0.5 mM
chlorophenylthio-cAMP, 100 nM TRH, or 100 nM phorbol myristate acetate. The
individual clustered point mutations covered a region from just up-stream of the 
TATA box (position -30) to a position 193 basepairs up-stream from the start of
transcription. Five regions in which mutations produced substantial decreases in 
both basal and cAMP-, TRH-, or phorbol ester-stimulated expression of the marker 
gene were detected. Three of these regions (positions -41 to -58, -113 to -124,
and -149 to -156) correspond to previously identified binding sites for the
pituitary-specific, homeobox protein, Pit-1/GHF-1. The fourth and fifth regions
do not correspond to Pit-1/GHF-1-binding sites and presumably represent sites for
an unidentified factor. Within these regions, sequences with some similarity to a
consensus cAMP response element and an AP-2-binding site have been detected.
These data confirm the importance of Pit-1/GHF-1 as a key factor in PRL gene
transcription. In addition, the results suggest that additional transcription
factors are probably required for efficient expression of the PRL gene.(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2178221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Virol. 1990 Oct;64(10):4808-19.

Purification of a mouse nuclear factor that binds to both the A and B cores of
the polyomavirus enhancer.

Kamachi Y(1), Ogawa E, Asano M, Ishida S, Murakami Y, Satake M, Ito Y, Shigesada 
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemsitry, Kyoto University, Japan.

We have previously identified a protein factor, PEBP2 (polyomavirus
enhancer-binding protein), in the nuclear extract from mouse NIH 3T3 cells which 
binds to the sequence motif, PEA2, located within the polyomavirus enhancer A
element. Upon cellular transformation with activated oncogene c-Ha-ras, this
factor frequently undergoes drastic molecular modifications into an altered form 
having a considerably reduced molecular size. In this study, the altered form,
PEBP3, was purified to near homogeneity. The purified PEBP3 comprised two sets of
families of polypeptides, alpha-1 to alpha-4 and beta-1 to beta-2, which were 30 
to 35 kilodaltons and 20 to 25 kilodaltons in size, respectively. Both kinds of
polypeptides possessed DNA-binding activities with exactly the same sequence
specificity. Individual alpha or beta polypeptides complexed with DNA showed
faster gel mobilities than did PEBP3. However, the original gel retardation
pattern was restored when alpha and beta polypeptides were mixed together in any 
arbitrary pair. These observation along with the results of UV- and
chemical-cross-linking studies led us to conclude that PEBP3 is a heterodimer of 
alpha and beta subunits, potentially having a divalent DNA-binding activity.
Furthermore, PEBP3 was found to bind a second, hitherto-unnoticed site of the
polyomavirus enhancer that is located within the B element and coincides with the
sequence previously known as the simian virus 40 enhancer core homology. From
comparison of this and the original binding sites, the consensus sequence for
PEBP3 was defined to be PuACCPuCA. These findings provided new insights into the 
biological significance of PEBP3 and PEBP2.

PMCID: PMC247969
PMID: 2168969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Oct;5(2):137-46.

The gene for the beta subunit of porcine LH: clusters of GC boxes and CACCC
elements.

Ezashi T(1), Hirai T, Kato T, Wakabayashi K, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Gunma University, Japan.

The gene for the beta subunit of porcine LH (LH-beta) was cloned from a genomic
library constructed in EMBL3. The nucleotide sequence was determined for the
entire gene transcriptional unit of porcine LH-beta in addition to 1277 and 372
bp of the 5'- and 3'-flanking regions respectively. Southern blot analysis of the
porcine genomic DNA indicated that the LH-beta gene is present as a single copy. 
The transcriptional unit of porcine LH-beta spanned 1107 bp and contained three
exons interrupted by two introns of 326 and 289 bp. The short untranslated
sequence in the first exon and the location of the exon/intron junctions at amino
acid residues -16/-15 and +41/+42 were highly conserved in the rat, human and
bovine LH-beta genes. In the 5'-flanking region, one TATA box and two CCAAT boxes
were present. The steroid-responsive element was not found up to 1277 bases
upstream of the transcription start site. The potential AP-2 factor-responsive
elements appeared nine times within the sequence that was determined, and four of
them were located in the 5'-flanking region. Two distal AP-2 elements were
arranged in an inverted repeat forming a 16 bp palindromic sequence. This feature
suggested that hypothalamic gonadotrophin-releasing hormone stimulates expression
of the LH-beta gene, predominantly by a signal-transduction system with the
protein kinase C cascade and a mediator, the AP-2 factor. A further
characteristic feature of the porcine LH-beta gene was the presence of clusters
of GC boxes and CACCC elements in the 5'-flanking region and the downstream
sequence. Co-existence of these regulatory elements with other elements, such as 
the AP-2 element or CCAAT box, was also found. The porcine LH-beta gene shows a
structure distinct from the porcine FSH-beta and common alpha genes, which are
counterparts of the LH-beta gene, reflecting differential control of their
synthesis during gametogenesis.

PMID: 1701088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Biol Chem. 1990 Sep 15;265(26):15611-6.

Structure of the human laminin B1 chain gene.

Vuolteenaho R(1), Chow LT, Tryggvason K.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter, University of Oulu, Finland.

The exon-intron structure of the human laminin B1 chain gene was determined from 
genomic clones that spanned 90 kilobase pairs (kb), including 80 kb of the
structural gene, about 1 kb of the 5'-flanking region, and 9 kb of the
3'-flanking region. DNA sequencing and heteroduplex analyses demonstrated that
the gene consists of 34 exons. The intron sizes vary from 92 base pairs to more
than 15,000 base pairs. The clones did not completely contain introns 13 and 14
and, therefore, the exact size of the gene remains to be determined. The first
exon encodes a 5'-untranslated region, with the ATG translation start codon being
in exon 2. The promoter region does not contain TATA or CAAT boxes, but it has
four GC boxes. Additionally, two GC boxes are located in the 5'-untranslated
sequence. A glucocorticoid response element-like sequence and a sequence
resembling the binding sequence for transcription factor AP-2 are present in the 
5'-flanking region. Another potential AP-2 binding sequence is located in the
5'-untranslated sequence of exon 1. A TGACC motif present in the binding region
for the retinoic acid response element of the mouse laminin B1 gene promoter is
also present in the human counterpart. The overall exon pattern of the gene
correlates only slightly with the highly conserved structural domains and
internal repeats of the B1 polypeptide chain. Furthermore, the exon profile
differs considerably from that of the laminin B2 gene. A HincII/HpaI restriction 
fragment length polymorphism was identified in exon 31.

PMID: 1975589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Sep;10(9):4996-5001.

Minimal subenhancer requirements for high-level polyomavirus DNA replication: a
cell-specific synergy of PEA3 and PEA1 sites.

Rochford R(1), Davis CT, Yoshimoto KK, Villarreal LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California,
Irvine 92717.

The cell-specific regulation of DNA replication has important implications for
the molecular strategy of cellular gene control. Mouse polyomavirus (Py) DNA
replication is examined as a model of cell-specific replication control. Using an
FM3A-derived mouse cell line which expresses early viral proteins (FOP cells), we
determined the minimal sequence requirements for viral DNA replication. FOP cells
were observed to have much simpler enhancer requirements than 3T6 and many other 
cells and did not need a B enhancer for high levels of DNA replication. Using
these cells, we show that the individual or tandem binding sites for several
unrelated trans-acting factors which are generally subfunctional as
transcriptional enhancers (simian virus 40 A core, TGTGGAATG; EBP20, TGTGGTTTT;
PEA1 [an AP-1 analog], GTGACTAA; PEA2, GACCGCAG; and PEA3, AGGAAG) stimulated low
levels of Py DNA replication. The ordered dimeric combination of PEA3 and PEA1
factor-binding sites, however, acted synergistically to stimulate viral DNA
replication to high wild-type levels. This is in contrast to prior results in
which much larger enhancer sequences were necessary for high-level viral DNA
replication. PEA3/PEA1-stimulated DNA replication showed a distance and
orientation independence relative to the origin, which disagrees with some but
not other prior analyses of enhancer-dependent DNA replication. It therefore
appears that trans-acting factor-binding sites (enhansons) can generally activate
DNA replication and that the AP-1 family of sites may act synergistically with
other associated trans-acting factors to strongly affect Py DNA replication in
specific cells.

PMCID: PMC361134
PMID: 2167444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Biol Chem. 1990 Aug 25;265(24):14618-26.

A DNA motif related to the cAMP-responsive element and an exon-located activator 
protein-2 binding site in the human tissue-type plasminogen activator gene
promoter cooperate in basal expression and convey activation by phorbol ester and
cAMP.

Medcalf RL(1), Rüegg M, Schleuning WD.

Author information: 
(1)Central Hematology Laboratory, University of Lausanne Medical School, CHUV,
Switzerland.

Tissue-type plasminogen activator (t-PA) gene expression is regulated by the
tumor-promoting phorbol ester, phorbol-12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA), by cyclic
AMP analogues, and the cAMP agonist, forskolin. Based on nuclear "run-on"
transcription assays, t-PA expression is modulated by PMA on the level of
transcription. 8-Bromo-cyclic AMP and forskolin do not induce t-PA gene
transcription alone but act synergistically with PMA. These effects are confirmed
by transient expression assays in HeLa cells employing deletion mutants of the
t-PA gene promoter fused to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter 
gene. Constitutive expression and most of the PMA-mediated induction requires
sequences downstream of position -145. DNase I protection ("footprint") analysis 
of this region reveals two protein-binding sites: one between position -102 and
-115, differing from the consensus sequence of the cAMP-responsive element (CRE) 
by the substitution of an adenine for a guanine in the middle of the core motif
(TGACATCA), and another, located in the first exon (between position +60 and
+74), displaying homology to the consensus sequence of the activator protein 2-
(AP-2) binding site (CCCCACCCCC). Base substitutions in the core of either the
CRE-like element or the AP-2 site suppress constitutive CAT expression by over
80%, whereas the relative PMA- and PMA plus cAMP-mediated responses are retained.
CAT expression is below the detection limit when both elements are mutagenized
together. Hence, the CRE-like element and the exon-located AP-2-binding site have
a cooperative impact on basal transcription, but each element can independently
convey the effect of activators of the protein kinase C- and A-dependent pathways
of signal transduction. The results of band-shift analysis and competition
titration experiments demonstrate that the CRE-like element acts as a low
affinity binding site for the same proteins which recognize the authentic CRE.

PMID: 2167321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Mol Biol. 1990 Aug 5;214(3):673-83.

Establishment of de novo DNA methylation patterns. Transcription factor binding
and deoxycytidine methylation at CpG and non-CpG sequences in an integrated
adenovirus promoter.

Toth M(1), Müller U, Doerfler W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, West Germany.

The establishment of de novo patterns of DNA methylation in mammalian genomes is 
characterized by the gradual spreading of methylation, which has been documented 
to occur across an entire integrated adenovirus genome as well as at the
nucleotide level in the integrated late E2A promoter of adenovirus type 2. By
applying the techniques of genomic sequencing and dimethylsulfate or DNase I
genomic footprinting in vivo, we have now demonstrated that the spreading of
methylation in cell lines that carry the late E2A promoter with three in vitro
pre-methylated 5'-CCGG-3' sequences initially involves a DNA domain of this
promoter that is devoid of bound proteins. Subsequently, methylation further
spreads to neighboring regions, and the patterns of complexed transcription
factors are altered. Evidence has been adduced that DNA methylation at sequences 
homologous to the AP-1 and octamer binding factor sites interferes with protein
binding. In contrast, the methylation of sequences in the vicinity of but not
involving sequences homologous to an AP-2 site still permits the binding of
proteins to these sites. It is significant that during the spreading of
methylation a few 5'-CG-3' sequences can remain hemimethylated for several cell
generations, before they also become methylated in both complements. Moreover, in
cell line HE2, the integrated, heavily methylated late E2A promoter has been
shown by the genomic sequencing technique to contain 5-methyldeoxycytidine
residues, not only in all 5'-CG-3' dinucleotides but also in a 5'CA-3' and a
5'-CT-3' dinucleotide sequence. Hence, 5-methyldeoxycytidine occurs in a silenced
mammalian DNA sequence also in dinucleotides other than 5'-CG-3'. This finding
raises the question of whether 5-methyldeoxycytidine in non-5'-CG-3'
dinucleotides can be maintained in the methylated state during continuous cell
propagation.

PMID: 2143784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jul 11;18(13):3697-703.

The human interleukin-2 receptor beta-chain gene: genomic organization, promoter 
analysis and chromosomal assignment.

Shibuya H(1), Yoneyama M, Nakamura Y, Harada H, Hatakeyama M, Minamoto S, Kono T,
Doi T, White R, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

The chromosomal gene for the human interleukin-2 receptor beta-chain (IL-2R beta)
was isolated and characterized. The entire IL-2R beta gene is composed of ten
exons spanning about 24.3 kilobases, in which the protein is encoded by the exons
2-10. The cysteine rich extracellular region which displays a significant
evolutionary resemblance to other cytokine receptors, as well as growth hormone
and prolactin receptors, is encoded primarily by exons 3 and 4, whereas the
membrane proximal, cysteine poor domain showing a homology with type III modules 
of fibronectin is encoded by exon 7. Sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region 
revealed the presence of potential binding sites for transcription factors such
as Octamer binding factors, AP-1, AP-2 as well as the 'GC-clusters'. At least
five potential cap sites were identified by S1 mapping analysis. The 850 bp DNA
sequence of the 5'-flanking region exhibited constitutive promoter activity when 
it was linked upstream of the HSV-tk reporter gene and then transfected into YT
cells, a human leukemic cell line. By applying the RFLP linkage analysis, the
IL-2R beta gene has been assigned to chromosome 22q12-13.

PMCID: PMC331067
PMID: 1973832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jul 11;18(13):3975-82.

CpG methylation inhibits proenkephalin gene expression and binding of the
transcription factor AP-2.

Comb M(1), Goodman HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114.

DNA methylation at HpaII (CmCGG) sites inhibits expression of a human
proenkephalin-CAT fusion gene when it is transiently expressed in CV-1 cells or
stably expressed in C6-glioma cells. The inhibitory effects of HpaII methylation 
have been mapped to a site within the human proenkephalin promoter located at
position -72 relative to the start site of transcription. This region spans a
cAMP and phorbol ester inducible enhancer and methylation at this position
inhibits both basal transcription and transcription induced by either cAMP or
TPA. The HpaII site is located within an element which binds the transcription
factor AP-2. In vitro methylation at this HpaII site inhibits the binding of
AP-2. These results suggest that CpG methylation inhibits proenkephalin gene
expression by directly interfering with the binding of a positively acting
transcription factor previously shown to be essential for maximal basal, cAMP,
and TPA inducible transcription.

PMCID: PMC331101
PMID: 1695733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 1990 Jul 5;265(19):11077-82.

Structure of the human type IV collagenase gene.

Huhtala P(1), Chow LT, Tryggvason K.

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter University of Oulu, Finland.

The structure of the gene for human 70-kDa type IV collagenase (gelatinase) was
determined. Three overlapping genomic clones were isolated and shown to contain
0.4 kilobase (kb) of the 5'-flanking region, the 27-kb structural gene, and 4.5
kb of the 3'-flanking region. The gene has 13 exons that vary in length from 110 
to 901 base pairs (bp) and 12 introns that range from 175 to 4350 bp. Alignment
of intron locations demonstrated that introns 1-4 and 8-12 of the type IV
collagenase gene coincide with intron locations in the interstitial collagenase
and stromelysin genes, indicating a close structural relationship of these
metalloproteinase genes. Exons 5-7 are each 174 bp in size, and each codes for
one complete internal repeat that resembles the collagen-binding domains of
fibronectin. The transcription initiation site was determined by primer extension
and S1 nuclease analyses. Analysis of the 0.4-kb 5'-flanking region of the gene
showed that, in contrast to the genes of interstitial collagenease and
stromelysin, there is no TATA box or
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-responsive element present in the promoter
region, whereas there are two GC boxes. There is no CAAT box, but a potential
binding site (CCCCAGGC) for the transcription factor AP-2 is located in the first
exon.

PMID: 2162831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1990 Jun 29;169(3):1021-7.

Cloning and characterization of the proximal promoter region of the rat
insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) receptor gene.

Werner H(1), Stannard B, Bach MA, LeRoith D, Roberts CT Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Branch, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

We have isolated genomic clones that contain the promoter region of the rat IGF-I
receptor gene. A unique transcriptional start site was suggested by the results
of primer extension and RNase protection assays, which also defined a 940-base
5'-untranslated region. Despite the single start site, the proximal 415 base
pairs of 5'-flanking region were devoid of TATA or CCAAT elements. The region
surrounding the start site was, however, similar to a recently described
"initiator" sequence that can direct specific transcription initiation in the
absence of a TATA element. The 5'-flanking region was GC-rich and contained
several possible SP1 sites, but also included potential ETF and AP-2 binding
sites. The rat IGF-I receptor gene promoter region appears to have some sequences
similar to both "housekeeping" and highly regulated promoters and may be an
example of an intermediary class of regulatory region.

PMID: 2163625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Endocrinol. 1990 Jun;4(6):940-6.

Follicle-stimulating hormone and cyclic AMP induce transcription from the human
urokinase promoter in primary cultures of mouse Sertoli cells.

Rossi P(1), Grimaldi P, Blasi F, Geremia R, Verde P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica e Biologia Cellulare II Università di Rome,
Italy.

The hormonal regulation of the human urokinase type plasminogen activator (uPA)
gene has been studied by introducing into mouse and rat Sertoli cell primary
cultures a recombinant plasmid, in which the transcription regulatory elements of
the cloned human uPA gene drive the expression of the bacterial
chloramphenicol-acetyl-transferase gene. It was found to be expressed and
regulated by FSH and (Bu)2cAMP in the mouse cells only, in agreement with data on
the expression of the endogenous gene in rat and mouse gonads. The stimulation of
transcription by FSH was evident in cultures from 13-day-old but not from
18-day-old mice, even though (Bu)2cAMP induction could be observed at both ages. 
Phorbol-myristate acetate was found to activate the human uPA promoter in Sertoli
cell cultures from mice of both ages, even though the effect was less evident in 
cultures of 18-day-old animals. Deletion analysis of the human uPA 5'-flanking
region showed that the distal enhancer element is not needed for (Bu)2cAMP
induction, and that at least two promoter regions are involved in (Bu)2cAMP
induced transcription. One of these cAMP responsive regions lies between
nucleotides -72 and -29 from the CAP site. The sequence of this region would
suggest the binding of transcription factor AP-2, a cell-specific mediator of
both cAMP and phorbol esters action on gene expression. However, these sequences 
do not mediate phorbol ester activation of human uPA promoter in mouse Sertoli
cells.

PMID: 2172796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Biol Chem. 1990 May 15;265(14):8230-6.

Interaction of cellular proteins with the human T-cell leukemia virus type I
transcriptional control region. Purification of cellular proteins that bind the
21-base pair repeat elements.

Nyborg JK(1), Dynan WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder
80309.

Nuclear extracts of cultured human cells contain multiple proteins that recognize
specific sequence elements within the transcriptional control region of the human
retrovirus, human T-cell leukemia virus type I (HTLV-I). Here we report the
purification of host expression factor 1T (HEF-1T), a DNA-binding protein from
human T-lymphocytes that binds to each of the three 21-base pair repeat enhancer 
elements in the proviral long terminal repeats of HTLV-I and the related virus,
HTLV-II. HEF-1T is composed of two polypeptides of 41 and 59 kDa. We show that
HEF-1T is distinct from a second protein, present in non-lymphoid cells, that
binds to overlapping sites in and near the 21-base pair repeats. This second
protein is composed of a single 47-kDa polypeptide and appears to be identical to
the previously described transcription factor AP-2. A third protein, also
distinct from HEF-1T, binds within the first repeat. The present results suggest 
that there may be multiple modes of HTLV-I promoter recognition involving
distinct sets of cellular proteins.

PMID: 2335523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. FEBS Lett. 1990 May 7;264(1):125-9.

A putative AP-2 binding site in the 5' flanking region of the mouse POMC gene.

Bishop JF(1), Rinaudo MS, Ritter JK, Chang AC, Conant K, Gehlert DR.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics Branch, NINDS, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Using extracts of AtT-20 cell nuclei, protein binding sites on the POMC gene
5'-flanking region were examined with an exonuclease protection approach. One
such binding site, located from -119 to -106 bp upstream from the mouse POMC gene
transcription initiation site, which exhibited a close homology to the activator 
protein-2 (AP-2) site [1]. A double-stranded oligonucleotide containing this site
was subsequently used in gel shift assays to demonstrate AP-2 consensus sequence 
binding activity in extracts of AtT-20 cell nuclei. Gel shift competition
experiments using both homologous and heterologous competitor DNA sequences
revealed that the AP-2 like factor(s) exhibited specific binding to the mouse
AP-2 consensus sequence. Furthermore, AP-2 factor binding was also modulated by a
CTF/NF1-like factor. Pretreatment of AtT-20 cell nuclear extracts with alkaline
phosphatase prior to inclusion in gel shift assays led to a reduction in the
intensities of AP-2 factor-specific bands, indicating a potential involvement of 
protein phosphorylation in AP-2 factor binding in AtT-20 cells.

PMID: 2338136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Biol Chem. 1990 Mar 25;265(9):4884-92.

Isolation and expression of a human ornithine decarboxylase gene.

Moshier JA(1), Gilbert JD, Skunca M, Dosescu J, Almodovar KM, Luk GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan 48201.

We have isolated a human ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) gene from a leukocyte
genomic DNA library in order to examine the mechanisms involved in the regulation
of ODC gene expression in normal and neoplastic cell growth. Nucleotide sequence 
analysis shows that the human ODC gene in clone ODC709-A2 consists of 12 exons
which encode a protein identical to that inferred from a human ODC cDNA sequence.
The 5' end of the gene was determined by S1 nuclease and primer extension
mapping. The high G + C content and small open reading frame found in exon 1 may 
be pertinent to translation regulation of ODC. Conserved sequences and potential 
promoter elements including a TATA box, a possible CCAAT element, SP1 and AP-2
transcription factor binding sites, and cAMP response elements were identified in
the 5'-flanking region. Transfection of mouse LM (tk-) cells with ODC709-A2 DNA
resulted in the production of human ODC mRNA approximately 2.25 kilobases in
length. Evidence that the protein synthesized from the human gene is functional
is provided by "rescue" transfection of a Chinese hamster ovary mutant cell line,
C55.7, which is ODC-deficient. C55.7 cells transfected with ODC709-A2 DNA
expressed ODC enzyme activity and proliferated without exogenous putrescine.

PMID: 2318872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Nature. 1990 Mar 1;344(6261):72-4.

Transactivation by the hepatitis B virus X protein depends on AP-2 and other
transcription factors.

Seto E(1), Mitchell PJ, Yen TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California School of Medicine, San
Francisco 94143-0506.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) X gene product (pX) could be important in disease
pathogenesis because it is known to transactivate transcription from many viral
and cellular gene promoters, including the HBV core gene promoter, the human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) long terminal repeat, and the c-myc promoter. We
have previously shown that only a subset of the promoters that can be
transactivated by pX is transactivated in any particular cell line, and have
proposed that pX acts through multiple, cell type-specific transcription factors.
We show here that pX acts through both AP-1 and AP-2 sites, and that pX has a
transcription activation domain. We conclude that transactivation by pX depends
on at least two distinct cellular DNA-binding transcription factors and we
present a model for the action of pX.

PMID: 2154703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Genomics. 1990 Mar;6(3):451-60.

The human Na, K-ATPase alpha 1 gene: characterization of the 5'-flanking region
and identification of a restriction fragment length polymorphism.

Shull MM(1), Pugh DG, Lingrel JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry, and Microbiology, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45267-0524.

We have determined the sequence of the 5'-flanking region and first three exons
of the human Na,K-ATPase alpha 1 gene, ATP1A1. Primer extension and S1 nuclease
protection analyses of RNA from human kidney, brain, and skeletal muscle indicate
that transcription initiates 273 nucleotides upstream of the translation start
site. The promoter region contains a potential TATA box at position -27 relative 
to the transcription initiation site; however, no CCAAT sequence is observed. The
5'-untranslated and 5'-flanking regions are G + C rich. Five sequence elements
exhibiting similarity to binding sites for the transcription factor Sp1 are
located within the 5'-flanking region. This region also contains potential
binding sites for the transcription factors AP-1, AP-2, AP-3, and NF-1, as well
as a site which exhibits perfect identity to an 8-bp sequence element important
for calcium induction. A comparison of the 5'-flanking region of the alpha 1 and 
alpha 2 genes reveals differences in potential transcription factor and hormone
receptor binding sites which may be important in mediating the tissue- and
developmental stage-specific expression of these genes. We have also identified
an intragenic DNA probe which detects a restriction fragment length polymorphism 
at the alpha 1 locus. This marker should facilitate genetic linkage studies
designed to evaluate the role of the sodium pump in human disease.

PMID: 1970326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Cell Growth Differ. 1990 Mar;1(3):135-47.

A ubiquitous repressor interacting with an F9 cell-specific silencer and its
functional suppression by differentiated cell-specific positive factors.

Furukawa K(1), Yamaguchi Y, Ogawa E, Shigesada K, Satake M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

A mutant of polyomavirus, F9-5000, capable of growing in F9 cell [M. Vasseur et
al., J. Virol., 43: 800-808, 1982 (1)], has a deletion in the enhancer from
nucleotide 5119 to nucleotide 5142. The oligonucleotide corresponding to the
deleted region (delta F9-5000 element) showed silencer activity on gene
expression in F9 cells. Mobility shift assay revealed a nuclear factor, PEBP4, in
F9 nuclear extract which bound to the delta F9-5000 element. Mutations introduced
into the PEBP4 binding site specifically abolished its binding as well as the
inhibitory effect on gene expression. After F9 cells were induced to
differentiate, two more factors, PEBP2 and PEBP1, a member of AP1 family, became 
detectable in addition to PEBP4, and at the same time the delta F9-5000 element
lost silencer activity and acquired an enhancer activity. The recognition
sequence of PEBP2 as well as that of PEBP1 overlapped with that of a repressor,
PEBP4. PEBP4 and PEBP3, a factor related to PEBP2, were shown to compete for
binding to delta F9-5000. Interplay of a ubiquitous negative factor and
differentiation-induced positive factors may represent one aspect of the gene
regulation during embryonic development.

PMID: 1964077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Biol Chem. 1990 Feb 25;265(6):3313-9.

Characterization of the promoter/regulatory region of the bovine CYP11A
(P-450scc) gene. Basal and cAMP-dependent expression.

Ahlgren R(1), Simpson ER, Waterman MR, Lund J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

The promoter/regulatory region of the bovine CYP11A (P-450scc) gene was cloned
from a bovine genomic library. One major start site of transcription was
identified by primer extension analysis with a minor start site four nucleotides 
further upstream. A putative TATA box is located at position -31, and at position
-68 resides a putative binding site for the transcription factor Sp1. Transient
transfection of chimeric reporter gene constructs into mouse adrenal tumor Y1
cells was used to locate regions within the P-450scc 5'-flanking sequences that
are important for basal and cAMP-dependent transcription of the reporter genes.
While cAMP-dependent accumulation of mRNA derived from expression of the
endogenous bovine P-450scc gene can be inhibited by protein synthesis inhibitors,
transcription of reporter gene constructs containing the promoter/regulatory
region of the P-450scc gene is not affected by cycloheximide following transient 
transfection of Y1 cells or primary bovine adrenocortical cells. Basal expression
of these constructs as well as cAMP responsiveness is reduced upon deletion of
sequences between -186 and -101, further deletion to -50 leading to loss of
virtually all the remaining cAMP responsiveness. The sequence between -183 and
-83 alone will direct both basal and cAMP-enhanced transcription when fused to a 
heterologous promoter and is equally active in either the correct or reverse
orientation. No homology to the consensus cAMP-responsive element (CRE) or AP-2
binding site is found in this region whereas an activator protein 1-like sequence
is found at position -116. It is concluded that the cAMP responsiveness of
P-450scc gene expression is mediated by sequences different from canonical
consensus regulatory elements. Whether or not there are sequences conferring cAMP
responsiveness which are common both to P-450scc and the other steroidogenic
P-450 genes remains to be established.

PMID: 2154474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biol Chem. 1990 Jan 25;265(3):1339-44.

The chicken urokinase-type plasminogen activator gene.

Leslie ND(1), Kessler CA, Bell SM, Degen JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science Research, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.

The chicken urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) cDNA and gene have been
isolated and the complete nucleotide sequence of each established. cDNA sequence 
and Northern blot RNA analysis indicate that the chicken uPA mRNA is
approximately 2500 nucleotides in size and contains a large 3'-noncoding region
(998 nucleotides). The predicted amino acid sequence of the chicken uPA primary
translation product (434 residues) suggests a domain architecture comparable to
the mammalian uPA proteins with the form: (i) signal peptide, (ii) growth factor 
domain (GF), (iii) kringle domain (K), and (iv) serine protease domain (C). The
overall sequence identity between the chicken and human proteins is 43.1%, with
56.3, 48.5, and 45.6% identity in the GF, K, and C domains, respectively. The
chicken uPA gene is similar to the mammalian uPA genes in both size (8158 base
pairs between transcription initiation and polyadenylation sites) and
organization (11 exons). However, the sequence of the chicken uPA gene is similar
to the mammalian uPA genes only within the protein-coding portions of exons. The 
transcription initiation site is flanked by a remarkably G/C-rich region (77%
between nucleotides -1 and -300) which contains a TATA element and several
potential transcription factor Spl-binding sites. The promoter region also
contains several repeat elements, including two 11-nucleotide repeats that
encompass six potential transcription factor AP-2-binding sites. This work
provides a foundation for exploring the mechanism(s) by which protein-tyrosine
kinase pp60v-src and protein kinase C modulate uPA gene transcription.

PMID: 2295632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Jan 11;18(1):57-64.

Nuclear factor-I and activator protein-2 bind in a mutually exclusive way to
overlapping promoter sequences and trans-activate the human growth hormone gene.

Courtois SJ(1), Lafontaine DA, Lemaigre FP, Durviaux SM, Rousseau GG.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Louvain University Medical School,
Brussels, Belgium.

Transcription of the human growth hormone (hGH) gene and its regulation are
controlled by trans-acting factors that bind to hGH gene promoter sequences.
Several DNase I footprints have been described within 500 bp of this promoter,
one of which (-289 to -267) has not yet been ascribed to a defined factor. By
DNase I footprinting, gel mobility shift, and methylation interference assays
with extracts from HeLa cells and GH-producing pituitary tumor (GC) cells, we
show that this factor belongs to the NF-I family. When NF-I was competed out of
the cell extracts, the trans-acting factor AP-2 bound to the same site as NF-I.
AP-2 was present not only in HeLa cells, but also in GC cells albeit at a much
lower concentration. Consistent with the mutually exclusive binding of NF-I and
AP-2, their methylation interference patterns included four guanine residues that
were crucial for binding of both NF-I and AP-2. Cell-free transcription from the 
hGH gene promoter showed that these two factors can transactivate this gene.

PMCID: PMC330203
PMID: 2308836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Oncogene. 1990 Jan;5(1):5-13.

A tumor promoting phorbol ester, TPA, enhances polyomavirus DNA replication by
activating the function of the viral enhancer.

Murakami Y(1), Asano M, Satake M, Ito Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Kyoto University, Japan.

The effect of tumor promoter, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) on
enhancer dependent polyomavirus (Py) DNA replication was examined in cells
expressing Py large T antigen. The results showed that TPA enhanced Py DNA
replication by stimulating the activity of the A element, one of the two cores of
Py enhancer. Of the three subdomains of the A element, the biding sites of PEBP1 
(PEA1), a member of AP1 family, and of PEBP5 were by themselves able to activate 
Py DNA replication. Furthermore, each binding site of PEBP1 and PEBP5 responded
to TPA to enhance Py DNA replication. The results suggest that growth promoting
signals could activate DNA replication directly via enhancer binding proteins.

PMID: 2157181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Neurobiol. 1990 Fall-Winter;4(3-4):197-210.

Molecular mechanisms of cAMP-regulated gene expression.

Walton KM(1), Rehfuss RP.

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute for Advanced Biomedical Research, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland 97201.

The ability of many genes to be induced by cAMP is dependent on the presence of
enhancers located in the regions of DNA upstream of the start sites to the genes.
The two best characterized enhancers are the CRE (5'-TGACGTCA-3') and the AP-2
site (5'-CCCCAGGC-3'). The activity of the CRE is modulated by sequences adjacent
to the consensus sequence as well as by promoter context and cell type. The
complex control of the CRE is reflected in the large number of cloned CRE binding
proteins that arise both from unique genes and from splice variants. These
factors are leucine zipper proteins that must dimerize before binding to DNA.
Although all of the factors isolated can form active homodimers, many are also
able to form heterodimers. The amino termini of these proteins contain consensus 
phosphorylation sites through which these factors trans-activate their cognate
promoters. The diversity of the trans-acting factors and their cis-acting
sequences reflects the precise control that cells require in the modulation of
gene expression by cAMP.

PMID: 1966918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. EMBO J. 1989 Dec 20;8(13):4205-14.

The SV40 TC-II(kappa B) and the related H-2Kb enhansons exhibit different cell
type specific and inducible proto-enhancer activities, but the SV40 core sequence
and the AP-2 binding site have no enhanson properties.

Kanno M(1), Fromental C, Staub A, Ruffenach F, Davidson I, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorie de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes du CNRS, Unité 184 de
Biologie Moléculaire et de Génie Génétique de l'INSERM, Institut de Chimie
Biologique, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The enhancer activity of the oligomerized SV40 TC-I and TC-II sequences has been 
investigated in lymphoid and non-lymphoid cell lines. While the TC-I sequence had
no demonstrable enhanson activity, a class C enhanson (proto-enhancer),
5'-GGAAAGTCCCC-3', overlapping the TC-II sequence and the GT-I enhanson was
identified. This TC-II enhanson, which is identical to the kappa B motif from the
kappa chain enhancer, was active in both lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells, which
contrasts with the previously reported lymphoid cell specificity of the kappa B
motif. However, its activity in non-lymphoid cells is in agreement with our
previous reports describing the effect of mutations in the 'TC region' within the
total SV40 enhancer in lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells. The activity of the TC-II
enhanson could be moderately increased in HeLa by
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and cycloheximide treatment,
indicating that the protein(s) mediating its activity may be partially repressed 
by the previously described inhibitor protein I kappa B. The TC-II related, H-2Kb
element, 5'-TGGGGATTCCCCA-3', of the histocompatibility class I H-2Kb gene
promoter is also a class C enhanson which is active in both lymphoid and
non-lymphoid cells. However, in contrast to the TC-II enhanson, the H-2Kb
enhanson exhibits a very low activity in HeLa cells, but can be strongly induced 
by TPA and/or cycloheximide treatments which suggests that its cognate factor is 
inactivated (repressed) by an inhibitor protein. Interestingly, cycloheximide,
but not TPA treatment, could induce the activity of both the TC-II and H-2Kb
enhansons in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells, suggesting that these cells lack some 
component(s) of the protein kinase C signal transduction pathway. We also show
that oligomers of the SV40 'core' sequence, which overlaps the TC-II enhanson,
had no enhanson activity in any of the cell types studied, which questions the
possible role of the AP-3 protein in SV40 enhancer activity in these cell types. 
In addition, oligomers of the AP-2 binding sites which are present in the SV40 TC
region and in the human metallothionein IIA promoter show no enhanson activity,
irrespective of whether the cells are treated with TPA.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400
WORDS)

PMCID: PMC401616
PMID: 2556264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. EMBO J. 1989 Dec 1;8(12):3793-800.

TNF stimulates expression of mouse MHC class I genes by inducing an NF kappa
B-like enhancer binding activity which displaces constitutive factors.

Israël A(1), Le Bail O, Hatat D, Piette J, Kieran M, Logeat F, Wallach D, Fellous
M, Kourilsky P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie Moléculaire du Gène, U.277 INSERM, Paris, France.

We have dissected the mouse H-2Kb gene promoter in order to define the sequences 
responsible for induction by tumour necrosis factor (TNF-alpha). An enhancer
element (-187 to -158) composed of two imperfect direct palindromic repeats has
been shown to be necessary and sufficient for TNF-alpha induction of a
heterologous promoter. A multimer of either repeat is also responsive, while a
single copy is not: this is the situation in the beta 2-microglobulin (beta 2-m) 
promoter which contains a single palindrome and does not respond to TNF-alpha. We
had previously found that the two repeats can bind a factor named KBF1. We show
here that in the uninduced state the transcription factor AP2 binds to the
interpalindromic region, while in TNF-treated cells an NF kappa B-like activity
is induced which displaces both KBF1 and AP2 and binds to the two palindromes.
This strongly suggests that induction of an NF kappa B-like activity is
responsible for TNF-alpha stimulation of mouse MHC class I genes.

PMCID: PMC402065
PMID: 2555174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Science. 1989 Nov 10;246(4931):780-6.

In vivo footprinting of a muscle specific enhancer by ligation mediated PCR.

Mueller PR(1), Wold B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena 91125.

Erratum in
    Science 1990 May 18;248(4957):802.

In vivo protein-DNA interactions at the developmentally regulated enhancer of the
mouse muscle creatine kinase (MCK) gene were examined by a newly developed
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) footprinting procedure. This ligation mediated,
single-sided PCR technique permits the exponential amplification of an entire
sequence ladder. Several footprints were detected in terminally differentiated
muscle cells where the MCK gene is actively transcribed. None were observed in
myogenic cells prior to differentiation or in nonmuscle cells. Two footprints
appear to correspond to sites that can bind the myogenic regulator MyoD1 in
vitro, whereas two others represent muscle specific use of apparently general
factors. Because MyoD1 is synthesized by undifferentiated myoblasts, these data
imply that additional regulatory mechanisms must restrict the interaction between
this protein and its target site prior to differentiation.

PMID: 2814500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Oct;9(10):4272-81.

Multiple sequence elements of a single functional class are required for cyclic
AMP responsiveness of the mouse c-fos promoter.

Berkowitz LA(1), Riabowol KT, Gilman MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, New York 11724.

Agents that elevate the intracellular concentration of cyclic AMP (cAMP) rapidly 
and transiently induce expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in BALB/c 3T3
cells. We show that the mouse c-fos promoter-enhancer region contains multiple
elements that contribute to cAMP responsiveness of the promoter in transient
expression assays. The most potent element was found to correspond to a
previously mapped basal promoter element and protein-binding site located 65 base
pairs upstream of the transcriptional initiation site. This element and two less 
potent sites contained a match to the cAMP response element (CRE) core sequence
defined in several mammalian genes. The relative potencies of these elements
corresponded with their relative affinities for cellular factors that bound to
the CRE in vitro. Mutation of all three elements failed to abolish completely
cAMP responsiveness of the c-fos promoter in the transient expression assay.
However, we present evidence that this residual responsiveness may have been due 
to sequences present in vector DNA. Finally, we show, by using a new
microinjection competition assay, that a double-stranded oligonucleotide carrying
the major c-fos CRE is sufficient to block induction of the endogenous c-fos gene
by cAMP. Therefore, induction of the endogenous gene requires positively acting
cellular factors that interact with a single functional class of regulatory sites
in the c-fos gene. Unrelated regulatory elements, such as the serum response
element and putative AP-2 sites, are not by themselves sufficient to mediate the 
cAMP response.

PMCID: PMC362507
PMID: 2555687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Genes Dev. 1989 Oct;3(10):1507-17.

Regulation of transcription factor AP-2 by the morphogen retinoic acid and by
second messengers.

Lüscher B(1), Mitchell PJ, Williams T, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
California, Berkeley 94720.

The expression of the transcription factor AP-2 recently has been shown to be
enhanced during retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation of NT2 cells, a human 
teratocarcinoma cell line. Here we show that this induction of AP-2 mRNA is at
the level of transcription and is transient, reaching a peak 48-72 hr after the
addition of RA and declining thereafter, even in the continuous presence of RA.
Increased levels of AP-2 mRNA are reflected in a similar elevation of AP-2
protein and accompanied by an increase in the AP-2-binding site-dependent
transcriptional activity of a reporter gene. AP-2 also has been proposed to
confer TPA and cAMP inducibility on promoters/enhancers containing AP-2-binding
sites. We investigated the effect of these agents on the expression of AP-2
protein and mRNA. Our experiments demonstrate that expression of the AP-2 gene in
HeLa cells is not elevated significantly by TPA or by a calcium ionophore and is 
not enhanced at all by agents that increase intracellular cAMP concentration. In 
fact, AP-2 mRNA is repressed by both TPA and the calcium ionophore A23187 through
a delayed response. These data suggest that the AP-2-binding site-mediated cAMP
and TPA responses are not regulated at the level of AP-2 expression but, rather, 
achieved either by post-translational changes in AP-2 or in conjunction with
another protein.

PMID: 2482225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Cancer Lett. 1989 Sep 15;47(1-2):1-9.

Does NF-kappa B relieve the transcription block in c-myc?

Renan MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biophysical Sciences, National Accelerator Centre, Faure, South
Africa.

In this report, it is shown that the mRNA of the c-myc oncogene is capable of
forming an extensive stem-and-loop structure, with a free energy of delta G (25
degrees C) = -34 kcal. This secondary structure is situated at the 3' end of the 
first exon, immediately upstream of an elongation block. It is shown that this
region contains potential binding sites for 3 different activator proteins,
namely AP-1, AP-2, and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappa B). From an analysis of
the properties of these proteins, NF-kappa B could be identified as a candidate
for the trans-acting factor involved in relieving the block to transcription.

PMID: 2517588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Jul;86(13):5168-72.

Hepatitis B virus X gene activates kappa B-like enhancer sequences in the long
terminal repeat of human immunodeficiency virus 1.

Twu JS(1), Chu K, Robinson WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, CA 94305.

The role of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) X gene during virus infection has not
been defined. We previously showed that expression of the HBV X gene in the human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line HepG2 trans-activates chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene expression under control of the human immunodeficiency
virus 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat and we have now identified a specific
sequence in the HIV-1 long terminal repeat that is responsive to the HBV X gene. 
Plasmid constructs with the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene regulated by
an isolated and twice-repeated 12-base-pair HIV-1 enhancer sequence homologous to
the nucleotide sequence that binds the nuclear transcription factor NF-kappa B
(the HIV-1 kappa B-like sequence) were trans-activated by the HBV X gene in HepG2
cells, indicating that the kappa B-like enhancer sequence in the HIV-1 long
terminal repeat is responsive to the X gene. When eight copies of the HIV-1 kappa
B-like sequence were used to regulate beta-globin gene expression, transcription 
of this gene was activated by the HBV X gene in HepG2 cells and no beta-globin
gene transcription was detected in the absence of the HBV X gene. beta-globin
gene expression regulated by the activator protein 2 (AP-2) binding sequence was 
not activated by the HBV X gene. Treatment of HepG2 cells with phorbol ester
resulted in modest activation of the HIV-1 kappa B-like enhancer sequence
suggesting that an NF-kappa B-like factor was induced in these cells as it is in 
T lymphocytes by phorbol ester; however, phorbol ester did not demonstrably
enhance the activation of the HIV-1 enhancer observed with the HBV X gene. These 
experiments indicate that the HIV-1 kappa B-like transcriptional enhancer
sequence is activated by the HBV X gene and suggest that the HBV X gene might
play a role in regulating transcription of a gene under control of a kappa B-like
enhancer during HBV infection. Since such a sequence has not been found in the
HBV genome and HBV gene expression appears not to be regulated by the HBV X gene,
a cellular gene that plays a role in HBV replication could be the target of the X
gene during HBV infection.

PMCID: PMC297579
PMID: 2740349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. EMBO J. 1989 May;8(5):1455-60.

Transcription factors AP-3 and AP-2 interact with the SV40 enhancer in a mutually
exclusive manner.

Mercurio F(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The 'core' sequence is critical for efficient transcriptional activity of the
SV40 enhancer. Moreover, the core was shown to be involved in a signal
transduction pathway elicited by treatment of cells with phorbol ester tumor
promoters. We report here the identification and characterization of activator
protein-3 (AP-3), which recognizes the core element. AP-3 was purified to near
homogeneity and identified as a 48K polypeptide. The purified protein is an
efficient transcriptional activator in vitro. In addition, we show that AP-3 and 
a second factor that recognizes the SV40 enhancer, AP-2, interact in a mutually
exclusive manner. These studies should facilitate understanding of the mechanism 
by which the SV40 enhancer achieves its characteristic broad cell-type
specificity.

PMCID: PMC400974
PMID: 2548845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Endocrinol. 1989 May;3(5):815-21.

Induction of human growth hormone promoter activity by the adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate pathway involves a novel responsive element.

Dana S(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California-San Diego School of
Medicine, La Jolla 92093.

Regulation of GH gene expression by GRF involves cAMP as a second messenger. We
have demonstrated that a 500-basepair fragment of the human GH (hGH) gene 5'
flanking region can confer cAMP inducibility upon the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase transcription unit in transient transfections of rat pituitary 
tumor cells treated with forskolin, an activator of adenyl cyclase. The same hGH 
construct is not induced by forskolin in nonpituitary-derived cells. Experiments 
with hGH deletion constructs reveal that binding sites for transcription factor
AP-2 and the pituitary-specific factor GHF-1 are not required for forskolin
stimulation, but that GHF-1 may potentiate the effect. RNA analyses reveal that
forskolin also stimulates accumulation of transcripts initiated at the hGH
promoter. Other agents that elevate cAMP levels also stimulate hGH expression.
Since the hGH 5' flanking region contains no sequences homologous to the
cAMP-responsive element of the somatostatin gene, and the AP-2 sites do not
appear to be required for the forskolin response, these results suggest that a
novel cAMP-responsive element exists within 82 basepairs upstream from the
transcriptional start of the hGH gene and that hGH regulation by GRF may involve 
interaction between a tissue-specific element and a cAMP-inducible element.

PMID: 2547155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Cell Biol. 1989 Apr;9(4):1691-704.

Differentiation-responsive elements in the 5' region of the mouse tissue
plasminogen activator gene confer two-stage regulation by retinoic acid and
cyclic AMP in teratocarcinoma cells.

Rickles RJ(1), Darrow AL, Strickland S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, State University of New York, Stony
Brook 11794.

F9 cells induced to differentiate with retinoic acid (RA) increase transcription 
of the tissue plasminogen activator (t-PA) gene. Further treatment of these cells
with cyclic AMP (cAMP) results in an additional stimulation of t-PA gene
transcription. To investigate the mechanism of this two-stage regulation, 4
kilobase pairs (kbp) of 5'-flanking sequence from the murine t-PA gene was
isolated. Two major start sites for transcription were found, neither of which
depended on a classical TATA motif for correct initiation. By using transient
transfection assays, it was determined that 4-kbp of flanking sequence could
confer on reporter genes the same two-stage differentiation-specific expression
as was observed for the endogenous t-PA gene. Deletion analyses of this 4-kbp
fragment showed that 190 bp of flanking sequence was sufficient to bestow the
same degree of two-stage regulation on reporter gene constructs. Within this
region of DNA, sequence analysis revealed a possible cAMP regulatory element, a
CTF/NF-1 recognition sequence, two potential Sp1 sites, and five potential
binding sites for transcription factor AP-2. The deletion experiments, coupled
with the positions of these potential cis-acting elements, suggest that multiple 
transcription factors, including those that bind to cAMP regulatory element,
CTF/NF-1, Sp1, and AP-2 sites, may be involved in regulation of the t-PA gene
during F9 cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC362588
PMID: 2542775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Biochemistry. 1989 Feb 21;28(4):1755-62.

Complete sequence of the human tissue factor gene, a highly regulated cellular
receptor that initiates the coagulation protease cascade.

Mackman N(1), Morrissey JH, Fowler B, Edgington TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Research Institute of Scripps Clinic, La Jolla,
California 92037.

Tissue factor (TF) is the high-affinity receptor for plasma factors VII and VIIa.
TF plays a role in normal hemostasis by initiating the cell-surface assembly and 
propagation of the coagulation protease cascade. Outside the vasculature, TF
expression is highly dependent upon cell type. TF can also be induced by
inflammatory mediators to appear on monocytes and vascular endothelial cells as a
component of cellular immune responses. As an initial step toward elucidating the
regulatory regions involved in control of TF gene expression, we have established
the organization of the 12.4 kbp human TF gene and its complete DNA sequence.
There are six exons separated by five introns. Within intron 5, we have mapped
the single nucleotide difference which leads to the previously described MspI
polymorphism; the same intron also contains an apparently polymorphic PstI site. 
The TF gene also contains three full-length Alu repeats and one partial Alu
repeat. A single major transcription start site was identified 26 bp downstream
from a TATA consensus promoter element. The putative promoter and first exon are 
located within a 1.2 kbp region of very high G + C content which fits the
criteria of an HTF island. A cluster of predicted binding sites for a number of
known transcription factors was found to coincide with this putative promoter
region. These factors included AP-1 and AP-2 which can mediate the effects of
phorbol esters, agonists known to induce TF expression in monocytes and vascular 
endothelial cells.

PMID: 2719931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Genes Dev. 1988 Dec;2(12A):1557-69.

Cloning and expression of AP-2, a cell-type-specific transcription factor that
activates inducible enhancer elements.

Williams T(1), Admon A, Lüscher B, Tjian R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
California, Berkeley 94720.

Human AP-2 is a sequence-specific DNA-binding protein that interacts with
inducible viral and cellular enhancer elements to stimulate transcription of
selected genes. Here, we report the isolation and characterization of a human
cDNA clone containing the entire protein-coding region of AP-2. The deduced
primary amino acid sequence of AP-2 does not contain a domain resembling any
previously identified DNA binding motif. However, an interesting feature of the
AP-2 protein is a clustered arrangement of proline and glutamine residues that
have been found recently within the activation domains of other transcription
factors. Expression of the AP-2 clone in bacteria yields a protein that binds to 
DNA and activates transcription in vitro in a comparable manner to native human
AP-2. Transfection of cDNA clones into Drosophila cells indicates that the AP-2
gene product can also activate gene expression in vivo in a DNA
template-dependent manner. Expression of endogenous AP-2 is repressed in a
hepatoma cell line and stimulated following retinoic-acid-induced differentiation
of a human teratocarcinoma cell line. This indicates that AP-2 may be a
transcription factor involved in the control of developmentally regulated gene
expression.

PMID: 3063603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. EMBO J. 1988 Dec 1;7(12):3793-805.

Proteins bound at adjacent DNA elements act synergistically to regulate human
proenkephalin cAMP inducible transcription.

Comb M(1), Mermod N, Hyman SE, Pearlberg J, Ross ME, Goodman HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital Boston 02114.

Synthesis of the endogenous opioid precursor, proenkephalin, is regulated by
neurotransmitters and membrane depolarization. These events act through second
messenger dependent signal transduction pathways via a short inducible DNA
enhancer to regulate transcription of the proenkephalin gene. Two DNA elements
located within this enhancer are essential for the transcriptional response to
cAMP and phorbol ester. Inactivation of either element by mutation or by
alteration of their stereospecific alignment eliminates inducible enhancer
activity. The promoter distal element, ENKCRE-1, in the absence of a functional
adjacent ENKCRE-2 element, has no inherent capacity to activate transcription.
However, in the presence of a functional ENKCRE-2 element, this element
synergistically augments cAMP and phorbol ester inducible transcription. The
promoter proximal element, ENKCRE-2, is essential for both basal and regulated
enhancer function. Four different protein factors found in HeLa cell nuclear
extracts bind in vitro to the enhancer region. ENKTF-1, a novel enhancer binding 
protein, binds to the DNA region encompassing ENKCRE-1. The transcription factors
AP-1 and AP-4 bind to overlapping sites spanning ENKCRE-2, and a fourth
transcription factor, AP-2, binds to a site immediately downstream of ENKCRE-2.
The binding of ENKTF-1 to mutant ENKCRE-1 sequences in vitro correlates with the 
in vivo inducibility of the mutant elements suggesting that ENKTF-1 acts in
combination with factors that recognize the ENKCRE-2 domain to regulate cAMP
inducible transcription. Together, the two DNA elements, ENKCRE-1 and ENKCRE-2
and the protein factors with which they interact, play a critical role in the
transduction and reception of signals transmitted from cell surface receptors to 
the proenkephalin nuclear transcription complex.

PMCID: PMC454956
PMID: 2850173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Genes Dev. 1988 Nov;2(11):1389-99.

Transcription analysis of a human U4C gene: involvement of transcription factors 
novel to snRNA gene expression.

Weller P(1), Bark C, Janson L, Pettersson U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedical Center, Uppsala, Sweden.

We have investigated the promoter requirements for in vivo transcription of a
human U4C snRNA gene following transfection into HeLa cells. Two elements
required for maximal U4C transcription were identified. The first, located
upstream of -50, provides a basal level of transcription 2-3% of the full
activity, and probably corresponds to the previously identified snRNA gene
proximal element. The distal element, centered around -220, acts as a
transcriptional enhancer and contains motifs for three previously recognized
transcription factors: the octamer-binding protein, NF-A, which binds to motifs
in the distal elements of other snRNA genes, and two factors not previously shown
to be involved in snRNA gene transcription, cAMP response element binding protein
(CREB) and AP-2. The octamer and putative AP-2 motifs are required for maximal
transcription of the U4C gene. Specific binding of NF-A and CREB to the motifs in
the distal element has been shown in vitro by DNase I and DMS methylation
protection footprint competition analyses using HeLa nuclear extracts. The
presence of a binding motif for the inducible factor CREB, together with the
transcriptional requirement for the putative AP-2 motif, suggests a means by
which expression of snRNA genes might be regulated.

PMID: 2850259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1988 Nov;85(21):7952-6.

Negative and positive factors determine the activity of the polyoma virus
enhancer alpha domain in undifferentiated and differentiated cell types.

Wasylyk B(1), Imler JL, Chatton B, Schatz C, Wasylyk C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire des Eucaryotes, l'Institut National de la
Santé et de la Recherche Medicale, Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France.

The host range of polyoma virus is dependent upon the activity of its enhancer,
which is inactive in undifferentiated embryonal carcinoma cells, such as F9
cells, and is active after their differentiation. We show here that the activity 
of the alpha domain of the polyoma virus enhancer displays a similar
cell-specificity and inducibility as does the whole enhancer. We present evidence
to show that its activity is determined by the balance between the activities of 
two factors, PEA2, a labile repressor, and PEA1, an inducible positive factor
that we have characterized previously. Changes in repressor activity help account
for the increase in alpha-domain activity after differentiation of F9 cells.
These results suggest that PEA2 is crucial in the regulation of viral gene
expression and perhaps more generally in the control of gene expression during
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC282331
PMID: 2847148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 1988 Aug 15;263(23):11111-6.

Characterization of the mouse SPARC/osteonectin gene. Intron/exon organization
and an unusual promoter region.

McVey JH(1), Nomura S, Kelly P, Mason IJ, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Embryology, National Institute for Medical Research,
London, United Kingdom.

Two overlapping cosmids have been isolated containing the entire murine gene for 
SPARC (osteonectin), a Ca2+-binding, phosphorylated glycoprotein associated with 
extracellular matrix synthesis and remodeling. The gene contains 10 exons and
covers 26.5 kilobase pairs of DNA. Exon analysis shows that the two N-terminal
glutamic acid-rich sequences which are predicted to undergo conformational change
upon binding of calcium, as well as the C-terminal EF-hand Ca2+-binding domain
are each encoded by a single exon. Comparative analysis of the exon sequence does
not support the idea that the SPARC gene has evolved by shuffling of exons from
other Ca2+-binding proteins. The 5' flanking region of the SPARC gene, which
promotes transcription when placed in front of the bacterial chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene, contains neither "TATA" nor "CAAT" box sequences.
However, unlike most other genes lacking these motifs, mapping of the 5' end of
the SPARC gene by RNase protection and primer extension analysis reveals only a
single major and one minor transcription start site. The upstream region to -120 
includes six repeats of the sequence GGAGG, two repeats of the sequence 5' GGAGG 
A/C GGAGGG 3', and a potential transcription factor AP-2 binding site.

PMID: 3165375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell. 1987 Oct 23;51(2):251-60.

Transcription factor AP-2 mediates induction by two different signal-transduction
pathways: protein kinase C and cAMP.

Imagawa M(1), Chiu R, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla 92093.

We have purified and characterized the 50 kd activator protein 2 (AP-2), another 
enhancer-binding protein interacting with the human metallothionein IIA (hMT-IIA)
gene control region. Purified AP-2 activates transcription in vitro from a hybrid
promoter containing hMT-IIA upstream sequences. AP-2 also recognizes control
elements of the human growth hormone, c-myc, and H-2Kb genes, and the SV40 and
bovine papilloma virus enhancers. Multiple synthetic copies of the hMT-IIA
high-affinity AP-2 binding site can act as efficient, cell-type-specific enhancer
elements; their activity increases after treatment of cells with phorbol ester or
cAMP-elevating agents. In contrast, a synthetic enhancer recognized by factor
AP-1 is activated only by phorbol ester. AP-2 appears to mediate transcriptional 
activation in response to two different signal-transduction pathways, one
involving the phorbol-ester- and diacylglycerol-activated protein kinase C, the
other involving cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.

PMID: 2822255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell. 1987 Sep 11;50(6):847-61.

Positive and negative regulation of transcription in vitro: enhancer-binding
protein AP-2 is inhibited by SV40 T antigen.

Mitchell PJ, Wang C, Tjian R.

We have purified a 52 kd protein, AP-2, that binds to enhancer regions of SV40
and human metallothionein IIA (hMT IIA) and stimulates RNA synthesis from these
promoters in vitro. Surprisingly, AP-2 also binds to two SV40 early promoter
regions recognized by Sp1 and T antigen. Juxtaposed binding sites for AP-2 and
Sp1 in the 21 bp repeats may facilitate productive interactions between the two
factors. In contrast, sequence-specific binding of AP-2 to SV40 and hMT IIA DNA
is inhibited by the viral repressor protein T antigen. Furthermore, T antigen
inhibits AP-2-dependent transcriptional activation of the hMT IIA promoter in
vitro. The inhibition is neither a direct nor an indirect result of T antigen
binding to DNA, because the hMT IIA promoter lacks T antigen binding sites.
Instead, sedimentation studies suggest that protein-protein interactions between 
AP-2 and T antigen block AP-2 binding to DNA. These findings suggest novel
mechanisms for mediating positive and negative regulation of transcription.

PMID: 3040262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


