
1. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 18;10(12):e0145388. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145388.
eCollection 2015.

Recurrent Amplification at 13q34 Targets at CUL4A, IRS2, and TFDP1 As an
Independent Adverse Prognosticator in Intrahepatic Cholangiocarcinoma.

Liu TT(1,)(2), You HL(2,)(3), Weng SW(4), Wei YC(5), Eng HL(1), Huang WT(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (2)Department of laboratory
Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University
College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Department of Medical Laboratory
Sciences and Biotechnology, Fooyin University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department
of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung
University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Department of Pathology,
Kaohsiung Municipal Ta-Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Amplification of genes at 13q34 has been reported to be associated with tumor
proliferation and progression in diverse types of cancers. However, its role in
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA) has yet to be explored. We examined two
iCCA cell lines and 86 cases of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma to analyze copy
number of three target genes, including cullin 4A (CUL4A), insulin receptor
substrate 2 (IRS2), and transcription factor Dp-1 (TFDP1) at 13q34 by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The cell lines and all tumor
samples were used to test the relationship between copy number (CN) alterations
and protein expression by western blotting and immunohistochemical assays,
respectively. IRS2 was introduced, and each target gene was silenced in cell
lines. The mobility potential of cells was compared in the basal condition and
after manipulation using cell migration and invasion assays. CN alterations
correlated with protein expression levels. The SNU1079 cell line containing
deletions of the target genes demonstrated decreased protein expression levels
and significantly lower numbers of migratory and invasive cells, as opposed to
the RBE cell line, which does not contain CN alterations. Overexpression of IRS2 
by introducing IRS2 in SUN1079 cells increased the mobility potential. In
contrast, silencing each target gene showed a trend or statistical significance
toward inhibition of migratory and invasive capacities in RBE cells. In tumor
samples, the amplification of each of these genes was associated with poor
disease-free survival. Twelve cases (13.9%) demonstrated copy numbers > 4 for all
three genes tested (CUL4A, IRS2, and TFDP1), and showed a significant difference 
in disease-free survival by both univariate and multivariate survival analyses
(hazard ratio, 2.69; 95% confidence interval, 1.23 to 5.88; P = 0.013). Our data 
demonstrate that amplification of genes at 13q34 plays an oncogenic role in iCCA 
featuring adverse disease-free survival, which may provide new directions for
targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC4686179
PMID: 26684807  [PubMed - in process]


2. BMC Cancer. 2015 Nov 30;15:940. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1952-z.

Intra-tumor heterogeneity in TP53 null High Grade Serous Ovarian Carcinoma
progression.

Mota A(1,)(2), Triviño JC(3), Rojo-Sebastian A(4), Martínez-Ramírez Á(5), Chiva
L(6), González-Martín A(7), Garcia JF(8,)(9), Garcia-Sanz P(10,)(11),
Moreno-Bueno G(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM), IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.
amota@iib.uam.es. (2)MD Anderson International Foundation, Madrid, Spain.
amota@iib.uam.es. (3)Sistemas Genómicos, Valencia, Spain.
jc.trivino@sistemasgenomicos.com. (4)Department of Pathology, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Madrid, Spain. arojo@mdanderson.es. (5)Department of Molecular
Cytogenetics, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain. anmartinez@mdanderson.es.
(6)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain. 
lchiva@mdanderson.es. (7)Department of Medical Oncology, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Madrid, Spain. agonzalezm@mdanderson.es. (8)MD Anderson International
Foundation, Madrid, Spain. jfgarcia@mdanderson.es. (9)Department of Pathology, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Madrid, Spain. jfgarcia@mdanderson.es. (10)Departamento
de Bioquímica, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM), IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain.
pgarcia@mdanderson.es. (11)MD Anderson International Foundation, Madrid, Spain.
pgarcia@mdanderson.es. (12)Departamento de Bioquímica, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid (UAM), Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (CSIC-UAM), 
IdiPAZ, Madrid, Spain. gmoreno@iib.uam.es. (13)MD Anderson International
Foundation, Madrid, Spain. gmoreno@iib.uam.es.

BACKGROUND: High grade serous ovarian cancer is characterised by high initial
response to chemotherapy but poor outcome in the long term due to acquired
resistance. One of the main genetic features of this disease is TP53 mutation.
The majority of TP53 mutated tumors harbor missense mutations in this gene,
correlated with p53 accumulation. TP53 null tumors constitute a specific subgroup
characterised by nonsense, frameshift or splice-site mutations associated to
complete absence of p53 expression. Different studies show that this kind of
tumors may have a worse prognosis than other TP53 mutated HGSC.
METHODS: In this study, we sought to characterise the intra-tumor heterogeneity
of a TP53 null HGSC consisting of six primary tumor samples, two intra-pelvic and
four extra-pelvic recurrences using exome sequencing and comparative genome
hybridisation.
RESULTS: Significant heterogeneity was found among the different tumor samples,
both at the mutational and copy number levels. Exome sequencing identified 102
variants, of which only 42 were common to all three samples; whereas 7 of the 18 
copy number changes found by CGH analysis were presented in all samples. Sanger
validation of 20 variants found by exome sequencing in additional regions of the 
primary tumor and the recurrence allowed us to establish a sequence of the tumor 
clonal evolution, identifying those populations that most likely gave rise to
recurrences and genes potentially involved in this process, like GPNMB and TFDP1.
Using functional annotation and network analysis, we identified those biological 
functions most significantly altered in this tumor. Remarkably, unexpected
functions such as microtubule-based movement and lipid metabolism emerged as
important for tumor development and progression, suggesting its potential
interest as therapeutic targets.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, our results shed light on the clonal evolution of the
distinct tumor regions identifying the most aggressive subpopulations and at
least some of the genes that may be implicated in its progression and recurrence,
and highlights the importance of considering intra-tumor heterogeneity when
carrying out genetic and genomic studies, especially when these are aimed to
diagnostic procedures or to uncover possible therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4666042
PMID: 26620706  [PubMed - in process]


3. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):664-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0828. Epub
2015 Nov 20.

Elucidation and Pharmacological Targeting of Novel Molecular Drivers of
Follicular Lymphoma Progression.

Bisikirska B(1), Bansal M(1), Shen Y(1), Teruya-Feldstein J(2), Chaganti R(3),
Califano A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. (3)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York. (4)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, 
New York. ac2248@cumc.columbia.edu.

Follicular lymphoma, the most common indolent subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, is
associated with a relatively long overall survival rate ranging from 6 to 10
years from the time of diagnosis. However, in 20% to 60% of follicular lymphoma
patients, transformation to aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
reduces median survival to only 1.2 years. The specific functional and genetic
determinants of follicular lymphoma transformation remain elusive, and genomic
alterations underlying disease advancement have only been identified for a subset
of cases. Therefore, to identify candidate drivers of follicular lymphoma
transformation, we performed systematic analysis of a B-cell-specific regulatory 
model exhibiting follicular lymphoma transformation signatures using the Master
Regulator Inference algorithm (MARINa). This analysis revealed FOXM1, TFDP1,
ATF5, HMGA1, and NFYB to be candidate master regulators (MR) contributing to
disease progression. Accordingly, validation was achieved through synthetic
lethality assays in which RNAi-mediated silencing of MRs individually or in
combination reduced the viability of (14;18)-positive DLBCL (t-DLBCL) cells.
Furthermore, specific combinations of small-molecule compounds targeting
synergistic MR pairs induced loss of viability in t-DLBCL cells. Collectively,
our findings indicate that MR analysis is a valuable method for identifying bona 
fide contributors to follicular lymphoma transformation and may therefore guide
the selection of compounds to be used in combinatorial treatment strategies.
Cancer Res; 76(3); 664-74. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4738055 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26589882  [PubMed - in process]


4. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9717-22. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3735-1. Epub 2015
Jul 9.

Association between cell cycle gene transcription and tumor size in oral squamous
cell carcinoma.

Diniz MG(1), de Fatima Correia Silva J(2), de Souza FT(2), Pereira NB(2), Gomes
CC(3), Gomez RS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery and Pathology, School of Dentistry, Universidade
Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, 
cep 31270-901, Brazil. marinadiniz@gmail.com. (2)Department of Oral Surgery and
Pathology, School of Dentistry, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Av. Antônio
Carlos, 6627, Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, cep 31270-901, Brazil. (3)Department 
of Pathology, Biological Sciences Institute, Universidade Federal de Minas
Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.

Higher tumor size correlates with poor prognosis and is an independent predictive
survival factor in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) patients. However, the
molecular events underlining OSCC tumor evolution are poorly understood. We aimed
to investigate if large OSCC tumors show different cell cycle gene
transcriptional signature compared to small tumors. Seventeen fresh OSCC tumor
samples with different tumor sizes (T) were included in the study. Tumors were
from the tongue or from the floor of the mouth, and only three patients were
nonsmokers. Samples were categorized according to clinical tumor size in tumors
=2 cm (T1, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>5) or tumors >2 cm (T2, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>9; T3, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>2; T4, n<U+2009>=<U+2009>1). The group of
tumors =2 cm was considered the reference group, while the larger tumors were
considered the test group. We assessed the expression of 84 cell cycle genes by
qRT-PCR array and normalized it to the expression of two housekeeping genes.
Results were analyzed according to the formula 2(^-DeltaCt). A five-fold change
cutoff was used, and p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.
Ki-67 immunohistochemistry was performed to estimate cell proliferation index.
Twenty-nine genes were downregulated in the test group (larger tumors) compared
to the reference group (smaller tumors). Among these genes, 13 reached
statistical significance: ANAPC4, CUL1, SUMO1, KPNA2, MAD2L2, CCNG2, E2F4, NBN,
CUL2, PCNA, TFDP1, KNTC1, and ATR. Ki-67 labeling index was similar in both tumor
groups. Our findings suggest that the transcriptional activity of specific cell
cycle genes varies according to the size of OSCC tumor, which probably reflects
tumor molecular evolution and adaptation to the microenvironment.

PMID: 26152289  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 12;290(24):15350-61. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.629956. Epub
2015 May 4.

Kelch Repeat and BTB Domain Containing Protein 5 (Kbtbd5) Regulates Skeletal
Muscle Myogenesis through the E2F1-DP1 Complex.

Gong W(1), Gohla RM(1), Bowlin KM(1), Koyano-Nakagawa N(1), Garry DJ(1), Shi
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities,
Minneapolis Minnesota 55455. (2)From the Lillehei Heart Institute, University of 
Minnesota-Twin Cities, Minneapolis Minnesota 55455 shixz@umn.edu.

We have previously isolated a muscle-specific Kelch gene, Kelch repeat and BTB
domain containing protein 5 (Kbtbd5)/Kelch-like protein 40 (Klhl40). In this
report, we identified DP1 as a direct interacting factor for Kbtbd5 using a yeast
two-hybrid screen and in vitro binding assays. Our studies demonstrate that
Kbtbd5 interacts and regulates the cytoplasmic localization of DP1. GST pulldown 
assays demonstrate that the dimerization domain of DP1 interacts with all three
of the Kbtbd5 domains. We further show that Kbtbd5 promotes the ubiquitination
and degradation of DP1, thereby inhibiting E2F1-DP1 activity. To investigate the 
in vivo function of Kbtbd5, we used gene disruption technology and engineered
Kbtbd5 null mice. Targeted deletion of Kbtbd5 resulted in postnatal lethality.
Histological studies reveal that the Kbtbd5 null mice have smaller muscle fibers,
a disorganized sarcomeric structure, increased extracellular matrix, and
decreased numbers of mitochondria compared with wild-type controls. RNA
sequencing and quantitative PCR analyses demonstrate the up-regulation of E2F1
target apoptotic genes (Bnip3 and p53inp1) in Kbtbd5 null skeletal muscle.
Consistent with these observations, the cellular apoptosis in Kbtbd5 null mice
was increased. Breeding of Kbtbd5 null mouse into the E2F1 null background
rescues the lethal phenotype of the Kbtbd5 null mice but not the growth defect.
The expression of Bnip3 and p53inp1 in Kbtbd5 mutant skeletal muscle are also
restored to control levels in the E2F1 null background. In summary, our studies
demonstrate that Kbtbd5 regulates skeletal muscle myogenesis through the
regulation of E2F1-DP1 activity.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4463473 [Available on 2016-06-12]
PMID: 25940086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Dev Dyn. 2015 May;244(5):651-68. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24259.

Proliferation following tetraploidization regulates the size and number of
erythrocytes in the blood flow during medaka development, as revealed by the
abnormal karyotype of erythrocytes in the medaka TFDP1 mutant.

Taimatsu K(1), Takubo K, Maruyama K, Suda T, Kudo A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Information, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: For the delivery of oxygen, the correct size/number of erythrocytes
is required for proper blood flow.
RESULTS: By combined analyses of wild-type (WT) medaka and the kyoho (kyo)
mutant, we found proliferation-mediated adaptation for size/number of
erythrocytes in the blood flow during medaka development. Before the start of
heart beating in the WT medaka, the karyotype of erythrocytes was 2N-4N. After
the start of blood flow, the karyotype changed to 4N-8N with tetraploidization,
and the cell size became larger. After the start of intersegmental and pharyngeal
blood flow, the erythrocytes became smaller. The medaka mutant kyo showed
erythrocytes of large size, and positional cloning of kyo demonstrated the
candidate gene TFDP1, indicating higher polyploidization due to arrest in S-phase
in erythrocytes of the kyo mutant.
CONCLUSIONS: From our findings, we uncovered a previously unrecognized system for
the regulation of the size/number in the blood flow:proliferation of erythrocytes
following tetraploidization during embryonic development.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25648602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. OMICS. 2014 Oct;18(10):625-35. doi: 10.1089/omi.2014.0058. Epub 2014 Aug 18.

Next-generation sequencing of colorectal cancers in chinese: identification of a 
recurrent frame-shift and gain-of-function Indel mutation in the TFDP1 gene.

Chen C(1), Liu J, Zhou F, Sun J, Li L, Jin C, Shao J, Jiang H, Zhao N, Zheng S,
Lin B.

Author information: 
(1)1 Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory of Cancer Prevention and Intervention,
China National Ministry of Education), Second Affiliated Hospital, College of
Medicine, Zhejiang University , Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China .

Abstract Re-sequencing of target genes is a highly effective approach for
identifying mutations in cancers. Mutations, including indels (insertions,
deletions, and the combination of the two), play important roles in
carcinogenesis. Combining genomic DNA capture using high-density oligonucleotide 
microarrays (NimbleGen, Inc.) with next-generation high-throughput sequencing, we
identified approximately 1600 indels for colorectal cancers in the Chinese
population. Among them, 5 indels were localized to exonic regions of genes,
including the TFDP1 (transcription factor Dp-1) gene. TFDP1 is an important
transcription factor that coordinates with E2F proteins, thereby promoting
transcription of E2F target genes and regulating the cell cycle and
differentiation. We report here the identification of a recurrent frame-shift
indel mutation (named indel84) in the TFDP1 gene in colorectal cancers by
next-generation sequencing. We found in a validation set that TFDP1 indel84 is
present in 70% of colorectal cancer (CRC) tissues. Wild-type TFDP1 encodes a
protein of 410 amino acids with a potential DNA binding site at its N-terminal
followed by several functional protein domains. The TFDP1 indel cDNA would
generate an alternative TFDP1 protein missing the first 120 amino acids and
potentially affecting the DNA binding domain. We further demonstrated that the
TFDP1 indel84 mutation generated a gain-of-function phenotype by increasing cell 
proliferation, migration, and invasion of CRC cells. Our study identified a key
molecular event for CRC that might have great diagnostic and therapeutic
potentials.

PMCID: PMC4175976
PMID: 25133581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Hepatology. 2014 Oct;60(4):1241-50. doi: 10.1002/hep.27218. Epub 2014 Jul 31.

Overexpression of far upstream element (FUSE) binding protein (FBP)-interacting
repressor (FIR) supports growth of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Malz M(1), Bovet M, Samarin J, Rabenhorst U, Sticht C, Bissinger M, Roessler S,
Bermejo JL, Renner M, Calvisi DF, Singer S, Ganzinger M, Weber A, Gretz N, Zörnig
M, Schirmacher P, Breuhahn K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany.

The far upstream element binding protein (FBP) and the FBP-interacting repressor 
(FIR) represent molecular tools for transcriptional fine tuning of target genes. 
Strong overexpression of FBP in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) supports
tumor growth and correlates with poor patient prognosis. However, the role of the
transcriptional repressor FIR in hepatocarcinogenesis remains poorly delineated. 
We show that overexpression of FIR correlates with tumor dedifferentiation and
tumor cell proliferation in about 60% of primary HCCs. Elevated FIR levels are
associated with genomic gains of the FIR gene locus at chromosome 8q24.3 in human
HCC specimens. In vitro, nuclear enrichment of FIR supports HCC cell
proliferation and migration. Expression profiling of HCC cells after small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated silencing of FIR identified the transcription
factor DP-1 (TFDP1) as a transcriptional target of FIR. Surprisingly, FIR
stimulates the expression of FBP in a TFDP1/E2F1-dependent manner. FIR splice
variants lacking or containing exon 2 and/or exon 5 are expressed in the majority
of HCCs but not in normal hepatocytes. Specific inhibition of FIR isoforms with
and without exon 2 revealed that both groups of FIR splice variants facilitate
tumor-supporting effects. This finding was confirmed in xenograft transplantation
experiments with lentiviral-infected short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting all FIR 
variants as well as FIR with and without exon 2.CONCLUSION: High-level nuclear
FIR does not facilitate repressor properties but supports tumor growth in HCC
cells. Thus, the pharmacological inhibition of FIR might represent a promising
therapeutic strategy for HCC patients with elevated FIR expression.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24824848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 5;9(3):e90133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090133. eCollection 
2014.

Nanostring-based multigene assay to predict recurrence for gastric cancer
patients after surgery.

Lee J(1), Sohn I(2), Do IG(3), Kim KM(4), Park SH(1), Park JO(1), Park YS(1), Lim
HY(1), Sohn TS(5), Bae JM(5), Choi MG(5), Lim do H(6), Min BH(7), Lee JH(7), Rhee
PL(7), Kim JJ(7), Choi DI(8), Tan IB(9), Das K(10), Tan P(11), Jung SH(2), Kang
WK(1), Kim S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Samsung
Cancer Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. (3)Samsung
Cancer Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea; Department of
Pathology, Samsung Medical Center Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine,
Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Department of Surgery, Samsung
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (7)Department of Gastroenterology,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(8)Department of Radiology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (9)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore. (10)Genome Institute of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore. (11)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical
School Singapore, Singapore; Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore;
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Despite the benefits from adjuvant chemotherapy or chemoradiotherapy,
approximately one-third of stage II gastric cancer (GC) patients developed
recurrences. The aim of this study was to develop and validate a prognostic
algorithm for gastric cancer (GCPS) that can robustly identify high-risk group
for recurrence among stage II patients. A multi-step gene expression profiling
study was conducted. First, a microarray gene expression profiling of archived
paraffin-embedded tumor blocks was used to identify candidate prognostic genes
(N=432). Second, a focused gene expression assay including prognostic genes was
used to develop a robust clinical assay (GCPS) in stage II patients from the same
cohort (N=186). Third, a predefined cut off for the GCPS was validated using an
independent stage II cohort (N=216). The GCPS was validated in another set with
stage II GC who underwent surgery without adjuvant treatment (N=300). GCPS was
developed by summing the product of Cox regression coefficients and normalized
expression levels of 8 genes (LAMP5, CDC25B, CDK1, CLIP4, LTB4R2, MATN3, NOX4,
TFDP1). A prospectively defined cut-point for GCPS classified 22.7% of validation
cohort treated with chemoradiotherapy (N=216) as high-risk group with 5-year
recurrence rate of 58.6% compared to 85.4% in the low risk group (hazard ratio
for recurrence=3.16, p=0.00004). GCPS also identified high-risk group among stage
II patients treated with surgery only (hazard ratio=1.77, p=0.0053).

PMCID: PMC3943911
PMID: 24598828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. BMC Genomics. 2013;14 Suppl 6:S5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-S6-S5. Epub 2013 Oct 
25.

A novel in silico reverse-transcriptomics-based identification and blood-based
validation of a panel of sub-type specific biomarkers in lung cancer.

Barh D, Jain N, Tiwari S, Field JK, Padin-Iruegas E, Ruibal A, López R, Herranz
M, Bhattacharya A, Juneja L, Viero C, Silva A, Miyoshi A, Kumar A, Blum K,
Azevedo V, Ghosh P, Liloglou T.

Lung cancer accounts for the highest number of cancer-related deaths worldwide.
Early diagnosis significantly increases the disease-free survival rate and a
large amount of effort has been expended in screening trials and the development 
of early molecular diagnostics. However, a gold standard diagnostic strategy is
not yet available. Here, based on miRNA expression profile in lung cancer and
using a novel in silico reverse-transcriptomics approach, followed by analysis of
the interactome; we have identified potential transcription factor (TF) markers
that would facilitate diagnosis of subtype specific lung cancer. A subset of
seven TF markers has been used in a microarray screen and was then validated by
blood-based qPCR using stage-II and IV non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC).
Our results suggest that overexpression of HMGA1, E2F6, IRF1, and TFDP1 and
downregulation or no expression of SUV39H1, RBL1, and HNRPD in blood is suitable 
for diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma sub-types of
NSCLC. Here, E2F6 was, for the first time, found to be upregulated in NSCLC blood
samples. The miRNA-TF-miRNA interaction based molecular mechanisms of these seven
markers in NSCLC revealed that HMGA1 and TFDP1 play vital roles in lung cancer
tumorigenesis. The strategy developed in this work is applicable to any other
cancer or disease and can assist in the identification of potential biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC3908344
PMID: 24564251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Exp Neurol. 2014 Mar;253:82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.12.002. Epub 2013
Dec 10.

Prostaglandin D(2) is crucial for seizure suppression and postictal sleep.

Kaushik MK(1), Aritake K(1), Kamauchi S(2), Hayaishi O(2), Huang ZL(3), Lazarus
M(4), Urade Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University 
of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, 
Osaka 565-0874, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka
Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan. (3)Department
of Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai,
Suita, Osaka 565-0874, Japan; Department of Pharmacology, Fudan University
Shanghai Medical College, 138 Yixueyuan Road, Shanghai 200032, China.
(4)International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University 
of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, 
Osaka 565-0874, Japan. Electronic address: lazarus.michael.ka@u.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(5)International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine (WPI-IIIS), University 
of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan; Department of
Molecular Behavioral Biology, Osaka Bioscience Institute, 6-2-4 Furuedai, Suita, 
Osaka 565-0874, Japan. Electronic address: urade.yoshihiro.ft@u.tsukuba.ac.jp.

Epilepsy is a neurological disorder with the occurrence of seizures, which are
often accompanied by sleep. Prostaglandin (PG) D2 is produced by hematopoietic or
lipocalin-type PGD synthase (H- or L-PGDS) and involved in the regulation of
physiological sleep. Here, we show that H-PGDS, L/H-PGDS or DP1 receptor (DP1R)
KO mice exhibited more intense pentylenetetrazole (PTZ)-induced seizures in terms
of latency of seizure onset, duration of generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and
number of seizure spikes. Seizures significantly increased the PGD2 content of
the brain in wild-type mice. This PTZ-induced increase in PGD2 was attenuated in 
the brains of L- or H-PGDS KO and abolished in L/H-PGDS KO mice. Postictal
non-rapid eye movement sleep was observed in the wild-type and H-PGDS or DP2R KO,
but not in the L-, L/H-PGDS or DP1R KO, mice. These findings demonstrate that
PGD2 produced by H-PGDS and acting on DP1R is essential for seizure suppression
and that the L-PGDS/PGD2/DP1R system regulates sleep that follows seizures.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Ovarian Res. 2013 Dec 6;6(1):88. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-6-88.

Gene-gene interaction network analysis of ovarian cancer using TCGA data.

Ying H(1), Lv J, Ying T, Jin S, Shao J, Wang L, Xu H, Yuan B, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, No,36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province
110004, China. huanchunyiing@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8(1):18.
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8:18. doi:10.1186/s13048-015-0146-2.

BACKGROUND: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Data portal provides a platform for
researchers to search, download, and analysis data generated by TCGA. The
objective of this study was to explore the molecular mechanism of ovarian cancer 
pathogenesis.
METHODS: Microarray data of ovarian cancer were downloaded from TCGA database,
and Limma package in R language was used to identify the differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between ovarian cancer and normal samples, followed by the function 
and pathway annotations of the DEGs. Next, NetBox software was used to for the
gene-gene interaction (GGI) network construction and the corresponding modules
identification, and functions of genes in the modules were screened using DAVID.
RESULTS: Our studies identified 332 DEGs, including 146 up-regulated genes which 
mainly involved in the cell cycle related functions and cell cycle pathway, and
186 down-regulated genes which were enriched in extracellular region par
function, and Ether lipid metabolism pathway. GGI network was constructed by 127 
DEGs and their significantly interacted 209 genes (LINKERs). In the top 10 nodes 
ranked by degrees in the network, 5 were LINKERs. Totally, 7 functional modules
in the network were selected, and they were enriched in different functions and
pathways, such as mitosis process, DNA replication and DNA double-strand
synthesis, lipid synthesis processes and metabolic pathways. AR, BRCA1, TFDP1,
FOXM1, CDK2, and DBF4 were identified as the transcript factors of the 7 modules.
CONCLUSION: our data provides a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of genes,
functions, and pathways which may be involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4029308
PMID: 24314048  [PubMed]


13. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 26;8(11):e80751. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080751.
eCollection 2013.

Novel factors in the pathogenesis of psoriasis and potential drug candidates are 
found with systems biology approach.

Manczinger M(1), Kemény L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University of Szeged, Szeged,
Hungary.

Psoriasis is a multifactorial inflammatory skin disease characterized by
increased proliferation of keratinocytes, activation of immune cells and
susceptibility to metabolic syndrome. Systems biology approach makes it possible 
to reveal novel important factors in the pathogenesis of the disease.
Protein-protein, protein-DNA, merged (containing both protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions) and chemical-protein interaction networks were
constructed consisting of differentially expressed genes (DEG) between lesional
and non-lesional skin samples of psoriatic patients and/or the encoded proteins. 
DEGs were determined by microarray meta-analysis using MetaOMICS package. We used
STRING for protein-protein, CisRED for protein-DNA and STITCH for
chemical-protein interaction network construction. General network-, cluster- and
motif-analysis were carried out in each network. Many DEG-coded proteins (CCNA2, 
FYN, PIK3R1, CTGF, F3) and transcription factors (AR, TFDP1, MEF2A, MECOM) were
identified as central nodes, suggesting their potential role in psoriasis
pathogenesis. CCNA2, TFDP1 and MECOM might play role in the hyperproliferation of
keratinocytes, whereas FYN may be involved in the disturbed immunity in
psoriasis. AR can be an important link between inflammation and insulin
resistance, while MEF2A has role in insulin signaling. A controller sub-network
was constructed from interlinked positive feedback loops that with the capability
to maintain psoriatic lesional phenotype. Analysis of chemical-protein
interaction networks detected 34 drugs with previously confirmed
disease-modifying effects, 23 drugs with some experimental evidences, and 21
drugs with case reports suggesting their positive or negative effects. In
addition, 99 unpublished drug candidates were also found, that might serve future
treatments for psoriasis.

PMCID: PMC3841158
PMID: 24303025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Tumour Biol. 2014 Mar;35(3):2619-29. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1345-3. Epub 2013
Nov 12.

Overexpression of stathmin 1 confers an independent prognostic indicator in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Hsu HP(1), Li CF, Lee SW, Wu WR, Chen TJ, Chang KY, Liang SS, Tsai CJ, Shiue YL.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Medical Education, Chi-Mei Medical Center, Tainan, Taiwan.

Data mining on public domain identified that stathmin 1 (STMN1) transcript was
significantly higher expressed in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). Also known as
the oncoprotein 18, STMN1 performs an important function in regulating rapid
microtubule remodeling of the cytoskeleton in response to the cellular
conditions. Immunoexpression of STMN1 was retrospectively assessed in biopsies of
124 consecutive NPC patients without initial distant metastasis and treated with 
consistent guidelines. The outcome was correlated with clinicopathological
features and patient survivals. Results indicated that high STMN1 expressions
(50 %) were correlated with advanced age (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.027), higher T stage (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003),
and overall clinical stage (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006) by the 7th American Joint Committee of
Cancer Staging. In multivariate analyses, high STMN1 expression emerged as an
independent prognosticator for worse disease-specific survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001),
distal metastasis-free survival (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003), and local recurrence-free survival
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006). Exogenous expression of E2F transcription factor 1 (E2F1) or/and its
dimeric partner, transcription factor Dp-1 (TFDP1), notably induced the STMN1
protein level in a NPC-derived cell line, TW01. Accordingly, high STMN1 protein
level is commonly associated with adverse prognosticators and confers tumor
aggressiveness in patients with NPC, and its upregulation might be attributed to 
E2F1 and/or TFDP1 transactivation.

PMID: 24218338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 3;33(27):3594-603. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.316. Epub 2013 Aug
12.

Pleiotropic effect of somatic mutations in the E2F subunit DP-1 gene in human
cancer.

Munro S(1), Oppermann U(2), La Thangue NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Laboratory of Cancer Biology, Medical Sciences
Division, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (2)Nuffield Department of
Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences University of Oxford,
Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre, Windmill Road, Oxford, UK.

Transcription factor E2F-1 and its interaction with pRb provide a key point of
control in cell proliferation. E2F-1 participates in both cell cycle progression 
and apoptosis, and in cells exists with a DP dimerization partner protein, the
most prominent being DP-1. By mining the tumor tissue and cancer cell line
encyclopedia genomic databases, we identified the first somatic mutations in the 
DP-1 gene and describe 53 distinct mutation events here. The mutations are mostly
missense mutations, but also include nonsense and frame-shift mutations that
result in truncated DP-1 derivatives. Mutation occurs throughout the DP-1 gene
but generally leaves protein dimerization activity intact. This allows the mutant
derivatives to affect the properties of the E2F-1/DP-1 heterodimer through a
transdominant mechanism, which changes the DNA binding, transcriptional
activation and pRb-binding properties of the heterodimer. In particular, many
DP-1 mutants were found to impair E2F-1-dependent apoptosis. Our results
establish that somatic mutations in DP-1 uncouple normal control of the E2F
pathway, and thus define a new mechanism that could contribute to aberrant
proliferation in tumor cells.

PMID: 23934193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 11;8(7):e67552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067552. Print 2013.

Reconstruction of an integrated genome-scale co-expression network reveals key
modules involved in lung adenocarcinoma.

Bidkhori G(1), Narimani Z, Hosseini Ashtiani S, Moeini A, Nowzari-Dalini A,
Masoudi-Nejad A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics (LBB), Institute of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran.

Our goal of this study was to reconstruct a "genome-scale co-expression network" 
and find important modules in lung adenocarcinoma so that we could identify the
genes involved in lung adenocarcinoma. We integrated gene mutation, GWAS, CGH,
array-CGH and SNP array data in order to identify important genes and loci in
genome-scale. Afterwards, on the basis of the identified genes a co-expression
network was reconstructed from the co-expression data. The reconstructed network 
was named "genome-scale co-expression network". As the next step, 23 key modules 
were disclosed through clustering. In this study a number of genes have been
identified for the first time to be implicated in lung adenocarcinoma by
analyzing the modules. The genes EGFR, PIK3CA, TAF15, XIAP, VAPB, Appl1, Rab5a,
ARF4, CLPTM1L, SP4, ZNF124, LPP, FOXP1, SOX18, MSX2, NFE2L2, SMARCC1, TRA2B,
CBX3, PRPF6, ATP6V1C1, MYBBP1A, MACF1, GRM2, TBXA2R, PRKAR2A, PTK2, PGF and MYO10
are among the genes that belong to modules 1 and 22. All these genes, being
implicated in at least one of the phenomena, namely cell survival, proliferation 
and metastasis, have an over-expression pattern similar to that of EGFR. In few
modules, the genes such as CCNA2 (Cyclin A2), CCNB2 (Cyclin B2), CDK1, CDK5,
CDC27, CDCA5, CDCA8, ASPM, BUB1, KIF15, KIF2C, NEK2, NUSAP1, PRC1, SMC4, SYCE2,
TFDP1, CDC42 and ARHGEF9 are present that play a crucial role in cell cycle
progression. In addition to the mentioned genes, there are some other genes (i.e.
DLGAP5, BIRC5, PSMD2, Src, TTK, SENP2, PSMD2, DOK2, FUS and etc.) in the modules.

PMCID: PMC3708931
PMID: 23874428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Jul 13;14:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-70.

Dystonia, facial dysmorphism, intellectual disability and breast cancer
associated with a chromosome 13q34 duplication and overexpression of TFDP1: case 
report.

Moscovich M, LeDoux MS, Xiao J, Rampon GL, Vemula SR, Rodriguez RL, Foote KD,
Okun MS.

BACKGROUND: Dystonia is a movement disorder characterized by involuntary
sustained muscle contractions causing twisting and repetitive movements or
abnormal postures. Some cases of primary and neurodegenerative dystonia have been
associated with mutations in individual genes critical to the G1-S checkpoint
pathway (THAP1, ATM, CIZ1 and TAF1). Secondary dystonia is also a relatively
common clinical sign in many neurogenetic disorders. However, the contribution of
structural variation in the genome to the etiopathogenesis of dystonia remains
largely unexplored.
CASE PRESENTATION: Cytogenetic analyses with the Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP
Array 6.0 identified a chromosome 13q34 duplication in a 36 year-old female with 
global developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, tall stature, breast cancer and
dystonia, and her neurologically-normal father. Dystonia improved with bilateral 
globus pallidus interna (GPi) deep brain stimulation (DBS). Genomic breakpoint
analysis, quantitative PCR (qPCR) and leukocyte gene expression were used to
characterize the structural variant. The 218,345 bp duplication was found to
include ADPRHL1, DCUN1D2, and TMCO3, and a 69 bp fragment from a long terminal
repeat (LTR) located within Intron 3 of TFDP1. The 3' breakpoint was located
within Exon 1 of a TFDP1 long non-coding RNA (NR_026580.1). In the affected
subject and her father, gene expression was higher for all three genes located
within the duplication. However, in comparison to her father, mother and
neurologically-normal controls, the affected subject also showed marked
overexpression (2×) of the transcription factor TFDP1 (NM_007111.4). Whole-exome 
sequencing identified an SGCE variant (c.1295G > A, p.Ser432His) that could
possibly have contributed to the development of dystonia in the proband. No
pathogenic mutations were identified in BRCA1 or BRCA2.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of TFDP1 has been associated with breast cancer and
may also be linked to the tall stature, dysmorphism and dystonia seen in our
patient.

PMCID: PMC3722009
PMID: 23849371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Skin Cancer. 2013;2013:452425. doi: 10.1155/2013/452425. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Protein Kinase C e , Which Is Linked to Ultraviolet Radiation-Induced Development
of Squamous Cell Carcinomas, Stimulates Rapid Turnover of Adult Hair Follicle
Stem Cells.

Singh A(1), Singh A, Sand JM, Heninger E, Hafeez BB, Verma AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Oncology, Wisconsin Institutes for Medical Research,
School of Medicine and Public Health, 1111 Highland Avenue, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

To find clues about the mechanism by which kinase C epsilon (PKC e ) may impart
susceptibility to ultraviolet radiation (UVR)-induced development of cutaneous
squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), we compared PKC e transgenic (TG) mice and their 
wild-type (WT) littermates for (1) the effects of UVR exposures on percent of
putative hair follicle stem cells (HSCs) and (2) HSCs proliferation. The percent 
of double HSCs (CD34+ and a 6-integrin or CD34+/CD49f+) in the isolated
keratinocytes were determined by flow cytometric analysis. Both single and
chronic UVR treatments (1.8<U+2009>kJ/m(2)) resulted in an increase in the frequency of 
double positive HSCs in PKC e TG mice as compared to their WT littermates. To
determine the rate of proliferation of bulge region stem cells, a
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine labeling (BrdU) experiment was performed. In the WT mice,
the percent of double positive HSCs retaining BrdU label was 28.4 ± 0.6% compared
to 4.0 ± 0.06% for the TG mice, an approximately 7-fold decrease. A comparison of
gene expression profiles of FACS sorted double positive HSCs showed increased
expression of Pes1, Rad21, Tfdp1 and Cks1b genes in TG mice compared to WT mice. 
Also, PKC e over expression in mice increased the clonogenicity of isolated
keratinocytes, a property commonly ascribed to stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3657453
PMID: 23738074  [PubMed]


19. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 15;73(14):4337-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4454. Epub 
2013 May 6.

Loss of ARF sensitizes transgenic BRAFV600E mice to UV-induced melanoma via
suppression of XPC.

Luo C(1), Sheng J, Hu MG, Haluska FG, Cui R, Xu Z, Tsichlis PN, Hu GF, Hinds PW.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, 
Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Both genetic mutations and UV irradiation (UVR) can predispose individuals to
melanoma. Although BRAF(V600E) is the most prevalent oncogene in melanoma, the
BRAF(V600E) mutant is not sufficient to induce tumors in vivo. Mutation at the
CDKN2A locus is another melanoma-predisposing event that can disrupt the function
of both p16(INK4a) and ARF. Numerous studies have focused on the role of
p16(INK4a) in melanoma, but the involvement of ARF, a well-known p53 activator,
is still controversial. Using a transgenic BRAF(V600E) mouse model previously
generated in our laboratory, we report that loss of ARF is able to enhance
spontaneous melanoma formation and cause profound sensitivity to neonatal UVB
exposure. Mechanistically, BRAF(V600E) and ARF deletion synergize to inhibit
nucleotide excision repair by epigenetically repressing XPC and inhibiting the
E2F4/DP1 complex. We suggest that the deletion of ARF promotes melanomagenesis
not by abrogating p53 activation but by acting in concert with BRAF(V600E) to
increase the load of DNA damage caused by UVR.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3715591
PMID: 23650282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Gene. 2013 Oct 1;528(1):51-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.145. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

A 1.1Mb deletion in distal 13q deletion syndrome region with congenital heart
defect and postaxial polydactyly: additional support for a CHD locus at distal
13q34 region.

Yang YF(1), Ai Q, Huang C, Chen JL, Wang J, Xie L, Zhang WZ, Yang JF, Tan ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

13q deletion syndrome is a rare genetic disorder, especially for group 3 deletion
(13q33-q34 deletion). Previously we described a patient with congenital heart
defect and mental retardation and proposed that a distal 6Mb region might contain
the causative gene of congenital heart defect. Here we present a new patient with
congenital heart defects (CHD), hand and foot anomalies and mild mental
retardation. We identified a 1.1Mb deletion at chromosome 13q34 with high
resolution SNP-array BeadChips (HumanOmni1-Quad, Illumina, USA). This chromosome 
region contains ten annotated genes, including GRK1, TFDP1, RASA3 and GAS6. To
our knowledge, this represents the smallest 13q34 deletion identified to date.
Our study provides additional support that distal 13q34 deletion region might
contain key gene(s) responsible for cardiac development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23639964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Nov;20(12):4041-54. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2519-8. Epub
2012 Aug 22.

The E2F transcription factor 1 transactives stathmin 1 in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Chen YL(1), Uen YH, Li CF, Horng KC, Chen LR, Wu WR, Tseng HY, Huang HY, Wu LC,
Shiue YL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Through data mining the Stanford Microarray Database, the stathmin 1 
(STMN1) transcript was found to be frequently upregulated in the hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) with low alpha-fetoprotein level. The molecular mechanism of
STMN1 upregulation in HCCs remained unclear.
METHODS: Quantitative RT-PCR, immunoblotting, immunohistochemistry, and
transfection of expression or small hairpin RNA interference plasmids, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation (ChIP), and quantitative ChIP assays were performed in HCC
specimens or 2 distinct HCC-derived cell lines. Dual luciferase assay and
site-directed mutagenesis were applied to analyze the activities of STMN1
proximal promoter region.
RESULTS: STMN1 mRNA and proteins were significantly associated with several
clinicopathological features. High STMN1 or E2F1 immunoexpression was predictive 
of poor overall survival (OS) rate (P < .01). In HCC-derived cell lines, E2F1 was
elevated before STMN1 mRNA during the cell cycle. Exogenous expression of E2F1 or
both transcription factor DP-1 (TFDP1) and E2F1 genes induced E2F1 and STMN1 mRNA
(P < .01). Knockdown of the E2F1 gene suppressed E2F1 and STMN1 mRNA and E2F1 and
STMN1 protein levels (P < .05). The promoter activity of STMN1 gene increased
with overexpression of both E2F1 and TFDP1 genes (P < .05); however, it decreased
when mutations were introduced in the E2F1-binding sites (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of E2F1 and STMN1 proteins associate with worse
outcomes in patients with HCC. E2F1 significantly correlates with STMN1 protein
level in HCC lesions and in vitro transactivation assays, suggesting that STMN1
gene is transactivated by the E2F1 protein.

PMID: 22911364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Aug;23(16):3079-93. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-02-0170. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Live-cell monitoring of periodic gene expression in synchronous human cells
identifies Forkhead genes involved in cell cycle control.

Grant GD(1), Gamsby J, Martyanov V, Brooks L 3rd, George LK, Mahoney JM, Loros
JJ, Dunlap JC, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755, USA.

We developed a system to monitor periodic luciferase activity from cell
cycle-regulated promoters in synchronous cells. Reporters were driven by a
minimal human E2F1 promoter with peak expression in G1/S or a basal promoter with
six Forkhead DNA-binding sites with peak expression at G2/M. After cell cycle
synchronization, luciferase activity was measured in live cells at 10-min
intervals across three to four synchronous cell cycles, allowing unprecedented
resolution of cell cycle-regulated gene expression. We used this assay to screen 
Forkhead transcription factors for control of periodic gene expression. We
confirmed a role for FOXM1 and identified two novel cell cycle regulators, FOXJ3 
and FOXK1. Knockdown of FOXJ3 and FOXK1 eliminated cell cycle-dependent
oscillations and resulted in decreased cell proliferation rates. Analysis of
genes regulated by FOXJ3 and FOXK1 showed that FOXJ3 may regulate a network of
zinc finger proteins and that FOXK1 binds to the promoter and regulates DHFR,
TYMS, GSDMD, and the E2F binding partner TFDP1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by high-throughput sequencing analysis identified 4329 genomic loci
bound by FOXK1, 83% of which contained a FOXK1-binding motif. We verified that a 
subset of these loci are activated by wild-type FOXK1 but not by a FOXK1 (H355A) 
DNA-binding mutant.

PMCID: PMC3418304
PMID: 22740631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Pathol. 2012 Dec;228(4):520-33. doi: 10.1002/path.4059. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

MYC-regulated genes involved in liver cell dysplasia identified in a transgenic
model of liver cancer.

Hunecke D(1), Spanel R, Länger F, Nam SW, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Pharmacology and Toxicology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany; Department of Molecular Medicine
and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental
Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Foci of liver cell dysplasia (LCD) are distinct morphological entities and may
evolve into hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). While most HCCs overexpress c-Myc, 
its role in LCD remains uncertain. Therefore, a c-Myc transgenic model of HCC was
investigated to understand the genetic events forcing liver cells into dysplasia 
and subsequent malignant transformation. Specifically, whole genome scans enabled
fingerprinting of genes at different stages of disease, ie LCD and HCC, while
laser microdissected LCD lesions were used to validate regulation of candidate
genes by quantitative real-time RT-PCR, ie Mybbp1a, Rps7, Rps19, Rpl10a, Skp1a,
Tfdp1, Nhp2, and Bola2. EMSA band shift assays confirmed c-Myc DNA binding at
regulatory sequences of candidate gene-specific promoters. Additionally,
published ChIP-seq data helped to define the candidate genes as c-Myc bona fide
targets. Treatment of the human hepatoma cell line HepG2 with hepatic growth
factor (Hgf) caused c-Myc protein induction and transcriptional up-regulation of 
candidate genes, albeit at different levels when individual genes were compared. 
A significant increase of HepG2 entering the G1-phase was associated with
up-regulation of the candidate genes in an Hgf concentration-dependent matter.
Finally, we confirmed regulation of candidate genes in patients' samples with
low- and high-grade dysplasia and HCC staged T1 to T3, while their expression was
unchanged in focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatic adenoma, therefore asserting
the diagnostic value and clinical significance of these candidate genes. Overall,
novel c-Myc targeted genes were identified and may contribute to hepatocyte
transformation by altering cell cycle control, thereby contributing to c-Myc's
oncogenic activity.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22653869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(17):8841-51. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00539-11. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Adenovirus E1A directly targets the E2F/DP-1 complex.

Pelka P(1), Miller MS, Cecchini M, Yousef AF, Bowdish DM, Dick F, Whyte P, Mymryk
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, MG DeGroote Institute for
Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, MDCL 4077, 1280 Main Street
West, Hamilton, ON, Canada L8S 4K1. peter.pelka@gmail.com

Deregulation of the cell cycle is of paramount importance during adenovirus
infection. Adenovirus normally infects quiescent cells and must initiate the cell
cycle in order to propagate itself. The pRb family of proteins controls entry
into the cell cycle by interacting with and repressing transcriptional activation
by the E2F transcription factors. The viral E1A proteins indirectly activate
E2F-dependent transcription and cell cycle entry, in part, by interacting with
pRb and family members to free the E2Fs. We report here that an E1A 13S isoform
can unexpectedly activate E2F-responsive gene expression independently of binding
to the pRb family of proteins. We demonstrate that E1A binds to E2F/DP-1
complexes through a direct interaction with DP-1. E1A appears to utilize this
binding to recruit itself to E2F-regulated promoters, and this allows the E1A 13S
protein, but not the E1A 12S protein, to activate transcription independently of 
interaction with pRb. Importantly, expression of E1A 13S, but not E1A 12S, led to
significant enhancement of E2F4 occupancy of E2F sites of two E2F-regulated
promoters. These observations identify a novel mechanism by which adenovirus
deregulates the cell cycle and suggest that E1A 13S may selectively activate a
subset of E2F-regulated cellular genes during infection.

PMCID: PMC3165805
PMID: 21715488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Syst Biol. 2011 May 9;5:67. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-5-67.

A modulated empirical Bayes model for identifying topological and temporal
estrogen receptor a regulatory networks in breast cancer.

Shen C(1), Huang Y, Liu Y, Wang G, Zhao Y, Wang Z, Teng M, Wang Y, Flockhart DA, 
Skaar TC, Yan P, Nephew KP, Huang TH, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Estrogens regulate diverse physiological processes in various tissues
through genomic and non-genomic mechanisms that result in activation or
repression of gene expression. Transcription regulation upon estrogen stimulation
is a critical biological process underlying the onset and progress of the
majority of breast cancer. Dynamic gene expression changes have been shown to
characterize the breast cancer cell response to estrogens, the every molecular
mechanism of which is still not well understood.
RESULTS: We developed a modulated empirical Bayes model, and constructed a novel 
topological and temporal transcription factor (TF) regulatory network in MCF7
breast cancer cell line upon stimulation by 17ß-estradiol stimulation. In the
network, significant TF genomic hubs were identified including ER-alpha and AP-1;
significant non-genomic hubs include ZFP161, TFDP1, NRF1, TFAP2A, EGR1, E2F1, and
PITX2. Although the early and late networks were distinct (<5% overlap of ERa
target genes between the 4 and 24 h time points), all nine hubs were
significantly represented in both networks. In MCF7 cells with acquired
resistance to tamoxifen, the ERa regulatory network was unresponsive to
17ß-estradiol stimulation. The significant loss of hormone responsiveness was
associated with marked epigenomic changes, including hyper- or hypo-methylation
of promoter CpG islands and repressive histone methylations.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a number of estrogen regulated target genes and
established estrogen-regulated network that distinguishes the genomic and
non-genomic actions of estrogen receptor. Many gene targets of this network were 
not active anymore in anti-estrogen resistant cell lines, possibly because their 
DNA methylation and histone acetylation patterns have changed.

PMCID: PMC3117732
PMID: 21554733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Hum Pathol. 2011 Oct;42(10):1505-13. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.01.005. Epub
2011 Apr 14.

Role for p16(INK4a) in progression of gastrointestinal stromal tumors of the
stomach: alteration of p16(INK4a) network members.

Mitomi H(1), Fukui N, Kishimoto I, Tanabe S, Kikuchi S, Saito T, Hayashi T, Yao
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan. hmitomi@juntendo-ac.jp

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors feature a wide spectrum of biologic behavior,
ranging from benign to extremely malignant. To determine the role of p16(INK4a)
alteration in progression of gastrointestinal stromal tumors of the stomach, we
have investigated protein expression and gene methylation in correlation with
clinicopathologic factors and survival. In addition to immunohistochemical
analysis of p16(INK4a) in a series of 95 cases, real-time quantitative
methylation specific polymerase chain reaction for p16(INK4a) and immunostaining 
for cyclin D1, cyclin E, pRb, DP-1, E2F-1, and Ki-67 were also evaluated in
randomly selected samples. The p16(INK4a) labeling indices ranged from 0% to 74% 
(median, 21%), demonstrating a significant inverse correlation with size (P =
.046). On univariate (P = .003) and multivariate (P = .067) analyses, loss of
p16(INK4a) expression increased the likelihood of a poor tumor-related survival. 
In addition, size (P = .036) and the mitotic index (P = .005) had independent
prognostic influence. The p16(INK4a) methylation index, which ranged from 0% to
100% (median, 17%), was significantly higher in larger tumors (P < .001) and in
high-risk category lesions (P = .001) and inversely correlated with protein
expression. Hierarchical cluster analysis based on expression of p16(INK4a)
network members identified 2 clusters in 27 randomly selected tumor samples,
containing 11 and 16 tumors each. Former cluster samples demonstrated higher risk
category (P = .022), higher p16(INK4a) methylation (P < .001), and more reduced
pRb expression (P < .018). In addition, p16(INK4a) network members clustered into
2 groups: (1) showing down-regulated p16(INK4a) protein and up-regulating of both
cyclin D1 and DP-1 and (2) down-regulated pRb and up-regulated E2F-1. We conclude
that p16(INK4a) alteration has an important role in progression of
gastrointestinal stromal tumors of the stomach. Furthermore, the study provides a
possible link between regulation of p16(INK4a) network members and
gastrointestinal stromal tumors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21496871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 15;10(8):1208-14. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

Nucleocytoplasmic Cdk5 is involved in neuronal cell cycle and death in
post-mitotic neurons.

Zhang J(1), Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, NJ, USA.

In a variety of neurodegenerative disease, despite the frequent correlation of
neuronal cell cycle and cell death in the same neuronal populations, the
mechanistic pathway linking the two remains undefined. One possible link is the
atypical cyclin dependent kinase, Cdk5. Cdk5 exerts a double protective function 
in neurons, first by suppressing the cell cycle in the nucleus and second by
suppressing cell death in the cytoplasm. Cdk5 transport between nucleus and
cytoplasm serves to regulate the balance between these two events. Cdk5 nuclear
localization relies on its interaction with p27, and its cell cycle suppression
activity is achieved by direct binding to E2F1, disrupting the DP1-E2F1 dimer and
its DNA binding ability. To bind to E2F1, Cdk5 does not need to be catalytically 
active but it does require a physical association with both p27 and its
cyclin-like activator, p35. Because of this requirement, the proper levels and
locations of p27 and p35 are characteristics that endow a neuron a unique form of
cell cycle regulation that uses Cdk5 in a non-catalytic role. The findings offer 
cautionary notes to any strategy aimed at blocking Cdk5 activity as a means of
combating neurodegenerative disease. To the extent that these approaches either
directly or indirectly influence Cdk5 levels or location, they may produce
unexpected and possibly unwanted consequences.

PMID: 21415596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Appl Toxicol. 2011 Jul;31(5):455-62. doi: 10.1002/jat.1646. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Pathway analysis of gene expression in local lymph nodes draining skin exposed to
three different sensitizers.

Ku HO(1), Jeong SH, Kang HG, Son SW, Yun SM, Ryu DY.

Author information: 
(1)National Veterinary Research and Quarantine Service, Anyang, 430-824, Republic
of Korea.

Genomic analysis in the local lymph node assays (LLNAs) is useful for assessing
skin sensitization of chemicals and providing insights into mechanisms of
sensitization. In this study, we collected 1406 genes from previous microarray
findings, validated changes in their expression by RT-PCR analysis in local lymph
nodes draining skin exposed to different sensitizers, and interpreted their
biological function through pathway-based genomic analysis, in which 468 genes
were identified as being in the KEGG pathway database. The top-ranked functions
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01) identified as being affected by the sensitizers were associated with
aspects of cell growth, such as DNA replication, cell cycle regulation and
pyrimidine metabolism. All the sensitizers tested (DNCB, OXA and TDI) induced
significant up-regulation of Psme4, which is associated with DNA replication;
Tfdp1, which is related to cell cycle regulation; and Dut, which is involved in
pyrimidine metabolism. Specific changes were also shown in functional categories 
related to the immune response, including cytokines and their receptors. Genes
identified in these functional categories, such as Ccl21c, Cxcl9, Cxcl10, Ifng
and Il12rb1, were found to have functional relevance. These findings may enhance 
our understanding and assessment of chemical sensitizers, and enable us to
distinguish sensitizers from irritants and to classify chemicals as contact
sensitizers.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21404309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Oncol. 2010 Dec;37(6):1529-36.

Novel medicinal mushroom blend suppresses growth and invasiveness of human breast
cancer cells.

Jiang J(1), Sliva D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratory, Methodist Research Institute, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

Mushrooms are an integral part of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), and have
been used for millennia to prevent or treat a variety of diseases. Currently
mushrooms or their extracts are used globally in the form of dietary supplements.
In the present study we have evaluated the anticancer effects of the dietary
supplement, MycoPhyto® Complex (MC), a novel medicinal mushroom blend which
consists of a blend of mushroom mycelia from the species Agaricus blazei,
Cordyceps sinensis, Coriolus versicolor, Ganoderma lucidum, Grifola frondosa and 
Polyporus umbellatus, and ß-1,3-glucan isolated from the yeast, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Here, we show that MC demonstrates cytostatic effects through the
inhibition of cell proliferation and cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase of
highly invasive human breast cancer cells MDA-MB-231. DNA-microarray analysis
revealed that MC inhibits expression of cell cycle regulatory genes (ANAPC2,
ANAPC2, BIRC5, Cyclin B1, Cyclin H, CDC20, CDK2, CKS1B, Cullin 1, E2F1, KPNA2,
PKMYT1 and TFDP1). Moreover, MC also suppresses the metastatic behavior of
MDA-MB-231 by the inhibition of cell adhesion, cell migration and cell invasion. 
The potency of MC to inhibit invasiveness of breast cancer cells is linked to the
suppression of secretion of the urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) from
MDA-MB-231 cells. In conclusion, the MC dietary supplement could have potential
therapeutic value in the treatment of invasive human breast cancer.

PMID: 21042722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 17;9:151. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-151.

Polycomb repressor complex 2 regulates HOXA9 and HOXA10, activating ID2 in
NK/T-cell lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Marquez VE, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, MacLeod RA,
Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr. 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

BACKGROUND: NK- and T-cells are closely related lymphocytes, originating from the
same early progenitor cells during hematopoiesis. In these differentiation
processes deregulation of developmental genes may contribute to leukemogenesis.
Here, we compared expression profiles of NK- and T-cell lines for identification 
of aberrantly expressed genes in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
which physiologically regulate the differentiation program of the NK-cell
lineage.
RESULTS: This analysis showed high expression levels of HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2 in 
NK-cell lines in addition to T-cell line LOUCY, suggesting leukemic deregulation 
therein. Overexpression experiments, chromatin immuno-precipitation and promoter 
analysis demonstrated that HOXA9 and HOXA10 directly activated expression of ID2.
Concomitantly elevated expression levels of HOXA9 and HOXA10 together with ID2 in
cell lines containing MLL translocations confirmed this form of regulation in
both ALL and acute myeloid leukemia. Overexpression of HOXA9, HOXA10 or ID2
resulted in repressed expression of apoptosis factor BIM. Furthermore, profiling 
data of genes coding for chromatin regulators of homeobox genes, including
components of polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2), indicated lacking expression
of EZH2 in LOUCY and exclusive expression of HOP in NK-cell lines. Subsequent
treatment of T-cell lines JURKAT and LOUCY with DZNep, an inhibitor of EZH2/PRC2,
resulted in elevated and unchanged HOXA9/10 expression levels, respectively.
Moreover, siRNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 in JURKAT enhanced HOXA10 expression, 
confirming HOXA10-repression by EZH2. Additionally, profiling data and
overexpression analysis indicated that reduced expression of E2F cofactor TFDP1
contributed to the lack of EZH2 in LOUCY. Forced expression of HOP in JURKAT
cells resulted in reduced HOXA10 and ID2 expression levels, suggesting
enhancement of PRC2 repression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that major differentiation factors of the NK-cell
lineage, including HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2, were (de)regulated via PRC2 which
therefore contributes to T-cell leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2894765
PMID: 20565746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Pathol. 2010 Sep;222(1):89-98. doi: 10.1002/path.2732.

Gene amplification of the transcription factor DP1 and CTNND1 in human lung
cancer.

Castillo SD(1), Angulo B, Suarez-Gauthier A, Melchor L, Medina PP, Sanchez-Verde 
L, Torres-Lanzas J, Pita G, Benitez J, Sanchez-Cespedes M.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Cancer Group, Programa de Epigenetica y Biologia del Cancer (PEBC), 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de
Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2010 Oct;222(2):119-23.

The search for novel oncogenes is important because they could be the target of
future specific anticancer therapies. In the present paper we report the
identification of novel amplified genes in lung cancer by means of global gene
expression analysis. To screen for amplicons, we aligned the gene expression data
according to the position of transcripts in the human genome and searched for
clusters of over-expressed genes. We found several clusters with gene
over-expression, suggesting an underlying genomic amplification. FISH and
microarray analysis for DNA copy number in two clusters, at chromosomes 11q12 and
13q34, confirmed the presence of amplifications spanning about 0.4 and 1 Mb for
11q12 and 13q34, respectively. Amplification at these regions each occurred at a 
frequency of 3%. Moreover, quantitative RT-PCR of each individual transcript
within the amplicons allowed us to verify the increased in gene expression of
several genes. The p120ctn and DP1 proteins, encoded by two candidate oncogenes, 
CTNND1 and TFDP1, at 11q12 and 13q amplicons, respectively, showed very strong
immunostaining in lung tumours with gene amplification. We then focused on the
13q34 amplicon and in the TFDP1 candidate oncogene. To further determine the
oncogenic properties of DP1, we searched for lung cancer cell lines carrying
TFDP1 amplification. Depletion of TFDP1 expression by small interference RNA in a
lung cancer cell line (HCC33) with TFDP1 amplification and protein
over-expression reduced cell viability by 50%. In conclusion, we report the
identification of two novel amplicons, at 13q34 and 11q12, each occurring at a
frequency of 3% of non-small cell lung cancers. TFDP1, which encodes the
E2F-associated transcription factor DP1 is a candidate oncogene at 13q34. The
data discussed in this publication have been deposited in NCBIs Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and are accessible through GEO
Series Accession No. GSE21168.

PMID: 20556744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 25;397(2):345-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.127. Epub 2010 May 27.

Identification of significant regions of transcription factor DP-1 (TFDP-1)
involved in stability/instability of the protein.

Arakawa T(1), Masuhiro Y, Kamiya Y, Kojima H, Hanazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Sciences, College of Bioresource Sciences,
Nihon University, 1866 Kameino, Fujisawa-city, Kanagawa 252-8510, Japan.

We previously reported the identification of DP-1 isoforms (alpha and beta),
which are structurally C-terminus-deleted ones, and revealed the low-level
expression of these isoforms. It is known that wild-type DP-1 is degraded by the 
ubiquitin-proteasome system, but few details are known about the domains
concerned with the protein stability/instability for the proteolysis of these
DP-1 isoforms. Here we identified the domains responsible for the
stability/instability of DP-1. Especially, the DP-1 "Stabilon" domain was a
C-terminal acidic motif and was quite important for DP-1 stability. Moreover, we 
propose that this DP-1 Stabilon may be useful for the stability of other nuclear 
proteins when fused to them.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20513349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Neurosci. 2010 Apr 14;30(15):5219-28. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5628-09.2010.

Cdk5 suppresses the neuronal cell cycle by disrupting the E2F1-DP1 complex.

Zhang J(1), Li H, Yabut O, Fitzpatrick H, D'Arcangelo G, Herrup K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, USA.

Neurons that reenter a cell cycle after maturation are at increased risk for
death, yet the mechanisms by which a normal neuron suppresses the cycle remain
mostly unknown. Our laboratory has shown that cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) is
a potent cell cycle suppressor, and we report here on the molecular basis of this
activity. Cell cycle suppression by Cdk5 requires its binding to the p35
activator protein. The related p39 and p25 proteins cannot serve as substitutes. 
Unexpectedly, Cdk5 enzymatic activity is not required to perform this function.
Rather, the link to cell cycle regulation is made through the formation of a
previously unknown complex consisting of the p35-Cdk5 dimer and E2F1. Formation
of this complex excludes the E2F1 cofactor, DP1, thus inhibiting E2F1 binding to 
the promoters of various cell cycle genes. This anti-cell cycle activity is most 
likely a neuroprotective function of Cdk5.

PMCID: PMC2862267
PMID: 20392944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(6):R86. doi: 10.1186/bcr2456. Epub 2009 Dec 8.

Comprehensive characterization of the DNA amplification at 13q34 in human breast 
cancer reveals TFDP1 and CUL4A as likely candidate target genes.

Melchor L(1), Saucedo-Cuevas LP, Muñoz-Repeto I, Rodríguez-Pinilla SM, Honrado E,
Campoverde A, Palacios J, Nathanson KL, García MJ, Benítez J.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genetics Group, Human Cancer Genetics Program, Spanish National Cancer
Research Center (CNIO), Madrid, E-28029, Spain. lorenzo.melchor@icr.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer subtypes exhibit different genomic aberration
patterns with a tendency for high-level amplifications in distinct chromosomal
regions. These genomic aberrations may drive carcinogenesis through the
upregulation of proto-oncogenes. We have characterized DNA amplification at the
human chromosomal region 13q34 in breast cancer.
METHODS: A set of 414 familial and sporadic breast cancer cases was studied for
amplification at region 13q34 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
analysis on tissue microarrays. Defining the minimal common region of
amplification in those cases with amplification at 13q34 was carried out using an
array-based comparative genomic hybridization platform. We performed a
quantitative real-time - polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) gene expression
analysis of 11 candidate genes located within the minimal common region of
amplification. Protein expression levels of two of these genes (TFDP1 and CUL4A) 
were assessed by immunohistochemical assays on the same tissue microarrays used
for FISH studies, and correlated with the expression of a panel of 33 antibodies 
previously analyzed.
RESULTS: We have found 13q34 amplification in 4.5% of breast cancer samples, but 
the frequency increased to 8.1% in BRCA1-associated tumors and to 20% in
basal-like tumors. Tumors with 13q34 amplification were associated with high
grade, estrogen receptor negativity, and expression of EGFR, CCNE, CK5, and
P-Cadherin, among other basal cell markers. We have defined a 1.83 megabases
minimal common region of genomic amplification and carried out mRNA expression
analyses of candidate genes located therein, identifying CUL4A and TFDP1 as the
most likely target genes. Moreover, we have confirmed that tumors with 13q34
amplification significantly overexpress CUL4A and TFDP1 proteins. Tumors
overexpressing either CUL4A or TFDP1 were associated with tumor proliferation and
cell cycle progression markers.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that 13q34 amplification may be of relevance in tumor
progression of basal-like breast cancers by inducing overexpression of CUL4A and 
TFDP1, which are both important in cell cycle regulation. Alternatively, as these
genes were also overexpressed in non-basal-like tumor samples, they could play a 
wider role in cancer development by inducing tumor proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2815550
PMID: 19995430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Sep;24(9):875-7.

[Preparation of the polypeptide antibody against human transcriptional factors
TFDP1 and TFDP3].

[Article in Chinese]

Tian C(1), Li YY, Qiao H, Zhang Y, Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Health Science Center, Peking University, Beijing
100083, China.

AIM: To prepare the polyclonal antibody against human transcriptional factors
DP3(TFDP3) and DP1(TFDP1) and identify their reactivity and specificity.
METHODS: Two totally different peptides between TFDP1 and TFDP3 were chosen as
antigens to inoculate rabbits. The proteins from HEK293 cells were transiently
transfcted with eukaryotic expression vectors of TFDP1 and TFDP3. The reactivity 
and specificity of antibodies were detected by Western blot.
RESULTS: The amino acid residues of TFDP3 17-26 and TFDP1 17-32 were selected and
synthesized to produce polypeptide antibodies. Western blot analysis demonstrated
that anti-TFDP3 antibody could specifically recognize TFDP3 protein, while
anti-TFDP1 antibody could both recognize TFDP1 and bind TFDP3 protein.
CONCLUSION: The polypeptide antibodies against TFDP3 and TFDP1 have been
prepared. The anti-TFDP3 antibody has no cross-reaction with TFDP1.

PMID: 18782520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 14;283(46):31575-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800328200. Epub 2008
Aug 7.

SOCS-3 inhibits E2F/DP-1 transcriptional activity and cell cycle progression via 
interaction with DP-1.

Masuhiro Y(1), Kayama K, Fukushima A, Baba K, Soutsu M, Kamiya Y, Gotoh M,
Yamaguchi N, Hanazawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Sciences, College of Bioresource Sciences,
Nihon University, 1866 Kameino, Fujisawa-city, Kanagawa 252-8510, Japan.

Recent studies using SOCS family knock-out mice have suggested that SOCS proteins
have multiple biological functions in addition to their role as negative
regulators of JAK-STAT signaling. To explore these other functions of this family
of proteins, we used yeast two-hybrid screening to find proteins interacting with
human SOCS-3. We identified the transcriptional factor DP-1 as a
SOCS-3-interacting protein involved in regulation of the cell cycle.
Immunoprecipitation-Western blot assay showed that this interaction between these
endogenous proteins occurred in cells both in vitro and in vivo. SOCS-3
interacted with the C-terminal region of DP-1, and amino acids 156-172 of SOCS-3 
were required for this interaction. Confocal microscopy revealed that SOCS-3 and 
DP-1 were primarily colocalized in the cytoplasm. SOCS-3 inhibited E2F/DP-1
transcriptional activity under the cyclin-E promoter and actually inhibited cell 
cycle progression and cell growth under E2F/DP-1 control. In contrast, DP-1
almost completely eliminated the inhibitory action of SOCS-3 on LIF-stimulated
STAT-3 transcriptional activity in JAK-STAT signaling. Interestingly, the
alternative regulatory action of SOCS-3 and DP-1 was dramatically eliminated by
each siRNA. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that SOCS-3 acts as a
negative regulator of the cell cycle progression under E2F/DP-1 control by
interfering with heterodimer formation between DP-1 and E2F and also that DP-1
plays an important role in controlling JAK-STAT signaling.

PMCID: PMC2581570
PMID: 18687693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Haematologica. 2008 Aug;93(8):1186-94. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12999. Epub 2008 Jun
12.

Somatic hypermutation signature in B-cell low-grade lymphomas.

Tracey L(1), Aggarwal M, García-Cosio M, Villuendas R, Algara P, Sánchez-Beato M,
Sánchez-Aguilera A, García JF, Rodríguez A, Camacho FI, Martínez N,
Ruiz-Ballesteros E, Mollejo M, Piris MA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Programme, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas,
Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Immunoglobulin gene somatic hypermutation is a biologically relevant 
and clinically useful prognostic factor in different types of low-grade B-cell
lymphomas, including chronic lymphocytic leukemia, mantle cell lymphoma and
splenic marginal zone lymphoma.
DESIGN AND METHODS: With the aim of identifying surrogate markers of somatic
hypermutation, a combined investigation of IgV(H) mutational status and
expression profiles of 93 samples from patients with small B-cell lymphoma was
performed.
RESULTS: The analysis identified an somatic hypermutation signature of genes
involved in the regulation of gene transcription, DNA repair and replication, and
chromosome maintenance. Eight of these genes were subjected to protein analysis
using tissue microarrays, for a set of 118 cases. We found a clear link between
RAD51C and CDK7 protein expression and somatic hypermutation status, in that
positive expression of either marker was significantly associated with a mutated 
status (p<0.003). We also found that positive expression of TFDP1 and POLA was
significantly associated with ongoing somatic hypermutation (p<0.001). To assess 
the potential clinical applicability of these somatic hypermutation markers, we
studied a series of cases of mantle cell lymphoma included in a tissue
microarray. The expression of RCC1 and CDK7, separately and together, was found
to be significantly associated with longer overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: An somatic hypermutation signature has been identified for different
types of small B-cell lymphoma. This has a potential mechanistic and diagnostic
value.

PMID: 18556400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 14;361(1):20-5. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

TFDP3 inhibits E2F1-induced, p53-mediated apoptosis.

Tian C(1), Lv D, Qiao H, Zhang J, Yin YH, Qian XP, Wang YP, Zhang Y, Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, 38 Xue Yuan
Road, Beijing 100083, China.

By dimerizing with E2F proteins, TFDP has profound influence on cellular E2F
activities. While TFDP1 and 2 enhance the DNA binding and the transcriptional
activity of E2F, the newly identified member of the DP family, TFDP3 primarily
functions as a negative regulator. To further characterize the inhibitory
property of TFDP3, the present study specifically examined the modulatory role of
TFDP3 on E2F1-induced cell death. HEK-293 cells underwent apoptosis following
ectopic expression of E2F1. This effect was virtually abolished by
co-transfection with TFDP3. In the meantime, the accumulation of p53 proteins and
the increased expression of the pro-apoptotic molecules, including Bax, Puma,
Noxa, and Bid were found to be suppressed. These data suggest a new mechanism for
the regulation of E2F1-induced apoptosis and provide further evidence for the
general involvement of TFDP3 in the regulation of E2F functions.

PMID: 17632080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cancer Res. 2007 May 1;67(9):4104-12.

Identification of novel amplification gene targets in mouse and human breast
cancer at a syntenic cluster mapping to mouse ch8A1 and human ch13q34.

Abba MC(1), Fabris VT, Hu Y, Kittrell FS, Cai WW, Donehower LA, Sahin A, Medina
D, Aldaz CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas 78957, USA.

Serial analysis of gene expression from aggressive mammary tumors derived from
transplantable p53 null mouse mammary outgrowth lines revealed significant
up-regulation of Tfdp1 (transcription factor Dp1), Lamp1 (lysosomal membrane
glycoprotein 1) and Gas6 (growth arrest specific 6) transcripts. All of these
genes belong to the same linkage cluster, mapping to mouse chromosome band 8A1.
BAC-array comparative genomic hybridization and fluorescence in situ
hybridization analyses revealed genomic amplification at mouse region ch8A1.1.
The minimal region of amplification contained genes Cul4a, Lamp1, Tfdp1, and
Gas6, highly overexpressed in the p53 null mammary outgrowth lines at
preneoplastic stages, and in all its derived tumors. The same amplification was
also observed in spontaneous p53 null mammary tumors. Interestingly, this region 
is homologous to human chromosome 13q34, and some of the same genes were
previously observed amplified in human carcinomas. Thus, we further investigated 
the occurrence and frequency of gene amplification affecting genes mapping to
ch13q34 in human breast cancer. TFDP1 showed the highest frequency of
amplification affecting 31% of 74 breast carcinomas analyzed. Statistically
significant positive correlation was observed for the amplification of CUL4A,
LAMP1, TFDP1, and GAS6 genes (P < 0.001). Meta-analysis of publicly available
gene expression data sets showed a strong association between the high expression
of TFDP1 and decreased overall survival (P = 0.00004), relapse-free survival (P =
0.0119), and metastasis-free interval (P = 0.0064). In conclusion, our findings
suggest that CUL4A, LAMP1, TFDP1, and GAS6 are targets for overexpression and
amplification in breast cancers. Therefore, overexpression of these genes and, in
particular, TFDP1 might be of relevance in the development and/or progression in 
a significant subset of human breast carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4166497
PMID: 17483321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. FEBS J. 2006 Dec;273(24):5714-23.

Ixocarpalactone A isolated from the Mexican tomatillo shows potent
antiproliferative and apoptotic activity in colon cancer cells.

Choi JK(1), Murillo G, Su BN, Pezzuto JM, Kinghorn AD, Mehta RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois
at Chicago, IL, USA.

Physalis philadelphica Lam, commonly known as a tomatillo, is a staple of the
Mesoamerican cuisine. In our laboratory, an ethyl acetate-soluble extract and
four withanolides [ixocarpalactone A (IxoA), ixocarpalactone B,
philadelphicalactone B, and withaphysacarpin] were isolated. Studies conducted on
Hepa-1c1c7 hepatoma cells revealed that withanolides were potent inducers of
quinone reductase, suggesting possible cancer chemoprotective activity. Here we
evaluated the antiproliferative properties of the withanolides in SW480 human
colon cancer cells. IxoA, which is present in the edible part of the tomatillo,
was selected for further evaluation. SW480 cells treated with IxoA showed cell
cycle arrest in the G2/M phase, up-regulation of hyper-phosphorylated
retinoblastoma, and down-regulation of E2F-1 and DP-1. On the basis of flow
cytometry analysis, ethidium bromide/acridine orange, and
4',6-diamidino-2-phenylindole staining, it was found that IxoA induces apoptosis 
in SW480 cells. Moreover, increased concentrations of the pro-apoptotic protein, 
BIM/BOD, were found by western blot analysis and immunocytochemistry.
Morphological examination revealed vacuole formation in cells treated with IxoA, 
and Oil Red O staining showed that the vacuole content was nonlipid. Furthermore,
immunocytochemistry demonstrated increased concentrations of mucin 3 in
IxoA-treated SW480 cells. These findings suggest that chemicals present in
tomatillos (e.g. IxoA) may have cancer chemopreventive properties.

PMID: 17212786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 5;282(1):454-66. Epub 2006 Oct 24.

Human TFDP3, a novel DP protein, inhibits DNA binding and transactivation by E2F.

Qiao H(1), Di Stefano L, Tian C, Li YY, Yin YH, Qian XP, Pang XW, Li Y, McNutt
MA, Helin K, Zhang Y, Chen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100083, China.

The two known DP proteins, TFDP1 and -2, bind E2Fs to form heterodimers essential
for high affinity DNA binding and efficient transcriptional
activation/repression. Here we report the identification of a new member of the
DP family, human TFDP3. Despite the high degree of sequence similarity, TFDP3 is 
apparently distinct from TFDP1 in function. Although TFDP3 retained the capacity 
to bind to E2F proteins, the resulting heterodimers failed to interact with the
E2F consensus sequence. In contrast to the stimulatory effect of TFDP1, TFDP3
inhibited E2F-mediated transcriptional activation. Consistent with this
observation, we found that ectopic expression of TFDP3 impaired cell cycle
progression from G(1) to S phase instead of facilitating such a transition as
TFDP1 does. Sequence substitution analysis indicated that the DNA binding domain 
of TFDP3 was primarily responsible for the lack of DNA binding ability of
E2F-TFDP3 heterodimers and the inhibition of E2F-mediated transcriptional
activation. Fine mapping further revealed four amino acids in this region, which 
were critical for the functional conversion from activation by TFDP1 to
suppression by TFDP3. In conclusion, these studies identify a new DP protein and 
a novel mechanism whereby E2F function is regulated.

PMID: 17062573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Cancer Res. 2006 Sep 15;66(18):8994-9001.

MCT-1 protein interacts with the cap complex and modulates messenger RNA
translational profiles.

Reinert LS(1), Shi B, Nandi S, Mazan-Mamczarz K, Vitolo M, Bachman KE, He H,
Gartenhaus RB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland, Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

MCT-1 is an oncogene that was initially identified in a human T cell lymphoma and
has been shown to induce cell proliferation as well as activate survival-related 
pathways. MCT-1 contains the PUA domain, a recently described RNA-binding domain 
that is found in several tRNA and rRNA modification enzymes. Here, we established
that MCT-1 protein interacts with the cap complex through its PUA domain and
recruits the density-regulated protein (DENR/DRP), containing the SUI1
translation initiation domain. Through the use of microarray analysis on
polysome-associated mRNAs, we showed that up-regulation of MCT-1 was able to
modulate the translation profiles of BCL2L2, TFDP1, MRE11A, cyclin D1, and E2F1
mRNAs, despite equivalent levels of mRNAs in the cytoplasm. Our data establish a 
role for MCT-1 in translational regulation, and support a linkage between
translational control and oncogenesis.

PMID: 16982740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell. 2005 Dec 16;123(6):1093-106.

Structure of the Rb C-terminal domain bound to E2F1-DP1: a mechanism for
phosphorylation-induced E2F release.

Rubin SM(1), Gall AL, Zheng N, Pavletich NP.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, NY 10021, USA.

The retinoblastoma (Rb) protein negatively regulates the G1-S transition by
binding to the E2F transcription factors, until cyclin-dependent kinases
phosphorylate Rb, causing E2F release. The Rb pocket domain is necessary for E2F 
binding, but the Rb C-terminal domain (RbC) is also required for growth
suppression. Here we demonstrate a high-affinity interaction between RbC and
E2F-DP heterodimers shared by all Rb and E2F family members. The crystal
structure of an RbC-E2F1-DP1 complex reveals an intertwined heterodimer in which 
the marked box domains of both E2F1 and DP1 contact RbC. We also demonstrate that
phosphorylation of RbC at serines 788 and 795 destabilizes one set of RbC-E2F-DP 
interactions directly, while phosphorylation at threonines 821 and 826 induces an
intramolecular interaction between RbC and the Rb pocket that destabilizes the
remaining interactions indirectly. Our findings explain the requirement of RbC
for high-affinity E2F binding and growth suppression and establish a mechanism
for the regulation of Rb-E2F association by phosphorylation.

PMID: 16360038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Sep;25(18):8024-36.

ARF directly binds DP1: interaction with DP1 coincides with the G1 arrest
function of ARF.

Datta A(1), Sen J, Hagen J, Korgaonkar CK, Caffrey M, Quelle DE, Hughes DE,
Ackerson TJ, Costa RH, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The tumor suppressor ARF inhibits cell growth in response to oncogenic stress in 
a p53-dependent manner. Also, there is an increasing appreciation of ARF's
ability to inhibit cell growth via multiple p53-independent mechanisms, including
its ability to regulate the E2F pathway. We have investigated the interaction
between the tumor suppressor ARF and DP1, the DNA binding partner of the E2F
family of factors (E2Fs). We show that ARF directly binds to DP1. Interestingly, 
binding of ARF to DP1 results in an inhibition of the interaction between DP1 and
E2F1. Moreover, ARF regulates the association of DP1 with its target gene, as
evidenced by a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay with the dhfr promoter. By
analyzing a series of ARF mutants, we demonstrate a strong correlation between
ARF's ability to regulate DP1 and its ability to cause cell cycle arrest. S-phase
inhibition by ARF is preceded by an inhibition of the E2F-activated genes.
Moreover, we provide evidence that ARF inhibits the E2F-activated genes
independently of p53 and Mdm2. Also, the interaction between ARF and DP1 is
enhanced during oncogenic stress and "culture shock." Taken together, our results
show that DP1 is a critical direct target of ARF.

PMCID: PMC1234342
PMID: 16135794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 1;280(26):24642-8. Epub 2005 Apr 29.

Identification and characterization of novel isoforms of human DP-1: DP-1{alpha} 
regulates the transcriptional activity of E2F1 as well as cell cycle progression 
in a dominant-negative manner.

Ishida H(1), Masuhiro Y, Fukushima A, Argueta JG, Yamaguchi N, Shiota S, Hanazawa
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty of Dental
Science, Kyushu University, Higashiku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The cell cycle-regulating transcription factors DP-1 and E2F form a heterodimeric
complex and play a central role in cell cycle progression. Two different DP
subunits (DP-1 and DP-2) exist in humans. In this study, we identified two novel 
DP-1 isoforms (DP-1alpha and DP-1beta) and characterized their structure and
function. DP-1alpha is composed of 278 amino acids and lacks a portion of the
C-terminal heterodimerization domain, whereas DP-1beta is composed of 357 amino
acids with a frameshift that causes truncation of the C-terminal domain. Yeast
two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that DP-1alpha binding to 
E2F1 was significantly reduced as compared with that of wild-type DP-1 or
DP-1beta. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed that the subcellular localization 
of both DP-1 isoforms changed from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in HEK 293 cells 
cotransfected with E2F1 and wild-type DP-1 or DP-1beta. However, such a
translocation for DP-1alpha was barely observed. Reverse transcription-PCR
results showed that the three DP-1 isoforms are expressed ubiquitously at equal
levels in several normal human tissues. We also demonstrated the expression of
these isoforms at the protein level by Western blotting. Interestingly, we
observed a significant decrease in transcriptional activity, a marked delay of
cell cycle progression, and an inhibition of cell proliferation in
DP-1alpha-transfected HEK 293 cells. Together, the results of the present study
suggest that DP-1alpha is a novel isoform of DP-1 that acts as a
dominant-negative regulator of cell cycle progression.

PMID: 15863509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jan 17;579(2):398-408.

Acquisition of essential somatic cell cycle regulatory protein expression and
implied activity occurs at the second to third cell division in mouse
preimplantation embryos.

Xie Y(1), Sun T, Wang QT, Wang Y, Wang F, Puscheck E, Rappolee DA.

Collaborators: Rappolee DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)CS Mott Center for Human Growth and Development of Ob/Gyn, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, 275 East Hancock, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

It is clear that G1-S phase control is exerted after the mouse embryo implants
into the uterus 4.5 days after fertilization (E4.5); null mutants of genes that
control cell cycle commitment such as max, rb (retinoblastoma), and dp1 are
embryonic lethal after implantation with proliferation phenotypes. But, a number 
of studies of genes mediating proliferation control in the embryo after
fertilization-implantation have yielded confusing results. In order to understand
when embryos might first exert G1-S phase regulatory control, we assayed
preimplantation mouse embryos for the acquisition of expression of mRNA, protein,
and phospho-protein for max, Rb, and DP-1, and for the proliferation-promoting
phospho-protein forms of mycC (thr58/ser62) and Rb (ser795). The key findings are
that: (1) DP-1 protein was present in the nucleus as early as the four-cell stage
onwards, (2) max protein was in the nucleus, suggesting function from the
four-cell stage onwards, (3) both mycC and Rb all form protein was present at
increasing quantities in the cytoplasm from the 2 cell and 4/8 cell stage,
respectively, (4) the phosphorylated form of mycC phospho was present in the
nucleus at high levels from the two-cell stage through blastocyst-stage, and (5) 
the phosphorylated form of Rb was detected at low levels in the two-cell stage
embryo and was highly expressed at the 4/8-cell stage through the blastocyst
stage. Taken together, these data suggest that activation of mycC phospho/max
dimer pairs, (E2F)/DP-1 dimer pairs, and repression of Rb inhibition of cell
cycle progression via phosphorylation at ser795 occurs at the earliest stages of 
embryonic development. In addition, the presence of max, mycC phospho, DP-1, and 
Rb phospho in the nuclei of embryonic and placental lineage cells in the
blastocyst and in trophoblast stem cells suggests that a similar type of cell
cycle regulation is present throughout preimplantation development and in both
embryonic and extra-embryonic cell lineages.

PMID: 15642350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 14;280(2):1199-208. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

A novel repressive E2F6 complex containing the polycomb group protein, EPC1, that
interacts with EZH2 in a proliferation-specific manner.

Attwooll C(1), Oddi S, Cartwright P, Prosperini E, Agger K, Steensgaard P,
Wagener C, Sardet C, Moroni MC, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Via
Ripamonti 435, Milan, 20141, Italy.

The transcriptional repressor E2F6 has been identified as a component of two
distinct polycomb group protein (PcG)-containing complexes, suggesting a
mechanism for the recruitment of repressive complexes to target sequences in DNA.
Whereas one complex is involved in the repression of classic E2F target genes in 
G0, a role for E2F6 within the cell cycle has yet to be defined. We searched for 
novel E2F6-binding proteins using a yeast two-hybrid screen and identified the
PcG protein, EPC1. We showed that, both in vitro and in vivo, E2F6, DP1, and EPC1
form a stable core complex with repressive activity. Furthermore, we identified
the proliferation-specific PcG, EZH2, as an EPC1-interacting protein. Using
affinity purification, we showed that E2F6, DP1, EPC1, EZH2, and Sin3B co-elute, 
suggesting the identification of a novel E2F6 complex that exists in vivo in both
normal and transformed human cell lines. EZH2 is required for cellular
proliferation and consistent with this, EZH2 elutes with the E2F6-EPC1 complex
only in proliferating cells. Thus we have identified a novel E2F6-PcG complex
(E2F6-EPC1) that interacts with EZH2 and may regulate genes required for cell
cycle progression.

PMID: 15536069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Aug;24(16):7197-205.

Dp1 is largely dispensable for embryonic development.

Kohn MJ(1), Leung SW, Criniti V, Agromayor M, Yamasaki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027,
USA.

E2F/DP complexes activate or repress the transcription of E2F target genes,
depending on the association of a pRB family member, thereby regulating cell
cycle progression. Whereas the E2F family consists of seven members, the DP
family contains only two (Dp1 and Dp2), Dp1 being the more highly expressed
member. In contrast to the inactivation of individual E2F family members, we have
recently demonstrated that loss of Dp1 results in embryonic lethality by
embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5) due to the failure of extraembryonic lineages to
develop and replicate DNA properly. To bypass this placental requirement and
search for roles of Dp1 in the embryo proper, we generated Dp1-deficient
embryonic stem (ES) cells that carry the ROSA26-LacZ marker and injected them
into wild-type blastocysts to construct Dp1-deficient chimeras. Surprisingly, we 
recovered mid- to late gestational embryos (E12.5 to E17.5), in which the
Dp1-deficient ES cells contributed strongly to most chimeric tissues as judged by
X-Gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-beta-D-galactopyranoside) staining and Western 
blotting. Importantly, the abundance of DP2 protein does not increase and the
expression of an array of cell cycle genes is virtually unchanged in
Dp1-deficient ES cells or chimeric E15.5 tissues with the absence of Dp1. Thus,
Dp1 is largely dispensable for embryonic development, despite the absolute
extraembryonic requirement for Dp1, which is highly reminiscent of the restricted
roles for Rb and cyclins E1/E2 in vivo.

PMCID: PMC479717
PMID: 15282318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cancer Res. 2003 Nov 15;63(22):7668-73.

Loss of protein phosphatase 2A expression correlates with phosphorylation of DP-1
and reversal of dysplasia through differentiation in a conditional mouse model of
cancer progression.

Tilli MT(1), Hudgins SL, Frech MS, Halama ED, Renou JP, Furth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Human Genetics, University of Maryland at Baltimore,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

A conditional mouse model of time-dependent dysplasia reversal demonstrated that 
reversal and differentiation of dysplastic salivary gland tissue at the 4-month
reversible stage was characterized by the appearance of a phosphorylated slower
mobility form of Differentiation Related Transcription Factor 1-polypeptide-1
that was correlated with cellular differentiation. The phosphorylated form of
DP-1 was not found at the 7-month irreversible stage or in adenocarcinomas. At
the 4-month reversible stage, protein phosphatase 2A expression was
down-regulated coincident with loss of oncogene expression, whereas PP2A
expression persisted at the 7-month irreversible stage. Results are consistent
with the hypothesis that persistent PP2A expression prevented the appearance of
the phosphorylated form of DP-1 required for cellular differentiation and
reversal of dysplasia after loss of oncogene expression.

PMID: 14633688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(12):609-13. Epub 2003 Nov 15.

Association of over-expressed TFDP1 with progression of hepatocellular
carcinomas.

Yasui K(1), Okamoto H, Arii S, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

DP-1 is a heterodimerization partner for members of the E2F family of
transcription factors; E2F/DP-1 regulates the expression of various cellular
promoters, particularly gene products that are involved in the cell cycle. Our
earlier studies identified the DP-1 gene ( TFDP1) as a probable target within a
13q34 amplicon that is frequently detected in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) and
esophageal squamous-cell carcinomas. The aim of the present study was to
investigate the clinicopathological significance of up-regulation of TFDP1 in
HCC. We determined expression levels of TFDP1 and E2F1 in 41 primary HCCs by
means of quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reactions,
and looked for relationships between those data and various clinicopathological
parameters. To assess transactivating activity of E2F1/DP-1, we also analyzed
expression of ten putative transcriptional targets of this complex in HCCs. Using
antisense oligonucleotides, we down-regulated TFDP1 in Hep3B, an HCC cell line
that had shown overexpression of the gene, to examine the role of elevated TFDP1 
expression in the growth of Hep3B cells. Elevated expression of TFDP1, but not
E2F1, was associated significantly with large (> or =5 cm) tumor size (P=0.021). 
Expression levels of TFDP1 and E2F1 correlated with those of seven
transcriptional targets ( TYMS, DHFR, PCNA, RRM1, CCNE1, CDC2, and MYBL2) that
play important roles in the G1/S transition, and down-regulation of TFDP1
inhibited growth of Hep3B cells. In conclusion, overexpression of TFDP1 may
contribute to progression of some HCCs by promoting growth of the tumor cells.

PMID: 14618416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Apoptosis. 2003 Oct;8(5):461-8.

The role of the transcription factor DP in apoptosis.

Hitchens MR(1), Robbins PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

DP1 and DP2 function as binding partners for E2F transcription factors. The
association of DP with E2F directly enhances both the DNA binding affinity and
the transactivation function of the heterodimer. Target genes include those
involved in DNA synthesis, cell cycle and apoptosis. E2F/DP activity is carefully
regulated since the heterodimer plays a central role in so many vital cellular
functions. Indeed, the association of additional proteins, the phosphorylation
state, the subcellular localization and the level of expression all contribute to
modulating heterodimer activity and are all influenced by DP proteins. Active
E2F1/DP1 promotes apoptosis in both a p53-dependent and independent manner.
E2F1/DP1 induces the expression of ARF, which in turn blocks MDM2-mediated
ubiquination of p53. E2F1/DP1, however, can mediate p53-dependent apoptosis in
the absence of ARF through the upregulation of the p53 kinase ATM and by
E2F1directly binding to p53, which enhances p53 transcriptional activity.
E2F1/DP1 also promotes p53-independent apoptosis by inducing the expression of
p73 in addition to upregulating central components of the apoptotic pathway such 
as casapases, Apaf1 and the pro-apoptotic Bcl2-family members. Lastly, E2F1
inhibits the NFkappaB survival signal. Although the DP proteins may not possess a
biological function on their own, they are indispensable for regulating E2F
activity and thus play a central role in important cellular functions such as
apoptosis.

PMID: 12975577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2002 Dec;10(4):322-6.

Immunohistochemical expression of the transcription factor DP-1 and its
heterodimeric partner E2F-1 in non-Hodgkin lymphoma.

Chan JA(1), Olvera M, Lai R, Naing W, Rezk SA, Brynes RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Los Angeles County and University of Southern
California Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA.

DP-1 is a G1 cell cycle-related protein that forms heterodimers with E2F, a
family of transcriptional factors regulating the expression of genes important
for G1 to S progression. Although the exact role of DP-1 is not well understood, 
it has been shown to stabilize DNA binding of E2F proteins. By
immunohistochemistry, the authors examined the expression of DP-1 in lymphoid
tissues, including 8 cases of reactive follicular hyperplasia and 69 cases of
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The expression of the cell cycle-related proteins
E2F-1 and Ki-67 was also assessed. Scoring was based on the proportion of labeled
nuclei (1-10%, 11-25%, 26-50%, and > 50%). In reactive follicular hyperplasia,
staining for DP-1, E2F-1, and Ki-67 was largely confined to the germinal centers.
All 25 cases of follicular lymphoma, regardless of grade, had a high proportion
(> 50%) of DP-1-positive cells but a lower proportion of cells marking for E2F-1 
and Ki-67 (P < 0.001). The diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (n = 24) had high DP-1 
and Ki-67 scores but low E2F-1 scores (P < 0.001). Small lymphocytic (n = 10),
marginal zone (n = 3), and mantle cell lymphomas (n = 5) contained relatively low
proportions of cells labeled for all three markers. Precursor B-cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma (n = 2) displayed high proportions of cells positive for
DP-1, Ki-67, and E2F-1 (> 50% in both cases). Except in follicular center cell
lesions, DP-1 expression generally correlated with that of Ki-67. However, the
expression of DP-1 was discordant with that of E2F-1 in benign and malignant
follicular center cells, suggesting that DP-1 may have functions other than
facilitating E2F-1-dependent gene regulation and cell cycle progression in these 
neoplasms.

PMID: 12607600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Development. 2003 Apr;130(7):1295-305.

Dp1 is required for extra-embryonic development.

Kohn MJ(1), Bronson RT, Harlow E, Dyson NJ, Yamasaki L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
USA.

Release of E2F1/DP1 heterodimers from repression mediated by the retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor (pRB) triggers cell cycle entry into S phase, suggesting that
E2F1 and DP1 proteins must act in unison, either to facilitate or to suppress
cell-cycle progression. In stark contrast to the milder phenotypes that result
from inactivation of E2Fs, we report that loss of Dp1 leads to death in utero
because of the failure of extra-embryonic development. Loss of Dp1 compromises
the trophectoderm-derived tissues - specifically, the expansion of the
ectoplacental cone and chorion, and endoreduplication in trophoblast giant cells.
Inactivation of p53 is unable to rescue the Dp1-deficient embryonic lethality.
Thus, DP1 is absolutely required for extra-embryonic development and consequently
embryonic survival, consistent with E2F/DP1 normally acting to promote growth in 
vivo.

PMID: 12588846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Dec;22(24):8398-408.

Differential regulation of E2F1, DP1, and the E2F1/DP1 complex by ARF.

Datta A(1), Nag A, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

The tumor suppressor protein ARF inhibits MDM2 to activate and stabilize p53.
Recent studies provided evidence for p53-independent tumor suppression functions 
of ARF. For example, it has been shown that ARF induces proteolysis of certain
E2F species, including E2F1. In addition, ARF relocalizes E2F1 from the
nucleoplasm to nucleolus and inhibits E2F1-activated transcription. Because DP1
is a functional partner of the E2F family of factors, we investigated whether DP1
is also regulated by ARF. Here we show that DP1 associates with ARF. Coexpression
of ARF relocalizes DP1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleolus, suggesting that DP1
is also a target of the ARF regulatory pathways. Surprisingly, however, the
E2F1/DP1 complex is refractory to ARF regulation. Coexpression of E2F1 and DP1
blocks ARF-induced relocalization of either subunit to the nucleolus. The
E2F1/DP1 complex localizes in the nucleoplasm, whereas ARF is detected in the
nucleolus, suggesting that ARF does not interact with the E2F1/DP1 complex.
Moreover, we show that E2F1 is more stable in the presence of ARF when
coexpressed with DP1. These results suggest that ARF differentially regulates the
free and heterodimeric forms of E2F1 and DP1. DP1 is a constitutively expressed
protein, whereas E2F1 is mainly expressed at the G(1)/S boundary of the cell
cycle. Therefore, the E2F1/DP1 complex is abundant only between late G(1) and
early S phase. Our results on the differential regulation E2F1, DP1, and the
E2F1/DP1 complex suggest the possibility that ARF regulates the function of these
cell cycle factors by altering the dynamics of their heterodimerization during
progression from G(1) to S phase.

PMCID: PMC139864
PMID: 12446760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell. 2002 Jul 12;110(1):19-32.

E2F4/5 and p107 as Smad cofactors linking the TGFbeta receptor to c-myc
repression.

Chen CR(1), Kang Y, Siegel PM, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Smad3 is a direct mediator of transcriptional activation by the TGFbeta receptor.
Its target genes in epithelial cells include cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
that generate a cytostatic reponse. We defined how, in the same context, Smad3
can also mediate transcriptional repression of the growth-promoting gene c-myc. A
complex containing Smad3, the transcription factors E2F4/5 and DP1, and the
corepressor p107 preexists in the cytoplasm. In response to TGFbeta, this complex
moves into the nucleus and associates with Smad4, recognizing a composite
Smad-E2F site on c-myc for repression. Previously known as the ultimate
recipients of cdk regulatory signals, E2F4/5 and p107 act here as transducers of 
TGFbeta receptor signals upstream of cdk. Smad proteins therefore mediate
transcriptional activation or repression depending on their associated partners.

PMID: 12150994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Hepatology. 2002 Jun;35(6):1476-84.

TFDP1, CUL4A, and CDC16 identified as targets for amplification at 13q34 in
hepatocellular carcinomas.

Yasui K(1), Arii S, Zhao C, Imoto I, Ueda M, Nagai H, Emi M, Inazawa J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cytogenetics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Japan.

We carried out molecular cytogenetic characterization of 11 cell lines derived
from hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and 51 primary HCCs. Comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH) revealed frequent amplification at 13q34, where we had
detected amplification in several other types of tumor, including esophageal
squamous cell carcinomas (ESC). Previously, we suggested possible involvement of 
TFDP1, encoding a transcription factor DP-1, in the 13q34 amplification observed 
in a primary ESC. Therefore, we investigated amplifications and expression levels
of 5 genes mapped on the amplified region, including TFDP1, for exploring
amplification targets at 13q34 in HCCs. 3 of those genes, TFDP1, CUL4A (cullin
4A), and CDC16 (cell division cycle 16), showed distinct amplification and
consequent over-expression in some cell lines. Moreover, each was amplified in 3 
or 4 of the 51 primary HCCs, and all 3 were amplified in 2 tumors, in which their
expression patterns correlated with amplification patterns. To elucidate the
functional role of TFDP1 in HCC, we examined expression levels of genes
downstream of TFDP1 with real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
Expression of cyclin E gene (CCNE1) correlated closely with that of TFDP1 in not 
only cell lines, but also primary tumors. Treatment of HCC cells with the
antisense oligonucleotide targeting TFDP1 resulted in down-regulation of CCNE1,
suggesting that TFDP1 overexpression led to up-regulation of CCNE1 that encoded a
positive regulator for cell cycle G1/S transition. In conclusion, our findings
suggest that TFDP1, CUL4A, and CDC16 are probable targets of an amplification
mechanism and therefore may be involved, together or separately, in development
and/or progression of some HCCs.

PMID: 12029633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cytokine. 2002 Jan 21;17(2):91-7.

Role of pRB-family/E2F complex in the inhibition of IL-3-dependent lymphoid cell 
proliferation.

Yamada M(1), Kondo T, Ashizawa S, Takebayashi T, Higashi H, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent proliferation of haematopoietic cells is
specifically inhibited by p130, a member of the pRB-family proteins. p130
interacts with the cell-cycle regulatory E2F transcription factors, notably E2F-4
and E2F-5, and affects promoters containing E2F-binding sites through two
distinct mechanisms. First, upon complex formation with E2F, it blocks
transcriptional activation by E2F. Second, the formed p130-E2F complex binds to
E2F sites and actively represses transcription by inhibiting the activity of
surrounding enhancer elements on the promoter. To pursue the relative
contributions of each mechanism in the p130-mediated inhibition of IL-3-dependent
cell proliferation, we employed a dominant-negative DP-1, which suppresses both
E2F-dependent transactivation and the formation of active transcriptional
repressors. Ectopic expression of the dominant negative DP-1 in the
IL-3-dependent BaF3 lymphoid cells gave rise to an inhibition of cell
proliferation, which was concomitantly associated with a decrease in levels of
cyclin E, an indispensable molecule for G1 to S-phase cell-cycle progression. Our
results indicate that blocking E2F-dependent transactivation, but not the
formation of p130-E2F transcriptional repressor complexes, is responsible for the
inhibition of IL-3-dependent cell growth by p130.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11886176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Cancer Res. 2001 Nov 1;61(21):7709-12.

A proapoptotic peptide for the treatment of solid tumors.

Mai JC(1), Mi Z, Kim SH, Ng B, Robbins PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261, USA.

We have designed a novel peptide, DP1, which is able to mediate significant
induction of apoptosis in solid tumors by local injection. This peptide,
comprised of a protein transduction domain (PTD), PTD-5, fused to an
antimicrobial peptide, (KLAKLAK)2, was able to trigger rapid apoptosis in a
variety of cell lines in vitro, including MCA205 murine fibrosarcomas and human
head and neck tumors. Furthermore, direct injection of DP1 into day 7 established
MCA205 tumors in C57BL/6 mice resulted in the induction of tumor apoptosis and
subsequent reduction in tumor volume. These results suggest that DP1 may be used 
clinically to treat accessible solid tumors or as an adjuvant therapy in
conjunction with radiotherapy, standard chemotherapy, immunotherapy, or surgical 
debulking.

PMID: 11691780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Ann Neurol. 2001 Jul;50(1):93-103.

Microarray analysis of hippocampal gene expression in global cerebral ischemia.

Jin K(1), Mao XO, Eshoo MW, Nagayama T, Minami M, Simon RP, Greenberg DA.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, CA 94945, USA.

The brain's response to ischemia, which helps determine clinical outcome after
stroke, is regulated partly by competing genetic programs that respectively
promote cell survival and delayed cell death. Many genes involved in this
response have been identified individually or systematically, providing insights 
into the molecular basis of ischemic injury and potential targets for therapy.
The development of microarray systems for gene expression profiling permits
screening of large numbers of genes for possible involvement in biological or
pathological processes. Therefore, we used an oligodeoxynucleotide-based
microarray consisting of 374 human genes, most implicated previously in apoptosis
or related events, to detect alterations in gene expression in the hippocampus of
rats subjected to 15 minutes of global cerebral ischemia followed by up to 72
hours of reperfusion. We found 1.7-fold or greater increases in the expression of
57 genes and 1.7-fold or greater decreases in the expression of 34 genes at 4,
24, or 72 hours after ischemia. The number of induced genes increased from 4 to
72 hours, whereas the number of repressed genes decreased. The induced genes
included genes involved in protein synthesis, genes mutated in hereditary human
diseases, proapoptotic genes, antiapoptotic genes, injury-response genes,
receptors, ion channels, and enzymes. We detected transcriptional induction of
several genes implicated previously in cerebral ischemia, including ALG2, APP,
CASP3, CLU, ERCC3, GADD34, GADD153, IGFBP2, TIAR, VEGF, and VIM, as well as other
genes not so implicated. We also found coinduction of several groups of related
genes that might represent functional modules within the ischemic neuronal
transcriptome, including VEGF and its receptor, NRP1; the IGF1 receptor and the
IGF1-binding protein IGFBP2; Rb, the Rb-binding protein E2F1, and the E2F-related
transcription factor, TFDP1; the CACNB3 and CACNB4 beta-subunits of the
voltage-gated calcium channel; and caspase-3 and its substrates, ACINUS, FEM1,
and GSN. To test the hypothesis that genes identified through this approach might
have roles in the pathophysiology of cerebral ischemia, we measured expression of
the products of two induced genes not heretofore implicated in cerebral
ischemia-GRB2, an adapter protein involved in growth-factor signaling pathways,
and SMN1, which participates in RNA processing and is deleted in most cases of
spinal muscular atrophy. Western analysis showed enhanced expression of both
proteins in hippocampus at 24 to 72 hours after ischemia, and SMN1 was localized 
by immunohistochemistry to hippocampal neurons. These results suggest that
microarray analysis of gene expression may be useful for elucidating novel
molecular mediators of cell death and survival in the ischemic brain.

PMID: 11456315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Carcinog. 2001 Jun;31(2):90-100.

Deregulated expression of DP1 induces epidermal proliferation and enhances skin
carcinogenesis.

Wang D(1), Russell J, Xu H, Johnson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Science Park-Research Division, Smithville, Texas, USA.

E2F transcription factors have been implicated in several cellular processes,
including proliferation, apoptosis, and oncogenic transformation. A functional
E2F factor consists of a heterodimer containing an E2F polypeptide (E2F1-E2F6)
and a DRTF1-polypeptide (DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP1) or DRTF1-polypeptide-2). It is
the E2F subunit that supplies the transcriptional activation domain and the motif
involved in binding to members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor family. The
role of the DP subunit in regulating E2F-dependent activities is not completely
understood. To examine the properties of DP1 in vivo, we generated transgenic
mouse lines expressing DP1 under the control of a keratin 5 (K5) promoter.
Overexpression of DP1 in basal layer keratinocytes caused mild hyperplasia and
hyperproliferation of the epidermis but did not result in increased apoptosis or 
spontaneous tumor development. Coexpression of DP1 with E2F1 or E2F4 in the
epidermis of bigenic mice modestly enhanced proliferation and apoptosis over the 
levels induced by E2F1 or E2F4 expression alone. In a two-stage chemical
carcinogenesis assay, more and larger skin tumors developed in K5 DP1 transgenic 
mice than in nontransgenic mice. These findings show that in this in vivo model, 
deregulated expression of DP1 on its own induced proliferation and enhanced
carcinogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11429786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. EMBO J. 2001 May 1;20(9):2273-85.

TRIP-Br: a novel family of PHD zinc finger- and bromodomain-interacting proteins 
that regulate the transcriptional activity of E2F-1/DP-1.

Hsu SI(1), Yang CM, Sim KG, Hentschel DM, O'Leary E, Bonventre JV.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

We report the isolation of TRIP-Br1, a transcriptional regulator that interacts
with the PHD-bromodomain of co-repressors of Krüppel-associated box
(KRAB)-mediated repression, KRIP-1(TIF1beta) and TIF1alpha, as well as the
co-activator/adaptor p300/CBP. TRIP-Br1 and the related protein TRIP-Br2 possess 
transactivation domains. Like MDM2, which has a homologous transactivation
domain, TRIP-Br proteins functionally contact DP-1, stimulating E2F-1/DP-1
transcriptional activity. KRIP-1 potentiates TRIP-Br protein co-activation of
E2F-1/DP-1. TRIP-Br1 is a component of a multiprotein complex containing E2F-1
and DP-1. Co-expression of the retinoblastoma gene product (RB) abolishes
baseline E2F-1/DP-1 transcriptional activity as well as TRIP-Br/KRIP-1
co-activation, both of which are restored by the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein.
These features suggest that TRIP-Br proteins function at E2F-responsive promoters
to integrate signals provided by PHD- and/or bromodomain- containing
transcription factors. TRIP-Br1 is identical to the cyclin-dependent kinase 4
(cdk4)-binding protein p34(SEI-1), which renders the activity of cyclin D/cdk4
resistant to the inhibitory effect of p16(INK4a) during late G(1).
TRIP-Br1(p34(SEI-1)) is differentially overexpressed during the G(1) and S phases
of the cell cycle, consistent with a dual role for TRIP-Br1(p34(SEI-1)) in the
regulation of cell cycle progression through sequential effects on the
transcriptional activity of E2F-responsive promoters during G(1) and S phases.

PMCID: PMC125435
PMID: 11331592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 22;20(8):910-20.

E2F-1 induces the stabilization of p53 but blocks p53-mediated transactivation.

Nip J(1), Strom DK, Eischen CM, Cleveland JL, Zambetti GP, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

E2F-1 induces p53 accumulation and E2F-1 and p53 form a physical complex, which
affects the ability of E2F-1 to activate transcription. We mapped the domains on 
E2F-1 that interact with p53 and found two p53-binding domains. To understand the
functional consequences of the E2F-1/p53 association on p53 activities we
identified the domains of E2F-1 that were responsible for the accumulation of
p53. Unexpectedly, we found that the E2F-1 transactivation domain was dispensable
for p53 induction. By contrast, further deletion of the DP-1 interaction/'marked'
box domain eliminated p53 accumulation. Radiolabeling pulse/chase analysis
demonstrated that E2F-1 caused post-translational stabilization of p53. Although 
E2F-1 caused the stabilization of p53, E2F-1 expression impaired p53-dependent
transactivation. Thus, the E2F-1 : p53 interaction may provide a checkpoint
function to inactivate overactive E2F-1, but the association may also inactivate 
p53 transactivation to allow cell cycle progression.

PMID: 11314026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2000;46(4):293-304.

Expression of pRB, cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinases and E2F1/DP-1 in human tumor
lines in cell culture and in xenograft tissues and response to cell cycle agents.

Lu K(1), Shih C, Teicher BA.

Author information: 
(1)Lilly Research Laboratories, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN 46285,
USA.

PURPOSE: Cell cycle regulatory components are interesting targets for cancer
therapy. Expression of pRb, cyclin D1, cdk4, cyclin E, cdk2, E2F1 and DP-1 was
determined in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 breast carcinoma cells, H460 and Calu-6
non-small cell lung carcinoma cells, H82 and SW2 small cell lung carcinoma cells,
HCT116 and HT29 colon carcinoma cells and LNCaP and DU-145 prostate carcinoma
cells.
METHODS: For Western blotting, the ratio with actin expression was used to
normalize the data; all lines were run on the same gels.
RESULTS: In cell culture, pRb was not detected in MB-468 and H82 was low in SW2
and DU-145 and highest in HCT116; in tumors, pRb was not detected in MB-468, H82,
SW2, and DU-145 and was highest in LNCaP and Calu-6. Cyclin D1 was not detected
in SW2 cells in culture, was low in MB-468 and H82, and was highest in LNCaP and 
H460; in tumors, cyclin D1 was low in MB-468, H460, SW2 and DU 145, and was
highest in LNCaP. In cell culture, cdk4 was lowest in Calu-6, HCT116, HT29 and
DU-145 and highest in H82 and SW2; in tumors, cdk4 was low in MCF-7, MB-468,
H460, Calu-6 and HCT116 and was very high in the SW2. Expression of cyclin E was 
very low in MCF-7 and HT29 and high in H460 in culture and was very low in MCF-7,
H460, Calu-6, H82, HT29 and DU-145 in tumors and high in HCT116 and LNCaP. In
cell culture, E2F1 was lowest in MB-468, Calu-6, HT29 and DU-145 cells and
highest in LNCaP cells; in tumors, E2F1 was lowest in MCF-7, MB-468 and Calu-6
and highest in LNCaP. In cell culture, DP-1 was lowest in MB-468, HCT116 and HT29
and highest in SW2. The MCF-7 and MB-468 lines were most resistant to
flavopiridol and olmoucine and the H460 and Calu-6 lines were most resistant to
genistein. The SW2 tumor was most responsive to flavopiridol and olomoucine.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a high degree of variability in the expression of cell
cycle components in human tumor cell lines, resulting in complexity in predicting
response to cell cycle directed agents.

PMID: 11052627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Int J Parasitol. 2000 Sep;30(10):1089-97.

Upregulation of a raf kinase and a DP-1 family transcription factor in epidermal 
growth factor (EGF) stimulated filarial parasites.

Dissanayake S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, UAE
University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates. sendiss@uaeu.ac.ae

Previously we have shown that in the filarial parasite Brugia malayi, stimulation
with murine epidermal growth factor (EGF) upregulated the expression of the
nuclear GTPase, Ran. In this paper we provide further evidence that filarial
parasites possess the ability to respond to mammalian EGF. Stimulation of B.
malayi microfilariae with EGF increased transcription of a Raf kinase, increased 
the physical interaction between Ran and at least eight unidentified proteins,
abolished the association of a putative EGF receptor with the nuclear GTPase Ran 
and enhanced phosphorylation of native microfilarial proteins. In the cattle
filarial parasite Setaria digitata, stimulation of adult worms with EGF was
probably responsible for up-regulation of a DP-1 family transcription factor.
These data suggest that filarial parasites possess the ability to respond to
mammalian EGF and that mammalian growth factors may regulate developmental
maturation of filarial parasites.

PMID: 10996327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Aug;20(16):5986-97.

C/EBPalpha inhibits cell growth via direct repression of E2F-DP-mediated
transcription.

Slomiany BA(1), D'Arigo KL, Kelly MM, Kurtz DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
South Carolina 29425, USA.

Using an inducible transcription system which allows the regulated expression of 
C/EBP isoforms in tissue culture cells, we have found that the ectopic expression
of C/EBPalpha, at a level comparable to that found in normal liver tissue, has a 
pronounced antimitogenic effect in mouse L cells and NIH 3T3 cells. The
inhibition of cell division by C/EBPalpha in mouse cells cannot be reversed by
simian virus 40 T antigen, by oncogenic ras, or by adenovirus E1a protein. When
expressed in thymidine kinase-deficient L cells or 3T3 cells, C/EBPalpha is
detected in a protein complex which binds to the E2F binding sites found in the
promoters of the genes for E2F-1 and dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR). Bacterially 
expressed C/EBPalpha has no affinity for these E2F sites, but when recombinant
C/EBPalpha is added to nuclear extracts from mouse fibroblasts, a new E2F binding
activity appears, which contains the C/EBPalpha protein. Using an
E2F-DP1-responsive promoter linked to a reporter gene, it can be shown that
C/EBPalpha directly inhibits the induction of this promoter by E2F-DP1 in
transient-transfection assays. Furthermore, C/EBPalpha can be shown to inhibit
the S-phase induction of the E2F and DHFR promoters in permanent cell lines.
These findings delineate a straightforward mechanism for C/EBPalpha-mediated cell
growth arrest through repression of E2F-DP-mediated S-phase transcription.

PMCID: PMC86075
PMID: 10913181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Clin Cancer Res. 2000 Apr;6(4):1488-97.

Differential cytotoxic pathways of topoisomerase I and II anticancer agents after
overexpression of the E2F-1/DP-1 transcription factor complex.

Hofland K(1), Petersen BO, Falck J, Helin K, Jensen PB, Sehested M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory and Finsen Centres, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

The transcription factor complex E2F-1/DP-1 regulates the G1-to-S-phase
transition and has been associated with sensitivity to the S-phase-specific
anticancer agents camptothecin and etoposide, which poison DNA topoisomerase I
and II, respectively. To investigate the relationship between E2F-1 and drug
sensitivity in detail, we established human osteosarcoma U-20S-TA cells
expressing full-length E2F-1/ DP-1 under the control of a tetracycline-responsive
promoter, designated UE1DP-1 cells. Topoisomerase I levels and activity as well
as the number of camptothecin-induced DNA single- and double-strand breaks were
unchanged in UEIDP-1/tc- cells with >10-fold E2F-1/DP-1 overexpression. However, 
UE1DP-1/tc- cells were hypersensitive to camptothecin in both a clonogenic assay 
and four different apoptotic assays. This indicates that camptothecin-induced
toxicity in this model is due to the activation of an E2F-1/ DP-1-induced
post-DNA damage pathway rather than an increase in the number of replication
forks caused by the S-phase initiation. In contrast, topoisomerase IIalpha levels
(but not topoisomerase IIbeta levels), together with topoisomerase IIalpha
promoter activity, increased 2--3-fold in UE1DP-1/tc-cells. Furthermore, the
number of etoposide-induced DNA single- and double-strand breaks increased in
UE1DP-1/tc-cells together with a rise in clonogenic sensitivity to etoposide, but
an equal apoptotic sensitivity to etoposide. The increase in topoisomerase
IIalpha promoter activity in UE1DP-1/tc--cells was shown to be due to S-phase
initiation per se because it was blocked by ectopic expression of dominant
negative cyclin-dependent kinase 2. In conclusion, overexpression of E2F-1/DP-1
in U-20S-TA cells is sufficient to increase clonogenic sensitivity to both
topoisomerase I- and II-targeted anticancer drugs. However, the mechanism by
which this occurs appears to be qualitatively different. The UE1DP-1 cell model
may be used to elucidate post-DNA damage mechanisms of cell death induced by
topoisomerase I-directed anticancer agents.

PMID: 10778981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neurosci. 2000 May 1;20(9):3104-14.

Involvement of retinoblastoma family members and E2F/DP complexes in the death of
neurons evoked by DNA damage.

Park DS(1), Morris EJ, Bremner R, Keramaris E, Padmanabhan J, Rosenbaum M,
Shelanski ML, Geller HM, Greene LA.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, K1H
8M5, Canada. dpark@uottawa.ca

Neuronal death evoked by DNA damage requires cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (Cdk4) and
6 activity and is accompanied by elevation of cyclin D1-associated kinase
activity. Because Cdk4/6 phosphorylates retinoblastoma protein (pRb) family
members that then modulate the transcriptional activity of E2F/DP1 complexes, we 
examined the involvement of these components in DNA damage-evoked neuronal death.
Camptothecin induced rapid pRb and p107 phosphorylation at a Cdk4/6
phosphorylation site followed by selective loss of Rb and p107. The CDK inhibitor
flavopiridol suppressed pRb and p107 phosphorylation and loss, implicating CDK
activity in these events. Moreover, the loss of pRb and p107 appeared to be
mediated by caspases because it was blocked by general caspase inhibitors. The
role of phosphorylation and pRb and p107 loss in the death pathway was indicated 
by observations that virally mediated expression of pRb mutated at sites of
phosphorylation, including the Cdk4/6 site, inhibited death. Finally, expression 
of dominant-negative versions of DP1, known to compromise E2F transcriptional
activity, protects cortical neurons from death induced by camptothecin and
sympathetic neurons from death evoked by UV treatment. Taken together, these
results implicate the CDK-pRb/E2F/DP pathway as a required element in the
neuronal death evoked by DNA damage.

PMID: 10777774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Exp Med. 2000 Mar 20;191(6):1005-16.

Deregulated E2F transcriptional activity in autonomously growing melanoma cells.

Halaban R(1), Cheng E, Smicun Y, Germino J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8059, USA. ruth.halaban@yale.edu

Inactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein (pRb) has been
implicated in melanoma cells, but the molecular basis for this phenotype has not 
yet been elucidated, and the status of additional family members (p107 and p130, 
together termed pocket proteins) or the consequences on downstream targets such
as E2F transcription factors are not known. Because cell cycle progression is
dependent on the transcriptional activity of E2F family members (E2F1-E2F6), most
of them regulated by suppressive association with pocket proteins, we
characterized E2F-pocket protein DNA binding activity in normal versus malignant 
human melanocytes. By gel shift analysis, we show that in mitogen-dependent
normal melanocytes, external growth factors tightly controlled the levels of
growth-promoting free E2F DNA binding activity, composed largely of E2F2 and
E2F4, and the growth-suppressive E2F4-p130 complexes. In contrast, in melanoma
cells, free E2F DNA binding activity (E2F2 and E2F4, to a lesser extent E2F1,
E2F3, and occasionally E2F5), was constitutively maintained at high levels
independently of external melanocyte mitogens. E2F1 was the only family member
more abundant in the melanoma cells compared with normal melanocytes, and the
approximately fivefold increase in DNA binding activity could be accounted for
mostly by a similar increase in the levels of the dimerization partner DP1. The
continuous high expression of cyclin D1, A2, and E, the persistent
cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and CDK2 activities, and the presence of
hyperphosphorylated forms of pRb, p107, and p130, suggest that melanoma cells
acquired the capacity for autonomous growth through inactivation of all three
pocket proteins and release of E2F activity, otherwise tightly regulated in
normal melanocytes by external growth factors.

PMCID: PMC2193116
PMID: 10727462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 17;19(7):961-4.

A role for E2F1 in Ras activation of p21(WAF1/CIP1) transcription.

Gartel AL(1), Najmabadi F, Goufman E, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois College of Medicine, Department of Genetics, M/C 669,
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

We recently reported that E2F1 could transactivate the p21 promoter via
cis-acting elements between -119 to +16 bp of the p21 gene. Here we show that
activated V12-H-Ras can induce the p21 promoter through the same region of the
p21 promoter by a p53-independent mechanism in NIH3T3 cells. In contrast,
activated Ras was not able to induce the p21 promoter in E2F1-/- fibroblasts,
suggesting that E2F1 is required for induction of the p21 promoter by activated
Ras. Cotransfection of increasing concentrations of dominant negative E2F1 alone,
or with dominant negative DP1 into NIH3T3 cells suppressed induction of the p21
promoter by activated Ras. These data suggest that p53-independent induction of
the p21 promoter by activated Ras is mediated at least in part by E2F1. Oncogene 
(2000) 19, 961 - 964.

PMID: 10702805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Mar;20(6):2186-97.

Apoptotic and growth-promoting activity of E2F modulated by MDM2.

Loughran O(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, United
Kingdom.

E2F integrates and coordinates cell cycle progression with the transcription
apparatus through its cyclical interactions with important regulators of cellular
proliferation, such as pRb, cyclins, and cdk's. Physiological E2F is a
heterodimeric transcription factor composed of an E2F and a DP family member, and
while E2F proteins can stimulate proliferation, certain members of the family are
known to be endowed with growth-inhibitory and tumor suppressor-like activity. We
have investigated the product of the human mdm2 oncogene, hDM2, and report on its
ability to regulate E2F-dependent apoptosis in a fashion that is independent of
p53. hDM2 can prevent p53(-/-) cells from entering E2F-dependent apoptosis, an
outcome that is dependent upon the presence of the DP subunit. Cells rescued from
apoptosis possess lower levels of E2F subunits, although the rescued cells show
an increase in DNA synthesis and possess enhanced viability that reflects
cooperation between E2F-DP and hMD2. Furthermore, the regulation of E2F activity 
correlates with an hDM2-dependent effect on the intracellular distribution of
DP-1, since hDM2 causes the nuclear accumulation of DP-1. The control of E2F by
hDM2 therefore has certain parallels with the targeted degradation by MDM2 of
p53. However, the domains in hDM2 required for the regulation of E2F activity can
be distinguished from those necessary for p53 degradation, suggesting that
control of E2F and p53 by hDM2 may be mechanistically distinct. These experiments
define a new level of interplay between E2F and hDM2 whereby hDM2 has a profound 
impact on the physiological consequences of E2F activation. They suggest that the
oncogenic properties of hDM2 may in part be mediated by an antiapoptotic activity
that converts E2F from a negative to a positive regulator of cell cycle
progression and thereby retains E2F at a level that contributes to a continual
state of growth stimulation.

PMCID: PMC110835
PMID: 10688665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;18(12):911-22.

Differential regulation of E2F transcription factors by p53 tumor suppressor
protein.

Vaishnav YN(1), Pant V.

Author information: 
(1)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi,
India. yvaishnav@hotmail.com

The cell cycle is under the control of various positive and negative regulators. 
Two such regulators are the E2F family of transcription factors and the p53 tumor
suppressor protein. While E2F proteins are implicated in promoting the S phase of
the cell cycle, p53 has the potential to arrest cells in G1 phase and thereby
prevent entry into S phase. Because they perform seemingly opposite functions in 
the control of cell growth, a possibility of functional interactions between E2F 
and p53 was investigated. It was found that p53 specifically inhibited activated 
transcription by E2F-5 but not by E2F-1. Investigation into the mechanism of
action established that heterodimer formation and the DNA-binding steps were not 
significantly inhibited by p53. However, the transcriptional activation step of
E2F-5 activity, as examined by using a Gal4 DNA-binding domain chimera, was
specifically inhibited by p53. Interestingly, p53 could also inhibit
transcriptional activation by E2F-4 but not by E2F-2 or E2F-3. The results
indicate that p53 differentially regulates the activities of two subclasses
(E2F-1/-2/-3 vs. E2F-4/-5) of E2F transcription factors. Detailed analysis using 
a two-hybrid approach in mammalian cells indicated lack of physical interaction
between p53 and E2F-5, DP-1, or E2F-1. Reciprocal analysis revealed that whereas 
E2F-1 dramatically inhibited p53-activated transcription, E2F-5 or DP-1 did not. 
Thus, nonreciprocal functional interactions exist between various members of the 
E2F family of transcription factors and p53 tumor suppressor protein. The complex
interplay between various positive and negative regulators of cell growth, such
as E2F and p53 proteins, may be crucial in determining the ultimate outcome in
terms of cell cycle arrest, cell growth, or apoptosis.

PMID: 10619603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jan;20(2):672-83.

Cyclin D1 is required for transformation by activated Neu and is induced through 
an E2F-dependent signaling pathway.

Lee RJ(1), Albanese C, Fu M, D'Amico M, Lin B, Watanabe G, Haines GK 3rd, Siegel 
PM, Hung MC, Yarden Y, Horowitz JM, Muller WJ, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, The Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The neu (c-erbB-2) proto-oncogene encodes a tyrosine kinase receptor that is
overexpressed in 20 to 30% of human breast tumors. Herein, cyclin D1 protein
levels were increased in mammary tumors induced by overexpression of wild-type
Neu or activating mutants of Neu in transgenic mice and in MCF7 cells
overexpressing transforming Neu. Analyses of 12 Neu mutants in MCF7 cells
indicated important roles for specific C-terminal autophosphorylation sites and
the extracellular domain in cyclin D1 promoter activation. Induction of cyclin D1
by NeuT involved Ras, Rac, Rho, extracellular signal-regulated kinase, c-Jun
N-terminal kinase, and p38, but not phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase. NeuT induction
of the cyclin D1 promoter required the E2F and Sp1 DNA binding sites and was
inhibited by dominant negative E2F-1 or DP-1. Neu-induced transformation was
inhibited by a cyclin D1 antisense or dominant negative E2F-1 construct in Rat-1 
cells. Growth of NeuT-transformed mammary adenocarcinoma cells in nude mice was
blocked by the cyclin D1 antisense construct. These results demonstrate that
E2F-1 mediates a Neu-signaling cascade to cyclin D1 and identify cyclin D1 as a
critical downstream target of neu-induced transformation.

PMCID: PMC85165
PMID: 10611246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Oncogene. 1999 Nov 4;18(46):6209-21.

Granulocytic differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells by p130, the
retinoblastoma tumor suppressor homologue.

Mori A(1), Higashi H, Hoshikawa Y, Imamura M, Asaka M, Hatakeyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Oncology, Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer
Research, Tokyo, Japan.

The retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and the related pocket proteins, p107 and p130, 
play crucial roles in mammalian cell cycle control. Recent studies indicate that 
these pocket proteins are also involved in cellular differentiation processes. We
demonstrate in this work that the pRB-related p130 selectively accumulates during
the in vitro differentiation of the myeloid progenitor cell, 32Dcl3, into
granulocyte in response to granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF). This
G-CSF-dependent granulocytic differentiation is blocked by the adenovirus E1A
oncoprotein, which binds to and inactivates the pRB family of pocket proteins
including p130. Furthermore, enforced overexpression of p130 but not pRB inhibits
the myeloid cell proliferation that is concomitantly associated with granulocytic
differentiation morphologically characterized by nuclear segmentation. However,
simple G1-cell cycle arrest induced by cytokine deprivation or ectopic
overexpression of the p27 cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, or inhibition of E2F
activities by dominant negative DP-1 is not sufficient to trigger granulocytic
differentiation. The differentiation-promoting activity of p130 in myeloid cells 
requires both the pocket domain and the spacer domain. Our results indicate that 
the pRB-related p130 plays a critical role in myeloid cell differentiation and
suggest that coupling of cell cycle exit with the cellular differentiation
program may be specifically achieved by p130.

PMID: 10597219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8442-50.

Distinct cellular factors regulate the c-myb promoter through its E2F element.

Campanero MR(1), Armstrong M, Flemington E.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard University and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Most E2F-driven promoters are transiently activated around the G(1)/S transition.
Although the promoter for the c-myb proto-oncogene harbors an E2F element, it is 
induced early in G(1) following entry into the cell cycle. Furthermore, this
promoter remains active throughout subsequent cell cycles. Since E2F sites
function as repressor elements during G(1) (due to the association of pRb with
E2F factors), we investigated whether the E2F element in the c-myb promoter is
regulated differently than E2F elements in promoters that are repressed during
G(1). By gel shift analysis, the E2F element from the c-myb promoter was found to
form a unique complex, referred to as E2Fmyb-sp, which was not observed with E2F 
elements from several other promoters. Antibodies to DP-1, E2F1 to -5, p107, or
pRb failed to either supershift or block E2Fmyb-sp complex formation. Methylation
interference experiments indicate that the DNA contact residues for the E2Fmyb-sp
complex are distinct from but overlapping with residues required for the binding 
of E2F proteins. In addition to the identification of E2Fmyb-sp, we have found
that SP-1 binds to the c-myb E2F element. Functional studies revealed that
E2Fmyb-sp and/or SP-1 are required to achieve full activation of the c-myb
promoter in different cell types and to maintain elevated expression of the c-myb
promoter during G(1) in NIH 3T3 cells. These studies demonstrate that E2F
elements can be regulated differently through the binding of unique sets of
proteins.

PMCID: PMC84947
PMID: 10567569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Eur J Immunol. 1999 Oct;29(10):3380-9.

Modulation of E2F activity in primary mouse B cells following stimulation via
surface IgM and CD40 receptors.

Lam EW(1), Glassford J, van der Sman J, Banerji L, Pizzey AR, Shaun N, Thomas B, 
Klaus GG.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Section of Virology and Cell Biology 
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, London, GB. eric.lam@ic.ac.uk

Since signals via CD40 and the B cell receptor are known to synergize to induce B
cell activation, we have analyzed the pocket protein/E2F complexes in mouse B
lymphocytes following stimulation by anti-IgM, anti-CD40, alone or together. We
find that E2F4 and DP1 form the predominant E2F heterodimers in the G0 and G1
phases of the cell cycle, complexed with hypophosphorylated p130. During late G1 
and S phase this complex is replaced by at least three different E2F complexes,
one of which is an E2F complex containing p107 or pRB as well as two "free" E2F
complexes consisting of E2F4/DP1 and E2F1-3/DP1. These effects were mirrored by
the levels and phosphorylation status of the three pocket proteins. We also
observed an increase in electrophoretic mobility of DP1 and E2F4 as B cells
progressed from G0 into early G1, resulting from their dephosphorylation. This is
known to correlate with a decrease in DNA binding capacity of these proteins and 
could also be important for derepression of genes negatively regulated through
E2F sites in their promoters. These results therefore indicate that the pRB/E2F
pathway integrates proliferative signals emanating from the sIgM and CD40
receptors.

PMID: 10540350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Oncogene. 1999 Sep 9;18(36):5054-62.

E2F activates late-G1 events but cannot replace E1A in inducing S phase in
terminally differentiated skeletal muscle cells.

Pajalunga D(1), Tognozzi D, Tiainen M, D'Angelo M, Ferrantelli F, Helin K, Sacchi
A, Crescenzi M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncogenesis Laboratory, Regina Elena Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

We have previously shown that the adenovirus E1A oncogene can reactivate the cell
cycle in terminally differentiated cells. Current models imply that much or all
of this E1A activity is mediated by the release of the E2F transcription factors 
from pocket-protein control. In contrast, we show here that overexpression of
E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-4, or a chimeric E2F-4 tethered to a nuclear localization
signal cannot reactivate postmitotic skeletal muscle cells (myotubes). This is
not due to lack of transcriptional activity, as demonstrated on both a reporter
construct and a number of endogenous target genes. Although cyclin E was strongly
overexpressed in E2F-transduced myotubes, it lacked associated kinase activity,
possibly explaining the inability of the myotubes to enter S phase and accumulate
cyclin A. Although E2F is not sufficient to trigger DNA synthesis in myotubes,
its activity is necessary even in the presence of E1A, as dominant-negative DP-1 
mutants inhibit E1A-mediated cell cycle reentry. Our data show that, to
reactivate myotubes, E1A must exert other functions, in addition to releasing
E2F. They also establish mouse myotubes as an experimental system uniquely suited
to study the most direct E2F functions in the absence of downstream cell cycle
effects.

PMID: 10490842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Hum Genet. 1999 Sep;7(6):695-703.

Three submicroscopic deletions at the APC locus and their rapid detection by
quantitative-PCR analysis.

De Rosa M(1), Scarano MI, Panariello L, Carlomagno N, Rossi GB, Tempesta A,
Borgheresi P, Renda A, Izzo P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, CEINGE-Biotecnologie
Avanzate, Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy.

We describe three unrelated kindreds, affected by familial adenomatous polyposis 
(FAP), with 5q submicroscopic deletions that encompass the entire adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) gene and the adjacent DP1 gene. In one family the deletion
encompasses also the MCC (mutated in colon cancer) gene. Affected members of
these families had dysplastic adenomatous polyps and congenital hypertrophy of
the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE); no individual was affected by mental
retardation or facial dysmorphism. The deletions were detected by linkage
analysis with several intragenic and closely flanking polymorphic markers and
confirmed by a quantitative PCR analysis. This procedure could have an impact on 
the detection of the molecular defect in FAP patients in whom mutational analysis
fails to identify the specific mutation.

PMID: 10482959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Oncol. 1999 Aug;15(2):387-90.

Upregulation of E2F transcription factors in chemically induced mouse skin
tumors.

Balasubramanian S(1), Ahmad N, Mukhtar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH
44106, USA.

E2F family of transcription factors plays an important role in cell cycle
regulation, oncogenesis and differentiation. E2Fs are a family of heterodimeric
transcription factors composed of E2F-like and DP-like subunits. They regulate
expression of specific genes controlling cellular proliferation by binding to
specific sequences within the promoter regions of these target genes and
affecting their transcription in a cell cycle dependent manner. Recent studies
have suggested an essential role of Rb/E2F pathway in the passage of cells
through the G1 phase of the cell cycle. To better understand the role of these
transcription factors in epithelial tumorigenesis, we compared the expression of 
various proteins involved in the Rb/E2F pathway in epidermis and
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA)-initiated and
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) promoted papillomas on SENCAR mouse
skin. Western blot analysis data showed 3.0- to 7.6-fold upregulation of E2F-1,
E2F-2, E2F-3, E2F-4 and E2F-5 in tumors compared to normal epidermis. In tumors, 
the protein expression of DP-1 did not show significant change whereas that of
DP-2 showed a 2.2-fold increase. Compared to normal epidermis, a significant
upregulation of pRb (6.3-fold) and p107 (13-fold) was also observed in tumors.
The protein expression of p130 was not detectable either in normal epidermis or
in tumors. These data suggest that the overexpression of E2F proteins may be
involved in the G1-S phase dysregulation that occurs during mouse skin
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 10402252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 May 19;258(3):596-604.

DP1 phosphorylation in multimeric complexes: weaker interaction with cyclin A
through the E2F1 cyclin A binding domain leads to more efficient phosphorylation 
than stronger interaction through the p107 cyclin A binding domain.

Guida P(1), Zhu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

Stable enzyme-substrate interaction has been recognized as a major mechanism
underlying the substrate preferences of cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks). To learn
the relationship between stability of physical association and efficiency of
phosphorylation, we studied DP1 phosphorylation by cyclin A-Cdk2 in multiprotein 
complexes. When DP1 was connected to cyclin A-Cdk2 through E2F4 and p107, its
phosphorylation was very inefficient, although its association with cyclin A-Cdk2
was stable. In contrast, DP1 was efficiently phosphorylated when weakly connected
to cyclin A-Cdk2 via E2F1 or E2F4 with a fused cyclin A binding domain of E2F1.
The transactivation activity of E2F4-DP1 heterodimers was reduced when DP1 was
phosphorylated, while a phosphorylation deficient mutant of DP1 resisted this
down-regulation. Phosphorylation and functional regulation of DP1 were not due to
nuclear localization. Thus, stronger physical association between the kinase and 
the substrate does not necessarily lead to more efficient phosphorylation than
weaker interaction does.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10329431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 1999 Apr 23;274(17):12009-16.

Modulation of E2F complexes during G0 to S phase transition in human primary
B-lymphocytes.

van der Sman J(1), Thomas NS, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Section of Virology and Cell Biology,
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, London W2 1PG, United Kingdom.

The pocket protein-E2F complexes are convergence points for cell cycle signaling.
In the present report, we identified and monitored the pocket protein-E2F
complexes in human primary B-lymphocytes after activation by phorbol 12-myristate
13-acetate. Consistent with previous data from human and mouse fibroblasts and
T-lymphocytes, E2F4 and DP1 form the predominant E2F heterodimers both in G0 and 
G1 phases of the human B-lymphocyte cell cycle, whereas E2F1 and -3 are first
detected in late G1, and their expression levels increase towards S phase.
Intriguingly, the major E2F complex that we detected in quiescent human
B-lymphocytes is consisted of pRB, E2F4, and DP1. Though the levels of DP1 and -2
increase when cells progress from G0 to S, the proportion of DP1 to DP2 remains
relatively constant during the cell cycle. We also observed an increase in
electrophoretic mobility of the predominant E2F components, DP1 and E2F4, as
B-lymphocytes progressed from G0 into early G1. This increase in mobility was
attributable to dephosphorylation, as lambda phosphatase treatment could convert 
the slower migrating forms into the corresponding faster mobility forms. We
further demonstrated that this change in phosphorylation status correlates with a
decrease in DNA binding activity. This modulation of DNA binding activity
mediated through the dephosphorylation of DP1 and E2F4 could help to explain the 
lack of in vivo DNA footprinting in late G1 and S phases of gene promoters
negatively regulated through E2F sites and suggests a novel mechanism for
controlling E2F transcriptional activity during the transition from quiescence to
proliferation.

PMID: 10207023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. EMBO J. 1999 Apr 1;18(7):1878-90.

Timing of cyclin E gene expression depends on the regulated association of a
bipartite repressor element with a novel E2F complex.

Le Cam L(1), Polanowska J, Fabbrizio E, Olivier M, Philips A, Ng Eaton E, Classon
M, Geng Y, Sardet C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique Moléculaire, UMR 5535, CNRS, 1919 route de Mende, 34293,
Montpellier cedex 5, France.

Transient induction of the cyclin E gene in late G1 gates progression into S. We 
show that this event is controlled via a cyclin E repressor module (CERM), a
novel bipartite repressor element located near the cyclin E transcription start
site. CERM consists of a variant E2F-binding site and a contiguous upstream
AT-rich sequence which cooperate during G0/G1 to delay cyclin E expression until 
late G1. CERM binds the protein complex CERC, which disappears upon progression
through G0-G1 and reappears upon entry into the following G1. CERC disappearance 
correlates kinetically with the liberation of the CERM module in vivo and cyclin 
E transcriptional induction. CERC contains E2F4/DP1 and a pocket protein, and
sediments faster than classical E2F complexes in a glycerol gradient, suggesting 
the presence of additional components in a novel high molecular weight complex.
Affinity purified CERC binds to CERM but not to canonical E2F sites, thus
displaying behavior different from known E2F complexes. In cells nullizygous for 
members of the Rb family, CERC is still detectable and CERM-dependent repression 
is functional. Thus p130, p107 and pRb function interchangeably in CERC. Notably,
the CERC-CERM complex dissociates prematurely in pRb-/- cells in correspondence
with the premature expression of cyclin E. Thus, we identify a new regulatory
module that controls repression of G1-specific genes in G0/G1.

PMCID: PMC1171273
PMID: 10202151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Oncogene. 1999 Mar 11;18(10):1891-6.

Involvement of retinoblastoma (Rb) and E2F transcription factors during
photodynamic therapy of human epidermoid carcinoma cells A431.

Ahmad N(1), Gupta S, Mukhtar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
44106, USA.

Photodynamic therapy (PDT), a promising new therapeutic modality for the
management of a variety of solid malignancies and many non-malignant diseases, is
a bimodal therapy using a porphyrin based photosensitizing chemical and visible
light. The proper understanding of the mechanism of PDT-mediated cancer cell-kill
may result in improving the efficacy of this treatment modality. Earlier we have 
shown (Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA; 95: 6977-6982, 1998) that silicon
phthalocyanine (Pc4)-PDT results in an induction of the cyclin kinase inhibitor
WAF1/CIP1/p21 which, by inhibiting cyclins (E and D1) and cyclin dependent
kinases (cdk2 and cdk6), results in a G0/G1-phase arrest followed by apoptosis in
human epidermoid carcinoma cells A431. We have also demonstrated the generation
of nitric oxide during PDT-mediated apoptosis (Cancer Res.; 58: 1785-1788, 1998).
Retinoblastoma (pRb) and E2F family transcription factors are important proteins,
which regulate the G1-->S transition in the cell cycle. Here, we provide evidence
for the involvement of pRb-E2F/DP machinery as an important contributor of
PDT-mediated cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Western blot analysis demonstrated 
a decrease in the hyper-phosphorylated form of pRb at 3, 6 and 12 h post-PDT with
a relative increase in hypo-phosphorylated pRb. Western blot analysis also
revealed that PDT-caused decrease in phosphorylation of pRb occurs at serine-780.
The ELISA data demonstrated a time dependent accumulation of hypo-phosphorylated 
pRb by PDT. This response was accompanied with down-regulation in the protein
expression of all five E2F (1-5) family transcription factors, and their
heterodimeric partners DP1 and DP2. These results suggest that Pc4-PDT of A431
cells results in a down regulation of hyper-phosphorylated pRb protein with a
relative increase in hypo-phosphorylated pRb that, in turn, compromises with the 
availability of free E2F. We suggest that these events result in a stoppage of
the cell cycle progression at G1-->S transition thereby leading to a G0/G1 phase 
arrest and a subsequent apoptotic cell death. These data provide an evidence for 
the involvement of pRb-E2F/DP machinery in PDT-mediated cell cycle arrest leading
to apoptosis.

PMID: 10086343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 21;18(3):593-605.

Association with E2F-1 governs intracellular trafficking and polyubiquitination
of DP-1.

Magae J(1), Illenye S, Chang YC, Mitsui Y, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington
05405, USA.

The cell cycle-regulated transcription factor E2F is a family of heterodimers
composed of E2F and DP protein subunits. While DP proteins stabilize DNA binding 
of E2F proteins, and influence the entry of E2F-4 and E2F-5 into the nucleus, the
role of DP proteins in E2F-dependent gene expression is not well understood.
Using immunolocalization, immunoprecipitation, and cell fractionation
experiments, here we show association with E2F subunits governs intracellular
trafficking and ubiquitination of DP-1. In transient transfection experiments,
DP-1 polypeptides that stably bound E2F-1 entered the nucleus. DP-1 proteins that
failed to associate with E2F subunits accumulated in the cell cytoplasm as
polyubiquitinated DP-1. A Chinese hamster cell line that conditionally expresses 
HA-DP-1 was used to examine the effect of DP-1 on cell cycle progression. In
serum response experiments, moderate increases in HA-DP-1 led to a threefold
increase in E2F DNA binding activity in vitro, a corresponding increase in dhfr
gene expression during transition of G1, and higher rates of S phase entry.
However, flow cytometry showed cells expressing very high levels of HA-DP-1
failed to enter the S phase. Inhibition of cell cycle progression by high levels 
of HA-DP-1 was associated with the accumulation of other ubiquitinated cellular
proteins, including c-jun and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21,
indicating that degradation of ubiquitinated proteins is required for progression
from G0 to S phase even in the presence of activated E2F. Under similar
conditions, expression of E2F-1 reduced the levels of ubiquitinated cellular
proteins and accelerated cell cycle progression. Our studies indicate association
with E2F subunits prevents ubiquitin-dependent degradation of DP-1 in the
cytoplasm by promoting nuclear entry of E2F/DP heterodimers.

PMID: 9989809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 20;17(7):867-76.

The E2F-family proteins induce distinct cell cycle regulatory factors in
p16-arrested, U343 astrocytoma cells.

Dirks PB(1), Rutka JT, Hubbard SL, Mondal S, Hamel PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

We previously demonstrated that P16Ink4a (p16) expression in p16-deficient U343
astrocytoma cells causes a G1 cell cycle arrest, profound changes in cytoskeletal
proteins and alterations in expression and activity of the pRB and E2F family
proteins. We examine here the effects of expressing wild type or mutant versions 
of the downstream targets of p16 in U343 astrocytomas. We first attempted to
block proliferation of U343 cells using the dominant mutant of pRB, deltap34.
Expression of this mutant in the human osteosarcoma, SAOS-2, potently blocked
proliferation but did not affect the cell cycle of U343 cells. We next showed
that expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3 and E2F-4 are each able to overcome this
p16-dependent cell cycle arrest but exhibit distinct biological activities.
Adenoviral-mediated expression of E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3, or E2F-4 overcame the
p16-dependent cell cycle block and induced alterations in cell morphology. E2F-5,
only in conjunction with DP1, promoted cell cycle progression. For both E2F-1 and
E2F-2, but not E2F-3 or E2F-5/DP1, cell cycle re-entry was associated with almost
quantitative cell death. Only small numbers of dying cells were observed in
E2F-4-expressing cultures. Expression of the different E2F's altered the
expression of distinct sets of cell cycle regulatory proteins. E2F-1 induced
endogenous E2F-4 expression and also caused an increase in pRB, p107 and cyclin E
levels. Expression of E2F-4 caused a weak increase in E2F-1 levels but also
strongly induced pRB, p107, p130 and cyclin E. However, E2F-1 and E2F-4 clearly
regulate expression of distinct genes, demonstrated when E2F-4 caused a threefold
increase in the levels of cdk2 whereas E2F-1 failed to increase in this cyclin
dependent kinase. Similarly, expression of E2F-1 or E2F-2 were shown to have
distinct effects on the expression of cdk2, cyclin E and pRB despite both of
these closely related E2F-family members potently inducing cell death. Thus,
E2F-1, E2F-2, E2F-3 and E2F-4 are able to overcome the p16-dependent
proliferative block in U343 astrocytoma cells. While overcoming this cell cycle
block, each of the E2F's uniquely affect the expression of a number of cell cycle
regulatory proteins and have distinct abilities to promote cell death.

PMID: 9780003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 20;17(7):853-65.

A novel E2F binding protein with Myc-type HLH motif stimulates E2F-dependent
transcription by forming a heterodimer.

Suzuki M(1), Okuyama S, Okamoto S, Shirasuna K, Nakajima T, Hachiya T, Nojima H, 
Sekiya S, Oda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science and Technology, Science University of Tokyo, 
Chiba, Japan.

The human embryonal carcinoma cells NEC14 can be induced to differentiate
morphologically by the addition of 10(-2) M N, N'-hexamethylene-bis-acetamide and
cease to grow in several days. Transcription factors of the E2F/DP family have
been shown to be closely related to the regulation of cell proliferation. To
analyse cellular proteins which interact with E2F in NEC14 cells, cDNA clones
encoding E2F binding proteins were isolated from a lambdaZAP II NEC14 cell
library with the 32P-labeled GST (Glutathione S-transferase)-E2F-1 fusion protein
as a probe. One of the clones encodes E2FBP1 which has the helix-loop-helix (HLH)
motif, but lacks the basic domain and the zipper structure usually found at N-
and C-terminal sides to the HLH motif, respectively. The arrangement of amino
acids in the helix 1 and helix 2 regions is quite similar to those of Mxi and
Mad, but different from those of E2F-1 and DP-1. Western blot analysis of the
immunoprecipitates prepared with anti-E2FBP1 antibody showed that E2FBP1
associates with both E2F-1 and DP-1 in vivo. E2FBP1 alone has no DNA binding
activity, but bind to the E2F site through heterodimerization with E2F-1 but not 
with DP-1. Although E2FBP1 lacks the transactivation domain, it stimulates E2F
site-dependent transcription in cooperation with E2F-1.

PMID: 9780002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):611-23.

E2F-6: a novel member of the E2F family is an inhibitor of E2F-dependent
transcription.

Cartwright P(1), Müller H, Wagener C, Holm K, Helin K.

Author information: 
(1)European Institute of Oncology, Department of Experimental Oncology, Milan,
Italy.

The E2F family of transcription factors are essential for the regulation of genes
required for appropriate progression through the cell cycle. Five members of the 
E2F family have been previously reported, namely E2F1-5. All five are key
elements in transcriptional regulation of essential genes, and they can be
divided into two functional groups, those that induce S-phase progression when
overexpressed in quiescent cells (E2Fs 1-3), and those that do not (E2Fs 4-5).
Here, we describe the identification of a novel member of this family, which we
refer to as E2F-6. E2F-6 shares significant homology with E2Fs 1-5, especially
within the DNA binding, heterodimerization and marked box domains. Unlike E2Fs
1-5, E2F-6 lacks a transactivation and a pocket protein binding domain, hence,
forms a unique third group within the E2F family. E2F-6 is a nuclear protein that
can form heterodimers with the DP proteins (both DP-I and DP-2) in vitro and in
vivo. Our results show that the complex formed between E2F-6 and the DP proteins,
possesses high DNA binding activity, displaying a preference for a TTTCCCGC E2F
recognition site, which is slightly different to the E2F consensus site derived
from the E2 promoter (TTTCGCGC). In contrast to the other members of the E2F
family, ectopic expression of E2F-6 inhibits transcription from promoters
possessing E2F recognition sites rather than activating transcription. In
addition, overexpression of E2F-6 suppresses the transactivational effects of
coexpression of E2F-1 and DP-1. The inhibitory effect of E2F-6 is dependent on
its DNA binding activity and its ability to form heterodimers with the DPs.
Interestingly, ectopic expression of E2F-6 leads to accumulation of cells in
S-phase. Our data suggest that E2F-6 expression delays the exit from S-phase
rather than inducing S-phase, which further emphasizes the functional difference 
between E2F-6 and the previously known E2F family members.

PMID: 9704927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Oncogene. 1998 Aug 6;17(5):585-94.

Regulation of E2F-1 gene expression in avian cells.

Espanel X(1), Le Cam L, North S, Sardet C, Brun G, Gillet G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 49 CNRS, ENS Lyon,
France.

E2F-1 is the prototype of a family of transcription factors playing a central
role in the control of cell proliferation and apoptosis. E2F DNA binding activity
is down-regulated during cellular differentiation, which is correlated with cell 
division arrest. We report here that the expression of E2F-1 itself is
down-regulated in the developing quail neural retina between embryonic days
E8-E10. This event occurs just after the massive arrest of the quail neuroretina 
cell division (E7-E8). To gain further insight into the regulatory mechanisms
monitoring E2F-1 expression in differentiating neurons, we have cloned the quail 
E2F-1 promoter. In vivo DNA footprintings of this promoter have shown that a
number of potential SP-1 and C/EBP response elements are constitutively occupied 
in the entire quail neuroretina of E5 and E14, whereas the two consensus
palindromic E2F binding sites are only protected at E5. This suggests that these 
E2F elements participate in down-regulation of E2F-1 gene expression during avian
neuroretina development. CAT reporter assays have shown that E2F-1 in association
with its partner DP-1 transactivates its own promoter, whereas p105Rb inhibits
the E2F-1 promoter. Both E2F-1/DP-1 and p105Rh require the presence of the E2F
binding sites to mediate their effects. However, experiments performed with
deletion mutants of the promoter strongly suggest that other regions located
upstream of the E2F binding sites also mediate part of the E2F-1 transactivating 
effect on its own promoter. Altogether, these results suggest that the
down-regulation of E2F-1 gene expression in differentiating neurons could be due,
in part, to the E2F/Rb complexes binding to the E2F-1 promoter.

PMID: 9704924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 1998 Jul 16;17(2):143-55.

E2F-1-induced p53-independent apoptosis in transgenic mice.

Holmberg C(1), Helin K, Sehested M, Karlström O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The E2F transcription factors are key targets for the retinoblastoma protein,
pRB. By inactivation of E2Fs, pRB prevents progression to the S phase. To test
proliferative functions of E2F, we generated transgenic mice expressing human
E2F-1 and/or human DP-1. When the hydroxymethyl glutaryl coenzyme A reductase
promoter was used to express DP-1, overexpression occurred in a variety of
tissues and did not confer phenotypic changes. In contrast, expression of E2F-1
from the same promoter was obtained only in testicles, in which E2F-1
overexpression caused atrophy and sterility through a process involving increased
apoptosis in the germinal epithelium. This effect was potentiated by simultaneous
overexpression of DP-1. Testicular atrophy as a result of overexpression of E2F-1
and DP-1 is independent of functional p53, since p53-nullizygous transgenic mice 
overexpressing E2F-1 and DP-1 also suffered testicular atrophy.

PMID: 9674698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4565-76.

Regulation of cellular genes in a chromosomal context by the retinoblastoma tumor
suppressor protein.

Buchmann AM(1), Swaminathan S, Thimmapaya B.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, Illinois 60611-3088, USA.

The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product (pRb) is involved in controlling
cell cycle progression from G1 into S. pRb functions, in part, by regulating the 
activities of several transcription factors, making pRb involved in the
transcriptional control of cellular genes. Transient-transfection assays have
implicated pRb in the transcription of several genes, including c-fos, the
interleukin-6 gene, c-myc, cdc-2, c-neu, and the transforming growth factor beta2
gene. However, these assays place the promoter in an artificial context and
exclude the effects of far 5' upstream regions and chromosomal architecture on
gene transcription. In these experiments, we have studied the role of pRb in the 
control of cell cycle-related genes within a chromosomal context and within the
context of the G1 phase of the cell cycle. We have used adenovirus vectors to
overexpress pRb in human osteosarcoma cells and breast cells synchronized in
early G1. By RNase protection assays, we have assayed the effects of this
virus-produced pRb on gene expression in these cells. These results indicate that
pRb is involved in the transcriptional downregulation of the E2F-1, E2F-2,
dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine kinase, c-myc, proliferating-cell nuclear
antigen, p107, and p21/Cip1 genes. However, it has no effect on the transcription
of the E2F-3, E2F-4, E2F-5, DP-1, DP-2, or p16/Ink4 genes. The results are
consistent with the notion that pRb controls the transcription of genes involved 
in S-phase promotion. They also suggest that pRb negatively regulates the
transcription of two of the transcription factors whose activity it also
represses, E2F-1 and E2F-2, and that it plays a role in downregulating the
immediate-early gene response to serum stimulation.

PMCID: PMC109042
PMID: 9671466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 1;273(18):10972-8.

The p53 tumor suppressor inhibits transcription of the TATA-less mouse DP1
promoter.

Gopalkrishnan RV(1), Lam EW, Kedinger C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (CNRS/INSERM,
University Louis Pasteur), F-67404 Illkirch Cedex C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

Cell cycle progression is subject to several regulatory controls, of which the
p53 protein plays a major role in growth arrest, subsequent to the detection of
cellular aberrations. It is well documented that p53 has the ability to inhibit
transcription driven by several promoters, possibly via distinct mechanisms. In
this report, we show that expression of the cell cycle regulatory transcription
factor DP1 is strongly inhibited by p53, at the level of transcription and
probably through the basal TATA-less promoter. This inhibitory activity has a
relative specificity for the DP1 promoter compared with the functionally related 
E2F1 promoter or unrelated promoters such as those of the transcription factor
ATFa or the thymidine kinase gene. Inhibition of DP1 transcription has
implications in one of the several possible mechanisms through which p53 induces 
cell cycle arrest.

PMID: 9556576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):10051-7.

Modulation of E2F activity via signaling through surface IgM and CD40 receptors
in WEHI-231 B lymphoma cells.

Lam EW(1), Choi MS, van der Sman J, Burbidge SA, Klaus GG.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and Department of Medical Microbiology,
Imperial College School of Medicine at St Mary's, Norfolk Place, London W2 1PG,
United Kingdom. eric.lam@ic.ac.uk

Stimulation of the phenotypically immature B cell lymphoma WEHI-231 with anti-IgM
induces G1 arrest followed by apoptotic cell death, which can be reversed by
stimulation via the CD40 receptor. Here, we show that cells expressing bcl-xL
(WEHI-bcl-xL) arrest at G0/G1 following culture with anti-IgM but do not undergo 
apoptosis. These arrested cells can be induced to reenter the cell cycle by
ligation of CD40. We have therefore used these cells as a model to study the
regulation of the transcription factor E2F, which is critically involved in
transit through the cell cycle. We found that anti-IgM treatment induces the
appearance of an inhibitory DNA binding complex containing the pRB-related pocket
protein p130 together with E2F and a concomitant decrease in "free" E2F,
consisting of E2F1 and its partner DP1; these effects were reversed following
stimulation via CD40. These changes in free E2F levels were regulated by changes 
in E2F1 gene transcription, which is at least partly a result of control of E2F1 
promoter activity through its E2F binding sites. Transient transfection
experiments showed that either E2F1 or the viral oncoprotein E1A, which
sequesters pocket proteins, including p130, overcame anti-IgM-induced cell cycle 
arrest in WEHI-bcl-xL. Taken together, these results indicate that in WEHI-231
sIgM ligation induces the accumulation of hypophosphorylated p130 with consequent
inhibition of E2F1 gene transcription and cell cycle arrest. Conversely, ligation
of CD40 causes hyperphosphorylation of p130, thereby releasing the repression of 
E2F1 and other E2F-regulated genes, enabling the cells to reenter the cycle.
These results, therefore, provide novel insights into the mechanisms whereby
antigen receptors on immature B cells deliver inhibitory signals (leading to
negative selection of self-reactive B cells) and how these signals can be
modulated by positive signals generated via CD40.

PMID: 9545352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jan 26;242(3):586-92.

The molecular and functional characterization of E2F-5 transcription factor.

Vaishnav YN(1), Vaishnav MY, Pant V.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, New Delhi, India. yash@iegebnd.ernet.in

The E2F activity plays a critical role in the control of cell cycle and action of
tumor suppressor proteins and is also a target of the transforming proteins of
small DNA tumor viruses. We describe here molecular cloning and functional
characterization of a fifth member of the E2F family of transcription factors.
E2F-5 protein is more homologous to E2F-4 (72% amino acid identity) than to
E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 (35% amino acid identity). Based on structural and
functional criteria, the E2F family appears to comprise two distinct
sub-families, one composed of E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 and the other composed of
E2F-4 and E2F-5, E2F-5 mRNA is expressed in a wide variety of human tissues. The 
protein is expressed as multiple species ranging in size from 46 to 54 kDa as a
result of differential phosphorylation. The expression of a reporter gene
containing E2F binding sites in the promoter is transcriptionally activated by
E2F-5 in a cooperative manner with the DP-1 protein. The interaction between
E2F-5 and DP-1 is demonstrated using a two-hybrid system in mammalian cells. We
have also demonstrated the presence of a strong transactivation domain at the
carboxy terminus (273-346 amino acid residues) of E2F-5 protein.

PMID: 9464260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Jan;9(1):59-69.

E2F-1 and E2F-3 are functionally distinct in their ability to promote myeloid
cell cycle progression and block granulocyte differentiation.

Strom DK(1), Cleveland JL, Chellappan S, Nip J, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and the Vanderbilt Cancer Center, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent 32D.3 myeloid cells are an attractive model system
for the analysis of hematopoietic cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis. In
these cells, E2F-3, E2F-4, and DP-1 are regulated by both IL-3 and granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), whereas E2F-1 was expressed at low levels and 
was not regulated by either cytokine. E2F-2 and E2F-5 were not detectable. To
examine phenotypes associated with the loss of normal cell cycle regulation by
pRb, we established E2F-1- and E2F-3-overexpressing cell lines. In contrast to
E2F-1, E2F-3 overexpression did not accelerate apoptosis or promote S-phase entry
in the absence of IL-3, demonstrating that they are not functionally redundant.
In addition, when cells were cultured in G-CSF to stimulate granulocytic
differentiation, E2F-1 overexpression overrode survival functions provided by
G-CSF and serum and induced apoptosis. In contrast, cells overexpressing E2F-3
exhibited normal granulocytic differentiation. Bcl-2 coexpression blocked
E2F-1-induced apoptosis in the presence of G-CSF. However, these cells were
blocked in the granulocytic differentiation program at the metamyelocyte stage
and remained dependent on G-CSF for continuous culture. Cells overexpressing both
E2F-1 and Bcl-2 exhibited slowed but continuous cell cycling in the absence of
IL-3 until they eventually succumbed to apoptosis. Therefore, E2F-1, but not
E2F-3, can temporally replace the requirement for growth factors to promote cell 
cycle progression, and in terminally differentiating cells, this leads to a block
in differentiation and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 9438389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cancer Res. 1998 Jan 1;58(1):123-34.

Disruption of the pRb/E2F pathway and inhibition of apoptosis are major oncogenic
events in liver constitutively expressing c-myc and transforming growth factor
alpha.

Santoni-Rugiu E(1), Jensen MR, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Division of Basic Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4255, USA.

The oncogene c-myc and transforming growth factor (TGF) alpha are frequently
coexpressed in human cancers, suggesting that their interaction may be a critical
step in malignant growth. Consistent with this idea, we recently demonstrated in 
a transgenic mouse model that TGF-alpha dramatically enhances c-myc-induced
hepatocarcinogenesis. To elucidate this synergistic effect, we have now
investigated regulation of cell cycle and apoptosis during neoplastic development
in the liver of c-myc and c-myc/TGFalpha transgenic mice. Both lines displayed
dramatic increases of mitotic and apoptotic rates before the onset of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but only c-myc/TGF-alpha livers showed
significant levels of net proliferation (mitosis minus apoptosis). Subsequently, 
mitosis declined in peritumorous tissues, concomitant with the previously
reported induction of TGF-beta1, whereas c-myc and c-myc/TGFalpha HCCs maintained
mitotic hyperactivity. The c-myc/TGF-alpha HCCs were also characterized by a
particularly strong expression of TGF-alpha and very low apoptotic index in
contrast to high levels of apoptosis in peritumorous tissues and c-myc HCCs. The 
differential levels of cell proliferation in noncancerous and cancerous tissues
correlated with a stronger induction of cyclin D1 mRNA and protein in
c-myc/TGF-alpha and c-myc HCCs associated with intense pRb hyperphosphorylation. 
Severe deregulation of G1-S transition was also indicated by the dramatic
up-regulation, particularly in the HCCs, of pRb-free E2F1-DP1 and E2F2-DP1
transcription factor heterodimers, as assessed by immunoprecipitation and
immunohistochemistry. The existence of increased E2F activity during
hepatocarcinogenesis was further indicated by the transcriptional induction of
putative E2F target genes involved in cell cycle progression, such as endogenous 
c-myc, cyclin A, Cdc2, and E2F itself. Cdc2 overexpression and the elevated
mitotic indices in the HCCs correlated also with induction of cyclin B
steady-state levels. The data suggest that coexpression of c-myc and TGF-alpha
leads to a selective growth advantage for hepatic (pre)neoplastic cells by
disrupting the pRb/E2F pathway and by TGF-alpha-mediated reduction of apoptosis.

PMID: 9426068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;17(12):6994-7007.

Subunit composition determines E2F DNA-binding site specificity.

Tao Y(1), Kassatly RF, Cress WD, Horowitz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The product of the retinoblastoma (Rb) susceptibility gene, Rb-1, regulates the
activity of a wide variety of transcription factors, such as E2F, in a cell
cycle-dependent fashion. E2F is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed of 
two subunits each encoded by one of two related gene families, denoted E2F and
DP. Five E2F genes, E2F-1 through E2F-5, and two DP genes, DP-1 and DP-2, have
been isolated from mammals, and heterodimeric complexes of these proteins are
expressed in most, if not all, vertebrate cells. It is not yet clear whether
E2F/DP complexes regulate overlapping and/or specific cellular genes. Moreover,
little is known about whether Rb regulates all or a subset of E2F-dependent
genes. Using recombinant E2F, DP, and Rb proteins prepared in
baculovirus-infected cells and a repetitive immunoprecipitation-PCR procedure
(CASTing), we have identified consensus DNA-binding sites for E2F-1/DP-1,
E2F-1/DP-2, E2F-4/DP-1, and E2F-4/DP-2 complexes as well as an Rb/E2F-1/DP-1
trimeric complex. Our data indicate that (i) E2F, DP, and Rb proteins each
influence the selection of E2F-binding sites; (ii) E2F sites differ with respect 
to their intrinsic DNA-bending properties; (iii) E2F/DP complexes induce distinct
degrees of DNA bending; and (iv) complex-specific E2F sites selected in vitro
function distinctly as regulators of cell cycle-dependent transcription in vivo. 
These data indicate that the specific sequence of an E2F site may determine its
role in transcriptional regulation and suggest that Rb/E2F complexes may regulate
subsets of E2F-dependent cellular genes.

PMCID: PMC232556
PMID: 9372931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Carcinog. 1997 Oct;20(2):216-23.

High-affinity binding of the cell cycle-regulated transcription factors E2F1 and 
E2F4 to benzo[a]pyrene diol epoxide-DNA adducts.

Johnson DG(1), Coleman A, Powell KL, MacLeod MC.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Science Park-Research
Division, Smithville 78957, USA.

Previous studies indicated that DNA adducts formed by a carcinogenic diol
epoxide, 7r,8t-dihydroxy-9t, 10t-epoxy-7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo[a]pyrene (BPDE), 
can increase the affinity of the transcription factor Sp1 for DNA sequences that 
are not normally specific binding sites. It was suggested that adduct-induced
bends in the DNA were responsible for this behavior. The cell cycle-regulated
transcription factor E2F is also known to bend DNA upon binding. When partially
purified E2F was tested in a gel mobility-shift assay, binding to a target DNA
containing two consensus E2F-binding sites was enhanced by prior modification of 
the DNA with BPDE. Recombinant human E2F1, E2F4, and DP1 fusion proteins were
affinity purified from bacteria expressing these genes. A combination of either
E2F1 or E2F4 with their dimerization partner, DP1, gave preparations that
exhibited binding to the E2F site-containing DNA fragment. In both cases, the
proteins exhibited much higher apparent affinity for BPDE-modified DNA than for
unmodified DNA. In addition, BPDE-modified DNA was a better competitor for the
binding than unmodified DNA. Heterologous DNA that contained no consensus E2F
binding motifs also competed well for E2F binding when modified with BPDE. In
contrast, transcription factor that does not bend DNA appreciably (GAL4) did not 
show enhanced affinity for BPDE-modified DNA. These findings suggest that
numerous transcription factors that bend DNA may bind with anomalously high
affinity to sequences that contain carcinogen-DNA adducts.

PMID: 9364211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cancer Res. 1997 Sep 1;57(17):3640-3.

Role for E2F in DNA damage-induced entry of cells into S phase.

Huang Y(1), Ishiko T, Nakada S, Utsugisawa T, Kato T, Yuan ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Pharmacology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Mammalian cells respond to ionizing radiation (IR) with transient cell cycle
arrest and induction of apoptosis. Here we show that IR increases the expression 
of the E2F-1 transcription factor and the entry of cells into S phase. E2F-1
transactivation function is inhibited by cyclin A-kinase to ensure orderly
progression through S phase. However, in contrast to proliferating cells, IR
treatment results in down-regulation of cyclin A-kinase. Expression of a dominant
negative form of the E2F heterodimeric partner DP-1 confirmed the involvement of 
E2F in IR-induced S-phase entry. These findings also support opposing signals
involving the induction of E2F and the down-regulation of cyclin A-kinase in the 
IR response.

PMID: 9288762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mech Dev. 1997 Aug;66(1-2):13-25.

Expression patterns of the E2F family of transcription factors during mouse
nervous system development.

Dagnino L(1), Fry CJ, Bartley SM, Farnham P, Gallie BL, Phillips RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Cancer Research, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. ldagnino@ogh.on.ca

The E2F family of transcription factors consists of two subgroups termed E2F and 
DP. E2F is required for cell proliferation, and is necessary for fruit fly
development. E2F activity is a target for regulation by the retinoblastoma gene
family, which includes pRB, p107 and p130. Mutant RB-/-, RB-/-:p107-/- and
p107-/-:p130-/- mice develop abnormally, probably as a result of dysregulation in
the activity of E2F, indicating the importance of E2F in mammalian development.
To investigate the role of E2F in murine development, we have examined the
patterns of expression of E2F-1 through E2F-5, and DP-1 in the developing nervous
system by in situ hybridization. E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-5 are first detected in the
9.5 days post-coitus (dpc) forebrain. Expression of these E2F forms extends
caudally thereafter and includes the developing brain and the upper half of the
10.5 dpc spinal cord. By 11.5 dpc, these E2F factors are expressed throughout the
central nervous system. In 12.5 dpc embryos, E2F-1, E2F-2 and E2F-5 are highly
expressed in proliferating, undifferentiated neuronal precursors. As neurons
differentiate and migrate to the outer marginal zones in the nervous system,
expression of these E2F members is extinguished. In the developing retina,
another neuronal tissue, E2F-1 expression is also confined to the proliferating, 
undifferentiated retinoblastic layer. In contrast, E2F-3 expression is
up-regulated as retinoblasts differentiate into the ganglion cell layer. In
non-neuronal tissues, high E2F-4 transcript levels are present in regions
corresponding to proliferative chondrocytes, whereas E2F-2 and E2F-4 transcripts 
are very abundant in the thymic cortex, which contains immature thymocytes. We
conclude that individual E2F forms are differentially regulated during the
development of distinct tissues, and especially during neuronal development.

PMID: 9376316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genes Dev. 1997 Aug 1;11(15):1987-98.

PPARgamma induces cell cycle withdrawal: inhibition of E2F/DP DNA-binding
activity via down-regulation of PP2A.

Altiok S(1), Xu M, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and the Department of Cell Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

PPAR gamma is an adipose-selective nuclear hormone receptor that plays a key role
in the control of adipocyte differentiation. Previous studies indicated that
activation of ectopically expressed PPAR gamma induces differentiation when cells
have ceased growth because of confluence. We show here that ligand activation of 
PPAR gamma is sufficient to induce growth arrest in fibroblasts and SV40 large
T-antigen transformed, adipogenic HIB1B cells. Cell cycle withdrawal is
accompanied by a decrease in the DNA-binding and transcriptional activity of the 
E2F/DP complex, which is attributable to an increase in the phosphorylation of
these proteins, especially DP-1. This effect is a consequence of decreased
expression of the catalytic subunit of the serine-threonine phosphatase PP2A.
These data suggest an important role for PP2A in the control of E2F/DP activity
and a new mode of cell cycle control in differentiation.

PMCID: PMC316411
PMID: 9271121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Invest Dermatol. 1997 Aug;109(2):187-93.

E2F as a regulator of keratinocyte proliferation: implications for skin tumor
development.

Jones SJ(1), Dicker AJ, Dahler AL, Saunders NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, University of Queensland Department
of Medicine, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Woolloonggabba, Australia.

E2F and DP family members are established regulators of the cell cycle. In this
study, we examined their activity/expression during keratinocyte growth arrest.
Treating human epidermal keratinocytes with the growth inhibitors TPA or
IFN-gamma or allowing the cells to reach confluence resulted in 90% inhibition of
DNA synthesis, whereas a keratinocyte-derived squamous carcinoma cell line
(SCC25) was resistant to growth inhibitors. Gel shift analysis of keratinocytes
using an E2F response element indicated that growth arrest was associated with a 
decrease in all E2F binding complexes. This indicates that growth inhibition is
not due to negative regulation by pocket proteins. Conversely, gel shift analysis
of growth inhibitor-resistant SCC25 cells showed no decrease in E2F binding. If
deregulated E2F expression/activity is involved in tumor development, then the
deliberate deregulation of E2F activity may make keratinocytes resistant to
growth inhibitors in much the same way as the SCC cells. The HPV16 E7 protein is 
known to activate E2F. Retroviral infection of keratinocytes with E7-expressing
constructs resulted in growth inhibitor resistance, whereas infection with E6
constructs did not. E2F is a heterodimeric complex consisting of E2F family
members (1-5) and DP proteins (1-3). Examination of the expression levels for E2F
genes and other genes associated with the cell cycle indicated that E2F1 was
profoundly decreased in growth-arrested keratinocytes (90%), whereas E2F3, E2F5, 
and DP1 were not. E2F2 and E2F4 were increased in IFN-gamma-treated keratinocytes
but not in TPA-treated or confluent keratinocytes. In contrast, SCC25 cells did
not undergo growth arrest and did not downregulate E2F1 mRNA expression in
response to growth inhibitors. Our results indicate that E2F DNA binding and in
particular E2F1 mRNA expression are associated with keratinocyte proliferation.
Our results with the SCC25 cells and the E7-infected cells are consistent with
the proposition that deregulated E2F expression/activity (in particular E2F1) may
be involved in the unregulated proliferation of skin tumor cells.

PMID: 9242506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Oncogene. 1997 Jul 17;15(3):291-301.

Inhibition of E2F-4/DP-1-stimulated transcription by p202.

Choubey D(1), Gutterman JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030, USA.

The interferon (IFN)-inducible proteins mediate activities of the interferons
including the cell growth-regulatory activity. We have shown that p202, an
IFN-inducible 52kDa primarily nuclear phosphoprotein whose expression in
transfected cells inhibits cell proliferation, interacts with the retinoblastoma 
tumor suppressor protein (pRb) and the transcription factor E2F (E2F-1/ DP-1) in 
vitro and in vivo. p202 was shown to inhibit E2F-1/DP-1-stimulated transcription 
of a reporter gene and of endogenous genes. Here we report that expression of
p202 inhibited E2F-4/DP-1-stimulated transcription of a reporter gene in
transfected cells. Furthermore, this inhibition was associated with the
inhibition of the sequence-specific DNA-binding of E2F-4 both in complex with the
pocket proteins p107 or p130 and in its 'free' form in vitro. p202 bound to p107 
and p130 in vitro and in vivo and also associated with E2F-4, supporting the
notion that complexes containing p107/E2F-4 or p130/ E2F-4 and p202 exist in
vivo. Moreover, cotransfection of E2F-4-encoding plasmid in AKR-2B cells overcame
p202-mediated inhibition of cell growth, raising the possibility that p202
contributes to cell growth inhibition by the interferons, at least in part, by
modulating E2F-4-mediated transcription.

PMID: 9233764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 1997 Jul 1;90(1):194-203.

Characterization of cell cycle status and E2F complexes in mobilized CD34+ cells 
before and after cytokine stimulation.

Williams CD(1), Linch DC, Watts MJ, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Medical School, UK.

Mobilized peripheral blood progenitors (CD34+ cells) have been shown to be either
in the G0 or G1 phase of the cell cycle. In this study, it is shown that they are
small cells with low protein content suggestive of G0. Support for this is
provided by showing that the principal E2F complex consists of hypophosphorylated
p130, E2F-4, and DP-1. The E2F-4 is more highly phosphorylated than in quiescent 
T cells. In response to cytokines in vitro, the CD34+ cells start to enter G1
within 8 hours and enter S-phase at about 48 hours. As cells enter G1, E2F-4 is
dephosphorylated to several hypophosphorylated forms and three new DNA-binding
complexes appear, including one containing E2F-4, DP-1, and p107. We suggest that
mobilized CD34+ cells may be maintained in G0 by p130, E2F-4, and DP-1 and the
coordinate dephosphorylation of E2F-4 and hyperphosphorylation of p130 may be
central to the initiation of proliferation.

PMID: 9207453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genes Dev. 1997 Jun 1;11(11):1479-92.

Cyclin E-induced S phase without activation of the pRb/E2F pathway.

Lukas J(1), Herzinger T, Hansen K, Moroni MC, Resnitzky D, Helin K, Reed SI,
Bartek J.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society, Division of Cancer Biology, Copenhagen.

In cells of higher eukaryotes, cyclin D-dependent kinases Cdk4 and Cdk6 and,
possibly, cyclin E-dependent Cdk2 positively regulate the G1- to S-phase
transition, by phosphorylating the retinoblastoma protein (pRb), thereby
releasing E2F transcription factors that control S-phase genes. Here we performed
microinjection and transfection experiments using rat R12 fibroblasts, their
derivatives conditionally overexpressing cyclins D1 or E, and human U-2-OS cells,
to explore the action of G1 cyclins and the relationship of E2F and cyclin E in
S-phase induction. We demonstrate that ectopic expression of cyclin E, but not
cyclin D1, can override G1 arrest imposed by either the p16INK4a Cdk inhibitor
specific for Cdk4 and Cdk6 or a novel phosphorylation-deficient mutant pRb.
Several complementary approaches to assess E2F activation, including quantitative
reporter assays in live cells, showed that the cyclin E-induced S phase and
completion of the cell division cycle can occur in the absence of E2F-mediated
transactivation. Together with the ability of cyclin E to overcome a G1 block
induced by expression of dominant-negative mutant DP-1, a heterodimeric partner
of E2Fs, these results provide evidence for a cyclin E-controlled S
phase-promoting event in somatic cells downstream of or parallel to
phosphorylation of pRb and independent of E2F activation. They furthermore
indicate that a lack of E2F-mediated transactivation can be compensated by
hyperactivation of this cyclin E-controlled event.

PMID: 9192874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncogene. 1997 May 29;14(21):2533-42.

Regulated ectopic expression of cyclin D1 induces transcriptional activation of
the cdk inhibitor p21 gene without altering cell cycle progression.

Hiyama H(1), Iavarone A, LaBaer J, Reeves SA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuro-Oncology, Neuroscience Center, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston 02129, USA.

Cyclin D1 plays a key regulatory role during the G1 phase of the cell cycle and
its gene is amplified and overexpressed in many cancers. To address the
relationship between cyclin D1 and other cell cycle regulatory proteins, we
established human glioma and rodent fibroblast cell lines in which cyclin D1
expression could be regulated ectopically with tetracycline. In both of these
cell lines, we found that ectopic expression of cyclin D1 in asynchronously
growing cells was accompanied by increased levels of the p53 tumor suppressor
protein and the cyclin/cdk inhibitor p21. Despite the induction of these cell
cycle inhibitory proteins, cyclin D1-associated cdk kinase remained activated and
the cells grew essentially like that of the parent cells. Although growth
parameters were unchanged in these cells, morphological changes were clearly
identifiable and anchorage independent growth was observed in NIH3T3 cells. In a 
first step toward elaborating the mechanism for cyclin D1-mediated induction of
p21 gene expression we show that co-expression of E2F-1 and DP-1 can specifically
transactivate the p21 promoter. In support of these findings and a direct effect 
of E2F on induction of p21 gene expression a putative E2F binding site was
identified within the p21 promoter. In summary, our results demonstrate that
ectopic expression of cyclin D1 can induce gene expression of the cdk inhibitor
p21 through an E2F mechanism the consequences of which are not to growth arrest
cells but possibly to stabilize cyclin D1/cdk function.

PMID: 9191053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 May 13;94(10):5095-100.

The subcellular localization of E2F-4 is cell-cycle dependent.

Lindeman GJ(1), Gaubatz S, Livingston DM, Ginsberg D.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors plays a crucial role in cell cycle
progression. E2F activity is tightly regulated by a number of mechanisms, which
include the timely synthesis and degradation of E2F, interaction with
retinoblastoma protein family members ("pocket proteins"), association with DP
heterodimeric partner proteins, and phosphorylation of the E2F/DP complex. Here
we report that another mechanism, subcellular localization, is important for the 
regulation of E2F activity. Unlike E2F-1, -2, or -3, which are constitutively
nuclear, ectopic E2F-4 and -5 were predominantly cytoplasmic. Cotransfection of
expression vectors encoding p107, p130, or DP-2, but not DP-1, resulted in the
nuclear localization of E2F-4 and -5. Moreover, the transcriptional activity of
E2F-4 was markedly enhanced when it was invariably nuclear. Conversely, it was
reduced when the protein was excluded from the nucleus, implying that E2F-4
transcription function depends upon its cytological location. In keeping with
this, the nuclear/cytoplasmic ratios of endogenous E2F-4 changed as cells exited 
G0, with high ratios in G0 and early G1 and a progressive increase in cytoplasmic
E2F-4 as cells approached S phase. Thus, the subcellular location of E2F-4 is
regulated in a cell cycle-dependent manner, providing another potential mechanism
for its functional regulation.

PMCID: PMC24637
PMID: 9144196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 9;272(19):12406-14.

Modulation of E2F activity is linked to interferon-induced growth suppression of 
hematopoietic cells.

Iwase S(1), Furukawa Y, Kikuchi J, Nagai M, Terui Y, Nakamura M, Yamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hemopoiesis, Institute of Hematology, and the Department of
Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi 329-04, Japan.

E2F is a heterodimeric transcription factor that controls transcription of
several growth-regulatory genes including cdc2. To investigate the mechanism of
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)-mediated growth suppression of hematopoietic cells, 
we examined the effect of IFN-alpha on the expression and function of E2F using
IFN-sensitive Daudi cells. Down-regulation of E2F-1, a subunit of E2F, was
observed after 8 h of culture with IFN-alpha; expression of E2F-4, another
subunit of E2F, and DP-1, a heterodimeric partner of E2F, was unaffected. Gel
shift assays revealed that the DNA binding activity of free E2F, which is
composed of E2F-1 and E2F-4, was inhibited by IFN-alpha. In contrast, IFN-alpha
did not affect the DNA binding ability of E2F-1 and E2F-4 in a complex with
retinoblastoma (RB) susceptibility gene family proteins including pRB, p107, and 
p130. IFN-alpha could induce dephosphorylation of pRB, thereby turning active
E2F-pRB complexes into transcriptional repressors. Transient chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assays revealed that the activity of the E2F-dependent cdc2
promoter was suppressed by IFN-alpha. These results suggest that the
antiproliferative action of IFN-alpha is mediated through the modulation of E2F
activity in two different ways: down-regulation of transcriptionally active free 
E2F and conversion of E2F-pRB complexes into transcriptional repressors.

PMID: 9139687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gene. 1997 Apr 11;189(1):113-7.

A DP1 pseudogene derived from an aberrantly processed RNA.

Gopalkrishnan RV(1), Mattei MG, Kedinger C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

A fragment of mouse genomic DNA containing a pseudogene corresponding to the
processed transcript of the DP1 locus was isolated and analysed. The pseudogene
sequence, on comparison with the genomic locus and the corresponding mRNA
indicated the presence of several small deletions and point mutations. In
addition, the pseudogene showed a deletion for the second exon of the DP1 gene
indicating the occurrence of an exon slippage event during its formation. We also
describe the chromosomal mapping of the pseudogene to chromosome 1 by
fluorescence in situ hybridisation and distinguish it from the localisation of
the actual murine DP1 genomic locus on mouse chromosome 8.

PMID: 9161421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Br J Haematol. 1997 Mar;96(4):688-96.

The predominant E2F complex in human primary haemopoietic cells and in AML blasts
contains E2F-4, DP-1 and p130.

Williams CD(1), Linch DC, Sørensen TS, La Thangue NB, Thomas NS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, University College London Medical School.

The E2F family of transcription factors are thought to play an important role in 
the control of cell cycle progression. There is now also increasing evidence that
some family members may act as oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes. The
characterization of these proteins in human primary haemopoietic cells and acute 
myeloid leukaemia (AML) blasts may thus give an insight to the molecular
mechanisms governing proliferation and leukaemogenesis in these cells. Therefore 
we analysed the expression of E2F-DNA binding activity and the constituent
proteins found in the complexes in human primary haemopoietic cells of various
lineages. We also studied blasts from 18 patients with acute myeloid leukaemia
(AML). On electromobility shift assays (EMSA) a single E2F-DNA binding complex
was detected in T cells, B cells and monocytes which was shown to contain E2F-4, 
DP-1 and p130, indicating that all quiescent haemopoietic cells have the same
complex. Examination of 18 AML samples by EMSA revealed the presence of E2F
binding and no gross abnormalities were detected. An E2F-4/p130 complex was
detected in representative samples of all FAB types analysed. Thus abnormalities 
of E2F function are unlikely to play a primary pathogenic role in AML.

PMID: 9074408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1049-56.

E2F-1 cooperates with topoisomerase II inhibition and DNA damage to selectively
augment p53-independent apoptosis.

Nip J(1), Strom DK, Fee BE, Zambetti G, Cleveland JL, Hiebert SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Mutations in the retinoblastoma (pRb) tumor suppressor pathway including its
cyclin-cdk regulatory kinases, or cdk inhibitors, are a hallmark of most cancers 
and allow unrestrained E2F-1 transcription factor activity, which leads to
unregulated G1-to-S-phase cell cycle progression. Moderate levels of E2F-1
overexpression are tolerated in interleukin 3 (IL-3)-dependent 32D.3 myeloid
progenitor cells, yet this induces apoptosis when these cells are deprived of
IL-3. However, when E2F activity is augmented by coexpression of its
heterodimeric partner, DP-1, the effects of survival factors are abrogated. To
determine whether enforced E2F-1 expression selectively sensitizes cells to
cytotoxic agents, we examined the effects of chemotherapeutic agents and
radiation used in cancer therapy. E2F-1 overexpression in the myeloid cells
preferentially sensitized cells to apoptosis when they were treated with the
topoisomerase II inhibitor etoposide. Although E2F-1 alone induces moderate
levels of p53 and treatment with drugs markedly increased p53, the deleterious
effects of etoposide in E2F-1-overexpressing cells were independent of p53
accumulation. Coexpression of Bcl-2 and E2F-1 in 32D.3 cells protected them from 
etoposide-mediated apoptosis. However, Bcl-2 also prevented apoptosis of these
cells upon exposure to 5-fluorouracil and doxorubicin, which were also cytotoxic 
for control cells. Pretreating E2F-1-expressing cells with ICRF-193, a second
topoisomerase II inhibitor that does not damage DNA, protected the cells from
etoposide-induced apoptosis. However, ICRF-193 cooperated with DNA-damaging
agents to induce apoptosis. Therefore, topoisomerase II inhibition and DNA damage
can cooperate to selectively induce p53-independent apoptosis in cells that have 
unregulated E2F-1 activity resulting from mutations in the pRb pathway.

PMCID: PMC231829
PMID: 9032231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genomics. 1997 Jan 1;39(1):95-8.

Genomic cloning and chromosomal assignment of the E2F dimerization partner TFDP
gene family.

Zhang Y(1), Venkatraj VS, Fischer SG, Warburton D, Chellappan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

The TFDP genes encode a family of transcription factors that can form
heterodimers with E2F family proteins in vivo. The E2F-TFDP transcription factors
are major regulators of genes that are required for the progression of S-phase,
such as DHFR and DNA polymerase alpha, and they play a critical role in cell
cycle regulation and differentiation. The retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein
has been shown to induce growth arrest by binding to E2F-TFDP and repressing its 
activity. Two human TFDP genes have been cloned, namely TFDP1 and TFDP2 (or DP1
and DP2). In the present study, we identified genomic clones of TFDP1, its
pseudogene TFDP1P and TFDP2, and we mapped them to chromosome 13q34, 1q32.3, and 
3q23, respectively. Chromosomal abnormalities involving regions 13q34 and 3q23
have been reported in certain lymphomas and other diseases associated with loss
of cell cycle regulation, and the involvement of the TFDP transcription factors
remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 9027491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 19;13(12):2671-80.

Genomic structure and developmental expression of the mouse cell cycle regulatory
transcription factor DP1.

Gopalkrishnan RV(1), Dollé P, Mattei MG, La Thangue NB, Kedinger C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France.

The E2F/DP family of transcription factors play an important role in the control 
of cell cycle progression. By direct regulatory interactions with the
retinoblastoma family of proteins, they integrate extracellular growth promoting 
signals impinging on the cyclin and cyclin dependent kinase complex during the G1
phase, with cell cycle progression. This is accomplished by direct
transcriptional activation of genes required for nucleotide biosynthesis and DNA 
replication in the S phase. In addition, these transcription factors also play a 
role in the control of genes involved in regulating G1 and S phase progression
including, autoregulatory control, as in the case of E2F1 itself. In this report,
we describe the characterisation of the genomic locus encoding DP1, a member of
this family. The DP1 gene has a TATA-less promoter and transcription initiates at
multiple sites. Using transient transfection assays we have delineated sequences 
in the upstream region which have promoter or enhancer activity. The DP1 gene was
localised to mouse chromosome 8 by metaphase chromosome analysis. We describe a
dynamic pattern of DP1 expression using in situ hybridisation on cryostat
sections of mouse embryos at various stages of development and a variable level
of expression by Northern blot analysis of RNA from various adult tissues.

PMID: 9000141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oncogene. 1996 Dec 5;13(11):2421-30.

Activation of JNK/SAPK pathway is not directly inhibitory for cell cycle
progression in NIH3T3 cells.

Shu J(1), Hitomi M, Stacey D.

Author information: 
(1)The Cleveland Clinic Foundation Research Institute, Department of Molecular
Biology, Ohio 44195, USA.

In this study the induction of stress activated protein kinase (SAPK) activity by
protein synthesis inhibitors was shown not to inhibit cellular proliferation.
Anisomycin induced strong SAPK activity at non-inhibitory concentrations for
either protein or DNA synthesis, while the other two inhibitors, emetine and
cycloheximide, blocked cell cycle progression without strong SAPK induction. With
all three inhibitors, the induction of SAPK activity was always accompanied by
protein synthesis inhibition to some extent. Stimulation of mRNA expression of
the genes c-jun, c-fos and c-myc correlated well with SAPK induction, but not
with cell cycle inhibition. With concentrations of each inhibitor able to block
DNA synthesis, no induction of message for the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 
waf-1 was observed; while induction of gadd45 message indicated that the cells
might be responding to growth-arrest or DNA damage. The inability of
microinjected E2F/DP1 transcription factor proteins to overcome the inhibition of
DNA synthesis induced by protein synthesis inhibitors indicate that blockage of
an early event in cell cycle progression had occurred. These results indicate
that the SAPK induction by protein synthesis inhibitors has no proliferative
consequences.

PMID: 8957084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5888-95.

Functional interaction between DP-1 and p53.

Sørensen TS(1), Girling R, Lee CW, Gannon J, Bandara LR, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

The cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F and the tumor suppressor protein p53 
play important roles in controlling early cell cycle events. DRTF1/E2F is
believed to coordinate and integrate the transcription of cell cycle-regulating
genes, for example, those involved in DNA synthesis, with the activity of
regulatory proteins, such as the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor gene product
(pRb), which modulate its transcriptional activity. In contrast, p53 is thought
to monitor the integrity of chromosomal DNA and when appropriate interfere with
cell cycle progression, for example, in response to DNA damage. Generic DRTF1/E2F
DNA binding activity and transcriptional activation arise when members of two
distinct families of proteins, such as DP-1 and E2F-1, interact as DP/E2F
heterodimers. In many cell types, DP-1 is a widespread component of DRTF1/E2F DNA
binding activity which when expressed at high levels oncogenically transforms
embryonic fibroblasts. Here, we document an association between DP-1 and p53 and 
demonstrate its presence in mammalian cell extracts. In vitro p53 interacts with 
an immunochemically distinct form of DP-1 and in vivo can regulate transcription 
driven by the DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer. At the biochemical level, p53 competes with
E2F-1 for DP-1, with a consequent reduction in DNA binding activity. Mutational
analysis defines within DP-1 a C-terminal region required for the interaction
with p53 and within p53 an N-terminal region distinct from that required to bind 
to MDM2. Our results establish DRTF1/E2F as a common cellular target in growth
control mediated through the activities of pRb and p53 and suggest an alternative
mechanism through which p53 may regulate cellular proliferation.

PMCID: PMC231590
PMID: 8816502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Gene. 1996 Sep 16;173(2):163-9.

Structure and partial genomic sequence of the human E2F1 gene.

Neuman E(1), Sellers WR, McNeil JA, Lawrence JB, Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02146, USA.

The E2F family of transcription factors appears to play a critical role in the
transcription of certain genes required for cell cycle progression. E2F1, the
first cloned member of this family, is regulated during the cell cycle at the
mRNA level by changes in transcription of the E2F1 gene and at the protein level 
by complex formation with proteins such as the retinoblastoma gene product (pRB),
cyclin A and DP1. E2F1 can override a pRB-induced G1/S block and can behave as an
oncogene in certain cells. E2F1 was cloned and was found to contain seven exons. 
The dinucleotides at the 5' and 3' splice sites of intron 4 do not agree with
consensus splice site sequences. Fluorescence in situ hybridization localized
E2F1 to chromosome 20q11. Knowledge of the organization of E2F1 may facilitate
identification of additional E2F family members, as well as detection of E2F1
abnormalities in human tumors.

PMID: 8964493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Oncogene. 1996 Sep 5;13(5):1073-82.

E2F binding is required but not sufficient for repression of B-myb transcription 
in quiescent fibroblasts.

Bennett JD(1), Farlie PG, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Imperial College School of Medicine at
St Mary's, London, UK.

We have previously shown in mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts that transcription of the
B-myb gene, which encodes a transcription factor required for S phase entry, is
repressed through a promoter E2F site in G0/early G1. Transcription repression at
this stage of the cell cycle was correlated with binding of a specific p107/E2F
complex to this site. We report here, however, that transfection of cells with
the known components of this complex, p107, E2F-4 and DP-1, did not repress the
B-myb promoter in cycling NIH3T3 cells, although p107 inhibited transcription
transactivation by E2F-4/DP-1. To establish definitively the contribution of E2F 
to repression, the effects of further mutations within and surrounding the E2F
site were examined. It was evident that E2F binding and repression were closely
correlated, lending greater weight to the contention that E2F itself is
implicated in this activity. These studies also identified a closely linked site,
designated the downstream repression site (DRS), which was not required for E2F
binding or transactivation but which was necessary for repression. These findings
indicated that E2F-dependent repression and activation are independently
regulated phenomena and suggest that repression involves additional interactions 
determined by the promoter context.

PMID: 8806697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Cell Physiol. 1996 Sep;168(3):580-8.

Regulation of dihydrofolate reductase gene expression and E2F components in human
diploid fibroblasts during growth and senescence.

Good L(1), Dimri GP, Campisi J, Chen KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Rutgers, State University of New Jersey, Piscataway
08855-0939, USA.

The induction of dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), a key enzyme in DNA biosynthesis
that is induced just before the onset of S phase, is markedly attenuated in
senescent human fibroblasts (Pang and Chen, 1994, J. Cell. Physiol.,
160:531-538). Footprinting analysis of the 365 bp promoter region of the human
DHFR gene (-381 to -17) indicated that nuclear proteins bind to a cluster of
cis-elements, including two overlapping E2F binding sequences, two Sp1 sites, and
one Yi sequence. Gel mobility shift assays were performed to assess the role of
each cis-element in the regulation of DHFR gene expression. We found that 1) Sp1 
binding activity was constitutively expressed throughout the cell cycle in early 
passage and senescent cells; 2) Yi binding activity was undetectable in both
early passage and senescent cells; and 3) E2F binding activity was
serum-inducible, senescence-dependent, and prominent in presenescent cells but
strikingly diminished in senescent cells. Northern blot analysis of the
expression of E2F and DP family members showed that the E2F-1, E2F-4, and E2F-5
mRNA was growth- and senescence-dependent, whereas E2F-3, DP-1, and DP-2
expression was constitutive and senescence-independent. In contrast, E2F-2 mRNA
was not detectable in IMR-90 or WI-38 human fibroblasts. Western blot analysis
showed that among the E2F-associated proteins, the expression of E2F-1, cyclin A,
and cyclin B but not p107 was cell cycle- and senescence-dependent. A nuclear
extract mixing experiment suggested that an inhibitory factor may further reduce 
E2F binding activity in senescent cells.

PMID: 8816912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Aug 1;24(15):2905-10.

Cell cycle-regulated repression of B-myb transcription: cooperation of an E2F
site with a contiguous corepressor element.

Liu N(1), Lucibello FC, Zwicker J, Engeland K, Müller R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung (IMT), Philipps-Universität 
Marburg, Germany.

B-myb belongs to a group of cell cycle genes whose transcription is repressed in 
G0/early G1 through a binding site for the transcription factor E2F. Here, we
show that the B-myb repressor element is specifically recognised by heterodimers 
consisting of DP-1 and E2F-1, E2F-3 or E2F-4. Surprisingly, E2F-mediated
repression is dependent on a contiguous corepressor element that resembles the
CHR previously established as a corepressor of the CDE in cell cycle genes
derepressed in S/G2, such as cyclin A, cdc2 and cdc25C. A factor binding to the
B-myb CHR was identified in fractionated HeLa nuclear extract and found to
interact with the minor groove, as previously shown by in vivo footprinting for
the cyclin A CHR. The B-myb and cdc25C CHRs are related with respect to protein
binding but are functionally clearly distinct. Our results support a model where 
both E2F- and CDE-mediated repression, acting at different stages in the cell
cycle, are dependent on promoter-specific CHR elements.

PMCID: PMC146036
PMID: 8760872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Cell Sci. 1996 Jul;109 ( Pt 7):1717-26.

Nuclear localization of DP and E2F transcription factors by heterodimeric
partners and retinoblastoma protein family members.

Magae J(1), Wu CL, Illenye S, Harlow E, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405, USA.

E2F is a family of transcription factors implicated in the regulation of genes
required for progression through G1 and entry into the S phase. The
transcriptionally active forms of E2F are heterodimers composed of one
polypeptide encoded by the E2F gene family and one polypeptide encoded by the DP 
gene family. The transcriptional activity of E2F/DP heterodimers is influenced by
association with the members of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor protein
family (pRb, p107, and p130). Here the intracellular distribution of E2F and DP
proteins was investigated in transiently transfected Chinese hamster and human
cells. In transfected cells, DP-1 did not accumulate in the nucleus unless it was
coexpressed with the heterodimeric partners E2F-1, E2F-2, or E2F-3. Domain
mapping experiments showed that regions of E2F-1 and DP-1 that are required for
stable association of the two proteins were also required for nuclear
localization of DP-1. Unlike E2F-1, -2, and -3, E2F-4 did not accumulate in the
nucleus unless it was coexpressed with DP-2, p107 and p130, but not pRb,
stimulated nuclear localization of E2F-4, either alone or in combination with
DP-2. These results indicate that DP proteins preferentially associate with
specific E2F partners, and suggest that the ability of specific E2F/DP
heterodimers to localize in the nucleus contributes to the regulation of E2F
activity.

PMID: 8832394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jul;16(7):3698-706.

Expression of dominant-negative mutant DP-1 blocks cell cycle progression in G1.

Wu CL(1), Classon M, Dyson N, Harlow E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA.

Unregulated expression of the transcription factor E2F promotes the G1-to-S phase
transition in cultured mammalian cells. However, there has been no direct
evidence for an E2F requirement in this process. To demonstrate that E2F is
obligatory for cell cycle progression, we attempted to inactivate E2F by
overexpressing dominant-negative forms of one of its heterodimeric partners,
DP-1. We dissected the functional domains of DP-1 and separated the region that
facilitate heterodimer DNA binding from the E2F dimerization domain. Various DP-1
mutants were introduced into cells via transfection, and the cell cycle profile
of the transfected cells was analyzed by flow cytometry. Expression of wild-type 
DP-1 or DP-1 mutants that bind to both DNA and E2F drove cells into S phase. In
contrast, DP-1 mutants that retained E2F binding but lost DNA binding arrested
cells in the G1 phase of the cell cycle. The DP-1 mutants that were unable to
bind DNA resulted in transcriptionally inactive E2F complexes, suggesting that
the G1 arrest is caused by formation of defective E2F heterodimers. Furthermore, 
the G1 arrest instigated by these DP-1 mutants could be rescued by coexpression
of wild-type E2F or DP protein. These experiments define functional domains of DP
and demonstrate a requirement for active E2F complexes in cell cycle progression.

PMCID: PMC231365
PMID: 8668186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1436-49.

E2F-4 switches from p130 to p107 and pRB in response to cell cycle reentry.

Moberg K(1), Starz MA, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
02139, USA.

The E2F transcription factor couples the coordinate expression of cell cycle
proteins to their appropriate transition points. Its activity is controlled by
the cell cycle regulators pRB, p107, and p130. These bind to E2F at defined but
distinct stages of the cell cycle. Using specific antisera, we have identified
the DP and E2F components of each of these species. Although present at very
different levels, DP-1 and DP-2 are evenly distributed among each of these
complexes. In contrast, the individual E2Fs have distinctly different binding
profiles. Consistent with previous studies, E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3 bind
specifically to the retinoblastoma protein. In each case, their expression and
DNA binding activity are restricted to post-G1/S fractions. Surprisingly, E2F-1
and E2F-3 make unequal contributions to the pRB-associated and free E2F activity,
suggesting that these proteins perform different cell cycle functions. Most
significantly, this study showed E2F-4 accounts for the vast majority of the
endogenous E2F activity. In arrested cells, E2F-4 is sequestered by the p130
protein. However, as the cells pass the G1-to-S transition, the levels of pRB and
p107 increase and E2F-4 now associates with both of these regulators. Despite
this, a considerable amount of E2F-4 exists as free E2F. In G1 cells, this
accounts for almost all of the free activity. Once the cells enter S phase, free 
E2F is composed of an equal mixture of E2F-4 and E2F-1.

PMCID: PMC231128
PMID: 8657117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jan;7(1):43-52.

Expression of the E2F-1/DP-1 transcription factor in murine development.

Tevosian SG(1), Paulson KE, Bronson R, Yee AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA.

Because of its critical role in the control of cell proliferation and
differentiation, we postulated that E2F-1 could have a role in murine
development. To this end, the organ and developmental expression of the E2F-1
transcription factor was analyzed from mid-gestation to late-stage embryogenesis.
We demonstrate that the mRNA levels for E2F-1 and its heterodimeric partner DP-1 
reach maximal levels in the late embryonic and early postnatal period but decline
in the later postnatal and adult periods. Additionally, using high resolution in 
situ hybridization, high expression of E2F-1 was observed in specific cells of
individual tissues, suggesting that the role of E2F-1 may be more complex than
previously indicated from cell culture studies. Furthermore, the unusual pattern 
of E2F-1 and DP-1 developmental expression may have an essential role in certain 
cells and tissues in the late embryonic and early postnatal period.

PMID: 8788032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Jan;7(1):31-42.

Changes in E2F DNA-binding activity during induced erythroid differentiation.

Richon VM(1), Venta-Perez G.

Author information: 
(1)DeWitt Wallace Research Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, New York 10021, USA. v-richon@ski.mskcc.org

The cytodifferentiation agent hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) is an inducer of 
differentiation of a variety of transformed cells, including the murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cell line. Induction of differentiation of MEL cells is a
multistep process resulting in cessation of cell division and phenotypic
maturation (including hemoglobin production). To investigate HMBA-induced MEL
cell differentiation, we have analyzed the regulation of the E2F transcription
factor. E2F regulates the transcription of several genes whose products are
involved in both cell cycle regulation and differentiation. In nuclear extracts
from uninduced MEL cells, three complexes were detected using gel mobility assays
with the E2F/E2 oligonucleotide. The complex with the fastest mobility is the
free form of E2F binding to DNA, and the more slowly migrating complexes contain 
E2F, p107, and cdk2. By 8 h of HMBA induction and for the remainder of the
differentiation process, the free E2F complex is not detected, and only complexes
of slower mobility, which contain p107 and cdk2, are found. The level of p107
protein increases during induction of differentiation; there is no change in the 
level of cdk2 protein and E2F-4 and DP-1 proteins during the first 4 days. The
level of E2F-1 mRNA does not change, but a new form of E2F is detected during
induction of differentiation. Thus, HMBA causes a selective loss in the free E2F 
DNA-binding complex, an increase in p107 protein, and an increase in a form of
E2F protein during MEL cell differentiation.

PMID: 8788031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 1996;208:1-30.

Introduction to the E2F family: protein structure and gene regulation.

Slansky JE(1), Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison 53706, USA.

E2F is a heterodimer composed of two partners, such as E2F1 and DP1. Although
E2F1 can bind DNA as a homodimer and increase promoter activity, optimal
DNA-binding and transcriptional activity occurs in the heterodimeric form. A
model (Fig. 3) for the involvement of E2F activity in cell growth control that
incorporates viral oncoproteins, positive regulators of cell growth (cyclins) and
negative regulators of cell growth (tumor suppressor proteins) can now be
advanced. Each aspect of this model is addressed in subsequent chapters of this
book. It is likely that binding of growth-suppressing proteins, such as Rb, can
inhibit the transactivation potential of E2F1, either by blocking the interaction
of E2F1 with a separate component of the transcription complex or by bringing a
repressor domain to the transcription complex (Flemington et al. 1993; Helin et
al. 1993; Weintraub et al. 1992; Zamanian and La Thangue 1993; Zhu et al. 1993). 
Phosphorylation or sequestration of Rb by viral oncoproteins can free E2F. The
influence of viral oncoproteins on E2F activity and the regulation of the
different E2F complexes is the focus of the contributions by Cobrinik and by
Cress and Nevens. The interaction of the free E2F induces a bend in the DNA that 
may also play a role in transactivation, perhaps by bringing proteins (such as an
Sp1 or CCAAT family member) separated by distance on the promoter DNA into
contact (Huber et al. 1994). Because E2F target genes encode proteins critical
for cell growth, deregulation of E2F activity can have severe consequences, such 
as apoptosis or uncontrolled proliferation. The effect of altered expression of
E2F activity on the cell cycle and on tumorigenicity is the focus of the
contribution by Adams and Kaelin. Finally, a comparison of E2F to the genetically
well-characterized factors that regulate G1/S phase transcription in yeast is the
subject of the chapter by Breeden. This volume concludes with Farnham's summary
of the rapid gains in knowledge concerning the E2F gene family that have been
made in the past several years and provides a series of questions and lines of
investigation that will be the focus of future studies.

PMID: 8575210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. EMBO J. 1995 Dec 15;14(24):6184-92.

Physical and functional interactions between p53 and cell cycle co-operating
transcription factors, E2F1 and DP1.

O'Connor DJ(1), Lam EW, Griffin S, Zhong S, Leighton LC, Burbidge SA, Lu X.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, St Mary's Hospital Medical School,
London, UK.

One way in which wild-type p53 is able to regulate cell cycle progression is
thought to be via the induction of its downstream target gene Waf1/CIP1, thus
indirectly regulating the transcriptional activity of E2F. The E2F transcription 
factors are known to be key effectors of the cell cycle. We report here that
there is a physical and functional interaction between p53 and two of the
components of the E2F transcription factors, E2F1 and DP1. The expression of
wild-type p53 can inhibit the transcriptional activity of E2F, and the expression
of both E2F1 and DP1 can also downregulate p53-dependent transcription. The
transcriptional activity of p53 is known to be inhibited by the direct binding of
mdm2, but we demonstrate here that both E2F1 and DP1 can inhibit p53
transcriptional activity independently of mdm2. Detailed studies of
protein-protein interactions have provided evidence that E2F1 and its
co-operating factor DP1 can complex with p53 both in vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC394743
PMID: 8557038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Dec;15(12):6864-74.

E2F-1:DP-1 induces p53 and overrides survival factors to trigger apoptosis.

Hiebert SW(1), Packham G, Strom DK, Haffner R, Oren M, Zambetti G, Cleveland JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The E2F DNA binding activity consists of a heterodimer between E2F and DP family 
proteins, and these interactions are required for association of E2F proteins
with pRb and the pRb-related proteins p107 and p130, which modulate E2F
transcriptional activities. E2F-1 expression is sufficient to release fibroblasts
from G0 and induce entry into S phase, yet it also initiates apoptosis. To
investigate the mechanisms of E2F-induced apoptosis, we utilized interleukin-3
(IL-3)-dependent 32D.3 myeloid cells, a model of hematopoietic progenitor
programmed cell death. In the absence of IL-3, E2F-1 alone was sufficient to
induce apoptosis, and p53 levels were diminished. DP-1 alone was not sufficient
to induce cell cycle progression or alter rates of death following IL-3
withdrawal. However, overexpression of both E2F-1 and DP-1 led to the rapid death
of cells even in the presence of survival factors. In the presence of IL-3,
levels of endogenous wild-type p53 increased in response to E2F-1, and
coexpression of DP-1 further augmented p53 levels. These results provide evidence
that E2F is a functional link between the tumor suppressors p53 and pRb. However,
induction of p53 alone was not sufficient to trigger apoptosis, suggesting that
the ability of E2F to override survival factors involves additional effectors.

PMCID: PMC230941
PMID: 8524253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1475-86.

Isolation and characterization of a chicken homolog of the E2F-1 transcription
factor.

Pasteau S(1), Loiseau L, Arnaud L, Trembleau A, Brun G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR49 CNRS-ENS, L.A INRA
Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France.

In higher eukaryotes, the E2F-1 transcription factor is an essential and limiting
component of cell cycle progression in late G1. E2F-1 heterodimerizes with
members of the DP gene family and the resulting heterodimer regulates the
expression of several proto-oncogenes and the genetic machinery of DNA
replication. Cell cycle regulation of E2F activity is mediated through its
association with the tumor suppressor Rb gene product. To examine the
evolutionary conservation of the E2F-1 protein sequence and its developmental
expression pattern we have isolated and sequenced the chick E2F-1 gene (chE2F-1) 
cDNA. The chicken protein is 34 amino acids (a.a) shorter than its human
counterpart (403/437 a.a.) but has extremely well conserved bHLH and pRb binding 
domains, with respectively 94% and 83% identity. The position of the leucine
zipper is also strictly conserved thereby accounting for ability of E2F-1 to form
heterodimers with human and chicken DP-1. E2F-1 expression was analysed in
synchronized cells as well as in embryonic or newborn chick tissues and appears
to be closely correlated to the cell proliferation rate. In situ hybridization
studies have shown very high expression levels in the neuroretina during the
early stages of embryonic development when active neuroblast division occurs. In 
contrast, a sharp down-regulation is observed when cells become postmitotic.
Overexpression of the chE2F-1 protein leads to oncogenic transformation only when
a truncated version of the transgene lacking the pRb binding domain is used; the 
full length protein either has no effect or may be deleterious for cell survival.

PMID: 7478572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Oncogene. 1995 Oct 19;11(8):1437-46.

A new member of the DP family, DP-3, with distinct protein products suggests a
regulatory role for alternative splicing in the cell cycle transcription factor
DRTF1/E2F.

Ormondroyd E(1), de la Luna S, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Integrating cell cycle progression with transcription provides an important level
of control during proliferation. The cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F is
implicated in this integration process by virtue of its physical interaction and 
control by key regulators of proliferation, such as retinoblastoma protein,
cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases and regulation of target genes required for 
cell cycle progression. Generic DRTF1/E2F DNA binding activity arises when a
member of two distinct families of proteins, DP and E2F, interact as DP/E2F
heterodimers. Here, we report the isolation and characterisation of a new member 
of the murine DP family, called DP-3 (also referred to as human DP-2). In
contrast to previously characterised members of the DP and E2F families,
processing of DP-3 RNA provides an important level of control by generating at
least four distinct DP-3 proteins, of which three have been isolated, called
alpha, beta and gamma. Processing events, which we show are both tissue- and
cell-restricted, can occur either in the 5' region of DP-3 RNA and determine
whether translation begins at one or two potential intiating codons, or within
the coding sequence, producing variations in internal domains of the DP-3
proteins. The DP-3 proteins studied can co-operate with E2F-1 in DNA binding
activity and trans activation of E2F site-dependent transcription. This analysis 
of DP-3, which has uncovered a hitherto unexpected and surprising level of
complexity, documents a new member of the DP family and novel levels of control
which may influence the activity DRTF1/E2F and hence cell cycle progression.

PMID: 7478568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nature. 1995 Jun 22;375(6533):691-4.

Stimulation of E2F1/DP1 transcriptional activity by MDM2 oncoprotein.

Martin K(1), Trouche D, Hagemeier C, Sørensen TS, La Thangue NB, Kouzarides T.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute, Cambridge, UK.

The MDM2 proto-oncogene is found amplified in a variety of tumours. The oncogenic
capacity of the MDM2 protein is attributed to its ability to bind the p53
tumour-suppressor protein and mask its transcriptional activation potential. Here
we show that MDM2 makes a functional contact with two cooperating transcription
factors, E2F1 and DP1 (refs 4,5), which are involved in S-phase progression. MDM2
contacts the activation domain of E2F1 using residues conserved in the activation
domain of p53. However, in contrast to its repression of p53 activity, MDM2
stimulates the activation capacity of E2F1/DP1. These results indicate that MDM2 
not only releases a proliferative block by silencing the tumour suppressor p53,
it also positively augments proliferation by stimulating the S-phase inducing
transcription factors E2F1/DP1.

PMID: 7791903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncogene. 1995 Jun 1;10(11):2085-93.

Cloning and characterization of human DP2, a novel dimerization partner of E2F.

Zhang Y(1), Chellappan SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The transcription factor E2F consists of a family of proteins that bind to the
sequence TTTCGCGC and regulate the expression of various cellular and viral
promoters. E2F binds to DNA as homodimers or as heterodimers in association with 
a protein, DP1 (for dimerization partner 1). E2F-DP1 heterodimers bind more
efficiently than homodimers to DNA, retinoblastoma gene product as well as the
adenovirus E4 protein and DP1 can stimulate transcription from E2F sites in a
synergistic fashion. Here we describe the cloning and characterization of a novel
human DP gene, DP2, whose product dimerizes efficiently with E2F. Unlike DP1,
there appear to be multiple transcripts for DP2 and their distribution appears to
vary in different tissues and cell lines. DP2 binds to E2F as detected by in
vitro reconstitution assays and an E2F-DP2 heterodimer can bind to DNA in
gel-retardation assays. We believe that DP2 also plays a major role in modulating
the function of E2F in cell cycle regulation and oncogenesis.

PMID: 7784053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 May;15(5):2536-46.

In vivo association of E2F and DP family proteins.

Wu CL(1), Zukerberg LR, Ngwu C, Harlow E, Lees JA.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129, USA.

The mammalian transcription factor E2F plays an important role in regulating the 
expression of genes that are required for passage through the cell cycle. This
transcriptional activity is inhibited by association with the retinoblastoma
tumor suppressor protein (pRB) or its relatives p107 and p103. The first cDNA
from the E2F family to be cloned was designated E2F-1, and multiple E2F family
members have now been identified. They bind to DNA as heterodimers, interacting
with proteins known as DP. Here we demonstrate that DP is also a family of
polypeptides with at least two members (hDP-1 and hDP-2). Both hDP-1 and hDP-2
bind to all E2F family members in vivo, and each complex is capable of activating
transcription. However, the various E2F/DP complexes display strong differences
in the ability to bind to either pRB or p107 in vivo, and the specificity of pRB 
or p107 binding is mediated by the E2F subunit.

PMCID: PMC230484
PMID: 7739537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Semin Cancer Biol. 1995 Apr;6(2):99-108.

Transcriptional control by E2F.

Adams PD(1), Kaelin WG Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Considerable evidence suggests that the E2F/DRTF1 family of transcription factors
(hereafter referred to as 'E2F') plays a critical role in cell growth control.
For example, the ability of several small DNA tumour viruses, such as SV40,
adenovirus and human papillomavirus, to transform certain cells is tightly linked
to their ability to deregulate E2F. Furthermore, E2F appears to directly regulate
the transcription of a diverse set of genes implicated in DNA replication and
cell growth control. Finally, a number of known cell cycle regulators, some of
which are commonly mutated in human tumours, appear to exert their effects, at
least in part, by altering E2F activity. Among these are pRb, p53, cdk-2, cdk-4
and certain cyclins.

PMID: 7647312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Biol Chem. 1995 Mar 10;270(10):5289-98.

E2F-1 and a cyclin-like DNA repair enzyme, uracil-DNA glycosylase, provide
evidence for an autoregulatory mechanism for transcription.

Walsh MJ(1), Shue G, Spidoni K, Kapoor A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029.

The cell cycle-dependent transcription factor, E2F-1, regulates the cyclin-like
species of the DNA repair enzyme uracil-DNA glycosylase (UDG) gene in human
osteosarcoma (Saos-2) cells. We demonstrate, through the deletion of the human
UDG promoter sequences, that expression of E2F-1 activates the UDG promoter
through several E2F sites. The major putative downstream site for E2F, located in
the first exon, serves as a target for E2F-1/DP1 complex binding in vitro. We
also provide evidence for the functional relationship between the cyclin-like UDG
gene product and E2F. High levels of UDG expression in a transient transfection
assay result in the down-regulation of transcriptional activity through elements 
specific for E2F-mediated transcription. Overexpression of UDG in Saos 2 cells
was observed to delay growth late in G1 phase and transiently arrest these cells 
from progressing into the S phase. This hypothetical model integrates one
mechanism of DNA repair with the cell cycle control of gene transcription, likely
through E2F. This implicates E2F as a multifunctional target for proteins and
enzymes, possibly, responsive to DNA damage through the negative effect of UDG on
E2F-mediated transcriptional activity.

PMID: 7534293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Cell Sci Suppl. 1995;19:91-4.

Regulation of transcription by E2F1/DP1.

Martin K(1), Trouche D, Hagemeier C, Kouzarides T.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome/CRC Institute, University of Cambridge, UK.

The E2F1 transcription factor, in co-operation with DP1, controls the expression 
of several S-phase specific genes. This activity is most likely responsible for
the oncogenic and S-phase inducing properties of E2F1, suggesting that this
transcription factor plays a key role in regulating the cell cycle. The
transcriptional activation functions of E2F1 are resident in a small C-terminal
domain which can independently activate transcription. Here we review the
protein-protein interactions which impinge upon and regulate this activation
domain and put forward some models on their mechanism of action.

PMID: 8655653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Gene Expr. 1995;4(3):95-109.

Regulation of cyclin D1, DNA topoisomerase I, and proliferating cell nuclear
antigen promoters during the cell cycle.

Lee HH(1), Chiang WH, Chiang SH, Liu YC, Hwang J, Ng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, NanKang, Taipei, Taiwan,
Republic of China.

Cyclin D1, DNA topoisomerase I, and proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) are
three important cell cycle regulatory proteins. Recently, their promoters have
been isolated, thus facilitating molecular analysis of transcriptional control
mechanisms of these genes. Transcription of these three promoters in stable K562 
transfectants during different cell cycle phases was analyzed after cell cycle
synchronization. About 1 kb of 5' flanking region from either cyclin D1 or DNA
topoisomerase I gene is sufficient to confer G1- or S-phase-specific
transcription activity to chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) reporter genes,
respectively. In contrast, 2.8 kb of 5' flanking sequences from the PCNA gene led
to constitutive transcription, but the inclusion of a segment of the PCNA gene
first intron, which contains evolutionarily conserved sequences, could enhance
transcription in G1/S-enriched nuclei. This PCNA intron region contains a binding
site recognized by the transcription factor E2F. To test whether this site is
functional, we cotransfected PCNA-CAT genes with E2F-1 and DP-1 expression
plasmids. Expression of the E2F-1/DP-1 heterodimer activated the CAT gene with
the PCNA intron. Therefore, this intron region, involved in transcriptional
activation at the cell cycle G1/S boundary, is also E2F inducible.

PMID: 7734951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 20;91(26):12823-7.

Oncogenic capacity of the E2F1 gene.

Johnson DG(1), Cress WD, Jakoi L, Nevins JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710.

Previous experiments have identified the E2F transcription factor as a potential 
downstream target for the action of cellular regulatory activities, such as the
Rb tumor suppressor protein, that control cell growth and that, when altered,
contribute to the development of human tumors. In light of these findings, we
have assayed the ability of the E2F1 and DP1 genes, which encode heterodimeric
partners that together create E2F activity, to act in an oncogenic fashion. We
find that E2F1, particularly in combination with the DP1 product, cooperates with
an activated ras oncogene to induce the formation of morphologically transformed 
foci in primary rat embryo fibroblast cultures. In addition, an E2F1 chimeric
protein, in which sequences involved in Rb binding have been replaced with the
herpesvirus VP16 activation domain, exhibits increased transformation activity.
Cells transfected with E2F1 and DP1 or the E2F1-VP16 chimera form colonies in
soft agar and induce tumor formation in nude mice. We conclude that deregulated
E2F1 expression and function can have oncogenic consequences.

PMCID: PMC45532
PMID: 7809128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):8420-31.

Cyclin A/CDK2 binds directly to E2F-1 and inhibits the DNA-binding activity of
E2F-1/DP-1 by phosphorylation.

Xu M(1), Sheppard KA, Peng CY, Yee AS, Piwnica-Worms H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111.

E2F-1, a member of the E2F transcription factor family, contributes to the
regulation of the G1-to-S phase transition in higher eukaryotic cells. E2F-1
forms a heterodimer with DP-1 and binds to several cell cycle regulatory
proteins, including the retinoblastoma family (RB, p107, p130) and cyclin A/CDK2 
complexes. We have analyzed E2F-1 phosphorylation and its interaction with cyclin
A/CDK2 complexes both in vivo and in vitro. In vitro, E2F-1 formed a stable
complex with cyclin A/CDK2 but not with either subunit alone. DP-1 did not
interact with cyclin A, CDK2, or the cyclin A/CDK2 complex. While the complex of 
cyclin A/CDK2 was required for stable complex formation with E2F-1, the
kinase-active form of CDK2 was not required. However, E2F-1 was phosphorylated by
cyclin A/CDK2 in vitro and was phosphorylated in vivo in HeLa cells.
Two-dimensional tryptic phosphopeptide mapping studies demonstrated an overlap in
the phosphopeptides derived from E2F-1 labeled in vitro and in vivo, indicating
that cyclin A/CDK2 may be responsible for the majority of E2F-1 phosphorylation
in vivo. Furthermore, an active DNA-binding complex could be reconstituted from
purified E2F-1/DP-1 and cyclin A/CDK2. Binding studies conducted both in vitro
and in vivo demonstrated that the cyclin A/CDK2-binding region resided within the
N-terminal 124 amino acids of E2F-1. Because the stable association of E2F-1 with
cyclin A/CDK2 in vitro and in vivo did not require a DP-1- or RB-binding domain
and because the interactions could be reconstituted from purified components in
vitro, we conclude that the interactions between cyclin A/CDK2 and E2F-1 are
direct. Finally, we report that the DNA-binding activity of the E2F-1/DP-1
complex is inhibited following phosphorylation by cyclin A/CDK2.

PMCID: PMC359381
PMID: 7969176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;6(6):859-66.

DP and E2F proteins: coordinating transcription with cell cycle progression.

Lam EW(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, London, UK.

Transcriptional control during the G1/S transition is important in regulating
cell cycle progression. The transcription factor DRTF1/E2F is believed to play a 
crucial role in this process by integrating the activity of the machinery that
drives the cell cycle with the transcription apparatus. Being the point of
convergence for growth-promoting and growth-inhibitory signals, it is a pivotal
cellular target for molecules which subvert normal cell cycle control, such as
oncoviral proteins. Recent studies have indicated that members of two distinct
families of proteins, DP and E2F, interact combinatorially as DP/E2F heterodimers
in DRTF1/E2F. The activities of both DP and E2F proteins are under cell cycle
control, being influenced by the level of phosphorylation imparted through the
cell cycle regulated activity of cyclin-dependent kinases. Both DP and E2F
proteins are endowed with proto-oncogenic activity and, conversely, have been
implicated in regulating apoptosis. Current evidence suggests therefore that the 
activity of DRTF1/E2F is instrumental in regulating progression through the cell 
cycle.

PMID: 7880534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Genes Dev. 1994 Nov 15;8(22):2680-90.

E2F-4, a new member of the E2F gene family, has oncogenic activity and associates
with p107 in vivo.

Beijersbergen RL(1), Kerkhoven RM, Zhu L, Carlée L, Voorhoeve PM, Bernards R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam.

The E2F family of transcription factors controls the expression of genes that are
involved in cell cycle regulation. E2F DNA-binding activity is found in complex
with the retinoblastoma protein, pRb, and with the pRb-related p107 and p130. To 
date, cDNAs for three members of the E2F gene family have been isolated. However,
all three E2Fs associate in vivo exclusively with pRb. We report here the cloning
and functional analysis of a fourth E2F family member. E2F-4 encodes a
413-amino-acid protein with significant homology to E2F-1. E2F-4 antibodies
recognize a 60-kD protein in anti-p107 immunoprecipitates, indicating that E2F-4 
associates with p107 in vivo. Like the other E2Fs, E2F-4 requires DP-1 for
efficient DNA binding and transcriptional activation of E2F site-containing
promoters. Increased expression of E2F-4 and DP-1 in SaoS-2 osteosarcoma cells
causes a shift from G1-phase cells to S and G2/M-phase cells, suggesting a role
for E2F-4 in regulation of cell-cycle progression. We show that expression of
E2F-4 and DP-1 together with an activated ras oncogene in rat embryo fibroblasts,
causes transformation, indicating that E2F-4 has oncogenic activity.

PMID: 7958925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 1994 Oct 21;269(42):26249-58.

The role of cellular transcription factor E2F in the regulation of cdc2 mRNA
expression and cell cycle control of human hematopoietic cells.

Furukawa Y(1), Terui Y, Sakoe K, Ohta M, Saito M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hemopoiesis, Jichi Medical School, Tochigi, Japan.

cdc2 mRNA transcripts were detected in immature bone marrow cells and became
undetectable along with differentiation. Peripheral blood resting cells did not
express cdc2 mRNA, but it was induced in T-lymphocytes when the cells reentered
the cell cycle in response to specific mitogens. In contrast, cdc2 mRNA could not
be induced in granulocytes and monocytes even after the culture with the
appropriate stimulants. In order to investigate the mechanism of the regulation
of cdc2 mRNA expression in hematopoietic cells, we isolated the 5'-flanking
sequence of the cdc2 gene and found the putative E2F binding site at the position
of nucleotides -124 to -117. The binding of E2F at this region was detected by a 
gel-retardation assay and DNaseI footprinting in phytohemagglutinin-stimulated
T-lymphocytes, which was coincident with the expression of cdc2 mRNA. E2F binding
was not observed in both granulocytes and monocytes. Transient chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase assay revealed that the region containing E2F binding site had 
a strong promoter activity, and introduction of the mutation at the E2F binding
site resulted in a significant loss of the activity. E2F-1 and DP-1 mRNAs were
not detectable in granulocytes, monocytes and resting T-lymphocytes but were
induced after the mitogenic stimulation of T-lymphocytes. The induction of E2F
activity preceded the appearance of cdc2 mRNA, which is consistent with the role 
of E2F in the regulation of cdc2 mRNA expression. These results suggest that cdc2
mRNA expression is related to the cell cycling of normal human hematopoietic
cells and that E2F plays some roles in the regulation of its expression.

PMID: 7929342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Virol. 1994 Aug;68(8):5027-35.

Heterodimerization of the transcription factors E2F-1 and DP-1 is required for
binding to the adenovirus E4 (ORF6/7) protein.

Helin K(1), Harlow E.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129.

Adenovirus infection leads to E1A-dependent activation of the transcription
factor E2F. E2F has recently been identified in complexes with cellular proteins 
such as the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) and the two pRB family members p107 and 
p130. E1A dissociates E2F from these cellular proteins, and another viral
protein, E4 (ORF6/7), can bind to E2F. The binding of E4 to E2F induces the
formation of a stable DNA-binding complex containing the two proteins, and
stimulation of the adenovirus E2 early promoter can occur. Recent studies have
shown that E2F is the combined activity of several proteins, and we demonstrate
here that heterodimerization of two of these proteins, E2F-1 and DP-1, is
required for stable binding to E4. This complex is formed independently of DNA
binding and requires the C-terminal 20 amino acids of E4. Furthermore, the
binding is dependent on a region of E2F-1 between amino acids 284 and 358. This
region of E2F-1 is conserved in E2F-2 and E2F-3, and deletion of this region
drastically reduces the transcriptional activity of the molecule without
affecting DP-1 binding, suggesting that this region of the E2F transcription
factors is involved in regulating their activity. Our experiments also
demonstrate that pRB binding to the E2F-1/DP-1 heterodimer prevents the formation
of an E2F-1/DP-1/E4 complex.

PMCID: PMC236445
PMID: 8035503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jul 5;91(14):6359-63.

DNA-binding and trans-activation properties of Drosophila E2F and DP proteins.

Dynlacht BD(1), Brook A, Dembski M, Yenush L, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer
Center, Charlestown 02129.

The temporal activation of E2F transcriptional activity appears to be an
important component of the mechanisms that prepare mammalian cells for DNA
replication. Regulation of E2F activity appears to be a highly complex process,
and the dissection of the E2F pathway will be greatly facilitated by the ability 
to use genetic approaches. We report the isolation of two Drosophila genes that
can stimulate E2F-dependent transcription in Drosophila cells. One of these
genes, dE2F, contains three domains that are highly conserved in the human
homologs E2F-1, E2F-2, and E2F-3. Interestingly, one of these domains is highly
homologous to the retinoblastoma protein (RB)-binding sequences of human E2F
genes. The other gene, dDP, is closely related to the human DP-1 and DP-2 genes. 
We demonstrate that dDP and dE2F interact and cooperate to give sequence-specific
DNA binding and optimal trans-activation. These features suggest that endogenous 
Drosophila E2F, like human E2F, may be composed of heterodimers and may be
regulated by RB-like proteins. The isolation of these genes will provide
important reagents for the genetic analysis of the E2F pathway.

PMCID: PMC44201
PMID: 8022787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. EMBO J. 1994 Jul 1;13(13):3104-14.

DP-1: a cell cycle-regulated and phosphorylated component of transcription factor
DRTF1/E2F which is functionally important for recognition by pRb and the
adenovirus E4 orf 6/7 protein.

Bandara LR(1), Lam EW, Sørensen TS, Zamanian M, Girling R, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, UK.

The cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F integrates cell cycle events with the
transcription apparatus through its cyclical interactions with important
regulators of cellular proliferation. Two sequence-specific DNA binding proteins,
DP-1 and E2F-1, are components of DRTF1/E2F which synergistically interact in a
DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer. Here, we show that DP-1 is a very frequent, possibly
universal, component of DRTF1/E2F in 3T3 cells since it is present in all forms
of the DNA binding activity that occur during cell cycle progression.
Furthermore, the DP-1 polypeptide, which is phosphorylated, undergoes a
phosphorylation-dependent mobility shift during the cell cycle suggesting that
its level of phosphorylation is regulated during cell cycle progression. A
C-terminal region in DP-1 can interact with pRb which, in the context of the
DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer, contributes to the efficiency of pRb binding. The
DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer specifically interacts with the adenovirus type 5 E4 orf
6/7 protein, to produce a DNA binding activity which binds co-operatively to, and
transcriptionally activates through, two appropriately positioned E2F sites in a 
manner which resembles the regulation of DRTF1/E2F by E4 orf 6/7 during
adenovirus infection. We conclude that DP-1 is a frequent and cell
cycle-regulated component of DRTF1/E2F, and that in the DP-1/E2F-1 heterodimer it
is functionally important for recognition by pRb and the E4 orf 6/7 protein.

PMCID: PMC395201
PMID: 8039504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 10;269(23):16180-6.

Regulation of two E2F-related genes in presenescent and senescent human
fibroblasts.

Dimri GP(1), Hara E, Campisi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory,
University of California, Berkeley 94720.

Several mammalian genes expressed in late G1 are positively regulated by E2F, a
heterodimeric transcription factor. Genes encoding two E2F proteins, E2F-1 and
DP-1, were regulated differently during the cell cycle and replicative senescence
of normal human fibroblasts. In presenescent cells, E2F-1 mRNA was cell-cycle
regulated, appearing a few hours before S phase. By contrast, DP-1 mRNA was
constitutively expressed, independent of position in the cell cycle. After a
finite number of divisions, normal cells enter a state of irreversible growth
arrest termed senescence. Many genes remain mitogen-inducible in senescent cells;
there are, however, exceptions, including several late G1 genes potentially
regulated by E2F. Senescent cells expressed DP-1 at the presenescent level, but
did not express E2F-1 mRNA. Senescent cells were also markedly deficient in E2F
binding activity associated with the dihydrofolate reductase promoter. E2F-1 and 
DP-1 expression vectors only weakly induced DNA synthesis in quiescent or
senescent human cells and immortal murine NIH3T3 cells, although the E2F-1 vector
stimulated DNA synthesis in immortal murine A31 cells, and transactivated
E2F-responsive promoters in NIH3T3 cells. The results suggest that senescent
cells may fail to express late G1 genes due to repression of E2F-1, leading to a 
deficiency of E2F activity. Furthermore, although E2F-1 stimulates DNA synthesis 
in some cells, other cells, including normal human fibroblasts, require
additional factors.

PMID: 8206919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1994 Jun;6(3):443-50.

DP and E2F proteins: components of a heterodimeric transcription factor
implicated in cell cycle control.

La Thangue NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, UK.

In mammalian cells, DRTF1/E2F is a transcription factor widely believed to
integrate cell-cycle progression with the transcription apparatus through its
cyclical interactions with important regulators of the cell cycle, such as the
retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor gene product, cyclins and cyclin-dependent
kinases. Recently, a number of exciting developments have uncovered the
heterodimeric nature of DRTF1/E2F by defining two distinct families of proteins, 
DP and E2F, which comprise its activity; efficient DNA-binding activity arises
when a DP protein interacts with an E2F protein. Combinatorial interactions
generate a surprising array of sequence-specific heterodimers, a diversity that
is probably necessary to enable different cell cycle regulating proteins to
integrate their activities with transcription.

PMID: 7917337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):1861-9.

Cloning, chromosomal location, and characterization of mouse E2F1.

Li Y(1), Slansky JE, Myers DJ, Drinkwater NR, Kaelin WG, Farnham PJ.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin, Madison
53706.

E2F has been implicated in growth control because of its association with the
retinoblastoma protein and the presence of E2F binding sites in the promoters of 
several growth-regulated genes. Proteins that bind to an E2F site have been
cloned from human and mouse cells. However, these two proteins (human E2F1 and
mouse DP-1) are quite different in sequence. We have now cloned a mouse cDNA
encoding a protein 86% identical to the human E2F1 protein. The mouse E2F1 cDNA
encodes a 430-amino-acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 46,322 and 
detects mRNAs of 2.7 and 2.2 kb. Using primers complementary to sequences in the 
mouse E2F1 3' untranslated region, we mapped the mouse E2F1 gene to chromosome 2,
near the Agouti and c-src loci. To understand the role of the different E2F
family members in the growth of mouse NIH 3T3 cells, we examined the levels of
E2F1 and DP-1 mRNAs in different stages of the cell cycle. Since the levels of
E2F1 but not DP-1 mRNA correlated with changes in transcription from the dhfr
promoter, we examined whether E2F1 could activate various growth-regulated
promoters. We found that E2F1 could activate some (dhfr, thymidine kinase, and
DNA polymerase alpha) but not all (thymidylate synthase, cad, and c-myc) of these
promoters. On the basis of changes in levels of E2F1 and its ability to
transactivate growth-regulated promoters, we propose that E2F1 may mediate growth
factor-initiated signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC358544
PMID: 8114719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1333-46.

The adenovirus E4-6/7 protein transactivates the E2 promoter by inducing
dimerization of a heteromeric E2F complex.

Obert S(1), O'Connor RJ, Schmid S, Hearing P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, State University of New York, Stony Brook 11794.

Binding of the mammalian transcription factor E2F to the adenovirus E2a early
promoter is modulated through interaction with the viral E4-6/7 protein. E4-6/7
induces the cooperative and stable binding of E2F in vitro to two correctly
spaced and inverted E2F binding sites in the E2a promoter (E2F induction) by
physical interaction in the protein-DNA complex. The E2a promoter is
transactivated in vivo by the E4-6/7 product. The C-terminal 70 amino acids of
E4-6/7 are necessary and sufficient for induction of E2F binding and for
transactivation. To assess the mechanism(s) of E2a transactivation and the
induction of cooperative E2F binding by the E4-6/7 protein, we have analyzed a
series of point mutants in the functional C-terminal domain of E4-6/7. Two
distinct segments of E4-6/7 are required for interaction with E2F. Additionally, 
and E4-6/7 mutant with a phenylalanine-to-proline substitution at amino acid 125 
(F-125-P) efficiently interacts with E2F but does not induce E2F binding to the
E2a promoter and is defective for transactivation. Induction of E2F stable
complex formation at the E2a promoter by the F-125-P mutant protein is restored
by divalent E4-6/7-specific monoclonal antibodies, but not a monovalent Fab
fragment, or by appending a heterologous dimerization domain to the N terminus of
the mutant protein. These and other data support the involvement of E4-6/7
dimerization in the induction of cooperative and stable E2F binding and
transactivation of the E2a promoter. We present evidence that at least two
cellular components are involved in E2F DNA binding activity and that both are
required for E2F induction by the E4-6/7 product. The recently cloned E2F-related
activities E2F-1 and DP-1 individually bind to an E2F binding site weakly, but
when combined generate an activity that is indistinguishable from endogenous
cellular E2F. Recombinant E2F-1, DP-1, and E4-6/7 are sufficient to form the
induced E2F complex at the E2a promoter.

PMCID: PMC358488
PMID: 8289811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7802-12.

Cloning and characterization of E2F-2, a novel protein with the biochemical
properties of transcription factor E2F.

Ivey-Hoyle M(1), Conroy R, Huber HE, Goodhart PJ, Oliff A, Heimbrook DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point,
Pennsylvania 19486.

E2F is a mammalian transcription factor that appears to play an important role in
cell cycle regulation. While at least two proteins (E2F-1 and DP-1) with E2F-like
activity have been cloned, studies from several laboratories suggest that
additional homologs may exist. A novel protein with E2F-like properties,
designated E2F-2, was cloned by screening a HeLa cDNA library with a DNA probe
derived from the DNA binding domain of E2F-1 (K. Helin, J. A. Lees, M. Vidal, N. 
Dyson, E. Harlow, and A. Fattaey, Cell 70:337-350, 1992). E2F-2 exhibits overall 
46% amino acid identity to E2F-1. Both the sequence and the function of the DNA
and retinoblastoma gene product binding domains of E2F-1 are conserved in E2F-2. 
The DNA binding activity of E2F-2 is dramatically enhanced by complementation
with particular sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis-purified components of HeLa cell E2F, and anti-E2F-2 antibodies
cross-react with components of purified HeLa cell E2F. These observations are
consistent with a model in which E2F binds DNA as a heterodimer of two distinct
proteins, and E2F-2 is functionally and immunologically related to one of these
proteins.

PMCID: PMC364852
PMID: 8246995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. EMBO J. 1993 Nov;12(11):4317-24.

Functional synergy between DP-1 and E2F-1 in the cell cycle-regulating
transcription factor DRTF1/E2F.

Bandara LR(1), Buck VM, Zamanian M, Johnston LH, La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, UK.

It is widely believed that the cellular transcription factor DRTF1/E2F integrates
cell cycle events with the transcription apparatus because during cell cycle
progression in mammalian cells it interacts with molecules that are important
regulators of cellular proliferation, such as the retinoblastoma tumour
suppressor gene product (pRb), p107, cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases. Thus, 
pRb, which negatively regulates early cell cycle progression and is frequently
mutated in tumour cells, and the Rb-related protein p107, bind to and repress the
transcriptional activity of DRTF1/E2F. Viral oncoproteins, such as adenovirus E1a
and SV40 large T antigen, overcome such repression by sequestering pRb and p107
and in so doing are likely to activate genes regulated by DRTF1/E2F, such as
cdc2, c-myc and DHFR. Two sequence-specific DNA binding proteins, E2F-1 and DP-1,
which bind to the E2F site, contain a small region of similarity. The functional 
relationship between them has, however, been unclear. We report here that DP-1
and E2F-1 exist in a DNA binding complex in vivo and that they bind efficiently
and preferentially as a heterodimer to the E2F site. Moreover, studies in yeast
and Drosophila cells indicate that DP-1 and E2F-1 interact synergistically in E2F
site-dependent transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC413728
PMID: 8223441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genes Dev. 1993 Oct;7(10):1850-61.

Heterodimerization of the transcription factors E2F-1 and DP-1 leads to
cooperative trans-activation.

Helin K(1), Wu CL, Fattaey AR, Lees JA, Dynlacht BD, Ngwu C, Harlow E.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129.

The E2F transcription factor has been implicated in the regulation of genes whose
products are involved in cell proliferation. Two proteins have recently been
identified with E2F-like properties. One of these proteins, E2F-1, has been shown
to mediate E2F-dependent trans-activation and to bind the hypophosphorylated form
of the retinoblastoma protein (pRB). The other protein, murine DP-1, was purified
from an E2F DNA-affinity column, and it was subsequently shown to bind the
consensus E2F DNA-binding site. To study a possible interaction between E2F-1 and
DP-1, we have now isolated a cDNA for the human homolog of DP-1. Human DP-1 and
E2F-1 associate both in vivo and in vitro, and this interaction leads to enhanced
binding to E2F DNA-binding sites. The association of E2F-1 and DP-1 leads to
cooperative activation of an E2F-responsive promoter. Finally, we demonstrate
that E2F-1 and DP-1 association is required for stable interaction with pRB in
vivo and that trans-activation by E2F-1/DP-1 heterodimers is inhibited by pRB. We
suggest that "E2F" is the activity that is formed when an E2F-1-related protein
and a DP-1-related protein dimerize.

PMID: 8405995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nature. 1993 Sep 30;365(6445):468.

A new component of the transcription factor DRTF1/E2F.

Girling R, Partridge JF, Bandara LR, Burden N, Totty NF, Hsuan JJ, La Thangue NB.

Erratum for
    Nature. 1993 Mar 4;362(6415):83-7.

PMID: 8413592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Biol Cell. 1993 Apr;4(4):389-96.

Transcriptional repression by the Rb-related protein p107.

Zamanian M(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor DRTF1/E2F is believed to play an important role in
regulating cellular proliferation because it undergoes a series of periodic
interactions with proteins that are known to be important regulators of the cell 
cycle, including the retinoblastoma gene product (pRb) and cyclin A. Furthermore,
certain viral oncogene products, such as adenovirus E1a, disrupt these DRTF1/E2F 
complexes by sequestering the associated proteins. p107, a protein that is
structurally related to pRb, also binds to DRTF1/E2F, and in this study we
investigate the functional consequences of this interaction. We show that p107
can repress E2F binding site-dependent transcription and that the adenovirus E1a 
protein overcomes p107-mediated transcriptional repression. Two distinct but
related proteins, pRb and p107, can therefore repress transcription driven by
DRTF1/E2F, whereas the E1a protein overrides the repression. We also demonstrate 
that the transcription repressing properties of p107 and pRb are influenced by
the cell type and by differentiation, because neither protein affects
transcription in F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells but both do so efficiently in 
differentiated derivatives. In this respect, the repressing activities of pRb and
p107 inversely correlate with the presence of the cellular E1a-like activity
previously documented in F9 EC cells. These data suggest that p107 and pRb exert 
their biological activities in some but not all cell types.

PMCID: PMC300940
PMID: 7685208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nature. 1993 Mar 4;362(6415):83-7.

A new component of the transcription factor DRTF1/E2F.

Girling R(1), Partridge JF, Bandara LR, Burden N, Totty NF, Hsuan JJ, La Thangue 
NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Nature. 1993 Sep 30;365(6445):468.

Transcription factor DRTF1/E2F coordinates events in the cell cycle with
transcription by its cyclical interactions with important regulators of cellular 
proliferation like the retinoblastoma tumour-suppressor gene product (Rb) and the
Rb-related protein, p107 (refs 1-8). DRTF1/E2F binding sites occur in the control
regions of genes involved in proliferation, and both Rb and p107 repress the
capacity of DRTF1/E2F to activate transcription (refs 11, 12; M. Zamanian and
N.B.L.T., manuscript submitted). Mutant Rb proteins isolated from tumour cells
are unable to bind DRTF1/E2F (refs 11-13), and certain viral oncoproteins, such
as adenovirus E1A, sequester Rb and p107 in order to free active DRTF1/E2F (refs 
5, 11, 12, 14, 15). Here we report the isolation of a complementary DNA encoding 
DRTF1-polypeptide-1 (DP-1), a major sequence-specific binding protein that is
present in DRTF1/E2F, including Rb- and p107-associated DRTF1/E2F. The
DNA-binding domain of DP-1 contains a region that resembles that of E2F-1 (refs
16, 17), and recognizes the same sequence. DRTF1/E2F thus appears to contain at
least two sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins.

PMID: 8446173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Cell Mol Biol Res. 1993;39(8):705-16.

Regulation of adenovirus 12 E1A transcription: E2F and ATF motifs in the E1A
promoter bind nuclear protein complexes including E2F1, DP-1, cyclin A and/or RB 
and mediate transcriptional (auto)activation.

Kirch HC(1), Pützer B, Schwabe G, Gnauck HK, Schulte Holthausen H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute für Molekularbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen, 
Germany.

Nuclear factors NFI and NFIII are involved in transcription of the E1A oncogene
of adenovirus 12. In addition, the E-box binding transcription factor ESF-1 was
found to activate basal transcription from the proximal transcription start site 
TS2. Deletion of a region upstream from the distal start site TS1 was reported to
abolish E1A transcription completely. Two motifs for transcription factors, one
for members of the E2F family and one that was related to ATF motifs in the
HTLV-1 LTR, are localized in this region. We examined the binding of nuclear
proteins to these motifs and studied their role in (auto)activation of Ad12 E1A
transcription from TS1. We found several cell type specific DNA-protein complexes
in Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assays (EMSA). For HeLa, 293, U937, and A549
cells, participation of E2F-1, DP-1, cyclin A, and RB was involved in formation
of some complexes only, assuming participation of factors different from E2F-1 or
DP-1 in others. One main and 2-3 minor specific complexes appeared in EMSA when
the ATF-motif was examined. Partial cross-competitions occurred in competition
experiments between the neighbouring E2F and ATF-motifs, suggesting cofactors or 
bridging proteins in formation or stabilization of some complexes. Transcription 
from TS1 mediated by these motifs was analysed using a CAT-reporter system, where
neither the ATF- nor the E2F-motif alone imparted striking activation of
transcription. In contrast, considerable and synergistic activation was observed 
when both sites were present in the CAT-construct. E1A autoactivation mediated by
these sites was about twofold compared with a ninefold activation described for
the complete E1A promoter.

PMID: 7951410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Nature. 1992 Jan 9;355(6356):176-9.

Independent binding of the retinoblastoma protein and p107 to the transcription
factor E2F.

Cao L(1), Faha B, Dembski M, Tsai LH, Harlow E, Dyson N.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown 02129.

The cellular protein p107 and the retinoblastoma protein (pRB) have many features
in common. Most strikingly, they contain homologous protein domains that mediate 
interaction with the oncoproteins of several small DNA tumour viruses, including 
adenovirus E1A and SV40 large-T antigen. In cells that do not contain these viral
oncoproteins, pRB interacts with the cellular transcription factor E2F or a
related protein termed DRTF1. E2F associates with a form of pRB that is found
primarily in G1 cells. It seems that the E2F-pRB complex dissociates near the
G1-S boundary before the initiation of S phase, releasing free E2F and apparently
stimulating the ability of E2F to activate transcription. Cells that express E1A 
have no or little pRB-E2F complex, presumably because of the association of E1A
with pRB. During S phase, E2F forms a second complex that contains cyclin A but
apparently lacks pRB. Here, we report that p107 is found in the cyclin A/E2F
complex and that this complex also contains p33cdk2. These observations suggest
that p107 and pRB cooperate in the regulation of E2F activity, each affecting
different stages of the cell cycle. Thus, by binding to pRB and p107, E1A and
large-T antigen target two distinct aspects of E2F regulation.

PMID: 1530885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. EMBO J. 1991 Dec;10(12):3819-27.

A developmentally regulated and tissue-dependent transcription factor complexes
with the retinoblastoma gene product.

Partridge JF(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, National Institute for Medical
Research, Mill Hill, London, UK.

DRTF1 is a cellular transcription factor which complexes with the retinoblastoma 
(Rb) gene product and cyclin A, an association modulated by certain viral
oncogenes, such as adenovirus E1a. Complexed DRTF1, referred to as DRTF1a, has
similar DNA binding specificity and DNA binding polypeptides to DRTF1b, which
lacks Rb. DRTF1b is abundant in both F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) stem cells and
pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells and is strongly down-regulated during the
differentiation of both cell types, suggestive of a stem cell E1a-like activity. 
In contrast, DRTF1a, which in F9 EC cells is much less abundant than the other
activities, is induced as F9 cells begin to differentiate. Consistent with the
relationship between EC, ES and inner cell mass cells, DRTF1b is present in
blastocyst stage embryos although as embryogenesis progresses the levels of
Rb-complexed DRTF1 increase. Certain tissues, such as liver and brain, contain
high levels of DRTF1 during early embryonic stages but little in adult terminally
differentiated tissue, in contrast to the thymus, which contains high levels of
Rb-complexed DRTF1 but lacks associated cyclin A. These data show that DRTF1 is a
group of transcription factors that share common DNA binding polypeptides and
which complex with other non-DNA binding proteins, such as the Rb protein and
cyclin A, in a developmentally regulated and tissue-dependent fashion.

PMCID: PMC453118
PMID: 1834460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nature. 1991 Jun 6;351(6326):494-7.

Adenovirus E1a prevents the retinoblastoma gene product from complexing with a
cellular transcription factor.

Bandara LR(1), La Thangue NB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Eukaryotic Molecular Genetics, MRC National Institute for
Medical Research, London, UK.

The transforming proteins of several DNA tumour viruses, including adenovirus E1a
and simian virus 40 large T antigen, complex with the retinoblastoma (Rb)
tumour-suppressor gene product. This requires regions in these viral proteins
necessary for transformation and is thought to inactivate the growth-suppressing 
properties of the Rb protein by disrupting its interaction with cellular targets.
Indeed, regions of Rb required to form a complex with E1a and large T antigen are
often mutated in transformed cells. The level at which the Rb protein regulates
proliferation is unknown, although one possibility is transcription. We have
previously characterized a sequence-specific transcription factor, DRTF1, the
activity of which is downregulated as embryonal carcinoma stem cells
differentiate. DRTF1 is found in several discrete protein complexes (a, b and c) 
which are of different sizes but have the same DNA specificity. We now show that 
one of these also contains the Rb protein and, further, that the adenovirus E1a
protein causes the dissociation of the Rb protein from this complex. This
requires conserved regions 1 and 2 of E1a that are known to be required for
efficient transformation. These results demonstrate that the Rb protein forms a
complex with a DNA-bound transcription factor, and suggests that the Rb protein
might act by regulating transcription.

PMID: 1710781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


