
1. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 22;7:10944. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10944.

Mondo complexes regulate TFEB via TOR inhibition to promote longevity in response
to gonadal signals.

Nakamura S(1), Karalay Ö(1), Jäger PS(1), Horikawa M(1), Klein C(1), Nakamura
K(1), Latza C(1), Templer SE(2), Dieterich C(2), Antebi A(1,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics of Ageing, Max Planck Institute for Biology
of Ageing, Joseph Stelzmann Strasse 9b, Cologne 50931, Germany. (2)Computational 
RNA Biology and Ageing, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne
50931, Germany. (3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Huffington
Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.
(4)Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated
Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany.

Germline removal provokes longevity in several species and shifts resources
towards survival and repair. Several Caenorhabditis elegans transcription factors
regulate longevity arising from germline removal; yet, how they work together is 
unknown. Here we identify a Myc-like HLH transcription factor network comprised
of Mondo/Max-like complex (MML-1/MXL-2) to be required for longevity induced by
germline removal, as well as by reduced TOR, insulin/IGF signalling and
mitochondrial function. Germline removal increases MML-1 nuclear accumulation and
activity. Surprisingly, MML-1 regulates nuclear localization and activity of
HLH-30/TFEB, a convergent regulator of autophagy, lysosome biogenesis and
longevity, by downregulating TOR signalling via LARS-1/leucyl-transfer RNA
synthase. HLH-30 also upregulates MML-1 upon germline removal. Mammalian MondoA/B
and TFEB show similar mutual regulation. MML-1/MXL-2 and HLH-30 transcriptomes
show both shared and preferential outputs including MDL-1/MAD-like HLH factor
required for longevity. These studies reveal how an extensive interdependent HLH 
transcription factor network distributes responsibility and mutually enforces
states geared towards reproduction or survival.

PMCID: PMC4804169
PMID: 27001890  [PubMed - in process]


2. Kidney Int. 2016 Apr;89(4):862-73. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2015.12.045.

Activation of the transcription factor EB rescues lysosomal abnormalities in
cystinotic kidney cells.

Rega LR(1), Polishchuk E(2), Montefusco S(2), Napolitano G(2), Tozzi G(3), Zhang 
J(4), Bellomo F(5), Taranta A(5), Pastore A(6), Polishchuk R(2), Piemonte F(3),
Medina DL(2), Catz SD(4), Ballabio A(2), Emma F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Dialysis, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital and
Research Institute, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: laurarita.rega@opbg.net.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli (Naples), Italy. (3)Unit
for Muscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital and
Research Institute, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Molecular and Experimental
Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. (5)Division 
of Nephrology and Dialysis, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital and Research
Institute, Rome, Italy. (6)Laboratory of Proteomics and Metabolomics, Bambino
Gesù Children's Hospital and Research Institute, Rome, Italy.

Nephropathic cystinosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease
characterized by accumulation of cystine into lysosomes secondary to mutations in
the cystine lysosomal transporter, cystinosin. The defect initially causes
proximal tubular dysfunction (Fanconi syndrome) which in time progresses to
end-stage renal disease. Cystinotic patients treated with the cystine-depleting
agent, cysteamine, have improved life expectancy, delayed progression to chronic 
renal failure, but persistence of Fanconi syndrome. Here, we have investigated
the role of the transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of the
autophagy-lysosomal pathway, in conditionally immortalized proximal tubular
epithelial cells derived from the urine of a healthy volunteer or a cystinotic
patient. Lack of cystinosin reduced TFEB expression and induced TFEB nuclear
translocation. Stimulation of endogenous TFEB activity by genistein, or
overexpression of exogenous TFEB lowered cystine levels within 24 hours in
cystinotic cells. Overexpression of TFEB also stimulated delayed endocytic cargo 
processing within 24 hours. Rescue of other abnormalities of the lysosomal
compartment was observed but required prolonged expression of TFEB. These
abnormalities could not be corrected with cysteamine. Thus, these data show that 
the consequences of cystinosin deficiency are not restricted to cystine
accumulation and support the role of TFEB as a therapeutic target for the
treatment of lysosomal storage diseases, in particular of cystinosis.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26994576  [PubMed - in process]


3. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar 11. [Epub ahead of print]

Renal Cell Carcinoma Occurring in Patients With Prior Neuroblastoma: A
Heterogenous Group of Neoplasms.

Falzarano SM(1), McKenney JK, Montironi R, Eble JN, Osunkoya AO, Guo J, Zhou S,
Xiao H, Dhanasekaran SM, Shukla S, Mehra R, Magi-Galluzzi C.

Author information: 
(1)*Robert J. Tomsich Pathology and Laboratory Medicine Institute, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH ‡ Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana 
University, Indianapolis, IN §Department of Pathology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA <U+2225>Department of Pathology, Kaiser Permanente Panorama City
Medical Center, Panorama City ¶Division of Pathology, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA #Department of Pathology and Michigan Center for
Translational Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI †Section of
Pathological Anatomy, University of Ancona, Ancona, Italy.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) associated with neuroblastoma (NB) was included as a
distinct entity in the 2004 World Health Organization classification of kidney
tumors. A spectrum of RCC subtypes has been reported in NB survivors. We herein
describe a series of 8 RCCs diagnosed in 7 patients with a history of NB.
Microscopic evaluation, immunohistochemical staining for PAX8, cathepsin K, and
succinate dehydrogenase subunit B (SDHB), and fluorescence in situ hybridization 
(FISH) for TFE3 and TFEB were performed. Four distinct morphologic subtypes were 
identified: 3 tumors were characterized by cells with abundant oncocytoid
cytoplasm and irregular nuclei; 3 showed features of microphthalmia transcription
factor family translocation RCC (MiTF-RCC); 1 had features of hybrid
oncocytic-chromophobe tumor; 1 had papillary RCC histology. All RCCs expressed
PAX8 and retained SDHB expression. Cathepsin K was positive in 2 MiTF-RCCs, 1 was
TFEB FISH positive, and the other was indeterminate. Cathepsin K was negative in 
a third MiTF-RCC with TFE3 rearrangement. TFE3 FISH was negative in 4 and
insufficient in 1 of the other 5 RCCs. While a subset of RCCs associated with NB 
is characterized by cells with prominent oncocytoid cytoplasm, other RCC subtypes
also occur in post-NB patients. Renal neoplasms occurring in patients with a
history of NB do not represent a single entity but a heterogenous group of RCCs. 
SDHB mutations do not explain the subset of nontranslocation RCCs with oncocytoid
features; therefore, further studies are needed to clarify whether they may
represent a distinct entity with unique molecular abnormalities or may belong to 
other emerging RCC subtypes.

PMID: 26975037  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Pathologe. 2016 Mar;37(2):159-65. doi: 10.1007/s00292-016-0151-2.

[The translocation carcinoma : A pediatric renal tumor also in adults].

[Article in German]

Bruder E(1), Moch H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsspital Basel, Schönbeinstrasse 40, Basel,
Schweiz. elisabeth.bruder@unibas.ch. (2)Institut für Klinische Pathologie,
Universitätsspital Zürich, Zürich, Schweiz.

The MiT family of translocation-associated renal cell carcinomas comprise
approximately 40<U+2009>% of renal cell carcinomas in young patients but only up to 4<U+2009>% 
of renal cell carcinomas in adult patients. The Xp11.2 translocation-associated
tumors are the most frequent and were included in the 2004 World Health
Organization (WHO) classification. They contain a fusion of the TFE3 gene with
ASPSCR1, PRCC, NONO, SPFQ or CLTC resulting in an immunohistochemically
detectable nuclear overexpression of TFE3. The Xp11.2 translocation-associated
renal cell carcinomas are characterized by ample clear cytoplasm, papillary
architecture and abundant psammoma bodies. The TFEB translocation-associated
renal cell carcinomas are much rarer and show a biphasic architecture.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization permits the detection of a translocation by
means of a break apart probe for the TFE3 and TFEB genes and is recommended for
the diagnosis of renal cell carcinomas in patients under 30 years of age. The
TFE3 and TFEB translocation-associated tumors are classified as MiT family
translocation carcinomas in the new WHO classification.The rare renal cell
carcinomas harboring an ALK rearrangement with fusion to VCL in young patients
with sickle cell trait show a characteristic morphology and are listed in the new
WHO classification as a provisional entity.

PMID: 26972595  [PubMed - in process]


5. Acta Neuropathol. 2016 Mar 12. [Epub ahead of print]

Glycolytic-to-oxidative fiber-type switch and mTOR signaling activation are
early-onset features of SBMA muscle modified by high-fat diet.

Rocchi A(1), Milioto C(1,)(2,)(3), Parodi S(1,)(4), Armirotti A(5), Borgia D(6), 
Pellegrini M(1,)(7), Urciuolo A(8), Molon S(8), Morbidoni V(8), Marabita M(9),
Romanello V(9), Gatto P(10), Blaauw B(9), Bonaldo P(8), Sambataro F(11), Robins
DM(12), Lieberman AP(13), Sorarù G(6), Vergani L(6), Sandri M(9,)(14), Pennuto
M(15,)(16).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 16163, Genoa, Italy. (2)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Centre for
Integrative Biology, University of Trento, 38123, Trento, Italy. (3)Dipartimento 
di Medicina Sperimentale, University of Genova, 16100, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Neurogenetics Branch, NINDS, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD,
20892, USA. (5)Drug Discovery and Development Department, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 16100, Genoa, Italy. (6)Department of Neurosciences, University of
Padova, 35100, Padua, Italy. (7)Department of Experimental Medicine
(DIMES)-Biochemistry Section, University of Genova, Viale Benedetto XV, 1, 16132,
Genoa, Italy. (8)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova, 35131,
Padua, Italy. (9)Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, Department of
Biomedical Science, University of Padova, 35100, Padua, Italy.
(10)High-Throughput Screening Core Facility, Centre for Integrative Biology,
University of Trento, 38123, Trento, Italy. (11)Department of Experimental and
Clinical Medical Sciences (DISM), University of Udine, 33100, Udine, Italy.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (13)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. (14)Telethon Institute of Genetic and 
Medicine, Pozzuoli, 80100, Naples, Italy. (15)Department of Neuroscience and
Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 16163, Genoa, Italy.
MPennuto@Dti.Telethon.it. (16)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Centre for Integrative
Biology, University of Trento, 38123, Trento, Italy. MPennuto@Dti.Telethon.it.

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is a neuromuscular disease caused by
the expansion of a polyglutamine tract in the androgen receptor (AR). The
mechanism by which expansion of polyglutamine in AR causes muscle atrophy is
unknown. Here, we investigated pathological pathways underlying muscle atrophy in
SBMA knock-in mice and patients. We show that glycolytic muscles were more
severely affected than oxidative muscles in SBMA knock-in mice. Muscle atrophy
was associated with early-onset, progressive glycolytic-to-oxidative fiber-type
switch. Whole genome microarray and untargeted lipidomic analyses revealed
enhanced lipid metabolism and impaired glycolysis selectively in muscle. These
metabolic changes occurred before denervation and were associated with a
concurrent enhancement of mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling, which
induced peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1 alpha (PGC1a) 
expression. At later stages of disease, we detected mitochondrial membrane
depolarization, enhanced transcription factor EB (TFEB) expression and autophagy,
and mTOR-induced protein synthesis. Several of these abnormalities were detected 
in the muscle of SBMA patients. Feeding knock-in mice a high-fat diet (HFD)
restored mTOR activation, decreased the expression of PGC1a, TFEB, and genes
involved in oxidative metabolism, reduced mitochondrial abnormalities,
ameliorated muscle pathology, and extended survival. These findings show
early-onset and intrinsic metabolic alterations in SBMA muscle and link
lipid/glucose metabolism to pathogenesis. Moreover, our results highlight an HFD 
regime as a promising approach to support SBMA patients.

PMID: 26971100  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Trends Neurosci. 2016 Apr;39(4):221-34. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2016.02.002. Epub
2016 Mar 9.

The Autophagy-Lysosomal Pathway in Neurodegeneration: A TFEB Perspective.

Martini-Stoica H(1), Xu Y(2), Ballabio A(3), Zheng H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA;
Interdepartmental Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Medical Scientist Training Program, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX; Dan and Jan Duncan
Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA;
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM) and Department of
Translational Medical Sciences, Frederico II University, Naples, Italy.
(4)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA;
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX. Electronic address: huiz@bcm.edu.

The autophagy-lysosomal pathway (ALP) is involved in the degradation of
long-lived proteins. Deficits in the ALP result in protein aggregation, the
generation of toxic protein species, and accumulation of dysfunctional
organelles, which are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease 
(PD), Huntington's disease (HD), and prion disease. Decades of research have
therefore focused on enhancing the ALP in neurodegenerative diseases. More
recently, transcription factor EB (TFEB), a major regulator of autophagy and
lysosomal biogenesis, has emerged as a leading factor in addressing disease
pathology. We review the regulation of the ALP and TFEB and their impact on
neurodegenerative diseases. We also offer our perspective on the complex role of 
autophagy and TFEB in disease pathogenesis and its therapeutic implications
through the examination of prion disease.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26968346  [PubMed - in process]


7. Gastroenterology. 2016 Mar 7. pii: S0016-5085(16)00299-7. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2016.02.076. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Susceptibility Loci and Genes for Colorectal Cancer Risk.

Zeng C(1), Matsuda K(2), Jia WH(3), Chang J(4), Kweon SS(5), Xiang YB(6), Shin
A(7), Jee SH(8), Kim DH(9), Zhang B(1), Cai Q(1), Guo X(1), Long J(1), Wang
N(10), Courtney R(1), Pan ZZ(3), Wu C(4), Takahashi A(11), Shin MH(12), Matsuo
K(13), Matsuda F(14), Gao YT(6), Oh JH(15), Kim S(8), Jung KJ(8), Ahn YO(16), Ren
Z(17), Li HL(6), Wu J(1), Shi J(1), Wen W(1), Yang G(1), Li B(18), Ji BT(19);
Genetics and Epidemiology of Colorectal Cancer Consortium (GECCO), Brenner H(20),
Schoen RE(21), Küry S(22); Colorectal Transdisciplinary (CORECT) Study, Gruber
SB(23), Schumacher FR(23), Stenzel SL(23); Colon Cancer Family Registry (CCFR),
Casey G(23), Hopper JL(24), Jenkins MA(25), Kim HR(26), Jeong JY(9), Park JW(27),
Tajima K(28), Cho SH(29), Kubo M(11), Shu XO(1), Lin D(4), Zeng YX(3), Zheng
W(30).

Collaborators: Baron JA, Berndt SI, Bezieau S, Brenner H, Caan BJ, Carlson CS,
Casey G, Chan AT, Chang-Claude J, Chanock SJ, Conti DV, Curtis K, Duggan D, Fuchs
CS, Gallinger S, Giovannucci EL, Gruber SB, Haile RW, Harrison TA, Hayes RB,
Hoffmeister M, Hopper JL, Hsu L, Hudson TJ, Hunter DJ, Hutter CM, Jackson RD,
Jenkins MA, Jiao S, Küry S, Le Marchand L, Lemire M, Lindor NM, Ma J, Newcomb PA,
Peters U, Potter JD, Qu C, Schoen RE, Schumacher FR, Seminara D, Slattery ML,
Thibodeau SN, White E, Zanke BW, Blalock K, Campbell PT, Casey G, Conti DV,
Edlund CK, Figueiredo J, Gauderman WJ, Gong J, Green RC, Gruber SB, Harju JF,
Harrison TA, Jacobs EJ, Jenkins MA, Jiao S, Li L, Lin Y, Manion FJ, Moreno V,
Mukherjee B, Peters U, Raskin L, Schumacher FR, Seminara D, Severi G, Stenzel SL,
Thomas DC, Casey G.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Known Genetic factors explain only a small fraction of genetic
variation in colorectal cancer (CRC). We conducted a genome-wide association
study (GWAS) to identify risk loci for CRC.
METHODS: This discovery stage included 8027 cases and 22577 controls of
East-Asian ancestry. Promising variants were evaluated in studies including as
many as 11044 cases and 12047 controls. Tumor-adjacent normal tissues from 188
patients were analyzed to evaluate correlations of risk variants with expression 
levels of nearby genes. Potential functionality of risk variants were evaluated
using public genomic and epigenomic databases.
RESULTS: We identified 4 loci associated with CRC risk; P values for the most
significant variant in each locus ranged from 3.92×10(-8) to 1.24×10(-12): 6p21.1
(rs4711689), 8q23.3 (rs2450115, rs6469656), 10q24.3 (rs4919687), and 12p13.3
(rs11064437). We also identified 2 risk variants at loci previously associated
with CRC: 10q25.2 (rs10506868) and 20q13.3 (rs6061231). These risk variants,
conferring an approximate 10%-18% increase in risk per allele, are located either
inside or near protein-coding genes that include TFEB (lysosome biogenesis and
autophagy), EIF3H (initiation of translation), CYP17A1 (steroidogenesis), SPSB2
(proteasome degradation), and RPS21 (ribosome biogenesis). Gene expression
analyses showed a significant association (P <.05) for rs4711689 with TFEB,
rs6469656 with EIF3H, rs11064437 with SPSB2, and rs6061231 with RPS21.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified susceptibility loci and genes associated with CRC
risk, linking CRC predisposition to steroid hormone, protein synthesis and
degradation, and autophagy pathways and providing added insight into the
mechanism of CRC pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2016 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26965516  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 10;6:22827. doi: 10.1038/srep22827.

Transcriptional induction of the heat shock protein B8 mediates the clearance of 
misfolded proteins responsible for motor neuron diseases.

Crippa V(1), D'Agostino VG(2), Cristofani R(3), Rusmini P(3), Cicardi ME(3),
Messi E(3), Loffredo R(2), Pancher M(2), Piccolella M(3), Galbiati M(3), Meroni
M(3), Cereda C(1), Carra S(4), Provenzani A(2), Poletti A(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Neurobiology, C. Mondino National Neurological
Institute, Pavia, Italy. (2)Centre for Integrative Biology (CIBIO), Università
degli Studi di Trento, Trento, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche e
Biomolecolari (DiSFeB), Centro di Eccellenza sulle Malattie Neurodegenerative,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze
Biomediche, Metaboliche e Neuroscienze, Universita' di Modena e Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy. (5)Centro InterUniversitario sulle Malattie Neurodegenerative,
Università degli Studi di Firenze, Genova, Roma Tor Vergata and Milano, Italy.

Neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) are often associated with the presence of
misfolded protein inclusions. The chaperone HSPB8 is upregulated in mice, the
human brain and muscle structures affected during NDs progression. HSPB8 exerts a
potent pro-degradative activity on several misfolded proteins responsible for
familial NDs forms. Here, we demonstrated that HSPB8 also counteracts
accumulation of aberrantly localized misfolded forms of TDP-43 and its 25<U+2009>KDa
fragment involved in most sporadic cases of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (sALS) 
and of Fronto Lateral Temporal Dementia (FLTD). HSPB8 acts with BAG3 and the
HSP70/HSC70-CHIP complex enhancing the autophagic removal of misfolded proteins. 
We performed a high-through put screening (HTS) to find small molecules capable
of inducing HSPB8 in neurons for therapeutic purposes. We identified two
compounds, colchicine and doxorubicin, that robustly up-regulated HSPB8
expression. Both colchicine and doxorubicin increased the expression of the
master regulator of autophagy TFEB, the autophagy linker p62/SQSTM1 and the
autophagosome component LC3. In line, both drugs counteracted the accumulation of
TDP-43 and TDP-25 misfolded species responsible for motoneuronal death in sALS.
Thus, analogs of colchicine and doxorubicin able to induce HSPB8 and with better 
safety and tolerability may result beneficial in NDs models.

PMCID: PMC4785366
PMID: 26961006  [PubMed - in process]


9. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2016 Mar 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Oxidative stress by monoamine oxidase-A impairs transcription factor-EB
activation and autophagosome clearance leading to cardiomyocyte necrosis and
heart failure.

Santin Y(1), Sicard P(2,)(3), Vigneron F(4), Guilbeau-Frugier C(5,)(6), Dutaur
M(7), Lairez O(5,)(8), Couderc B(9), Manni D(10), Korolchuk V(11), Lezoualc'h
F(12), Parini A(13), Mialet-Perez J(14).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France ; yohan.santin@inserm.fr. (2)I2MC, cardiology ,
1 ave Jean Poulhes , toulouse, France , 31000. (3)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France 
; pierre.sicard@inserm.fr. (4)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France ;
francois.vigneron@inserm.fr. (5)I2MC, cardiac remodelling, Toulouse, France.
(6)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France ; guilbeau-frugier.c@chu-toulouse.fr.
(7)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France ; marianne.dutaur@inserm.fr. (8)INSERM, I2MC,
Toulouse, France ; lairez@gmail.com. (9)INSERM, Institut Claudius regaud,
Toulouse, France ; Couderc.Bettina@iuct-oncopole.fr. (10)University of NewCastle,
Institute for Ageing and Health, NewCastle, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland ; d.manni@ncl.ac.uk. (11)University of NewCastle, Institute for 
Ageing and Health, NewCastle, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland ; viktor.korolchuk@ncl.ac.uk. (12)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France ;
Frank.Lezoualch@inserm.fr. (13)INSERM, I2MC, Toulouse, France ;
angelo.parini@inserm.fr. (14)INSERM, I2MC , 1, ave Jean Poulhes , BP84225 ,
Toulouse, France , 31432 ; jeanne.perez@inserm.fr.

Aims- In Heart Failure (HF), mitochondrial quality control and autophagy are
progressively impaired, but the role of oxidative stress in this process and its 
underlying mechanism remain to be defined. By degrading norepinephrine and
serotonin, the mitochondrial enzyme monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) is a potent
source of Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) in the heart and its activation leads to 
the persistence of mitochondrial damage. Here, we analysed the consequences of
ROS generation by MAO-A on the autophagy-lysosome pathway in the heart. Results- 
Cardiomyocyte-driven expression of MAO-A in mice led to mitochondrial fission and
translocation of Drp1 and Parkin in the mitochondrial compartment. Ventricles
from MAO-A transgenic mice displayed accumulation of LC3-positive autophagosomes,
together with p62 and ubiquitylated proteins, indicating impairment of autophagy.
In vitro, adenoviral delivery of MAO-A in cardiomyocytes and the consequent
generation of ROS blocked autophagic flux with accumulation of LC3II, p62 and
ubiquitylated proteins, leading to mitochondrial fission and cell necrosis. In
addition, MAO-A activation induced accumulation of lysosomal proteins cathepsin D
and Lamp1, reduced lysosomal acidification and blocked the nuclear translocation 
of Transcription Factor-EB (TFEB), a master regulator of autophagy and lysosomes 
biogenesis. Most interestingly, overexpression of TFEB attenuated autophagosome
build-up, mitochondrial fission, cardiomyocyte death and HF associated with MAO-A
activation. Innovation and conclusion- This study unravels a new link between
MAO-dependent H2O2 production and lysosomal dysfunction. Altogether, our findings
demonstrate that the MAO-A/H2O2 axis has a negative impact on the elimination and
recycling of mitochondria through autophagy-lysosome pathway, which participates 
in cardiomyocyte death and HF.

PMID: 26959532  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Genes Dev. 2016 Mar 1;30(5):535-52. doi: 10.1101/gad.274142.115.

AMPK governs lineage specification through Tfeb-dependent regulation of
lysosomes.

Young NP(1), Kamireddy A(1), Van Nostrand JL(1), Eichner LJ(1), Shokhirev MN(2), 
Dayn Y(3), Shaw RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological
Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA; (2)Integrative Genomics and
Bioinformatics Core, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA; (3)Transgenic Core Facility, The Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Faithful execution of developmental programs relies on the acquisition of unique 
cell identities from pluripotent progenitors, a process governed by combinatorial
inputs from numerous signaling cascades that ultimately dictate lineage-specific 
transcriptional outputs. Despite growing evidence that metabolism is integrated
with many molecular networks, how pathways that control energy homeostasis may
affect cell fate decisions is largely unknown. Here, we show that AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), a central metabolic regulator, plays critical roles in
lineage specification. Although AMPK-deficient embryonic stem cells (ESCs) were
normal in the pluripotent state, these cells displayed profound defects upon
differentiation, failing to generate chimeric embryos and preferentially adopting
an ectodermal fate at the expense of the endoderm during embryoid body (EB)
formation. AMPK(-/-) EBs exhibited reduced levels of Tfeb, a master
transcriptional regulator of lysosomes, leading to diminished endolysosomal
function. Remarkably, genetic loss of Tfeb also yielded endodermal defects, while
AMPK-null ESCs overexpressing this transcription factor normalized their
differential potential, revealing an intimate connection between Tfeb/lysosomes
and germ layer specification. The compromised endolysosomal system resulting from
AMPK or Tfeb inactivation blunted Wnt signaling, while up-regulating this pathway
restored expression of endodermal markers. Collectively, these results uncover
the AMPK pathway as a novel regulator of cell fate determination during
differentiation.

© 2016 Young et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4782048 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26944679  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 8;14(9):2166-79. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.006. Epub 2016 
Feb 25.

Dysregulation of Nutrient Sensing and CLEARance in Presenilin Deficiency.

Reddy K(1), Cusack CL(1), Nnah IC(1), Khayati K(1), Saqcena C(1), Huynh TB(2),
Noggle SA(3), Ballabio A(4), Dobrowolski R(5).

Author information: 
(1)Federated Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University/New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan and Dan
Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children Hospital, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (3)The New York Stem Cell Foundation Research Institute, New York, NY
10032, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research
Institute, Texas Children Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, 80131 Naples, Italy; Medical Genetics,
Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, 80131 Naples,
Italy. (5)Federated Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University/New
Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. Electronic address:
r.dobrowolski@rutgers.edu.

Attenuated auto-lysosomal system has been associated with Alzheimer disease (AD),
yet all underlying molecular mechanisms leading to this impairment are unknown.
We show that the amino acid sensing of mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 
(mTORC1) is dysregulated in cells deficient in presenilin, a protein associated
with AD. In these cells, mTORC1 is constitutively tethered to lysosomal
membranes, unresponsive to starvation, and inhibitory to TFEB-mediated clearance 
due to a reduction in Sestrin2 expression. Normalization of Sestrin2 levels
through overexpression or elevation of nuclear calcium rescued mTORC1 tethering
and initiated clearance. While CLEAR network attenuation in vivo results in
buildup of amyloid, phospho-Tau, and neurodegeneration, presenilin-knockout
fibroblasts and iPSC-derived AD human neurons fail to effectively initiate
autophagy. These results propose an altered mechanism for nutrient sensing in
presenilin deficiency and underline an importance of clearance pathways in the
onset of AD.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4793148
PMID: 26923592  [PubMed - in process]


12. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Dec;44(12):895-9.

[Renal cell carcinoma with t(6;11)(p21.2;q13)/MALAT1-TFEB fusion: a clinical and 
pathological analysis].

[Article in Chinese]

Xia Q(1), Shi S(1), Shen Q(1), Wei X(1), Wang X(1), Ma H(1), Lu Z(1), Zhou X(1), 
Rao Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School
of Medicine, Nanjing 210002, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Jinling
Hospital, Nanjing University School of Medicine, Nanjing 210002, China; E-mail:
raoqiu1103@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features, immunophenotype, differential
diagnosis and prognosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) associated with
t(6;11)(p21.2;q13)/MALAT1-TFEB gene fusion.
METHODS: A total of 9 cases of such rare tumor were selected for
clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical and molecular analysis, with review of
literature.
RESULTS: The age of the patients ranged from 21 to 42 years (mean=31.3 years).
The patients included four men and five women. Histologically, 4 of the 9 cases
studied showed classic morphologic features of TFEB RCC, with hyaline material,
pigments and psammoma bodies frequently identified. The remaining 5 cases
demonstrated uncommon morphology, mimicking perivascular epithelioid cell
neoplasm, clear cell RCC, chromophobe RCC or papillary RCC. Immunohistochemical
study showed that TFEB and vimentin were positive in all cases. Most of the
tumors studied also expressed Ksp-cadherin, E-cadherin, CD117, HMB45, Melan A and
Cathepsin K. CKpan showed immunostaining in only 1 case. The staining for TFE3,
CD10 and CK7 were all negative. TFEB gene rearrangement was detected in all the 9
cases studied using fluorescence in-situ hybridization. MALAT1-TFEB fusion gene
was identified in 2 cases by polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing.
TFEB RCC seemed to be an indolent tumor. During a mean follow-up of 31 months,
none developed tumor recurrence, progression, or metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: TFEB fusion-associated RCC is a rare neoplasm, tends to occur in
young age group and carries an indolent behavior. Diagnosis relies on
clinicopathologic findings and immunohistochemical analysis. TFEB break-apart
FISH assay is a reliable tool in confirming the diagnosis.

PMID: 26888508  [PubMed - in process]


13. Drug Resist Updat. 2016 Jan;24:23-33. doi: 10.1016/j.drup.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 
Nov 26.

Lysosomes as mediators of drug resistance in cancer.

Zhitomirsky B(1), Assaraf YG(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Fred Wyszkowski Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Biology,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. (2)The Fred Wyszkowski
Cancer Research Laboratory, Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa, Israel. Electronic address: assaraf@technion.ac.il.

Drug resistance remains a leading cause of chemotherapeutic treatment failure and
cancer-related mortality. While some mechanisms of anticancer drug resistance
have been well characterized, multiple mechanisms remain elusive. In this
respect, passive ion trapping-based lysosomal sequestration of multiple
hydrophobic weak-base chemotherapeutic agents was found to reduce the
accessibility of these drugs to their target sites, resulting in a markedly
reduced cytotoxic effect and drug resistance. Recently we have demonstrated that 
lysosomal sequestration of hydrophobic weak base drugs triggers TFEB-mediated
lysosomal biogenesis resulting in an enlarged lysosomal compartment, capable of
enhanced drug sequestration. This study further showed that cancer cells with an 
increased number of drug-accumulating lysosomes are more resistant to
lysosome-sequestered drugs, suggesting a model of drug-induced lysosome-mediated 
chemoresistance. In addition to passive drug sequestration of hydrophobic weak
base chemotherapeutics, other mechanisms of lysosome-mediated drug resistance
have also been reported; these include active lysosomal drug sequestration
mediated by ATP-driven transporters from the ABC superfamily, and a role for
lysosomal copper transporters in cancer resistance to platinum-based
chemotherapeutics. Furthermore, lysosomal exocytosis was suggested as a mechanism
to facilitate the clearance of chemotherapeutics which highly accumulated in
lysosomes, thus providing an additional line of resistance, supplementing the
organelle entrapment of chemotherapeutics away from their target sites. Along
with these mechanisms of lysosome-mediated drug resistance, several approaches
were recently developed for the overcoming of drug resistance or exploiting
lysosomal drug sequestration, including lysosomal photodestruction and
drug-induced lysosomal membrane permeabilization. In this review we explore the
current literature addressing the role of lysosomes in mediating cancer drug
resistance as well as novel modalities to overcome this chemoresistance.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26830313  [PubMed - in process]


14. EMBO J. 2016 Mar 1;35(5):479-95. doi: 10.15252/embj.201593428. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

TFEB and TFE3 are novel components of the integrated stress response.

Martina JA(1), Diab HI(1), Brady OA(1), Puertollano R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Physiology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Cell Biology and Physiology 
Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA puertolr@mail.nih.gov.

To reestablish homeostasis and mitigate stress, cells must activate a series of
adaptive intracellular signaling pathways. The participation of the transcription
factors TFEB and TFE3 in cellular adaptation to starvation is well established.
Here, we show that TFEB and TFE3 also play an important role in the cellular
response to ER stress. Treatment with ER stressors causes translocation of TFEB
and TFE3 to the nucleus in a process that is dependent on PERK and calcineurin
but not on mTORC1. Activated TFEB and TFE3 enhance cellular response to stress by
inducing direct transcriptional upregulation of ATF4 and other UPR genes. Under
conditions of prolonged ER stress, TFEB and TFE3 contribute to cell death, thus
revealing an unexpected role for these proteins in controlling cell fate. This
work evidences a broader role of TFEB and TFE3 in the cellular response to stress
than previously anticipated and reveals an integrated cooperation between
different cellular stress pathways.

Published 2016. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC4772850 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26813791  [PubMed - in process]


15. Autophagy. 2016 Jan 13:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Drosophila Mitf regulates the V-ATPase and the lysosomal-autophagic pathway.

Bouché V(1,)(2,)(3), Perez Espinosa A(1,)(2), Leone L(1,)(2,)(4), Sardiello
M(1,)(2), Ballabio A(1,)(2,)(3,)(5), Botas J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular and Human Genetics , Baylor College of Medicine ,
Houston , TX , USA. (2)b Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute,
Texas Children's Hospital , Houston , TX , USA. (3)c Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM) , Naples , Italy. (4)d Institute of Biomolecular
Chemistry, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche , Pozzuoli , Italy. (5)e Medical
Genetics, Department of Translational Medicine , Federico II University , Naples 
, Italy.

An evolutionary conserved gene network regulates the expression of genes involved
in lysosome biogenesis, autophagy and lipid metabolism. In mammals, TFEB and
other members of the MiTF-TFE family of transcription factors control this
network. Here we report that the lysosomal-autophagy pathway is controlled by
Mitf gene in Drosophila melanogaster. Mitf is the single MiTF-TFE family member
in Drosophila and prior to this work was known only for its function in eye
development. We show that Mitf regulates the expression of genes encoding
V-ATPase subunits as well as many additional genes involved in the
lysosomal-autophagy pathway. Reduction of Mitf function leads to abnormal
lysosomes and impairs autophagosome fusion and lipid breakdown during the
response to starvation. In contrast, elevated Mitf levels increase the number of 
lysosomes, autophagosomes and autolysosomes, and decrease the size of lipid
droplets. Inhibition of Drosophila MTORC1 induces Mitf translocation to the
nucleus, underscoring conserved regulatory mechanisms between Drosophila and
mammalian systems. Furthermore, we show Mitf-mediated clearance of cytosolic and 
nuclear expanded ATXN1 (ataxin 1) in a cellular model of spinocerebellar ataxia
type 1 (SCA1). This remarkable observation illustrates the potential of the
lysosomal-autophagy system to prevent toxic protein aggregation in both the
cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments. We anticipate that the genetics of the
Drosophila model and the absence of redundant MIT transcription factors will be
exploited to investigate the regulation and function of the lysosomal-autophagy
gene network.

PMID: 26761346  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Autophagy. 2016 Jan 4:1-16. [Epub ahead of print]

Control of lysosomal biogenesis and Notch-dependent tissue patterning by
components of the TFEB-V-ATPase axis in Drosophila melanogaster.

Tognon E(1), Kobia F(1), Busi I(1), Fumagalli A(1), De Masi F(2), Vaccari T(1).

Author information: 
(1)a IFOM - FIRC Institute of Molecular Oncology , Milan , Italy. (2)b Center for
Biological Sequence Analysis, Institute for Systems Biology, Technical University
of Denmark , Lyngby , Denmark.

In vertebrates, TFEB (transcription factor EB) and MITF
(microphthalmia-associated transcription factor) family of basic Helix-Loop-Helix
(bHLH) transcription factors regulates both lysosomal function and organ
development. However, it is not clear whether these 2 processes are
interconnected. Here, we show that Mitf, the single TFEB and MITF ortholog in
Drosophila, controls expression of vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase pump (V-ATPase)
subunits. Remarkably, we also find that expression of Vha16-1 and Vha13, encoding
2 key components of V-ATPase, is patterned in the wing imaginal disc. In
particular, Vha16-1 expression follows differentiation of proneural regions of
the disc. These regions, which will form sensory organs in the adult, appear to
possess a distinctive endolysosomal compartment and Notch (N) localization.
Modulation of Mitf activity in the disc in vivo alters endolysosomal function and
disrupts proneural patterning. Similar to our findings in Drosophila, in human
breast epithelial cells we observe that impairment of the Vha16-1 human ortholog 
ATP6V0C changes the size and function of the endolysosomal compartment and that
depletion of TFEB reduces ligand-independent N signaling activity. Our data
suggest that lysosomal-associated functions regulated by the TFEB-V-ATPase axis
might play a conserved role in shaping cell fate.

PMID: 26727288  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2015 Jun;44(6):372-6.

[Clear cell papillary renal cell carcinoma: a distinct low-grade renal tumour].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang X(1), Miao N, Gan H, Wang L, Wang C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital, Fudan University/Department of
Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.
(2)E-mail: wangchaofu@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinicopathologic features of clear cell papillary renal 
cell carcinoma (CCPRCC).
METHODS: The clinical, morphologic and immunohistochemical characteristics of 6
cases of CCPRCC were reviewed, with analysis of follow-up data.
RESULTS: There were altogether 3 men and 3 women. The mean age of patients was 56
years. The size of tumors ranged from 1.0 to 4.5 cm in greatest dimension. They
had solid or solid-cystic cut surface. Histologically, the tumors were
encapsulated and showed several morphologic patterns, with tubules, papillae,
acini, interconnecting ribbons and macro/microcysts lined by single layer of
cells with clear or small amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and low-grade nuclei
(corresponding to Fuhrman grade 1 or 2). Mitotic figures were rarely seen.
Characteristically, there was linear arrangement of the nuclei away from the
basement membrane, conferring an appearance similar to that of endometrial glands
in early secretory phase. Tubules and cysts contained serosanguineous fluid or
colloid-like secretion were identified. No foamy histiocytes, psammomatous
calcifications or hemosiderin was present in the papillary areas. Two of the
tumors showed focal or extensive angioleiomyoma/leiomyoma-like components. No
coagulative necrosis, sarcomatoid dedifferentiation, nor microscopic vascular
invasion was observed. Immunohistochemically, all tumors showed strong
co-expression of CK7 and CA9 (with characteristic "goblet" staining pattern). The
staining for EMA, CK (AE1/AE3), vimentin, CK8, CK18, CK19 and PAX-8 were also
positive in all cases. Ki-67 was expressed in less than or about 5% of the tumor 
cell nuclei. The staining for CD10, P504S, CD117, TFE3 and TFEB was negative.
Follow-up data were available in all patients, with mean duration of 14 months
(range = 7 to 27 months). All of the patients were disease-free after operation.
CONCLUSION: CCPRCC is a special type of low-grade renal neoplasm with
characteristic histopathologic and immunohistochemical features. It needs to be
distinguished from clear cell renal cell carcinoma or papillary renal cell
carcinoma.

PMID: 26704829  [PubMed - in process]


18. EMBO J. 2016 Jan 18;35(2):121-42. doi: 10.15252/embj.201591998. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

TDP-43 loss of function increases TFEB activity and blocks autophagosome-lysosome
fusion.

Xia Q(1), Wang H(1), Hao Z(1), Fu C(2), Hu Q(1), Gao F(1), Ren H(1), Chen D(1),
Han J(3), Ying Z(4), Wang G(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of
Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease, School of Life Sciences University of
Science & Technology of China Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Disease, Institute of Life
Sciences Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. (4)Laboratory of
Molecular Neuropathology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Translational Research and
Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and
Translational Medicine for Geriatric Diseases, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China wanggh@suda.edu.cn
zheng.ying@suda.edu.cn. (5)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropathology, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases and
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China
Key Laboratory of Brain Function and Disease, School of Life Sciences University 
of Science & Technology of China Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, China
wanggh@suda.edu.cn zheng.ying@suda.edu.cn.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease that is 
characterized by selective loss of motor neurons in brain and spinal cord. TAR
DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) was identified as a major component of disease
pathogenesis in ALS, frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), and other
neurodegenerative disease. Despite the fact that TDP-43 is a multi-functional
protein involved in RNA processing and a large number of TDP-43 RNA targets have 
been discovered, the initial toxic effect and the pathogenic mechanism underlying
TDP-43-linked neurodegeneration remain elusive. In this study, we found that loss
of TDP-43 strongly induced a nuclear translocation of TFEB, the master regulator 
of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, through targeting the mTORC1 key component
raptor. This regulation in turn enhanced global gene expressions in the
autophagy-lysosome pathway (ALP) and increased autophagosomal and lysosomal
biogenesis. However, loss of TDP-43 also impaired the fusion of autophagosomes
with lysosomes through dynactin 1 downregulation, leading to accumulation of
immature autophagic vesicles and overwhelmed ALP function. Importantly,
inhibition of mTORC1 signaling by rapamycin treatment aggravated the
neurodegenerative phenotype in a TDP-43-depleted Drosophila model, whereas
activation of mTORC1 signaling by PA treatment ameliorated the neurodegenerative 
phenotype. Taken together, our data indicate that impaired mTORC1 signaling and
influenced ALP may contribute to TDP-43-mediated neurodegeneration.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4718457 [Available on 2017-01-18]
PMID: 26702100  [PubMed - in process]


19. J Med Case Rep. 2015 Dec 9;9:281. doi: 10.1186/s13256-015-0749-7.

Translocational renal cell carcinoma (t(6;11)(p21;q12) with transcription factor 
EB (TFEB) amplification and an integrated precision approach: a case report.

Lilleby W(1), Vlatkovic L(2), Meza-Zepeda LA(3,)(4), Revheim ME(5), Hovig
E(6,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, Nydalen, Postboks 4950,
0424, Oslo, Norway. wolfgang.lilleby@ous-hf.no. (2)Department of Pathology, Oslo 
University Hospital, Nydalen, Postboks 4950, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
ljiljana.vlatkovic@ous-hf.no. (3)Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for
Cancear Research, Oslo, Oslo University Hospital, Nydalen, Postboks 4950, 0424,
Oslo, Norway. Leonardo.Meza-Zepeda@rr-research.no. (4)Department of Core
Facilities, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Nydalen,
Postboks 4950, 0424, Oslo, Norway. Leonardo.Meza-Zepeda@rr-research.no.
(5)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Oslo University Hospital,
Nydalen, Postboks 4950, 0424, Oslo, Norway. monar@ous-hf.no. (6)Department of
Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, Nydalen, Postboks 4950, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
ehovig@ifi.uio.no. (7)Department of Cancer Genetics and Informatics, University
of Oslo, Oslo University Hospital, Nydalen, Postboks 4950, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
ehovig@ifi.uio.no. (8)Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Blindern,
Postboks 1080, 0316, Oslo, Norway. ehovig@ifi.uio.no.

INTRODUCTION: Renal cell carcinoma with the distinct type of t(6;11)(p21;q12)
translocation (transcription factor EB) is a rare neoplasm. In the present case
study, we show for the first time an autophagy signature in a patient with
transcription factor EB renal cell carcinoma. We attempted to characterize the
mutational and expressional features of a t(6;11)(p21;q12) renal cell carcinoma, 
in an effort to address the potential for molecular guidance of personalized
medical decision for a case in this renal cell carcinoma category.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a 42-year-old white man who had a late
relapse of his renal cell carcinoma. The first diagnosis of clear cell renal
carcinoma was derived from a histological examination; analyzing the metastasis
and going back to the primary tumor it turned out to be a transcription factor
EB-renal cell carcinoma. The treatment plan included local radiation and systemic
therapy. As part of the multimodal approach, tumor samples for genetic assessment
were obtained. However, there is no recommended standard therapy for
transcription factor EB-renal cell carcinoma. Despite four lines of medical
treatment with targeted therapy and one checkpoint inhibitor, all attempts to
prolong the patient's survival failed.
CONCLUSIONS: During the course of this unusual disease, we gained insights which,
to the best of our knowledge, were unknown before in the expression of the gene
signature linked to autophagy. This might in part explain the resistance to
conventional targeted therapy acknowledged in our patient.

PMCID: PMC4674949
PMID: 26654961  [PubMed - in process]


20. Pharmacol Res. 2016 Jan;103:144-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.11.011. Epub 2015 Nov
24.

PPARa in lysosomal biogenesis: A perspective.

Ghosh A(1), Pahan K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, United States. (2)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University
Medical Center, Chicago, IL, United States; Division of Research and Development,
Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 820 South Damen Avenue, Chicago,
IL,United States. Electronic address: Kalipada_Pahan@rush.edu.

Lysosomes are membrane-bound vesicles containing hydrolytic enzymes, ubiquitously
present in all eukaryotic cells. Classically considered to be central to the
cellular waste management machinery, recent studies revealed the role of
lysosomes in a wide array of cellular processes like, degradation, cellular
development, programmed cell death, secretion, plasma membrane repair,
nutritional responses, and lipid metabolism. We recently studied the regulation
of TFEB, considered to be the master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis, by
activation of peroxisomal proliferator activated receptor a (PPARa), one of the
key regulators of lipid metabolism. In this article, we discuss how the recent
finding could be put in to perspective with the previous findings that relate
lysosomal biogenesis to lipid metabolism, and comment on the possibility of a
bi-directional interplay between these two distinct cellular processes upon
activation of PPARa.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26621249  [PubMed - in process]


21. Elife. 2015 Nov 27;4. pii: e10616. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10616.

Intracellular sphingosine releases calcium from lysosomes.

Höglinger D(1), Haberkant P(1), Aguilera-Romero A(2), Riezman H(2), Porter FD(3),
Platt FM(4), Galione A(4), Schultz C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Biophysics Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Geneva, Geneva,
Switzerland. (3)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, United States.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

To elucidate new functions of sphingosine (Sph), we demonstrate that the
spontaneous elevation of intracellular Sph levels via caged Sph leads to a
significant and transient calcium release from acidic stores that is independent 
of sphingosine 1-phosphate, extracellular and ER calcium levels. This
photo-induced Sph-driven calcium release requires the two-pore channel 1 (TPC1)
residing on endosomes and lysosomes. Further, uncaging of Sph leads to the
translocation of the autophagy-relevant transcription factor EB (TFEB) to the
nucleus specifically after lysosomal calcium release. We confirm that Sph
accumulates in late endosomes and lysosomes of cells derived from Niemann-Pick
disease type C (NPC) patients and demonstrate a greatly reduced calcium release
upon Sph uncaging. We conclude that sphingosine is a positive regulator of
calcium release from acidic stores and that understanding the interplay between
Sph homeostasis, calcium signaling and autophagy will be crucial in developing
new therapies for lipid storage disorders such as NPC.

PMCID: PMC4744193
PMID: 26613410  [PubMed - in process]


22. Neuroscience. 2016 Jan 28;313:10-22. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.028.
Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Increase of transcription factor EB (TFEB) and lysosomes in rat DRG neurons and
their transportation to the central nerve terminal in dorsal horn after nerve
injury.

Jung J(1), Uesugi N(2), Jeong NY(3), Park BS(4), Konishi H(2), Kiyama H(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee
University, Heogi-Dong 1, Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea; Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) of the Japan Science and 
Technology Agency (JST), Saitama, Japan. (2)Department of Functional Anatomy &
Neuroscience, Nagoya University, Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumaicho,
Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional Science and
Technology (CREST) of the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Saitama,
Japan. (3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology and Mitochondria, Hub Regulation
Center, Dong-A University College of Medicine, 3-1 Dongdaesin-dong, Seo-gu, Busan
602-714, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, School of 
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Heogi-Dong 1, Dongdaemun-Gu, Seoul 130-701,
Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Functional Anatomy & Neuroscience, Nagoya
University, Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumaicho, Showa-ku, Nagoya
466-8550, Japan; Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST) of 
the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Saitama, Japan. Electronic
address: kiyama@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp.

In the spinal dorsal horn (DH), nerve injury activates microglia and induces
neuropathic pain. Several studies clarified an involvement of adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) in the microglial activation. However, the origin of ATP
together with the release mechanism is unclear. Recent in vitro study revealed
that an ATP marker, quinacrine, in lysosomes was released from neurite terminal
of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons to extracellular space via lysosomal
exocytosis. Here, we demonstrate a possibility that the lysosomal ingredient
including ATP released from DRG neurons by lysosomal-exocytosis is an additional 
source of the glial activation in DH after nerve injury. After rat L5 spinal
nerve ligation (SNL), mRNA for transcription factor EB (TFEB), a transcription
factor controlling lysosomal activation and exocytosis, was induced in the DRG.
Simultaneously both lysosomal protein, LAMP1- and vesicular nuclear transporter
(VNUT)-positive vesicles were increased in L5 DRG neurons and ipsilateral DH. The
quinacrine staining in DH was increased and co-localized with LAMP1
immunoreactivity after nerve injury. In DH, LAMP1-positive vesicles were also
co-localized with a peripheral nerve marker, Isolectin B4 (IB4) lectin. Injection
of the adenovirus encoding mCherry-LAMP1 into DRG showed that mCherry-positive
lysosomes are transported to the central nerve terminal in DH. These findings
suggest that activation of lysosome synthesis including ATP packaging in DRG, the
central transportation of the lysosome, and subsequent its exocytosis from the
central nerve terminal of DRG neurons in response to nerve injury could be a
partial mechanism for activation of microglia in DH. This lysosome-mediated
microglia activation mechanism may provide another clue to control nociception
and pain.

Copyright © 2015 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26601776  [PubMed - in process]


23. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):158-67. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2014.12.011. Epub
2015 Mar 9.

Role of farnesoid X receptor and bile acids in alcoholic liver disease.

Manley S(1), Ding W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, the University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is one of the major causes of liver morbidity and
mortality worldwide. Chronic alcohol consumption leads to development of liver
pathogenesis encompassing steatosis, inflammation, fibrosis, cirrhosis, and in
extreme cases, hepatocellular carcinoma. Moreover, ALD may also associate with
cholestasis. Emerging evidence now suggests that farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and
bile acids also play important roles in ALD. In this review, we discuss the
effects of alcohol consumption on FXR, bile acids and gut microbiome as well as
their impacts on ALD. Moreover, we summarize the findings on FXR, FoxO3a
(forkhead box-containing protein class O3a) and PPARa (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha) in regulation of autophagy-related gene
transcription program and liver injury in response to alcohol exposure.

PMCID: PMC4629219
PMID: 26579442  [PubMed]


24. Cell Microbiol. 2015 Nov 17. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12548. [Epub ahead of print]

Lysosome biogenesis/scattering increases host cell susceptibility to invasion by 
Trypanosoma cruzi metacyclic forms and resistance to tissue culture
trypomastigotes.

Cortez C(1), Real F(1), Yoshida N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Microbiologia, Imunologia e Parasitologia, Escola Paulista de 
Medicina, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, R. Pedro de Toledo, 669 - 6o andar, 
04039-032, São Paulo, SP, Brasil.

A fundamental question to be clarified concerning the host cell invasion by
Trypanosoma cruzi is whether the insect-borne and mammalian stage parasites use
similar mechanisms for invasion. To address that question, we analyzed the cell
invasion capacity of metacyclic trypomastigotes (MT) and tissue culture
trypomastigotes (TCT) under diverse conditions. Incubation of parasites for 1<U+2009>h
with HeLa cells in nutrient-deprived medium, a condition that triggered lysosome 
biogenesis and scattering, increased MT invasion and reduced TCT entry into
cells. Sucrose-induced lysosome biogenesis increased HeLa cell susceptibility to 
MT and resistance to TCT. Treatment of cells with rapamycin, which inhibits
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR), induced perinuclear lysosome accumulation
and reduced MT invasion while augmenting TCT invasion. MT, but not TCT, induced
mTOR dephosphorylation and the nuclear translocation of TFEB, a mTOR-associated
lysosome biogenesis regulator. Lysosome biogenesis/scattering was stimulated upon
HeLa cell interaction with MT but not with TCT. Recently internalized MT, but not
TCT, were surrounded by colocalized lysosome marker LAMP2 and mTOR. The
recombinant gp82 protein, the MT-specific surface molecule that mediates
invasion, induced mTOR dephosphorylation, nuclear TFEB translocation and lysosome
biogenesis/scattering. Taken together, our data clearly indicate that MT invasion
is mainly lysosome-dependent whereas TCT entry is predominantly
lysosome-independent.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26572924  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Autophagy. 2015 Nov;11(12):2383-4. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1110670.

Aneuploidy triggers a TFEB-mediated lysosomal stress response.

Santaguida S(1), Amon A(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT; Department of
Biology; Howard Hughes Medical Institute; Massachusetts Institute of Technology; 
Cambridge , MA USA.

Aneuploidy, defined as an alteration in chromosome number that is not a multiple 
of the haploid complement, severely affects cellular physiology. Changes in
chromosome number lead to imbalances in cellular protein composition, thus
disrupting cellular processes and causing proteins to misfold and aggregate. We
recently reported that in mammalian cells protein aggregates are readily
encapsulated within autophagosomes but are not degraded by lysosomes. This leads 
to a lysosomal stress response in which the transcription factor TFEB induces
expression of factors needed for macroautophagy-mediated protein degradation. Our
studies uncover lysosomal degradation defects as a feature of the aneuploid
state, and a role for the transcription factor TFEB in the response thereto.

PMID: 26571033  [PubMed - in process]


26. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2015 Dec;39(12):2354-63. doi: 10.1111/acer.12904. Epub 2015
Nov 11.

Acute and Chronic Ethanol Administration Differentially Modulate Hepatic
Autophagy and Transcription Factor EB.

Thomes PG(1,)(2), Trambly CS(1,)(2), Fox HS(3), Tuma DJ(1,)(2,)(4), Donohue TM
Jr(1,)(2,)(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Study Unit, Department of Veterans Affairs, VA Nebraska-Western Iowa
Health Care System (NWIHCS), Omaha, Nebraska. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, College of Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska. (4)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska. (5)Department of Pathology and Microbiology,
College of Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(6)The Center for Environmental Health and Toxicology, College of Public Health, 
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.

BACKGROUND: Chronic ethanol (EtOH) consumption decelerates the catabolism of
long-lived proteins, indicating that it slows hepatic macroautophagy (hereafter
called autophagy) a crucial lysosomal catabolic pathway in most eukaryotic cells.
Autophagy and lysosome biogenesis are linked. Both are regulated by the
transcription factor EB (TFEB). Here, we tested whether TFEB can be used as a
singular indicator of autophagic activity, by quantifying its nuclear content in 
livers of mice subjected to acute and chronic EtOH administration. We correlated 
nuclear TFEB to specific indices of autophagy.
METHODS: In acute experiments, we gavaged GFP-LC3(tg) mice with a single dose of 
EtOH or with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). We fed mice chronically by feeding 
them control or EtOH liquid diets.
RESULTS: Compared with PBS-gavaged controls, livers of EtOH-gavaged mice
exhibited greater autophagosome (AV) numbers, a higher incidence of AV-lysosome
co-localization, and elevated levels of free GFP, all indicating enhanced
autophagy, which correlated with a higher nuclear content of TFEB. Compared with 
pair-fed controls, livers of EtOH-fed mice exhibited higher AV numbers, but had
lower lysosome numbers, lower AV-lysosome co-localization, higher P62/SQSTM1
levels, and lower free GFP levels. The latter findings correlated with lower
nuclear TFEB levels in EtOH-fed mice. Thus, enhanced autophagy after acute EtOH
gavage correlated with a higher nuclear TFEB content. Conversely, chronic EtOH
feeding inhibited hepatic autophagy, associated with a lower nuclear TFEB
content.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the effect of acute EtOH gavage on hepatic
autophagy differs significantly from that after chronic EtOH feeding. Each
regimen distinctly affects TFEB localization, which in turn, regulates hepatic
autophagy and lysosome biogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 26556759  [PubMed - in process]


27. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Sep 15;7(9):1574-87. eCollection 2015.

The altered autophagy mediated by TFEB in animal and cell models of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis.

Chen Y(1), Liu H(2), Guan Y(3), Wang Q(4), Zhou F(5), Jie L(3), Ju J(3), Pu L(3),
Du H(3), Wang X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Weifang Medical University Weifang,
Shandong, PR China ; Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery,
Clinical College, Weifang Medical University Weifang, Shandong, PR China.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Weifang Medical University Weifang,
Shandong, PR China. (4)Department of Human Anatomy, Weifang Medical University
Weifang, Shandong, PR China. (5)Department of Pathology, Weifang Medical
University Weifang, Shandong, PR China. (6)Department of Neurosurgery, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School Boston, MA, USA.

Autophagy is an intracellular degradation process that clears away aggregated
proteins or aged and damaged organelles. Abnormalities in autophagy result in
defects in clearance of these misfolded and aggregate proteins, which have been
associated with neurodegenerative disorders. A key neuropathological hallmark of 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) that contributes to the progressive loss of
motor neurons is abnormal protein aggregation of mutant Cu/Zn superoxide
dismutase1 (SOD1). TFEB is a recently described gene that regulates autophagy.
Several studies have reported that autophagy is altered in ALS, but little is
known about the role and mechanisms of TFEB-mediated autophagy during the
progression of ALS. In this study, altered expression of TFEB and Beclin-1 were
detected in the spinal cords of ALS transgenic mice at different stages and in an
NSC-34 cell model with the SOD1-G93A mutation using RT-PCR, western blot, and
immunohistochemistry. The majority of cells positive for TFEB and Beclin-1 are
ß-tubulin III-labeled neurons, especially in the anterior horn of the gray
matter. Overexpression of TFEB in NSC-34 cells with the SOD1-G93A mutation
increased the mRNA and protein levels of Beclin-1, accompanied by increased
levels of LC3-II protein. MTS assay revealed that TFEB overexpression increased
proliferation and survival of NSC-34 cells with the SOD1-G93A mutation. Our
findings suggest that TFEB promotes autophagy by enhancing the expression of
Beclin-1. The altered autophagy mediated by TFEB is a key element in the
pathogenesis of ALS, making TFEB a very promising target for the development of
novel drugs and new gene therapeutics for ALS.

PMCID: PMC4626419
PMID: 26550457  [PubMed]


28. J Cell Physiol. 2016 Jun;231(6):1321-33. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25235. Epub 2015 Nov
20.

The Transcription Factor EB (TFEB) Regulates Osteoblast Differentiation Through
ATF4/CHOP-Dependent Pathway.

Yoneshima E(1,)(2), Okamoto K(1), Sakai E(1), Nishishita K(1), Yoshida N(2),
Tsukuba T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dental Pharmacology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan. (2)Division of Orthodontics and Dentofacial
Orthopedics, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University,
Nagasaki, Japan.

Osteoblasts are bone-forming cells that produce large amounts of collagen type I 
and various bone matrix proteins. Although osteoblast differentiation is highly
regulated by various factors, it remains unknown whether lysosomes are directly
involved in osteoblast differentiation. Here, we demonstrate the transcription
factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis, modulates
osteoblast differentiation. The expression levels of TFEB as well as those of
endosomal/lysosomal proteins were up-regulated during osteoblast differentiation 
using mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. By gene knockdown (KD) experiments with 
small interfering RNA (siRNA), TFEB depletion caused markedly reduced osteoblast 
differentiation as compared with the control cells. Conversely, overexpression
(OE) of TFEB resulted in strikingly enhanced osteoblastogenesis compared to the
control cells. By analysis of down-stream effector molecules, TFEB KD was found
to cause marked up-regulation of activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein homologous protein (CHOP), both of which are
essential factors for osteoblastogenesis. In contrast, TFEB OE promoted
osteoblast differentiation through reduced expression of ATF4 and CHOP without
differentiation agents. Given the importance of ATF4 and CHOP in
osteoblastogenesis, it is clear that the TFEB-regulated signaling pathway for
osteoblast differentiation is involved in ATF4/CHOP-dependent signaling pathway. 
J. Cell. Physiol. 231: 1321-1333, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26519689  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Neurochem. 2015 Oct 28. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13412. [Epub ahead of print]

Mitochondrial and lysosomal biogenesis are activated following
PINK1/parkin-mediated mitophagy.

Ivankovic D(1), Chau KY(1), Schapira AH(1), Gegg ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

Impairment of the autophagy-lysosome pathway (ALP) is implicated with the changes
in a-synuclein and mitochondrial dysfunction observed in Parkinson's disease
(PD). Damaged mitochondria accumulate PINK1, which then recruits parkin,
resultingin ubiquitination of mitochondrial proteins. These can then be bound by 
the autophagic proteins p62/SQSTM1 and LC3, resulting in degradation of
mitochondria by mitophagy. Mutations in PINK1 and parkin genes are a cause of
familial PD. We found a significant increase in the expression of p62/SQSTM1 mRNA
and protein following mitophagy induction in human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cells.
p62 protein not only accumulated on mitochondria, but was also greatly increased 
in the cytosol. Increased p62/SQSMT1 expression was prevented in PINK1 knock down
(KD) cells, suggesting increased p62 expression was a consequence of mitophagy
induction. The transcription factors Nrf2 and TFEB, which play roles in
mitochondrial and lysosomal biogenesis, respectively, can regulate p62/SQSMT1. We
report that both Nrf2 and TFEB translocate to the nucleus following mitophagy
induction and that the increase in p62 mRNA levels was significantly impaired in 
cells with Nrf2 or TFEB KD.. TFEB translocation also increased expression of
itself and lysosomal proteins such as glucocerebrosidase and cathepsin D
following mitophagy induction. We also report that cells with increased TFEB
protein have significantly higher PGC-1a mRNA levels, a regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis, resulting in increased mitochondrial content. Our data 
suggests that TFEB is activated following mitophagy to maintain ALP and
mitochondrial biogenesis. Therefore strategies to increase TFEB may improve both 
the clearance of a-synuclein and mitochondrial dysfunction in PD. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26509433  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 27;6:8620. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9620.

Pharmaceutical screen identifies novel target processes for activation of
autophagy with a broad translational potential.

Chauhan S(1), Ahmed Z(2), Bradfute SB(1), Arko-Mensah J(1), Mandell MA(1), Won
Choi S(1), Kimura T(1), Blanchet F(2), Waller A(3), Mudd MH(1), Jiang S(1), Sklar
L(3), Timmins GS(4), Maphis N(1), Bhaskar K(1,)(5), Piguet V(2), Deretic
V(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, School of Medicine,
University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA. (2)Cardiff Institute of Infection &Immunity, 
Cardiff University, School of Medicine, Henry Wellcome Building, Heath Park CF14 
4XN, Cardiff, UK. (3)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of
New Mexico Health Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, New
Mexico 87131, USA. (4)College of Pharmacy, University of New Mexico Health
Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of New Mexico Health
Sciences Center, 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131, USA.

Autophagy is a conserved homeostatic process active in all human cells and
affecting a spectrum of diseases. Here we use a pharmaceutical screen to discover
new mechanisms for activation of autophagy. We identify a subset of
pharmaceuticals inducing autophagic flux with effects in diverse cellular systems
modelling specific stages of several human diseases such as HIV transmission and 
hyperphosphorylated tau accumulation in Alzheimer's disease. One drug,
flubendazole, is a potent inducer of autophagy initiation and flux by affecting
acetylated and dynamic microtubules in a reciprocal way. Disruption of dynamic
microtubules by flubendazole results in mTOR deactivation and dissociation from
lysosomes leading to TFEB (transcription factor EB) nuclear translocation and
activation of autophagy. By inducing microtubule acetylation, flubendazole
activates JNK1 leading to Bcl-2 phosphorylation, causing release of Beclin1 from 
Bcl-2-Beclin1 complexes for autophagy induction, thus uncovering a new approach
to inducing autophagic flux that may be applicable in disease treatment.

PMCID: PMC4624223
PMID: 26503418  [PubMed - in process]


31. PeerJ. 2015 Oct 6;3:e1314. doi: 10.7717/peerj.1314. eCollection 2015.

Autophagic flux inhibition and lysosomogenesis ensuing cellular capture and
retention of the cationic drug quinacrine in murine models.

Parks A(1), Charest-Morin X(1), Boivin-Welch M(1), Bouthillier J(1), Marceau
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center CHU de Québec, Université Laval , Quebec City QC , Canada.

The proton pump vacuolar (V)-ATPase is the driving force that mediates the
concentration of cationic drugs (weak bases) in the late endosome-lysosome
continuum; secondary cell reactions include the protracted transformation of
enlarged vacuoles into autophagosomes. We used the inherently fluorescent
tertiary amine quinacrine in murine models to further assess the accumulation and
signaling associated with cation trapping. Primary fibroblasts concentrate
quinacrine ~5,000-fold from their culture medium (KM 9.8 µM; transport studies). 
The drug is present in perinuclear granules that are mostly positive for Rab7 and
LAMP1 (microscopy). Both drug uptake and retention are extensively inhibited by
treatments with the V-ATPase inhibitor bafilomycin A1. The H(+) ionophore
monensin also prevented quinacrine concentration by fibroblasts. However,
inhibition of plasma membrane transporters or of the autophagic process with
spautin-1 did not alter quinacrine transport parameters. Ancillary experiments
did not support that low micromolar concentrations of quinacrine are substrates
for organic cation transporters-1 to -3 or P-glycoprotein. The secondary
autophagy induced by quinacrine in cells may derive from the accumulation of
incompetent autophagolysosomes, as judged from the accumulation of p62/SQSTM1 and
LC3 II (immunoblots). Accordingly, protracted lysosomogenesis is evidenced by
increased expression of LAMP1 and LAMP2 in quinacrine-treated fibroblasts (48 h, 
immunoblots), a response that follows the nuclear translocation of the lysosomal 
genesis transcription factor TFEB and upregulation of LAMP1 and -2 mRNAs (24 h). 
Quinacrine administration to live mice evidenced variable distribution to various
organs and heterogeneous accumulation within the lung (stereo-microscopy,
extraction). Dose-dependent in vivo autophagic and lysosomal accumulation was
observed in the lung (immunoblots). No evidence has been found for transport or
extrusion mechanisms modulating the cellular uptake of micromolar quinacrine at
the plasma membrane level. As shown in vitro and in vivo, V-ATPase-mediated
cation sequestration is associated, above a certain threshold, to autophagic flux
inhibition and feed-back lysosomogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4614855
PMID: 26500823  [PubMed]


32. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 11;290(50):29742-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.691253. Epub
2015 Oct 22.

Enhancing Autophagy with Drugs or Lung-directed Gene Therapy Reverses the
Pathological Effects of Respiratory Epithelial Cell Proteinopathy.

Hidvegi T(1), Stolz DB(2), Alcorn JF(1), Yousem SA(3), Wang J(4), Leme AS(5),
Houghton AM(5), Hale P(1), Ewing M(1), Cai H(1), Garchar EA(1), Pastore N(6),
Annunziata P(6), Kaminski N(5), Pilewski J(5), Shapiro SD(5), Pak SC(1),
Silverman GA(7), Brunetti-Pierri N(8), Perlmutter DH(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224. (2)Cell Biology, and. (3)Pathology University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine and. (4)From the Departments of Pediatrics.
(5)Medicine. (6)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University,
Naples, Italy, 80138. (7)From the Departments of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital 
of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, Cell Biology, and.
(8)Department of Translational Medicine, Federico II University, Naples, Italy,
80138 Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy,
80131, and. (9)From the Departments of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15224, Cell Biology, and
david.perlmutter@chp.edu.

Recent studies have shown that autophagy mitigates the pathological effects of
proteinopathies in the liver, heart, and skeletal muscle but this has not been
investigated for proteinopathies that affect the lung. This may be due at least
in part to the lack of an animal model robust enough for spontaneous pathological
effects from proteinopathies even though several rare proteinopathies, surfactant
protein A and C deficiencies, cause severe pulmonary fibrosis. In this report we 
show that the PiZ mouse, transgenic for the common misfolded variant
a1-antitrypsin Z, is a model of respiratory epithelial cell proteinopathy with
spontaneous pulmonary fibrosis. Intracellular accumulation of misfolded
a1-antitrypsin Z in respiratory epithelial cells of the PiZ model resulted in
activation of autophagy, leukocyte infiltration, and spontaneous pulmonary
fibrosis severe enough to elicit functional restrictive deficits. Treatment with 
autophagy enhancer drugs or lung-directed gene transfer of TFEB, a master
transcriptional activator of the autophagolysosomal system, reversed these
proteotoxic consequences. We conclude that this mouse is an excellent model of
respiratory epithelial proteinopathy with spontaneous pulmonary fibrosis and that
autophagy is an important endogenous proteostasis mechanism and an attractive
target for therapy.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4705969 [Available on 2016-12-11]
PMID: 26494620  [PubMed - in process]


33. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2015 Oct;139(10):1224-33. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2015-0196-RA.

MiT Family Translocation-Associated Renal Cell Carcinoma: A Contemporary Update
With Emphasis on Morphologic, Immunophenotypic, and Molecular Mimics.

Magers MJ(1), Udager AM, Mehra R.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology (Drs Magers, Udager, and Mehra), and the
Comprehensive Cancer Center (Dr Mehra), University of Michigan Health System, Ann
Arbor; and the Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor (Dr Mehra).

Translocation-associated renal cell carcinoma (t-RCC) is a relatively uncommon
subtype of renal cell carcinoma characterized by recurrent gene rearrangements
involving the TFE3 or TFEB loci. TFE3 and TFEB are members of the microphthalmia 
transcription factor (MiT) family, which regulates differentiation in melanocytes
and osteoclasts, and MiT family gene fusions activate unique molecular programs
that can be detected immunohistochemically. Although the overall clinical
behavior of t-RCC is variable, emerging molecular data suggest the possibility of
targeted approaches to advanced disease. Thus, distinguishing t-RCC from its
morphologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular mimics may have important clinical
implications. The differential diagnosis for t-RCC includes a variety of common
renal neoplasms, particularly those demonstrating clear cell and papillary
features; in addition, because of immunophenotypic overlap and/or shared
molecular abnormalities (ie, TFE3 gene rearrangement), a distinctive set of
nonepithelial renal tumors may also warrant consideration. Directed ancillary
testing is an essential aspect to the workup of t-RCC cases and may include a
panel of immunohistochemical stains, such as PAX8, pancytokeratins, epithelial
membrane antigen, carbonic anhydrase IX, HMB-45, and Melan-A. Dual-color,
break-apart fluorescent in situ hybridization for TFE3 or TFEB gene rearrangement
may be helpful in diagnostically challenging cases or when molecular confirmation
is needed.

PMID: 26414466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Genes Dev. 2015 Oct 1;29(19):2010-21. doi: 10.1101/gad.269118.115. Epub 2015 Sep 
24.

Aneuploidy-induced cellular stresses limit autophagic degradation.

Santaguida S(1), Vasile E(2), White E(3), Amon A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA;
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA; (2)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer
Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, 
USA; (3)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers, The State University of 
New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey 08903-2681 USA.

An unbalanced karyotype, a condition known as aneuploidy, has a profound impact
on cellular physiology and is a hallmark of cancer. Aneuploid cells experience a 
number of stresses that are caused by aneuploidy-induced proteomic changes. How
the aneuploidy-associated stresses affect cells and whether cells respond to them
are only beginning to be understood. Here we show that autophagosomal cargo such 
as protein aggregates accumulate within lysosomes in aneuploid cells. This causes
a lysosomal stress response. Aneuploid cells activate the transcription factor
TFEB, a master regulator of autophagic and lysosomal gene expression, thereby
increasing the expression of genes needed for autophagy-mediated protein
degradation. Accumulation of autophagic cargo within the lysosome and activation 
of TFEB-responsive genes are also observed in cells in which proteasome function 
is inhibited, suggesting that proteotoxic stress causes TFEB activation. Our
results reveal a TFEB-mediated lysosomal stress response as a universal feature
of the aneuploid state.

© 2015 Santaguida et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4604343
PMID: 26404941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Autophagy. 2015 Nov 2;11(11):1987-1997.

NR1D1 ameliorates Mycobacterium tuberculosis clearance through regulation of
autophagy.

Chandra V(1), Bhagyaraj E(1), Nanduri R(1), Ahuja N(1), Gupta P(1).

Author information: 
(1)a CSIR- Institute of Microbial Technology ; Chandigarh , India.

NR1D1 (nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group D, member 1), an adopted orphan
nuclear receptor, is widely known to orchestrate the expression of genes involved
in various biological processes such as adipogenesis, skeletal muscle
differentiation, and lipid and glucose metabolism. Emerging evidence suggests
that various members of the nuclear receptor superfamily perform a decisive role 
in the modulation of autophagy. Recently, NR1D1 has been implicated in augmenting
the antimycobacterial properties of macrophages and providing protection against 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection by downregulating the expression of the IL10
gene in human macrophages. This antiinfective property of NR1D1 suggests the need
for an improved understanding of its role in other host-associated
antimycobacterial pathways. The results presented here demonstrate that in human 
macrophages either ectopic expression of NR1D1 or treatment with its agonist,
GSK4112, enhanced the number of acidic vacuoles as well as the level of
MAP1LC3-II, a signature molecule for determination of autophagy progression, in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner. Conversely, a decrease in NR1D1 in
knockdown cells resulted in the reduced expression of lysosomal-associated
membrane protein 1, LAMP1, commensurate with a decrease in the level of
transcription factor EB, TFEB. This is indicative of that NR1D1 may have a
regulatory role in lysosome biogenesis. NR1D1 being a repressor, its positive
regulation on LAMP1 and TFEB is suggestive of an indirect byzantine mechanism of 
action. Its role in the modulation of autophagy and lysosome biogenesis together 
with its ability to repress IL10 gene expression supports the theory that NR1D1
has a pivotal antimycobacterial function in human macrophages.

PMID: 26390081  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. J Neurosci. 2015 Sep 16;35(37):12833-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0109-15.2015.

Mitochondrial Quality Control via the PGC1a-TFEB Signaling Pathway Is Compromised
by Parkin Q311X Mutation But Independently Restored by Rapamycin.

Siddiqui A(1), Bhaumik D(1), Chinta SJ(1), Rane A(1), Rajagopalan S(1), Lieu
CA(1), Lithgow GJ(1), Andersen JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California 94945. (2)Buck
Institute for Research on Aging, Novato, California 94945
jandersen@buckinstitute.org.

Following its activation by PINK1, parkin is recruited to depolarized
mitochondria where it ubiquitinates outer mitochondrial membrane proteins,
initiating lysosomal-mediated degradation of these organelles. Mutations in the
gene encoding parkin, PARK2, result in both familial and sporadic forms of
Parkinson's disease (PD) in conjunction with reductions in removal of damaged
mitochondria. In contrast to what has been reported for other PARK2 mutations,
expression of the Q311X mutation in vivo in mice appears to involve a downstream 
step in the autophagic pathway at the level of lysosomal function. This coincides
with increased PARIS expression and reduced expression of a reciprocal signaling 
pathway involving the master mitochondrial regulator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator (PGC1a) and the lysosomal
regulator transcription factor EB (TFEB). Treatment with rapamycin was found to
independently restore PGC1a-TFEB signaling in a manner not requiring parkin
activity and to abrogate impairment of mitochondrial quality control and
neurodegenerative features associated with this in vivo model. Losses in
PGC1a-TFEB signaling in cultured rat DAergic cells expressing the Q311X mutation 
associated with reduced mitochondrial function and cell viability were found to
be PARIS-dependent and to be independently restored by rapamycin in a manner
requiring TFEB. Studies in human iPSC-derived neurons demonstrate that TFEB
induction can restore mitochondrial function and cell viability in a
mitochondrially compromised human cell model. Based on these data, we propose
that the parkin Q311X mutation impacts on mitochondrial quality control via
PARIS-mediated regulation of PGC1a-TFEB signaling and that this can be
independently restored via upregulation of TFEB function.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: 
Mutations in PARK2 are generally associated with loss in ability to interact with
PINK1, impacting on autophagic initiation. Our data suggest that, in the case of 
at least one parkin mutation, Q311X, detrimental effects are due to inhibition at
the level of downstream lysosomal function. Mechanistically, this involves
elevations in PARIS protein levels and subsequent effects on PGC1a-TFEB signaling
that normally regulates mitochondrial quality control. Treatment with rapamycin
independently restores PGC1a-TFEB signaling in a manner not requiring parkin
activity and abrogates subsequent mitochondrial impairment and neuronal cell
loss. Taken in total, our data suggest that the parkin Q311X mutation impacts on 
mitochondrial quality control via PARIS-mediated regulation of PGC1a-TFEB
signaling and that this can be independently restored via rapamycin.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3512833-12$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4571606
PMID: 26377470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Nov;34(11):661-8. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2738. Epub 2015 Sep
14.

TFEB Participates in the Aß-Induced Pathogenesis of Alzheimer's Disease by
Regulating the Autophagy-Lysosome Pathway.

Zhang YD(1), Zhao JJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Encephalopathy Therapy Area, The Affiliated Hospital of Changchun University
of Chinese Medicine , Changchun Jilin, People's Republic of China .

To investigate whether transcriptional factor EB (TFEB) participates in
amyloid-ß(1-42) (Aß(1-42))-induced pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and
its underlying mechanisms. Three-month-old and 8-month-old transgenic APP/PS1 AD 
mice and age-matched wild mice were used in this study. We found that the
8-month-old AD animals presented significantly higher deposition of Aß(1-42) and 
expression of TFEB and its targeted proteins, such as LAMP-1 and cathepsin D, and
autophagy-associated LC3-II and p62 in brain tissues than in others. In an in
vitro study, TFEB overexpression rescued autophagic flux that blocked by Aß(1-42)
and the degradation of the absorbed Aß(1-42), relieved Aß(1-42)-mediated
induction of overloaded autophagy. In addition, TFEB overexpression enhanced
cathepsin D expression and activity, restored Aß(1-42)-disturbed acid environment
of lysosome, and promoted the fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes.
Furthermore, TFEB upregulation reduced Aß(1-42)-induced production of
malondialdehyde, oxidative carbonyl proteins, and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
and cell apoptosis mainly dependent on the removal of Aß(1-42) by the
autophagy-lysosome pathway. TFEB overexpression alleviated AD progression by
reducing Aß accumulation through regulating the autophagy-lysosome pathway and
reducing Aß-induced ROS production and cell apoptosis.

PMID: 26368054  [PubMed - in process]


38. No To Hattatsu. 2015 Mar;47(2):122-4.

[Pompe disease treatable by enzyme replacement therapy and the underlying
autophagic dysfunction].

[Article in Japanese]

Fukuda T.

PMID: 26349370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Biochem J. 2015 Sep 1;470(2):207-21. doi: 10.1042/BJ20150404. Epub 2015 Jul 9.

GSK3-mediated raptor phosphorylation supports amino-acid-dependent
mTORC1-directed signalling.

Stretton C(1), Hoffmann TM(1), Munson MJ(2), Prescott A(1), Taylor PM(1), Ganley 
IG(2), Hundal HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Signalling & Immunology, James Black Centre, College of Life 
Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, U.K. (2)MRC Protein
Phosphorylation Unit, James Black Centre, College of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, U.K. (3)Division of Cell Signalling & Immunology, James
Black Centre, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH,
U.K. h.s.hundal@dundee.ac.uk.

The mammalian or mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) is a
ubiquitously expressed multimeric protein kinase complex that integrates nutrient
and growth factor signals for the co-ordinated regulation of cellular metabolism 
and cell growth. Herein, we demonstrate that suppressing the cellular activity of
glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3), by use of pharmacological inhibitors or
shRNA-mediated gene silencing, results in substantial reduction in amino acid
(AA)-regulated mTORC1-directed signalling, as assessed by phosphorylation of
multiple downstream mTORC1 targets. We show that GSK3 regulates mTORC1 activity
through its ability to phosphorylate the mTOR-associated scaffold protein raptor 
(regulatory-associated protein of mTOR) on Ser(859). We further demonstrate that 
either GSK3 inhibition or expression of a S859A mutated raptor leads to reduced
interaction between mTOR and raptor and under these circumstances, irrespective
of AA availability, there is a consequential loss in phosphorylation of mTOR
substrates, such as p70S6K1 (ribosomal S6 kinase 1) and uncoordinated-51-like
kinase (ULK1), which results in increased autophagic flux and reduced cellular
proliferation.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMCID: PMC4652938
PMID: 26348909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Neurosci. 2015 Sep 2;35(35):12137-51. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0705-15.2015.

Neuronal-Targeted TFEB Accelerates Lysosomal Degradation of APP, Reducing Aß
Generation and Amyloid Plaque Pathogenesis.

Xiao Q(1), Yan P(1), Ma X(2), Liu H(2), Perez R(1), Zhu A(1), Gonzales E(1),
Tripoli DL(1), Czerniewski L(1), Ballabio A(3), Cirrito JR(1), Diwan A(4), Lee
JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders.
(2)Center for Cardiovascular Research in Department of Medicine, and John Cochran
VA Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, and. (3)Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli, Naples, Italy 80078. (4)Center for
Cardiovascular Research in Department of Medicine, and Department of Cell Biology
and Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
63110, John Cochran VA Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63108, and
leejm@wustl.edu adiwan@dom.wustl.edu. (5)Department of Neurology and the Hope
Center for Neurological Disorders, leejm@wustl.edu adiwan@dom.wustl.edu.

In AD, an imbalance between Aß production and removal drives elevated brain Aß
levels and eventual amyloid plaque deposition. APP undergoes nonamyloidogenic
processing via a-cleavage at the plasma membrane, amyloidogenic ß- and <U+03B3>-cleavage
within endosomes to generate Aß, or lysosomal degradation in neurons. Considering
multiple reports implicating impaired lysosome function as a driver of increased 
amyloidogenic processing of APP, we explored the efficacy of targeting
transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal pathways, to
reduce Aß levels. CMV promoter-driven TFEB, transduced via stereotactic
hippocampal injections of adeno-associated virus particles in APP/PS1 mice,
localized primarily to neuronal nuclei and upregulated lysosome biogenesis. This 
resulted in reduction of APP protein, the a and ß C-terminal APP fragments
(CTFs), and in the steady-state Aß levels in the brain interstitial fluid. In
aged mice, total Aß levels and amyloid plaque load were selectively reduced in
the TFEB-transduced hippocampi. TFEB transfection in N2a cells stably expressing 
APP695, stimulated lysosome biogenesis, reduced steady-state levels of APP and a-
and ß-CTFs, and attenuated Aß generation by accelerating flux through the
endosome-lysosome pathway. Cycloheximide chase assays revealed a shortening of
APP half-life with exogenous TFEB expression, which was prevented by concomitant 
inhibition of lysosomal acidification. These data indicate that TFEB enhances
flux through lysosomal degradative pathways to induce APP degradation and reduce 
Aß generation. Activation of TFEB in neurons is an effective strategy to
attenuate Aß generation and attenuate amyloid plaque deposition in
AD.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: A key driver for AD pathogenesis is the net balance
between production and clearance of Aß, the major component of amyloid plaques.
Here we demonstrate that lysosomal degradation of holo-APP influences Aß
production by limiting the availability of APP for amyloidogenic processing.
Using viral gene transfer of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator
of lysosome biogenesis in neurons of APP/PS1 mice, steady-state levels of APP
were reduced, resulting in decreased interstitial fluid Aß levels and attenuated 
amyloid deposits. These effects were caused by accelerated lysosomal degradation 
of endocytosed APP, reflected by reduced APP half-life and steady-state levels in
TFEB-expressing cells, with resultant decrease in Aß production and release.
Additional studies are needed to explore the therapeutic potential of this
approach.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3512137-15$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4556784
PMID: 26338325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Nat Rev Urol. 2015 Oct;12(10):558-69. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2015.206. Epub 2015 Sep
1.

Molecular genetics and clinical features of Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome.

Schmidt LS(1), Linehan WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 10, CRC Room 15940, Bethesda, 
MD 20892-1107, USA.

Birt-Hogg-Dubé (BHD) syndrome is an inherited renal cancer syndrome in which
affected individuals are at risk of developing benign cutaneous
fibrofolliculomas, bilateral pulmonary cysts and spontaneous pneumothoraces, and 
kidney tumours. Bilateral multifocal renal tumours that develop in BHD syndrome
are most frequently hybrid oncocytic tumours and chromophobe renal carcinoma, but
can present with other histologies. Germline mutations in the FLCN gene on
chromosome 17 are responsible for BHD syndrome--BHD-associated renal tumours
display inactivation of the wild-type FLCN allele by somatic mutation or
chromosomal loss, confirming that FLCN is a tumour suppressor gene that fits the 
classic two-hit model. FLCN interacts with two novel proteins, FNIP1 and FNIP2,
and with AMPK, a negative regulator of mTOR. Studies with FLCN-deficient cell and
animal models support a role for FLCN in modulating the AKT-mTOR pathway.
Emerging evidence links FLCN with a number of other molecular pathways and
cellular processes important for cell homeostasis that are frequently deregulated
in cancer, including regulation of TFE3 and/or TFEB transcriptional activity,
amino-acid-dependent mTOR activation through Rag GTPases, TGFß signalling,
PGC1a-driven mitochondrial biogenesis, and autophagy. Currently, surgical
intervention is the only therapy available for BHD-associated renal tumours, but 
improved understanding of the FLCN pathway will hopefully lead to the development
of effective forms of targeted systemic therapy for this disease.

PMID: 26334087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:955-73. eCollection 2015.

Chromatin features, RNA polymerase II and the comparative expression of lens
genes encoding crystallins, transcription factors, and autophagy mediators.

Sun J(1), Rockowitz S(2), Chauss D(3), Wang P(4), Kantorow M(3), Zheng D(5),
Cvekl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (2)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY. (3)Department of Biomedical Science, Florida Atlantic
University, Boca Raton, FL. (4)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, NY. (5)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY ; Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY.

PURPOSE: Gene expression correlates with local chromatin structure. Our studies
have mapped histone post-translational modifications, RNA polymerase II (pol II),
and transcription factor Pax6 in lens chromatin. These data represent the first
genome-wide insights into the relationship between lens chromatin structure and
lens transcriptomes and serve as an excellent source for additional data analysis
and refinement. The principal lens proteins, the crystallins, are encoded by
predominantly expressed mRNAs; however, the regulatory mechanisms underlying
their high expression in the lens remain poorly understood.
METHODS: The formaldehyde-assisted identification of regulatory regions
(FAIRE-Seq) was employed to analyze newborn lens chromatin. ChIP-seq and RNA-seq 
data published earlier (GSE66961) have been used to assist in FAIRE-seq data
interpretation. RNA transcriptomes from murine lens epithelium, lens fibers,
erythrocytes, forebrain, liver, neurons, and pancreas were compared to establish 
the gene expression levels of the most abundant mRNAs versus median gene
expression across other differentiated cells.
RESULTS: Normalized RNA expression data from multiple tissues show that
crystallins rank among the most highly expressed genes in mammalian cells. These 
findings correlate with the extremely high abundance of pol II all across the
crystallin loci, including crystallin genes clustered on chromosomes 1 and 5, as 
well as within regions of "open" chromatin, as identified by FAIRE-seq. The
expression levels of mRNAs encoding DNA-binding transcription factors (e.g.,
Foxe3, Hsf4, Maf, Pax6, Prox1, Sox1, and Tfap2a) revealed that their transcripts 
form "clusters" of abundant mRNAs in either lens fibers or lens epithelium. The
expression of three autophagy regulatory mRNAs, encoding Tfeb, FoxO1, and Hif1a, 
was found within a group of lens preferentially expressed transcription factors
compared to the E12.5 forebrain.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals novel features of lens chromatin, including the
remarkably high abundance of pol II at the crystallin loci that exhibit features 
of "open" chromatin. Hsf4 ranks among the most abundant fiber cell-preferred
DNA-binding transcription factors. Notable transcripts, including Atf4, Ctcf,
E2F4, Hey1, Hmgb1, Mycn, RXRß, Smad4, Sp1, and Taf1 (transcription factors) and
Ctsd, Gabarapl1, and Park7 (autophagy regulators) have been identified with high 
levels of expression in lens fibers, which suggests specific roles in lens fiber 
cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4551281
PMID: 26330747  [PubMed - in process]


43. Autophagy. 2015 Oct 3;11(10):1760-74. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1082021.

TMBIM6 (transmembrane BAX inhibitor motif containing 6) enhances autophagy and
reduces renal dysfunction in a cyclosporine A-induced nephrotoxicity model.

Yadav RK(1), Lee GH(1), Lee HY(1), Li B(1), Jung HE(1), Rashid HO(1), Choi MK(1),
Yadav BK(2), Kim WH(3), Kim KW(4), Park BH(5), Kim W(6), Lee YC(6), Kim HR(7),
Chae HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pharmacology and Institute of New Drug Development, Chonbuk
National University Medical School ; Jeonju , Chonbuk , Korea. (2)b Department of
Biochemistry, Maharajgunj Medical Campus; Institute of Medicine; Tribhuvan
University ; Kathmandu , Nepal. (3)c Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University Medical School ; Seoul , Korea. (4)d Animal Biotechnology Division;
National Institute of Animal Science ; RDA, Wanju-gun; Chonbuk , Korea. (5)e
Department of Biochemistry, Chonbuk National University Medical School ; Jeonju ,
Chonbuk , Korea. (6)f Department of Internal Medicine, Chonbuk National
University Medical School ; Jeonju , Jeonbuk , Korea. (7)g Department of Dental
Pharmacology and Wonkwang Biomaterial Implant Research Institute, School of
Dentistry, Wonkwang University ; Iksan , Chonbuk , Korea.

Cyclosporine A (CsA) is widely used as an immunosuppressor in transplantation.
Previous studies reported that CsA induces autophagy and that chronic treatment
with CsA results in accumulation of autophagosomes and reduced autophagic
clearance. Autophagy is a prosurvival process that promotes recovery from acute
kidney injury by degrading misfolded proteins produced in the kidney. In the
present study, we used TMBIM6-expressing HK-2, human kidney tubular cells (TMBIM6
cells) and Tmbim6 knockout (tmbim6(-/-)) mice. When exposed to CsA, the TMBIM6
cells maintained autophagy activity by preventing autophagosome accumulation.
With regard to signaling, PRKKA/AMPK phosphorylation and mechanistic target of
rapamycin (serine/threonine kinase) complex 1 (MTORC1) expression and its
downstream target TFEB (transcription factor EB), a lysosome biogenesis factor,
were regulated in the TMBIM6 cells. Lysosomal activity was highly increased or
stably maintained in the presence of TMBIM6. In addition, treatment of
tmbim6(-/-) mice with CsA resulted in increased autophagosome formation and
decreased lysosome formation and activity. We also found that tmbim6(-/-) mice
were susceptible to CsA-induced kidney injury. Taken together, these results
indicate that TMBIM6 protects against CsA-induced nephrotoxicity both in vitro
and in vivo by inducing autophagy and activating lysosomes.

PMID: 26305401  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Phys Chem A. 2015 Sep 3;119(35):9294-306. doi: 10.1021/acs.jpca.5b03961. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

Gas Phase Kinetics of 2,2,2-Trifluoroethylbutyrate with the Cl Atom: An
Experimental and Theoretical Study.

Srinivasulu G(1), Rajakumar B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Madras , Chennai
600036, India.

The gas phase temperature dependent rate coefficients of Cl atoms with
2,2,2-trifluoroethylbutyrate, CH3CH2CH2C(O)OCH2CF3, were measured in the
temperature range 268-343 K, at atmospheric pressures using the relative rate
method, with ethyl acetate and ethane as reference compounds. The temperature
dependent rate coefficients for the reaction of 2,2,2-TFEB + Cl were measured and
were used to deduce the Arrhenius expression: k268-343K = [(4.42 ± 0.01) ×
10(-19)]T(2.6)<U+202F>exp{(1132 ± 566)/T} cm(3) molecule(-1) s(-1). At 298 K, the rate
coefficient for the title reaction is (4.54 ± 2.87) × 10(-11) cm(3) molecule(-1) 
s(-1), which is in good agreement with a previously reported value at 298 K. To
complement our experimental results over the studied temperature range,
theoretical kinetic calculations were also performed for the title reaction using
canonical variational transition state theory (CVT) with small curvature
tunneling (SCT) corrections in combination with the
CCSD(T)/cc-pVDZ//M062X/6-31+g(d,p) level of theory. The temperature dependent
Arrhenius expression was obtained to be k(T) = (1.89 ± 2.64) ×
10(-21)T(3.4)<U+202F>exp{(1321 ± 111)/T} cm(3) molecule(-1) s(-1). The branching ratios,
atmospheric implications, and degradation mechanism of
2,2,2-trifluoroethylbutyrate, CH3CH2CH2C(O)OCH2CF3, were discussed in detail in
this manuscript.

PMID: 26270034  [PubMed]


45. Lung Cancer. 2015 Oct;90(1):98-105. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2015.07.008. Epub 2015
Jul 26.

Increased expression of transcription factor EB (TFEB) is associated with
autophagy, migratory phenotype and poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Giatromanolaki A(1), Kalamida D(2), Sivridis E(1), Karagounis IV(2), Gatter
KC(3), Harris AL(4), Koukourakis MI(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Democritus University of Thrace, and University
General Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Alexandroupolis 68100, Greece. (2)Department
of Radiotherapy/Oncology, Democritus University of Thrace, and University General
Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Alexandroupolis 68100, Greece. (3)Radcliffe
Department of Medicine, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of
Oxford, Headington, Oxford, UK. (4)CR UK Molecular Oncology Laboratories,
Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headington,
Oxford, UK. Electronic address: aharris.lab@cancer.org.uk. (5)Department of
Radiotherapy/Oncology, Democritus University of Thrace, and University General
Hospital of Alexandroupolis, Alexandroupolis 68100, Greece. Electronic address:
targ@her.forthnet.gr.

OBJECTIVES: We investigated the role of lysosomal biogenesis and hydrolase
activity in the clinical behavior and postoperative outcome of lung cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry we investigated the expression 
of the transcription factor EB (TFEB) which orchestrates lysosomal biogenesis,
the lysosome membrane protein LAMP2a and of the lysosomal hydrolase cathepsin D
in a series of 98 non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) treated with surgery
alone. In vitro experiments with the A549 and H1299 lung cancer cell lines were
also performed.
RESULTS: Overexpression of TFEB, LAMP2a and Cathepsin D was noted in 47/98
(47.9%), 43/98 (43.9%) and 39/98 (39.8%) cases, respectively, and were
significantly correlated with each other and with adenocarcinomas. High LAMP2a
was related to high histology grade. Linear regression analysis confirmed
significant association of TFEB with BNIP3 (p=0.0003, r=0.35) and LC3A with
LAMP2a expression (p=0.0002, r=0.37). An inverse association of Cathepsin D
expression with stone-like structures (SLS) was recorded (p=0.02, r=0.22). On
univariate analysis all three lyososomal variables were associated with poor
prognosis (p=0.05, 0.04 and 0.01, for TFEB, Cathepsin D and LAMP2a,
respectively). Multivariate analysis showed that the SLS number (p=0.0001,
HR5.37), Cathepsin D expression (p=0.01, HR=2.2) and stage (p=0.01, HR=1.5) were 
independent prognostic variables. Silencing of TFEB with siRNAs in the A549 and
H1299 lung cancer cell lines did not affect proliferation but resulted in reduced
migration ability.
CONCLUSION: Lysosomal biogenesis is linked to autophagosomal protein expression
in NSCLC and characterizes subgroups of high risk patients after complete
surgical lung tumor resection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26264650  [PubMed - in process]


46. Biochem J. 2015 Aug 15;470(1):65-76. doi: 10.1042/BJ20140645. Epub 2015 Jun 11.

Transition metals activate TFEB in overexpressing cells.

Peña KA(1), Kiselyov K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
15206, U.S.A. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15206, U.S.A. kiselyov@pitt.edu.

Transition metal toxicity is an important factor in the pathogenesis of numerous 
human disorders, including neurodegenerative diseases. Lysosomes have emerged as 
important factors in transition metal toxicity because they handle transition
metals via endocytosis, autophagy, absorption from the cytoplasm and exocytosis. 
Transcription factor EB (TFEB) regulates lysosomal biogenesis and the expression 
of lysosomal proteins in response to lysosomal and/or metabolic stresses. Since
transition metals cause lysosomal dysfunction, we proposed that TFEB may be
activated to drive gene expression in response to transition metal exposure and
that such activation may influence transition metal toxicity. We found that
transition metals copper (Cu) and iron (Fe) activate recombinant TFEB and
stimulate the expression of TFEB-dependent genes in TFEB-overexpressing cells. In
cells that show robust lysosomal exocytosis, TFEB was cytoprotective at moderate 
levels of Cu exposure, decreasing oxidative stress as reported by the expression 
of heme oxygenase-1 (HMOX1) gene. However, at high levels of Cu exposure,
particularly in cells with low levels of lysosomal exocytosis, activation of
overexpressed TFEB was toxic, increasing oxidative stress and mitochondrial
damage. Based on these data, we conclude that TFEB-driven gene network is a
component of the cellular response to transition metals. These data suggest
limitations and disadvantages of TFEB overexpression as a therapeutic approach.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMCID: PMC4613523
PMID: 26251447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cell Biol. 2015 Aug 3;210(3):435-50. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201501002.

MiT/TFE transcription factors are activated during mitophagy downstream of Parkin
and Atg5.

Nezich CL(1), Wang C(1), Fogel AI(1), Youle RJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892. (2)Biochemistry Section, Surgical Neurology Branch, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892 youler@ninds.nih.gov.

The kinase PINK1 and ubiquitin ligase Parkin can regulate the selective
elimination of damaged mitochondria through autophagy (mitophagy). Because of the
demand on lysosomal function by mitophagy, we investigated a role for the
transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis, in
this process. We show that during mitophagy TFEB translocates to the nucleus and 
displays transcriptional activity in a PINK1- and Parkin-dependent manner. MITF
and TFE3, homologues of TFEB belonging to the same microphthalmia/transcription
factor E (MiT/TFE) family, are similarly regulated during mitophagy. Unlike TFEB 
translocation after starvation-induced mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1
inhibition, Parkin-mediated TFEB relocalization required Atg9A and Atg5 activity.
However, constitutively active Rag guanosine triphosphatases prevented TFEB
translocation during mitophagy, suggesting cross talk between these two MiT/TFE
activation pathways. Analysis of clustered regularly interspaced short
palindromic repeats-generated TFEB/MITF/TFE3/TFEC single, double, and triple
knockout cell lines revealed that these proteins partly facilitate
Parkin-mediated mitochondrial clearance. These results illuminate a pathway
leading to MiT/TFE transcription factor activation, distinct from
starvation-induced autophagy, which occurs during mitophagy.

PMCID: PMC4523611
PMID: 26240184  [PubMed - in process]


48. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Oct 15;24(20):5775-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv297. Epub 2015 Jul
28.

Altered TFEB-mediated lysosomal biogenesis in Gaucher disease iPSC-derived
neuronal cells.

Awad O(1), Sarkar C(2), Panicker LM(1), Miller D(1), Zeng X(3), Sgambato JA(1),
Lipinski MM(4), Feldman RA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology. (2)Department of Anesthesiology.
(3)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, CA, USA. (4)Department of
Anesthesiology, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA and. (5)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, rfeldman@som.umaryland.edu.

Gaucher disease (GD) is caused by mutations in the GBA1 gene, which encodes the
lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GCase). The severe forms of GD are
associated with neurodegeneration with either rapid (Type 2) or slow progression 
(Type 3). Although the neurodegenerative process in GD has been linked to
lysosomal dysfunction, the mechanisms involved are largely unknown. To identify
the lysosomal alterations in GD neurons and uncover the mechanisms involved, we
used induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from patients with GD. In GD 
iPSC-derived neuronal cells (iPSC-NCs), GBA1 mutations caused widespread
lysosomal depletion, and a block in autophagic flux due to defective lysosomal
clearance of autophagosomes. Autophagy induction by rapamycin treatment in GD
iPSC-NCs led to cell death. Further analysis showed that in GD iPSC-NCs,
expression of the transcription factor EB (TFEB), the master regulator of
lysosomal genes, and lysosomal gene expression, were significantly downregulated.
There was also reduced stability of the TFEB protein and altered lysosomal
protein biosynthesis. Treatment of mutant iPSC-NCs with recombinant GCase
(rGCase) reverted the lysosomal depletion and autophagy block. The effect of
rGCase on restoring lysosomal numbers in mutant cells was enhanced in the
presence of overexpressed TFEB, but TFEB overexpression alone did not reverse the
lysosomal depletion phenotype. Our results suggest that GBA1 mutations interfere 
with TFEB-mediated lysosomal biogenesis, and that the action of GCase in
maintaining a functioning pool of lysosomes is exerted in part through TFEB. The 
lysosomal alterations described here are likely to be a major determinant in
GBA1-associated neurodegeneration.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26220978  [PubMed - in process]


49. Nature. 2015 Aug 20;524(7565):361-5. doi: 10.1038/nature14587. Epub 2015 Jul 13.

Transcriptional control of autophagy-lysosome function drives pancreatic cancer
metabolism.

Perera RM(1,)(2,)(3), Stoykova S(1,)(2), Nicolay BN(1,)(3), Ross KN(1,)(2,)(3),
Fitamant J(1,)(2,)(3), Boukhali M(1), Lengrand J(1,)(2), Deshpande V(3,)(4),
Selig MK(4), Ferrone CR(1,)(3,)(5), Settleman J(1), Stephanopoulos G(6), Dyson
NJ(1,)(3), Zoncu R(7), Ramaswamy S(1,)(2,)(3), Haas W(1,)(3), Bardeesy
N(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA. (2)Center for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (3)Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02114, USA. (6)Department of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. (7)Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2015 Sep;15(9):513.

Activation of cellular stress response pathways to maintain metabolic homeostasis
is emerging as a critical growth and survival mechanism in many cancers. The
pathogenesis of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) requires high levels of
autophagy, a conserved self-degradative process. However, the regulatory circuits
that activate autophagy and reprogram PDA cell metabolism are unknown. Here we
show that autophagy induction in PDA occurs as part of a broader transcriptional 
program that coordinates activation of lysosome biogenesis and function, and
nutrient scavenging, mediated by the MiT/TFE family of transcription factors. In 
human PDA cells, the MiT/TFE proteins--MITF, TFE3 and TFEB--are decoupled from
regulatory mechanisms that control their cytoplasmic retention. Increased nuclear
import in turn drives the expression of a coherent network of genes that induce
high levels of lysosomal catabolic function essential for PDA growth. Unbiased
global metabolite profiling reveals that MiT/TFE-dependent autophagy-lysosome
activation is specifically required to maintain intracellular amino acid pools.
These results identify the MiT/TFE proteins as master regulators of metabolic
reprogramming in pancreatic cancer and demonstrate that transcriptional
activation of clearance pathways converging on the lysosome is a novel hallmark
of aggressive malignancy.

PMID: 26168401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Circ Res. 2015 Aug 14;117(5):424-36. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.305393. Epub
2015 Jul 2.

Angiotensin II Induces Skeletal Muscle Atrophy by Activating TFEB-Mediated MuRF1 
Expression.

Du Bois P(1), Pablo Tortola C(1), Lodka D(1), Kny M(1), Schmidt F(1), Song K(1), 
Schmidt S(1), Bassel-Duby R(1), Olson EN(1), Fielitz J(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Molecular Cardiology, Experimental and Clinical
Research Center (ECRC), a Cooperation between Max-Delbrück-Centrum and Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Buch, Berlin, Germany (P.D.B., C.P.T., D.L.,
M.K., F.S., S.S., J.F.); Department of Cardiology, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany (J.F.); and Department of Molecular
Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas (K.S., R.B.-D., 
E.N.O.). (2)From the Department of Molecular Cardiology, Experimental and
Clinical Research Center (ECRC), a Cooperation between Max-Delbrück-Centrum and
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Buch, Berlin, Germany (P.D.B., C.P.T.,
D.L., M.K., F.S., S.S., J.F.); Department of Cardiology, Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany (J.F.); and
Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas (K.S., R.B.-D., E.N.O.). jens.fielitz@charite.de.

RATIONALE: Skeletal muscle wasting with accompanying cachexia is a life
threatening complication in congestive heart failure. The molecular mechanisms
are imperfectly understood, although an activated renin-angiotensin aldosterone
system has been implicated. Angiotensin (Ang) II induces skeletal muscle atrophy 
in part by increased muscle-enriched E3 ubiquitin ligase muscle RING-finger-1
(MuRF1) expression, which may involve protein kinase D1 (PKD1).
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the molecular mechanism of Ang II-induced skeletal muscle
wasting.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A cDNA expression screen identified the lysosomal
hydrolase-coordinating transcription factor EB (TFEB) as novel regulator of the
human MuRF1 promoter. TFEB played a key role in regulating Ang II-induced
skeletal muscle atrophy by transcriptional control of MuRF1 via conserved E-box
elements. Inhibiting TFEB with small interfering RNA prevented Ang II-induced
MuRF1 expression and atrophy. The histone deacetylase-5 (HDAC5), which was
directly bound to and colocalized with TFEB, inhibited TFEB-induced MuRF1
expression. The inhibition of TFEB by HDAC5 was reversed by PKD1, which was
associated with HDAC5 and mediated its nuclear export. Mice lacking PKD1 in
skeletal myocytes were resistant to Ang II-induced muscle wasting.
CONCLUSION: We propose that elevated Ang II serum concentrations, as occur in
patients with congestive heart failure, could activate the PKD1/HDAC5/TFEB/MuRF1 
pathway to induce skeletal muscle wasting.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4537692 [Available on 2016-08-14]
PMID: 26137861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun 26;11(6):e1005018. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005018.
eCollection 2015.

Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 Nef Inhibits Autophagy through Transcription 
Factor EB Sequestration.

Campbell GR(1), Rawat P(1), Bruckman RS(1), Spector SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America. (2)Division
of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America; Rady Children's Hospital, 
San Diego, California, United States of America.

HIV Nef acts as an anti-autophagic maturation factor through interaction with
beclin-1 (BECN1). We report that exposure of macrophages to infectious or
non-infectious purified HIV induces toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8) and BECN1
dependent dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of TFEB and that this
correlates with an increase in autophagy markers. RNA interference for ATG13,
TFEB, TLR8, or BECN1 inhibits this HIV-induced autophagy. However, once HIV
establishes a productive infection, TFEB phosphorylation and cytoplasmic
sequestration are increased resulting in decreased autophagy markers. Moreover,
by 7 d post-infection, autophagy levels are similar to mock infected controls.
Conversely, although Nef deleted HIV similarly induces TFEB dephosphorylation and
nuclear localization, and increases autophagy, these levels remain elevated
during continued productive infection. Thus, the interaction between HIV and TLR8
serves as a signal for autophagy induction that is dependent upon the
dephosphorylation and nuclear translocation of TFEB. During permissive infection,
Nef binds BECN1 resulting in mammalian target of rapamycin (MTOR) activation,
TFEB phosphorylation and cytosolic sequestration, and the inhibition of
autophagy. To our knowledge, this is the first report of a virus modulating TFEB 
localization and helps to explain how HIV modulates autophagy to promote its own 
replication and cell survival.

PMCID: PMC4482621
PMID: 26115100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Autophagy. 2015;11(9):1537-60. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1063768.

Repetitive stimulation of autophagy-lysosome machinery by intermittent fasting
preconditions the myocardium to ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Godar RJ(1,)(2), Ma X(1,)(2), Liu H(1), Murphy JT(1), Weinheimer CJ(1), Kovacs
A(1), Crosby SD(3), Saftig P(4), Diwan A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Cardiology and Center for Cardiovascular Research ; Department
of Internal Medicine; Washington University School of Medicine ; St. Louis , MO
USA. (2)b John Cochran VA Medical Center ; St. Louis , MO USA. (3)c Department of
Genetics ; Washington University School of Medicine ; St. Louis , MO USA. (4)d
Institut für Biochemie; Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel ; Kiel , Germany.

Autophagy, a lysosomal degradative pathway, is potently stimulated in the
myocardium by fasting and is essential for maintaining cardiac function during
prolonged starvation. We tested the hypothesis that intermittent fasting protects
against myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury via transcriptional stimulation of
the autophagy-lysosome machinery. Adult C57BL/6 mice subjected to 24-h periods of
fasting, every other day, for 6 wk were protected from in-vivo
ischemia-reperfusion injury on a fed day, with marked reduction in infarct size
in both sexes as compared with nonfasted controls. This protection was lost in
mice heterozygous null for Lamp2 (coding for lysosomal-associated membrane
protein 2), which demonstrate impaired autophagy in response to fasting with
accumulation of autophagosomes and SQSTM1, an autophagy substrate, in the heart. 
In lamp2 null mice, intermittent fasting provoked progressive left ventricular
dilation, systolic dysfunction and hypertrophy; worsening cardiomyocyte
autophagosome accumulation and lack of protection to ischemia-reperfusion injury,
suggesting that intact autophagy-lysosome machinery is essential for myocardial
homeostasis during intermittent fasting and consequent ischemic cardioprotection.
Fasting and refeeding cycles resulted in transcriptional induction followed by
downregulation of autophagy-lysosome genes in the myocardium. This was coupled
with fasting-induced nuclear translocation of TFEB (transcription factor EB), a
master regulator of autophagy-lysosome machinery; followed by rapid decline in
nuclear TFEB levels with refeeding. Endogenous TFEB was essential for attenuation
of hypoxia-reoxygenation-induced cell death by repetitive starvation, in neonatal
rat cardiomyocytes, in-vitro. Taken together, these data suggest that
TFEB-mediated transcriptional priming of the autophagy-lysosome machinery
mediates the beneficial effects of fasting-induced autophagy in myocardial
ischemia-reperfusion injury.

PMCID: PMC4590628 [Available on 2016-06-23]
PMID: 26103523  [PubMed - in process]


53. J Cell Sci. 2015 Aug 1;128(15):2938-50. doi: 10.1242/jcs.173807. Epub 2015 Jun
19.

Mitf is a master regulator of the v-ATPase, forming a control module for cellular
homeostasis with v-ATPase and TORC1.

Zhang T(1), Zhou Q(1), Ogmundsdottir MH(2), Möller K(2), Siddaway R(3), Larue
L(4), Hsing M(5), Kong SW(5), Goding CR(3), Palsson A(6), Steingrimsson E(7),
Pignoni F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Center for Vision Research and SUNY Eye
Institute, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, 13210 NY, USA. (2)Department of 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, BioMedical Center, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegur 16, Reykjavik 101, Iceland. (3)Ludwig
Institute for Cancer Research, Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oxford, Headington, OX3 7DQ Oxford, UK. (4)Institut Curie, INSERM
U1021, CNRS UMR3347, Normal and Pathological Development of Melanocytes, 91405
Orsay, France. (5)Informatics Program, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (6)Life and Environmental Sciences, School of
Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegur 16,
Reykjavik 101, Iceland. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
BioMedical Center, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegur
16, Reykjavik 101, Iceland eirikurs@hi.is pignoniF@upstate.edu. (8)Department of 
Ophthalmology, Center for Vision Research and SUNY Eye Institute, Upstate Medical
University, Syracuse, 13210 NY, USA Departments of Neuroscience and Physiology,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, 13210
NY, USA eirikurs@hi.is pignoniF@upstate.edu.

The v-ATPase is a fundamental eukaryotic enzyme that is central to cellular
homeostasis. Although its impact on key metabolic regulators such as TORC1 is
well documented, our knowledge of mechanisms that regulate v-ATPase activity is
limited. Here, we report that the Drosophila transcription factor Mitf is a
master regulator of this holoenzyme. Mitf directly controls transcription of all 
15 v-ATPase components through M-box cis-sites and this coordinated regulation
affects holoenzyme activity in vivo. In addition, through the v-ATPase, Mitf
promotes the activity of TORC1, which in turn negatively regulates Mitf. We
provide evidence that Mitf, v-ATPase and TORC1 form a negative regulatory loop
that maintains each of these important metabolic regulators in relative balance. 
Interestingly, direct regulation of v-ATPase genes by human MITF also occurs in
cells of the melanocytic lineage, showing mechanistic conservation in the
regulation of the v-ATPase by MITF family proteins in fly and mammals.
Collectively, this evidence points to an ancient module comprising Mitf, v-ATPase
and TORC1 that serves as a dynamic modulator of metabolism for cellular
homeostasis.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4540953 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26092939  [PubMed - in process]


54. Autophagy. 2015;11(7):973-4. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1058475.

The symphony of autophagy and calcium signaling.

Yao Z(1), Klionsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)a Life Sciences Institute and Department of Molecular; Cellular and
Developmental Biology; University of Michigan ; Ann Arbor , MI , USA.

Posttranslational regulation of macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy), including
phosphorylating and dephosphorylating components of the autophagy-related (Atg)
core machinery and the corresponding upstream transcriptional factors, is
important for the precise modulation of autophagy levels. Several kinases that
are involved in phosphorylating autophagy-related proteins have been identified
in both yeast and mammalian cells. However, there has been much less research
published with regard to the identification of the complementary phosphatases
that function in autophagy. A recent study identified PPP3/calcineurin, a
calcium-dependent phosphatase, as a regulator of autophagy, and demonstrated that
one of the key targets of PPP3/calcineurin is TFEB, a master transcriptional
factor that controls autophagy and lysosomal function in mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC4590665 [Available on 2016-06-05]
PMID: 26046237  [PubMed - in process]


55. Autophagy. 2015;11(7):1192-5. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1054594.

Intracellular calcium signaling regulates autophagy via calcineurin-mediated TFEB
dephosphorylation.

Tong Y(1), Song F.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Toxicology; School of Public Health; Shandong University ;
Jinan , Shandong , China.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;17(3):288-99.

The transcription-regulating activity of TFEB is dependent on its phosphorylation
modification, but the phosphatase(s) involved in TFEB dephosphorylation have
remained elusive. It has now become clear that lysosomal calcium signaling
activates calcineurin, an endogenous serine/threonine phosphatase, which
dephosphorylate TFEB leading to upregulation of autophagy.

PMCID: PMC4590610 [Available on 2016-06-04]
PMID: 26043755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nat Immunol. 2015 Jul;16(7):729-36. doi: 10.1038/ni.3196. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

The transcription factor TFEB acts as a molecular switch that regulates exogenous
antigen-presentation pathways.

Samie M(1), Cresswell P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) can initiate immune responses by presenting exogenous
antigens to T cells via both major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
pathways and MHC class II pathways. Lysosomal activity has an important role in
modulating the balance between these two pathways. The transcription factor TFEB 
regulates lysosomal function by inducing lysosomal activation. Here we report
that TFEB expression inhibited the presentation of exogenous antigen by MHC class
I while enhancing presentation via MHC class II. TFEB promoted phagosomal
acidification and protein degradation. Furthermore, we found that the activation 
of TFEB was regulated during DC maturation and that phagosomal acidification was 
impaired in DCs in which the gene encoding TFEB was silenced. Our data indicate
that TFEB is a key participant in the differential regulation of the presentation
of exogenous antigens by DCs.

PMID: 26030023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Pharmacol Res. 2015 Sep;99:36-43. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.04.006. Epub 2015 May 
21.

The MITF family of transcription factors: Role in endolysosomal biogenesis, Wnt
signaling, and oncogenesis.

Ploper D(1), De Robertis EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095-1662, United States; Department of Biological Chemistry, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, United States. Electronic address:
dploper@mednet.ucla.edu. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, United States; Department of Biological
Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, United States.

Canonical Wnt signaling influences cellular fate and proliferation through
inhibition of Glycogen Synthase Kinase (GSK3) and the subsequent stabilization of
its many substrates, most notably ß-Catenin, a transcriptional co-activator.
MITF, a melanoma oncogene member of the microphthalmia family of transcription
factors (MiT), was recently found to contain novel GSK3 phosphorylation sites and
to be stabilized by Wnt. Other MiT members, TFEB and TFE3, are known to play
important roles in cellular clearance pathways by transcriptionally regulating
the biogenesis of lysosomes and autophagosomes via activation of CLEAR elements
in gene promoters of target genes. Recent studies suggest that MITF can also
upregulate many lysosomal genes. MiT family members are dysregulated in cancer
and are considered oncogenes, but the underlying oncogenic mechanisms remain
unclear. Here we review the role of MiT members, including MITF, in lysosomal
biogenesis, and how cancers overexpressing MITF, TFEB or TFE3 could rewire the
lysosomal pathway, inhibit cellular senescence, and activate Wnt signaling by
increasing sequestration of negative regulators of Wnt signaling in
multivesicular bodies (MVBs). Microarray studies suggest that MITF expression
inhibits macroautophagy. In melanoma the MITF-driven increase in MVBs generates a
positive feedback loop between MITF, Wnt, and MVBs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26003288  [PubMed - in process]


58. Exp Neurol. 2015 Sep;271:112-21. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2015.05.008. Epub 2015 
May 19.

TNF compromises lysosome acidification and reduces a-synuclein degradation via
autophagy in dopaminergic cells.

Wang MX(1), Cheng XY(1), Jin M(1), Cao YL(1), Yang YP(2), Wang JD(1), Li Q(3),
Wang F(4), Hu LF(5), Liu CF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Translational Research and 
Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Soochow University, Suzhou 215004, China; Institute of Neuroscience, 
Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. (2)Department of Neurology, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases, The
Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Soochow University, Suzhou
215004, China; Beijing Key Laboratory for Parkinson's Disease, Beijing 100053,
China. (3)Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China;
Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China. (4)Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China. (5)Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow
University, Suzhou 215123, China; Department of Pharmacology, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. Electronic
address: hulifang@suda.edu.cn. (6)Department of Neurology, Jiangsu Key Laboratory
of Translational Research and Therapy for Neuro-Psycho-Diseases, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Soochow University, Suzhou 215004,
China; Institute of Neuroscience, Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China;
Beijing Key Laboratory for Parkinson's Disease, Beijing 100053, China. Electronic
address: liucf@suda.edu.cn.

Tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF) is increasingly implicated as a critical
pro-inflammatory cytokine involved in chronic inflammation and neurodegeneration 
of Parkinson's disease (PD). However, the cellular and molecular events that lead
to dopaminergic neuron degeneration are not fully understood. In this study, we
demonstrated that microglia-released and recombinant TNF disrupted a-synuclein
(a-SYN) degradation and caused its accumulation in PC12 cells and midbrain
neurons. At subtoxic doses, recombinant TNF was found to increase the number of
LC3 puncta dots and LC3II protein level, associated with the increases of P62
protein level. Inhibition of lysosomal degradation with Bafilomycin A1
pretreatment abrogated the TNF-induced elevation in LC3II protein level whereas
autophagy inhibitor 3-methyladenine did not affect it. Moreover, TNF led to a
marked increase in the number of yellow LC3 dots with a marginal elevation in
red-only dots in RFP-GFP-tandem fluorescent LC3 (tf-LC3) transfected PC12 cells, 
implying the impairment in autophagic flux. Furthermore, TNF treatment reduced
lysosomal acidification, as LysoTracker Red fluorescence and LysoSensor
fluorescence shift from blue to yellow was markedly decreased in TNF-treated PC12
cells. Co-treatment with mammalian target of rapamycin kinase complex 1 (mTORC1) 
inhibitor PP242, which activated transcription factor EB (TFEB) signaling and
lysosome biogenesis, partially rescued the accumulation of a-SYN in PC12 cells
and midbrain neurons. Taken together, our results demonstrated that at subtoxic
levels, TNF was able to impair autophagic flux and result in a-SYN accumulation
by compromising lysosomal acidification in dopaminergic cells. This may represent
a novel mechanism for TNF-induced dopaminergic neuron degeneration in PD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26001614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Autophagy. 2015;11(6):970-1. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1047130.

Lysosomal calcium regulates autophagy.

Medina DL(1), Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)a Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM) ; Pozzuoli, Naples ,
Italy.

Recent evidence has indicated that the lysosome is able to act as a signaling
organelle that senses nutrient availability and generates an adaptive response
that is important for cellular homeostasis. We recently discovered another
example of lysosomal signaling where lysosomal calcium release activates the
master autophagy regulator TFEB via the phosphatase calcineurin.

PMCID: PMC4502748 [Available on 2016-05-22]
PMID: 26000950  [PubMed - in process]


60. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2015 Aug;35:59-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ceb.2015.04.014. Epub 2015
May 15.

Beyond indigestion: emerging roles for lysosome-based signaling in human disease.

Ferguson SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
06510, United States; Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and
Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, United States.
Electronic address: shawn.ferguson@yale.edu.

Lysosomes are becoming increasingly recognized as a hub that integrates diverse
signals in order to control multiple aspects of cell physiology. This is
illustrated by the discovery of a growing number of lysosome-localized proteins
that respond to changes in growth factor and nutrient availability to regulate
mTORC1 signaling as well as the identification of MiT/TFE transcription factors
(MITF, TFEB and TFE3) as proteins that shuttle between lysosomes and the nucleus 
to elicit a transcriptional response to ongoing changes in lysosome status. These
findings have been paralleled by advances in human genetics that connect
mutations in genes involved in lysosomal signaling to a broad range of human
illnesses ranging from cancer to neurological disease. This review summarizes
these new discoveries at the interface between lysosome cell biology and human
disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4529762 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25950843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. EMBO Rep. 2015 Jun;16(6):674-5. doi: 10.15252/embr.201540470. Epub 2015 May 4.

Another face of RIPK1.

Green DR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.

Comment on
    EMBO Rep. 2015 Jun;16(6):700-8.

Receptor-interacting protein kinase-1 (RIPK1) sits at a signaling node
controlling a number of functional pathways. These include both positive and
negative control of apoptosis and necroptosis (a form of regulated necrosis). In 
this issue of EMBO Reports, Yonekawa and colleagues describe another function for
RIPK1, the inhibition of autophagy via ERK-mediated phosphorylation of the
transcription factor, TFEB [1]. Their findings are considered in the context of
RIPK1 signaling, and how it is engaged.

PMCID: PMC4467849 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25940558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 12;290(24):14945-62. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.656116. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

p62/Sequestosome-1, Autophagy-related Gene 8, and Autophagy in Drosophila Are
Regulated by Nuclear Factor Erythroid 2-related Factor 2 (NRF2), Independent of
Transcription Factor TFEB.

Jain A(1), Rusten TE(2), Katheder N(3), Elvenes J(1), Bruun JA(1), Sjøttem E(1), 
Lamark T(1), Johansen T(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Cancer Research Group, Institute of Medical Biology,
University of Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, Norway and. (2)the Department of Molecular
Cell Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Centre for
Cancer Biomedicine, University of Oslo, 0379 Oslo, Norway
tor.erik.rusten@rr-research.no. (3)the Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University Hospital, Centre for Cancer
Biomedicine, University of Oslo, 0379 Oslo, Norway. (4)From the Molecular Cancer 
Research Group, Institute of Medical Biology, University of Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø, 
Norway and terje.johansen@uit.no.

The selective autophagy receptor p62/sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1) interacts directly
with LC3 and is involved in oxidative stress signaling in two ways in mammals.
First, p62 is transcriptionally induced upon oxidative stress by the
NF-E2-related factor 2 (NRF2) by direct binding to an antioxidant response
element in the p62 promoter. Second, p62 accumulation, occurring when autophagy
is impaired, leads to increased p62 binding to the NRF2 inhibitor KEAP1,
resulting in reduced proteasomal turnover of NRF2. This gives chronic oxidative
stress signaling through a feed forward loop. Here, we show that the Drosophila
p62/SQSTM1 orthologue, Ref(2)P, interacts directly with DmAtg8a via an
LC3-interacting region motif, supporting a role for Ref(2)P in selective
autophagy. The ref(2)P promoter also contains a functional antioxidant response
element that is directly bound by the NRF2 orthologue, CncC, which can induce
ref(2)P expression along with the oxidative stress-associated gene gstD1.
However, distinct from the situation in mammals, Ref(2)P does not interact
directly with DmKeap1 via a KEAP1-interacting region motif; nor does ectopically 
expressed Ref(2)P or autophagy deficiency activate the oxidative stress response.
Instead, DmAtg8a interacts directly with DmKeap1, and DmKeap1 is removed upon
programmed autophagy in Drosophila gut cells. Strikingly, CncC induced increased 
Atg8a levels and autophagy independent of TFEB/MitF in fat body and larval gut
tissues. Thus, these results extend the intimate relationship between oxidative
stress-sensing NRF2/CncC transcription factors and autophagy and suggest that
NRF2/CncC may regulate autophagic activity in other organisms too.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4463441 [Available on 2016-06-12]
PMID: 25931115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2015 Jul 1;309(1):C22-37. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00384.2014. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Exon 4-encoded sequence is a major determinant of cytotoxicity of apolipoprotein 
L1.

Khatua AK(1), Cheatham AM(1), Kruzel ED(2), Singhal PC(3), Skorecki K(2), Popik
W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Meharry Medical College, Center for AIDS Health Disparities Research,
Nashville, Tennessee; (2)Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel;
and. (3)Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York. (4)Meharry
Medical College, Center for AIDS Health Disparities Research, Nashville,
Tennessee; wpopik@mmc.edu.

The apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) gene (APOL1) product is toxic to kidney cells, and 
its G1 and G2 alleles are strongly associated with increased risk for kidney
disease progression in African Americans. Variable penetrance of the G1 and G2
risk alleles highlights the significance of additional factors that trigger or
modify the progression of disease. In this regard, the effect of alternative
splicing in the absence or presence of G1 or G2 alleles is unknown. In this study
we investigated whether alternative splicing of non-G1, non-G2 APOL1 (APOL1 G0)
affects its biological activity. Among seven APOL1 exons, exons 2 and 4 are
differentially expressed in major transcripts. We found that, in contrast to
APOL1 splice variants B3 or C, variants A and B1 demonstrate strong toxicity in
human embryonic kidney (HEK293T) cells. Subsequently, we established that exon 4 
is a major determinant of toxicity of variants A and B1 and that extracellular
release of these variants is dispensable for their cytotoxicity. Although only
variants A and B1 induced nuclear translocation of transcription factor EB
(TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, exon 4-positive
and -negative APOL1 variants stimulated perinuclear accumulation of unprocessed
autophagosomes. Knockdown of endogenous TFEB did not attenuate APOL1
cytotoxicity, indicating that nuclear translocation of TFEB is dispensable for
APOL1 toxicity. Our findings that a human podocyte cell line expresses exon
4-positive and -negative APOL1 transcripts suggest that these variants may play a
differential role in podocyte pathology. In summary, we have identified exon 4 as
a major determinant of APOL1 G0 cytotoxicity.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4490327 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25924622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. EMBO Rep. 2015 Jun;16(6):700-8. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439496. Epub 2015 Apr 23.

RIP1 negatively regulates basal autophagic flux through TFEB to control
sensitivity to apoptosis.

Yonekawa T(1), Gamez G(1), Kim J(2), Tan AC(2), Thorburn J(1), Gump J(1),
Thorburn A(3), Morgan MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
CO, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, University of
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA. (3)Department of Pharmacology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA University of Colorado
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Aurora, CO, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA University of Colorado
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Aurora, CO, USA michael.morgan@ucdenver.edu.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2015 Jun;16(6):674-5.

In a synthetic lethality/viability screen, we identified the serine-threonine
kinase RIP1 (RIPK1) as a gene whose knockdown is highly selected against during
growth in normal media, in which autophagy is not critical, but selected for in
conditions that increase reliance on basal autophagy. RIP1 represses basal
autophagy in part due to its ability to regulate the TFEB transcription factor,
which controls the expression of autophagy-related and lysosomal genes. RIP1
activates ERK, which negatively regulates TFEB though phosphorylation of serine
142. Thus, in addition to other pro-death functions, RIP1 regulates cellular
sensitivity to pro-death stimuli by modulating basal autophagy.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4467854 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25908842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Jun 1;95(3):201-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.03.017. Epub
2015 Apr 13.

A role for the autophagy regulator Transcription Factor EB in amiodarone-induced 
phospholipidosis.

Buratta S(1), Urbanelli L(2), Ferrara G(3), Sagini K(3), Goracci L(4), Emiliani
C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry,
Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via del Giochetto, I-06123
Perugia, Italy. Electronic address: sandra.buratta@unipg.it. (2)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry, Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via del Giochetto, I-06123 Perugia, Italy. 
Electronic address: lorena.urbanelli@unipg.it. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University
of Perugia, via del Giochetto, I-06123 Perugia, Italy. (4)Laboratory for
Chemoinformatics and Molecular Modelling, Department of Chemistry, Biology and
Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via Elce di Sotto 8, 06123 Perugia, Italy. 
(5)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Department of Chemistry,
Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, via del Giochetto, I-06123
Perugia, Italy; CEMIN-Center of Excellence for Innovative Nanostructured
Material, Perugia, Italy.

The antiarrhythmic agent amiodarone, a cationic amphiphilic drug, is known to
induce phospholipidosis, i.e. the accumulation of phospholipids within lysosomal 
structures to give multi-lamellar inclusion bodies. Despite the concerns raised
about phospholipidosis in the recent years, the molecular mechanisms underlying
amiodarone- or other cationic amphiphilic drug-induced phospholipidosis are still
under investigation. Here we demonstrated that amiodarone doses able to induce
phospholiposis according to NBD-PC uptake assay (1-12 µM, 24 h) activates
Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), a pivotal regulator of the autophagic pathway, in
human HepG2 cells. Further evidences confirmed the effect of amiodarone on the
autophagic-lysosomal system in HepG2 and BEAS-2B cells: lysosomal
ß-hexosaminidase isoenzymes secretion, transcriptional up-regulation of the
lysosomal ß-hexosaminidase a-subunit, alteration of cathepsin B, D and L
intracellular maturation in a cell- and protease-specific manner. Autophagy
activation was also demonstrated by increased conversion of LC3-I into LC3-II and
reduced phosphorylation of the mTORC1 target S6 kinase. Besides, we provided
evidence that TFEB over-expression prevents amiodarone-induced phospholipid
accumulation, suggesting that this transcription factor could be a possible
target to develop strategies for phospholipidosis attenuation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25881747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Autophagy. 2015;11(6):867-80. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1034410.

Transcriptional and epigenetic regulation of autophagy in aging.

Lapierre LR(1), Kumsta C, Sandri M, Ballabio A, Hansen M.

Author information: 
(1)a Development, Aging and Regeneration Program; Sanford-Burnham Medical
Research Institute ; La Jolla , CA USA.

Macroautophagy is a major intracellular degradation process recognized as playing
a central role in cell survival and longevity. This multistep process is
extensively regulated at several levels, including post-translationally through
the action of conserved longevity factors such as the nutrient sensor TOR. More
recently, transcriptional regulation of autophagy genes has emerged as an
important mechanism for ensuring the somatic maintenance and homeostasis
necessary for a long life span. Autophagy is increased in many long-lived model
organisms and contributes significantly to their longevity. In turn, conserved
transcription factors, particularly the helix-loop-helix transcription factor
TFEB and the forkhead transcription factor FOXO, control the expression of many
autophagy-related genes and are important for life-span extension. In this
review, we discuss recent progress in understanding the contribution of these
transcription factors to macroautophagy regulation in the context of aging. We
also review current research on epigenetic changes, such as histone modification 
by the deacetylase SIRT1, that influence autophagy-related gene expression and
additionally affect aging. Understanding the molecular regulation of
macroautophagy in relation to aging may offer new avenues for the treatment of
age-related diseases.

PMCID: PMC4502732 [Available on 2016-04-02]
PMID: 25836756  [PubMed - in process]


67. Skelet Muscle. 2015 Mar 18;5:9. doi: 10.1186/s13395-015-0033-y. eCollection 2015.

PGC-1a modulates denervation-induced mitophagy in skeletal muscle.

Vainshtein A(1), Desjardins EM(1), Armani A(2), Sandri M(3), Hood DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Muscle Health Research Centre, School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York 
University, 4700 Keele St., Toronto, Ontario M3J 1P3 Canada. (2)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Viale G. Colombo 3, I-35121 Padova,
Italy. (3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Viale G.
Colombo 3, I-35121 Padova, Italy ; Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine,
35129 Padova, Italy ; Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 80131 
Napoli, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in skeletal muscle contractile activity necessitate an
efficient remodeling mechanism. In particular, mitochondrial turnover is
essential for tissue homeostasis during muscle adaptations to chronic use and
disuse. While mitochondrial biogenesis appears to be largely governed by the
transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator co-activator 1 alpha
(PGC-1a), selective mitochondrial autophagy (mitophagy) is thought to mediate
organelle degradation. However, whether PGC-1a plays a direct role in autophagy
is currently unclear.
METHODS: To investigate the role of the co-activator in autophagy and mitophagy
during skeletal muscle remodeling, PGC-1a knockout (KO) and overexpressing (Tg)
animals were unilaterally denervated, a common model of chronic muscle disuse.
RESULTS: Animals lacking PGC-1a exhibited diminished mitochondrial density
alongside myopathic characteristics reminiscent of autophagy-deficient muscle.
Denervation promoted an induction in autophagy and lysosomal protein expression
in wild-type (WT) animals, which was partially attenuated in KO animals,
resulting in reduced autophagy and mitophagy flux. PGC-1a overexpression led to
an increase in lysosomal capacity as well as indicators of autophagy flux but
exhibited reduced localization of LC3II and p62 to mitochondria, compared to WT
animals. A correlation was observed between the levels of the autophagy-lysosome 
master regulator transcription factor EB (TFEB) and PGC-1a in muscle, supporting 
their coordinated regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation has uncovered a regulatory role for PGC-1a in
mitochondrial turnover, not only through biogenesis but also via degradation
using the autophagy-lysosome machinery. This implies a PGC-1a-mediated cross-talk
between these two opposing processes, working to ensure mitochondrial homeostasis
during muscle adaptation to chronic disuse.

PMCID: PMC4381453
PMID: 25834726  [PubMed]


68. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 23;5:9378. doi: 10.1038/srep09378.

Modulation of expression of genes involved in glycosaminoglycan metabolism and
lysosome biogenesis by flavonoids.

Moskot M(1), Jakóbkiewicz-Banecka J(2), Kloska A(2), Smolinska E(2), Mozolewski
P(2), Malinowska M(2), Rychlowski M(3), Banecki B(4), Wegrzyn G(2),
Gabig-Ciminska M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology (affiliated with the University of Gdansk),
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wita
Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland. (2)Department of Molecular Biology, University
of Gdansk, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland. (3)Department of Molecular
Virology, Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, Kladki 24, 80-822
Gdansk, Poland. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Intercollegiate 
Faculty of Biotechnology UG-MUG, Kladki 24, 80-822 Gdansk, Poland.

Flavonoids were found previously to modulate efficiency of synthesis of
glycosaminoglycans (GAGs), compounds which are accumulated in cells of patients
suffering from mucopolysaccharidoses (MPSs). The aim of this work was to
determine effects of different flavonoids (genistein, kaempferol, daidzein) used 
alone or in combinations, on expression of genes coding for proteins involved in 
GAG metabolism. Analyses with DNA microarray, followed by real-time qRT-PCR
revealed that genistein, kaempferol and combination of these two compounds
induced dose- and time-dependent remarkable alterations in transcript profiles of
GAG metabolism genes in cultures of wild-type human dermal fibroblasts (HDFa).
Interestingly, effects of the mixture of genistein and kaempferol were stronger
than those revealed by any of these compounds used alone. Similarly, the most
effective reduction in levels of GAG production, in both HDFa and MPS II cells,
was observed in the presence of genistein, keampferol and combination of these
compounds. Forty five genes were chosen for further verification not only in
HDFa, but also in MPS II fibroblasts by using real-time qRT-PCR. Despite effects 
on GAG metabolism-related genes, we found that genistein, kaempferol and mixture 
of these compounds significantly stimulated expression of TFEB. Additionally, a
decrease in MTOR transcript level was observed at these conditions.

PMCID: PMC4369724
PMID: 25797591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 19;10(3):e0120819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120819.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic and chemical activation of TFEB mediates clearance of aggregated
a-synuclein.

Kilpatrick K(1), Zeng Y(1), Hancock T(1), Segatori L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston,
Texas, United States of America. (2)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, United States of America;
Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, Texas, United States of
America; Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology. Rice University, Houston,
Texas, United States of America.

Aggregation of a-synuclein (a-syn) is associated with the development of a number
of neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD). The formation 
of a-syn aggregates results from aberrant accumulation of misfolded a-syn and
insufficient or impaired activity of the two main intracellular protein
degradation systems, namely the ubiquitin-proteasome system and the
autophagy-lysosomal pathway. In this study, we investigated the role of
transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of the autophagy-lysosomal
pathway, in preventing the accumulation of a-syn aggregates in human neuroglioma 
cells. We found that TFEB overexpression reduces the accumulation of aggregated
a-syn by inducing autophagic clearance of a-syn. Furthermore, we showed that
pharmacological activation of TFEB using 2-hydroxypropyl-ß-cyclodextrin promotes 
autophagic clearance of aggregated a-syn. In summary, our findings demonstrate
that TFEB modulates autophagic clearance of a-syn and suggest that
pharmacological activation of TFEB is a promising strategy to enhance the
degradation of a-syn aggregates.

PMCID: PMC4366176
PMID: 25790376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):351-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3452. Epub 2015 Mar 6.

Bioinformatics analysis of abnormal DNA methylation in muscle samples from
monozygotic twins discordant for type 2 diabetes.

Liu F(1), Sun Q(2), Wang L(3), Nie S(4), Li J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan 610041, P.R. China. (2)Department of Geriatrics, West China Hospital of
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China. (3)Geriatric Department,
The Fifth People's Hospital of Chengdu City, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Geriatrics, West China Medical College of Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to examine the changes in DNA methylation of gene
promoters associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D). The DNA methylation profile
dataset GSE38291 was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. A
paired t-test was used to analyze differences in the DNA methylation of gene
promoters between T2D and normal muscle samples. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis was performed using online tool, The Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integrated Discovery. Whole-Genome rVISTA was used to analyze
the enriched transcription factor (TF) binding sites upstream of the
transcription start site in the differentially methylated genes. A total of 38
genes, including Sirtuin 1, N-acetyltransferase 6, phospholipase A2 group XIIB
and nuclear factor of activated T cells calcineurin-dependent 1, were identified 
to be differentially methylated between these two groups. One GO term, DNA
geometric change (GO:0032392), was significantly enriched (P<0.05) by the
hyper-methylated genes. In addition, the binding sites of one gene, zinc finger
E-box binding homeobox 1, and three TFs, methyl CpG binding protein 2, TFEB and
TFAP4, were significantly enriched in the hyper- and hypo-methylated genes,
respectively. The resulting T2D-associated genes and potential TFs provided a
novel insight into the molecular mechanisms underlying the pathology of T2D.
These genes may become promising target genes for the development of treatments
for T2D.

PMID: 25760736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Semin Diagn Pathol. 2015 Mar;32(2):103-13. doi: 10.1053/j.semdp.2015.02.003. Epub
2015 Feb 4.

MiT family translocation renal cell carcinoma.

Argani P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, The 
Johns Hopkins Hospital, 401 North Broadway, Weinberg 2242, Baltimore, Maryland
21231. Electronic address: pargani@jhmi.edu.

The MiT subfamily of transcription factors includes TFE3, TFEB, TFC, and MiTF.
Gene fusions involving two of these transcription factors have been identified in
renal cell carcinoma (RCC). The Xp11 translocation RCCs were first officially
recognized in the 2004 WHO renal tumor classification, and harbor gene fusions
involving TFE3. The t(6;11) RCCs harbor a specific Alpha-TFEB gene fusion and
were first officially recognized in the 2013 International Society of Urologic
Pathology (ISUP) Vancouver classification of renal neoplasia. These two subtypes 
of translocation RCC have many similarities. Both were initially described in and
disproportionately involve young patients, though adult translocation RCC may
overall outnumber pediatric cases. Both often have unusual and distinctive
morphologies; the Xp11 translocation RCCs frequently have clear cells with
papillary architecture and abundant psammomatous bodies, while the t(6;11) RCCs
frequently have a biphasic appearance with both large and small epithelioid cells
and nodules of basement membrane material. However, the morphology of these two
neoplasms can overlap, with one mimicking the other. Both of these RCCs
underexpress epithelial immunohistochemical markers like cytokeratin and
epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) relative to most other RCCs. Unlike other RCCs,
both frequently express the cysteine protease cathepsin k and often express
melanocytic markers like HMB45 and Melan A. Finally, TFE3 and TFEB have
overlapping functional activity as these two transcription factors frequently
heterodimerize and bind to the same targets. Therefore, on the basis of clinical,
morphologic, immunohistochemical, and genetic similarities, the 2013 ISUP
Vancouver classification of renal neoplasia grouped these two neoplasms together 
under the heading of "MiT family translocation RCC." This review summarizes our
current knowledge of these recently described RCCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25758327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2015 Apr 17;290(16):10309-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.610659. Epub
2015 Mar 6.

Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a induces lysosomal
biogenesis in brain cells: implications for lysosomal storage disorders.

Ghosh A(1), Jana M(1), Modi K(1), Gonzalez FJ(2), Sims KB(3), Berry-Kravis E(4), 
Pahan K(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Neurological Sciences and. (2)the Laboratory of
Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892. (3)the Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, and. (4)Pediatrics, Neurological Sciences, and
Biochemistry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612. (5)From
the Departments of Neurological Sciences and the Division of Research and
Development, Jesse Brown Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612
Kalipada_Pahan@rush.edu.

Lysosomes are ubiquitous membrane-enclosed organelles filled with an acidic
interior and are central to the autophagic, endocytic, or phagocytic pathway. In 
contrast to its classical function as the waste management machinery, lysosomes
are now considered to be an integral part of various cellular signaling
processes. The diverse functionality of this single organelle requires a very
complex and coordinated regulation of its activity with transcription factor EB
(TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis, at its core. However,
mechanisms by which TFEB is regulated are poorly understood. This study
demonstrates that gemfibrozil, an agonist of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor (PPAR) a, alone and in conjunction with all-trans-retinoic acid is
capable of enhancing TFEB in brain cells. We also observed that PPARa, but not
PPARß and PPAR<U+03B3>, is involved in gemfibrozil-mediated up-regulation of TFEB.
Reporter assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies confirmed the
recruitment of retinoid X receptor a, PPARa, and PGC1a on the PPAR-binding site
on the Tfeb promoter as well. Subsequently, the drug-mediated induction of TFEB
caused an increase in lysosomal protein and the lysosomal abundance in cell.
Collectively, this study reinforces the link between lysosomal biogenesis and
lipid metabolism with TFEB at the crossroads. Furthermore, gemfibrozil may be of 
therapeutic value in the treatment of lysosomal storage disorders in which
autophagy-lysosome pathway plays an important role.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4400343 [Available on 2016-04-17]
PMID: 25750174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Oct;230(10):2330-6. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24978.

Transcription Factor Tfe3 Directly Regulates Pgc-1alpha in Muscle.

Salma N(1), Song JS(2,)(3,)(4), Arany Z(5), Fisher DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Cutaneous Biology Research Center (CBRC),
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Charlestown,
Massachusetts. (2)Institute for Genomic Biology, CDMC Theme, Urbana, Illinois.
(3)Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois.
(4)Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois.
(5)Cardiovascular Institute Perelman School of Medicine. University of
Pennsylvania, Smilow Center for Translational Research, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

The microphthalmia (MiT) family of transcription factors is an important mediator
of metabolism. Family members Mitf and Tfeb directly regulate the expression of
the master regulator of metabolism, peroxisome-proliferator activated receptor
gamma coactivator-1 alpha (Pgc-1alpha), in melanomas and in the liver,
respectively. Pgc-1alpha is enriched in tissues with high oxidative capacity and 
plays an important role in the regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and
cellular metabolism. In skeletal muscle, Pgc-1alpha affects many aspects of
muscle functionally such as endurance, fiber-type switching, and insulin
sensitivity. Tfe3 also regulates muscle metabolic genes that enhance insulin
sensitivity in skeletal muscle. Tfe3 has not yet been shown to regulate
Pgc-1alpha expression. Our results reported here show that Tfe3 directly
regulates Pgc-1alpha expression in myotubes. Tfe3 ectopic expression induces
Pgc-1alpha, and Tfe3 silencing suppresses Pgc-1alpha expression. This regulation 
is direct, as shown by Tfe3's binding to E-boxes on the Pgc-1alpha proximal
promoter. We conclude that Tfe3 is a critical transcription factor that regulates
Pgc-1alpha gene expression in myotubes. Since Pgc-1alpha coactivates numerous
biological programs in diverse tissues, the regulation of its expression by
upstream transcription factors such Tfe3 implies potential opportunities for the 
treatment of diseases where modulation of Pgc-1alpha expression may have
important clinical outcomes.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4617629
PMID: 25736533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Mar 17;112(11):E1373-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419669112. Epub 2015 Mar 2.

Up-regulation of lysosomal TRPML1 channels is essential for lysosomal adaptation 
to nutrient starvation.

Wang W(1), Gao Q(1), Yang M(1), Zhang X(1), Yu L(1), Lawas M(1), Li X(1),
Bryant-Genevier M(2), Southall NT(2), Marugan J(2), Ferrer M(2), Xu H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and. (2)National Center for Advancing
Translational Sciences, National Institute of Health, Rockville, MD 20850.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and haoxingx@umich.edu.

Upon nutrient starvation, autophagy digests unwanted cellular components to
generate catabolites that are required for housekeeping biosynthesis processes. A
complete execution of autophagy demands an enhancement in lysosome function and
biogenesis to match the increase in autophagosome formation. Here, we report that
mucolipin-1 (also known as TRPML1 or ML1), a Ca(2+) channel in the lysosome that 
regulates many aspects of lysosomal trafficking, plays a central role in this
quality-control process. By using Ca(2+) imaging and whole-lysosome patch
clamping, lysosomal Ca(2+) release and ML1 currents were detected within hours of
nutrient starvation and were potently up-regulated. In contrast, lysosomal
Na(+)-selective currents were not up-regulated. Inhibition of mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) or activation of transcription factor EB (TFEB) mimicked a
starvation effect in fed cells. The starvation effect also included an increase
in lysosomal proteostasis and enhanced clearance of lysosomal storage, including 
cholesterol accumulation in Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) cells. However,
this effect was not observed when ML1 was pharmacologically inhibited or
genetically deleted. Furthermore, overexpression of ML1 mimicked the starvation
effect. Hence, lysosomal adaptation to environmental cues such as nutrient levels
requires mTOR/TFEB-dependent, lysosome-to-nucleus regulation of lysosomal ML1
channels and Ca(2+) signaling.

PMCID: PMC4371935
PMID: 25733853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;17(3):288-99.

Lysosomal calcium signalling regulates autophagy through calcineurin and <U+200B>TFEB.

Medina DL, Di Paola S, Peluso I, Armani A, De Stefani D, Venditti R, Montefusco
S, Scotto-Rosato A, Prezioso C, Forrester A, Settembre C, Wang W, Gao Q, Xu H,
Sandri M, Rizzuto R, De Matteis MA, Ballabio A.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2015;11(7):1192-5.

The view of the lysosome as the terminal end of cellular catabolic pathways has
been challenged by recent studies showing a central role of this organelle in the
control of cell function. Here we show that a lysosomal Ca2+ signalling mechanism
controls the activities of the phosphatase calcineurin and of its substrate
<U+200B>TFEB, a master transcriptional regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy. 
Lysosomal Ca2+ release through <U+200B>mucolipin 1 (<U+200B>MCOLN1) activates calcineurin,
which binds and dephosphorylates <U+200B>TFEB, thus promoting its nuclear translocation.
Genetic and pharmacological inhibition of calcineurin suppressed <U+200B>TFEB activity
during starvation and physical exercise, while calcineurin overexpression and
constitutive activation had the opposite effect. Induction of autophagy and
lysosomal biogenesis through <U+200B>TFEB required <U+200B>MCOLN1-mediated calcineurin
activation. These data link lysosomal calcium signalling to both calcineurin
regulation and autophagy induction and identify the lysosome as a hub for the
signalling pathways that regulate cellular homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4801004
PMID: 25720963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Annu Rev Physiol. 2015;77:57-80. doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-021014-071649.

Lysosomal physiology.

Xu H(1), Ren D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109; email: haoxingx@umich.edu.

Lysosomes are acidic compartments filled with more than 60 different types of
hydrolases. They mediate the degradation of extracellular particles from
endocytosis and of intracellular components from autophagy. The digested products
are transported out of the lysosome via specific catabolite exporters or via
vesicular membrane trafficking. Lysosomes also contain more than 50 membrane
proteins and are equipped with the machinery to sense nutrient availability,
which determines the distribution, number, size, and activity of lysosomes to
control the specificity of cargo flux and timing (the initiation and termination)
of degradation. Defects in degradation, export, or trafficking result in
lysosomal dysfunction and lysosomal storage diseases (LSDs). Lysosomal channels
and transporters mediate ion flux across perimeter membranes to regulate
lysosomal ion homeostasis, membrane potential, catabolite export, membrane
trafficking, and nutrient sensing. Dysregulation of lysosomal channels underlies 
the pathogenesis of many LSDs and possibly that of metabolic and common
neurodegenerative diseases.

PMCID: PMC4524569
PMID: 25668017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Methods Cell Biol. 2015;126:45-62. doi: 10.1016/bs.mcb.2014.11.011. Epub 2015 Jan
19.

TFEB and the CLEAR network.

Settembre C(1), Medina DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Pozzuoli, Italy; Telethon Institute of Genetics
and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy; Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan
Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA;
Medical Genetics, Department of Medical and Translational Science Unit, Federico 
II University, Naples, Italy. (2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine
(TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy.

The general view of the lysosome as the terminal end of cellular catabolic
pathways, has started to change due to the recent discoveries of a lysosomal
nutrient sensing machinery and of a lysosome-to-nucleus signaling mechanism that 
modulate lysosomal function by way of the master transcriptional regulator TFEB. 
Lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy are coordinated by TFEB, whose function is
regulated by phosphorylation. TFEB interacts with and is phosphorylated by mTORC1
at the lysosomal surface. Thus, conditions resulting in inhibition of mTOR, such 
as starvation and lysosomal stress, promote TFEB nuclear translocation.
Preliminary evidences showing that the TFEB activation are able to ameliorate the
phenotype of lysosomal storage disorders and more common neurodegenerative
diseases have opened an extraordinary possibility for the development of
innovative therapies. Research in TFEB and lysosomal function has continued to
advance and attract interest due to increased understanding of the mechanisms
behind lysosomal function. In this paper, we present a set of procedures that
facilitate examination of TFEB function and its related processes.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25665440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Curr Drug Targets. 2015;16(2):125-35.

Oncotargets in different renal cancer subtypes.

Moch H, Montironi R, Lopez-Beltran A, Cheng L, Mischo A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Surgical Pathology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
holger.moch@usz.ch.

Renal cell cancer is a heterogeneous group of cancers with different histologic
subtypes. The majority of renal tumors in adults are clear cell renal cell
carcinomas, which are characterized by von Hippel- Lindau (VHL) gene alterations.
Recent advances in defining the genetic landscape of renal cancer has shown the
genetic heterogeneity of clear cell renal cell carcinomas (ccRCC) and the
presence of at least 3 additional ccRCC tumor suppressor genes on chromosome 3p. 
Due to inactivation of VHL, renal cancer cells produce the HIF-responsive growth 
factor VEGF. The PI3K--mTORC1 signaling axis also represents a target for
therapy. The new systemic therapies, including tyrosine kinase inhibitors,
monoclonal antibodies, and mTOR inhibitors, aim to suppress angiogenesis with
vascular endothelial growth factor as a target. Various VEGF-inhibitors are
approved for the treatment of ccRCC and we discuss recent advancements in the
treatment of metastatic ccRCC. Other gene alterations have been identified in
hereditary cancer syndromes, e.g. FLCN, TSC1, TSC2, TFE3, TFEB, MITF, FH, SDHB,
SDHD, MET, and PTEN and we review their role in renal tumor carcinogenesis,
prognosis, and targeted therapy. By reviewing the associations between
morphologic features and molecular genetics of renal cancer we provide insight
into the basis for targeted renal cancer therapy.

PMID: 25619751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 3;112(5):E420-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1424576112.
Epub 2015 Jan 20.

MITF drives endolysosomal biogenesis and potentiates Wnt signaling in melanoma
cells.

Ploper D(1), Taelman VF(1), Robert L(2), Perez BS(1), Titz B(3), Chen HW(4),
Graeber TG(5), von Euw E(4), Ribas A(6), De Robertis EM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology. (3)Department of
Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for Molecular Imaging, and.
(4)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095. (5)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for
Molecular Imaging, and Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095. (6)Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095. (7)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and
Department of Biological Chemistry, ederobertis@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment in
    Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2015 Jul;28(4):372-3.

Canonical Wnt signaling plays an important role in development and disease,
regulating transcription of target genes and stabilizing many proteins
phosphorylated by glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3). We observed that the MiT
family of transcription factors, which includes the melanoma oncogene MITF
(micropthalmia-associated transcription factor) and the lysosomal master
regulator TFEB, had the highest phylogenetic conservation of three consecutive
putative GSK3 phosphorylation sites in animal proteomes. This finding prompted us
to examine the relationship between MITF, endolysosomal biogenesis, and Wnt
signaling. Here we report that MITF expression levels correlated with the
expression of a large subset of lysosomal genes in melanoma cell lines. MITF
expression in the tetracycline-inducible C32 melanoma model caused a marked
increase in vesicular structures, and increased expression of late endosomal
proteins, such as Rab7, LAMP1, and CD63. These late endosomes were not functional
lysosomes as they were less active in proteolysis, yet were able to concentrate
Axin1, phospho-LRP6, phospho-ß-catenin, and GSK3 in the presence of Wnt ligands. 
This relocalization significantly enhanced Wnt signaling by increasing the number
of multivesicular bodies into which the Wnt signalosome/destruction complex
becomes localized upon Wnt signaling. We also show that the MITF protein was
stabilized by Wnt signaling, through the novel C-terminal GSK3 phosphorylations
identified here. MITF stabilization caused an increase in multivesicular body
biosynthesis, which in turn increased Wnt signaling, generating a
positive-feedback loop that may function during the proliferative stages of
melanoma. The results underscore the importance of misregulated endolysosomal
biogenesis in Wnt signaling and cancer.

PMCID: PMC4321275
PMID: 25605940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2015 Jun;13(3):e199-201. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2014.12.008.
Epub 2014 Dec 20.

Partial nephrectomy for the treatment of translocation renal cell carcinoma.

Gorin MA(1), Ball MW(2), Pierorazio PM(2), Argani P(3), Allaf ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute and Department of Urology, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD. Electronic address:
mgorin1@jhmi.edu. (2)The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute and Department
of Urology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate the outcome of patients with
translocation renal cell carcinoma (RCC) treated with partial nephrectomy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Our institutional review board-approved renal mass registry
was queried for patients who underwent partial nephrectomy for a pathologically
confirmed translocation RCC. We describe the demographic, clinical, pathological,
and follow-up data for this series of patients.
RESULTS: Between 2003 and 2013, 1897 patients with RCC were treated at our
institution with a radical or partial nephrectomy. In total, 10 (0.5%) patients
were diagnosed with a translocation RCC. Of these patients, 4 (40%) underwent
treatment with partial nephrectomy for an incidentally detected small renal mass 
(mean imaging diameter, 2.6 cm [range, 1.0-4.2 cm]). During a mean follow-up of
37 months (range, 8-81 months), all patients were alive without evidence of
disease.
CONCLUSION: At short-term follow-up, partial nephrectomy appears to be an
effective treatment option for patients with small translocation RCCs. Larger
studies are required to more extensively investigate the optimal treatment of
these potentially aggressive tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4648265
PMID: 25592300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2015;7C:16-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2014.12.026. Epub 2014
Dec 23.

Renal cell carcinoma with t(6:11) (p21;q12). A case report highlighting
distinctive immunohistologic features of this rare tumor.

Arneja SK(1), Gujar N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology And Cytology, Breach Candy Hospital Trust, 60
A Bhulabhai Desai Road,Mumbai 400026, India. Electronic address:
drsarabjeetkaur@breachcandyhospital.org. (2)Department of Surgical Pathology And 
Cytology, Breach Candy Hospital Trust, 60 A Bhulabhai Desai Road,Mumbai 400026,
India. Electronic address: drneeraj.gujar@breachcandyhospital.org.

INTRODUCTION: Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with t(6:11) (p21;q12) are extremely
rare, fewer than 30 cases have been reported in literature. These tumors are
characterized by specific chromosomal translocation involving TFEB, as against
the more commonly known TFE3 (Xp11.2) translocation associated RCCs. The
distinctive immnohistologic features are helpful in enabling a diagnosis of this 
rare tumor, otherwise diagnosed by fluorescence in situ hybridization assay,
specific for detecting TFEB gene rearrangement.
PRESENTATION OF CASE: Herein, we report a case of this rare tumor in a 11 years
old boy, with the objective of highlighting distinctive light microscopic and
immuno-phenotypic features of this rare sub-type of translocation associated
renal cell carcinoma, otherwise diagnosed by fluorescence in situ hybridization
technique. Morphologically tumor showed distinctive biphasic population of cells,
large epitheloid cells with voluminous eosinophillic cytoplasm and smaller cells 
with much lesser amount of cytoplasm and small rounded nuclei. The smaller cells 
at places clustered around hyaline pink material forming "pseudorosettes".
population. Immunohistochemically both types of tumor cells showed negativity for
pan CK (cytokeratin), EMA (epitheleal membrane antigen) and TFE3 (transcription
factor E3). HMB 45 (human melanoma black 45) and Melan- A /MART 1 (melanoma
antigen recognized by T cells) were moderate to strongly expressed.
DISCUSSION: On review of literature, most RCCs with t(6;11) translocation have
been reported to be negative for pan cytokeratins and EMA. Published literature
also shows that the most distinctive immunohistochemical feature of t(6;11)
translocation RCC is nuclear staining for TFEB protein. Immunostains for TFE3
have always been negative in the reported cases. It is noteworthy that
immunoreactivity for melanocytic markers HMB45 and Melan A and immunonegativity
for epithelial markers pan CK and EMA may lead to misdiagnosis of angiomyolipoma 
to the unwary.
CONCLUSION: Knowledge of distinctive morphological and immuno-histochemical
features of this tumor can help in establishing a diagnosis of this rare subset
of translocation associated RCC on routine hematoxylin and eosin (H and E)
staining and immunophenotyping.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336393
PMID: 25562596  [PubMed]


82. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 27;290(9):5592-605. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.616714. Epub 2015
Jan 5.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) inhibition induces prosurvival autophagic
signals in human pancreatic cancer cells.

Marchand B(1), Arsenault D(1), Raymond-Fleury A(1), Boisvert FM(2), Boucher
MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medicine, Gastroenterology Division, and. (2)the
Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la
Santé, Pavillon de Recherche Appliquée sur le Cancer, Université de Sherbrooke,
Sherbrooke, Québec J1E 4K8, Canada. (3)From the Department of Medicine,
Gastroenterology Division, and marie-josee.boucher@usherbrooke.ca.

Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3) are ubiquitously expressed serine-threonine
kinases involved in a plethora of functions ranging from the control of glycogen 
metabolism to transcriptional regulation. We recently demonstrated that GSK3
inhibition triggers JNK-cJUN-dependent apoptosis in human pancreatic cancer
cells. However, the comprehensive picture of downstream GSK3-regulated
pathways/functions remains elusive. Herein, counterbalancing the death signals,
we show that GSK3 inhibition induces prosurvival signals through increased
activity of the autophagy/lysosomal network. Our data also reveal a contribution 
of GSK3 in the regulation of the master transcriptional regulator of autophagy
and lysosomal biogenesis, transcription factor EB (TFEB) in pancreatic cancer
cells. Similarly to mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition, GSK3
inhibitors promote TFEB nuclear localization and leads to TFEB dephosphorylation 
through endogenous serine/threonine phosphatase action. However, GSK3 and mTOR
inhibition impinge differently and independently on TFEB phosphorylation
suggesting that TFEB is regulated by a panel of kinases and/or phosphatases.
Despite their differential impact on TFEB phosphorylation, both GSK3 and mTOR
inhibitors promote 14-3-3 dissociation and TFEB nuclear localization.
Quantitative mass spectrometry analyses further reveal an increased association
of TFEB with nuclear proteins upon GSK3 and mTOR inhibition suggesting a positive
impact on TFEB transcriptional function. Finally, a predominant nuclear
localization of TFEB is unveiled in fully fed pancreatic cancer cells, whereas a 
reduction in TFEB expression significantly impairs their capacity for growth in
an anchorage-independent manner. In addition, TFEB-restricted cells are more
sensitive to apoptosis upon GSK3 inhibition. Altogether, our data uncover new
functions under the control of GSK3 in pancreatic cancer cells in addition to
providing key insight into TFEB regulation.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4342473
PMID: 25561726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Mar;35(6):956-76. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01091-14. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Regulation of the transcription factor EB-PGC1a axis by beclin-1 controls
mitochondrial quality and cardiomyocyte death under stress.

Ma X(1), Liu H(1), Murphy JT(2), Foyil SR(1), Godar RJ(1), Abuirqeba H(2),
Weinheimer CJ(2), Barger PM(2), Diwan A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology and Center for Cardiovascular Research, Department of
Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri,
USA John Cochran VA Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (2)Division of
Cardiology and Center for Cardiovascular Research, Department of Internal
Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Division of Cardiology and Center for Cardiovascular Research, Department of
Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri,
USA Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA John Cochran VA Medical Center, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA adiwan@dom.wustl.edu.

In cardiac ischemia-reperfusion injury, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation 
and upregulation of the hypoxia-inducible protein BNIP3 result in mitochondrial
permeabilization, but impairment in autophagic removal of damaged mitochondria
provokes programmed cardiomyocyte death. BNIP3 expression and ROS generation
result in upregulation of beclin-1, a protein associated with transcriptional
suppression of autophagy-lysosome proteins and reduced activation of
transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of the autophagy-lysosome
machinery. Partial beclin-1 knockdown transcriptionally stimulates lysosome
biogenesis and autophagy via mTOR inhibition and activation of TFEB, enhancing
removal of depolarized mitochondria. TFEB activation concomitantly stimulates
mitochondrial biogenesis via PGC1a induction to restore normally polarized
mitochondria and attenuate BNIP3- and hypoxia-reoxygenation-induced cell death.
Conversely, overexpression of beclin-1 activates mTOR to inhibit TFEB, resulting 
in declines in lysosome numbers and suppression of PGC1a transcription.
Importantly, knockdown of endogenous TFEB or PGC1a results in a complete or
partial loss, respectively, of the cytoprotective effects of partial beclin-1
knockdown, indicating a critical role for both mitochondrial autophagy and
biogenesis in ensuring cellular viability. These studies uncover a
transcriptional feedback loop for beclin-1-mediated regulation of TFEB activation
and implicate a central role for TFEB in coordinating mitochondrial autophagy
with biogenesis to restore normally polarized mitochondria and prevent
ischemia-reperfusion-induced cardiomyocyte death.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4333088
PMID: 25561470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Placenta. 2015 Feb;36(2):160-9. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2014.12.001. Epub 2014
Dec 13.

Increased glucocerebrosidase expression and activity in preeclamptic placenta.

Jebbink JM(1), Boot RG(2), Keijser R(3), Moerland PD(4), Aten J(5), Veenboer
GJ(3), van Wely M(6), Buimer M(7), Ver Loren van Themaat E(4), Aerts JM(2), van
der Post JA(7), Afink GB(3), Ris-Stalpers C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
Reproductive Biology Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.m.jebbink@amc.uva.nl. (2)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Reproductive Biology Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (4)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Clinical Epidemiology,
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (5)Department of Pathology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. (6)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Obstetrics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (8)Department of Obstetrics, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Reproductive Biology Laboratory, Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: Lysosomal glucosidase beta acid (GBA) deficiency is inherent to
Gaucher disease, Parkinsonism and Lewy-body dementia. Increased GBA expression
has never been associated with human disease. We describe increased GBA
expression and activity in placenta from preeclamptic pregnancies.
METHODS: 112 placenta biopsies were available for qPCR, analysis of GBA gene
expression and activity. Microanalysis was performed on 20 placenta samples.
Alternatively spliced placental GBA transcripts were cloned, expressed in HEK293 
cells and analyzed by Western blot and activity assay.
RESULTS: GBA is expressed in the syncytiotrophoblast layer of human placenta
already at 5 weeks of gestation. We identified five novel GBA transcripts in
placenta that enzymatically inactive when expressed in HEK293 cells. Both GBA RNA
expression and enzymatic activity are upregulated in preeclamptic placenta.
Microarray analysis of 20 placenta tissues identified 158 genes co-regulating
with GBA expression and gene enrichment analysis highlights lysosomal function.
In our micro-array data GBA expression does not correlate with FLT1 expression,
currently the most powerful marker for preeclampsia. There are 89 transcripts
that are negatively correlated with GBA expression of which BMP4 and TFEB are
interesting as they are essential to early placenta function.
DISCUSSION: Although very speculative, we hypothesize that increased GBA
expression might relate to placentation through decreased BMP4 signaling or
vascularization through downregulation of TFEB. Ceramide, the product of
hydrolysis of glucosylceramide by GBA and involved in the regulation of cell
differentiation, survival and apoptosis, is another putative candidate linking
increased GBA activity to preeclampsia. Both pathways merit further
investigation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25552189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 20;6(2):1143-56.

Lysosomal sequestration of hydrophobic weak base chemotherapeutics triggers
lysosomal biogenesis and lysosome-dependent cancer multidrug resistance.

Zhitomirsky B(1), Assaraf YG(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Fred Wyszkowski Cancer Research Laboratory, Dept. of Biology,
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) is a primary hindrance to curative cancer
chemotherapy. In this respect, lysosomes were suggested to play a role in
intrinsic MDR by sequestering protonated hydrophobic weak base chemotherapeutics 
away from their intracellular target sites. Here we show that intrinsic
resistance to sunitinib, a hydrophobic weak base tyrosine kinase inhibitor known 
to accumulate in lysosomes, tightly correlates with the number of lysosomes
accumulating high levels of sunitinib in multiple human carcinoma cells.
Furthermore, exposure of cancer cells to hydrophobic weak base drugs leads to a
marked increase in the number of lysosomes per cell. Non-cytotoxic, nanomolar
concentrations, of the hydrophobic weak base chemotherapeutics doxorubicin and
mitoxantrone triggered rapid lysosomal biogenesis that was associated with
nuclear translocation of TFEB, the dominant transcription factor regulating
lysosomal biogenesis. This resulted in increased lysosomal gene expression and
lysosomal enzyme activity. Thus, treatment of cancer cells with hydrophobic weak 
base chemotherapeutics and their consequent sequestration in lysosomes triggers
lysosomal biogenesis, thereby further enhancing lysosomal drug entrapment and
MDR. The current study provides the first evidence that drug-induced
TFEB-associated lysosomal biogenesis is an emerging determinant of MDR and
suggests that circumvention of lysosomal drug sequestration is a novel strategy
to overcome this chemoresistance.

PMCID: PMC4359223
PMID: 25544758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cancer Biol Ther. 2014;15(11):1468-78. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.955719.

Autophagy and lysosomal related protein expression patterns in human
glioblastoma.

Giatromanolaki A(1), Sivridis E, Mitrakas A, Kalamida D, Zois CE, Haider S,
Piperidou C, Pappa A, Gatter KC, Harris AL, Koukourakis MI.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Pathology ; Democritus University of Thrace/University General
Hospital of Alexandroupolis ; Alexandroupolis , Greece.

Glioblastoma cells are resistant to apoptotic stimuli with autophagic death
prevailing under cytotoxic stress. Autophagy interfering agents may represent a
new strategy to test in combination with chemo-radiation. We investigated the
patterns of expression of autophagy related proteins (LC3A, LC3B, p62, Beclin 1, 
ULK1 and ULK2) in a series of patients treated with post-operative radiotherapy. 
Experiments with glioblastoma cell lines (T98 and U87) were also performed to
assess autophagic response under conditions simulating the adverse intratumoral
environment. Glioblastomas showed cytoplasmic overexpression of autophagic
proteins in a varying extent, so that cases could be grouped into low and high
expression groups. 10/23, 5/23, 13/23, 5/23, 8/23 and 9/23 cases examined showed 
extensive expression of LC3A, LC3B, Beclin 1, Ulk 1, Ulk 2 and p62, respectively.
Lysosomal markers Cathepsin D and LAMP2a, as well as the lyososomal biogenesis
transcription factor TFEB were frequently overexpressed in glioblastomas (10/23, 
11/23, and 10/23 cases, respectively). TFEB was directly linked with PTEN,
Cathepsin D, HIF1a, LC3B, Beclin 1 and p62 expression. PTEN was also
significantly related with LC3B but not LC3A expression, in both
immunohistochemistry and gene expression analysis. Confocal microscopy in T98 and
U87 cell lines showed distinct identity of LC3A and LC3B autophagosomes. The
previously reported stone-like structure (SLS) pattern of LC3 expression was
related with prognosis. SLS were inducible in glioblastoma cell lines under
exposure to acidic conditions and 2DG mediated glucose antagonism. The present
study provides the basis for autophagic characterization of human glioblastoma
for further translational studies and targeted therapy trials.

PMCID: PMC4622979
PMID: 25482944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2014 Dec;18(6):351-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2014.10.002.
Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Aggressive and nonaggressive translocation t(6;11) renal cell carcinoma:
comparative study of 6 cases and review of the literature.

Peckova K(1), Vanecek T(1), Martinek P(1), Spagnolo D(2), Kuroda N(3), Brunelli
M(4), Vranic S(5), Djuricic S(6), Rotterova P(1), Daum O(1), Kokoskova B(1),
Vesela P(1), Pivovarcikova K(1), Bauleth K(1), Dubova M(1), Kalusova K(7), Hora
M(7), Michal M(1), Hes O(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Plzen,
Charles University, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (2)Department of Pathology, PathWest 
Laboratory Medicine WA, Nedlands, Australia. (3)Department of Diagnostic
Pathology, Kochi Red Cross Hospital, Kochi, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology and
Diagnostic, University of Verona, Verona, Italy. (5)Department of Pathology,
Clinical Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
(6)Department of Pathology, Mother and Child Health Institute of Serbia,
Belgrade, Serbia. (7)Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Charles
University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (8)Department of Pathology, Faculty
of Medicine, University Hospital Plzen, Charles University, Pilsen, Czech
Republic; Biomedical Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Plzen, Charles University in 
Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. Electronic address: hes@medima.cz.

t(6;11) renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has been recognized as a rare and mostly
nonaggressive tumor (NAT). The criteria for distinguishing aggressive tumors (AT)
from NATs are not well established. A total of 6 cases were selected for the
study. Five cases of t(6;11) RCCs behaved nonaggressively, and 1 was carcinoma
with aggressive behavior. The tumors were analyzed morphologically using
immunohistochemistry and by molecular-genetic methods. The specimen of aggressive
t(6;11) RCC was from a 77-year-old woman who died of the disease 2.5 months after
diagnosis. The specimens of nonaggressive t(6;11) RCCs were from 3 women and 2
men whose ages range between 15 and 54 years. Follow-up was available in all
cases (2.5 months-8 years). The tumor size ranged from 3 to 14 cm in
nonaggressive t(6;11) RCC. In the aggressive carcinoma, the tumor size was 12 cm.
All tumors (6/6) were well circumscribed. Aggressive t(6;11) RCC was widely
necrotic. Six (100%) of 6 all tumors displayed a solid/alveolar architecture with
occasional tubules and pseudorosettes. Pseudopapillary formations lined by
bizarre polymorphic cells were found focally in the aggressive t(6;11) RCC case. 
Mitoses, though rare, were found as well. All cases (AT and NAT) were positive
for HMB-45, Melan-A, Cathepsin K, and cytokeratins. CD117 positivity was seen in 
4 of 5 NATs, as well as in the primary and metastatic lesions of the AT. mTOR was
positive in 2 of 5 NATs and vimentin in 4 of 5 NATs. Vimentin was negative in the
primary lesion of the AT, as well as in the metastasis found in the adrenal
gland. Translocation t(6;11)(Alpha-TFEB) or TFEB break was detected in 4 of 5
NATs and in the AT case. Aggressive tumor showed amplification of TFEB locus.
Losses of part of chromosome 1 and chromosome 22 were found in 1 of 5 NATs and in
the AT.CONCLUSIONS: (1) Aggressive t(6;11) RCCs generally occur in the older
population in comparison with their indolent counterparts. (2) In regard to the
histologic findings in ATs, 3 of 5 so far published cases were morphologically
not typical for t(6;11) RCC. Of the 3 cases, 2 cases lacked a small cell
component and 1 closely mimicked clear cell-type RCC. (3) Necroses were only
present in aggressive t(6;11) RCC. (4) Amplification of TFEB locus was also found
only in the aggressive t(6;11) RCC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25438924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nature. 2014 Dec 4;516(7529):108-11. doi: 10.1038/nature13949. Epub 2014 Nov 12.

Transcriptional regulation of autophagy by an FXR-CREB axis.

Seok S(1), Fu T(1), Choi SE(2), Li Y(3), Zhu R(4), Kumar S(1), Sun X(4), Yoon
G(5), Kang Y(5), Zhong W(4), Ma J(3), Kemper B(1), Kemper JK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA. (2)1] Department of Molecular and 
Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana,
Illinois 61801, USA [2] Institute for Medical Science, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon 442-749, Korea. (3)Department of Bioengineering and the Institute
for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois
61801, USA. (4)Department of Statistics, University of Georgia, Athens, Gerogia
30602, USA. (5)Institute for Medical Science, Ajou University School of Medicine,
Suwon 442-749, Korea.

Lysosomal degradation of cytoplasmic components by autophagy is essential for
cellular survival and homeostasis under nutrient-deprived conditions. Acute
regulation of autophagy by nutrient-sensing kinases is well defined, but
longer-term transcriptional regulation is relatively unknown. Here we show that
the fed-state sensing nuclear receptor farnesoid X receptor (FXR) and the fasting
transcriptional activator cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB)
coordinately regulate the hepatic autophagy gene network. Pharmacological
activation of FXR repressed many autophagy genes and inhibited autophagy even in 
fasted mice, and feeding-mediated inhibition of macroautophagy was attenuated in 
FXR-knockout mice. From mouse liver chromatin immunoprecipitation and
high-throughput sequencing data, FXR and CREB binding peaks were detected at 178 
and 112 genes, respectively, out of 230 autophagy-related genes, and 78 genes
showed shared binding, mostly in their promoter regions. CREB promoted autophagic
degradation of lipids, or lipophagy, under nutrient-deprived conditions, and FXR 
inhibited this response. Mechanistically, CREB upregulated autophagy genes,
including Atg7, Ulk1 and Tfeb, by recruiting the coactivator CRTC2. After feeding
or pharmacological activation, FXR trans-repressed these genes by disrupting the 
functional CREB-CRTC2 complex. This study identifies the new FXR-CREB axis as a
key physiological switch regulating autophagy, resulting in sustained nutrient
regulation of autophagy during feeding/fasting cycles.

PMCID: PMC4257899
PMID: 25383523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Apr;172(4):1090-5. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13512. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

Human herpesvirus 6 involvement in paediatric drug hypersensitivity syndrome.

Ahluwalia J(1), Abuabara K, Perman MJ, Yan AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of General Pediatrics, Section of
Dermatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 3550 Market Street, 2nd
Floor, Philadelphia, 19104, PA, U.S.A.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2015 Apr;172(4):858-9.

BACKGROUND: Human herpesvirus (HHV)6 positivity in the context of drug
hypersensitivity syndrome (DHS) may influence disease severity. Systemic
corticosteroid treatment of those with DHS testing positive for HHV6 has been
speculated to prolong the duration of disease.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether paediatric HHV6-positive patients with DHS
develop a more severe illness than those without presumed reactivation, and to
evaluate the response to systemic corticosteroid treatment.
METHODS: A retrospective case series of 29 paediatric inpatients treated for DHS 
and tested for HHV6 was undertaken. HHV6-positive and -negative patients were
identified and stratified into groups treated or not treated with systemic
corticosteroids to examine their disease severity on the basis of hospital length
of stay (LOS), total number of febrile days (Tfeb) and days until cessation of
progression (CTP).
RESULTS: Human herpesvirus6-positive patients had similar demographic
characteristics to those of HHV6-negative patients, but had significantly longer 
hospital LOS (11·5 days vs. 5 days, P = 0·039), Tfeb (12·5 days vs. 3 days, P =
0·032) and CTP (4 days vs. 2 days, P = 0·014). All HHV6-positive patients and
most (80%) of the HHV6-negative patients received systemic corticosteroids. Among
the HHV6-negative patients, those who received corticosteroids showed
significantly shorter CTP than those who did not (3 days vs. 2 days, P = 0·043). 
Additionally, there was a trend towards shorter hospital LOS and Tfeb among
HHV6-negative patients who received corticosteroids vs. those who did not,
although these differences were not statistically significant. The most common
inciting drugs included trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (34%), phenytoin (10%) and 
amoxicillin (10%).
CONCLUSIONS: Human herpesvirus6 positivity with DHS is associated with a more
severe disease course. Treatment with systemic corticosteroids was associated
with a trend towards reduced hospital LOS and Tfeb, and a significantly reduced
number of days until cessation of progression.

© 2014 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMCID: PMC4382397
PMID: 25369238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 Nov;138(11):1531-41. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0653-RA.

Diagnostic approach to eosinophilic renal neoplasms.

Kryvenko ON(1), Jorda M, Argani P, Epstein JI.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Pathology (Drs Kryvenko and Jorda) and Urology (Drs
Kryvenko and Jorda), University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida; and the Departments of Pathology (Drs Argani and Epstein), Oncology (Drs
Argani and Epstein), and Urology (Dr Epstein), The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.

CONTEXT: Eosinophilic renal neoplasms include a spectrum of solid and papillary
tumors ranging from indolent benign oncocytoma to highly aggressive malignancies.
Recognition of the correct nature of the tumor, especially in biopsy specimens,
is paramount for patient management.
OBJECTIVE: To review the diagnostic approach to eosinophilic renal neoplasms with
light microscopy and ancillary techniques.
DATA SOURCES: Review of the published literature and personal experience.
CONCLUSIONS: The following tumors are in the differential diagnosis of oncocytic 
renal cell neoplasm: oncocytoma, chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (RCC), hybrid
tumor, tubulocystic carcinoma, papillary RCC, clear cell RCC with predominant
eosinophilic cell morphology, follicular thyroid-like RCC, hereditary
leiomyomatosis-associated RCC, acquired cystic disease-associated RCC, rhabdoid
RCC, microphthalmia transcription factor translocation RCC, epithelioid
angiomyolipoma, and unclassified RCC. In low-grade nonpapillary eosinophilic
neoplasms, distinction between oncocytoma and low-grade RCC mostly rests on
histomorphology; however, cytokeratin 7 immunostain may be helpful. In high-grade
nonpapillary lesions, there is more of a role for ancillary techniques, including
immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin 7, CA9, CD10, racemase, HMB45, and Melan-A. 
In papillary eosinophilic neoplasms, it is important to distinguish sporadic type
2 papillary RCC from microphthalmia transcription factor translocation and
hereditary leiomyomatosis-associated RCC. Histologic and cytologic features along
with immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization tests for TFE3
(Xp11.2) and TFEB [t(6;11)] are reliable confirmatory tests. Eosinophilic
epithelial neoplasms with architecture, cytology, and/or immunoprofile not
qualifying for either of the established types of RCC should be classified as
unclassified eosinophilic RCC and arbitrarily assigned a grade (low or high).

PMCID: PMC4352320
PMID: 25357116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Toxicol Pathol. 2014 Jul;27(2):153-8. doi: 10.1293/tox.2014-0004. Epub 2014 Apr
17.

Activation of Master Autophagy Regulator TFEB During Systemic LPS Administration 
in the Cornea.

Uchida K(1), Unuma K(1), Funakoshi T(1), Aki T(1), Uemura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Forensic Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University,Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

The involvement of autophagy in the cornea during the systemic inflammatory
response elicited by intravenous administration of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) was
investigated. Eight-week-old male Sprague-Dawley rats were injected i.v. with 15 
mg/kg body weight LPS. RC4 rabbit corneal keratocytes were also used and treated 
with 100 ng/mL of tumor necrosis factor a (TNFa) and/or cycloheximide (CHX). The 
nuclear translocation of transcription factor EB (TFEB), the master
transcriptional regulator for autophagy, was observed after LPS administration in
the corneal epithelium. Induction of autophagy-related proteins was observed in
the cornea after LPS administration, as well as in RC4 cells after treatment with
TNFa. Administration of trehalose, an inducer of TFEB, mitigated RC4 cell death
caused by TNFa/CHX. These results demonstrate the importance of TFEB activation
in cellular defense against the systemic inflammatory response in the cornea.

PMCID: PMC4110941
PMID: 25352718  [PubMed]


92. ACS Nano. 2014 Oct 28;8(10):10328-42. doi: 10.1021/nn505073u. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

Ceria nanoparticles stabilized by organic surface coatings activate the
lysosome-autophagy system and enhance autophagic clearance.

Song W(1), Soo Lee S, Savini M, Popp L, Colvin VL, Segatori L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of †Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, ‡Chemistry,
§Biochemistry and Cell Biology, and <U+22A5>Bioengineering, Rice University , Houston,
Texas 77005, United States.

Cerium oxide nanoparticles (nanoceria) are widely used in a variety of industrial
applications including UV filters and catalysts. The expanding commercial scale
production and use of ceria nanoparticles have inevitably increased the risk of
release of nanoceria into the environment as well as the risk of human exposure. 
The use of nanoceria in biomedical applications is also being currently
investigated because of its recently characterized antioxidative properties. In
this study, we investigated the impact of ceria nanoparticles on the
lysosome-autophagy system, the main catabolic pathway that is activated in
mammalian cells upon internalization of exogenous material. We tested a battery
of ceria nanoparticles functionalized with different types of biocompatible
coatings (N-acetylglucosamine, polyethylene glycol and polyvinylpyrrolidone)
expected to have minimal effect on lysosomal integrity and function. We found
that ceria nanoparticles promote activation of the transcription factor EB, a
master regulator of lysosomal function and autophagy, and induce upregulation of 
genes of the lysosome-autophagy system. We further show that the array of
differently functionalized ceria nanoparticles tested in this study enhance
autophagic clearance of proteolipid aggregates that accumulate as a result of
inefficient function of the lysosome-autophagy system. This study provides a
mechanistic understanding of the interaction of ceria nanoparticles with the
lysosome-autophagy system and demonstrates that ceria nanoparticles are
activators of autophagy and promote clearance of autophagic cargo. These results 
provide insights for the use of nanoceria in biomedical applications, including
drug delivery. These findings will also inform the design of engineered
nanoparticles with safe and precisely controlled impact on the environment and
the design of nanotherapeutics for the treatment of diseases with defective
autophagic function and accumulation of lysosomal storage material.

PMID: 25315655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Pain Med. 2015 Jan;16(1):61-7. doi: 10.1111/pme.12582. Epub 2014 Oct 7.

Cervical transforaminal epidural block using low-dose local anesthetic: a
prospective, randomized, double-blind study.

Woo JH(1), Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, School of Medicine, Ewha
Womans University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Intra-arterial injections of local anesthetic during cervical
transforaminal epidural block (TFEB) can cause rare but fatal neurologic
complications. We hypothesized that using a dose of local anesthetic lower than
seizure threshold during cervical TFEB would not be associated with seizure
activity in cases of accidental intra-arterial injection.
METHODS: Patients were randomized to one of two groups: group I received
injections of 1<U+2009>mL of 1% lidocaine mixed with dexamethasone 2.5<U+2009>mg (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15), and 
group II received 1<U+2009>mL of 0.125% lidocaine mixed with dexamethasone 2.5<U+2009>mg
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15). When the numeric rating scale (NRS) for pain was greater than 3,
cervical TFEBs were performed three times at 2-week intervals. Patients were
evaluated up to 3 months.
RESULTS: Thirty patients with cervical radicular pain were enrolled in this
study. The NRS pain score on the day of procedure and at 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 6
weeks, and 3 months following the initial procedure were similarly significantly 
reduced in both groups. The total number of procedures performed and the outcomes
evaluated according to Odom's criteria at the 3-month follow-up visit were not
different between groups. Overall, 73.3% and 80% patients in groups I and II,
respectively, rated the degree of their symptom relief as excellent or good.
CONCLUSION: Cervical TFEB performed using 0.125% lidocaine with dexamethasone
achieved similar satisfactory effects as 1% lidocaine with dexamethasone for the 
treatment of cervical radicular pain. Therefore, the use of low-dose lidocaine
with dexamethasone is reasonable for cervical TFEB, as this may reduce the
incidence of rare but fatal complications.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25286965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Sep;17(9):1140-2. doi: 10.1038/nn.3793.

CLEARance wars: PolyQ strikes back.

Yang XW(1), Yamamoto A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences and Semel Institute, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, USA. (2)Departments of Neurology, Pathology and Cell Biology, College
of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Sep;17(9):1180-9.

Polyglutamine expansion in the androgen receptor, causing X-linked spinal and
bulbar muscular atrophy, impairs its function as a transcriptional coactivator
regulating an extensive network of proteins involved in protein clearance.

PMID: 25157508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mech Dev. 2014 Aug;133:189-202. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2014.08.001. Epub 2014 Aug 17.

Loss of PiT-1 results in abnormal endocytosis in the yolk sac visceral endoderm.

Wallingford MC(1), Giachelli CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 91895,
USA. Electronic address: marycwallingford@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 91895, USA. Electronic
address: ceci@uw.edu.

PiT-1 protein is a transmembrane sodium-dependent phosphate (Pi) transporter.
PiT-1 knock out (KO) embryos die from largely unknown causes by embryonic day (E)
12.5. We tested the hypothesis that PiT-1 is required for endocytosis in the
embryonic yolk sac (YS) visceral endoderm (VE). Here we present data supporting
that PiT-1 KO results in a YS remodeling defect and decreased endocytosis in the 
YS VE. The remodeling defect is not due to an upstream cardiomyocyte requirement 
for PiT-1, as SM22aCre-specific KO of PiT-1 in the developing heart and the YS
mesodermal layer (ME) does not recapitulate the PiT-1 global KO phenotype.
Furthermore, we find that high levels of PiT-1 protein localize to the YS VE
apical membrane. Together these data support that PiT-1 is likely required in YS 
VE. During normal development maternal immunoglobulin (IgG) is endocytosed into
YS VE and accumulates in the apical side of the VE in a specialized lysosome
termed the apical vacuole (AV). We have identified a reduction in PiT-1 KO VE
cell height and a striking loss of IgG accumulation in the PiT-1 KO VE. The
endocytosis genes Tfeb, Lamtor2 and Snx2 are increased at the RNA level.
Lysotracker Red staining reveals a loss of distinct AVs, and yolk sacs incubated 
ex vivo with phRODO Green Dextran for Endocytosis demonstrate a functional loss
of endocytosis. As yolk sac endocytosis is controlled in part by microautophagy, 
but expression of LC3 had not been examined, we investigated LC3 expression
during yolk sac development and found stage-specific LC3 RNA expression that is
predominantly from the YS VE layer at E9.5. Normalized LC3-II protein levels are 
decreased in the PiT-1 KO YS, supporting a requirement for PiT-1 in autophagy in 
the YS. Therefore, we propose the novel idea that PiT-1 is central to the
regulation of endocytosis and autophagy in the YS VE.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4207432
PMID: 25138534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Neurosci. 2014 Sep;17(9):1180-9. doi: 10.1038/nn.3787. Epub 2014 Aug 10.

Polyglutamine-expanded androgen receptor interferes with TFEB to elicit autophagy
defects in SBMA.

Cortes CJ(1), Miranda HC(2), Frankowski H(3), Batlevi Y(3), Young JE(4), Le A(3),
Ivanov N(5), Sopher BL(6), Carromeu C(3), Muotri AR(7), Garden GA(5), La Spada
AR(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA. [2]. (2)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [2] Department of Cellular &Molecular
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [3].
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA. (4)Department of Cellular &Molecular Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. (5)1] Center on Human
Development &Disability, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. [2] 
Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(7)1] Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA. [2] Department of Cellular &Molecular Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [3] Department of
Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA.
[4] Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, California, USA. [5] Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine,
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [6] Rady
Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, USA. (8)1] Department of Pediatrics, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [2] Department of
Cellular &Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA. [3] Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [4] Institute for Genomic Medicine, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [5] Sanford Consortium for
Regenerative Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California,
USA. [6] Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, USA. [7] Division of
Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2014 Sep;17(9):1140-2.

Macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy) is a key pathway in neurodegeneration.
Despite protective actions, autophagy may contribute to neuron demise when
dysregulated. Here we consider X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy
(SBMA), a repeat disorder caused by polyglutamine-expanded androgen receptor
(polyQ-AR). We found that polyQ-AR reduced long-term protein turnover and
impaired autophagic flux in motor neuron-like cells. Ultrastructural analysis of 
SBMA mice revealed a block in autophagy pathway progression. We examined the
transcriptional regulation of autophagy and observed a functionally significant
physical interaction between transcription factor EB (TFEB) and AR. Normal AR
promoted, but polyQ-AR interfered with, TFEB transactivation. To evaluate
physiological relevance, we reprogrammed patient fibroblasts to induced
pluripotent stem cells and then to neuronal precursor cells (NPCs). We compared
multiple SBMA NPC lines and documented the metabolic and autophagic flux defects 
that could be rescued by TFEB. Our results indicate that polyQ-AR diminishes TFEB
function to impair autophagy and promote SBMA pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4180729
PMID: 25108912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. EMBO Mol Med. 2014 Jul 28;6(9):1142-60. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201303671.

Selective clearance of aberrant tau proteins and rescue of neurotoxicity by
transcription factor EB.

Polito VA(1), Li H(1), Martini-Stoica H(2), Wang B(3), Yang L(1), Xu Y(1),
Swartzlander DB(1), Palmieri M(4), di Ronza A(4), Lee VM(5), Sardiello M(4),
Ballabio A(6), Zheng H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA
Interdepartmental Program of Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Medical Scientist Training Program, Baylor 
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (3)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Dan and Jan Duncan
Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Lab Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Dan and Jan Duncan Neurological
Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA Department of
Translational Medical Sciences, Section of Pediatrics, Telethon Institute of
Genetics and Medicine Federico II University, Naples, Italy. (7)Huffington Center
on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Medical Scientist Training
Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA Department of Molecular and
Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA huiz@bcm.edu.

Accumulating evidence implicates impairment of the autophagy-lysosome pathway in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recently discovered, transcription factor EB (TFEB) is 
a molecule shown to play central roles in cellular degradative processes. Here we
investigate the role of TFEB in AD mouse models. In this study, we demonstrate
that TFEB effectively reduces neurofibrillary tangle pathology and rescues
behavioral and synaptic deficits and neurodegeneration in the rTg4510 mouse model
of tauopathy with no detectable adverse effects when expressed in wild-type mice.
TFEB specifically targets hyperphosphorylated and misfolded Tau species present
in both soluble and aggregated fractions while leaving normal Tau intact. We
provide in vitro evidence that this effect requires lysosomal activity and we
identify phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) as a direct target of TFEB that is
required for TFEB-dependent aberrant Tau clearance. The specificity and efficacy 
of TFEB in mediating the clearance of toxic Tau species makes it an attractive
therapeutic target for treating diseases of tauopathy including AD.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4197862
PMID: 25069841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2014 Jul;61:226-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2014.07.006. Epub 2014 
Jul 24.

Lysosome size, motility and stress response regulated by fronto-temporal dementia
modifier TMEM106B.

Stagi M(1), Klein ZA(1), Gould TJ(2), Bewersdorf J(2), Strittmatter SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration & Repair, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536, USA; Department of Neurology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (2)Department of Cell
Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. (3)Program
in Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration & Repair, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536, USA; Department of Neurology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address:
stephen.strittmatter@yale.edu.

Fronto-temporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 (FTLD-TDP) is a fatal
neurodegeneration. TMEM106B variants are linked to FTLD-TDP risk, and TMEM106B is
lysosomal. Here, we focus on neuronal TMEM106B, and demonstrate co-localization
and traffic with lysosomal LAMP-1. pH-sensitive reporters demonstrate that the
TMEM106B C-terminus is lumenal. The TMEM106B N-terminus interacts with endosomal 
adaptors and other TMEM106 proteins. TMEM106B knockdown reduces neuronal
lysosomal number and diameter by STED microscopy, and overexpression enlarges
LAMP-positive structures. Reduction of TMEM106B increases axonally transported
lysosomes, while TMEM106B elevation inhibits transport and yields large lysosomes
in the soma. TMEM106B overexpression alters lysosomal stress signaling, causing a
translocation of the mTOR-sensitive transcription factor, TFEB, to neuronal
nuclei. TMEM106B loss-of-function delays TFEB translocation after Torin-1-induced
stress. Enlarged TMEM106B-overexpressing lysosomes maintain organelle integrity
longer after lysosomal photodamage than do control lysosomes, while small
TMEM106B-knockdown lysosomes are more sensitive to illumination. Thus, neuronal
TMEM106B plays a central role in regulating lysosomal size, motility and
responsiveness to stress, highlighting the possible role of lysosomal biology in 
FTLD-TDP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4145808
PMID: 25066864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Trends Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;24(12):743-50. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2014.06.006. Epub
2014 Jul 21.

Lysosome: regulator of lipid degradation pathways.

Settembre C(1), Ballabio A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Via Pietro Castellino 111, 80131, Naples, Italy; 
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Pietro Castellino 111,
80131, Naples, Italy; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research
Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Medical Genetics,
Department of Translational and Medical Science, Federico II University, Via
Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic address: Settembre@tigem.it.
(2)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Pietro Castellino
111, 80131, Naples, Italy; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA; Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research
Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA; Medical Genetics,
Department of Translational and Medical Science, Federico II University, Via
Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic address: Ballabio@tigem.it.

Autophagy is a catabolic pathway that has a fundamental role in the adaptation to
fasting and primarily relies on the activity of the endolysosomal system, to
which the autophagosome targets substrates for degradation. Recent studies have
revealed that the lysosomal-autophagic pathway plays an important part in the
early steps of lipid degradation. In this review, we discuss the transcriptional 
mechanisms underlying co-regulation between lysosome, autophagy, and other steps 
of lipid catabolism, including the activity of nutrient-sensitive transcription
factors (TFs) and of members of the nuclear receptor family. In addition, we
discuss how the lysosome acts as a metabolic sensor and orchestrates the
transcriptional response to fasting.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4247383
PMID: 25061009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2014 Sep;34(9):1942-52. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.114.303342. Epub 2014 Jul 24.

Induction of lysosomal biogenesis in atherosclerotic macrophages can rescue
lipid-induced lysosomal dysfunction and downstream sequelae.

Emanuel R(1), Sergin I(1), Bhattacharya S(1), Turner JN(1), Epelman S(1),
Settembre C(1), Diwan A(1), Ballabio A(1), Razani B(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Division, Department of Medicine (R.E., I.S., S.B.,
S.E., A.D., B.R.) and Department of Pathology and Immunology (J.N.T., B.R.),
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; John Cochran VA Medical 
Center, St Louis, MO (A.D.); Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM),
Naples, Italy (C.S., A.B.); and Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX (C.S., A.B.). (2)From the Cardiovascular 
Division, Department of Medicine (R.E., I.S., S.B., S.E., A.D., B.R.) and
Department of Pathology and Immunology (J.N.T., B.R.), Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO; John Cochran VA Medical Center, St Louis, MO
(A.D.); Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy (C.S.,
A.B.); and Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX (C.S., A.B.). brazani@im.wustl.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Recent reports of a proatherogenic phenotype in mice with
macrophage-specific autophagy deficiency have renewed interest in the role of the
autophagy-lysosomal system in atherosclerosis. Lysosomes have the unique ability 
to process both exogenous material, including lipids and autophagy-derived cargo 
such as dysfunctional proteins/organelles. We aimed to understand the effects of 
an atherogenic lipid environment on macrophage lysosomes and to evaluate novel
ways to modulate this system.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Using a variety of complementary techniques, we show that
oxidized low-density lipoproteins and cholesterol crystals, commonly encountered 
lipid species in atherosclerosis, lead to profound lysosomal dysfunction in
cultured macrophages. Disruptions in lysosomal pH, proteolytic capacity, membrane
integrity, and morphology are readily seen. Using flow cytometry, we find that
macrophages isolated from atherosclerotic plaques also display features of
lysosome dysfunction. We then investigated whether enhancing lysosomal function
can be beneficial. Transcription factor EB (TFEB) is the only known transcription
factor that is a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis although its role in
macrophages has not been studied. Lysosomal stress induced by chloroquine or
atherogenic lipids leads to TFEB nuclear translocation and activation of
lysosomal and autophagy genes. TFEB overexpression in macrophages further
augments this prodegradative response and rescues several deleterious effects
seen with atherogenic lipid loading as evidenced by blunted lysosomal
dysfunction, reduced secretion of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin-1ß,
enhanced cholesterol efflux, and decreased polyubiquitinated protein aggregation.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data demonstrate that lysosomal function is
markedly impaired in atherosclerosis and suggest that induction of a lysosomal
biogenesis program in macrophages has antiatherogenic effects.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4140993
PMID: 25060788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Aug;11(8):465-75. doi: 10.1038/nrurol.2014.162. Epub 2014 Jul 
22.

Molecular genetics and cellular features of TFE3 and TFEB fusion kidney cancers.

Kauffman EC(1), Ricketts CJ(1), Rais-Bahrami S(1), Yang Y(1), Merino MJ(2),
Bottaro DP(1), Srinivasan R(1), Linehan WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Building 10, CRC Room 1-5940, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)Laboratory of
Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 10,
CRC Room 1-5940, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Despite nearly two decades passing since the discovery of gene fusions involving 
TFE3 or TFEB in sporadic renal cell carcinoma (RCC), the molecular mechanisms
underlying the renal-specific tumorigenesis of these genes remain largely
unclear. The recently published findings of The Cancer Genome Atlas Network
reported that five of the 416 surveyed clear cell RCC tumours (1.2%) harboured
SFPQ-TFE3 fusions, providing further evidence for the importance of gene fusions.
A total of five TFE3 gene fusions (PRCC-TFE3, ASPSCR1-TFE3, SFPQ-TFE3, NONO-TFE3,
and CLTC-TFE3) and one TFEB gene fusion (MALAT1-TFEB) have been identified in RCC
tumours and characterized at the mRNA transcript level. A multitude of molecular 
pathways well-described in carcinogenesis are regulated in part by TFE3 or TFEB
proteins, including activation of TGFß and ETS transcription factors, E-cadherin 
expression, CD40L-dependent lymphocyte activation, mTORC1 signalling,
insulin-dependent metabolism regulation, folliculin signalling, and
retinoblastoma-dependent cell cycle arrest. Determining which pathways are most
important to RCC oncogenesis will be critical in discovering the most promising
therapeutic targets for this disease.

PMCID: PMC4551450
PMID: 25048860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Neurosci. 2014 Jul 16;34(29):9607-20. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3788-13.2014.

Enhancing astrocytic lysosome biogenesis facilitates Aß clearance and attenuates 
amyloid plaque pathogenesis.

Xiao Q(1), Yan P(1), Ma X(2), Liu H(3), Perez R(1), Zhu A(1), Gonzales E(1),
Burchett JM(1), Schuler DR(1), Cirrito JR(1), Diwan A(4), Lee JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and the Hope Center for Neurological Disorders and.
(2)Division of Cardiology and Center for Cardiovascular Research, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, and John Cochran VA
Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63108. (3)Division of Cardiology and Center
for Cardiovascular Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, and. (4)Division of Cardiology and Center for Cardiovascular
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110,
and John Cochran VA Medical Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63108 leejm@wustl.edu
adiwan@dom.wustl.edu. (5)Department of Neurology and the Hope Center for
Neurological Disorders and leejm@wustl.edu adiwan@dom.wustl.edu.

In sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD), impaired Aß removal contributes to elevated
extracellular Aß levels that drive amyloid plaque pathogenesis. Extracellular
proteolysis, export across the blood-brain barrier, and cellular uptake
facilitate physiologic Aß clearance. Astrocytes can take up and degrade Aß, but
it remains unclear whether this function is insufficient in AD or can be enhanced
to accelerate Aß removal. Additionally, age-related dysfunction of lysosomes, the
major degradative organelles wherein Aß localizes after uptake, has been
implicated in amyloid plaque pathogenesis. We tested the hypothesis that
enhancing lysosomal function in astrocytes with transcription factor EB (TFEB), a
master regulator of lysosome biogenesis, would promote Aß uptake and catabolism
and attenuate plaque pathogenesis. Exogenous TFEB localized to the nucleus with
transcriptional induction of lysosomal biogenesis and function in vitro. This
resulted in significantly accelerated uptake of exogenously applied Aß42, with
increased localization to and degradation within lysosomes in C17.2 cells and
primary astrocytes, indicating that TFEB is sufficient to coordinately enhance
uptake, trafficking, and degradation of Aß. Stereotactic injection of
adeno-associated viral particles carrying TFEB driven by a glial fibrillary
acidic protein promoter was used to achieve astrocyte-specific expression in the 
hippocampus of APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Exogenous TFEB localized to astrocyte
nuclei and enhanced lysosome function, resulting in reduced Aß levels and
shortened half-life in the brain interstitial fluid and reduced amyloid plaque
load in the hippocampus compared with control virus-injected mice. Therefore,
activation of TFEB in astrocytes is an effective strategy to restore adequate Aß 
removal and counter amyloid plaque pathogenesis in AD.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/349607-14$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4099542
PMID: 25031402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Proteome Res. 2014 Aug 1;13(8):3783-91. doi: 10.1021/pr500387m. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Proteomic Analysis of the EWS-Fli-1 Interactome Reveals the Role of the Lysosome 
in EWS-Fli-1 Turnover.

Elzi DJ(1), Song M(1), Hakala K(1), Weintraub ST(1), Shiio Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)†Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute and ‡Department of Biochemistry,
The University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78229-3900,
United States.

Ewing sarcoma is a cancer of bone and soft tissue in children that is
characterized by a chromosomal translocation involving EWS and an Ets family
transcription factor, most commonly Fli-1. EWS-Fli-1 fusion accounts for 85% of
cases. The growth and survival of Ewing sarcoma cells are critically dependent on
EWS-Fli-1. A large body of evidence has established that EWS-Fli-1 functions as a
DNA-binding transcription factor that regulates the expression of a number of
genes important for cell proliferation and transformation. However, little is
known about the biochemical properties of the EWS-Fli-1 protein. We undertook a
series of proteomic analyses to dissect the EWS-Fli-1 interactome. Employing a
proximity-dependent biotinylation technique, BioID, we identified
cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CIMPR) as a protein located in
the vicinity of EWS-Fli-1 within a cell. CIMPR is a cargo that mediates the
delivery of lysosomal hydrolases from the trans-Golgi network to the endosome,
which are subsequently transferred to the lysosomes. Further molecular cell
biological analyses uncovered a role for lysosomes in the turnover of the
EWS-Fli-1 protein. We demonstrate that an mTORC1 active-site inhibitor, torin 1, 
which stimulates the TFEB-lysosome pathway, can induce the degradation of
EWS-Fli-1, suggesting a potential therapeutic approach to target EWS-Fli-1 for
degradation.

PMCID: PMC4123944
PMID: 24999758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nat Commun. 2014 Jul 1;5:4241. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5241.

Rag GTPases are cardioprotective by regulating lysosomal function.

Kim YC(1), Park HW(2), Sciarretta S(3), Mo JS(1), Jewell JL(1), Russell RC(1), Wu
X(4), Sadoshima J(5), Guan KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Moores Cancer Center, University of California 
at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. (2)1] Department of Pharmacology
and Moores Cancer Center, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA [2]. (3)1] Department of Cell Biology and Molecular
Medicine, Cardiovascular Research Institute, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School,
Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA [2] IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS) 86077, Italy [3].
(4)Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200433, China. (5)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine,
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, New
Jersey 07103, USA.

The Rag family proteins are Ras-like small GTPases that have a critical role in
amino-acid-stimulated mTORC1 activation by recruiting mTORC1 to lysosome. Despite
progress in the mechanistic understanding of Rag GTPases in mTORC1 activation,
little is known about the physiological function of Rag GTPases in vivo. Here we 
show that loss of RagA and RagB (RagA/B) in cardiomyocytes results in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and phenocopies lysosomal storage diseases, although 
mTORC1 activity is not substantially impaired in vivo. We demonstrate that
despite upregulation of lysosomal protein expression by constitutive activation
of the transcription factor EB (TFEB) in RagA/B knockout mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, lysosomal acidification is compromised owing to decreased v-ATPase
level in the lysosome fraction. Our study uncovers RagA/B GTPases as key
regulators of lysosomal function and cardiac protection.

PMCID: PMC4100214
PMID: 24980141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):857-8. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.06.002.

Of worms and men: HLH-30 and TFEB regulate tolerance to infection.

Tiller GR(1), Garsin DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston Department of Microbiology 
and Molecular Genetics, 6431 Fannin Street, MSB 1.168, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston Department of Microbiology 
and Molecular Genetics, 6431 Fannin Street, MSB 1.168, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Electronic address: danielle.a.garsin@uth.tmc.edu.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):896-909.

In this issue of Immunity, Visvikis et al. (2014) use the model host
Caenorhabditis elegans to discover a role in innate immunity for the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor, HLH-30. The finding inspires study of
the mammalian ortholog TFEB, in which a similar role in immune response is
ascertained.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4126603
PMID: 24950206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Genes Dev. 2014 Jun 1;28(11):1204-16. doi: 10.1101/gad.237354.113.

p62/SQSTM1 synergizes with autophagy for tumor growth in vivo.

Wei H(1), Wang C(2), Croce CM(3), Guan JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA; Ohio State
University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA; (2)Division of
Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA; Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA. (3)Ohio State University Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA;

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2014 Jun 1;28(11):1137-9.

Autophagy is crucial for cellular homeostasis and plays important roles in
tumorigenesis. FIP200 (FAK family-interacting protein of 200 kDa) is an essential
autophagy gene required for autophagy induction, functioning in the
ULK1-ATG13-FIP200 complex. Our previous studies showed that conditional knockout 
of FIP200 significantly suppressed mammary tumorigenesis, which was accompanied
by accumulation of p62 in tumor cells. However, it is not clear whether FIP200 is
also required for maintaining tumor growth and how the increased p62 level
affects the growth in autophagy-deficient FIP200-null tumors in vivo. Here, we
describe a new system to delete FIP200 in transformed mouse embryonic fibroblasts
as well as mammary tumor cells following their transplantation and show that
ablation of FIP200 significantly reduced growth of established tumors in vivo.
Using similar strategies, we further showed that either p62 knockdown or p62
deficiency in established FIP200-null tumors dramatically impaired tumor growth. 
The stimulation of tumor growth by p62 accumulation in FIP200-null tumors is
associated with the up-regulated activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway by p62. Last, we
showed that overexpression of the autophagy master regulator TFEB(S142A)
increased the growth of established tumors, which correlated with the increased
autophagy of the tumor cells. Together, our studies demonstrate that p62 and
autophagy synergize to promote tumor growth, suggesting that inhibition of both
pathways could be more effective than targeting either alone for cancer therapy.

© 2014 Wei et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4052766
PMID: 24888590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):896-909. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.05.002. Epub 2014
May 29.

Innate host defense requires TFEB-mediated transcription of cytoprotective and
antimicrobial genes.

Visvikis O(1), Ihuegbu N(2), Labed SA(1), Luhachack LG(1), Alves AM(1),
Wollenberg AC(1), Stuart LM(3), Stormo GD(2), Irazoqui JE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Immunology, Center for the Study of Inflammatory
Bowel Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02114, USA. (2)Department of Genetics, Center for Genome Sciences, Washington 
University Medical School, Saint Louis, MO 63118, USA. (3)Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation, Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (4)Laboratory of Comparative Immunology,
Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address:
jirazoqui@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Jul;14(7):432.
    Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):857-8.

Animal host defense against infection requires the expression of defense genes at
the right place and the right time. Understanding such tight control of host
defense requires the elucidation of the transcription factors involved. By using 
an unbiased approach in the model Caenorhabditis elegans, we discovered that
HLH-30 (known as TFEB in mammals) is a key transcription factor for host defense.
HLH-30 was activated shortly after Staphylococcus aureus infection, and drove the
expression of close to 80% of the host response, including antimicrobial and
autophagy genes that were essential for host tolerance of infection. TFEB was
also rapidly activated in murine macrophages upon S. aureus infection and was
required for proper transcriptional induction of several proinflammatory
cytokines and chemokines. Thus, our data suggest that TFEB is a previously
unappreciated, evolutionarily ancient transcription factor in the host response
to infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4104614
PMID: 24882217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur Urol. 2015 Jan;67(1):85-97. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.04.029. Epub 2014 May 
21.

Understanding pathologic variants of renal cell carcinoma: distilling therapeutic
opportunities from biologic complexity.

Shuch B(1), Amin A(2), Armstrong AJ(3), Eble JN(4), Ficarra V(5), Lopez-Beltran
A(6), Martignoni G(7), Rini BI(8), Kutikov A(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic
address: Brian.shuch@yale.edu. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Alpert School of Medicine, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Divisions of Urology and Medical Oncology, Departments of Medicine and
Surgery, Duke School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN,
USA. (5)Department of Oncologic, Surgical and Gastrointestinal Sciences, Urologic
Unit, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (6)Unit of Anatomical Pathology,
Department of Surgery and Pathology, University of Cordoba, Faculty of Medicine, 
Cordoba, Spain. (7)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic, University of Verona
and Pederzoli Hospital, Peschiera del Garda, Verona, Italy. (8)Department of
Solid Tumor Oncology and Urology, Cleveland Clinic Taussig Cancer Institute,
Cleveland, OH, USA. (9)Division of Urologic Oncology, Department of Surgery, Fox 
Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Eur Urol. 2015 Jan;67(1):98-9.

CONTEXT: Once believed to represent a uniform malignant phenotype, renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) is now viewed as a diverse group of cancers that arise from the
nephron.
OBJECTIVE: To review the pathologic characteristics, clinical behavior, molecular
biology, and systemic therapy options of recognized RCC histologic subtypes.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: A systematic review of English-language articles was
performed using the Medline and Web of Science databases. Manuscripts were
selected with consensus of the coauthors and evaluated using the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) criteria.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The major findings of the evaluated manuscripts are discussed
with an emphasis on the description of the pathologic features, clinical
behavior, prognosis, and therapeutic strategies.
CONCLUSIONS: Classification schemes for kidney cancer have undergone dramatic
changes over the past two decades. Improvements in these classification schemes
are important, as pathologic variants differ not only in disease biology, but
also in clinical behavior, prognosis, and response to systemic therapy. In the
era of genomic medicine, further refinements in characterization of RCC subtypes 
will be critical to the progress of this burgeoning clinical space.
PATIENT SUMMARY: Kidney cancer can be subdivided into related but different
cancers that arise from the kidney's tubules. In this article we review current
classifications for kidney cancer, discuss their characteristics, and provide an 
overview of each subtype's clinical behavior and treatment. We stress that each
subtype harbors unique biology and thus responds differently to available
treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2014 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24857407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1782-7. eCollection 2014.

Coexistent loss of INI1 and BRG1 expression in a rhabdoid renal cell carcinoma
(RCC): implications for a possible role of SWI/SNF complex in the pathogenesis of
RCC.

Rao Q(1), Xia QY(1), Shen Q(1), Shi SS(1), Tu P(1), Shi QL(1), Zhou XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School
of Medicine Nanjing, China.

In this study, we analyzed the immunohistochemical and molecular profiles of an
unusual RCC showed coexistent absence of INI1 and BRG1 expression, rhabdoid
morphology, and poor prognosis. Histologically, the tumor had rhabdoid features, 
which were demonstrated by large round to polygonal cells with eccentric nuclei, 
prominent nucleoli, and eosinophilic cytoplasm varying from abundant to scanty.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor were positive for BRM, PBRM1, ARID1A, CD10,
CKpan, Vimentin, carbonic anhydrase IX (CA-IX), and P504S (AMACR) but negative
for INI1, BRG1, HMB45, melan A, CK7, CD117, Ksp-cadherin, TFEB, TFE3, and
Cathepsin K. We detected all three exons status of the VHL gene of the tumor and 
observed 1 somatic mutations in 1st exon. Chromosome 3p deletion, coupled with
polysomy of chromosome 3 was also found. Based on these findings, it is further
indicated that in some cases, rhabdoid RCC may arise from clear cell RCC. SWI/SNF
chromatin remodeling complex may be an attractive candidate for being the "second
hit" in RCCs and may play an important role during tumor progression. The role of
SWI/SNF complex in rhabdoid RCC should be further studied on a larger number of
cases.

PMCID: PMC4014263
PMID: 24817979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2014 May 5;6(6). pii: a016907. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a016907.

Lysosomal adaptation: how the lysosome responds to external cues.

Settembre C(1), Ballabio A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, 80131 Naples, Italy Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030
Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital,
Houston, Texas 77030 Medical Genetics, Department of Translational Medicine,
Federico II University, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Recent evidence indicates that the importance of the lysosome in cell metabolism 
and organism physiology goes far beyond the simple disposal of cellular garbage. 
This dynamic organelle is situated at the crossroad of the most important
cellular pathways and is involved in sensing, signaling, and transcriptional
mechanisms that respond to environmental cues, such as nutrients. Two main
mediators of these lysosomal adaptation mechanisms are the mTORC1 kinase complex 
and the transcription factor EB (TFEB). These two factors are linked in a
lysosome-to-nucleus signaling pathway that provides the lysosome with the ability
to adapt to extracellular cues and control its own biogenesis. Modulation of
lysosomal function by acting on TFEB has a profound impact on cellular clearance 
and energy metabolism and is a promising therapeutic target for a large variety
of disease conditions.

Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 24799353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jun 13;289(24):17054-69. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.555300. Epub
2014 Apr 25.

The phytoestrogen genistein modulates lysosomal metabolism and transcription
factor EB (TFEB) activation.

Moskot M(1), Montefusco S(2), Jakóbkiewicz-Banecka J(3), Mozolewski P(3), Wegrzyn
A(4), Di Bernardo D(2), Wegrzyn G(3), Medina DL(5), Ballabio A(6), Gabig-Ciminska
M(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Molecular Biology (affiliated with the University of
Gdansk), Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland. (2)the High Content Screening Facility,
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via P. Castellino 111, 80131
Naples, Italy. (3)the Department of Molecular Biology, University of Gdansk, Wita
Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland. (4)the Department of Microbiology, University 
of Szczecin, Felczaka 3c, 71-412 Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland. (5)the High Content 
Screening Facility, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via P.
Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy, medina@tigem.it. (6)the High Content
Screening Facility, Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via P.
Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy, the Department of Molecular and Human
Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, the Jan and Dan
Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas
77030, and Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University,
Via Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy. (7)From the Laboratory of Molecular Biology
(affiliated with the University of Gdansk), Institute of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Wita Stwosza 59, 80-308 Gdansk, Poland,
m.gabig@biol.ug.edu.pl.

Genistein (5,7-dihydroxy-3-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4H-1-benzopyran-4-one) has been
previously proposed as a potential drug for use in substrate reduction therapy
for mucopolysaccharidoses, a group of inherited metabolic diseases caused by
mutations leading to inefficient degradation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in
lysosomes. It was demonstrated that this isoflavone can cross the blood-brain
barrier, making it an especially desirable potential drug for the treatment of
neurological symptoms present in most lysosomal storage diseases. So far, no
comprehensive genomic analyses have been performed to elucidate the molecular
mechanisms underlying the effect elicited by genistein. Therefore, the aim of
this work was to identify the genistein-modulated gene network regulating GAG
biosynthesis and degradation, taking into consideration the entire lysosomal
metabolism. Our analyses identified over 60 genes with known roles in lysosomal
biogenesis and/or function whose expression was enhanced by genistein. Moreover, 
19 genes whose products are involved in both GAG synthesis and degradation
pathways were found to be remarkably differentially regulated by genistein
treatment. We found a regulatory network linking genistein-mediated control of
transcription factor EB (TFEB) gene expression, TFEB nuclear translocation, and
activation of TFEB-dependent lysosome biogenesis to lysosomal metabolism. Our
data indicate that the molecular mechanism of genistein action involves not only 
impairment of GAG synthesis but more importantly lysosomal enhancement via TFEB. 
These findings contribute to explaining the beneficial effects of genistein in
lysosomal storage diseases as well as envisage new therapeutic approaches to
treat these devastating diseases.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4059147
PMID: 24770416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. EMBO Rep. 2014 Jun;15(6):705-13. doi: 10.1002/embr.201338310. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Genome-wide screen identifies signaling pathways that regulate autophagy during
Caenorhabditis elegans development.

Guo B(1), Huang X(2), Zhang P(3), Qi L(3), Liang Q(3), Zhang X(2), Huang J(3),
Fang B(3), Hou W(3), Han J(3), Zhang H(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences China Agricultural University, Beijing, China State
Key Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing,
China. (2)National Institute of Biological Sciences, Beijing, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute
of Biophysics Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
hongzhang@sun5.ibp.ac.cn.

The mechanisms that coordinate the regulation of autophagy with developmental
signaling during multicellular organism development remain largely unknown. Here,
we show that impaired function of ribosomal protein RPL-43 causes an accumulation
of SQST-1 aggregates in the larval intestine, which are removed upon autophagy
induction. Using this model to screen for autophagy regulators, we identify 139
genes that promote autophagy activity upon inactivation. Various signaling
pathways, including Sma/Mab TGF-ß signaling, lin-35/Rb signaling, the
XBP-1-mediated ER stress response, and the ATFS-1-mediated mitochondrial stress
response, regulate the expression of autophagy genes independently of the TFEB
homolog HLH-30. Our study thus provides a framework for understanding the role of
signaling pathways in regulating autophagy under physiological conditions.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4197881
PMID: 24764321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Int J Parasitol. 2014 Jun;44(7):415-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpara.2014.02.007. Epub
2014 Apr 1.

Identification and pharmacological induction of autophagy in the larval stages of
Echinococcus granulosus: an active catabolic process in calcareous corpuscles.

Loos JA(1), Caparros PA(1), Nicolao MC(1), Denegri GM(1), Cumino AC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Zoonosis Parasitarias, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMdP),
Funes 3350, Nivel Cero, (7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina. (2)Laboratorio de
Zoonosis Parasitarias, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y
Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMdP), Funes 3350, Nivel Cero,
(7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas 
y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina; Departamento de Química, Facultad de Ciencias
Exactas y Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Mar del Plata (UNMdP), Funes 3350,
Nivel 2, (7600) Mar del Plata, Argentina. Electronic address: acumino@mdp.edu.ar.

Autophagy is a fundamental catabolic pathway conserved from yeast to mammals, but
which remains unknown in parasite cestodes. In this work, the pharmacological
induction of autophagy was cellularly and molecularly analysed in the larval
stages of Echinococcus granulosus. Metacestode sensitivity to rapamycin and TORC1
expression in protoscoleces and metacestodes were shown. Ultrastructural studies 
showed that treated parasites had an isolation membrane, autophagosomes and
autolysosomes, all of which evidenced the autophagic flux. Genes coding for key
autophagy-related proteins were also identified in the Echinococcus genome. These
genes were involved in autophagosome formation and transcriptional
over-expression of Eg-atg5, Eg-atg6, Eg-atg8, Eg-atg12, Eg-atg16 and Eg-atg18 was
shown in presence of rapamycin or arsenic trioxide. Thus, Echinococcus autophagy 
could be regulated by non-transcriptional inhibition through TOR and by
transcription-dependent up-regulation via FoxO-like transcription factors and/or 
TFEB proteins. An increase in the punctate pattern and Eg-Atg8 polypeptide level 
in the tegument, parenchyma cells and excretory system of protoscoleces and in
vesicularised parasites was detected after rapamycin treatment. This suggests the
occurrence of basal autophagy in the larval stages and during vesicular
development. In arsenic-treated protoscoleces, high Eg-Atg8 polypeptide levels
within the free cytoplasmic matrix of calcareous corpuscles were observed, thus
verifying the occurrence of autophagic events. These experiments also confirmed
that the calcareous corpuscles are sites of arsenic trioxide accumulation. The
detection of the autophagic machinery in this parasite represents a basic
starting point to unravel the role of autophagy under both physiological and
stress conditions which will allow identification of new strategies for drug
discovery against neglected parasitic diseases caused by cestodes.

Copyright © 2014 Australian Society for Parasitology Inc. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 May;38(5):604-14. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000203.

t(6;11) renal cell carcinoma (RCC): expanded immunohistochemical profile
emphasizing novel RCC markers and report of 10 new genetically confirmed cases.

Smith NE(1), Illei PB, Allaf M, Gonzalez N, Morris K, Hicks J, Demarzo A, Reuter 
VE, Amin MB, Epstein JI, Netto GJ, Argani P.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology †Urology ‡Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, MD §Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, NY <U+2225>Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA.

Renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) harboring the t(6;11)(p21;q12) translocation were
first described in 2001 and recently recognized by the 2013 International Society
of Urological Pathology Vancouver Classification of Renal Neoplasia. Although
these RCCs are known to label for melanocytic markers HMB45 and Melan A and the
cysteine protease cathepsin K by immunohistochemistry (IHC), a comprehensive IHC 
profile has not been reported. We report 10 new t(6;11) RCCs, all confirmed by
break-apart TFEB fluorescence in situ hybridization. A tissue microarray
containing 6 of these cases and 7 other previously reported t(6;11) RCCs was
constructed and immunolabeled for 21 different antigens. Additional whole
sections of t(6;11) RCC were labeled with selected IHC markers. t(6;11) RCC
labeled diffusely and consistently for cathepsin K and Melan A (13 of 13 cases)
and almost always at least focally for HMB45 (12 of 13 cases). They labeled
frequently for PAX8 (14 of 23 cases), CD117 (10 of 14 cases), and vimentin (9 of 
13 cases). A majority of cases labeled at least focally for cytokeratin Cam5.2 (8
of 13 cases) and CD10 and RCC marker antigen (10 of 14 cases each). In contrast
to a prior study's findings, only a minority of cases labeled for Ksp-cadherin (3
of 19 cases). The median H score (product of intensity score and percentage
labeling) for phosphorylated S6, a marker of mTOR pathway activation, was 101,
which is high relative to most other RCC subtypes. In summary, IHC labeling for
PAX8, Cam5.2, CD10, and RCC marker antigen supports classification of the t(6;11)
RCC as carcinomas despite frequent negativity for broad-spectrum cytokeratins and
EMA. Labeling for PAX8 distinguishes the t(6;11) RCC from epithelioid
angiomyolipoma, which otherwise shares a similar immunoprofile. CD117 labeling is
more frequent in the t(6;11) RCC compared with the related Xp11 translocation
RCC. Increased pS6 expression suggests a possible molecular target for the
uncommon t(6;11) RCCs that metastasize.

PMCID: PMC4370182
PMID: 24618616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biol Reprod. 2014 Apr 25;90(4):83. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.113910. Print 2014
Apr.

Preconception zinc deficiency disrupts postimplantation fetal and placental
development in mice.

Tian X(1), Anthony K, Neuberger T, Diaz FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology and Health and Department of Animal Science,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania.

Zinc is an essential nutrient for optimal fertility, but the effects of
preconception zinc deficiency on postimplantation development are not known.
Female mice were fed a control or a zinc-deficient diet (ZDD) for 4-5 days before
ovulation (preconception). Embryonic and/or placental development were evaluated 
on Days 3.5, 6.5, 10.5, 12.5, and 16.5 of pregnancy. The findings show a decrease
in embryo length (31%, Day 10.5; 13%, Day 12.5; 10%, Day 16.5) and weight (23%,
Day 16.5) in embryos from mothers fed a ZDD preconception. Zinc deficiency also
caused a high incidence of pregnancy loss (46%, Day 10.5; 34%, Day 12.5; 51%, Day
16.5) compared to control (2%, Day 10.5; 7%, Day 12.5; 9%, Day 16.5). ZDD embryos
transferred to normal recipients were 38% smaller and implantation rate was only 
10% compared to 40% for controls. Trophoblast cell differentiation and
implantation on Day 6.5 of pregnancy were compromised by preconception zinc
deficiency. On Day 12.5 of pregnancy, placenta weight and area of fetal placenta 
were decreased 37% and 31%, respectively, by preconception zinc deficiency.
Consistent with a smaller fetal placenta, expression of key placental
transcripts, including Ar, Esx1, Syna, Tfeb, Dlx3, and Gcm1 mRNA, but not Ctsq
mRNA, were decreased 30%-70% in the ZDD group. Preconception zinc deficiency
caused 41%-57% of embryos to exhibit delayed or aberrant neural tube development,
as examined by light microscopy and magnetic resonance imaging. Collectively, the
findings provide evidence for the importance of preconception zinc in promoting
optimal fertility and oocyte developmental potential.

PMCID: PMC4076385
PMID: 24599289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 24;9(2):e89485. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089485. eCollection
2014.

Oncogenic H-Ras up-regulates acid ß-hexosaminidase by a mechanism dependent on
the autophagy regulator TFEB.

Urbanelli L(1), Magini A(2), Ercolani L(3), Sagini K(1), Polchi A(1), Tancini
B(1), Brozzi A(4), Armeni T(3), Principato G(3), Emiliani C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical
Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy ; Department of Medical and
Biological Sciences (DSMB), University of Udine, Udine, Italy. (3)Department of
Clinical Sciences, Section of Biochemistry, Biology and Physics, Marche
Polytechnic University, Ancona, Italy. (4)Department of Experimental Medicine and
Biochemical Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy ; Centro di
Eccellenza sui Materiali Innovativi Nanostrutturati (CEMIN), University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

The expression of constitutively active H-RasV12 oncogene has been described to
induce proliferative arrest and premature senescence in many cell models. There
are a number of studies indicating an association between senescence and
lysosomal enzyme alterations, e.g. lysosomal ß-galactosidase is the most widely
used biomarker to detect senescence in cultured cells and we previously reported 
that H-RasV12 up-regulates lysosomal glycohydrolases enzymatic activity in human 
fibroblasts. Here we investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying lysosomal
glycohydrolase ß-hexosaminidase up-regulation in human fibroblasts expressing the
constitutively active H-RasV12. We demonstrated that H-Ras activation increases
ß-hexosaminidase expression and secretion by a Raf/extracellular signal-regulated
protein kinase dependent pathway, through a mechanism that relies on the activity
of the transcription factor EB (TFEB). Because of the pivotal role of TFEB in the
regulation of lysosomal system biogenesis and function, our results suggest that 
this could be a general mechanism to enhance lysosomal enzymes activity during
oncogene-induced senescence.

PMCID: PMC3933543
PMID: 24586816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 4;289(14):10211-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.506246. Epub 2014
Feb 20.

2-Hydroxypropyl-ß-cyclodextrin promotes transcription factor EB-mediated
activation of autophagy: implications for therapy.

Song W(1), Wang F, Lotfi P, Sardiello M, Segatori L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering.

2-Hydroxypropyl-ß-cyclodextrin (HPßCD) is a Food and Drug Administration-approved
excipient used to improve the stability and bioavailability of drugs. Despite its
wide use as a drug delivery vehicle and the recent approval of a clinical trial
to evaluate its potential for the treatment of a cholesterol storage disorder,
the cellular pathways involved in the adaptive response that is activated upon
exposure to HPßCD are still poorly defined. Here, we show that cell treatment
with HPßCD results in the activation of the transcription factor EB, a master
regulator of lysosomal function and autophagy, and in enhancement of the cellular
autophagic clearance capacity. HPßCD administration promotes transcription factor
EB-mediated clearance of proteolipid aggregates that accumulate due to
inefficient activity of the lysosome-autophagy system in cells derived from a
patient with a lysosomal storage disorder. Interestingly, HPßCD-mediated
activation of autophagy was found not to be associated with activation of
apoptotic pathways. This study provides a mechanistic understanding of the
cellular response to HPßCD treatment, which will inform the development of safe
HPßCD-based therapeutic modalities and may enable engineering HPßCD as a platform
technology to reduce the accumulation of lysosomal storage material.

PMCID: PMC3974990
PMID: 24558044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Redox Biol. 2013 Dec 25;2:82-90. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2013.12.013. eCollection
2014.

Autophagy as an essential cellular antioxidant pathway in neurodegenerative
disease.

Giordano S(1), Darley-Usmar V(1), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Free Radical Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, United
States ; Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, United
States. (2)Center for Free Radical Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
United States ; Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
United States ; Department of Veterans Affairs, Birmingham VA Medical Center,
United States.

Oxidative stress including DNA damage, increased lipid and protein oxidation, are
important features of aging and neurodegeneration suggesting that endogenous
antioxidant protective pathways are inadequate or overwhelmed. Importantly,
oxidative protein damage contributes to age-dependent accumulation of
dysfunctional mitochondria or protein aggregates. In addition, environmental
toxins such as rotenone and paraquat, which are risk factors for the pathogenesis
of neurodegenerative diseases, also promote protein oxidation. The obvious
approach of supplementing the primary antioxidant systems designed to suppress
the initiation of oxidative stress has been tested in animal models and positive 
results were obtained. However, these findings have not been effectively
translated to treating human patients, and clinical trials for antioxidant
therapies using radical scavenging molecules such as a-tocopherol, ascorbate and 
coenzyme Q have met with limited success, highlighting several limitations to
this approach. These could include: (1) radical scavenging antioxidants cannot
reverse established damage to proteins and organelles; (2) radical scavenging
antioxidants are oxidant specific, and can only be effective if the specific
mechanism for neurodegeneration involves the reactive species to which they are
targeted and (3) since reactive species play an important role in physiological
signaling, suppression of endogenous oxidants maybe deleterious. Therefore,
alternative approaches that can circumvent these limitations are needed. While
not previously considered an antioxidant system we propose that the
autophagy-lysosomal activities, may serve this essential function in
neurodegenerative diseases by removing damaged or dysfunctional proteins and
organelles.

PMCID: PMC3909266
PMID: 24494187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Jul;71(13):2483-97. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1565-8. Epub 
2014 Jan 30.

Novel roles for the MiTF/TFE family of transcription factors in organelle
biogenesis, nutrient sensing, and energy homeostasis.

Martina JA(1), Diab HI, Li H, Puertollano R.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Physiology Center, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bldg. 50/3537, Bethesda, MD, 
20892, USA.

The MiTF/TFE family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription
factors includes MITF, TFEB, TFE3, and TFEC. The involvement of some family
members in the development and proliferation of specific cell types, such as mast
cells, osteoclasts, and melanocytes, is well established. Notably, recent
evidence suggests that the MiTF/TFE family plays a critical role in organelle
biogenesis, nutrient sensing, and energy metabolism. The MiTF/TFE family is also 
implicated in human disease. Mutations or aberrant expression of most MiTF/TFE
family members has been linked to different types of cancer. At the same time,
they have recently emerged as novel and very promising targets for the treatment 
of neurological and lysosomal diseases. The characterization of this fascinating 
family of transcription factors is greatly expanding our understanding of how
cells synchronize environmental signals, such as nutrient availability, with gene
expression, energy production, and cellular homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4057939
PMID: 24477476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Proteome Res. 2014 Mar 7;13(3):1293-306. doi: 10.1021/pr4010184. Epub 2014 Jan 
28.

Quantitative glycoproteomics analysis reveals changes in N-glycosylation level
associated with pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Pan S(1), Chen R, Tamura Y, Crispin DA, Lai LA, May DH, McIntosh MW, Goodlett DR,
Brentnall TA.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Washington , 1959 North East Pacific Street, Seattle, Washington 98195, United
States.

Glycosylation plays an important role in epithelial cancers, including pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. However, little is known about the glycoproteome of the
human pancreas or its alterations associated with pancreatic tumorigenesis. Using
quantitative glycoproteomics approach, we investigated protein N-glycosylation in
pancreatic tumor tissue in comparison with normal pancreas and chronic
pancreatitis tissue. The study lead to the discovery of a roster of glycoproteins
with aberrant N-glycosylation level associated with pancreatic cancer, including 
mucin-5AC (MUC5AC), carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule 5
(CEACAM5), insulin-like growth factor binding protein (IGFBP3), and
galectin-3-binding protein (LGALS3BP). Pathway analysis of cancer-associated
aberrant glycoproteins revealed an emerging phenomenon that increased activity of
N-glycosylation was implicated in several pancreatic cancer pathways, including
TGF-ß, TNF, NF-kappa-B, and TFEB-related lysosomal changes. In addition, the
study provided evidence that specific N-glycosylation sites within certain
individual proteins can have significantly altered glycosylation occupancy in
pancreatic cancer, reflecting the complexity of the molecular mechanisms
underlying cancer-associated glycosylation events.

PMCID: PMC3993895
PMID: 24471499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Sci Signal. 2014 Jan 21;7(309):ra9. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004754.

The nutrient-responsive transcription factor TFE3 promotes autophagy, lysosomal
biogenesis, and clearance of cellular debris.

Martina JA(1), Diab HI, Lishu L, Jeong-A L, Patange S, Raben N, Puertollano R.

Author information: 
(1)1Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 50/3537, Bethesda,
MD 20892, USA.

The discovery of a gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and its
transcriptional regulator transcription factor EB (TFEB) revealed that cells
monitor lysosomal function and respond to degradation requirements and
environmental cues. We report the identification of transcription factor E3
(TFE3) as another regulator of lysosomal homeostasis that induced expression of
genes encoding proteins involved in autophagy and lysosomal biogenesis in ARPE-19
cells in response to starvation and lysosomal stress. We found that in
nutrient-replete cells, TFE3 was recruited to lysosomes through interaction with 
active Rag guanosine triphosphatases (GTPases) and exhibited mammalian (or
mechanistic) target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1)-dependent phosphorylation.
Phosphorylated TFE3 was retained in the cytosol through its interaction with the 
cytosolic chaperone 14-3-3. After starvation, TFE3 rapidly translocated to the
nucleus and bound to the CLEAR elements present in the promoter region of many
lysosomal genes, thereby inducing lysosomal biogenesis. Depletion of endogenous
TFE3 entirely abolished the response of ARPE-19 cells to starvation, suggesting
that TFE3 plays a critical role in nutrient sensing and regulation of energy
metabolism. Furthermore, overexpression of TFE3 triggered lysosomal exocytosis
and resulted in efficient cellular clearance in a cellular model of a lysosomal
storage disorder, Pompe disease, thus identifying TFE3 as a potential therapeutic
target for the treatment of lysosomal disorders.

PMCID: PMC4696865
PMID: 24448649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Neuroscience. 2014 Mar 28;263:111-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.01.001.
Epub 2014 Jan 10.

Lysosomal alkalization and dysfunction in human fibroblasts with the Alzheimer's 
disease-linked presenilin 1 A246E mutation can be reversed with cAMP.

Coffey EE(1), Beckel JM(1), Laties AM(2), Mitchell CH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United States. (3)Department of Anatomy 
and Cell Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, United
States; Department of Physiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, United States. Electronic address: chm@exchange.upenn.edu.

Mutation in presenilin 1 (PS1) is one of the leading causes of familial
Alzheimer's disease (fAD). PS1 mutation exacerbates the autophagic and lysosomal 
pathology in AD patients, leading to accumulation of partially degraded material 
in bloated lysosomes and autophagosomes - a pathology that bears some resemblance
to other diseases characterized by elevated lysosomal pH, like age-related
macular degeneration. In this study, we examined the effect of the PS1-fAD
mutation A246E on lysosomal pH and lysosomal function, and asked whether
restoration of lysosomal pH could reverse some of these changes. Lysosomal pH was
elevated by 0.2-0.3 pH units in human fibroblasts with the PS1-fAD mutation. The 
lysosomal alkalization in PS1-fAD fibroblasts was supported by a reduction in the
pH-dependent cleavage of cathepsin D and by a reduction in binding of
boron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) FL-pepstatin A to the cathepsin D active site.
PS1-fAD cells had increased LC3B-II/-I ratios and p62 levels, consistent with
impaired lysosomal degradation and analogous to changes induced by lysosomal
alkalinization with chloroquine. PS1-fAD fibroblasts had increased expression of 
ATP6V1B2, ATG5, BECN1 TFEB mRNA, and of ATP6V1B2, ATG5 and beclin at the protein 
level, consistent with chronic impairment of autophagic and lysosomal functions
in the mutant cells. Critically, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) treatment 
reacidified lysosomal pH in mutant PS1-fAD; cAMP also increased the availability 
of active cathepsin D and lowered the LC3B-II/-I ratio. These results confirm a
small elevation in the lysosomal pH of human PS1-fAD fibroblasts, demonstrate
that this lysosomal alkalization is associated with chronic changes in autophagy 
and degradation, and suggest that treatment to reacidify the lysosomes with cAMP 
can reverse these changes.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4028113
PMID: 24418614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Apoptosis. 2014 Apr;19(4):748-58. doi: 10.1007/s10495-013-0960-1.

Induction of autophagy-dependent cell death by the survivin suppressant YM155 in 
salivary adenoid cystic carcinoma.

Wang YF(1), Zhang W, He KF, Liu B, Zhang L, Zhang WF, Kulkarni AB, Zhao YF, Sun
ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology & Key
Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, Department of Oral and
Maxillofacial-Head and Neck Oncology, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, 430079, China.

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is one of the most common malignancies of the
major and minor salivary glands. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the 
aggressive growth of human salivary ACC remains unclear. In the present study, we
showed that survivin, which belongs to the family of inhibitors of apoptosis, is 
closely related to the high expression of CDK4 and cyclin D1 in human ACC
specimens. By employing the small-molecule drug YM155, we found that the
inhibition of survivin in ACC cells caused significant cell death and induced
autophagy. Chloroquine, an autophagy inhibitor, prevented cell death induced by
YM155, suggesting YM155-induced autophagy contributed to the cell death effects
in ACC cells. More importantly, evidence obtained from a xenograft model using
ACC-2 cells proved the occurrence of YM155-induced autophagy and cell death in
vivo was correlated with the suppression of Erk1/2 and S6 activation as well as
increased TFEB nuclear translocation. Taken together, our results indicate YM155 
is a novel inducer of autophagy-dependent cell death and possesses therapeutic
potential in ACC.

PMCID: PMC4211076
PMID: 24370995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Trends Biochem Sci. 2014 Feb;39(2):61-71. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2013.12.001. Epub
2013 Dec 24.

At the end of the autophagic road: an emerging understanding of lysosomal
functions in autophagy.

Shen HM(1), Mizushima N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: han-ming_shen@nuhs.edu.sg.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School and Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address:
nmizu@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

In the past decade, autophagy studies have largely focused on the early stage of 
autophagy: the molecular mechanisms leading to autophagosome formation. Recently,
however, we have observed significant progress in understanding the role of
lysosomes, the specific cellular organelle that degrades cellular components
delivered via autophagy. The discoveries include connections between autophagy
and lysosomal biogenesis, activation, reformation, and turnover, as well as the
identification of an autophagosomal SNARE (soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive
factor attachment protein receptor) protein in control of autophagosome-lysosome 
fusion. We illustrate these findings in the context of the underlying molecular
mechanisms and the relevance to human health and disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24369758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 31;289(5):2864-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.521641. Epub 2013 
Dec 19.

GCN5-like protein 1 (GCN5L1) controls mitochondrial content through coordinated
regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy.

Scott I(1), Webster BR, Chan CK, Okonkwo JU, Han K, Sack MN.

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Mitochondrial Biology and Metabolism, NHLBI, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Cellular mitochondrial content is governed by the competing processes of
organelle biogenesis and degradation. It is proposed that these programs are
tightly regulated to ensure that the cell maintains sufficient organelles to meet
its biosynthetic, energetic, and other homeostatic requirements. We recently
reported that GCN5L1, a putative nutrient-sensing regulator, controls
mitochondrial removal by autophagy. Here we show that genetic deletion of GCN5L1 
has a direct positive effect on the expression and activity of Transcriptional
Factor EB (TFEB), which acts as a master regulator of autophagy. Surprisingly,
the induction of TFEB-mediated autophagy pathways does not diminish cellular
mitochondrial content, as its activity is countered by induction of the
mitochondrial biogenesis transcriptional co-activator PPAR<U+03B3> coactivator 1a
(PGC-1a). Concurrent induction of the TFEB and PGC-1a pathways results in an
increased mitochondrial turnover rate in GCN5L1(-/-) cells. Finally, we show that
genetic knockdown of either TFEB or PGC-1a leads to a corresponding decrease in
the expression of the other gene, indicating that these proteins act
coordinately, and in opposition, to maintain cellular mitochondrial content in
response to the modulation of nutrient-sensing signatures.

PMCID: PMC3908418
PMID: 24356961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;15(1):65-74. doi: 10.1038/nrm3716. Epub 2013 Dec 
11.

The return of the nucleus: transcriptional and epigenetic control of autophagy.

Füllgrabe J(1), Klionsky DJ(2), Joseph B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology Pathology, Cancer Centrum Karolinska, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm 17176, Sweden. (2)Life Sciences Institute and Departments
of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology and Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Autophagy is a conserved process by which cytoplasmic components are degraded by 
the lysosome. It is commonly seen as a cytoplasmic event and, until now, nuclear 
events were not considered of primary importance for this process. However,
recent studies have unveiled a transcriptional and epigenetic network that
regulates autophagy. The identification of tightly controlled transcription
factors (such as TFEB and ZKSCAN3), microRNAs and histone marks (especially
acetylated Lys16 of histone 4 (H4K16ac) and dimethylated H3K9 (H3K9me2))
associated with the autophagic process offers an attractive conceptual framework 
to understand the short-term transcriptional response and potential long-term
responses to autophagy.

PMID: 24326622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Virol. 2014 Jan;88(1):592-603. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02828-13. Epub 2013 Oct 30.

The innate immune factor apolipoprotein L1 restricts HIV-1 infection.

Taylor HE(1), Khatua AK, Popik W.

Author information: 
(1)Meharry Medical College, Center for AIDS Health Disparities Research,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) is a major component of the human innate immune
response against African trypanosomes. Although the mechanism of the trypanolytic
activity of circulating APOL1 has been recently clarified, the intracellular
function(s) of APOL1 in human cells remains poorly defined. Like that of many
genes linked to host immunity, APOL1 expression is induced by proinflammatory
cytokines gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a).
Additionally, IFN-<U+03B3>-polarized macrophages that potently restrict HIV-1
replication express APOL1, which suggests that APOL1 may contribute to HIV-1
suppression. Here, we report that APOL1 inhibits HIV-1 replication by multiple
mechanisms. We found that APOL1 protein targeted HIV-1 Gag for degradation by the
endolysosomal pathway. Interestingly, we found that APOL1 stimulated both
endocytosis and lysosomal biogenesis by promoting nuclear localization of
transcription factor EB (TFEB) and expression of TFEB target genes. Moreover, we 
demonstrated that APOL1 depletes cellular viral accessory protein Vif, which
counteracts the host restriction factor APOBEC3G, via a pathway involving
degradation of Vif in lysosomes and by secretion of Vif in microvesicles. As a
result of Vif depletion by APOL1, APOBEC3G was not degraded and reduced
infectivity of progeny virions. In support of this model, we also showed that
endogenous expression of APOL1 in differentiated U937 monocytic cells stimulated 
with IFN-<U+03B3> resulted in a reduced production of virus particles. This finding
supports the hypothesis that induction of APOL1 contributes to HIV-1 suppression 
in differentiated monocytes. Deciphering the precise mechanism of APOL1-mediated 
HIV-1 restriction may facilitate the design of unique therapeutics to target
HIV-1 replication.

PMCID: PMC3911732
PMID: 24173214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Mar 1;23(5):1376-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt527. Epub 2013 Oct
22.

Transcriptional activation of TFEB/ZKSCAN3 target genes underlies enhanced
autophagy in spinobulbar muscular atrophy.

Chua JP(1), Reddy SL, Merry DE, Adachi H, Katsuno M, Sobue G, Robins DM,
Lieberman AP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and.

Spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) is an inherited neuromuscular disorder caused
by the expansion of a CAG repeat encoding a polyglutamine tract in exon 1 of the 
androgen receptor (AR) gene. SBMA demonstrates androgen-dependent toxicity due to
unfolding and aggregation of the mutant protein. There are currently no
disease-modifying therapies, but of increasing interest for therapeutic targeting
is autophagy, a highly conserved cellular process mediating protein quality
control. We have previously shown that genetic manipulations inhibiting autophagy
diminish skeletal muscle atrophy and extend the lifespan of AR113Q knock-in mice.
In contrast, manipulations inducing autophagy worsen muscle atrophy, suggesting
that chronic, aberrant upregulation of autophagy contributes to pathogenesis.
Since the degree to which autophagy is altered in SBMA and the mechanisms
responsible for such alterations are incompletely defined, we sought to delineate
autophagic status in SBMA using both cellular and mouse models. Here, we confirm 
that autophagy is induced in cellular and knock-in mouse models of SBMA and show 
that the transcription factors transcription factor EB (TFEB) and ZKSCAN3 operate
in opposing roles to underlie these changes. We demonstrate upregulation of TFEB 
target genes in skeletal muscle from AR113Q male mice and SBMA patients.
Furthermore, we observe a greater response in AR113Q mice to physiological
stimulation of autophagy by both nutrient starvation and exercise. Taken
together, our results indicate that transcriptional signaling contributes to
autophagic dysregulation and provides a mechanistic framework for the pathologic 
increase of autophagic responsiveness in SBMA.

PMCID: PMC3919011
PMID: 24150846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Cell Biol. 2013 Sep 30;202(7):1107-22. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201307084.

Recruitment of folliculin to lysosomes supports the amino acid-dependent
activation of Rag GTPases.

Petit CS(1), Roczniak-Ferguson A, Ferguson SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and 2 Program in Cellular Neuroscience,
Neurodegeneration, and Repair, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510.

Birt-Hogg-Dubé syndrome, a human disease characterized by fibrofolliculomas (hair
follicle tumors) as well as a strong predisposition toward the development of
pneumothorax, pulmonary cysts, and renal carcinoma, arises from loss-of-function 
mutations in the folliculin (FLCN) gene. In this study, we show that FLCN
regulates lysosome function by promoting the mTORC1-dependent phosphorylation and
cytoplasmic sequestration of transcription factor EB (TFEB). Our results indicate
that FLCN is specifically required for the amino acid-stimulated recruitment of
mTORC1 to lysosomes by Rag GTPases. We further demonstrated that FLCN itself was 
selectively recruited to the surface of lysosomes after amino acid depletion and 
directly bound to RagA via its GTPase domain. FLCN-interacting protein 1 (FNIP1) 
promotes both the lysosome recruitment and Rag interactions of FLCN. These new
findings define the lysosome as a site of action for FLCN and indicate a critical
role for FLCN in the amino acid-dependent activation of mTOR via its direct
interaction with the RagA/B GTPases.

PMCID: PMC3787382
PMID: 24081491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mov Disord. 2013 Sep;28(10):1346. doi: 10.1002/mds.25601.

Restoring impaired protein metabolism in Parkinson's disease--TFEB-mediated
autophagy as a novel therapeutic target.

Ebrahimi-Fakhari D(1), Wahlster L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases and Pediatric Neurology, Department
of Pediatrics, Heidelberg Children's Hospital, Ruprecht-Karls University
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):E1817-26.

PMID: 24078330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Feb;35(2):345-56. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.08.003. Epub 2013 Sep 21.

miR128 up-regulation correlates with impaired amyloid ß(1-42) degradation in
monocytes from patients with sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Tiribuzi R(1), Crispoltoni L, Porcellati S, Di Lullo M, Florenzano F, Pirro M,
Bagaglia F, Kawarai T, Zampolini M, Orlacchio A, Orlacchio A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e Scienze Biochimiche, Università di
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common form of dementia in elderly
individuals, is characterized by neurofibrillary tangles, extracellular amyloid-ß
(Aß) plaques and neuroinflammation. New evidence has shown that the lysosomal
system might be a crossroad in which etiological factors in AD pathogenesis
converge. This study shows that several lysosomal enzymes, including Cathepsin B,
D, S, ß-Galactosidase, a-Mannosidase, and ß-Hexosaminidase, were less expressed
in monocytes and lymphocytes from patients with a clinical diagnosis of AD
dementia compared with cells from healthy controls. In vitro experiments of gain 
and loss of function suggest that down-regulation is a direct consequence of
miR-128 up-regulation found in AD-related cells. The present study also
demonstrates that miR-128 inhibition in monocytes from AD patients improves
Aß(1-42) degradation. These results could contribute to clarify the molecular
mechanisms that affect the imbalanced Aß production/clearance involved in the
pathogenesis of AD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24064186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Oct 18;440(2):251-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.060. Epub 2013 Sep 20.

TFEB activation promotes the recruitment of lysosomal glycohydrolases
ß-hexosaminidase and ß-galactosidase to the plasma membrane.

Magini A(1), Polchi A, Urbanelli L, Cesselli D, Beltrami A, Tancini B, Emiliani
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Perugia, Italy; Department of Medical and Biological Sciences (DSMB),
University of Udine, Udine, Italy.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 3;443(1):344.

Lysosomes are membrane-enclosed organelles containing acid hydrolases. They
mediate a variety of physiological processes, such as cellular clearance, lipid
homeostasis, energy metabolism and pathogen defence. Lysosomes can secrete their 
content through a process called lysosome exocytosis in which lysosomes fuse with
the plasma membrane realising their content into the extracellular milieu.
Lysosomal exocytosis is not only responsible for the secretion of lysosomal
enzymes, but it also has a crucial role in the plasma membrane repair. Recently, 
it has been demonstrated that lysosome response to the physiologic signals is
regulated by the transcription factor EB (TFEB). In particular, lysosomal
secretion is transcriptionally regulated by TFEB which induces both the docking
and fusion of lysosomes with the plasma membrane. In this work we demonstrated
that TFEB nuclear translocation is accompanied by an increase of mature
glycohydrolases ß-hexosaminidase and ß-galactosidase on cell surface. This
evidence contributes to elucidate an unknown TFEB biological function leading the
lysosomal glycohydrolases on plasma membrane.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Oct;37(10):1518-31. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e318299f12e.

Renal tumors: diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers.

Tan PH(1), Cheng L, Rioux-Leclercq N, Merino MJ, Netto G, Reuter VE, Shen SS,
Grignon DJ, Montironi R, Egevad L, Srigley JR, Delahunt B, Moch H; ISUP Renal
Tumor Panel.

Collaborators: Abraham A, Adeniran A, Ahmed K, Al Ahmadie H, Algaba F, Allan R,
Amin M, Argani P, Axcrona U, Barry M, Baydar D, Bégin L, Berney D, Bethwaite P,
Billis A, Birbe R, Bonsib S, Bostwick D, Brimo F, Cathro H, Chen YB, Cheng L,
Cheville J, Mee Cho Y, Chuang AY, Cohen C, Crist H, Delahunt B, Delprado W, Deng 
FM, Egevad L, Epstein J, Evans A, Fadare O, Fajardo D, Falzarano S, Fine S,
Fleming S, Fridman E, Furusato B, Ganji M, Ghayouri M, Giannico G, Gokden N,
Griffiths D, Grignon D, Gupta N, Hameed O, Hes O, Hirsch M, Huang J, Huang W,
Hulsbergen-van de Kaa C, Humphrey P, Hussein S, Iczkowski K, Jimenez R, Jones E, 
Jufe LI, Kench J, Kida M, Kristiansen G, Kunju LP, Lane Z, Latour M, Lewin C, Lie
K, Lloreta J, Loftus B, Lopez-Beltran A, Maclean F, Magi-Galluzzi C, Martignoni
G, McHale T, McKenney J, Merino M, Miller R, Miyamoto H, Moch H, Montironi R,
Murphy H, Nacey J, Nazeer T, Nesi G, Netto G, Nichols P, O'Donnell M, Olgac S,
Orozco R, Osunkoya A, Ozagari A, Pan CC, Parwani A, Perry-Keene J, Petraki C,
Picken M, Pyda-Karwicka M, Reuter V, Rezaei K, Rioux- Leclercq N, Robinson B,
Rohan S, Ronchetti R, Russell L, Samaratunga H, Scarpelli M, Shabaik A, Shah R,
Shanks J, Shen S, Shevchuk M, Sibony M, Srigley J, Srinivasan B, Susani M,
Suzigan S, Sweet J, Takahashi H, Tamboli P, Tan PH, Tickoo S, Trias I, Trpkov K, 
True L, Tsuzuki T, Vakar- Lopez F, Van der Kwast T, Wang C, Warren A, Yao J,
Yilmaz A, Zhao J, Zhou M, Zynger D.

The International Society of Urological Pathology convened a consensus conference
on renal cancer, preceded by an online survey, to address issues relating to the 
diagnosis and reporting of renal neoplasia. In this report, the role of
biomarkers in the diagnosis and assessment of prognosis of renal tumors is
addressed. In particular we focused upon the use of immunohistochemical markers
and the approach to specific differential diagnostic scenarios. We enquired
whether cytogenetic and molecular tools were applied in practice and asked for
views on the perceived prognostic role of biomarkers. Both the survey and
conference voting results demonstrated a high degree of consensus in
participants' responses regarding prognostic/predictive markers and molecular
techniques, whereas it was apparent that biomarkers for these purposes remained
outside the diagnostic realm pending clinical validation. Although no individual 
antibody or panel of antibodies reached consensus for classifying renal tumors,
or for confirming renal metastatic disease, it was noted from the online survey
that 87% of respondents used immunohistochemistry to subtype renal tumors
sometimes or occasionally, and a majority (87%) used immunohistochemical markers 
(Pax 2 or Pax 8, renal cell carcinoma [RCC] marker, panel of pan-CK, CK7,
vimentin, and CD10) in confirming the diagnosis of metastatic RCC. There was
consensus that immunohistochemistry should be used for histologic subtyping and
applied before reaching a diagnosis of unclassified RCC. At the conference, there
was consensus that TFE3 and TFEB analysis ought to be requested when RCC was
diagnosed in a young patient or when histologic appearances were suggestive of
the translocation subtype; whereas Pax 2 and/or Pax 8 were considered to be the
most useful markers in the diagnosis of a renal primary.

PMCID: PMC4714713
PMID: 24025522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Sep 3;7:85. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-85.

Systems analysis reveals a transcriptional reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype 
induced by SNAIL-inhibitor GN-25.

Azmi AS(1), Bollig-Fischer A, Bao B, Park BJ, Lee SH, Yong-Song G, Dyson G, Reddy
CK, Sarkar FH, Mohammad RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, John R, HWCRC 732, Detroit, MI, 4100, USA.
azmia@karmanos.org.

BACKGROUND: HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE, Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as
excellent model system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that
reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We had earlier developed a
SNAIL-p53 interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL
function. In this report, using systems biology and pathway network analysis, we 
show that GN-25 could cause reversal of EMT leading to mesenchymal-to-epithelial 
transition (MET) in a well-recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models.
RESULTS: GN-25 induced MET was found to be consistent with growth inhibition,
suppression of spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. Pathway
network analysis of mRNA expression using microarrays from GN-25 treated
Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells showed an orchestrated global re-organization of EMT
network genes. The expression signatures were validated at the protein level
(down-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1 and TWIST2 that was
concurrent with up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin), and RNAi studies 
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most importantly,
GN-25 modulated many major transcription factors (TFs) such as inhibition of
oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and led to enhancement in the expression of tumor 
suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7 and XBP1,
resulting in MET as well as cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems and network investigations provide convincing
pre-clinical evidence in support of the clinical application of GN-25 for the
reversal of EMT and thereby reducing cancer cell aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3848843
PMID: 24004452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Semin Oncol. 2013 Aug;40(4):511-20. doi: 10.1053/j.seminoncol.2013.05.009.

Non-clear cell renal cancer: disease-based management and opportunities for
targeted therapeutic approaches.

Linehan WM(1), Srinivasan R, Garcia JA.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. WML@nih.gov

A better understanding of the biology of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) has
significantly changed the treatment paradigm of the disease. Several novel
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) inhibitors have been approved recently by the US Food and Drug
Administration. Unfortunately, the vast majority of clinical trials conducted
today have been aimed to include patients with clear cell RCC, which remains the 
most common histologic subtype of the disease. Non-clear cell RCC represents
approximately 20%-25% of all RCC patients. Non-clear cell RCC is made up of
multiple histologic subtypes, each with a different molecular printing profile.
Although VEGF and TORC inhibitors are commonly used in the management of this
cohort of patients, non-clear cell histologies do not appear to be related to the
von Hippel-Lindau gene (VHL). As such, the clinical efficacy of the existing
agents is quite limited. There is a need to develop more rational therapeutic
approaches that specifically target the biology of each of the different subtypes
of non-clear cell RCC. In this review, we discuss molecular and clinical
characteristics of each of the non-clear cell RCC subtypes and describe ongoing
efforts to develop novel agents for this subset of patients.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4165483
PMID: 23972715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell Cycle. 2013 Sep 1;12(17):2744-52. doi: 10.4161/cc.25825. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Regulation of lysosome biogenesis and functions in osteoclasts.

Lacombe J(1), Karsenty G, Ferron M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal; Montréal, Québec, Canada.

In order to resorb the mineralized bone extracellular matrix, the osteoclast
relies on the generation of a resorption lacuna characterized by the presence of 
specific proteases and a low pH. Hence, bone resorption by osteoclasts is highly 
dependent on lysosomes, the organelles specialized in intra- and extracellular
material degradation. This is best illustrated by the fact that multiple forms of
human osteopetrosis are caused by mutations in genes encoding for lysosomal
proteins. Yet, until recently, the molecular mechanisms regulating lysosomal
biogenesis and function in osteoclasts were poorly understood. Here we review the
latest developments in the study of lysosomal biogenesis and function in
osteoclasts with an emphasis on the transcriptional control of these processes.

PMCID: PMC3899188
PMID: 23966172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Pathol Int. 2013 Aug;63(8):381-90. doi: 10.1111/pin.12080.

Recent advances of immunohistochemistry for diagnosis of renal tumors.

Kuroda N(1), Tanaka A, Ohe C, Nagashima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kochi Red Cross Hospital, Kochi, Japan.
kurochankochi@yahoo.co.jp

The recent classification of renal tumors has been proposed according to genetic 
characteristics as well as morphological difference. In this review, we summarize
the immunohistochemical characteristics of each entity of renal tumors. Regarding
translocation renal cell carcinoma (RCC), TFE3, TFEB and ALK protein expression
is crucial in establishing the diagnosis of Xp11.2 RCC, renal carcinoma with
t(6;11)(p21;q12), and renal carcinoma with ALK rearrangement, respectively. In
dialysis-related RCC, neoplastic cells of acquired cystic disease-associated RCC 
are positive for alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR), but negative for
cytokeratin (CK) 7, whereas clear cell papillary RCC shows the inverse pattern.
The diffuse positivity for carbonic anhydrase 9 (CA9) is diagnostic for clear
cell RCC. Co-expression of CK7 and CA9 is characteristic of multilocular cystic
RCC. CK7 and AMACR are excellent markers for papillary RCC and mucinous tubular
and spindle cell carcinoma. CD82 and epithelial-related antigen (MOC31) may be
helpful in the distinction between chromophobe RCC and renal oncocytoma. WT1 and 
CD57 highlights the diagnosis of metanephric adenoma. The combined panel of PAX2 
and PAX8 may be useful in the diagnosis of metastatic RCC.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23957913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Gene. 2013 Nov 15;531(1):64-70. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.054. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Screening of transcription factors with transcriptional initiation activity.

Zhang L(1), Yu H, Wang P, Ding Q, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Science Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Electronic address: zhanglang08@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.

A majority of mammalian promoters are associated with CpG islands. CpG island
promoters frequently lack common core promoter elements, such as the TATA box,
and often have dispersed transcription start sites. The mechanism through which
CpG island promoters are transcriptionally initiated remains unclear. We
speculate that some transcription factors can direct transcription initiation by 
themselves. To test this hypothesis, we screened a variety of transcription
factors to see whether they could initiate transcription. Most transcription
factors, including specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and nuclear factor Y (NF-Y),
showed little transcriptional initiation activity. However, nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1), the basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (bHLH/ZIP) family of 
proteins and the E-twenty six (Ets) family of proteins had strong transcriptional
activity. We further demonstrated that these transcription factors initiate
dispersed transcription. Our studies provide perspectives to the mechanism of
transcription initiation from CpG island promoters.

© 2013.

PMID: 23933270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2267. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3267.

The TFEB orthologue HLH-30 regulates autophagy and modulates longevity in
Caenorhabditis elegans.

Lapierre LR(1), De Magalhaes Filho CD, McQuary PR, Chu CC, Visvikis O, Chang JT, 
Gelino S, Ong B, Davis AE, Irazoqui JE, Dillin A, Hansen M.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Development and Aging, Del E Webb Neuroscience, Aging and Stem Cell
Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA, USA.

Autophagy is a cellular recycling process that has an important anti-aging role, 
but the underlying molecular mechanism is not well understood. The mammalian
transcription factor EB (TFEB) was recently shown to regulate multiple genes in
the autophagy process. Here we show that the predicted TFEB orthologue HLH-30
regulates autophagy in Caenorhabditis elegans and, in addition, has a key role in
lifespan determination. We demonstrate that hlh-30 is essential for the extended 
lifespan of Caenorhabditis elegans in six mechanistically distinct longevity
models, and overexpression of HLH-30 extends lifespan. Nuclear localization of
HLH-30 is increased in all six Caenorhabditis elegans models and, notably,
nuclear TFEB levels are augmented in the livers of mice subjected to dietary
restriction, a known longevity-extending regimen. Collectively, our results
demonstrate a conserved role for HLH-30 and TFEB in autophagy, and possibly
longevity, and identify HLH-30 as a uniquely important transcription factor for
lifespan modulation in Caenorhabditis elegans.

PMCID: PMC3866206
PMID: 23925298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;5(4):214-26. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjt022.

The lysosome: from waste bag to potential therapeutic target.

Appelqvist H(1), Wäster P, Kågedal K, Öllinger K.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine,
Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.

Lysosomes are ubiquitous membrane-bound intracellular organelles with an acidic
interior. They are central for degradation and recycling of macromolecules
delivered by endocytosis, phagocytosis, and autophagy. In contrast to the rather 
simplified view of lysosomes as waste bags, nowadays lysosomes are recognized as 
advanced organelles involved in many cellular processes and are considered
crucial regulators of cell homeostasis. The function of lysosomes is critically
dependent on soluble lysosomal hydrolases (e.g. cathepsins) as well as lysosomal 
membrane proteins (e.g. lysosome-associated membrane proteins). This review
focuses on lysosomal involvement in digestion of intra- and extracellular
material, plasma membrane repair, cholesterol homeostasis, and cell death.
Regulation of lysosomal biogenesis and function via the transcription factor EB
(TFEB) will also be discussed. In addition, lysosomal contribution to diseases,
including lysosomal storage disorders, neurodegenerative disorders, cancer, and
cardiovascular diseases, is presented.

PMID: 23918283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Nov;45(11):2444-55. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.07.019. Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Regulation of Akt-mTOR, ubiquitin-proteasome and autophagy-lysosome pathways in
response to formoterol administration in rat skeletal muscle.

Joassard OR(1), Amirouche A, Gallot YS, Desgeorges MM, Castells J, Durieux AC,
Berthon P, Freyssenet DG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie de l'Exercice, Université de Lyon, F-42023
Saint-Etienne, France.

Administration of ß2-agonists triggers skeletal muscle anabolism and hypertrophy.
We investigated the time course of the molecular events responsible for rat
skeletal muscle hypertrophy in response to 1, 3 and 10 days of formoterol
administration (i.p. 2000µg/kg/day). A marked hypertrophy of rat tibialis
anterior muscle culminated at day 10. Phosphorylation of Akt, ribosomal protein
S6, 4E-BP1 and ERK1/2 was increased at day 3, but returned to control level at
day 10. This could lead to a transient increase in protein translation and could 
explain previous studies that reported increase in protein synthesis following
ß2-agonist administration. Formoterol administration was also associated with a
significant reduction in MAFbx/atrogin-1 mRNA level (day 3), suggesting that
formoterol can also affect protein degradation of MAFbx/atrogin1 targeted
substrates, including MyoD and eukaryotic initiation factor-3f (eIF3-f).
Surprisingly, mRNA level of autophagy-related genes, light chain 3 beta (LC3b)
and gamma-aminobutyric acid receptor-associated protein-like 1 (Gabarapl1), as
well as lysosomal hydrolases, cathepsin B and cathepsin L, was significantly and 
transiently increased after 1 and/or 3 days, suggesting that autophagosome
formation would be increased in response to formoterol administration. However,
this has to be relativized since the mRNA level of Unc-51-like kinase1 (Ulk1),
BCL2/adenovirus E1B interacting protein3 (Bnip3), and transcription factor EB
(TFEB), as well as the protein content of Ulk1, Atg13, Atg5-Atg12 complex and
p62/Sqstm1 remained unchanged or was even decreased in response to formoterol
administration. These results demonstrate that the effects of formoterol are
mediated, in part, through the activation of Akt-mTOR pathway and that other
signaling pathways become more important in the regulation of skeletal muscle
mass with chronic administration of ß2-agonists.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Cell Cycle. 2013 Aug 15;12(16):2524-5. doi: 10.4161/cc.25835. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

mTOR, AMBRA1, and autophagy: an intricate relationship.

Nazio F, Cecconi F.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Apr;15(4):406-16.

PMCID: PMC3865034
PMID: 23907135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Toxicology. 2013 Sep 15;311(3):205-15. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2013.07.001. Epub 2013 
Jul 10.

Impairment of autophagy: from hereditary disorder to drug intoxication.

Aki T(1), Funakoshi T, Unuma K, Uemura K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Forensic Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan. aki.legm@tmd.ac.jp

At first, the molecular mechanism of autophagy was unveiled in a unicellular
organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast), followed by the discovery that
the basic mechanism of autophagy is conserved in multicellular organisms
including mammals. Although autophagy was considered to be a non-selective bulk
protein degradation system to recycle amino acids during periods of nutrient
starvation, it is also believed to be an essential mechanism for the selective
elimination of proteins/organelles that are damaged under pathological
conditions. Research advances made using autophagy-deficient animals have
revealed that impairments of autophagy often underlie the pathogenesis of
hereditary disorders such as Danon, Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and Huntington's
diseases, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. On the other hand, there are many
reports that drugs and toxicants, including arsenic, cadmium, paraquat,
methamphetamine, and ethanol, induce autophagy during the development of their
toxicity on many organs including heart, brain, lung, kidney, and liver. Although
the question as to whether autophagic machinery is involved in the execution of
cell death or not remains controversial, the current view of the role of
autophagy during cell/tissue injury is that it is an important, often essential, 
cytoprotective reaction; disturbances in cytoprotective autophagy aggravate
cell/tissue injuries. The purpose of this review is to provide (1) a gross
summarization of autophagy processes, which are becoming more important in the
field of toxicology, and (2) examples of important studies reporting the
involvement of perturbations in autophagy in cell/tissue injuries caused by acute
as well as chronic intoxication.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23851159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 28;8(6):e68060. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068060. Print 2013.

A rapid and sensitive method for measuring N-acetylglucosaminidase activity in
cultured cells.

Mauri V(1), Lotfi P, Segatori L, Sardiello M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Jan
and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

A rapid and sensitive method to quantitatively assess N-acetylglucosaminidase
(NAG) activity in cultured cells is highly desirable for both basic research and 
clinical studies. NAG activity is deficient in cells from patients with
Mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB (MPS IIIB) due to mutations in NAGLU, the gene
that encodes NAG. Currently available techniques for measuring NAG activity in
patient-derived cell lines include chromogenic and fluorogenic assays and provide
a biochemical method for the diagnosis of MPS IIIB. However, standard protocols
require large amounts of cells, cell disruption by sonication or freeze-thawing, 
and normalization to the cellular protein content, resulting in an error-prone
procedure that is material- and time-consuming and that produces highly variable 
results. Here we report a new procedure for measuring NAG activity in cultured
cells. This procedure is based on the use of the fluorogenic NAG substrate,
4-Methylumbelliferyl-2-acetamido-2-deoxy-alpha-D-glucopyranoside (MUG), in a
one-step cell assay that does not require cell disruption or post-assay
normalization and that employs a low number of cells in 96-well plate format. We 
show that the NAG one-step cell assay greatly discriminates between wild-type and
MPS IIIB patient-derived fibroblasts, thus providing a rapid method for the
detection of deficiencies in NAG activity. We also show that the assay is
sensitive to changes in NAG activity due to increases in NAGLU expression
achieved by either overexpressing the transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master
regulator of lysosomal function, or by inducing TFEB activation chemically.
Because of its small format, rapidity, sensitivity and reproducibility, the NAG
one-step cell assay is suitable for multiple procedures, including the
high-throughput screening of chemical libraries to identify modulators of NAG
expression, folding and activity, and the investigation of candidate molecules
and constructs for applications in enzyme replacement therapy, gene therapy, and 
combination therapies.

PMCID: PMC3695942
PMID: 23840811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Neuroscience. 2013 Oct 10;250:8-19. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.06.049. Epub
2013 Jul 2.

Increased lysosomal biogenesis in activated microglia and exacerbated neuronal
damage after traumatic brain injury in progranulin-deficient mice.

Tanaka Y(1), Matsuwaki T, Yamanouchi K, Nishihara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life 
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Progranulin (PGRN) is known to play a role in the pathogenesis of
neurodegenerative diseases. Recently, it has been demonstrated that patients with
the homozygous mutation in the GRN gene present with neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis, and there is growing evidence that PGRN is related to lysosomal
function. In the present study, we investigated the possible role of PGRN in the 
lysosomes of activated microglia in the cerebral cortex after traumatic brain
injury (TBI). We showed that the mouse GRN gene has two possible coordinated
lysosomal expression and regulation (CLEAR) sequences that bind to transcription 
factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal genes. PGRN was colocalized
with Lamp1, a lysosomal marker, and Lamp1-positive areas in GRN-deficient (KO)
mice were significantly expanded compared with wild-type (WT) mice after TBI.
Expression of all the lysosome-related genes examined in KO mice was
significantly higher than that in WT mice. The number of activated microglia with
TFEB localized to the nucleus was also significantly increased in KO as compared 
with WT mice. Since the TFEB translocation is regulated by the mammalian target
of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) activity in the lysosome, we compared ribosomal
S6 kinase 1 (S6K1) phosphorylation that reflects mTORC1 activity. S6K1
phosphorylation in KO mice was significantly lower than that in WT mice. In
addition, the number of nissl-positive and fluoro-jade B-positive cells around
the injury was significantly decreased and increased, respectively, in KO as
compared with WT mice. These results suggest that PGRN localized in the lysosome 
is involved in the activation of mTORC1, and its deficiency leads to increased
TFEB nuclear translocation with a resultant increase in lysosomal biogenesis in
activated microglia and exacerbated neuronal damage in the cerebral cortex after 
TBI.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23830905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Jun 15;6(7):1452-7. Print 2013.

Renal cell carcinomas with t(6;11)(p21;q12) presenting with tubulocystic renal
cell carcinoma-like features.

Rao Q(1), Zhang XM, Tu P, Xia QY, Shen Q, Zhou XJ, Shi QL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School
of Medicine, Nanjing, China.

In this study, we reported an additional genetically confirmed case of renal cell
carcinomas (RCCs) with t(6;11)(p21;q12) showing an unusual histological pattern. 
Histologically, the tumor was entirely composed of small to intermediate sized
tubules and cysts. The tubules and cysts were lined by a single layer of flat,
hobnail, cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells. Most cells demonstrated abundant 
eosinophilic cytoplasm with regular, round or oval nuclei and some inconspicuous 
nucleoli. All these morphological features are suggestive of tubulocystic
carcinoma of the kidney. However, the tumor demonstrated moderately (2+) or
strongly (3+) positive staining for TFEB, Cathepsin K, Ksp-cadherin, and vimentin
but negative for TFE3, CD10, HMB45, melan A, CKpan, and CK7. Using a recently
developed TFEB split FISH assay, the presence of TFEB rearrangement was
demonstrated. Our results support the clinical application of a TFEB break-apart 
FISH assay for diagnosis and confirmation of TFEB RCC and further expand the
morphologic spectrum that may be present in these neoplasms, sometimes raising a 
challenging differential diagnosis with other renal tumors.

PMCID: PMC3693216
PMID: 23826432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Sep 1;19(17):4673-84. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3825.
Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Genomic heterogeneity of translocation renal cell carcinoma.

Malouf GG(1), Monzon FA, Couturier J, Molinié V, Escudier B, Camparo P, Su X, Yao
H, Tamboli P, Lopez-Terrada D, Picken M, Garcia M, Multani AS, Pathak S, Wood CG,
Tannir NM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030-3721, USA.

PURPOSE: Translocation renal cell carcinoma (tRCC) is a rare subtype of kidney
cancer involving the TFEB/TFE3 genes. We aimed to investigate the genomic and
epigenetic features of this entity.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Cytogenomic analysis was conducted with 250K
single-nucleotide polymorphism microarrays on 16 tumor specimens and four cell
lines. LINE-1 methylation, a surrogate marker of DNA methylation, was conducted
on 27 cases using pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: tRCC showed cytogenomic heterogeneity, with 31.2% and 18.7% of cases
presenting similarities with clear-cell and papillary RCC profiles, respectively.
The most common alteration was a 17q gain in seven tumors (44%), followed by a 9p
loss in six cases (37%). Less frequent were losses of 3p and 17p in five cases
(31%) each. Patients with 17q gain were older (P=0.0006), displayed more genetic 
alterations (P<0.003), and had a worse outcome (P=0.002) than patients without
it. Analysis comparing gene-expression profiling of a subset of tumors bearing
17q gain and those without suggest large-scale dosage effects and TP53
haploinsufficiency without any somatic TP53 mutation identified. Cell line-based 
cytogenetic studies revealed that 17q gain can be related to isochromosome 17
and/or to multiple translocations occurring around 17q breakpoints. Finally,
LINE-1 methylation was lower in tRCC tumors from adults compared with tumors from
young patients (71.1% vs. 76.7%; P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal genomic heterogeneity of tRCC with similarities
to other renal tumor subtypes and raise important questions about the role of
TFEB/TFE3 translocations and other chromosomal imbalances in tRCC biology.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3882157
PMID: 23817689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013 Aug;23(4):252-61. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2013.06.009.
Epub 2013 Jun 28.

Complex regulation of autophagy in cancer - integrated approaches to discover the
networks that hold a double-edged sword.

Kubisch J(1), Türei D, Földvári-Nagy L, Dunai ZA, Zsákai L, Varga M, Vellai T,
Csermely P, Korcsmáros T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Eötvös Loránd University, Pázmány P. s. 1C, H-1117
Budapest, Hungary.

Autophagy, a highly regulated self-degradation process of eukaryotic cells, is a 
context-dependent tumor-suppressing mechanism that can also promote tumor cell
survival upon stress and treatment resistance. Because of this ambiguity,
autophagy is considered as a double-edged sword in oncology, making anti-cancer
therapeutic approaches highly challenging. In this review, we present how
systems-level knowledge on autophagy regulation can help to develop new
strategies and efficiently select novel anti-cancer drug targets. We focus on the
protein interactors and transcriptional/post-transcriptional regulators of
autophagy as the protein and regulatory networks significantly influence the
activity of core autophagy proteins during tumor progression. We list several
network resources to identify interactors and regulators of autophagy proteins.
As in silico analysis of such networks often necessitates experimental
validation, we briefly summarize tractable model organisms to examine the role of
autophagy in cancer. We also discuss fluorescence techniques for high-throughput 
monitoring of autophagy in humans. Finally, the challenges of pharmacological
modulation of autophagy are reviewed. We suggest network-based concepts to
overcome these difficulties. We point out that a context-dependent modulation of 
autophagy would be favored in anti-cancer therapy, where autophagy is stimulated 
in normal cells, while inhibited only in stressed cancer cells. To achieve this
goal, we introduce the concept of regulo-network drugs targeting specific
transcription factors or miRNA families identified with network analysis. The
effect of regulo-network drugs propagates indirectly through transcriptional or
post-transcriptional regulation of autophagy proteins, and, as a
multi-directional intervention tool, they can both activate and inhibit specific 
proteins in the same time. The future identification and validation of such
regulo-network drug targets may serve as novel intervention points, where
autophagy can be effectively modulated in cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23810837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Autophagy. 2013 Aug;9(8):1244-6. doi: 10.4161/auto.25044. Epub 2013 May 22.

TFEB: Pathogenic role and therapeutic target in Parkinson disease.

Decressac M(1), Björklund A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Sciences; Wallenberg Neuroscience Center;
Lund University; Lund, Skane Sweden.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):E1817-26.

Parkinson disease (PD) is characterized by the progressive loss of nigral
dopamine neurons and the presence of accumulations containing the disease-causing
protein SNCA/a-synuclein. Here we review our recent findings describing how SNCA 
impairs the function of the master regulator of the autophagy-lysosomal pathway
(ALP), the transcription factor EB (TFEB), and that genetic or pharmacological
stimulation of its activity promotes protection of dopamine neurons. These
findings suggest that strategies aimed at enhancing autophagy-mediated
degradation of SNCA may hold great promise for disease intervention in PD.

PMCID: PMC3748195
PMID: 23715007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Autophagy. 2013 Jul;9(7):1117-8. doi: 10.4161/auto.24920. Epub 2013 May 6.

What else is in store for autophagy? Exocytosis of autolysosomes as a mechanism
of TFEB-mediated cellular clearance in Pompe disease.

Feeney EJ(1), Spampanato C, Puertollano R, Ballabio A, Parenti G, Raben N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation; National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases; National Institutes of Health;
Bethesda, MD USA.

It is hard to find an area of biology in which autophagy is not involved. In
fact, the topic extends beyond scientific research to stimulate intellectual
exercise and entertainment-autophagy has found its way into a crossword puzzle
(Klionsky, 2013). We have found yet another function of autophagy while searching
for a better treatment for Pompe disease, a devastating metabolic myopathy
resulting from excessive lysosomal glycogen storage. To relieve this glycogen
burden, we stimulated lysosomal exocytosis through upregulation of transcription 
factor EB (TFEB). Overexpression of TFEB in Pompe muscle clears the cells of
enlarged lysosomes, reduces glycogen levels, and alleviates autophagic buildup,
the major secondary abnormality in Pompe disease. Unexpectedly, the process of
exocytosis does not seem to be a purely lysosomal event; vesicles arranged along 
the plasma membrane are double-labeled with the lysosomal marker LAMP1 and the
autophagosomal marker LC3, indicating that TFEB induces the exocytosis of
autolysosomes. Furthermore, the effects of TFEB are almost abrogated in
autophagy-deficient Pompe mice, suggesting a previously unrecognized role of
autophagy in TFEB-mediated cellular clearance.

PMCID: PMC3722326
PMID: 23669057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Cell Sci. 2013 Apr 15;126(Pt 8):1713-9. doi: 10.1242/jcs.125773. Epub 2013 May 
2.

Regulation of mTORC1 and its impact on gene expression at a glance.

Laplante M(1), Sabatini DM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et de
Pneumologie de Québec (CRIUCPQ), Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, 2725
Chemin Ste-Foy, Québec, QC, G1V 4G5, Canada. mathieu.laplante@criucpq.ulaval.ca

The mechanistic (or mammalian) target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a kinase that
regulates key cellular functions linked to the promotion of cell growth and
metabolism. This kinase, which is part of two protein complexes termed mTOR
complex 1 (mTORC1) and 2 (mTORC2), has a fundamental role in coordinating
anabolic and catabolic processes in response to growth factors and nutrients. Of 
the two mTOR complexes, mTORC1 is by far the best characterized. When active,
mTORC1 triggers cell growth and proliferation by promoting protein synthesis,
lipid biogenesis, and metabolism, and by reducing autophagy. The fact that mTORC1
deregulation is associated with several human diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, 
cancer, obesity and neurodegeneration, highlights its importance in the
maintenance of cellular homeostasis. Over the last years, several groups observed
that mTORC1 inhibition, in addition to reducing protein synthesis, deeply affects
gene transcription. Here, we review the connections between mTORC1 and gene
transcription by focusing on its impact in regulating the activation of specific 
transcription factors including including STAT3, SREBPs, PPAR<U+03B3>, PPARa, HIF1a,
YY1–PGC1a and TFEB. We also discuss the importance of these transcription factors
in mediating the effects of mTORC1 on various cellular processes in physiological
and pathological contexts.

PMCID: PMC3678406
PMID: 23641065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):E1817-26. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305623110. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

TFEB-mediated autophagy rescues midbrain dopamine neurons from a-synuclein
toxicity.

Decressac M(1), Mattsson B, Weikop P, Lundblad M, Jakobsson J, Björklund A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Sciences, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center,
Lund University, 22184 Lund, Sweden. Mickael.Decressac@med.lu.se

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2013 Aug;9(8):1244-6.
    Mov Disord. 2013 Sep;28(10):1346.

The aggregation of a-synuclein plays a major role in Parkinson disease (PD)
pathogenesis. Recent evidence suggests that defects in the autophagy-mediated
clearance of a-synuclein contribute to the progressive loss of nigral dopamine
neurons. Using an in vivo model of a-synuclein toxicity, we show that the PD-like
neurodegenerative changes induced by excess cellular levels of a-synuclein in
nigral dopamine neurons are closely linked to a progressive decline in markers of
lysosome function, accompanied by cytoplasmic retention of transcription factor
EB (TFEB), a major transcriptional regulator of the autophagy-lysosome pathway.
The changes in lysosomal function, observed in the rat model as well as in human 
PD midbrain, were reversed by overexpression of TFEB, which afforded robust
neuroprotection via the clearance of a-synuclein oligomers, and were aggravated
by microRNA-128-mediated repression of TFEB in both A9 and A10 dopamine neurons. 
Delayed activation of TFEB function through inhibition of mammalian target of
rapamycin blocked a-synuclein induced neurodegeneration and further disease
progression. The results provide a mechanistic link between a-synuclein toxicity 
and impaired TFEB function, and highlight TFEB as a key player in the induction
of a-synuclein-induced toxicity and PD pathogenesis, thus identifying TFEB as a
promising target for therapies aimed at neuroprotection and disease modification 
in PD.

PMCID: PMC3651458
PMID: 23610405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2013 May;14(5):283-96. doi: 10.1038/nrm3565.

Signals from the lysosome: a control centre for cellular clearance and energy
metabolism.

Settembre C(1), Fraldi A, Medina DL, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Pietro Castellino
111, 80131, Naples, Italy.

For a long time, lysosomes were considered merely to be cellular 'incinerators'
involved in the degradation and recycling of cellular waste. However, now there
is compelling evidence indicating that lysosomes have a much broader function and
that they are involved in fundamental processes such as secretion, plasma
membrane repair, signalling and energy metabolism. Furthermore, the essential
role of lysosomes in autophagic pathways puts these organelles at the crossroads 
of several cellular processes, with significant implications for health and
disease. The identification of a master regulator, transcription factor EB
(TFEB), that regulates lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy has revealed how the
lysosome adapts to environmental cues, such as starvation, and targeting TFEB may
provide a novel therapeutic strategy for modulating lysosomal function in human
disease.

PMCID: PMC4387238
PMID: 23609508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 May;5(5):691-706. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201202176. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

Transcription factor EB (TFEB) is a new therapeutic target for Pompe disease.

Spampanato C(1), Feeney E, Li L, Cardone M, Lim JA, Annunziata F, Zare H,
Polishchuk R, Puertollano R, Parenti G, Ballabio A, Raben N.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy.

A recently proposed therapeutic approach for lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs)
relies upon the ability of transcription factor EB (TFEB) to stimulate autophagy 
and induce lysosomal exocytosis leading to cellular clearance. This approach is
particularly attractive in glycogen storage disease type II [a severe metabolic
myopathy, Pompe disease (PD)] as the currently available therapy, replacement of 
the missing enzyme acid alpha-glucosidase, fails to reverse skeletal muscle
pathology. PD, a paradigm for LSDs, is characterized by both lysosomal
abnormality and dysfunctional autophagy. Here, we show that TFEB is a viable
therapeutic target in PD: overexpression of TFEB in a new muscle cell culture
system and in mouse models of the disease reduced glycogen load and lysosomal
size, improved autophagosome processing, and alleviated excessive accumulation of
autophagic vacuoles. Unexpectedly, the exocytosed vesicles were labelled with
lysosomal and autophagosomal membrane markers, suggesting that TFEB induces
exocytosis of autophagolysosomes. Furthermore, the effects of TFEB were almost
abrogated in the setting of genetically suppressed autophagy, supporting the role
of autophagy in TFEB-mediated cellular clearance.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3662313
PMID: 23606558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;15(6):647-58. doi: 10.1038/ncb2718. Epub 2013 Apr 21.

TFEB controls cellular lipid metabolism through a starvation-induced
autoregulatory loop.

Settembre C(1), De Cegli R, Mansueto G, Saha PK, Vetrini F, Visvikis O, Huynh T, 
Carissimo A, Palmer D, Klisch TJ, Wollenberg AC, Di Bernardo D, Chan L, Irazoqui 
JE, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Italy.
settembre@tigem.it

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):1016.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;15(6):565-7.

The lysosomal-autophagic pathway is activated by starvation and plays an
important role in both cellular clearance and lipid catabolism. However, the
transcriptional regulation of this pathway in response to metabolic cues is
uncharacterized. Here we show that the transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master
regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, is induced by starvation through
an autoregulatory feedback loop and exerts a global transcriptional control on
lipid catabolism via Ppargc1a and Ppar1a. Thus, during starvation a
transcriptional mechanism links the autophagic pathway to cellular energy
metabolism. The conservation of this mechanism in Caenorhabditis elegans suggests
a fundamental role for TFEB in the evolution of the adaptive response to food
deprivation. Viral delivery of TFEB to the liver prevented weight gain and
metabolic syndrome in both diet-induced and genetic mouse models of obesity,
suggesting a new therapeutic strategy for disorders of lipid metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3699877
PMID: 23604321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;15(6):668-76. doi: 10.1038/ncb2741. Epub 2013 Apr 21.

MXL-3 and HLH-30 transcriptionally link lipolysis and autophagy to nutrient
availability.

O'Rourke EJ(1), Ruvkun G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.
eorourke@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;17(1):104.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;15(6):565-7.

Fat is stored or mobilized according to food availability. Malfunction of the
mechanisms that ensure this coordination underlie metabolic diseases in humans.
In mammals, lysosomal and autophagic function is required for normal fat storage 
and mobilization in the presence or absence of food. Autophagy is tightly linked 
to nutrients. However, if and how lysosomal lipolysis is coupled to nutritional
status remains to be determined. Here we identify MXL-3 and HLH-30 (TFEB
orthologue) [corrected] as transcriptional switches coupling lysosomal lipolysis 
and autophagy to nutrient availability and controlling fat storage and ageing in 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Transcriptional coupling of lysosomal lipolysis and
autophagy to nutrients is also observed in mammals. Thus, MXL-3 and HLH-30
orchestrate an adaptive and conserved cellular response to nutritional status and
regulate lifespan.

PMCID: PMC3723461
PMID: 23604316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Genes Dev. 2013 Apr 15;27(8):955-69. doi: 10.1101/gad.213827.113. Epub 2013 Apr
18.

A RANKL-PKCß-TFEB signaling cascade is necessary for lysosomal biogenesis in
osteoclasts.

Ferron M(1), Settembre C, Shimazu J, Lacombe J, Kato S, Rawlings DJ, Ballabio A, 
Karsenty G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Bone resorption by osteoclasts requires a large number of lysosomes that release 
proteases in the resorption lacuna. Whether lysosomal biogenesis is a consequence
of the action of transcriptional regulators of osteoclast differentiation or is
under the control of a different and specific transcriptional pathway remains
unknown. We show here, through cell-based assays and cell-specific gene deletion 
experiments in mice, that the osteoclast differentiation factor RANKL promotes
lysosomal biogenesis once osteoclasts are differentiated through the selective
activation of TFEB, a member of the MITF/TFE family of transcription factors.
This occurs following PKCß phosphorylation of TFEB on three serine residues
located in its last 15 amino acids. This post-translational modification
stabilizes and increases the activity of this transcription factor. Supporting
these biochemical observations, mice lacking in osteoclasts--either TFEB or
PKCß--show decreased lysosomal gene expression and increased bone mass.
Altogether, these results uncover a RANKL-dependent signaling pathway taking
place in differentiated osteoclasts and culminating in the activation of TFEB to 
enhance lysosomal biogenesis-a necessary step for proper bone resorption.

PMCID: PMC3650231
PMID: 23599343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Autophagy. 2013 Jul;9(7):945-6. doi: 10.4161/auto.24475. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Autophagy and gene therapy combine in the treatment of liver disease.

Thompson DA(1), Klionsky DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Department of Biological
Chemistry; University of Michigan; Ann Arbor, MI USA.

Molecular biology holds the promise not only of increasing our understanding of
basic cell biology, but also of advancing our ability to design targeted
therapeutic methods for treating a range of diseases. One example that seems to
hold tremendous potential is gene therapy, the use of exogenous DNA to replace or
suppress a mutant gene in the patient's genome, or to boost the activity of a
normal gene. A recent report (highlighted in a punctum in this issue of the
journal) has brought autophagy into the gene therapy realm.

PMCID: PMC3722329
PMID: 23590992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Autophagy. 2013 Jul;9(7):1094-6. doi: 10.4161/auto.24469. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Autophagy master regulator TFEB induces clearance of toxic
SERPINA1/a-1-antitrypsin polymers.

Pastore N(1), Ballabio A, Brunetti-Pierri N.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine; Naples, Italy.

Deficiency of SERPINA1/AAT [serpin peptidase inhibitor, clade A (a-1
antiproteinase, antitrypsin), member 1/a 1-antitrypsin] results in polymerization
and aggregation of mutant SERPINA1 molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum of
hepatocytes, triggering liver injury. SERPINA1 deficiency is the most common
genetic cause of hepatic disease in children and is frequently responsible for
chronic liver disease in adults. Liver transplantation is currently the only
available treatment for the severe form of the disease. We found that
liver-directed gene transfer of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master
regulator of autophagy and lysosomal biogenesis, results in marked reduction of
toxic mutant SERPINA1 polymer, apoptosis and fibrosis in the liver of a mouse
model of SERPINA1 deficiency. TFEB-mediated correction of hepatic disease is
dependent upon increased degradation of SERPINA1 polymer in autolysosomes and
decreased expression of SERPINA1 monomer. In conclusion, TFEB gene transfer is a 
novel strategy for treatment of liver disease in SERPINA1 deficiency. Moreover,
this study suggests that TFEB-mediated cellular clearance may have broad
applications for therapy of human disorders due to intracellular accumulation of 
toxic proteins.

PMCID: PMC3722318
PMID: 23584152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Autophagy. 2013 Jun 1;9(6):928-30. doi: 10.4161/auto.24371. Epub 2013 Mar 22.

RRAG GTPases link nutrient availability to gene expression, autophagy and
lysosomal biogenesis.

Martina JA(1), Puertollano R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

When the levels of intracellular amino acids are high, RRAG GTPases recruit
MTORC1 to lysosomes and promote its activation. We found that RRAGs also recruit 
specific MTORC1 substrates to the lysosomal surface, thus facilitating
MTORC1-mediated phosphorylation and regulation. In particular, active RRAGs
interact with the transcription factor EB (TFEB), the master regulator of a gene 
network that promotes lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy. Redistribution to
lysosomes is critical for MTORC1-dependent inactivation of TFEB under
nutrient-rich conditions. Therefore, RRAGs play a critical role coordinating
nutrient availability and cellular clearance.

PMCID: PMC3672304
PMID: 23524842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56526. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056526. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Cobalt protoporphyrin accelerates TFEB activation and lysosome reformation during
LPS-induced septic insults in the rat heart.

Unuma K(1), Aki T, Funakoshi T, Yoshida K, Uemura K.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Forensic Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo Japan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced myocardial dysfunction is caused, at least in
part, by mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial dysfunction and the oxidative
damage associated with it are scavenged through various cellular defense systems 
such as autophagy to prevent harmful effects. Our recent study has demonstrated
that cobalt protoporphyrin IX (CoPPIX), a potent inducer of heme oxygenase-1
(HO-1), ameliorates septic liver injuries by enhancing mitochondrial autophagy in
rats. In our current study, we show that CoPPIX (5 mg/kg s.c.) not only
accelerates the autophagic response but also promotes lysosome reformation in the
rat heart treated with LPS (15 mg/kg i.p.). Lysosomal membrane-associated
protein-2 (LAMP2), which is essential to the maintenance of lysosomal functions
in the heart, is depleted transiently but restored rapidly during LPS
administration in the rat. Activation of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master
regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, was also observed, indicating a 
hyper consumption and subsequent reformation of the lysosome to meet the
increased demand for autophagosome cleaning. CoPPIX was found to promote these
processes and tended to restore the LPS-induced suppression of cardiac
performances whilst chloroquine (CQ; 20 mg/kg i.p.), an inhibitor of lysosomes
and autophagic protein degradation, abrogates these beneficial effects. The
cardioprotective effect of CoPPIX against LPS toxicity was also observed via
decreased levels of cardiac releasing enzymes in the plasma. Taken together, our 
current data indicate that lysosome reformation mediated by TFEB may be involved 
in cardioprotection against LPS-induced septic insults, and serve as a novel
mechanism by which CoPPIX protects the heart against oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC3574118
PMID: 23457579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 12;288(15):10703-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.414771. Epub
2013 Mar 1.

Chaperone-mediated autophagy targets hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) for
lysosomal degradation.

Hubbi ME(1), Hu H, Kshitiz, Ahmed I, Levchenko A, Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Program, Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) is a heterodimeric transcription factor that
mediates adaptive responses to hypoxia. We demonstrate that lysosomal degradation
of the HIF-1a subunit by chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) is a major regulator 
of HIF-1 activity. Pharmacological inhibitors of lysosomal degradation, such as
bafilomycin and chloroquine, increased HIF-1a levels and HIF-1 activity, whereas 
activators of chaperone-mediated autophagy, including 6-aminonicotinamide and
nutrient starvation, decreased HIF-1a levels and HIF-1 activity. In contrast,
macroautophagy inhibitors did not increase HIF-1 activity. Transcription factor
EB, a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis, also negatively regulated HIF-1
activity. HIF-1a interacts with HSC70 and LAMP2A, which are core components of
the CMA machinery. Overexpression of HSC70 or LAMP2A decreased HIF-1a protein
levels, whereas knockdown had the opposite effect. Finally, hypoxia increased the
transcription of genes involved in CMA and lysosomal biogenesis in cancer cells. 
Thus, pharmacological and genetic approaches identify CMA as a major regulator of
HIF-1 activity and identify interplay between autophagy and the response to
hypoxia.

PMCID: PMC3624450
PMID: 23457305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 11;50(1):16-28. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.024. Epub 2013
Feb 21.

ZKSCAN3 is a master transcriptional repressor of autophagy.

Chauhan S(1), Goodwin JG, Chauhan S, Manyam G, Wang J, Kamat AM, Boyd DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

Autophagy constitutes a major cell-protective mechanism that eliminates damaged
components and maintains energy homeostasis via recycling nutrients under
normal/stressed conditions. Although the core components of autophagy have been
well studied, regulation of autophagy at the transcriptional level is poorly
understood. Herein, we establish ZKSCAN3, a zinc finger family DNA-binding
protein, as a transcriptional repressor of autophagy. Silencing of ZKSCAN3
induced autophagy and increased lysosome biogenesis. Importantly, we show that
ZKSCAN3 represses transcription of a large gene set (>60) integral to, or
regulatory for, autophagy and lysosome biogenesis/function and that a subset of
these genes, including Map1lC3b and Wipi2, represent direct targets.
Interestingly, ZKSCAN3 and TFEB are oppositely regulated by starvation and in
turn oppositely regulate lysosomal biogenesis and autophagy, suggesting that they
act in conjunction. Altogether, our study uncovers an autophagy master switch
regulating the expression of a transcriptional network of genes integral to
autophagy and lysosome biogenesis/function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3628091
PMID: 23434374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Histol Histopathol. 2013 Jun;28(6):685-90. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Review of renal carcinoma with t(6;11)(p21;q12) with focus on clinical and
pathobiological aspects.

Kuroda N(1), Tanaka A, Sasaki N, Ishihara A, Matsuura K, Moriyama M, Nagashima Y,
Inoue K, Petersson F, Martignoni G, Michal M, Hes O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kochi Red Cross Hospital, Kochi, Japan.
kurochankochi@yahoo.co.jp

Recently, a new category of MiTF/TFE family translocation carcinomas of the
kidney has been proposed. This category includes Xp11.2 renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) and the t(6;11) RCC. These tumors share clinical, morphological,
immunohistochemical and molecular genetic features. In this article, we review
t(6;11) RCC. This tumor predominantly affects children and young adults.
Macroscopically, the tumor generally forms a well circumscribed mass. Satellite
nodules may be observed. Histologically, the tumor comprises large cells and
small cells surrounded by basement membrane material. Immunohistochemically,
tumor cells show nuclear immunolabeling for TFEB and usually express Cathepsin-K 
in the cytoplasm. Karyotyping detects the rearrangement between chromosome 6p21
and chromosome 11q12. Alpha-TFEB fusion can be detected by reverse transcriptase 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). 
Most cases affecting children and young adults seem to be indolent, but some
adult cases have presented with metastasis or caused death. As previously
reported cases remain limited to date, further examination in a large scale study
will be needed in order to elucidate clinical behavior and molecular
characteristics.

PMID: 23426439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 14. pii: S0006-291X(13)00272-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.02.026. [Epub ahead of print]

WITHDRAWN: Clearance of lysosomal glycogen accumulation by Transcription factor
EB (TFEB) in muscle cells from lysosomal alpha-glucosidase deficient mice.

Li HM(1), Feeney E, Li L, Zare H, Puertollano R, Raben N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Muscle Stem Cells and Gene Regulation, National Institute of
Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: hmli.nih@gmail.com.

This article has been withdrawn at the request of the author(s) and/or editor.
The Publisher apologizes for any inconvenience this may cause. The full Elsevier 
Policy on Article Withdrawal can be found at
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/withdrawalpolicy.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3687018
PMID: 23416076  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


166. J Cell Biol. 2013 Feb 18;200(4):475-91. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201209135. Epub 2013 Feb
11.

Rag GTPases mediate amino acid-dependent recruitment of TFEB and MITF to
lysosomes.

Martina JA(1), Puertollano R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The mTORC1 complex supports cell growth and proliferation in response to energy
levels, growth factors, and nutrients. The Rag guanosine triphosphatases
(GTPases) activate mTORC1 in response to amino acids by promoting its
redistribution to lysosomes. In this paper, we identify a novel role for Rags in 
controlling activation of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of
autophagic and lysosomal gene expression. Interaction of TFEB with active Rag
heterodimers promoted recruitment of TFEB to lysosomes, leading to
mTORC1-dependent phosphorylation and inhibition of TFEB. The interaction of TFEB 
with Rags required the first 30 residues of TFEB and the switch regions of the
Rags G domain. Depletion or inactivation of Rags prevented recruitment of TFEB to
lysosomes, whereas expression of active Rags induced association of TFEB with
lysosomal membranes. Finally, Rag GTPases bound and regulated activation of
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor, suggesting a broader role for
Rags in the control of gene expression. Our work provides new insight into the
molecular mechanisms that link nutrient availability and TFEB localization and
activation.

PMCID: PMC3575543
PMID: 23401004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 May 15;22(10):1994-2009. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt052. Epub 2013
Feb 7.

TFEB regulates lysosomal proteostasis.

Song W(1), Wang F, Savini M, Ake A, di Ronza A, Sardiello M, Segatori L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University, Houston,
TX 77005, USA.

Loss-of-function diseases are often caused by destabilizing mutations that lead
to protein misfolding and degradation. Modulating the innate protein homeostasis 
(proteostasis) capacity may lead to rescue of native folding of the mutated
variants, thereby ameliorating the disease phenotype. In lysosomal storage
disorders (LSDs), a number of highly prevalent alleles have missense mutations
that do not impair the enzyme's catalytic activity but destabilize its native
structure, resulting in the degradation of the misfolded protein. Enhancing the
cellular folding capacity enables rescuing the native, biologically functional
structure of these unstable mutated enzymes. However, proteostasis modulators
specific for the lysosomal system are currently unknown. Here, we investigate the
role of the transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal
biogenesis and function, in modulating lysosomal proteostasis in LSDs. We show
that TFEB activation results in enhanced folding, trafficking and lysosomal
activity of a severely destabilized glucocerebrosidase (GC) variant associated
with the development of Gaucher disease (GD), the most common LSD. TFEB
specifically induces the expression of GC and of key genes involved in folding
and lysosomal trafficking, thereby enhancing both the pool of mutated enzyme and 
its processing through the secretory pathway. TFEB activation also rescues the
activity of a ß-hexosaminidase mutant associated with the development of another 
LSD, Tay-Sachs disease, thus suggesting general applicability of TFEB-mediated
proteostasis modulation to rescue destabilizing mutations in LSDs. In summary,
our findings identify TFEB as a specific regulator of lysosomal proteostasis and 
suggest that TFEB may be used as a therapeutic target to rescue enzyme
homeostasis in LSDs.

PMID: 23393155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. EMBO Mol Med. 2013 Mar;5(3):397-412. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201202046. Epub 2013 Feb
4.

Gene transfer of master autophagy regulator TFEB results in clearance of toxic
protein and correction of hepatic disease in alpha-1-anti-trypsin deficiency.

Pastore N(1), Blomenkamp K, Annunziata F, Piccolo P, Mithbaokar P, Maria Sepe R, 
Vetrini F, Palmer D, Ng P, Polishchuk E, Iacobacci S, Polishchuk R, Teckman J,
Ballabio A, Brunetti-Pierri N.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

Alpha-1-anti-trypsin deficiency is the most common genetic cause of liver disease
in children and liver transplantation is currently the only available treatment. 
Enhancement of liver autophagy increases degradation of mutant, hepatotoxic
alpha-1-anti-trypsin (ATZ). We investigated the therapeutic potential of
liver-directed gene transfer of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master gene
that regulates lysosomal function and autophagy, in PiZ transgenic mice,
recapitulating the human hepatic disease. Hepatocyte TFEB gene transfer resulted 
in dramatic reduction of hepatic ATZ, liver apoptosis and fibrosis, which are key
features of alpha-1-anti-trypsin deficiency. Correction of the liver phenotype
resulted from increased ATZ polymer degradation mediated by enhancement of
autophagy flux and reduced ATZ monomer by decreased hepatic NF<U+03BA>B activation and
IL-6 that drives ATZ gene expression. In conclusion, TFEB gene transfer is a
novel strategy for treatment of liver disease of alpha-1-anti-trypsin deficiency.
This study may pave the way towards applications of TFEB gene transfer for
treatment of a wide spectrum of human disorders due to intracellular accumulation
of toxic proteins.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by John Wiley and Sons, Ltd on behalf of 
EMBO.

PMCID: PMC3598080
PMID: 23381957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Autophagy. 2013 Apr;9(4):581-94. doi: 10.4161/auto.23568. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Lysosomal basification and decreased autophagic flux in oxidatively stressed
trabecular meshwork cells: implications for glaucoma pathogenesis.

Porter K(1), Nallathambi J, Lin Y, Liton PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests oxidative damage as a key factor contributing to the
failure of the conventional outflow pathway tissue to maintain appropriate levels
of intraocular pressure, and thus increase the risk for developing glaucoma, a
late-onset disease which is the second leading cause of permanent blindness
worldwide. Autophagy is emerging as an essential cellular survival mechanism
against a variety of stressors, including oxidative stress. Here, we have
monitored, by using different methodologies (LC3-I to LC3-II turnover, tfLC3, and
Cyto ID), the induction of autophagy and autophagy flux in TM cells subjected to 
a normobaric hyperoxic model of mild chronic oxidative stress. Our data indicate 
the MTOR-mediated activation of autophagy and nuclear translocation of TFEB in
oxidatively stressed TM cells, as well as the role of autophagy in the occurrence
of SA-GLB1/SA-ß-gal. Concomitant with the activation of the autophagic pathway,
TM cells grown under oxidative stress conditions displayed, however, reduced
cathepsin (CTS) activities, reduced lysosomal acidification and impaired CTSB
proteolytic maturation, resulting in decreased autophagic flux. We propose that
diminished autophagic flux induced by oxidative stress might represent one of the
factors leading to progressive failure of cellular TM function with age and
contribute to the pathogenesis of primary open angle glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC3627672
PMID: 23360789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cell Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):508-23. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.11. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Activation of lysosomal function in the course of autophagy via mTORC1
suppression and autophagosome-lysosome fusion.

Zhou J(1), Tan SH, Nicolas V, Bauvy C, Yang ND, Zhang J, Xue Y, Codogno P, Shen
HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine and Saw Swee Hock
School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597.

Lysosome is a key subcellular organelle in the execution of the autophagic
process and at present little is known whether lysosomal function is controlled
in the process of autophagy. In this study, we first found that suppression of
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) activity by starvation or two mTOR catalytic
inhibitors (PP242 and Torin1), but not by an allosteric inhibitor (rapamycin),
leads to activation of lysosomal function. Second, we provided evidence that
activation of lysosomal function is associated with the suppression of mTOR
complex 1 (mTORC1), but not mTORC2, and the mTORC1 localization to lysosomes is
not directly correlated to its regulatory role in lysosomal function. Third, we
examined the involvement of transcription factor EB (TFEB) and demonstrated that 
TFEB activation following mTORC1 suppression is necessary but not sufficient for 
lysosomal activation. Finally, Atg5 or Atg7 deletion or blockage of the
autophagosome-lysosome fusion process effectively diminished lysosomal
activation, suggesting that lysosomal activation occurring in the course of
autophagy is dependent on autophagosome-lysosome fusion. Taken together, this
study demonstrates that in the course of autophagy, lysosomal function is
upregulated via a dual mechanism involving mTORC1 suppression and
autophagosome-lysosome fusion.

PMCID: PMC3616426
PMID: 23337583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Clin Genitourin Cancer. 2013 Sep;11(3):357-61. doi: 10.1016/j.clgc.2012.12.006.
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Translocation renal cell carcinomas: an evolving entity and a member of the
microphthalmia transcription factor-associated family of tumors.

Bambury RM(1), Battley JE, McCarthy A, Brady C, O'Reilly S, Kelly PJ, O'Brien F, 
Sweeney P, Fleming S, Mayer NJ, Power DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Mercy University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
richardbambury@me.com

PMID: 23332637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1285-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202208. Epub 2012
Dec 28.

TLR4 activation under lipotoxic conditions leads to synergistic macrophage cell
death through a TRIF-dependent pathway.

Schilling JD(1), Machkovech HM, He L, Diwan A, Schaffer JE.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetic Cardiovascular Disease Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Macrophage dysfunction in obesity and diabetes may predispose to the development 
of diabetic complications, such as infection and impaired healing after tissue
damage. Saturated fatty acids, such as palmitate, are present at elevated
concentrations in the plasma of patients with metabolic disease and may
contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetes and its sequelae. To examine the
effect of lipid excess on macrophage inflammatory function, we determined the
influence of palmitate on LPS-mediated responses in peritoneal macrophages.
Palmitate and LPS led to a profound synergistic cell death response in both
primary and RAW 264.7 macrophages. The cell death had features of apoptosis and
necrosis and was not dependent on endoplasmic reticulum stress, ceramide
generation, or reactive oxygen species production. Instead, we uncovered a
macrophage death pathway that required TLR4 signaling via TRIF but was
independent of NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPKs, and IRF3. A significant decrease in macrophage
lysosomal content was observed early in the death pathway, with evidence of
lysosomal membrane damage occurring later in the death response. Overexpression
of the transcription factor TFEB, which induces a lysosomal biogenic program,
rescued the lysosomal phenotype and improved viability in palmitate- and
LPS-treated cells. Our findings provide new evidence for cross-talk between lipid
metabolism and the innate immune response that converges on the lysosome.

PMCID: PMC3552058
PMID: 23275600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2012 Dec 19;3(12):1063-72. doi: 10.1021/cn300145z. Epub 2012
Sep 13.

Rotenone inhibits autophagic flux prior to inducing cell death.

Mader BJ(1), Pivtoraiko VN, Flippo HM, Klocke BJ, Roth KA, Mangieri LR, Shacka
JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Neuropathology Division, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.

Rotenone, which selectively inhibits mitochondrial complex I, induces oxidative
stress, a-synuclein accumulation, and dopaminergic neuron death, principal
pathological features of Parkinson's disease. The autophagy-lysosome pathway
degrades damaged proteins and organelles for the intracellular maintenance of
nutrient and energy balance. While it is known that rotenone causes autophagic
vacuole accumulation, the mechanism by which this effect occurs has not been
thoroughly investigated. Treatment of differentiated SH-SY5Y cells with rotenone 
(10 µM) induced the accumulation of autophagic vacuoles at 6 h and 24 h as
indicated by Western blot analysis for microtubule associated protein-light chain
3-II (MAP-LC3-II). Assessment of autophagic flux at these time points indicated
that autophagic vacuole accumulation resulted from a decrease in their effective 
lysosomal degradation, which was substantiated by increased levels of autophagy
substrates p62 and a-synuclein. Inhibition of lysosomal degradation may be
explained by the observed decrease in cellular ATP levels, which in turn may have
caused the observed concomitant increase in acidic vesicle pH. The early (6 h)
effects of rotenone on cellular energetics and autophagy-lysosome pathway
function preceded the induction of cell death and apoptosis. These findings
indicate that the classical mitochondrial toxin rotenone has a pronounced effect 
on macroautophagy completion that may contribute to its neurotoxic potential.

PMCID: PMC3526971
PMID: 23259041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Autophagy. 2013 Mar;9(3):410-2.

Intracellular NAD(+) depletion induces autophagic death in multiple myeloma
cells.

Cea M(1), Cagnetta A, Patrone F, Nencioni A, Gobbi M, Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)LeBow Institute for Myeloma Therapeutics and Jerome Lipper Center for Multiple
Myeloma Research, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA. michele_cea@dfci.harvard.edu

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a clonal B-cell malignancy characterized by the
proliferation of plasma cells in the bone marrow. Despite recent therapeutic
advances, MM remains an incurable disease. Therefore, research has focused on
defining new aspects in MM biology that can be therapeutically targeted.
Compelling evidence suggests that malignant cells have a higher nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) turnover rate than normal cells, suggesting that this
biosynthetic pathway represents an attractive target for cancer treatment. We
recently reported that an intracellular NAD(+)-depleting agent, FK866, exerts its
anti-MM effect by triggering autophagic cell death via transcriptional-dependent 
(transcription factor EB, TFEB) and -independent (PI3K-MTORC1) mechanisms. Our
findings link intracellular NAD(+) levels to autophagy in MM cells, providing the
rationale for novel targeted therapies in MM.

PMCID: PMC3590260
PMID: 23221771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jan;14(1):61-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2475. Epub 2012 Nov 18.

Trex1 regulates lysosomal biogenesis and interferon-independent activation of
antiviral genes.

Hasan M(1), Koch J, Rakheja D, Pattnaik AK, Brugarolas J, Dozmorov I, Levine B,
Wakeland EK, Lee-Kirsch MA, Yan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Jan;14(1):10-2.

The sensing of viral nucleic acids by the innate immune system triggers the
production of type I interferons, which activates interferon-stimulated genes
(ISGs) and directs a multifaceted antiviral response. ISGs can also be activated 
through interferon-independent pathways, although the precise mechanisms remain
elusive. Here we found that the cytosolic exonuclease Trex1 regulated the
activation of a subset of ISGs independently of interferon. Both Trex1(-/-) mouse
cells and Trex1-mutant human cells had high expression of genes encoding
antiviral molecules ('antiviral genes') and were refractory to viral infection.
The interferon-independent activation of antiviral genes in Trex1(-/-) cells
required the adaptor STING, the kinase TBK1 and the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7. We also found that Trex1-deficient cells had an expanded lysosomal
compartment, altered subcellular localization of the transcription factor TFEB
and diminished activity of the regulator mTORC1. Together our data identify Trex1
as a regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and interferon-independent activation of
antiviral genes and show that dysregulation of lysosomes can elicit innate immune
responses.

PMCID: PMC3522772
PMID: 23160154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Genome Res. 2012 Nov;22(11):2089-100. doi: 10.1101/gr.131110.111. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Genetic basis of kidney cancer: role of genomics for the development of
disease-based therapeutics.

Linehan WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
linehanm@mail.nih.gov

Kidney cancer is not a single disease; it is made up of a number of different
types of cancer, including clear cell, type 1 papillary, type 2 papillary,
chromophobe, TFE3, TFEB, and oncocytoma. Sporadic, nonfamilial kidney cancer
includes clear cell kidney cancer (75%), type 1 papillary kidney cancer (10%),
papillary type 2 kidney cancer (including collecting duct and medullary RCC)
(5%), the microphalmia-associated transcription (MiT) family translocation kidney
cancers (TFE3, TFEB, and MITF), chromophobe kidney cancer (5%), and oncocytoma
(5%). Each has a distinct histology, a different clinical course, responds
differently to therapy, and is caused by mutation in a different gene. Genomic
studies identifying the genes for kidney cancer, including the VHL, MET, FLCN,
fumarate hydratase, succinate dehydrogenase, TSC1, TSC2, and TFE3 genes, have
significantly altered the ways in which patients with kidney cancer are managed. 
While seven FDA-approved agents that target the VHL pathway have been approved
for the treatment of patients with advanced kidney cancer, further genomic
studies, such as whole genome sequencing, gene expression patterns, and gene copy
number, will be required to gain a complete understanding of the genetic basis of
kidney cancer and of the kidney cancer gene pathways and, most importantly, to
provide the foundation for the development of effective forms of therapy for
patients with this disease.

PMCID: PMC3483538
PMID: 23038766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cancer Lett. 2013 Feb 1;329(1):27-36. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.09.007. Epub
2012 Sep 18.

GDC-0941 enhances the lysosomal compartment via TFEB and primes glioblastoma
cells to lysosomal membrane permeabilization and cell death.

Enzenmüller S(1), Gonzalez P, Karpel-Massler G, Debatin KM, Fulda S.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Ulm University, Eythstrasse 24, Ulm, Germany.

Since phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitors are primarily cytostatic
against glioblastoma, we searched for new drug combinations. Here, we discover
that the PI3K inhibitor GDC-0941 acts in concert with the natural compound B10, a
glycosylated derivative of betulinic acid, to induce cell death in glioblastoma
cells. Importantly, parallel experiments in primary glioblastoma cultures
similarly show that GDC-0941 and B10 cooperate to trigger cell death,
underscoring the clinical relevance of this finding. Molecular studies revealed
that treatment with GDC-0941 stimulates the expression and nuclear translocation 
of Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis,
the lysosomal membrane marker LAMP-1 and the mature form of cathepsin B. Also,
GDC-0941 triggers a time-dependent increase of the lysosomal compartment in a
TFEB-dependent manner, since knockdown of TFEB significantly reduces this
GDC-0941-stimulated lysosomal enhancement. Importantly, GDC-0941 cooperates with 
B10 to trigger lysosomal membrane permeabilization, leading to increased
activation of Bax, loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), caspase-3
activation and cell death. Addition of the cathepsin B inhibitor CA-074me reduces
Bax activation, loss of MMP, caspase-3 activation and cell death upon treatment
with GDC-0941/B10. By comparison, knockdown of caspase-3 or the broad-range
caspase inhibitor zVAD.fmk inhibits GDC-0941/B10-induced DNA fragmentation, but
does not prevent cell death, thus pointing to both caspase-dependent and
-independent pathways. By identifying the combination of GDC-0941 and B10 as a
new, potent strategy to trigger cell death in glioblastoma cells, our findings
have important implications for the development of novel treatment approaches for
glioblastoma.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23000516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Blood. 2012 Oct 25;120(17):3519-29. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-416776. Epub 2012 
Sep 5.

Targeting NAD+ salvage pathway induces autophagy in multiple myeloma cells via
mTORC1 and extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK1/2) inhibition.

Cea M(1), Cagnetta A, Fulciniti M, Tai YT, Hideshima T, Chauhan D, Roccaro A,
Sacco A, Calimeri T, Cottini F, Jakubikova J, Kong SY, Patrone F, Nencioni A,
Gobbi M, Richardson P, Munshi N, Anderson KC.

Author information: 
(1)LeBow Institute for Myeloma Therapeutics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, 
USA.

Malignant cells have a higher nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) turnover
rate than normal cells, making this biosynthetic pathway an attractive target for
cancer treatment. Here we investigated the biologic role of a rate-limiting
enzyme involved in NAD(+) synthesis, Nampt, in multiple myeloma (MM).
Nampt-specific chemical inhibitor FK866 triggered cytotoxicity in MM cell lines
and patient MM cells, but not normal donor as well as MM patients PBMCs.
Importantly, FK866 in a dose-dependent fashion triggered cytotoxicity in MM cells
resistant to conventional and novel anti-MM therapies and overcomes the
protective effects of cytokines (IL-6, IGF-1) and bone marrow stromal cells.
Nampt knockdown by RNAi confirmed its pivotal role in maintenance of both MM cell
viability and intracellular NAD(+) stores. Interestingly, cytotoxicity of FK866
triggered autophagy, but not apoptosis. A transcriptional-dependent (TFEB) and
independent (PI3K/mTORC1) activation of autophagy mediated FK866 MM cytotoxicity.
Finally, FK866 demonstrated significant anti-MM activity in a xenograft-murine MM
model, associated with down-regulation of ERK1/2 phosphorylation and proteolytic 
cleavage of LC3 in tumor cells. Our data therefore define a key role of Nampt in 
MM biology, providing the basis for a novel targeted therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3482862
PMID: 22955917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Autophagy. 2012 Dec;8(12):1845-7. doi: 10.4161/auto.21862. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

PPARGC1A/PGC-1a, TFEB and enhanced proteostasis in Huntington disease: defining
regulatory linkages between energy production and protein-organelle quality
control.

La Spada AR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Cellular and Molecular Medicine, and Neurosciences,
Division of Biological Sciences, Institute for Genomic Medicine, and the Sanford 
Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA, USA. alaspada@ucsd.edu

Huntington disease (HD) results from CAG repeats that encode expanded
polyglutamine tracts in the HTT/huntingtin protein. HD belongs to a large
category of inherited and sporadic neurodegenerative disorders in which
production of a misfolded protein initiates the pathogenic cascade. Previous
studies have shown that misfolded proteins become resistant to cellular protein
turnover pathways by eluding and disabling the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) 
and autophagy-lysosome pathway. Based upon earlier work implicating impaired
PPARGC1A function in HD, we derived inducible PPARGC1A mice and crossed them with
HD mice. We found that PPARGC1A overexpression can rescue HD neurological
phenotypes and neurodegeneration. An unexpected outcome of the rescue was the
virtual elimination of huntingtin aggregates, and we found that PPARGC1A-mediated
aggregate elimination required the autophagy pathway. Moreover, we observed
decreased expression of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of the
autophagy-lysosome pathway, in HD cells and mice, and documented PPARGC1A
co-activation of TFEB in these model systems, noting that PPARGC1A is upstream of
TFEB in promoting proteostasis. These findings underscore the importance of
bioenergetics and autophagy in neurodegeneration, and indicate that PPARGC1A
promotes mitochondrial quality control to support high-energy production states
in cells, such as neurons. As impaired energy production and altered
protein-organelle quality control appear inextricably linked in disorders such as
HD, Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer disease, efforts directed at enhancing
PPARGC1A and TFEB action may represent viable strategies for therapy development 
in neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3541300
PMID: 22932698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;32(21):4410-8. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00930-12. Epub 2012 Aug
27.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3 inhibition promotes lysosomal biogenesis and
autophagic degradation of the amyloid-ß precursor protein.

Parr C(1), Carzaniga R, Gentleman SM, Van Leuven F, Walter J, Sastre M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Apr 1;36(7):1219.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been associated with altered activity of glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) isozymes, which are proposed to contribute to both
neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaque formation. However, the molecular
basis by which GSK3 affects the formation of Aß remains unknown. Our aim was to
identify the underlying mechanisms of GSK3-dependent effects on the processing of
amyloid precursor protein (APP). For this purpose, N2a cells stably expressing
APP carrying the Swedish mutation were treated with specific GSK3 inhibitors or
transfected with GSK3a/ß short interfering RNA. We show that inhibition of GSK3
leads to decreased expression of APP by enhancing its degradation via an increase
in the number of lysosomes. This induction of the lysosomal/autophagy pathway was
associated with nuclear translocation of transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master
regulator of lysosomal biogenesis. Our data indicate that GSK3 inhibition reduces
Aß through an increase of the degradation of APP and its carboxy-terminal
fragment (CTF) by activation of the lysosomal/autophagy pathway. These results
suggest that an increased propensity toward autophagic/lysosomal alterations in
AD patients could have consequences for neuronal function.

PMCID: PMC3486153
PMID: 22927642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Sep;36(9):1327-38. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31825aafb5.

Renal cell carcinomas with t(6;11)(p21;q12): A clinicopathologic study
emphasizing unusual morphology, novel alpha-TFEB gene fusion point,
immunobiomarkers, and ultrastructural features, as well as detection of the gene 
fusion by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Rao Q(1), Liu B, Cheng L, Zhu Y, Shi QL, Wu B, Jiang SJ, Wang Y, Wang X, Yu B,
Zhang RS, Ma HH, Lu ZF, Tu P, Wang JD, Zhou XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University School
of Medicine, Nanjing, China.

Renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) with t(6;11)(p21;q12) are extremely rare and
characterized by specific chromosome translocation, involving the transcription
factor EB (TFEB). Fewer than 30 cases have been described in the literature. We
examined 7 additional cases of this rare tumor by clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, molecular, and ultrastructural analyses. Four tumors had the
typical morphologic features of TFEB RCCs, whereas 3 cases demonstrated uncommon 
morphologic features, mimicking epithelioid angiomyolipoma, chromophobe cell RCC,
and clear cell RCC, respectively. Immunohistochemically, aside from TFEB and
cathepsin K, kidney-specific cadherin was another sensitive and relatively
specific marker for TFEB RCCs, supporting a distal nephron origin for these renal
tumors. We also observed different ultrastructures including mitochondrion with
areas of lipofuscin pigment in the smaller cells in these cases. An identical
Alpha-TFEB fusion gene, 486 bp, was identified in 2 cases. In addition to the
polymerase chain reaction method, we also developed a fluorescence in situ
hybridization assay to serve as a cost-effective and time-efficient diagnostic
tool. We detected a TFEB gene rearrangement in all 7 cases using the fluorescence
in situ hybridization method. TFEB RCC seemed to be an indolent tumor. During a
mean follow-up of 31 months, none of the cases developed tumor recurrence,
progression, or metastasis.

PMID: 22895266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Oct;36(10):1516-26. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182613d8f.

Molecular confirmation of t(6;11)(p21;q12) renal cell carcinoma in archival
paraffin-embedded material using a break-apart TFEB FISH assay expands its
clinicopathologic spectrum.

Argani P(1), Yonescu R, Morsberger L, Morris K, Netto GJ, Smith N, Gonzalez N,
Illei PB, Ladanyi M, Griffin CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD
21231-2410, USA. pargani@jhmi.edu

A subset of renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) is characterized by t(6;11)(p21;q12),
which results in fusion of the untranslated Alpha (MALAT1) gene to the TFEB gene.
Only 21 genetically confirmed cases of t(6;11) RCCs have been reported. This
neoplasm typically demonstrates a distinctive biphasic morphology, comprising
larger epithelioid cells and smaller cells clustered around basement membrane
material; however, the full spectrum of its morphologic appearances is not known.
The t(6;11) RCCs differ from most conventional RCCs in that they consistently
express melanocytic immunohistochemical (IHC) markers such as HMB45 and Melan A
and the cysteine protease cathepsin K but are often negative for epithelial
markers such as cytokeratins. TFEB IHC has been proven to be useful to confirm
the diagnosis of t(6;11) RCCs in archival material, because native TFEB is
upregulated through promoter substitution by the gene fusion. However, IHC is
highly fixation dependent and has been proven to be particularly difficult for
TFEB. A validated fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay for molecular
confirmation of the t(6;11) RCC in archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
material has not been previously reported. We report herein the development of a 
break-apart TFEB FISH assay for the diagnosis of t(6;11)(p21;q12) RCCs. We
validated the assay on 4 genetically confirmed cases and 76 relevant expected
negative control cases and used the assay to report 8 new cases that expand the
clinicopathologic spectrum of t(6;11) RCCs. An additional previously reported
TFEB IHC-positive case was confirmed by TFEB FISH in 46-year-old archival
material. In conclusion, TFEB FISH is a robust, clinically validated assay that
can confirm the diagnosis of t(6;11) RCC in archival material and should allow a 
more comprehensive clinicopathologic delineation of this recently recognized
neoplastic entity.

PMCID: PMC4441265
PMID: 22892601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Jul 11;4(142):142ra97. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003799.

PGC-1a rescues Huntington's disease proteotoxicity by preventing oxidative stress
and promoting TFEB function.

Tsunemi T(1), Ashe TD, Morrison BE, Soriano KR, Au J, Roque RA, Lazarowski ER,
Damian VA, Masliah E, La Spada AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is caused by CAG repeat expansions in the huntingtin
(htt) gene, yielding proteins containing polyglutamine repeats that become
misfolded and resist degradation. Previous studies demonstrated that mutant htt
interferes with transcriptional programs coordinated by the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), a regulator of
mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative stress. We tested whether restoration of
PGC-1a could ameliorate the symptoms of HD in a mouse model. We found that PGC-1a
induction virtually eliminated htt protein aggregation and ameliorated HD
neurodegeneration in part by attenuating oxidative stress. PGC-1a promoted htt
turnover and the elimination of protein aggregates by activating transcription
factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of the autophagy-lysosome pathway. TFEB
alone was capable of reducing htt aggregation and neurotoxicity, placing PGC-1a
upstream of TFEB and identifying these two molecules as important therapeutic
targets in HD and potentially other neurodegenerative disorders caused by protein
misfolding.

PMCID: PMC4096245
PMID: 22786682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Semin Cancer Biol. 2013 Feb;23(1):46-55. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2012.06.002.
Epub 2012 Jun 13.

The metabolic basis of kidney cancer.

Linehan WM(1), Ricketts CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Urologic Oncology Branch, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, United
States. WML@nih.gov

Kidney cancer is not a single disease; it is made up of a number of different
types of cancer that occur in the kidney. Each of these different types of kidney
cancer can have a different histology, have a different clinical course, can
respond differently to therapy and is caused by a different gene. Kidney cancer
is essentially a metabolic disease; each of the known genes for kidney cancer,
VHL, MET, FLCN, TSC1, TSC2, TFE3, TFEB, MITF, fumarate hydratase (FH), succinate 
dehydrogenase B (SDHB), succinate dehydrogenase D (SDHD), and PTEN genes is
involved in the cells ability to sense oxygen, iron, nutrients or energy.
Understanding the metabolic basis of kidney cancer will hopefully provide the
foundation for the development of effective forms of therapy for this disease.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3563773
PMID: 22705279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Sci Signal. 2012 Jun 12;5(228):ra42. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002790.

The transcription factor TFEB links mTORC1 signaling to transcriptional control
of lysosome homeostasis.

Roczniak-Ferguson A(1), Petit CS, Froehlich F, Qian S, Ky J, Angarola B, Walther 
TC, Ferguson SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06510, USA.

Lysosomes are the major cellular site for clearance of defective organelles and
digestion of internalized material. Demand on lysosomal capacity can vary
greatly, and lysosomal function must be adjusted to maintain cellular
homeostasis. Here, we identified an interaction between the lysosome-localized
mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) and the transcription factor
TFEB (transcription factor EB), which promotes lysosome biogenesis. When
lysosomal activity was adequate, mTOR-dependent phosphorylation of TFEB on
Ser(211) triggered the binding of 14-3-3 proteins to TFEB, resulting in retention
of the transcription factor in the cytoplasm. Inhibition of lysosomal function
reduced the mTOR-dependent phosphorylation of TFEB, resulting in diminished
interactions between TFEB and 14-3-3 proteins and the translocation of TFEB into 
the nucleus, where it could stimulate genes involved in lysosomal biogenesis.
These results identify TFEB as a target of mTOR and suggest a mechanism for
matching the transcriptional regulation of genes encoding proteins of
autophagosomes and lysosomes to cellular need. The closely related transcription 
factors MITF (microphthalmia transcription factor) and TFE3 (transcription factor
E3) also localized to lysosomes and accumulated in the nucleus when lysosome
function was inhibited, thus broadening the range of physiological contexts under
which this regulatory mechanism may prove important.

PMCID: PMC3437338
PMID: 22692423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Autophagy. 2012 Jun;8(6):903-14. doi: 10.4161/auto.19653. Epub 2012 May 11.

MTORC1 functions as a transcriptional regulator of autophagy by preventing
nuclear transport of TFEB.

Martina JA(1), Chen Y, Gucek M, Puertollano R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD USA.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (MTOR) protein kinase complex is a key
component of a pathway that regulates cell growth and proliferation in response
to energy levels, hypoxia, nutrients and insulin. Inhibition of MTORC1 strongly
induces autophagy by regulating the activity of the ULK protein kinase complex
that is required for the formation of autophagosomes. However, the participation 
of MTORC1 in the expression of autophagy genes has not been characterized. Here
we show that MTORC1 regulates nuclear localization and activity of the
transcription factor EB (TFEB), a member of the bHLH leucine-zipper family of
transcription factors that drives expression of autophagy and lysosomal genes.
Under normal nutrient conditions, TFEB is phosphorylated in Ser211 in an
MTORC1-dependent manner. This phosphorylation promotes association of TFEB with
members of the YWHA (14-3-3) family of proteins and retention of the
transcription factor in the cytosol. Pharmacological or genetic inhibition of
MTORC1 causes dissociation of the TFEB/YWHA complex and rapid transport of TFEB
to the nucleus where it increases transcription of multiple genes implicated in
autophagy and lysosomal function. Active TFEB also associates with late
endosomal/lysosomal membranes through interaction with the LAMTOR/RRAG/MTORC1
complex. Our results unveil a novel role for MTORC1 in the maintenance of
cellular homeostasis by regulating autophagy at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC3427256
PMID: 22576015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Cells. 2012 Jun;33(6):597-604. doi: 10.1007/s10059-012-0042-1. Epub 2012 May 
7.

Status of mTOR activity may phenotypically differentiate senescence and
quiescence.

Cho S(1), Hwang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, University of Seoul, Seoul 130-743, Korea.

SA ß-Gal activity is a key marker of cellular senescence. The origin of this
activity is the lysosomal ß-galactosidase, whose activity has increased high
enough to be detected at suboptimal pH. SA ß-Gal is also expressed in the cells
in quiescence driven by serum-starvation or a high confluency, and it has been
hypothesized that SA ß-Gal positivity is rather a surrogate marker of high
lysosome content or activity. In this study, it was determined how SA ß-Gal
activity is expressed in quiescence and how lysosome content and activities are
differently maintained in senescence and quiescence using DNA damage-induced
senescence and serum starvation-induced quiescence as study models. Lysosome
content increased to facilitate SA ß-Gal expression in both the conditions but
with a big difference in the levels of the change. Lipofuscins whose accumulation
leads to an increase in residual bodies also increased but with a smaller
difference between the two conditions. Meanwhile, lysosome biogenesis was
actively ongoing only in senescence progression, indicating that the difference
in the lysosome contents may largely be due to lysosome biogenesis. Further, the 
cells undergoing senescence progression but not the ones in quiescence maintained
high mTOR and low autophagy activities. Overall, the results indicate that,
although SA ß-Gal is expressed due to the elevated lysosome content in both
cellular senescence and quiescence, senescence differs from quiescence with high 
lysosome biogenesis and low autophagy activity, and mTOR activity might be
involved in these differences.

PMCID: PMC3887751
PMID: 22570149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Mar;28(3):258-61. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012283010. Epub 2012
Apr 6.

[MITF: a genetic key to melanoma and renal cell carcinoma?].

[Article in French]

Bertolotto C, Lesueur F, Bressac de Paillerets B.

PMID: 22480646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 May;36(5):654-62. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824f24a6.

Translocation renal cell carcinomas in adults: a single-institution experience.

Zhong M(1), De Angelo P, Osborne L, Paniz-Mondolfi AE, Geller M, Yang Y, Linehan 
WM, Merino MJ, Cordon-Cardo C, Cai D.

Author information: 
(1)Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.
minghaozhong@gmail.com

Translocation renal cell carcinoma is a newly recognized subtype of renal cell
carcinoma (RCC) with chromosomal translocations involving TFE3 (Xp11.2) or, less 
frequently, TFEB (6p21). Xp11 translocation RCC was originally described as a
pediatric neoplasm representing 20% to 40% of pediatric RCCs, with a much lower
frequency in the adult population. TFEB translocation RCC is very rare, with
approximately 10 cases reported in the literature. Here, we describe the
clinicopathologic features of adult translocation RCC from a single institution. 
Using tissue microarray, immunohistochemistry, cytogenetic examination, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization, we identified 6 (~5%) cases of TFE3
translocation RCC and 1 (<1%) case of TFEB translocation RCC in 121 consecutive
adult RCC cases between 2001 and 2009. Our results suggest that weak TFE3
staining of a significant proportion of RCC cases may be because of expression of
the full-length TFE3 protein rather than the chimeric fusion protein resulting
from chromosomal translocation.

PMCID: PMC3527899
PMID: 22446944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. EMBO J. 2012 Mar 7;31(5):1095-108. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.32. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

A lysosome-to-nucleus signalling mechanism senses and regulates the lysosome via 
mTOR and TFEB.

Settembre C(1), Zoncu R, Medina DL, Vetrini F, Erdin S, Erdin S, Huynh T, Ferron 
M, Karsenty G, Vellard MC, Facchinetti V, Sabatini DM, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

The lysosome plays a key role in cellular homeostasis by controlling both
cellular clearance and energy production to respond to environmental cues.
However, the mechanisms mediating lysosomal adaptation are largely unknown. Here,
we show that the Transcription Factor EB (TFEB), a master regulator of lysosomal 
biogenesis, colocalizes with master growth regulator mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1) on
the lysosomal membrane. When nutrients are present, phosphorylation of TFEB by
mTORC1 inhibits TFEB activity. Conversely, pharmacological inhibition of mTORC1, 
as well as starvation and lysosomal disruption, activates TFEB by promoting its
nuclear translocation. In addition, the transcriptional response of lysosomal and
autophagic genes to either lysosomal dysfunction or pharmacological inhibition of
mTORC1 is suppressed in TFEB-/- cells. Interestingly, the Rag GTPase complex,
which senses lysosomal amino acids and activates mTORC1, is both necessary and
sufficient to regulate starvation- and stress-induced nuclear translocation of
TFEB. These data indicate that the lysosome senses its content and regulates its 
own biogenesis by a lysosome-to-nucleus signalling mechanism that involves TFEB
and mTOR.

PMCID: PMC3298007
PMID: 22343943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Autophagy. 2012 Mar;8(3):297-309. doi: 10.4161/auto.18658. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Enhancing lysosome biogenesis attenuates BNIP3-induced cardiomyocyte death.

Ma X(1), Godar RJ, Liu H, Diwan A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Research, Division of Cardiology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible pro-death protein BNIP3 (BCL-2/adenovirus E1B 19-kDa
interacting protein 3), provokes mitochondrial permeabilization causing
cardiomyocyte death in ischemia-reperfusion injury. Inhibition of autophagy
accelerates BNIP3-induced cell death, by preventing removal of damaged
mitochondria. We tested the hypothesis that stimulating autophagy will attenuate 
BNIP3-induced cardiomyocyte death. Neonatal rat cardiac myocytes (NRCMs) were
adenovirally transduced with BNIP3 (or LacZ as control; at multiplicity of
infection = 100); and autophagy was stimulated with rapamycin (100 nM). Cell
death was assessed at 48 h. BNIP3 expression increased autophagosome abundance
8-fold and caused a 3.6-fold increase in cardiomyocyte death as compared with
control. Rapamycin treatment of BNIP3-expressing cells led to further increase in
autophagosome number without affecting cell death. BNIP3 expression led to
accumulation of autophagosome-bound LC3-II and p62, and an increase in
autophagosomes, but not autolysosomes (assessed with dual fluorescent
mCherry-GFP-LC3 expression). BNIP3, but not the transmembrane deletion variant,
interacted with LC3 and colocalized with mitochondria and lysosomes. However,
BNIP3 did not target to lysosomes by subcellular fractionation, provoke lysosome 
permeabilization or alter lysosome pH. Rather, BNIP3-induced autophagy caused a
decline in lysosome numbers with decreased expression of the lysosomal protein
LAMP-1, indicating lysosome consumption and consequent autophagosome
accumulation. Forced expression of transcription factor EB (TFEB) in
BNIP3-expressing cells increased lysosome numbers, decreased autophagosomes and
increased autolysosomes, prevented p62 accumulation, removed depolarized
mitochondria and attenuated BNIP3-induced death. We conclude that BNIP3
expression induced autophagosome accumulation with lysosome consumption in
cardiomyocytes. Forced expression of TFEB, a lysosomal biogenesis factor,
restored autophagosome processing and attenuated BNIP3-induced cell death.

PMCID: PMC3337840
PMID: 22302006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Prog Urol. 2012 Feb;22(2):93-9. doi: 10.1016/j.purol.2011.11.007. Epub 2012 Jan
4.

[Renal cell carcinoma of patients younger than 40 years old].

[Article in French]

Ghoneim TP(1), Ouzzane A, Leroy X, Lemaitre L, Berthon N, Fantoni JC, Villers A, 
Zini L.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'urologie, université de Lille Nord-de-France, hôpital Claude Huriez,
CHU de Lille, 2, rue Michel-Polonovski, 59000 Lille, France.
tarek.p.ghoneim@gmail.com

CONTEXT: Clinical and pathological characteristics of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) 
of patients younger than 40 years old are not well known. The objective of this
study was to analyze these characteristics by comparison to a group of patients
aged 58 to 62.
METHODS: Retrospective study of a group of patients aged less than 40 years old
(group 1, n=44) and a group of patients aged 58 to 62 years old (group 2; n=106) 
treated surgically for a renal mass from January 2000 to July 2009. A comparative
analysis of clinical, pathological characteristics and of cancer-specific
survival was performed. Specific survival was calculated with the Kaplan-Meier
method and compared with the Log-Rank test. Univariate and multivariable analysis
were performed to assess and quantify the effect of age on cancer-specific
survival. Covariates were gender, age group, tumor size, pT stage, histological
sub-type and Fuhrman grade.
RESULTS: Clinical and pathological characteristics were similar in both groups
(P>0.05) except for histological sub-type (56% of clear cell RCC for group 1
versus 82% for group 2). In the group of patients younger than 40 years,
translocation RCC represented 23% of all RCCs. Cancer-specific survival at five
years was similar in both groups (80% and 76% for group 1 and 2 respectively,
P>0.58). Fuhrman grade was the only independent prognostic factor of
cancer-specific survival (P=0.001).
CONCLUSION: Patients younger than 40 years were more likely to have a
translocation RCC than their older counterparts for who clear cell RCC
represented the main histological sub-type. Cancer-specific survival was similar 
between both groups. Only a systematic specific immunostaining for TFE3 or TFEB
will allow to assess the exact incidence and prognosis of this entity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22284593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Histol Histopathol. 2012 Feb;27(2):133-40.

Review of renal carcinoma associated with Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3 gene fusions
with focus on pathobiological aspect.

Kuroda N(1), Mikami S, Pan CC, Cohen RJ, Hes O, Michal M, Nagashima Y, Tanaka Y, 
Inoue K, Shuin T, Lee GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kochi Red Cross Hospital, Kochi, Japan.
kurochankochi@yahoo.co.jp

The concept of Xp11.2 renal cell carcinoma (RCC) was recently established as a
tumor affecting 15% of RCC patients <45 years. Many patients present with
advanced stage with frequent lymph node metastases. Histologically, Xp11.2 RCC is
characterized by mixed papillary nested/alveolar growth pattern and tumor cells
with clear and/or eosinophilic, voluminous cytoplasm. Neoplastic cells show
intense nuclear immunoreactivity to TFE3, while focal immunostaining for
melanocytic markers, including melanosome-associated antigen or Melan A in some
cases, are also noted. Alpha smooth muscle actin and TFEB are consistently
negative. Ultrastructurally, the ASPL-TFE3 RCC variant contains rhomboid crystals
in the cytoplasm, similar to that observed in alveolar soft part sarcoma. The
fusion of the TFE3 gene with several different genes, including ASPL(17q25),
PRCC(1q21), PSF(1q34), NonO (Xq12) and CLTC (17q23) have been identified to date.
The behavior of Xp11.2 RCC in children and young adults is considered as indolent
even when diagnosed at advanced stage, including lymph node metastasis. However, 
Xp11.2 RCC in older patients behaves in a more aggressive fashion. Therapy
includes nephrectomy with extended lymphadenectomy. There may be a role for new
protease inhibitors in advanced inoperable disease. Further research is required 
to correlate clinical behavior with the expanding genetic spectrum of this tumor,
and to establish standard therapy protocols for primary and metastatic lesions.

PMID: 22207547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jan;36(1):35-42. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182293ec3.

Diverse fusion patterns and heterogeneous clinicopathologic features of renal
cell carcinoma with t(6;11) translocation.

Inamura K(1), Fujiwara M, Togashi Y, Nomura K, Mukai H, Fujii Y, Yamamoto S,
Yonese J, Fukui I, Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, The Cancer Institute, The Cancer Institute Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan.

Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with t(6;11) translocation, involving the
transcription factor EB (TFEB) and Alpha, also known as MALATI, (TFEB RCC), is
extremely rare, with only 20 cases reported to date. It may be frequently
misdiagnosed because of a lack of established characteristics. TFEB RCCs are
predominantly seen in younger patients and are generally indolent, with only 2
cases of metastasis. Genetic analysis has been limited, showing break points
upstream of TFEB exon 3, yielding only a single transcript. We examined 3 new
adult Japanese TFEB RCC cases by means of precise clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, cytogenetic, and molecular analyses and compared them with
200 ordinary RCCs. A 57-year-old man was the oldest patient with TFEB RCC at the 
time of this study. Although the tumor had histology typical of translocation
RCC, its fusion points were different between the genomic and transcript
coordinates. A 37-year-old man had an aggressive course resulting in death. The
tumor had 2 variants of messenger ribonucleic acid. A 47-year-old man showed
borderline histologic and immunohistochemical features between TFEB RCC and
chromophobe-type RCC. The tumor had a fusion point in TFEB exon 4, downstream of 
the wild-type ATG in exon 3. Nuclear expression of the TFEB protein was detected,
and a Western blotting analysis identified a protein similar in size to the
wild-type TFEB protein. Immunohistochemistry is useful for the diagnosis of these
tumors, and TFEB RCCs have heterogeneous clinicopathologic features and more
diverse fusion patterns than previously thought, requiring attention to
polymerase chain reaction experiments for diagnosis. Our study will contribute to
the correct diagnosis of TFEB RCC.

PMID: 22173116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Bioessays. 2012 Jan;34(1):6. doi: 10.1002/bies.201100165. Epub 2011 Nov 24.

A new class of transcription factors?

Pin C(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Western Ontario-Paediatrics, Children's Health Research
Institute, London, Ontario, Canada. cpin@uwo.ca

PMID: 22113789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 1;10(23):3987-8. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.23.18251. Epub 2011 Dec 
1.

TFEB, a novel mTORC1 effector implicated in lysosome biogenesis, endocytosis and 
autophagy.

Peña-Llopis S, Brugarolas J.

PMCID: PMC3272281
PMID: 22101272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jul;40(7):496-8.

[Research advance in tumors associated with microphthalmia-associated
transcription factor gene family].

[Article in Chinese]

Rao Q, Zhou XJ.

PMID: 22088385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Hum Pathol. 2012 May;43(5):726-36. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.07.001. Epub 2011 
Nov 3.

A distinctive translocation carcinoma of the kidney; "rosette forming," t(6;11), 
HMB45-positive renal tumor: a histomorphologic, immunohistochemical,
ultrastructural, and molecular genetic study of 4 cases.

Petersson F(1), Vanecek T, Michal M, Martignoni G, Brunelli M, Halbhuber Z,
Spagnolo D, Kuroda N, Yang X, Cabrero IA, Hora M, Branžovský J, Trivunic S,
Kacerovská D, Steiner P, Hes O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Charles University Hospital, 304 60 Plzen, Czech
Republic.

Comment in
    Hum Pathol. 2012 Jul;43(7):1154-5.

To date, only a few cases of "rosette forming t(6;11), HMB45-positive renal
carcinoma" have been published. In this article, we contribute further data on 4 
cases of this rare entity. Patients were 3 women and 1 man with an age range of
20 to 54 years (median, 23 years). Follow-up (range, 3-5 years; median, 4 years) 
did not reveal any metastatic events or recurrences. All tumors were well
circumscribed and mostly encapsulated with homogeneous gray to tan cut surfaces. 
No necrosis was seen. All tumors displayed a solid or solid/alveolar architecture
and contained occasionally long and branching tubular structures composed of
discohesive neoplastic cells and pseudorosettes. The presence of pseudorosettes
was a constant finding, but the number of pseudorosettes varied significantly
among cases. All cases displayed focal immunoreactivity for the melanocytic
marker HMB45, cathepsin K, and vimentin. Melan A, tyrosinase, cytokeratins, CD10,
and microphthalmia transcription factor were each positive in 3 of 4 cases. On
ultrastructural examination, numerous electron-dense secretory cytoplasmic
granules with some resemblance to melanosomes were identified. The pseudorosettes
were composed of reduplicated basement membrane material surrounded by small
lymphocyte-like neoplastic cells. Using reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction, 2 tumors were positive for the Alpha-TFEB fusion transcript. The
presence of the translocation t(6;11)(Alpha-TFEB) was confirmed in 2 analyzed
cases. No von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene mutation, promotor methylation 
or loss of heterozygosity of 3p was found. Losses of part of chromosome 1 and
chromosome 22 were found in one case.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22051379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Bioessays. 2012 Jan;34(1):10-6. doi: 10.1002/bies.201100089. Epub 2011 Oct 26.

Scaling factors: transcription factors regulating subcellular domains.

Mills JC(1), Taghert PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. jmills@wustl.edu

Developing cells acquire mature fates in part by selective (i.e. qualitatively
different) expression of a few cell-specific genes. However, all cells share the 
same basic repertoire of molecular and subcellular building blocks. Therefore,
cells must also specialize according to quantitative differences in cell-specific
distributions of those common molecular resources. Here we propose the novel
hypothesis that evolutionarily-conserved transcription factors called scaling
factors (SFs) regulate quantitative differences among mature cell types. SFs: (1)
are induced during late stages of cell maturation; (2) are dedicated to specific 
subcellular domains; and, thus, (3) allow cells to emphasize specific subcellular
features. We identify candidate SFs and discuss one in detail: MIST1 (BHLHA15,
vertebrates)/DIMM (CG8667, Drosophila); professional secretory cells use this SF 
to scale up regulated secretion. Because cells use SFs to develop their mature
properties and also to adapt them to ever-changing environmental conditions, SF
aberrations likely contribute to diseases of adult onset.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3692000
PMID: 22028036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Dyn. 2011 Nov;240(11):2529-38. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22743. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

Embryonic expression of zebrafish MiT family genes tfe3b, tfeb, and tfec.

Lister JA(1), Lane BM, Nguyen A, Lunney K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics and Massey Cancer Center, Virginia 
Commonwealth University School of Medicine, PO Box 980033, Richmond, Virginia
23298, USA. jalister@vcu.edu

The MiT family comprises four genes in mammals: Mitf, Tfe3, Tfeb, and Tfec, which
encode transcription factors of the basic-helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper class. 
Mitf is well-known for its essential role in the development of melanocytes,
however the functions of the other members of this family, and of interactions
between them, are less well understood. We have now characterized the complete
set of MiT genes from zebrafish, which totals six instead of four. The zebrafish 
genome contain two mitf (mitfa and mitfb), two tfe3 (tfe3a and tfe3b), and single
tfeb and tfec genes; this distribution is shared with other teleosts. We present 
here the sequence and embryonic expression patterns for the zebrafish tfe3b,
tfeb, and tfec genes, and identify a new isoform of tfe3a. These findings will
assist in elucidating the roles of the MiT gene family over the course of
vertebrate evolution.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3197887
PMID: 21932325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Dev Cell. 2011 Sep 13;21(3):421-30. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.07.016. Epub 2011 
Sep 1.

Transcriptional activation of lysosomal exocytosis promotes cellular clearance.

Medina DL(1), Fraldi A, Bouche V, Annunziata F, Mansueto G, Spampanato C, Puri C,
Pignata A, Martina JA, Sardiello M, Palmieri M, Polishchuk R, Puertollano R,
Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via P. Castellino 111,
80131 Naples, Italy.

Lysosomes are cellular organelles primarily involved in degradation and recycling
processes. During lysosomal exocytosis, a Ca²<U+207A>-regulated process, lysosomes are
docked to the cell surface and fuse with the plasma membrane (PM), emptying their
content outside the cell. This process has an important role in secretion and PM 
repair. Here we show that the transcription factor EB (TFEB) regulates lysosomal 
exocytosis. TFEB increases the pool of lysosomes in the proximity of the PM and
promotes their fusion with PM by raising intracellular Ca²<U+207A> levels through the
activation of the lysosomal Ca²<U+207A> channel MCOLN1. Induction of lysosomal
exocytosis by TFEB overexpression rescued pathologic storage and restored normal 
cellular morphology both in vitro and in vivo in lysosomal storage diseases
(LSDs). Our data indicate that lysosomal exocytosis may directly modulate
cellular clearance and suggest an alternative therapeutic strategy for disorders 
associated with intracellular storage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3173716
PMID: 21889421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Pathol Int. 2011 Sep;61(9):539-45. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2011.02711.x. Epub
2011 Aug 7.

Renal carcinoma with (6;11)(p21;q12) translocation: report of an adult case.

Ishihara A(1), Yamashita Y, Takamori H, Kuroda N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Miyazaki Prefectural Nobeoka Hospital,
Nobeoka, Miyazaki, Japan. aishr-vc9@pref-hp.nobeoka.miyazaki.jp

An extremely rare adult example of renal carcinoma with t(6;11)(p21;q12 or q13)
is presented here. The tumor of a 45-year-old Japanese male, excised under the
diagnosis of renal cell carcinoma, was a well circumscribed 7 cm mass with light 
brown sectioned surfaces. Histologically, it was composed of a major population
of large polygonal epithelioid cells in a nested alveolar growth and a
subpopulation of smaller cells clustering around hyaline basement membrane
material. The former cells possessed ample, clear to eosinophilic granular
cytoplasm with well-defined cell borders and the latter was frequently
accompanied by psammomatous calcification. These tumor cells exhibited
immunoreactivity for melanoma markers, transcription factor EB and cathepsin K,
but were not reactive for epithelial markers and transcription factor E3. While
pulmonary metastatic foci that were noted preoperatively progressed rapidly
following interferon-based therapy, subsequent sunitinib malate yielded a partial
response and stabilized the lung metastasis for 6 months after surgery. We could 
trace 20 cases of 6p21 translocation renal carcinoma, among which only four were 
in individuals older than 40 years. Description of a new case like this is
important since little is known about the prognosis and treatment of adult
patients with this condition.

© 2011 The Authors. Pathology International © 2011 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21884304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. EMBO J. 2011 Jul 29;30(16):3242-58. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.257.

Regulation of TFEB and V-ATPases by mTORC1.

Peña-Llopis S(1), Vega-Rubin-de-Celis S, Schwartz JC, Wolff NC, Tran TA, Zou L,
Xie XJ, Corey DR, Brugarolas J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2011 Aug 17;30(16):3215-6.

Mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 1 (mTORC1) is an important, highly
conserved, regulator of cell growth. Ancient among the signals that regulate
mTORC1 are nutrients. Amino acids direct mTORC1 to the surface of the late
endosome/lysosome, where mTORC1 becomes receptive to other inputs. However, the
interplay between endosomes and mTORC1 is poorly understood. Here, we report the 
discovery of a network that links mTORC1 to a critical component of the late
endosome/lysosome, the V-ATPase. In an unbiased screen, we found that mTORC1
regulated the expression of, among other lysosomal genes, the V-ATPases. mTORC1
regulates V-ATPase expression both in cells and in mice. V-ATPase regulation by
mTORC1 involves a transcription factor translocated in renal cancer, TFEB. TFEB
is required for the expression of a large subset of mTORC1 responsive genes.
mTORC1 coordinately regulates TFEB phosphorylation and nuclear localization and
in a manner dependent on both TFEB and V-ATPases, mTORC1 promotes endocytosis.
These data uncover a regulatory network linking an oncogenic transcription factor
that is a master regulator of lysosomal biogenesis, TFEB, to mTORC1 and
endocytosis.

PMCID: PMC3160667
PMID: 21804531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Autophagy. 2011 Nov;7(11):1379-81. doi: 10.4161/auto.7.11.17166. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

TFEB regulates autophagy: an integrated coordination of cellular degradation and 
recycling processes.

Settembre C(1), Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

Autophagy is a fundamental catabolic process that plays a central role in health 
and disease. An efficient autophagic process relies on the cooperation of two
distinct types of organelles: the autophagosome and the lysosome. We have
identified a gene network that regulates the biogenesis and function of both
organelles. Our findings reveal an important role of transcription in the
regulation of starvation-induced autophagy, and link lysosomal biogenesis to
autophagy.

PMID: 21785263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Oct 1;20(19):3852-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr306. Epub 2011 Jul 
13.

Characterization of the CLEAR network reveals an integrated control of cellular
clearance pathways.

Palmieri M(1), Impey S, Kang H, di Ronza A, Pelz C, Sardiello M, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Jan
and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at Texas Children's Hospital,
Houston, TX, USA.

In metazoans, lysosomes are the center for the degradation of macromolecules and 
play a key role in a variety of cellular processes, such as autophagy, exocytosis
and membrane repair. Defects of lysosomal pathways are associated with lysosomal 
storage disorders and with several late onset neurodegenerative diseases. We
recently discovered the CLEAR (Coordinated Lysosomal Expression and Regulation)
gene network and its master gene transcription factor EB (TFEB), which regulates 
lysosomal biogenesis and function. Here, we used a combination of genomic
approaches, including ChIP-seq (sequencing of chromatin immunoprecipitate)
analysis, profiling of TFEB-mediated transcriptional induction, genome-wide
mapping of TFEB target sites and recursive expression meta-analysis of TFEB
targets, to identify 471 TFEB direct targets that represent essential components 
of the CLEAR network. This analysis revealed a comprehensive system regulating
the expression, import and activity of lysosomal enzymes that control the
degradation of proteins, glycosaminoglycans, sphingolipids and glycogen.
Interestingly, the CLEAR network appears to be involved in the regulation of
additional lysosome-associated processes, including autophagy, exo- and
endocytosis, phagocytosis and immune response. Furthermore, non-lysosomal enzymes
involved in the degradation of essential proteins such as hemoglobin and chitin
are also part of the CLEAR network. Finally, we identified nine novel lysosomal
proteins by using the CLEAR network as a tool for prioritizing candidates. This
study provides potential therapeutic targets to modulate cellular clearance in a 
variety of disease conditions.

PMID: 21752829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Sci Signal. 2011 Jul 5;4(180):ra44. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2001450.

Identification of a lysosomal pathway that modulates glucocorticoid signaling and
the inflammatory response.

He Y(1), Xu Y, Zhang C, Gao X, Dykema KJ, Martin KR, Ke J, Hudson EA, Khoo SK,
Resau JH, Alberts AS, MacKeigan JP, Furge KA, Xu HE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Structural Sciences, Van Andel Research Institute, 333 Bostwick 
Avenue Northeast, Grand Rapids, MI 49503, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Aug;11(8):502.

The antimalaria drug chloroquine has been used as an anti-inflammatory agent for 
treating systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. We report that
chloroquine promoted the transrepression of proinflammatory cytokines by the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). In a mouse collagen-induced arthritis model,
chloroquine enhanced the therapeutic effects of glucocorticoid treatment. By
inhibiting lysosome function, chloroquine synergistically activated
glucocorticoid signaling. Lysosomal inhibition by either bafilomycin A1 (an
inhibitor of the vacuolar adenosine triphosphatase) or knockdown of transcription
factor EB (TFEB, a master activator of lysosomal biogenesis) mimicked the effects
of chloroquine. The abundance of the GR, as well as that of the androgen receptor
and estrogen receptor, correlated with changes in lysosomal biogenesis. Thus, we 
showed that glucocorticoid signaling is regulated by lysosomes, which provides a 
mechanistic basis for treating inflammation and autoimmune diseases with a
combination of glucocorticoids and lysosomal inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3684214
PMID: 21730326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1392-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1208607.

Cell biology. Autophagy's top chef.

Cuervo AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Marion Bessin Liver
Research Center and Institute for Aging Studies, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. ana-maria.cuervo@einstein.yu.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1429-33.

PMID: 21680833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Sep 1;29(25):3474-82. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.32.6223. Epub 2011
Jun 13.

Biology and clinical relevance of the micropthalmia family of transcription
factors in human cancer.

Haq R(1), Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General
Hospital, 55 Fruit St, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Members of the micropthalmia (MiT) family of transcription factors (MITF, TFE3,
TFEB, and TFEC) are physiologic regulators of cell growth, differentiation, and
survival in several tissue types. Because their dysregulation can lead to
melanoma, renal cell carcinoma, and some sarcomas, understanding why these genes 
are co-opted in carcinogenesis may be of general utility. Here we describe the
structure of the MiT family of proteins, the ways in which they are aberrantly
activated, and the molecular mechanisms by which they promote oncogenesis. We
discuss how meaningful understanding of these mechanisms can be used to elucidate
the oncogenic process. Because the expression of these proteins is essential for 
initiating and maintaining the oncogenic state in some cancer types, we propose
ways that they can be exploited to prevent, diagnose, and rationally treat these 
malignancies.

PMID: 21670463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jun 8;12(7):404. doi: 10.1038/nrm3139.

Autophagy: TFEB perfects multitasking.

David R.

Comment on
    Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1429-33.

PMID: 21654707  [PubMed]


210. Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1429-33. doi: 10.1126/science.1204592. Epub 2011
May 26.

TFEB links autophagy to lysosomal biogenesis.

Settembre C(1), Di Malta C, Polito VA, Garcia Arencibia M, Vetrini F, Erdin S,
Erdin SU, Huynh T, Medina D, Colella P, Sardiello M, Rubinsztein DC, Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Via Pietro Castellino
111, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Jun 17;332(6036):1392-3.
    Hepatology. 2012 May;55(5):1632-4.
    Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;12(7):404.

Autophagy is a cellular catabolic process that relies on the cooperation of
autophagosomes and lysosomes. During starvation, the cell expands both
compartments to enhance degradation processes. We found that starvation activates
a transcriptional program that controls major steps of the autophagic pathway,
including autophagosome formation, autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and substrate
degradation. The transcription factor EB (TFEB), a master gene for lysosomal
biogenesis, coordinated this program by driving expression of autophagy and
lysosomal genes. Nuclear localization and activity of TFEB were regulated by
serine phosphorylation mediated by the extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2,
whose activity was tuned by the levels of extracellular nutrients. Thus, a
mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent mechanism regulates autophagy by
controlling the biogenesis and partnership of two distinct cellular organelles.

PMCID: PMC3638014
PMID: 21617040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mod Pathol. 2011 Oct;24(10):1313-9. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.93. Epub 2011 May
20.

Differential expression of cathepsin K in neoplasms harboring TFE3 gene fusions.

Martignoni G(1), Gobbo S, Camparo P, Brunelli M, Munari E, Segala D, Pea M,
Bonetti F, Illei PB, Netto GJ, Ladanyi M, Chilosi M, Argani P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
guido.martignoni@univr.it

Cathepsin K is a protease whose expression is driven by microphthalmia
transcription factor (MITF) in osteoclasts. TFE3 and TFEB are members of the same
transcription factor subfamily as MITF and all three have overlapping
transcriptional targets. We have shown that all t(6;11) renal cell carcinomas,
which harbor an Alpha-TFEB gene fusion, as well as a subset of the Xp11
translocation renal carcinomas, which harbor various TFE3 gene fusions, express
cathepsin K, while no other common renal carcinoma does. We have hypothesized
that overexpression of TFEB or certain TFE3 fusion proteins function like MITF in
these neoplasms, and thus activate cathepsin K expression. However, the
expression of cathepsin K in specific genetic subtypes of Xp11 translocation
carcinomas, as well as alveolar soft part sarcoma, which harbors the same
ASPSCR1-TFE3 gene fusion as some Xp11 translocation carcinomas, has not been
addressed. We performed immunohistochemistry for cathepsin K on 14 genetically
confirmed t(X;1)(p11;q21) carcinomas, harboring the PRCC-TFE3 gene fusion; eight 
genetically confirmed t(X;17)(p11;q25) carcinomas, harboring the ASPSCR1-TFE3
gene fusion; and 18 alveolar soft part sarcomas (12 genetically confirmed),
harboring the identical ASPSCR1-TFE3 gene fusion. All 18 alveolar soft part
sarcomas expressed cathepsin K. In contrast, all eight ASPSCR1-TFE3 carcinomas
were completely negative for cathepsin K. However, 12 of 14 PRCC-TFE3 carcinomas 
expressed cathepsin K. Expression of cathepsin K distinguishes alveolar soft part
sarcoma from the ASPSCR1-TFE3 carcinoma, harboring the same gene fusion. The
latter can be useful diagnostically, especially when alveolar soft part sarcoma
presents in an unusual site (such as bone) or with clear cell morphology, which
raises the differential diagnosis of metastatic ASPSCR1-TFE3 renal cell
carcinoma. The difference in expression of cathepsin K between the PRCC-TFE3 and 
ASPSCR1-TFE3 carcinomas, together with the observed clinical differences between 
these subtypes of Xp11 translocation carcinomas, suggests the possibility of
functional differences between these two related fusion proteins.

PMID: 21602817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nanotoxicology. 2012 May;6(3):249-62. doi: 10.3109/17435390.2011.572195. Epub
2011 Apr 17.

Mechanisms of cellular adaptation to quantum dots--the role of glutathione and
transcription factor EB.

Neibert KD(1), Maysinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Québec, Canada.

Cellular adaptation is the dynamic response of a cell to adverse changes in its
intra/extra cellular environment. The aims of this study were to investigate the 
role of: (i) the glutathione antioxidant system, and (ii) the transcription
factor EB (TFEB), a newly revealed master regulator of lysosome biogenesis, in
cellular adaptation to nanoparticle-induced oxidative stress. Intracellular
concentrations of glutathione species and activation of TFEB were assessed in rat
pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells following treatment with uncapped CdTe quantum dots
(QDs), using biochemical, live cell fluorescence and immunocytochemical
techniques. Exposure to toxic concentrations of QDs resulted in a significant
enhancement of intracellular glutathione concentrations, redistribution of
glutathione species and a progressive translocation and activation of TFEB. These
changes were associated with an enlargement of the cellular lysosomal
compartment. Together, these processes appear to have an adaptive character, and 
thereby participate in the adaptive cellular response to toxic nanoparticles.

PMID: 21495880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Med Mol Morphol. 2011 Mar;44(1):46-51. doi: 10.1007/s00795-009-0478-3. Epub 2011 
Mar 23.

Re-evaluation of histological type by immunohistochemical and genetic study of
transcription factors (TFE3 and TFEB) of VHL gene mutation-negative clear cell
renal cell carcinoma and other special types of renal tumor.

Kuroda N(1), Kawada C, Tamura K, Hiroi M, Hes O, Michal M, Wada Y, Inoue K, Ohara
M, Mizuno K, Shuin T, Lee GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kochi Red Cross Hospital, 2-13-51
Shin-honmachi, Kochi, 780-8562, Japan. kurochankochi@yahoo.co.jp

Translocation-type renal carcinoma has been recently discovered, and it is
possible that this tumor may have been previously diagnosed as other types of
renal tumor. We have subjected 41 renal tumors, including VHL gene
mutation-negative clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC), papillary RCC, and
chromophobe RCC, to immunohistochemistry of transcription factor E3 (TFE3) and
TFEB. All tumors were histologically evaluated by additional immunohistochemical 
study. As a result, 5 tumors showed a positive reaction for TFE3 with a range
from 1+ to 2+ in intensity. No tumors were positive for TFEB. In 5 tumors
immunohistochemically positive for TFE3, chimeric transcripts including
ASPL-TFE3, PRCC-TFE3, CLTCTFE3, PSF-TFE3, or Nono-TFE3 were not detected. The
diagnosis of 6 tumors was changed by reevaluation through retrospective
histological and immunohistochemical study. In 4 of 6 tumors, the diagnosis of
clear cell RCC was changed to chromophobe RCC. In 1 tumor, oncocytoma was
detectable, and RCC with rhabdoid features and sarcomatoid changes was detected
in 1 tumor. Finally, the cutoff value of TFE3 immunohistochemistry should be more
than 2+ with a wide range. The translocation-type renal carcinoma seems to be
quite rare.

PMID: 21424937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;39(9):582-6.

[Clinicopathologic and molecular genetic study of renal cell carcinoma occurring 
in teenagers].

[Article in Chinese]

Rao Q(1), Zhou J, Zhang RS, Ma HH, Zhou HB, Lu ZF, Zhou XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing University/Nanjing General Hospital of
People's Liberation Army, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate clinicopathological features, molecular genetic
characteristics, differential diagnoses and prognosis of renal cell carcinoma in 
teenagers.
METHODS: Microscopic and immunohistochemical features of 46 cases of renal cell
carcinomas in teenagers were reviewed along with the clinical follow-up data.
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH), analysis of von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) gene and
screening for VHL gene mutations were performed in all of the tumors.
RESULTS: There were 19 Xp11.2 translocations/TFE3 gene fusions renal clear cell
carcinomas (Xp11 RCCs), 9 chromophobe renal cell carcinomas (CCRCCs), 17
papillary renal cell carcinomas (PRCCs), and 1 unclassified renal cell carcinoma 
(RCC). All of the 19 Xp11.2 translocation RCCs showed a moderate to strong
immunoreactivity for TFE, however, no TFEB expression was obtained. There were 4 
histological patterns in the Xp11 RCC cases including: 8 tumors possessing a
nested to papillary architecture resembling to the t(X;17) ASPL-TFE3 phenotype; 6
tumors possessing a morphologic feature like the t(X;1) PRCC-TFE3 phenotype; 4
cases morphologically resembling to clear cell RCC; and 1 Xp11 RCC case, with a
special morphologic feature not searched yet in the literature, including a
ground glass appearance of the nuclei accompanying occasionally with grooves on
the nuclear surface; nucleoli inconspicuous with accumulation of abundant
mucin-like substance in the stroma. VHL gene analysis revealed deletions at
3p25-26 in one clear cell RCC and one papillary type 2 RCC. The papillary type 2 
RCC had also a family history of VHL disease, with a germline G<U+2192>C mutation at a
splicing site of position 553+5. There were no VHL mutations detected in the
remaining 45 RCCs. Statistical analysis of tumor stage and outcome revealed that 
TFE+ RCCs of teen-agers were more frequently associated with a higher pT3/pT4
stage and a poorer outcome than that of the TFE-RCCs (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: RCCs of the teenagers have a different morphologic spectrum and
genetic background from the RCCs seen in adults. Among RCCs of the teen-agers,
Xp11.2 translocation tumors are the most common RCCs and have a poorer prognosis 
than that of the TFE-RCCs.

PMID: 21092583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Urol. 2011 Jan;185(1):24-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.08.092. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Transcription factor E3 and transcription factor EB renal cell carcinomas:
clinical features, biological behavior and prognostic factors.

Malouf GG(1), Camparo P, Molinié V, Dedet G, Oudard S, Schleiermacher G, Theodore
C, Dutcher J, Billemont B, Bompas E, Guillot A, Boccon-Gibod L, Couturier J,
Escudier B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
ggmalouf@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: Translocation renal cell carcinomas represent a distinct
clinicopathological entity. Studying the natural history, biological behavior and
potential prognostic factors are crucially warranted.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We selected 54 patients with renal cell carcinoma with
positive nuclear transcription factor E3 and transcription factor EB expression
from the Juvenile RCC Network. Recurrence-free survival and overall survival were
assessed.
RESULTS: Median patient age was 24 years (range 1 to 64) and the male-to-female
ratio was 1:1.4. At diagnosis 35 patients (65%) had local disease while 19 (35%) 
presented with distant metastases. The latter patients were older (median age 36 
years) and predominantly male (male-to-female ratio 2) whereas the former group
had a median age of 16 years and a male-to-female ratio of 1:2.5. Overall 36
patients underwent complete tumor resection and of these 8 had recurring cancer. 
On univariate analysis only lymph node involvement and American Joint Committee
on Cancer stage were associated with poor recurrence-free survival. When
stratified according to lymph node status age 25 years or older was found to
predict relapse (p = 0.03). With a median followup of 19.2 months (range 1 to 58)
3-year overall survival was 14.3% in patients with distant metastasis and 70.6%
in those without distant metastasis. Distant metastasis developed in the 2
patients with ASPSCR1-TFE3 fusion vs 1 of 11 with other fusion genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcription factor E3 and transcription factor EB renal cell
carcinoma display different clinical behavior according to gender and age. Lymph 
node involvement represents the only factor that predicts recurrence.
ASPSCR1-TFE3 might be the most aggressive among the transcription factor E3
fusion genes.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21074195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Clin Oncol. 2010 Dec 1;28(34):e709-13. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.30.3172. Epub 2010
Sep 7.

Renal cell carcinoma with t(6;11) translocation: a patient case with a novel
Alpha-TFEB fusion point.

Zhan HQ(1), Wang CF, Zhu XZ, Xu XL.

Author information: 
(1)Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

PMID: 20823414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Toxicol Lett. 2010 Nov 30;199(2):153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2010.08.017. Epub
2010 Sep 9.

Arsenite exposure in human lymphoblastoid cell lines induces autophagy and
coordinated induction of lysosomal genes.

Bolt AM(1), Douglas RM, Klimecki WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85724, USA.

Chronic exposure to inorganic arsenic is associated with diverse, complex
diseases, making the identification of the mechanism underlying arsenic-induced
toxicity a challenge. An increasing body of literature from epidemiological and
in vitro studies has demonstrated that arsenic is an immunotoxicant, but the
mechanism driving arsenic-induced immunotoxicity is not well established. We have
previously demonstrated that in human lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs),
arsenic-induced cell death is strongly associated with the induction of
autophagy. In this study we utilized genome-wide gene expression analysis and
functional assays to characterize arsenic-induced effects in seven LCLs that were
exposed to an environmentally relevant, minimally cytotoxic, concentration of
arsenite (0.75 µM) over an eight-day time course. Arsenic exposure resulted in
inhibition of cellular growth and induction of autophagy (measured by expansion
of acidic vesicles) over the eight-day exposure duration. Gene expression
analysis revealed that arsenic exposure increased global lysosomal gene
expression, which was associated with increased functional activity of the
lysosome protease, cathepsin D. The arsenic-induced expansion of the lysosomal
compartment in LCL represents a novel target that may offer insight into the
immunotoxic effects of arsenic.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2956852
PMID: 20816728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Int J Surg Pathol. 2011 Apr;19(2):170-9. doi: 10.1177/1066896909354337. Epub 2009
Dec 24.

Renal cell carcinoma in children and young adults: clinicopathological,
immunohistochemical, and VHL gene analysis of 46 cases with follow-up.

Rao Q(1), Chen JY, Wang JD, Ma HH, Zhou HB, Lu ZF, Zhou XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Clinical School of Medical College of Nanjing
University, Nanjing Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

To further study the characteristics of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) in young
patients and better define their biological features, 46 RCCs of patients younger
than 25 years were morphologically and immunohistochemically characterized with
follow-up. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
gene region and screening for VHL gene mutations were performed in all tumors.
Applying the 2004 WHO classification for RCC, there were 19 Xp11.2 translocation 
RCCs, 9 clear cell RCCs, 17 papillary RCCs, and 1 unclassified RCC. All 19 Xp11.2
translocation RCCs showed moderate to strong immunoreactivity for TFE3. None had 
TFEB immunoreactivity. One Xp11.2 translocation RCC had an unreported morphology 
with empty or ground glass nuclei, occasional nuclear grooves, inconspicuous
nucleoli and abundant mucinous material in stroma.VHL gene analysis revealed
deletions at 3p25-26 in 1 clear cell RCC and 1 papillary type 2 RCC. The
papillary type 2 RCC was also presented with a family history of VHL disease and 
found a germline mutation G <U+2192> C on a splicing site at position 553+5. The present
case widens the spectrum of microscopic features to be found in VHL-associated
RCC. There were no VHL mutations in the remaining 45 RCCs. Statistical analysis
of stage and outcome revealed that TFE+ pediatric RCCs were significantly more
frequently associated with a higher pTNM pT3/pT4 stage and a poorer outcome than 
TFE-RCCs (P < .05). Owing to the already known aggressive behavior of these
Xp11.2 translocation RCCs, patients with TFE+ pediatric RCCs should benefit from 
a stricter follow-up.

PMID: 20034980  [PubMed - in process]


219. Cell Cycle. 2009 Dec 15;8(24):4021-2. Epub 2009 Dec 5.

Lysosomal enhancement: a CLEAR answer to cellular degradative needs.

Sardiello M, Ballabio A.

PMID: 19949301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Surg Pathol. 2011 Aug;19(4):506-9. doi: 10.1177/1066896909340531. Epub 2009
Aug 16.

Renal translocation carcinoma with expression of TFEB: presentation of a case
with distinctive histological and immunohistochemical features.

Suárez-Vilela D(1), Izquierdo-García F, Méndez-Álvarez JR, Miguélez-García E,
Domínguez-Iglesias F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomía Patológica, Hospital de León, León, Spain.

The authors describe a case of renal cell carcinoma with t(6; 11) (p21; q12) in a
22-year-old man. The tumor showed typical histological features of this neoplasm 
with 2 types of cells and hyaline nodules surrounded by small cells.
Characteristically, the tumor showed cystic lumina with hyaline-papillary
structures inside and in some areas large and irregular intratumoral vessels. On 
immunohistochemical study, the tumoral cells were positive for melanocytic
markers and transcription factor EB, as also for AE1-AE3 and Cam5.2
anticytokeratin antibodies. The expression of epithelial markers in this neoplasm
is uncommon, and we think it is an important finding because otherwise, if
melanocytic markers such as HMB45 or Melan A are not used, some renal cell
carcinomas with the t(6; 11) (p21; q12) may be mistaken for other more common
renal cell carcinomas.

PMID: 19687027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Science. 2009 Jul 24;325(5939):473-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1174447. Epub 2009 Jun
25.

A gene network regulating lysosomal biogenesis and function.

Sardiello M(1), Palmieri M, di Ronza A, Medina DL, Valenza M, Gennarino VA, Di
Malta C, Donaudy F, Embrione V, Polishchuk RS, Banfi S, Parenti G, Cattaneo E,
Ballabio A.

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Via P. Castellino 111, 80131
Naples, Italy.

Lysosomes are organelles central to degradation and recycling processes in animal
cells. Whether lysosomal activity is coordinated to respond to cellular needs
remains unclear. We found that most lysosomal genes exhibit coordinated
transcriptional behavior and are regulated by the transcription factor EB (TFEB).
Under aberrant lysosomal storage conditions, TFEB translocated from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus, resulting in the activation of its target genes. TFEB
overexpression in cultured cells induced lysosomal biogenesis and increased the
degradation of complex molecules, such as glycosaminoglycans and the pathogenic
protein that causes Huntington's disease. Thus, a genetic program controls
lysosomal biogenesis and function, providing a potential therapeutic target to
enhance cellular clearing in lysosomal storage disorders and neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMID: 19556463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jun;22 Suppl 2:S2-S23. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.70.

Uncommon and recently described renal carcinomas.

Srigley JR(1), Delahunt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, c/o The
Credit Valley Hospital, 2200 Eglinton Avenue West, Mississauga, ON L5M2N1,
Canada. jsrigley@cvh.on.ca

Major consensus conferences held over a decade ago laid the foundations for the
current (2004) WHO classification of renal carcinoma. Clear cell, papillary and
chromophobe carcinomas account for 85-90% carcinomas seen in routine practice.
The remaining 10-15% of carcinomas consist of rare sporadic and hereditary
tumors, some of which had been long recognized, but many of which only emerged as
distinct entities in the decade leading up to the WHO publication.
Collecting-duct carcinoma is a rare, often lethal form of carcinoma. Medullary
carcinoma associated with sickle cell trait, has emerged as a distinctive tumor
showing some overlapping features with upper tract urothelial carcinoma. Mucinous
tubular and spindle-cell carcinoma and tubulocystic carcinoma were earlier
considered as patterns of low-grade collecting-duct carcinoma, but are now
recognized as separate tumor entities. Carcinomas associated with somatic
translocations of TFE3 and TFEB comprise a significant proportion of pediatric
renal carcinomas. Oncocytoid renal carcinomas in neuroblastoma survivors was
recognized as a unique tumor category in the WHO classification. Renal carcinoma 
associated with end-stage renal disease is now recognized as having distinct
morphological patterns and behavior. In addition there is a group of rare
recently described carcinomas, including clear cell papillary carcinoma,
oncocytic papillary renal cell carcinoma, follicular renal carcinoma and
leiomyomatous renal cell carcinoma. It behooves the surgical pathologist to not
only be capable of diagnosing the common forms of renal cancer, but also to be
aware of the rare types of renal carcinoma, many of which have emerged in recent 
years.

PMID: 19494850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mod Pathol. 2009 Aug;22(8):1016-22. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.58. Epub 2009 Apr
24.

Cathepsin-K immunoreactivity distinguishes MiTF/TFE family renal translocation
carcinomas from other renal carcinomas.

Martignoni G(1), Pea M, Gobbo S, Brunelli M, Bonetti F, Segala D, Pan CC, Netto
G, Doglioni C, Hes O, Argani P, Chilosi M.

Author information: 
(1)Anatomia Patologica, Università di Verona, Verona, Italy.
guido.martignoni@univr.it

The microphthalmia transcription factor/transcription factor E (TFE)-family
translocation renal cell carcinomas bear specific translocations that result in
overexpression of TFE3 or TFEB. TFE3 fusion gene product overexpression occurs as
consequence of different translocations involving chromosome Xp11.2, whereas TFEB
overexpression is the result of the specific translocation t(6;11)(p21;q12),
which fuses the Alpha gene to TFEB. Both TFE3 and TFEB are closely related
members of the microphthalmia transcription factor/TFE-family, which also
includes TFEC and microphthalmia transcription factor. These transcription
factors have overlapping transcriptional targets. Overexpression of
microphthalmia transcription factor has been shown to mediate the expression of
cathepsin-K in osteoclasts. We hypothesize that the overexpression of the related
TFE3 fusion proteins and TFEB in translocation renal cell carcinomas may have the
same effect. We studied cathepsin-K in 17 cytogenetically confirmed
microphthalmia transcription factor/TFE-family translocation renal cell
carcinomas. Seven cases showed a t(6;11)(p21;q12), ten cases showed
translocations involving Xp11.2; five cases t(X;1)(p11;q21) resulting in a
PRCC-TFE3 gene fusion; three cases t(X;1)(p11;p34) resulting in a PSF-TFE3 gene
fusion, one t(X;17)(p11;q25) resulting in an ASPL-TFE3 gene fusion, and one
t(X;3)(p11;q23) with an unknown TFE3 gene fusion. As control we analyzed
cathepsin-K in 210 clear cell, 40 papillary, 25 chromophobe renal cell carcinomas
and 30 oncocytomas. All seven TFEB translocation renal cell carcinomas were
labeled for cathepsin-K. Among the cytogenetically confirmed TFE3 translocation
renal cell carcinomas, 6 out of 10 were positive. None of the other renal
neoplasms expressed cathepsin-K. We conclude the following: (1) cathepsin-K is
consistently and strongly expressed in TFEB translocation renal cell carcinomas
and in 6 of 10 TFE3 translocation renal cell carcinomas. (2) Cathepsin-K
immunolabeling in both TFE3 and TFEB translocation renal cell carcinomas
distinguishes these neoplasms from the more common adult renal cell carcinomas,
and may be a specific marker of these neoplasms. (3) These results further
support the concept that the overexpression of TFE3 or TFEB in these neoplasms
activates the expression of genes normally regulated by microphthalmia
transcription factor in other cell types.

PMID: 19396149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Ann Pathol. 2008 Oct;28(5):402-8. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2008.06.032. Epub 2008
Oct 9.

[Genomic classification of renal cell tumors in adults].

[Article in French]

Couturier J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de génétique oncologique, institut Curie - Hôpital, 26, rue d'Ulm,
75248 Paris cedex 05, France. jerome.couturier@curie.net

Classification of adult renal-cell tumors, based for years on histological
criteria only, has been recently updated by taking into account characteristic
chromosome rearrangements and genome and transcriptome profiles identified by
cytogenetic techniques, detection of fusion transcripts and by genomic analyses
on DNA microarrays. Papillary carcinomas are divided into two types. Type 1 is
characterized by trisomies 7 and 17, and 12, 16, and 20. Type 2 is a
heterogeneous group, including a low-grade subtype corresponding to genetically
evolved type 1 tumors, and a high-grade subtype, identified by its expression
profile which remains to be well characterized at the genomic level. Mucinous
tubular carcinoma exhibits a recurrent genomic profile with whole chromosome
losses involving 1, 4, 6, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, and 22, consequently without
relationship with type 1 papillary tumors. The profile of chromophobe-cell
carcinoma corresponds to the same genomic mechanism, with losses of chromosomes
1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17, and 21, without relationship with that of oncocytoma.
Juvenile carcinoma, that can occur also in adults, shows translocations involving
genes of the MiTF/TFE family, TFE3, in Xp11.2, and TFEB, in 6p21. So, molecular
diagnosis, either by identification of specific translocations, or by genomic
profiling, can be of valuable help for typing renal tumors when histological
classification is difficult.

PMID: 19068394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Prog Urol. 2008 May;18(5):275-80. doi: 10.1016/j.purol.2008.03.026. Epub 2008 May
19.

[Renal carcinoma associated with MiTF/TFE translocation: report of six cases in
young adults].

[Article in French]

Hintzy MC(1), Camparo P, Vasiliu V, Peyromaure M, Vieillefond A.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'urologie, CHU Cochin-Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, 27, rue du
Faubourg-Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. marieceline.hintzy@free.fr

OBJECTIVE: The authors present six cases of renal carcinoma associated with
MiTF/TFE translocation in young adults. This tumour is one of the newly
identified entities of the WHO 2004 classification.
MATERIALS: Six patients with MiTF/TFE translocation were identified in a series
of 636 adults operated between 2001 and 2005. The diagnosis was based on
cytogenetic analysis and immunohistochemistry (IHC) in three patients and IHC
alone in the other three patients.
RESULTS: Four women and two men between the ages of 28 and 42 years presented a
tumour with a mean diameter of 6 cm (range: 3-15 cm). The TNM classification of
these tumours was pT1N0 (n=2), pT2N0 (n=1), pT3aN+M0 (n=1), and pT3aN+M+ (n=2).
The mean follow-up was 32 months. One M+ patient died six months after the
operation, another two pT3 patients developed metastatic disease and pT1 or pT2
patients were alive without recurrence. The histological features comprised a
typical papillary architecture with large eosinophil and/or clear cells. IHC
showed TFE3 (n=5) or TFEB (n=1) expression. Cytogenetic analysis demonstrated a
t(X;1)(p11.2;p34) or t(X;17)(p11.2;q25) translocation in two patients expressing 
TFE3 and a t(6;11)(p21; q13) translocation in the patient expressing TFEB.
CONCLUSION: Renal carcinoma associated with MiTF/TFE translocation can be
diagnosed by IHC. However, cytogenetic analysis on fresh or frozen material
allows characterization of the translocation and should be performed on all renal
tumours in young adults. Prognosis is related to stage. In the future, the
diagnosis of more cases of this type of carcinoma will allow more precise
definition of the clinicopathological profile and the most appropriate
management.

PMID: 18538271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Surg Pathol. 2008 May;32(5):656-70. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181609914.

Renal translocation carcinomas: clinicopathologic, immunohistochemical, and gene 
expression profiling analysis of 31 cases with a review of the literature.

Camparo P(1), Vasiliu V, Molinie V, Couturier J, Dykema KJ, Petillo D, Furge KA, 
Comperat EM, Lae M, Bouvier R, Boccon-Gibod L, Denoux Y, Ferlicot S, Forest E,
Fromont G, Hintzy MC, Laghouati M, Sibony M, Tucker ML, Weber N, Teh BT,
Vieillefond A.

Author information: 
(1)HIA Val de Grace, Van Andel Research Institute, Paris, France.
phcamparo@yahoo.fr

We report clinicopathologic features of a large series of renal translocation
carcinomas from a multicentric study. Diagnosis was performed by cytogenetic
examination of fresh material and/or by immunochemistry with antibodies directed 
against the C-terminal part of transcription factor E3 (TFE3) and native
transcription factor EB (TFEB) proteins. Clinical data, follow-up, and histologic
features were assessed. Antibodies against CK7, CD10, vimentin, epithelial
membrane antigen, AE1-AE3, E-cadherin, alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase,
melan A, and HMB45 were tested on tissue microarrays. Whole-genome microarray
expression profiling was performed on 4 tumors. Twenty-nine cases were diagnosed 
as TFE3 and 2 as TFEB renal translocation carcinomas, including 13 males and 18
females, mean age 24.6 years. Two patients had a previous history of chemotherapy
and 1 had a history of renal failure. Mean size of the tumor was 6.9 cm. Thirteen
cases were > or = pT3 stage. Twelve cases were N+ or M+. Mean follow-up was 29.5 
months. Three patients presented metastases and 5 have died. Mixed papillary and 
nested patterns with clear and/or eosinophilic cells represented the most
consistent histologic appearance, with common foci of calcifications regardless
of the type of translocation. Using a 30 mn incubation at room temperature, TFE3 
immunostainings were positive in only 82% of our TFE3 translocation carcinomas.
Both TFE3 and TFEB renal translocation carcinomas expressed CD10 and
alpha-methylacyl-coenzyme A racemase in all cases. An expression of E-cadherin
was observed in two-third of cases. Cytokeratins were expressed in less than
one-third of cases. Melanocytic markers were expressed at least weakly in all
cases except two. Unsupervised clustering on the basis of the gene expression
profiling indicated a distinct subgroup of tumors. TRIM 63 glutathione
S-transferase A1 and alanyl aminopeptidase are the main differentially expressed 
genes for this group of tumors. Our results suggest that these differentially
expressed genes may serve as novel diagnostic or prognostic markers.

PMID: 18344867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cancer. 2008 Apr 1;112(7):1607-16. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23331.

Translocation renal cell carcinoma: lack of negative impact due to lymph node
spread.

Geller JI(1), Argani P, Adeniran A, Hampton E, De Marzo A, Hicks J, Collins MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology Oncology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.
james.geller@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: Pediatric renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is clinically distinct from
adult RCC. Characterization of the unique biological and clinical features of
pediatric RCC are required.
METHODS: A retrospective review and biological analysis of all RCC cases
presenting to Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) in the last
30 years was undertaken. Cases were classified according to the recent World
Heath Organization morphologic classification and according to TFE3/TFEB status. 
A literature review of pediatric TFE+ cases was performed.
RESULTS: Eleven cases of RCC with clinical data were identified in our
institutional review as follows: 6 clear cell, 2 papillary, 2 translocation, and 
1 sarcomatoid. Upon reanalysis, 1 papillary and 1 sarcomatoid were confirmed, 1
case was "unclassified", and 8 of 11 (72.7%) had features consistent with
translocation morphology. Of these 8, all demonstrated immunoreactivity for TFE3 
(7 patients) or TFEB (1 patient) protein. In 3 cases, cytogenetics was available,
each demonstrating confirmatory MiTF/TFE translocations. Seven of 8 TFE+ RCC
patients presented with TNM Stage III/IV disease. Literature analysis confirmed a
significant increase in advanced stage presentation in pediatric TFE+ RCC
compared with TFE- RCC. Fourteen of fifteen (93.3%) patients with TFE+ stage
III/IV RCC due to lymph node spread (N+ M(0)) remain disease free with a median
and mean follow-up of 4.4 and 6.3 years, respectively (range, 0.3-15.5).
CONCLUSIONS: Translocation morphology RCC is the predominant form of pediatric
RCC, associated with an advanced stage at presentation. Patients with TFE+ N+
M(0) RCC maintain a favorable short-term prognosis after surgery alone. Young RCC
patients should be screened for translocation morphology, and the screening
information should be considered when debating adjuvant therapy.

PMID: 18278810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 May;312(1-2):17-24. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9716-6. Epub
2008 Feb 17.

Protein-DNA array-based identification of transcription factor activities
differentially regulated in skeletal muscle of normal and dystrophin-deficient
mdx mice.

Dogra C(1), Srivastava DS, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Disease Center, Jerry L. Pettis Memorial Veteren Affairs
Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA 92357, USA.

Inactivation of dystrophin gene is the primary cause of Duchenne muscular
dystrophy (DMD) in humans and mdx mice. However, the underpinning mechanisms,
which govern the pathogenesis of dystrophin-deficient skeletal muscle, remain
poorly understood. We have previously reported activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAPK), nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB), and
phosphatidyl-inositol 3-kinase/Akt (PI3K/Akt) signaling pathways in diaphragm
muscle of mdx mice. In this study, using a protein-DNA array-based approach, we
have investigated the activation of 345 transcription factors in diaphragm muscle
of 6-week old normal and dystrophin-deficient mdx mice. Our data demonstrate
increased activation of a number nuclear transcription factors including AP1,
HFH-3, PPARalpha, c.myb BP, ETF, Fra-1/JUN, kBF-A, N-rasBP, lactoferrin BP,
Myb(2), EBP40_45, EKLF(1), p53(2), TFEB, Myc-Max; c-Rel; E2, ISRE; NF-kB; Stat1
p84/p91, Antioxidant RE, EVI-1, Stat3, AP3, p53, Stat4, AP4, HFH-1, FAST-1,
Pax-5, and Beta-RE in the diaphragm muscle of mdx mice compared to corresponding 
normal mice. The level of activation for p53 was highest among all the
transcription factors studied. Furthermore, higher activation of p53 in diaphragm
muscle of mdx mice was associated with its increased phosphorylation and nuclear 
translocation. Collectively, our data suggest that the primary deficiency of
dystrophin leads to the aberrant activation of nuclear transcription factors
which might further contribute to muscle pathogenesis in mdx mice.

PMCID: PMC2785438
PMID: 18278580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2007;118(2-4):157-65.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the MiT translocation subgroup of renal cell
carcinomas.

Medendorp K(1), van Groningen JJ, Schepens M, Vreede L, Thijssen J, Schoenmakers 
EF, van den Hurk WH, Geurts van Kessel A, Kuiper RP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) represent a heterogeneous group of neoplasms, which 
differ in histological, pathologic and clinical characteristics. The tumors
originate from different locations within the nephron and are accompanied by
different recurrent (cyto)genetic anomalies. Recently, a novel subgroup of RCCs
has been defined, i.e., the MiT translocation subgroup of RCCs. These tumors
originate from the proximal tubule of the nephron, exhibit pleomorphic
histological features including clear cell morphologies and papillary structures,
and are found predominantly in children and young adults. In addition, these
tumors are characterized by the occurrence of recurrent chromosomal
translocations, which result in disruption and fusion of either the TFE3 or TFEB 
genes, both members of the MiT family of basic helix-loop-helix/leucine-zipper
transcription factor genes. Hence the name MiT translocation subgroup of RCCs. In
this review several features of this RCC subgroup will be discussed, including
the molecular mechanisms that may underlie their development.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18000366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. BMC Immunol. 2007 Aug 17;8:17.

Transcription factor network downstream of protease activated receptors (PARs)
modulating mouse bladder inflammation.

Saban R(1), Simpson C, Davis CA, Dozmorov I, Maier J, Fowler B, Ihnat MA, Hurst
RE, Wershil BK, Saban MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, The University Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. ricardo-saban@ouhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: All four PARs are present in the urinary bladder, and their
expression is altered during inflammation. In order to search for therapeutic
targets other than the receptors themselves, we set forth to determine TFs
downstream of PAR activation in the C57BL/6 urinary bladders.
METHODS: For this purpose, we used a protein/DNA combo array containing 345
different TF consensus sequences. Next, the TF selected was validated by EMSA and
IHC. As mast cells seem to play a fundamental role in bladder inflammation, we
determined whether c-kit receptor deficient (Kit w/Kit w-v) mice have an
abrogated response to PAR stimulation. Finally, TFEB antibody was used for
CHIP/Q-PCR assay and revealed up-regulation of genes known to be downstream of
TFEB.
RESULTS: TFEB, a member of the MiTF family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine
zipper, was the only TF commonly up-regulated by all PAR-APs. IHC results confirm
a correlation between inflammation and TFEB expression in C57BL/6 mice. In
contrast, Kit w/Kit w-v mice did not exhibit inflammation in response to PAR
activation. EMSA results confirmed the increased TFEB binding activity in C57BL/6
but not in Kit w/Kit w-v mice.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report describing the increased expression of TFEB 
in bladder inflammation in response to PAR activation. As TFEB belongs to a
family of TFs essential for mast cell survival, our findings suggest that this
molecule may influence the participation of mast cells in PAR-mediated
inflammation and that targeting TFEB/MiTF activity may be a novel approach for
the treatment of bladder inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC2000913
PMID: 17705868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Am J Clin Pathol. 2007 Jul;128(1):70-9.

Xp11.2 translocation renal cell carcinoma with very aggressive course in five
adults.

Meyer PN(1), Clark JI, Flanigan RC, Picken MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, 
USA.

Renal cell carcinomas associated with Xp11.2 translocations ( TFE3 gene fusions) 
are rare tumors predominantly reported in children. We studied 5 cases of
translocation carcinoma in adult patients, 18 years or older (mean age, 32.6
years). Tumors were examined histologically, immunohistochemically, and electron 
microscopically and correlated with the clinical picture. Most tumors showed
solid sheets of clear to eosinophilic cells with rich vasculature and foci of
papillary or pseudopapillary architecture. All cases showed strong nuclear
positivity for TFE3. Vimentin and CD10 were positive in the cytoplasm. A panel of
cytokeratin antibodies, smooth muscle actin, CD45, HMB45, and calretinin were
negative. Patients had nonspecific initial complaints and were diagnosed with
advanced disease, most with distant metastases. Various treatments met with
minimal success. Unlike pediatric patients, the adult patients followed a rapidly
terminal course, with a mean survival of 18 months after diagnosis (range, 10-24 
months).

PMID: 17580272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Crit Rev Oncog. 2006 Dec;12(3-4):257-71.

Recurrent fusion oncogenes in carcinomas.

Teixeira MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Portuguese Oncology Institute, Rua Dr. António
Bernardino de Almeida, 4200-072 Porto, Portugal. mteixeir@ipoporto.min-saude.pt

Chromosome structural aberrations giving rise to fusion oncogenes is one of the
most common mechanisms in oncogenesis. Although this type of gene rearrangement
has long been recognized as a fundamental pathogenetic mechanism in
hematologi-cal malignancies and soft-tissue tumors, it has until recently only
rarely been described in the common carcinomas. In this review, the existing
information on recurrent fusion oncogenes characterizing carcinomas is
summarized, namely, the RET and NTRK1 fusion oncogenes in papillary thyroid
carcinoma, PAX8-PPARG in follicular thyroid carcinoma, MECT1-MAML2 in
mucoepidermoid carcinoma, the TFE3 and TFEB fusion oncogenes in kidney
carcinomas, BRD4-NUT in midline carcinomas, ETV6-NTRK3 in secretory breast
carcinomas, and TMPRSS2-ETS fusion oncogenes in prostate carcinomas. As in
hematological and soft-tissue malignancies, the most common types of genes
involved in fusion oncogenes in carcinomas are transcription factors and tyrosine
kinases. With a few exceptions, most fusion oncogenes are tumor type specific in 
carcinomas, as in other cancers. The mechanisms behind the relative specificity
of this type of somatic mutation involve the cellular environment influencing the
selection of oncogenic fusions, and the oncogenic fusions in turn driving
differentiation programs that may alter the cellular environment. The data
summarized on different types of carcinomas characterized by fusion oncogenes
indicate that the pathogenetic mechanisms involved in epithelial carcino-genesis 
may be similar to those known to operate in hematological and soft-tissue
malignancies, and further anticipates that many more fusion oncogenes await
identification in the most common types of human cancer.

PMID: 17425505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2007 May;46(5):419-26.

Characterization of t(6;11)(p21;q12) in a renal-cell carcinoma of an adult
patient.

Pecciarini L(1), Cangi MG, Lo Cunsolo C, Macri' E, Dal Cin E, Martignoni G,
Doglioni C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Scientific Institute San Raffaele Hospital, Milano,
Italy.

Renal-cell carcinoma (RCC) constitutes a heterogeneous group of tumors with
specific chromosome aberrations. Recently, a new small group of RCC, occurring in
children and young adults, has been described as characterized by
t(6;11)(p21;q12). It has been shown that this translocation results in the fusion
of the 5' portion of the ALPHA gene (11q12) with the transcription factor gene
TFEB (6p21). Herewith, we report the first complete cytogenetic and molecular
characterization of a t(6;11)-positive RCC of an adult patient, a 54-year-old
woman. The tumor was histologically defined as RCC with peculiar features and it 
was negative for epithelial markers and positive for melanocytic markers.
Chromosome QFQ banding analysis of short-term cultured cells from the RCC showed 
t(6;11)(p21;q12) as the sole cytogenetic abnormality. The translocation was
confirmed by FISH analysis. RT-PCR analysis, performed on total RNA isolated from
both neoplastic and normal tissue samples, revealed an ALPHA-TFEB chimeric
transcript in the tumor sample; sequencing of the RT-PCR product defined a novel 
TFEB gene breakpoint cluster region, broader than the one reported thus far.
Western blot analysis showed a band at the expected size of wild-type TFEB in the
neoplastic tissue compared to the normal sample, supporting that the fusion gene 
does not encode for a chimeric protein but it causes an upregulation of the
wild-type TFEB. Our data contribute to define better this rare RCC type, which is
typical not only of childhood but can also be found in adulthood.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17285572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 19;282(3):1838-50. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

VMD2 promoter requires two proximal E-box sites for its activity in vivo and is
regulated by the MITF-TFE family.

Esumi N(1), Kachi S, Campochiaro PA, Zack DJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Guerrieri Center for Genetic Engineering and Molecular Ophthalmology, The 
Wilmer Eye Institute, the Departments of Ophthalmology, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287-9289, USA.
nesumi@jhmi.edu

The retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is crucial for the function and survival of 
retinal photoreceptors. VMD2 encodes bestrophin, an oligomeric chloride channel
that is preferentially expressed in the RPE and, when mutated, causes Best
macular dystrophy. Previously, we defined the VMD2 upstream region from -253 to
+38 bp as being sufficient to direct RPE-specific expression in the eye, and we
suggested microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) as a possible
positive regulator. Here we show that in transgenic mice the -154 to +38 bp
region is sufficient for RPE expression, and mutation of two E-boxes, 1 and 2,
within this region leads to loss of promoter activity. A yeast one-hybrid screen 
using bait containing E-box 1 identified clones encoding MITF, TFE3, and TFEB,
and chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies against these proteins enriched
the VMD2 proximal promoter. Analysis using in vivo electroporation with
constructs containing mutation of each E-box indicated that expression in native 
RPE requires both E-boxes, yet in vitro DNA binding studies suggested that MITF
binds well to E-box 1 but only minimally to E-box 2. MITF knockdown by small
interfering RNA (siRNA) in cell culture revealed a strong correlation between
MITF and VMD2 mRNA levels. Sequential transfection of a luciferase construct with
expression vectors following MITF siRNA revealed that TFE3 and TFEB can also
transactivate the VMD2 promoter. Taken together, we suggest that VMD2 is
regulated by the MITF-TFE family through two E-boxes, with E-box 1 required for a
direct interaction of MITF-TFE factors and E-box 2 for binding of the as yet
unidentified factor(s).

PMID: 17085443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Exp Cell Res. 2006 Dec 10;312(20):4079-89. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Tfe3 expression is closely associated to macrophage terminal differentiation of
human hematopoietic myeloid precursors.

Zanocco-Marani T(1), Vignudelli T, Gemelli C, Pirondi S, Testa A, Montanari M,
Parenti S, Tenedini E, Grande A, Ferrari S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Sezione di Chimica Biologica, Università
di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Via Campi 287, 41100, Modena, Italy.

The MItf-Tfe family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH-Zip)
transcription factors encodes four family members: MItf, Tfe3, TfeB and TfeC. In 
vitro, each protein of the family binds DNA in a homo- or heterodimeric form with
other family members. Tfe3 is involved in chromosomal translocations recurrent in
different tumors and it has been demonstrated, by in vivo studies, that it plays,
redundantly with MItf, an important role in the process of osteoclast formation, 
in particular during the transition from mono-nucleated to multi-nucleated
osteoclasts. Since mono-nucleated osteoclasts derive from macrophages we
investigated whether Tfe3 might play a role upstream during hematopoietic
differentiation. Here we show that Tfe3 is able to induce mono-macrophagic
differentiation of U937 cells, in association with a decrease of cell
proliferation and an increase of apoptosis. We also show that Tfe3 does not act
physiologically during commitment of CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), since
it is not able to direct HSCs toward a specific lineage as observed by clonogenic
assay, but is a strong actor of terminal differentiation since it allows human
primary myeloblasts' maturation toward the macrophage lineage.

PMID: 17046750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8336-46. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

Placental but not heart defects are associated with elevated hypoxia-inducible
factor alpha levels in mice lacking prolyl hydroxylase domain protein 2.

Takeda K(1), Ho VC, Takeda H, Duan LJ, Nagy A, Fong GH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Vascular Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030-3501, USA.

PHD1, PHD2, and PHD3 are prolyl hydroxylase domain proteins that regulate the
stability of hypoxia-inducible factor alpha subunits (HIF-alpha). To determine
the roles of individual PHDs during mouse development, we disrupted all three Phd
genes and found that Phd2(-/-) embryos died between embryonic days 12.5 and 14.5 
whereas Phd1(-/-) or Phd3(-/-) mice were apparently normal. In Phd2(-/-) mice,
severe placental and heart defects preceded embryonic death. Placental defects
included significantly reduced labyrinthine branching morphogenesis, widespread
penetration of the labyrinth by spongiotrophoblasts, and abnormal distribution of
trophoblast giant cells. The expression of several trophoblast markers was also
altered, including an increase in the spongiotrophoblast marker Mash2 and
decreases in the labyrinthine markers Tfeb and Gcm1. In the heart, trabeculae
were poorly developed, the myocardium was remarkably thinner, and
interventricular septum was incompletely formed. Surprisingly, while there were
significant global increases in HIF-alpha protein levels in the placenta and the 
embryo proper, there was no specific HIF-alpha increase in the heart. Taken
together, these data indicate that among all three PHD proteins, PHD2 is uniquely
essential during mouse embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1636770
PMID: 16966370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Nat Immunol. 2006 Oct;7(10):1082-91. Epub 2006 Aug 27.

Transcription factors TFE3 and TFEB are critical for CD40 ligand expression and
thymus-dependent humoral immunity.

Huan C(1), Kelly ML, Steele R, Shapira I, Gottesman SR, Roman CA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology, The School of Graduate Studies,
State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center at Brooklyn, New York, New
York 11203, USA.

TFE3 and TFEB are broadly expressed transcription factors related to the
transcription factor Mitf. Although they have been linked to cytokine signaling
pathways in nonlymphoid cells, their function in T cells is unknown.
TFE3-deficient mice are phenotypically normal, whereas TFEB deficiency causes
early embryonic death. We now show that combined inactivation of TFE3 and TFEB in
T cells resulted in a hyper-immunoglobulin M syndrome due to impaired expression 
of CD40 ligand by CD4(+) T cells. Native TFE3 and TFEB bound to multiple cognate 
sites in the promoter of the gene encoding CD40 ligand (Cd40lg), and maximum
Cd40lg promoter activity and gene expression required TFE3 or TFEB. Thus, TFE3
and TFEB are direct, physiological and mutually redundant activators of Cd40lg
expression in activated CD4(+) T cells critical for T cell-dependent antibody
responses.

PMCID: PMC2386253
PMID: 16936731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Sep;126(3):349-64.

Pediatric renal cell carcinoma: clinical, pathologic, and molecular abnormalities
associated with the members of the mit transcription factor family.

Ramphal R(1), Pappo A, Zielenska M, Grant R, Ngan BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Haematology/Oncology, Division of
Pathology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Sep;126(3):332-4.

We describe the clinical features, outcome, pathology, cytogenetics, and
molecular aspects of 13 pediatric papillary renal cell carcinomas during a
19-year period. Seven cases (54%) had translocations involving Xp11.2 (TFE3).
They were identified by cytogenetic, molecular, and/or immunohistochemical
analyses. All Xp11.2+ translocations were TFE3+ by immunostaining. Cytogenetic
and/or polymerase chain reaction analyses identified 3 cases with t(X17) and 1
case with t(1;17), and all had additional translocations. Histologic features in 
common in TFE3+ tumors also were present in some TFE3- tumors. One TFE3- tumor
had complex cytogenetic abnormalities,
55XY,+2,del(3)(p14),+7,+8,+12,+13,+16,+17,+20[11 ], and 2 cases had normal
karyotypes. None had t(6;11)/TFEB+ immunostaining. Five cases had focal, weak
MITF tumor immunostaining. The key clinical findings were as follows: (1) The
presence of an Xp11.2 (TFE3) translocation frequently is associated with advanced
stage at initial examination. (2) All patients who underwent complete, partial
nephrectomy with clear margins (adequate only for stage 1) and resection of
metastases were alive and relapse-free at last follow-up. (3) The mean +/- SD
event-free survival and overall survival rates at 5 years were both 92% +/- 7.4%.
(4) One patients with a TFE3+ and MITF+ tumor and
66-87,XXY,der(1)t(1;8)del(4)(q?) der(11)t(11;15)der17t(X;17 abnormalities died 9 
months after diagnosis.

PMID: 16880148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Sep;126(3):332-4.

The evolving story of renal translocation carcinomas.

Argani P, Ladanyi M.

Comment on
    Am J Clin Pathol. 2006 Sep;126(3):349-64.

PMID: 16880145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Phys Chem B. 2005 Jul 28;109(29):14102-11.

Negative dipole potentials of uncharged langmuir monolayers due to fluorination
of the hydrophilic heads.

Petrov JG(1), Andreeva TD, Kurth DG, Möhwald H.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Am Mühlenberg 1, D-14476
Golm/Potsdam, Germany. jordan_g_petrov@yahoo.com

The dipole potential, affecting the structure, functions, and interactions of
biomembranes, lipid bilayers, and Langmuir monolayers, is positive toward the
hydrocarbon moieties. We show that uncharged Langmuir monolayers of docosyl
trifluoroethyl ether (DFEE) exhibit large negative dipole potentials, while the
nonfluorinated docosyl ethyl ether (DEE) forms films with positive dipole
potentials. Comparison of the Delta V values for these ethers with those of the
previously studied(37-39) monolayers of trifluoroethyl ester (TFEB) and ethyl
ester of behenic acid (EB) shows that the reversal of the sign of Delta V causes 
the same change Delta(Delta V) = -706 +/- 16 mV due to fluorination of heads. The
Delta V values of both TFEB and EB films differ by -122 +/- 16 mV from those of
DFEE and DEE monolayers, respectively, with the same density. Such quantitative
coincidence points to a common mechanism of reversal of the sign of the dipole
potential for the ether and ester films despite the different structure of their 
heads. The mechanical properties and phase behaviors of these monolayers show
that both fluorinated heads are less hydrated, suggesting that the change of the 
sign of Delta V could, at least partially, be related to different hydration
water structure. The same negative contribution of the carbonyl bond in both TFEB
and EB films contrasts with the generally accepted positive contribution of the
C(delta+)=O(delta-) bond in condensed Langmuir monolayers of fatty acids, their
alcohol esters, glycerides, and phospholipids but concurs with the theoretical
analysis of Delta V of stearic acid monolayers. Both results question the
literature values of the molecular dipole moments of these substances calculated 
via summation of bonds and atomic group contributions. Mixed monolayers of DFEE
and DEE show smooth monotonic variation of Delta V from +450 to -235 mV,
indicating a way for adjustment of the sign and magnitude of the dipole potential
at the membrane-water boundary and regulation of such membrane behaviors as
binding and translocation rate of hydrophobic ions and ion-carriers, adsorption
and penetration of amphiphilic peptides, polarization of hydration water, and
short-range repulsion. The interaction of the hydrophobic ions tetraphenylboron
TPhB- and tetraphenylphosphonium TPhP+ with DFEE and DEE monolayers qualitatively
follows the theory of binding of such ions to lipid bilayers, but the shifts
Delta(Delta V) from the values obtained on water are much smaller than those for 
DPPC monolayers. This difference seems to be due to the solid (polycrystalline)
character of the DFEE and DEE films that hampers the penetration of TPhB- and
TPhP+ in the monolayers and reduces the attractive interaction with the
hydrophobic moiety. This conclusion orients the future synthesis of amphiphiles
with fluorinated heads to those which could form liquid-expanded Langmuir
monolayers.

PMID: 16852771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Actas Urol Esp. 2006 Apr;30(4):372-85.

[Usefulness of the present renal cell carcinoma classifications].

[Article in Spanish]

Algaba F(1), Arce Y, Trias I, Santaularia JM, Antonio Rosales A.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Patologia, Fundació Puigvert-Barcelona.
falgaba@fundacio-puigvert.es

The purpose of classifying neoplasias is to recognize groups with similar
progress and prognosis and, if possible, receiving the same treatment. This is
why those classifications are systematically being submitted to review and
improvement through the new technologies. Differentiation of various entities in 
renal cancer has been comparatively fast, as the new genetic and molecular
discoveries have confirmed the morphologic criteria of the different cell types, 
thus making it possible to open new therapeutic pathways. Using the current WHO
classification we recognize subtypes with excellent prognosis (Multilocular
cystic renal carcinoma, Type I renal papillary carcinoma, Tubular and
fusocellular mucinous carcinoma), other very aggressive ones (Bellini's
collecting duct carcinoma, Medullary carcinoma), and also that the sarcomatoid
transformation, even in small areas, impacts the prognosis negatively.
Childhood-characteristic renal carcinomas associated with chromosome
translocations have been recognized (genetic fusion TFE3 or TFEB), as well as the
family forms of renal carcinoma. Regarding the UICC (International Union Against 
Cancer) classification, there are a series of aspects under argument (size,
venous invasion, microvascular invasion, invasion of the adipous tissue of the
renal sinus) that shall be discussed too, since it is possible that some
modifications of the TNM might occur in the near future.

PMID: 16838609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Apr 1;24(10):1529-34.

Translocation carcinomas of the kidney after chemotherapy in childhood.

Argani P(1), Laé M, Ballard ET, Amin M, Manivel C, Hutchinson B, Reuter VE,
Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD, USA.

PURPOSE: Children who survive cancer are at more than 19-fold increased risk of
developing another malignancy. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) occurring as a
secondary malignancy is uncommon. Translocation RCC, bearing TFE3 or TFEB gene
fusions, are recently recognized entities for which risk factors have not been
identified.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We describe the clinical, pathologic, cytogenetic, and
molecular data on six translocation RCCs that arose in five young patients who
had received chemotherapy.
RESULTS: The ages at time of diagnosis of the RCC ranged from 6 to 22 years.
Histologically, these tumors showed typical features previously described for
translocation RCCs. At the molecular level, three tumors contained the ASPL-TFE3 
fusion, two contained Alpha-TFEB, and one contained PRCC-TFE3. The intervals
between chemotherapy and the diagnosis of RCC ranged from 4 to 13 years. The
indications for the antecedent chemotherapy were varied and included acute
promyelocytic leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia with t(9;11), bilateral Wilms'
tumor, systemic lupus erythematosus, and conditioning regimen of bone marrow
transplant for Hurler's syndrome. Only the latter patient had also received
radiation. Hence, among 39 genetically confirmed translocation RCCs in our
personal experience, six (15%) have arisen in patients who had received cytotoxic
chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: Cytotoxic chemotherapy may predispose to the development of renal
translocation carcinomas.

PMID: 16575003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Cell Cycle. 2006 Mar;5(5):495-8. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

Hypoxia, HIF and the placenta.

Fryer BH(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Early in mammalian development the placenta, a highly vascularized organ,
develops to facilitate exchange of oxygen (O2), nutrients and waste between
mother and offspring. This process is intricately regulated by O2 tension and the
hypoxic (low O2) uterine environment. Consequently, the placenta provides an
excellent model for understanding the relationship between hypoxia (low O2
tension), organogenesis (organ development)and angiogenesis (blood vessel
development). Herein we describe recent research on Hypoxia Inducible Factor
(HIF), a heterodimeric transcription factor regulated by hypoxia that is crucial 
for proper placental development. Complete disruption of HIF signaling through
loss of the HIFbeta (ARNT) or HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha subunits results in
improper placental development, characterized by a diminished spongiotrophoblast 
layer and insufficient chorio/allantoic fusion. Experiments using placental stem 
cells (TS cells) derived from Hif1alpha-/- Hif2alpha-/- (Hifalpha-/-) and Arnt-/-
mice indicate that there is increased expression of the labyrinthine specific
transcription factors GCM and TFEB and a deficiency in the spongiotrophoblast
transcription factor Mash2. Furthermore Hifalpha-/- and Arnt-/- TS cells
subjected to differentiating conditions tend to adopt a labyrinthine like
syncytial fate, and do not form giant cells or spongiotrophoblasts. These
observations demonstrate a crucial role for HIF in the formation of the
spongiotrophoblast that is probably regulated by Mash2, and suggest a complex
interaction between hypoxia, HIF and Mash2 in the formation of the
spongiotrophoblast.

PMID: 16552177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Dec;14(6):697-711.

Transforming growth factor-beta induces differentiation of the labyrinthine
trophoblast stem cell line SM10.

Selesniemi K(1), Reedy M, Gultice A, Guilbert LJ, Brown TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology, and Physiology, Wright State
University School of Medicine, Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA.

The mammalian placenta consists of different trophoblast cell types that assist
in the variety of functions required for the maintenance of pregnancy. In
rodents, labyrinthine trophoblasts of the placenta are especially important,
because they are capable of differentiating into fused labyrinthine cells, which 
form the feto-maternal exchange surface. Even though the molecular signals
triggering labyrinthine trophoblast differentiation are poorly understood,
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) has been shown to be present in the
placental environment and alter trophoblast development. In this study, we
investigated the effects of TGF-beta on the differentiation of the labyrinthine
trophoblast stem cell lines SM10 and HRP-1. RT-PCR analyses demonstrated that
while the molecular expression of labyrinthine-specific lineage markers (Esx1,
Tfeb, and Tec) was maintained in TGF-beta-treated SM10 and HRP-1 cells, TGF-beta 
induced the down-regulation of trophoblast stem cell markers Id2 and Cdx2. In
contrast, TGF-beta induced the expression of a marker of differentiated
labyrinthine trophoblasts, Gcm1, only in the SM10 cell line. Furthermore, we
demonstrated an increased glucose uptake in the TGF-beta-treated SM10 cells,
indicative of functional differentiation. Finally, cell fusion in
TGF-beta-treated SM10 and HRP-1 cells was investigated by western blotting
analysis of placental alkaline phosphatase and cadherin-11 and by microscopic
analyses of cell morphology using green fluorescent protein (GFP) and rhodamine
phalloidin staining. The western blotting and morphological analyses indicate
TGF-beta-induced cell fusion and morphological differentiation in the SM10 cell
line. The SM10 cell line will provide a new and unique model for detailed
analysis of TGF-beta-induced molecular events associated with labyrinthine
trophoblast differentiation and function.

PMID: 16433625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Acta Cardiol. 2005 Jun;60(3):295-301.

Total flavones from Elsholtzia blanda reduce infarct size and improve heart
function during acute myocardial infarction by inhibiting myocardial apoptosis in
canines.

Ling H(1), Lou Y, Wu H, Lou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Science, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310031, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: The current study tests the hypothesis that inhibition of apoptotic
cell death with total flavones from Elsholtzia blanda (TFEB), a traditional
Chinese medicine, reduces infarct size and improves heart function during
myocardial ischaemia induced by coronary occlusion in canines.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Myocardial apoptosis was detected by the TdT-mediated dUTP
nick end labelling (TUNEL) method and DNA laddering. Infarct size of the left
ventricle, serum level of CK-MB, haemodynamic parameters including rate of rise
and decline of left ventricular pressure (+/- dp/dtmax), left ventricular
systolic pressure (LVSP), main arterial pressure (MAP), coronary blood flow
(CBF), coronary vascular resistance (CVR) were measured in this study. TUNEL
positive cells were markedly reduced from 27.83 +/- 8.15% in the control dogs to 
7.74 +/- 3.50% in the TFEB-treated ones (P < 0.01), consistent with the absence
of DNA laddering. TFEB significantly reduced infarct size from 19.30 +/- 6.66% in
the control dogs to 8.87 +/- 1.66% (P < 0.01), confirmed by lower serum CK-MB
activity. TFEB significantly reduced MAP and CVR. The decrease in +/- dp/dtmax,
LVSP and CBF also tended to be much smaller in the TFEB treated group.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that the inhibitory effect of TFEB on apoptosis
during coronary occlusion is associated with reduction in infarct size and
improvement in heart function.

PMID: 15999469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Ethnopharmacol. 2005 Oct 3;101(1-3):169-75.

Total flavones from Elsholtzia blanda reduce infarct size during acute myocardial
ischemia by inhibiting myocardial apoptosis in rats.

Ling H(1), Lou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310031, PR China.

Apoptosis is a common pathological feature in acute myocardial infarction (AMI). 
The infarct size is an important determinant of the prognosis of AMI. In recent
years, Chinese medicinal herbs and their extracts have received great attention
in prevention of AMI. The aim of this investigation was to evaluate the
anti-ischemic effect of total flavones from Elsholtzia blanda (Benth.) Benth.
(TFEB), a traditional Chinese medicine and to make clear the mechanism involved
in it. Myocardial infarction was induced by coronary occlusion in rats. Apoptosis
was measured quantitatively by the terminal transferase UTP nick end-labeling
(TUNEL) method and confirmed by DNA laddering on agarose gel. The expression of
anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-2 and pro-apoptotic protein, Bax was visualized by
Western blot analysis. TFEB significantly reduced infarct size and TUNEL-positive
rate confirmed by disappearance of DNA laddering. Greater Bcl-2 and attenuated
Bax expression was found in TFEB treating rats. These results suggest that TFEB
reduce infarct size during AMI by inhibiting myocardial apoptosis through
modulation of Bcl-2 family.

PMID: 15998571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Biol Chem. 2005 Aug 26;280(34):30225-35. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Renal carcinoma-associated transcription factors TFE3 and TFEB are leukemia
inhibitory factor-responsive transcription activators of E-cadherin.

Huan C(1), Sashital D, Hailemariam T, Kelly ML, Roman CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and the Morse Institute for
Molecular Genetics, State University of New York Downstate Medical Center,
Brooklyn 11203, USA.

Translocations of the genes encoding the related transcription factors TFE3 and
TFEB are almost exclusively associated with a rare juvenile subset of renal cell 
carcinoma and lead to overexpression of TFE3 or TFEB protein sequences. A better 
understanding of how deregulated TFE3 and TFEB contribute to the transformation
process requires elucidating more of the normal cellular processes in which they 
participate. Here we identify TFE3 and TFEB as cell type-specific leukemia
inhibitory factor-responsive activators of E-cadherin. Overexpression of TFE3 or 
TFEB in 3T3 cells activated endogenous and reporter E-cadherin expression.
Conversely, endogenous TFE3 and/or TFEB was required for endogenous E-cadherin
expression in primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts and human embryonic kidney
cells. Chromatin precipitation analyses and E-cadherin promoter reporter gene
assays revealed that E-cadherin induction by TFE3 or TFEB was primarily or
exclusively direct and mitogen-activated protein kinase-dependent in those cell
types. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts, TFE3 and TFEB activation of E-cadherin was
responsive to leukemia inhibitory factor. In 3T3 cells, TFE3 and TFEB expression 
also induced expression of Wilms' tumor-1, another E-cadherin activator. In
contrast, E-cadherin expression in model mouse and canine renal epithelial cell
lines was indifferent to inhibition of endogenous TFE3 and/or TFEB and was
reduced by TFE3 or TFEB overexpression. These results reveal new cell
type-specific activities of TFE3 and TFEB which may be affected by their
mutation.

PMID: 15994295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3393-403. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-dependent histone deacetylase activity determines stem
cell fate in the placenta.

Maltepe E(1), Krampitz GW, Okazaki KM, Red-Horse K, Mak W, Simon MC, Fisher SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Molecular Medicine Program, University of
California, Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a heterodimeric transcription factor composed
of HIFalpha and the arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator
(ARNT/HIF1beta). Previously, we have reported that ARNT function is required for 
murine placental development. Here, we used cultured trophoblast stem (TS) cells 
to investigate the molecular basis of this requirement. In vitro, wild-type TS
cell differentiation is largely restricted to spongiotrophoblasts and giant
cells. Interestingly, Arnt-null TS cells differentiated into chorionic
trophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, as demonstrated by their expression of
Tfeb, glial cells missing 1 (Gcm1) and the HIV receptor CXCR4. During this
process, a region of the differentiating Arnt-null TS cells underwent granzyme
B-mediated apoptosis, suggesting a role for this pathway in murine
syncytiotrophoblast turnover. Surprisingly, HIF1alpha and HIF2alpha were induced 
during TS cell differentiation in 20% O2; additionally, pVHL levels were
modulated during the same time period. These results suggest that
oxygen-independent HIF functions are crucial to this differentiation process. As 
histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity has been linked to HIF-dependent gene
expression, we investigated whether ARNT deficiency affects this epigenetic
regulator. Interestingly, Arnt-null TS cells had reduced HDAC activity, increased
global histone acetylation, and altered class II HDAC subcellular localization.
In wild-type TS cells, inhibition of HDAC activity recapitulated the Arnt-null
phenotype, suggesting that crosstalk between the HIFs and the HDACs is required
for normal trophoblast differentiation. Thus, the HIFs play important roles in
modulating the developmental plasticity of stem cells by integrating
physiological, transcriptional and epigenetic inputs.

PMID: 15987772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Clin Lab Med. 2005 Jun;25(2):363-78.

Translocation carcinomas of the kidney.

Argani P(1), Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, The Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD
21231-2410, USA. pargani@jhmi.edu

A significant proportion of RCCs of children and young adults bear specific
chromosome translocations that result in gene fusions that involve members of the
MiTF/TFE transcription factor family. These include the Xp11-translocation
carcinomas, which bear TFE3 gene fusions, and the renal carcinomas with the
t(6;11)(p21;q12), which bear an Alpha-TFEB gene fusion. Both types of
translocation result in overexpression of the fusion gene products, such that
nuclear labeling for TFE3 or TFEB by immunohistochemistry is a sensitive and
specific marker of these respective tumor types. The clinical behavior of these
neoplasms relative to conventional, adult-type renal carcinomas remains to be
determined, and will be an important area of future investigation.

PMID: 15848741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Am J Surg Pathol. 2005 Feb;29(2):230-40.

Renal carcinomas with the t(6;11)(p21;q12): clinicopathologic features and
demonstration of the specific alpha-TFEB gene fusion by immunohistochemistry,
RT-PCR, and DNA PCR.

Argani P(1), Laé M, Hutchinson B, Reuter VE, Collins MH, Perentesis J,
Tomaszewski JE, Brooks JS, Acs G, Bridge JA, Vargas SO, Davis IJ, Fisher DE,
Ladanyi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD,
USA.

A highly distinctive subset of renal neoplasms of children and young adults
contains a t(6;11)(p21;q12), a translocation recently been shown to result in
fusion of Alpha, a gene on 11q12, with the transcription factor gene TFEB on
6p21. To define the clinicopathologic spectrum of this nascent entity and to
establish immunohistochemical (IHC) and molecular methods for the detection of
the specific Alpha-TFEB fusion, we studied 7 renal neoplasms that showed the
t(6;11) by cytogenetic or molecular analysis (patient age: range, 9-33 years;
mean, 17 years). While all tumors were confined to the kidney, 3 tumors
demonstrated vascular invasion. In limited follow-up, none has metastasized. We
postulated that the Alpha-TFEB gene fusion may result in deregulated expression
of TFEB protein that would be detectable by IHC. Using a polyclonal antibody to
TFEB on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections, we found that all 7
renal neoplasms with the t(6;11) demonstrated moderate (2 cases) or strong (5
cases) nuclear TFEB immunoreactivity. In contrast, none of 1089 other tumors (of 
74 histologic types from 16 sites) labeled significantly for TFEB. Nuclear
immunoreactivity for TFEB in normal tissues was extremely rare, limited to weak
labeling of scattered benign lymphocytes. We also show that the Alpha-TFEB fusion
RNAs are highly variable in size and structure, making detection by
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) less reliable than for
other gene fusions. Because Alpha is an intronless gene and therefore lacks
splice signals, we hypothesized that DNA PCR and RT-PCR products would be
identical, allowing for the use of more robust molecular assays based on genomic 
DNA. Indeed, in 2 cases with available frozen tissue, we showed the genomic
Alpha-TFEB junction detected by DNA PCR to be identical to the Alpha-TFEB fusion 
mRNA detected by RT-PCR. In summary, renal neoplasms with the t(6;11) are a
distinctive neoplastic entity with many similarities to the Xp11 translocation
carcinomas, and together with the latter form a growing "MiTF/TFE family" of
translocation carcinomas. Nuclear immunoreactivity for TFEB protein is a highly
sensitive and specific diagnostic marker for these renal neoplasms. Finally, the 
special molecular features of the Alpha-TFEB gene fusion allow its molecular
detection by DNA PCR as a robust alternative to RT-PCR in clinical tumor samples.

PMID: 15644781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Annu Rev Genet. 2004;38:365-411.

Melanocytes and the microphthalmia transcription factor network.

Steingrímsson E(1), Copeland NG, Jenkins NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Iceland, 101
Reykjavik, Iceland. eirikurs@hi.is

The first mouse microphthalmia transcription factor (Mitf ) mutation was
discovered over 60 years ago, and since then over 24 spontaneous and induced
mutations have been identified at the locus. Mitf encodes a member of the Myc
supergene family of basic helix-loop-helix zipper (bHLH-Zip) transcription
factors. Like Myc, Mitf regulates gene expression by binding to DNA as a
homodimer or as a heterodimer with another related family member, in the case of 
Mitf the Tfe3, Tfeb, and Tfec proteins. The study of Mitf has provided many
insights into the biology of melanocytes and helped to explain how
melanocyte-specific gene expression and signaling is regulated. The human
homologue of MITF is mutated in patients with the pigmentary and deafness
disorder Waardenburg Syndrome Type 2A (WS2A). The mouse Mitf mutations therefore 
serve as a model for the study of this human disease. Mutations and/or aberrant
expression of several MITF family member genes have also been reported in human
cancer, including melanoma (MITF), papillary renal cell carcinoma (TFE3, TFEB),
and alveolar soft part sarcoma (TFE3). Genes in the MITF/TFE pathway may
therefore also represent valuable therapeutic targets for the treatment of human 
cancer. Here we review recent developments in the analysis of Mitf function in
vivo and in vitro and show how traditional genetics, modern forward genetics and 
in vitro biochemical analyses have combined to produce an intriguing story on the
role and actions of a gene family in a living organism.

PMID: 15568981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 7;280(1):146-55. Epub 2004 Oct 25.

Sumoylation of MITF and its related family members TFE3 and TFEB.

Miller AJ(1), Levy C, Davis IJ, Razin E, Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric 
Hematology/Oncology, Melanoma Program in Medical Oncology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

MITF and its related family members TFE3 and TFEB heterodimerize with each other,
recognize the same DNA sequences, and are subject to many of the same
post-translational modifications. We show that lysine residues within conserved
small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) consensus sites in these family members are 
subject to SUMO modification. Mutation of these sites significantly affects the
transcriptional activity of MITF but does not alter dimerization, DNA binding,
stability, or nuclear localization. Mutagenesis reducing the number of MITF
binding sites in the promoter of TRPM1 from three to one eliminated the
difference in transcriptional activity between the MITF mutants. Among other MITF
target gene promoter constructs, differences in transcriptional activity between 
wild type and non-sumoylatable MITF were only seen in promoters with multiple
MITF binding sites. These data support a synergy control model in which the
functional consequences of MITF sumoylation depend on promoter context.
Sumoylation, thus, provides a possible mechanism for altering the effects of MITF
by affecting the target genes that it activates.

PMID: 15507434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Mol Carcinog. 2004 Sep;41(1):1-16.

Changes in the DNA methylation profile of the rat H19 gene upstream region during
development and transgenic hepatocarcinogenesis and its role in the imprinted
transcriptional regulation of the H19 gene.

Manoharan H(1), Babcock K, Pitot HC.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, Medical School, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53706-1599, USA.

Monoallelic expression of the imprinted H19 and insulin-like growth factor-2
(Igf2) genes depends on the hypomethylation of the maternal allele and
hypermethylation of the paternal allele of the H19 upstream region. Previous
studies from our laboratory on liver carcinogenesis in the F1 hybrid of Fischer
344 (F344) and Sprague-Dawley Alb SV40 T Ag transgenic rat (SD) strains revealed 
the biallelic expression of H19 in hepatomas. We undertook a comparative study of
the DNA methylation status of the upstream region of H19 in fetal, adult, and
neoplastic liver. Bisulfite DNA sequencing analysis of a 3.745-kb DNA segment
extending from 2950 to 6695 bp of the H19 upstream region revealed marked
variations in the methylation patterns in fetal, adult, and neoplastic liver. In 
the fetal liver, equal proportions of hyper- and hypomethylated strands revealed 
the differentially methylated status of the parental alleles, but in neoplastic
liver a pronounced change in the pattern of methylation was observed with a
distinct change to hypomethylation in the short segments between 2984 and 3301
bp, 6033-6123 bp, and 6518-6548 bp. These results indicated that methylation of
all cytosines in this region may contribute to the imprinting status of the rat
H19 gene. This phenomenon of differential methylation-related epigenetic
alteration in the key cis-regulatory domains of the H19 promoter influences
switching to biallelic expression in hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Similar to
mouse and human, we showed that the zinc-finger CCTCC binding factor (CTCF) binds
to the unmethylated CTCF binding site in the upstream region to influence
monoallelic imprinted expression in fetal liver. CTCF does not appear to be rate 
limiting in fetal, normal, and neoplastic liver. 3' to the CTCF binding sites,
another DNA region exhibits methylation of CpG's in both DNA strands in adult
liver, retention of the imprint in fetal liver, and complete demethylation in
neoplastic liver. In this region is also a putative binding site for a basic
helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper transcription factor, TFEB. The differential CpG 
methylation seen in the adult that involves the TFEB binding site may explain the
lack of expression of the H19 gene in adult normal liver. Furthermore, these
findings demonstrate that the loss of imprinting of the H19 gene in hepatic
neoplasms of the SD Alb SV40 T Ag transgenic rat is directly correlated with and 
probably the result of differential methylation of CpG dinucleotides in two
distinct regions of the gene that are within 4 kb 5' of the transcription start
site. Cytogenetic analysis of hepatocytes in the transgenic animal prior to the
appearance of nodules or neoplasms indicates a role of such loss of imprinting in
the very early period of neoplastic development, possibly the transition from the
stage of promotion to that of progression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15352122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Ethnopharmacol. 2004 Sep;94(1):101-7.

Protective effect of total flavones from Elsholtzia blanda (TFEB) on myocardial
ischemia induced by coronary occlusion in canines.

Haiyun L(1), Yijia L, Honggang L, Honghai W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310031, PR China.

This study was undertaken to determine the effect of total flavones from
Elsholtzia blanda (Benth.) Benth. (TFEB), a traditional Chinese medicine, on
myocardial ischemia induced by coronary occlusion in Beagle dogs. Infarct size of
left ventricle, serum activity of creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) and malondialdehyde 
(MDA), hemorrheologic variables and homodynamic parameters including mean
arterial pressure (MAP), coronary blood flow (CBF), coronary vascular resistance 
(CVR), end-diastolic pressure of left ventricle (LVEDP), rate of rise and decline
of left ventricular pressure (+/-dp/dtmax) were measured in this study.
Administration with TFEB produced a dose-dependent reduction in infarct size.
TFEB 100 mg/kg exerted notable inhibition in the elevation of serum CK-MB and MDA
activity. TFEB significantly reduced MAP and CVR. The decrease in CBF also tended
to be smaller in treated dogs. TFEB improved the recovery of myocardial function 
by depressing the degree of reduction in +/-dp/dtmax and LVEDP. TFEB also showed 
a capacity to resist ischemic damage through lowering blood viscosity. The
results indicated that TFEB kept heart from ischemic damage due to coronary
occlusion in Beagle dogs.

PMID: 15261969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Genetics. 2004 May;167(1):233-41.

The basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factor Mitf is conserved 
in Drosophila and functions in eye development.

Hallsson JH(1), Haflidadóttir BS, Stivers C, Odenwald W, Arnheiter H, Pignoni F, 
Steingrímsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Iceland, 101 Reykjavík, Iceland.

The MITF protein is a member of the MYC family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine 
zipper (bHLH-Zip) transcription factors and is most closely related to the TFE3, 
TFEC, and TFEB proteins. In the mouse, MITF is required for the development of
several different cell types, including the retinal pigment epithelial (RPE)
cells of the eye. In Mitf mutant mice, the presumptive RPE cells
hyperproliferate, abnormally express the retinal transcriptional regulator Pax6, 
and form an ectopic neural retina. Here we report the structure of the Mitf gene 
in Drosophila and demonstrate expression during embryonic development and in the 
eye-antennal imaginal disc. In vitro, transcriptional regulation by Drosophila
Mitf, like its mouse counterpart, is modified by the Eyeless (Drosophila Pax6)
transcription factor. In vivo, targeted expression of wild-type or
dominant-negative Drosophila Mitf results in developmental abnormalities
reminiscent of Mitf function in mouse eye development. Our results suggest that
the Mitf gene is the original member of the Mitf-Tfe subfamily of bHLH-Zip
proteins and that its developmental function is at least partially conserved
between vertebrates and invertebrates. These findings further support the common 
origin of the vertebrate and invertebrate eyes.

PMCID: PMC1470875
PMID: 15166150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Apr 26;32(8):2315-22. Print 2004.

Regulation of the MiTF/TFE bHLH-LZ transcription factors through restricted
spatial expression and alternative splicing of functional domains.

Kuiper RP(1), Schepens M, Thijssen J, Schoenmakers EF, van Kessel AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Nijmegen, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.

The MiTF/TFE (MiT) family of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription 
factors is composed of four closely related members, MiTF, TFE3, TFEB and TFEC,
which can bind target DNA both as homo- or heterodimers. Using real-time RT-PCR, 
we have analyzed the relative expression levels of the four members in a broad
range of human tissues, and found that their ratio of expression is
tissue-dependent. We found that, similar to the MiTF gene, the genes for TFEB and
TFEC contain multiple alternative first exons with restricted and differential
tissue distributions. Seven alternative 5' exons were identified in the TFEB
gene, of which three displayed specific expression in placenta and brain,
respectively. A novel TFEC transcript (TFEC-C) encodes an N-terminally truncated 
TFEC isoform lacking the acidic activation domain (AAD), and is exclusively
expressed in kidney and small intestine. Furthermore, we observed that a
considerable proportion of the TFEC transcripts splice out protein-coding exons, 
resulting in transcription factor isoforms lacking one or more functional
domains, primarily the basic region and/or the AAD. These isoforms were always
co-expressed with the intact transcription factors and may act as negative
regulators of MiTF/TFE proteins. Our data reveal that multiple levels of
regulation exist for the MiTF/TFE family of transcription factors, which
indicates how these transcription factors may participate in various cellular
processes in different tissues.

PMCID: PMC419459
PMID: 15118077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zhong Yao Cai. 2003 Dec;26(12):878-80.

[Experimental research on total flavone from Elsholtzia blanda against xiongbi
symptom].

[Article in Chinese]

Lou H(1), He Q, Wu H, Lou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310009, Pharmacy College, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310031.

OBJECTIVE: To study the protective effect and mechanism of total flavone from
Elsholtzia blanda (TFEB) on Xiongbi symptom induced by coronary artery ligation
in rats.
METHODS: The left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) of male rat was
ligated for 3 h after feeding TFEB or 0.5% CMC for 5 d by ig. Then, the rats were
decollated and the left ventricle were dyed by nitrotetrazolum blue chloride(NBT)
to distinguish infraction area from non-infraction area. Myocardial infarction
index was calculated accordingly to assess the effect of TFEB on myocardial
ischemia. A piece of ventricular muscle come from apex of heart was dyed by
hematoxylin and eosin (HE) to observe the degree of myocardial lesions by
microscopic examination. Nitric oxide (NO) level in serum was measured to
demonstrate the relevant mechanism.
RESULTS: TFEB could markedly reduce the myocardial infraction index in a
dose-dependent fashion (P < 0.05-0.01). Microscopic examination showed that the
myocardium of sham group had no lesion in morphology and the muscle fiber kept
integrity and the cardiac myocyte lined up in order. While control group
displayed extensive swelling, rupture, confluent, even break in cardiac myocyte. 
TFEB could relieve the lesion degree of myocardium. NO level in serum after LAD
ligation in TFEB 100 and 150 mg/kg groups was markedly reduced(P < 0.05-0.01).
CONCLUSION: TFEB has protective effect on myocardial ischemia induced by LAD
ligation in rats and can prevent against Xiongbi symptom, possibly via the
decrease of NO level in serum.

PMID: 15058209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Jul 15;12(14):1661-9.

Upregulation of the transcription factor TFEB in t(6;11)(p21;q13)-positive renal 
cell carcinomas due to promoter substitution.

Kuiper RP(1), Schepens M, Thijssen J, van Asseldonk M, van den Berg E, Bridge J, 
Schuuring E, Schoenmakers EF, van Kessel AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Nijmegen, PO Box 9101,
6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. r.kuiper@antrg.umcn.nl

The MITF/TFE subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper (bHLH-LZ)
transcription factors consists of four closely related members, TFE3, TFEB, TFEC 
and MITF, which can form both homo- and heterodimers. Previously, we demonstrated
that in t(X;1)(p11;q21)-positive renal cell carcinomas (RCCs), the TFE3 gene on
the X chromosome is disrupted and fused to the PRCC gene on chromosome 1. Here we
show that in t(6;11)(p21;q13)-positive RCCs the TFEB gene on chromosome 6 is
fused to the Alpha gene on chromosome 11. The AlphaTFEB fusion gene appears to
contain all coding exons of the TFEB gene linked to 5' upstream regulatory
sequences of the Alpha gene. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that AlphaTFEB
mRNA levels are up to 60-fold upregulated in primary tumor cells as compared with
wild-type TFEB mRNA levels in normal kidney samples, resulting in a dramatic
upregulation of TFEB protein levels. Additional transfection studies revealed
that the TFEB protein encoded by the AlphaTFEB fusion gene is efficiently
targeted to the nucleus. Based on these results we conclude that the
RCC-associated t(6;11)(p21;q13) translocation leads to a dramatic transcriptional
and translational upregulation of TFEB due to promoter substitution, thereby
severely unbalancing the nuclear ratios of the MITF/TFE subfamily members. We
speculate that this imbalance may lead to changes in the expression of downstream
target genes, ultimately resulting in the development of RCC. Moreover, since
this is the second MITF/TFE transcription factor that is involved in RCC
development, our findings point towards a concept in which this bHLH-LZ subfamily
may play a critical role in the regulation of (aberrant) renal cellular growth.

PMID: 12837690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 May 13;100(10):6051-6. Epub 2003 Apr 28.

Cloning of an Alpha-TFEB fusion in renal tumors harboring the t(6;11)(p21;q13)
chromosome translocation.

Davis IJ(1), Hsi BL, Arroyo JD, Vargas SO, Yeh YA, Motyckova G, Valencia P,
Perez-Atayde AR, Argani P, Ladanyi M, Fletcher JA, Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

MITF, TFE3, TFEB, and TFEC comprise a transcription factor family (MiT) that
regulates key developmental pathways in several cell lineages. Like MYC, MiT
members are basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcription factors. MiT
members share virtually perfect homology in their DNA binding domains and bind a 
common DNA motif. Translocations of TFE3 occur in specific subsets of human renal
cell carcinomas and in alveolar soft part sarcomas. Although multiple
translocation partners are fused to TFE3, each translocation product retains
TFE3's basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper. We have identified the genes fused 
by the chromosomal translocation t(6;11)(p21.1;q13), characteristic of another
subset of renal neoplasms. In two primary tumors we found that Alpha, an
intronless gene, rearranges with the first intron of TFEB, just upstream of
TFEB's initiation ATG, preserving the entire TFEB coding sequence. Fluorescence
in situ hybridization confirmed the involvement of both TFEB and Alpha in this
translocation. Although the Alpha promoter drives expression of this fusion gene,
the Alpha gene does not contribute to the ORF. Whereas TFE3 is typically fused to
partner proteins in subsets of renal tumors, we found that wild-type, unfused
TFE3 stimulates clonogenic growth in a cell-based assay, suggesting that
dysregulated expression, rather than altered function of TFEB or TFE3 fusions,
may confer neoplastic properties, a mechanism reminiscent of MYC activation by
promoter substitution in Burkitt's lymphoma. Alpha-TFEB is thus identified as a
fusion gene in a subset of pediatric renal neoplasms.

PMCID: PMC156324
PMID: 12719541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 28;278(13):11227-36. Epub 2003 Jan 27.

Both Max and TFE3 cooperate with Smad proteins to bind the plasminogen activator 
inhibitor-1 promoter, but they have opposite effects on transcriptional activity.

Grinberg AV(1), Kerppola T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta regulates gene expression in large part
through combinatorial interactions between members of the Smad family and other
transcription factors. The basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLHZIP)
protein TFE3 and Smad3 synergistically activate transcription of the plasminogen 
activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) as well as other genes. We investigated
interactions among different bHLHZIP and Smad family proteins. TFE3, TFEB, and
Max associated with Smad3 and Smad4 in the absence of DNA and at the PE2.1
element of the PAI-1 promoter. These interactions were mediated by the leucine
zipper and MH1 regions of the respective proteins. No interactions were observed 
with the E47 bHLH family protein. Chimeric proteins, in which leucine zippers
from bHLHZIP or bZIP proteins were fused to heterologous bHLH domains, associated
with Smad proteins both in the absence of DNA and at the PE2.1 element. The
kinetics of bHLHZIP and Smad protein binding at the PE2.1 element were examined
using surface plasmon resonance analysis. TFE3 exhibited cooperative DNA binding 
with Smad proteins, whereas no cooperativity was observed between E47 and Smads. 
Max inhibited transcription activation by Smad3 and TGF-beta at the PAI-1
promoter, whereas TFE3 and TFEB stimulated transcription activation. These
results suggest that Smad family proteins can interact with several bHLHZIP
proteins, resulting in different transcriptional outcomes.

PMID: 12551947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4477-82.

Mitf and Tfe3, two members of the Mitf-Tfe family of bHLH-Zip transcription
factors, have important but functionally redundant roles in osteoclast
development.

Steingrimsson E(1), Tessarollo L, Pathak B, Hou L, Arnheiter H, Copeland NG,
Jenkins NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Iceland, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland. eirikurs@hi.is

The Mitf-Tfe family of basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-Zip)
transcription factors encodes four family members: Mitf, Tfe3, Tfeb, and Tfec. In
vitro, each protein in the family can bind DNA as a homo- or heterodimer with
other family members. Mutational studies in mice have shown that Mitf is
essential for melanocyte and eye development, whereas Tfeb is required for
placental vascularization. Here, we uncover a role for Tfe3 in osteoclast
development, a role that is functionally redundant with Mitf. Although
osteoclasts seem normal in Mitf or Tfe3 null mice, the combined loss of the two
genes results in severe osteopetrosis. We also show that Tfec mutant mice are
phenotypically normal, and that the Tfec mutation does not alter the phenotype of
Mitf, Tfeb, or Tfe3 mutant mice. Surprisingly, our studies failed to identify any
phenotypic overlap between the different Mitf-Tfe mutations. These results
suggest that heterodimeric interactions are not essential for Mitf-Tfe function
in contrast to other bHLH-Zip families like Myc/Max/Mad, where heterodimeric
interactions seem to be essential.

PMCID: PMC123673
PMID: 11930005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 8;98(10):5798-803. Epub 2001 May 1.

Linking osteopetrosis and pycnodysostosis: regulation of cathepsin K expression
by the microphthalmia transcription factor family.

Motyckova G(1), Weilbaecher KN, Horstmann M, Rieman DJ, Fisher DZ, Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 8;98(10):5385-6.

Various genetic conditions produce dysfunctional osteoclasts resulting in
osteopetrosis or osteosclerosis. These include human pycnodysostosis, an
autosomal recessive syndrome caused by cathepsin K mutation, cathepsin
K-deficient mice, and mitf mutant rodent strains. Cathepsin K is a highly
expressed cysteine protease in osteoclasts that plays an essential role in the
degradation of protein components of bone matrix. Cathepsin K also is expressed
in a significant fraction of human breast cancers where it could contribute to
tumor invasiveness. Mitf is a member of a helix-loop-helix transcription factor
subfamily, which contains the potential dimerization partners TFE3, TFEB, and
TFEC. In mice, dominant negative, but not recessive, mutations of mitf, produce
osteopetrosis, suggesting a functional requirement for other family members. Mitf
also has been found-and TFE3 has been suggested-to modulate age-dependent changes
in osteoclast function. This study identifies cathepsin K as a transcriptional
target of Mitf and TFE3 via three consensus elements in the cathepsin K promoter.
Additionally, cathepsin K mRNA and protein were found to be deficient in mitf
mutant osteoclasts, and overexpression of wild-type Mitf dramatically
up-regulated expression of endogenous cathepsin K in cultured human osteoclasts. 
Cathepsin K promoter activity was disrupted by dominant negative, but not
recessive, mouse alleles of mitf in a pattern that closely matches their
osteopetrotic phenotypes. This relationship between cathepsin K and the Mitf
family helps explain the phenotypic overlap of their corresponding deficiencies
in pycnodysostosis and osteopetrosis and identifies likely regulators of
cathepsin K expression in bone homeostasis and human malignancy.

PMCID: PMC33293
PMID: 11331755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Mar;14(3):449-56.

TFE3, a transcription factor homologous to microphthalmia, is a potential
transcriptional activator of tyrosinase and TyrpI genes.

Verastegui C(1), Bertolotto C, Bille K, Abbe P, Ortonne JP, Ballotti R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U385, Faculté de
Médecine, Nice, France.

Microphthalmia gene encodes a basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (bHLH-Zip)
transcription factor involved in the development of the melanocyte lineage and
plays a key role in the transcriptional regulation of the melanogenic enzymes,
tyrosinase and TyrpI. Recently, we have shown that Microphthalmia mediates the
melanogenic effects elicited by alphaMSH that up-regulates the expression of
tyrosinase through the activation of the cAMP pathway. Therefore, Microphthalmia 
appears as a principal gene in melanocyte development and functioning. Among the 
transcription factors of the bHLH-Zip family, TFE3 and TFEB show a remarkably
elevated homology with Microphthalmia. These observations prompted us to
investigate the role of TFE3 and TFEB in the regulation of tyrosinase and TyrpI
gene transcription. We show in this report that overexpression of TFE3 stimulates
the tyrosinase and TyrpI promoter activities, while TFEB acts only on the TyrpI
promoter. TFE3 and TFEB elicit their effects mainly through the binding to Mbox
(AGTCATGTGCT) and Ebox motifs (CATGTG) of tyrosinase and TyrpI promoters. In B16 
melanoma cells, the high basal expression of TFE3 is down-regulated by forskolin 
and by alphaMSH. Interestingly, endogenous TFE3 cannot bind as homodimers to the 
Mbox, and we did not detect TFE3/Mi heterodimers. According to these data, TFE3
is clearly endowed with the capacity to regulate tyrosinase and TyrpI gene
expression. However, TFE3 binding to the melanogenic gene promoters is hindered, 
thereby preventing its potential melanogenic action. In specific physiological or
pathological conditions, the recovery of its binding function would make TFE3 an 
important element in melanogenesis regulation.

PMID: 10707962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Genomics. 1999 Feb 15;56(1):111-20.

Cloning and characterization of the murine genes for bHLH-ZIP transcription
factors TFEC and TFEB reveal a common gene organization for all MiT subfamily
members.

Rehli M(1), Den Elzen N, Cassady AI, Ostrowski MC, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Q4072, Australia.

The microphthalmia-TFE (MiT) subfamily of basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper
(bHLH-ZIP) transcription factors, including TFE3, TFEB, TFEC, and Mitf, has been 
implicated in the regulation of tissue-specific gene expression in several cell
lineages. In this report, we investigate the genomic organization and structural 
relatedness of MiT transcription factors. We characterized the gene for mTFEC,
which covers a region of more than 50 kb and is composed of seven exons. Further,
we cloned a cDNA for the murine TFEB homologue and characterized its genomic
structure. The eight coding exons of mTFEB are distributed over a 6-kb region. A 
multiple alignment of amino acid sequences of known MiT subfamily members
indicates undescribed, conserved N-terminal regions and common putative
phosphorylation sites for TFE3, TFEB, and Mitf. Also, intron-exon borders for
characterized MiT genes appear completely conserved. A new family member and
closely related putative transcription factor in Caenorhabditis elegans was
identified by database searches that show a similar genomic organization within
the bHLH-ZIP region and the acidic domain. Evolutionary aspects and implications 
for structure-function relationships are discussed.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10036191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Immunol. 1999 Feb 1;162(3):1559-65.

TFEC is a macrophage-restricted member of the microphthalmia-TFE subfamily of
basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper transcription factors.

Rehli M(1), Lichanska A, Cassady AI, Ostrowski MC, Hume DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

The murine homologue of the TFEC was cloned as part of an analysis of the
expression of the microphthalmia-TFE (MiT) subfamily of transcription factors in 
macrophages. TFEC, which most likely acts as a transcriptional repressor in
heterodimers with other MiT family members, was identified in cells of the
mononuclear phagocyte lineage, coexpressed with all other known MiT subfamily
members (Mitf, TFE3, TFEB). Northern blot analysis of several different cell
lineages indicated that the expression of murine TFEC (mTFEC) was restricted to
macrophages. A 600-bp fragment of the TATA-less putative proximal promoter of
TFEC shares features with many known macrophage-specific promoters and
preferentially directs luciferase expression in the RAW264.7 macrophage cell line
in transient transfection assays. Five of six putative Ets motifs identified in
the TFEC promoter bind the macrophage-restricted transcription factor PU.1 under 
in vitro conditions and in transfected 3T3 fibroblasts; the minimal luciferase
activity of the TFEC promoter could be induced by coexpression of PU.1 or the
related transcription factor Ets-2. The functional importance of the
tissue-restricted expression of TFEC and a possible role in macrophage-specific
gene regulation require further investigation, but are likely to be linked to the
role of the other MiT family members in this lineage.

PMID: 9973413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 1998 Dec;125(23):4607-16.

The bHLH-Zip transcription factor Tfeb is essential for placental
vascularization.

Steingrímsson E(1), Tessarollo L, Reid SW, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory and Neural Development Group, ABL-Basic Research
Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center, Frederick, MD
21702-1201, USA. eirikurs@rhi.hi.is

Tfeb is a member of the basic Helix-Loop-Helix-Zipper family of transcription
factors. In vitro studies have shown that TFEB can bind DNA as a homodimer or as 
a heterodimer with three closely related family members: MITF, TFE3 and TFEC.
While mutations of Mitf have been shown to affect the development of a number of 
cell types including melanocytes, osteoclasts, and masts cells, little is known
about the phenotypic consequences of mutations at Tfe3, Tfeb and Tfec. Here we
show that mice with a targeted disruption of Tfeb die between 9.5 and 10.5 days
in embryonic development and have severe defects in placental vascularization.
Tfeb is expressed at low levels in the embryo but at high levels in the
labyrinthine trophoblast cells of the placenta. While labyrinthine cells are
present in the mutant Tfeb placenta, they fail to express VEGF, a potent mitogen 
required for normal vasculogenesis of the embryo and extraembryonic tissues. In
Tfeb mutant embryos the embryonic vasculature forms normally but few vessels are 
seen entering the placenta and those that do enter fail to thrive and branch
normally. Our results indicate that Tfeb plays a critical role in the signal
transduction processes required for normal vascularization of the placenta.

PMID: 9806910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jun 29;247(3):710-5.

Identification of a novel isoform of microphthalmia-associated transcription
factor that is enriched in retinal pigment epithelium.

Amae S(1), Fuse N, Yasumoto K, Sato S, Yajima I, Yamamoto H, Udono T, Durlu YK,
Tamai M, Takahashi K, Shibahara S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Applied Physiology, Tohoku University
School of Medicine, Miyagi, Japan.

Mutations at the mouse locus encoding microphthalmia-associated transcription
factor (Mitf) affect the development of many cell types, including retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE), melanocytes, mast cells, and osteoclasts. Here we have 
identified a novel Mitf isoform, Mitf-a, and its human homologue MITF-A by cDNA
cloning. MITF-A consists of 520 amino acid residues and differs in the
amino-terminus from authentic melanocyte-type MITF (MITF-M). MITF-A mRNA is
widely expressed and represents a predominant MITF isoform in cultured RPE cells,
whereas MITF-M mRNA is exclusively expressed in melanocytes and melanoma cells.
In situ hybridization analysis suggested that Mitf-a mRNA is enriched in the
prospective RPE of mouse embryo. Moreover, transient cotransfection assays
suggested that MITF-A activated transcription of the tyrosinase and
tyrosinase-related protein 1 genes. MITF-A/Mitf-a therefore may play an important
role in melanogenesis in RPE.

PMID: 9647758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jun;212(2):267-76.

Gene trap integrations expressed in the developing heart: insertion site affects 
splicing of the PT1-ATG vector.

McClive P(1), Pall G, Newton K, Lee M, Mullins J, Forrester L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genome Research, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, United Kingdom.

We describe the characterisation of three gene trap integrations in embryonic
stem cells in which the lacZ reporter gene is repressed by retinoic acid (RA) in 
vitro and is expressed in the developing heart in vivo. In one of these, the gene
trap vector has integrated into a gene that is located on chromosome 17 and is
homologous to the human transcription factor gene, TFEB. Embryonic and adult
cardiac expression of both the fusion transcript and the endogenous gene was
confirmed. However, we show that the integration has not resulted in a null
allele, because wild type transcripts, possibly resulting from splicing around
the vector, are observed in homozygous tissue. The other two cardiac-expressing
gene trap integrations have occurred into exons on chromosomes 1 and 5 and have
used cryptic donor sites within the vector to generate functional fusion
transcripts. One of these exon integrations results in a lethal neonatal
phenotype.

PMID: 9626501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Biochemistry. 1998 Apr 28;37(17):6015-22.

Recognition properties of a sequence-specific DNA binding antibody.

LeBlanc JF(1), McLane KE, Parren PW, Burton DR, Ghazal P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

A sequence-specific DNA-binding antibody was previously generated by
incorporating a 17 amino acid alpha-helix from the DNA-binding domain of the
transcription factor TFEB into the HCDR3 site of a recombinant human Fab
fragment. The recombinant DNA-binding antibody, called Fab-E box, binds the TFEB 
recognition sequence CACGTG (an E box site) with a 5-10-fold lower affinity than 
TFEB. Here, we have determined the precise kinetics of interaction of Fab-E box
with DNA and show that the lower affinity of Fab-E box relative to TFEB for E box
DNA is due to a higher dissociation rate. DNase I protection assays show Fab-E
box physically interacts with one half-site of the E box. Additional DNA target
sites of Fab-E box were identified by DNase I protection assays. A compilation of
these binding sites indicates that the recognition elements for Fab-E box binding
include a half-site of the E box, CAW, with an 8 bp consensus sequence identified
as YNYYCAWW. Thus, the DNA determinants for Fab-E box recognition extend beyond
one-half site of the E box sequence, with preferences for pyrimidines and
A+T-rich sequences in the 5' and 3' outer regions of the binding site,
respectively. Apparent dissociation constants of Fab-E box for a subset of these 
target DNA sequences are 5-10-fold greater than the DNA-binding affinity of the
antibody with the E box site. Therefore, these results identify important DNA
specificity determinants for high-affinity binding by Fab-E box.

PMID: 9558339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Aug 6;93(16):8536-40.

Sin3 corepressor function in Myc-induced transcription and transformation.

Harper SE(1), Qiu Y, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA.

Many basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (b-HLH-LZ) proteins, including the Myc
family and non-Myc family, bind a common DNA sequence CACGTG, yet have quite
different biological actions. Myc binds this sequence as a heterodimer with Max
in the activation of both transcription and transformation. The Myc family
members Mad and Mxi1 are known to suppress Myc-induced transcription and
transformation and to dimerize with Max to form ternary complexes with the
mammalian Sin3 transcriptional corepressor (mSin3). The b-HLH-LZ domain of TFEB, 
which cannot heterodimerize within the Myc family, does not suppress Myc-induced 
transcription or transformation. However, transfer of a 25- to 36-aa region from 
Mad or Mxi1, which interacts with mSin3, to the b-HLH-LZ of TFEB, mediated
profound suppression of Myc-induced transcription and transformation. These
results suggest that the DNA binding specificities of the Myc family and non-Myc 
family b-HLH-LZ proteins, in the context of the cellular genes involved in
Myc-induced transformation, are shared. The results also demonstrate that
targeting mSin3 to CACGTG sites via a non-Myc family DNA binding domain is
sufficient to oppose Myc activity in growth regulation.

PMCID: PMC38707
PMID: 8710905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Oct 11;23(19):3865-71.

TFE3 contains two activation domains, one acidic and the other proline-rich, that
synergistically activate transcription.

Artandi SE(1), Merrell K, Avitahl N, Wong KK, Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

TFE3 is a basic-helix-loop-helix-zipper (bHLHZIP) domain-containing protein that 
binds mu E3 sites in regulatory elements in the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene. 
The protein is a transcriptional activator that is expressed in vivo as two
alternately spliced isoforms with different activating properties: TFE3L contains
an N-terminal acidic activation domain; TFE3S lacks this activation domain and is
a dominant negative inhibitor of TFE3L. We show that TFE3L and TFE3S contain a
second, C-terminal activation domain rich in proline residues. This pro-rich
activation domain has activity in a Gal4 fusion assay comparable to the
N-terminal acidic activation domain present in TFE3L. The TFE3 pro-rich
activation domain contains regions of strong homology with the related proteins
microphthalmia and TFEB, suggesting that these regions are important for
function. Using two different assays, we show that the N- and C-terminal
activation domains of TFE3 act synergistically. This synergism explains in part
the ability of TFE3S to act as a dominant negative. Our domain analysis of TFE3
is incorporated into a general structural model for the TFE3 protein that
predicts that the activation domains of TFE3 will be widely separated in space.

PMCID: PMC307303
PMID: 7479029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 May 23;92(11):5214-8.

Transplantation of a 17-amino acid alpha-helical DNA-binding domain into an
antibody molecule confers sequence-dependent DNA recognition.

McLane KE(1), Burton DR, Ghazal P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Recombinant antibodies capable of sequence-specific interactions with nucleic
acids represent a class of DNA- and RNA-binding proteins with potential for broad
application in basic research and medicine. We describe the rational design of a 
DNA-binding antibody, Fab-Ebox, by replacing a variable segment of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain with a 17-amino acid domain derived from TFEB, a class
B basic helix-loop-helix protein. DNA-binding activity was studied by
electrophoretic mobility-shift assays in which Fab-Ebox was shown to form a
specific complex with DNA containing the TFEB recognition motif (CACGTG).
Similarities were found in the abilities of TFEB and Fab-Ebox to discriminate
between oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing altered recognition sequences.
Comparable interference of binding by methylation of cytosine residues indicated 
that Fab-Ebox and TFEB both contact DNA through interactions along the major
groove of double-stranded DNA. The results of this study indicate that
DNA-binding antibodies of high specificity can be developed by using the modular 
nature of both immunoglobulins and transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC41879
PMID: 7761476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Gene Expr. 1995;4(6):311-7.

Structural constraints for DNA recognition by Myc and other b-HLH-ZIP proteins:
design of oncoprotein analogues.

Takemoto C(1), Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

DNA recognition is a critical property of many transcription factors, some of
which play important roles in human disease. Disruption of this recognition may
profoundly influence the biology of these factors. One such factor, the Myc
oncoprotein, utilizes a basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper motif to recognize 
the DNA target CACGTG. As discussed here, this recognition appears to occur
through recognition by one face of a basic region alpha helix utilizing amino
acid side chains highly conserved among CACGTG binding proteins. This basic
domain alpha helix, however, requires DNA binding for stabilization. To
circumvent this energetic requirement, analogues were produced that introduce
multiple alanines, displaying substantially increased spontaneous alpha helicity 
and significantly enhanced DNA affinity. These studies simplify our understanding
of the structural constraints for DNA recognition by this family and may serve as
a template for the design of small molecule transcription-targeted therapeutics.

PMID: 7549463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Dec;14(12):7704-16.

The basic helix-loop-helix-zipper domain of TFE3 mediates enhancer-promoter
interaction.

Artandi SE(1), Cooper C, Shrivastava A, Calame K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, New York 10032.

Binding sites for three families of sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins,
microE3, C/EBP, and OCT, are found in both the promoters and the intronic
enhancer of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene. We have used a cotransfection
system to investigate how proteins binding these sites may participate in
enhancer-promoter interactions. Basic helix-loop-helix-zipper (BHLHZIP) proteins 
TFE3 and TFEB activate from a distance in this assay, but the basic zipper (BZIP)
protein NF-IL6 and endogenous OCT-binding proteins do not. Our results suggest
that remotely bound TFE3 is recruited to the initiation site by association with 
proximally bound TFE3; this interaction is mediated by the BHLHZIP domain and not
by activation domains of TFE3. The BZIP domain of Ig/EBP lacks this activity,
revealing an important functional difference between these structurally related
dimerization domains. We also show that TFE3 can exist as a tetramer in solution 
and that tetramerization is determined by the HLHZIP domain. These data support a
model in which protein-protein interactions between proximally and remotely bound
TFE3 recruit TFE3 to the initiation site for activation. The IgH gene is the
first example of a cellular gene in which proximal and distal binding sites are
found for a protein capable of mediating enhancer-promoter interaction.

PMCID: PMC359312
PMID: 7969114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Genes Dev. 1994 Nov 15;8(22):2770-80.

microphthalmia, a critical factor in melanocyte development, defines a discrete
transcription factor family.

Hemesath TJ(1), Steingrímsson E, McGill G, Hansen MJ, Vaught J, Hodgkinson CA,
Arnheiter H, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Fisher DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts.

The microphthalmia (mi) gene appears essential for pigment cell development
and/or survival, based on its mutation in mi mice. It has also been linked to the
human disorder Waardenburg Syndrome. The mi gene was recently cloned and predicts
a basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (b-HLH-ZIP) factor with tissue-restricted
expression. Here, we show that Mi protein binds DNA as a homo- or heterodimer
with TFEB, TFE3, or TFEC, together constituting a new MiT family. Mi can also
activate transcription through recognition of the M box, a highly conserved
pigmentation gene promoter element, and may thereby determine tissue-specific
expression of pigmentation enzymes. Six mi mutations shown recently to cluster in
the b-HLH-ZIP region produce surprising and instructive effects on DNA
recognition and oligomerization. An alternatively spliced exon located outside of
the b-HLH-ZIP region is shown to significantly modulate DNA recognition by the
basic domain. These findings suggest that Mi's critical roles in melanocyte
survival and pigmentation are mediated by MiT family interactions and
transcriptional activities.

PMID: 7958932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biochemistry. 1994 Sep 20;33(37):11296-306.

The dimerization stability of the HLH-LZ transcription protein family is
modulated by the leucine zippers: a CD and NMR study of TFEB and c-Myc.

Muhle-Goll C(1), Gibson T, Schuck P, Schubert D, Nalis D, Nilges M, Pastore A.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.

In the HLH-LZ protein family, the helix-loop-helix DNA-binding dimerization
domain is followed in the sequence by a leucine zipper motif. The precise
function of this second dimerization domain is still unclear, since the HLH motif
of a subset of this family has been shown to be necessary and sufficient for
dimerization. However, deletion and mutagenesis studies of the leucine zipper in 
various HLH-LZ proteins have shown a clear influence of this motif on homo- and
heterodimerization. In this paper, we present a structural characterization of
synthetic peptides encompassing the leucine zipper sequences of c-Myc and TFEB,
using circular dichroism, analytical ultracentrifugation, and nuclear magnetic
resonance. We show that the different ability of the synthetic leucine zippers of
c-Myc and TFEB to homodimerize at neutral pH reflects the different dimerization 
properties reported for the entire proteins. The TFEB protein is known to form
homodimers. c-Myc, on the other hand, does not homodimerize in vivo, but is
mostly found in heterodimeric complexes with Max, another protein of the HLH-LZ
family. Accordingly, our results show that the TFEB peptide homodimerizes at
neutral pH whereas the Myc peptide dimerizes to a comparable amount only at
acidic pH and high ionic strength. Both synthetic peptides are far less stable
than leucine zippers of the b-ZIP family. The relative stability of the two
leucine zippers and the factors which stabilize the dimer formation are
discussed.

PMID: 7727380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 25;21(17):4133-41.

Mutational analysis of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae general regulatory factor
CP1.

Masison DC(1), O'Connell KF, Baker RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester 01655.

The Saccharomyces cerevisiae general regulatory factor CP1, a helix-loop-helix
protein that binds the centromere DNA element I (CDEI) of yeast centromeres, is
required in yeast for optimal centromere function and for methionine prototrophy.
Mutant alleles of CEP1, the gene encoding CP1, were generated by linker
insertion, 5'- and 3'-deletion, and random mutagenesis and assayed for DNA
binding activity and their ability to confer CP1 function when expressed in
yeast. A heterologous CDEI-binding protein, TFEB, was also tested for CP1
function. The results suggested that DNA binding is required for both biological 
functions of CP1 but is not sufficient. A direct and quantitative correlation was
observed between the chromosome loss and nutritional (i.e., Met) phenotypes of
strains carrying loss of function alleles, but qualitatively the chromosome loss 
phenotype was more sensitive to decreased CP1 expression. The data are consistent
with a model in which CP1 performs the same general chromatin-related function at
centromeres and MET gene promoters and is normally present in functional excess.

PMCID: PMC310021
PMID: 8371988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4505-12.

TFEC, a basic helix-loop-helix protein, forms heterodimers with TFE3 and inhibits
TFE3-dependent transcription activation.

Zhao GQ(1), Zhao Q, Zhou X, Mattei MG, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston 77030.

We have identified a new basic helix-loop-helix (BHLH) DNA-binding protein,
designated TFEC, which is closely related to TFE3 and TFEB. The basic domain of
TFEC is identical to the basic DNA-binding domain of TFE3 and TFEB, whereas the
helix-loop-helix motif of TFEC shows 88 and 85% identity with the same domains in
TFE3 and TFEB, respectively. Like the other two proteins, TFEC contains a leucine
zipper motif, which has a lower degree of sequence identity with homologous
domains in TFE3 and TFEB than does the BHLH segment. Little sequence identity
exists outside these motifs. Unlike the two other proteins, TFEC does not contain
an acidic domain, which for TFE3 mediates the ability to activate transcription. 
Like the in vitro translation product of TFE3, the in vitro-translated TFEC binds
to the mu E3 DNA sequence of the immunoglobulin heavy-chain gene enhancer. In
addition, the product of cotranslation of TFEC RNA and TFE3 RNA forms a
heteromeric protein-DNA complex with mu E3 DNA. In contrast to TFE3, TFEC is
unable to transactivate a reporter gene linked to a promoter containing tandem
copies of the immunoglobulin mu E3 enhancer motif. Cotransfection of TFEC DNA and
TFE3 DNA strongly inhibits the transactivation caused by TFE3. TFEC RNA is found 
in many tissues of adult rats, but the relative concentrations of TFEC and TFE3
RNAs vary considerably in these different tissues. No TFEC RNA was detectable in 
several cell lines, including fibroblasts, myoblasts, chondrosarcoma cells, and
myeloma cells, indicating that TFEC is not ubiquitously expressed.

PMCID: PMC360062
PMID: 8336698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell. 1993 Feb 12;72(3):467-76.

High affinity DNA-binding Myc analogs: recognition by an alpha helix.

Fisher DE(1), Parent LA, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139.

Myc and other basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper (b-HLH-ZIP) proteins bind the
sequence CACGTG. Exhaustive mutagenesis in the basic domain identified four amino
acids critical for DNA binding with spacing suggestive of an alpha-helical face. 
Surprisingly, two highly conserved amino acids were nonessential for DNA binding.
Circular dichroism demonstrated a DNA-induced alpha-helical transition. A series 
of analogs were constructed with multiple simultaneous alanine substitutions at
nonessential positions and a critical lysine for arginine substitution. In this
way 35-fold higher specific affinity for CACGTG was obtained as compared with the
basic domain of c-Myc. These b-HLH-ZIP proteins appear to bind the same
palindromic sequence and may compete for common sites in vivo. Additionally, a
C-terminal basic region clamp motif was identified that was also identifiable in 
crystal structures from several different families of DNA-binding factors.

PMID: 8431949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Dec 15;89(24):11779-83.

Myc/Max and other helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper proteins bend DNA toward the
minor groove.

Fisher DE(1), Parent LA, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139.

A distinct family of DNA-binding proteins is characterized by the presence of
adjacent "basic," helix-loop-helix, and leucine zipper domains. Members of this
family include the Myc oncoproteins, their binding partner Max, and the mammalian
transcription factors USF, TFE3, and TFEB. Consistent with their homologous
domains, these proteins bind to DNA containing the same core hexanucleotide
sequence CACGTG. Analysis of the conformation of DNA in protein-DNA complexes has
been undertaken with a circular permutation assay. Large mobility anomalies were 
detected for all basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper proteins tested,
suggesting that each protein induced a similar degree of bending. Phasing
analysis revealed that basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper proteins orient the 
DNA bend toward the minor groove. The presence of in-phase spacing between
adjacent binding sites for this family of proteins in the immunoglobulin
heavy-chain enhancer suggests the possible formation of an unusual triple-bended 
structure and may have implications for the activities of Myc.

PMCID: PMC50640
PMID: 1465398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Genes Dev. 1991 Dec;5(12A):2342-52.

TFEB has DNA-binding and oligomerization properties of a unique
helix-loop-helix/leucine-zipper family.

Fisher DE(1), Carr CS, Parent LA, Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

The DNA-binding factor TFEB contains adjacent helix-loop-helix (HLH) and leucine 
zipper (LZ) domains flanked by an upstream basic region. This arrangement of
interactive motifs has recently been observed in several other transcription
factors and in the Myc family of oncogenes. TFEB was isolated by virtue of its
binding to the major late promoter of adenovirus. DNA binding by a soluble
protein was achieved by deleting a hydrophobic amino-terminal domain and
permitted the structural analysis of the oligomerization and DNA-binding
properties of TFEB. TFEB specifically bound DNA as both a homodimer and a
heterodimer with another b-HLH-LZ protein TFE3. The LZ domain was essential for
homo- or hetero-oligomerization and high-affinity DNA binding. In the absence of 
DNA a tetramer-sized form of TFEB was observed that dissociates to bind added DNA
as a dimer. Binding by TFEB and TFE3 to related, but different, naturally
occurring DNA target sequences was observed with distinct binding preferences.
Analysis of basic domain residues in this family of proteins revealed a pattern
of sequence conservation predictive of an interacting alpha-helical face. Common 
oligomerization and DNA-binding features suggest the b-HLH-LZ domain structure to
define a distinct family of DNA-binding factors.

PMID: 1748288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;11(3):1739-44.

Tst-1, a member of the POU domain gene family, binds the promoter of the gene
encoding the cell surface adhesion molecule P0.

He X(1), Gerrero R, Simmons DM, Park RE, Lin CJ, Swanson LW, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Eukaryotic Regulatory Biology Program, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla 92093-0648.

Tst-1, a member of the POU domain gene family, is expressed in specific neurons
and in myelinating glia in the mammalian nervous system. Bacterially expressed
Tst-1 binds specifically to the promoter of the gene encoding myelin protein P0, 
a Schwann cell surface adhesion molecule. In cotransfection assays, Tst-1 can
specifically repress the P0 promoter. The N-terminal part of Tst-1 protein is
highly glycine- and alanine-rich, a structural feature shared by the
helix-loop-helix protein TFEB.

PMCID: PMC369487
PMID: 1705013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Aug;10(8):4384-8.

A helix-loop-helix protein related to the immunoglobulin E box-binding proteins.

Carr CS(1), Sharp PA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139.

A human cDNA encoding a novel protein in the helix-loop-helix family has been
isolated by screening a bacteriophage expression library with a probe containing 
the binding site for major late transcription factor. The protein encoded by this
cDNA, TFEB, probably recognizes E-box sequences in the heavy-chain immunoglobulin
enhancer.

PMCID: PMC360994
PMID: 2115126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


