
1. BMC Genomics. 2016 Mar 10;17(1):218. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2513-9.

Clinical and subclinical endometritis induced alterations in bovine endometrial
transcriptome and miRNome profile.

Salilew-Wondim D(1), Ibrahim S(1), Gebremedhn S(1), Tesfaye D(2), Heppelmann
M(3), Bollwein H(4), Pfarrer C(5), Tholen E(1), Neuhoff C(1), Schellander K(1),
Hoelker M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Breeding and Husbandry, Institute of Animal Science,
Endenicher Allee 15, 53115, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department of Animal Breeding and
Husbandry, Institute of Animal Science, Endenicher Allee 15, 53115, Bonn,
Germany. tesfaye@itw.uni-bonn.de. (3)Clinic for Cattle, University of Veterinary 
Medicine, 30173, Hannover, Germany. (4)Clinic of Reproductive Medicine, Vetsuisse
Faculty, University of Zurich, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland. (5)University of
Veterinary Medicine, 30173, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Clinical and subclinical endometritis are known to affect the
fertility of dairy cows by inducing uterine inflammation. We hypothesized that
clinical or subclinical endometritis could affect the fertility of cows by
disturbing the molecular milieu of the uterine environment. Here we aimed to
investigate the endometrial molecular signatures and pathways affected by
clinical and subclinical endometritis. For this, Holstein Frisian cows at 42-60
days postpartum were classified as healthy (HE), subclinical endometritis (SE) or
clinical endometritis (CE) based on veterinary clinical examination of the
animals and histological evaluation the corresponding endometrial biopsies.
Endometrial transcriptome and miRNome profile changes and associated molecular
pathways induced by subclinical or clinical endometritis were then investigated
using GeneChip® Bovine Genome Array and Exiqon microRNA PCR Human Panel arrays,
respectively. The results were further validated in vitro using endometrial
stromal and epithelial cells challenged with subclinical and clinical doses of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
RESULT: Transcriptome profile analysis revealed altered expression level of 203
genes in CE compared to HE animals. Of these, 92 genes including PTHLH, INHBA,
DAPL1 and SERPINA1 were significantly upregulated, whereas the expression level
of 111 genes including MAOB, CXCR4, HSD11B and, BOLA, were significantly
downregulated in CE compared to the HE animal group. However, in SE group, the
expression patterns of only 28 genes were found to be significantly altered, of
which 26 genes including PTHLH, INHBA, DAPL1, MAOB, CXCR4 and TGIF1 were common
to the CE group. Gene annotation analysis indicated the immune system processes; 
G-protein coupled receptor signaling pathway and chemotaxis to be among the
affected functions in endometritis animal groups. In addition, miRNA expression
analysis indicated the dysregulation of 35 miRNAs including miR-608, miR-526b*
and miR-1265 in CE animals and 102 miRNAs including let-7 family (let-7a, let-7c,
let-7d, let-7d*, let-7e, let-7f, let-7i) in SE animals. Interestingly, 14 miRNAs 
including let-7e, miR-92b, miR-337-3p, let-7f and miR-145 were affected in both
SE and CE animal groups. Further in vitro analysis of selected differentially
expressed genes and miRNAs in endometrial stroma and epithelial cells challenged 
with SE and CE doses of LPS showed similar results to that of the array data
generated using samples collected from SE and CE animals.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study unraveled endometrial transcriptome and
miRNome profile alterations in cows affected by subclinical or clinical
endometritis which may have a significant effect on the uterine homeostasis and
uterine receptivity.

PMCID: PMC4785637
PMID: 26965375  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Theor Biol. 2016 Mar 3;398:74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2016.02.036. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Bistability analyses of CD4+ T follicular helper and regulatory cells during
Helicobacter pylori infection.

Leber A(1), Abedi V(1), Hontecillas R(1), Viladomiu M(1), Hoops S(1), Ciupe S(2),
Caughman J(1), Andrew T(1), Bassaganya-Riera J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory, Biocomplexity
Institute of Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA; Center for Modeling Immunity to 
Enteric Pathogens, Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(2)Center for Modeling Immunity to Enteric Pathogens, Biocomplexity Institute of 
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA; Department of Mathematics, Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA. (3)Nutritional Immunology and Molecular Medicine Laboratory,
Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA; Center for
Modeling Immunity to Enteric Pathogens, Biocomplexity Institute of Virginia Tech,
Blacksburg, VA, USA. Electronic address: jbassaga@vt.edu.

T follicular helper (Tfh) cells are a highly plastic subset of CD4+ T cells
specialized in providing B cell help and promoting inflammatory and effector
responses during infectious and immune-mediate diseases. Helicobacter pylori is
the dominant member of the gastric microbiota and exerts both beneficial and
harmful effects on the host. Chronic inflammation in the context of H. pylori has
been linked to an upregulation in T helper (Th)1 and Th17 CD4+ T cell phenotypes,
controlled in part by the cytokine, interleukin-21. This study investigates the
differentiation and regulation of Tfh cells, major producers of IL-21, in the
immune response to H. pylori challenge. To better understand the conditions
influencing the promotion and inhibition of a chronically elevated Tfh
population, we used top-down and bottom-up approaches to develop computational
models of Tfh and T follicular regulatory (Tfr) cell differentiation. Stability
analysis was used to characterize the presence of two bi-stable steady states in 
the calibrated Tfh/Tfr models. Stochastic simulation was used to illustrate the
ability of the parameter set to dictate two distinct behavioral patterns.
Furthermore, sensitivity analysis helped identify the importance of various
parameters on the establishment of Tfh and Tfr cell populations. The core network
model was expanded into a more comprehensive and predictive model by including
cytokine production and signaling pathways. From the expanded network, the
interaction between TGFB-Induced Factor Homeobox 1 (Tgif1) and the retinoid X
receptor (RXR) was displayed to exert control over the determination of the Tfh
response. Model simulations predict that Tgif1 and RXR respectively induce and
curtail Tfh responses. This computational hypothesis was validated experimentally
by assaying Tgif1, RXR and Tfh in stomachs of mice infected with H. pylori.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26947272  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Mol Immunol. 2016 Mar;71:192-202. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.01.009. Epub 2016
Feb 23.

Transcriptomic analysis of responses to cytopathic bovine viral diarrhea virus-1 
(BVDV-1) infection in MDBK cells.

Villalba M(1), Fredericksen F(1), Otth C(2), Olavarría V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Bioquímica y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Laboratorio de 
Virología, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. (2)Instituto de
Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral de Chile,
Valdivia, Chile. (3)Instituto de Bioquímica y Microbiología, Facultad de
Ciencias, Laboratorio de Virología, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia,
Chile. Electronic address: volavarria@uach.cl.

The bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) is responsible for significant economic
losses in the dairy and cattle industry; however, little is known about the
protective and pathological responses of hosts to infection. The present study
determined the principal molecular markers implicated in viral infection through 
meta-transcriptomic analysis using MDBK cells infected for two hours with a field
isolate of BVDV-1. While several immune regulator genes were induced, genes
involved in cell signaling, metabolic processes, development, and integrity were 
down-regulated, suggesting an isolation of infected cells from cell-to-cell
interactions and responses to external signals. Analysis through RT-qPCR
confirmed the expression of more than one hundred markers. Interestingly, there
was a significant up-regulation of two negative NF-<U+03BA>B regulators, IER3 and
TNFAIP3, indicating a possible blocking of this signaling pathway mediated by
BVDV-1 infection. Additionally, several genes involved in the metabolism of
reactive oxygen species were down-regulated, suggesting increased oxidative
stress. Notably, a number of genes involved in cellular growth and development
were also regulated during infection, including MTHFD1L, TGIF1, and Brachyury.
Moreover, there was an increased expression of the genes ß-catenin, caprin-2,
GSK3ß, and MMP-7, all of which are crucial to the Wnt signaling pathway that is
implicated in the embryonic development of a variety of organisms. This
meta-transcriptomic analysis provides the first data towards understanding the
infection mechanisms of cytopathic BVDV-1 and the putative molecular relationship
between viral and host components.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26919728  [PubMed - in process]


4. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(6):2101-14. doi: 10.1159/000438568. Epub 2015 Nov
25.

TGIF1 Gene Silencing in Tendon-Derived Stem Cells Improves the Tendon-to-Bone
Insertion Site Regeneration.

Chen L, Jiang C, Tiwari SR, Shrestha A, Xu P, Liang W, Sun Y, He S, Cheng B.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The slow healing process of tendon-to-bone junctions can be
accelerated via implanted tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) with silenced
transforming growth interacting factor 1 (TGIF1) gene. Tendon-to-bone insertion
site is the special form of connective tissues derivatives of common connective
progenitors, where TGF-ß plays bidirectional effects (chondrogenic or fibrogenic)
through different signaling pathways at different stages. A recent study revealed
that TGF-ß directly induces the chondrogenic gene Sox9. However, TGIF1 represses 
the expression of the cartilage master Sox9 gene and changes its expression rate 
against the fibrogenesis gene Scleraxis (Scx).
METHODS: TGIF1 siRNA was transduced or TGIF1 was over-expressed in tendon-derived
stem cells. Following suprapinatus tendon repair, rats were either treated with
transduced TDSCs or nontransduced TDSCs. Histologic examination and Western blot 
were performed in both groups.
RESULTS: In this study, the silencing of TGIF1 significantly upregulated the
chondrogenic genes and markers. Similarly, TGIF1 inhibited TDSC differentiation
into cartilage via interactions with TGF-ß-activated Smad2 and suppressed the
phosphorylation of Smad2. The area of fibrocartilage at the tendon-bone interface
was significantly increased in the TGIF1 (-) group compared with the control and 
TGIF1-overexpressing groups in the early stages of the animal model. The
interface between the tendon and bone showed a increase of new bone and
fibrocartilage in the TGIF1 (-) group at 4 weeks. Fibrovascular scar tissue was
observed in the TGIF1-overexpressing group and the fibrin glue only group. Low
levels of fibrocartilage and fibrovascular scar tissue were found in the TDSCs
group.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, this study shows that the tendon-derived stem cell
modified with TGIF1 gene silencing has promising effects on tendon-to-bone
healing which can be further explored as a therapeutic tool in regenerative
medicine.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26599628  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cell Rep. 2015 Oct 6;13(1):52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.067. Epub 2015
Sep 24.

Tgif1 Counterbalances the Activity of Core Pluripotency Factors in Mouse
Embryonic Stem Cells.

Lee BK(1), Shen W(2), Lee J(1), Rhee C(1), Chung H(1), Kim KY(3), Park IH(3), Kim
J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the University of Texas at
Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA. (3)Department of Genetics, Yale Stem Cell Center, 
Yale School of Medicine, 10 Amistad, 201B, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Biosciences, the University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712, USA; Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for
Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
TX 78712, USA. Electronic address: jonghwankim@mail.utexas.edu.

Core pluripotency factors, such as Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, play important roles in
maintaining embryonic stem cell (ESC) identity by autoregulatory feedforward
loops. Nevertheless, the mechanism that provides precise control of the levels of
the ESC core factors without indefinite amplification has remained elusive. Here,
we report the direct repression of core pluripotency factors by Tgif1, a
previously known terminal repressor of TGFß/activin/nodal signaling.
Overexpression of Tgif1 reduces the levels of ESC core factors, whereas its
depletion leads to the induction of the pluripotency factors. We confirm the
existence of physical associations between Tgif1 and Oct4, Nanog, and HDAC1/2 and
further show the level of Tgif1 is not significantly altered by treatment with an
activator/inhibitor of the TGFß/activin/nodal signaling. Collectively, our
findings establish Tgif1 as an integral member of the core regulatory circuitry
of mouse ESCs that counterbalances the levels of the core pluripotency factors in
a TGFß/activin/nodal-independent manner.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26411691  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Vis. 2015 Aug 28;21:974-84. eCollection 2015.

Role of 5'TG3'-interacting factors (TGIFs) in Vorinostat (HDAC
inhibitor)-mediated Corneal Fibrosis Inhibition.

Sharma A(1), Sinha NR(2), Siddiqui S(2), Mohan RR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Harry S. Truman Memorial Veteran Hospital, Columbia, MO ; Veterinary Medicine 
and Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO. (2)Veterinary Medicine and
Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO. (3)Harry S. Truman Memorial
Veteran Hospital, Columbia, MO ; Mason Eye Institute, School of Medicine,
Columbia, MO ; Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, University of Missouri, Columbia,
MO.

PURPOSE: We have previously reported that vorinostat, an FDA-approved, clinically
used histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, attenuates corneal fibrosis in vivo in
rabbits by blocking transforming growth factor ß (TGFß). The 5'TG3'-interacting
factors (TGIFs) are transcriptional repressors of TGFß1 signaling via the Smad
pathway. The present study was designed to explore the expression of TGIFs in
human corneal fibroblasts and to investigate their role in mediating the
antifibrotic effect of vorinostat.
METHODS: Human corneal fibroblast cultures were generated from donor corneas. RNA
isolation, cDNA preparation, and PCR were performed to detect the presence of
TGIF1 and TGIF2 transcripts. The cultures were exposed to vorinostat (2.5 µM) to 
test its effect on TGIF mRNA and protein levels using qPCR and immunoblotting.
Myofibroblast formation was induced with TGFß1 (5 ng/ml) treatment under
serum-free conditions. The changes in fibrosis parameters were quantified by
measuring fibrosis marker a-smooth muscle actin (aSMA) mRNA and protein levels
with qPCR, immunostaining, and immunoblotting. Smad2/3/4 and TGIF knockdowns were
performed using pre-validated RNAi/siRNAs and a commercially available
transfection reagent.
RESULTS: Human corneal fibroblasts showed the expression of TGIF1 and TGIF2.
Vorinostat (2.5 µM) caused a 2.8-3.3-fold increase in TGIF1 and TGIF2 mRNA levels
and a 1.4-1.8-fold increase in TGIF1 and TGIF2 protein levels. Vorinostat
treatment also caused a significant increase in acetylhistone H3 and
acetylhistone H4. Vorinostat-induced increases in TGIF1 and TGIF2 were
accompanied by a concurrent decrease in corneal fibrosis, as indicated by a
decrease in aSMA mRNA by 83±7.7% and protein levels by 97±5%. The RNAi-mediated
knockdown of Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4 markedly attenuated TGFß1-evoked
transdifferentiation of fibroblasts to myofibroblasts. The siRNA-mediated
knockdown of TGIF1 and TGIF2 neutralized vorinostat-evoked decreases in aSMA mRNA
by 31%-45% and protein levels by 12%-23%.
CONCLUSIONS: Human corneal fibroblasts demonstrate the expression of TGIF1 and
TGIF2 transcription factors. These transcriptional repressors are critical, at
least partially, in mediating the antifibrotic effect of vorinostat in the
cornea.

PMCID: PMC4551282
PMID: 26330748  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2015;146(2):115-9. doi: 10.1159/000438502. Epub 2015 Aug
13.

Deletion 18p11.32p11.31 in a Child with Global Developmental Delay and Atypical, 
Drug-Resistant Absence Seizures.

Verrotti A(1), Palka C, Prezioso G, Alfonsi M, Calabrese G, Palka G, Chiarelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

We report the first case of an 18p11.32 deletion, detected by array CGH,
associated with a drug-resistant form of atypical absence epilepsy, global
developmental delay and no signs of holoprosencephaly (HPE). In particular, this 
region encompasses 19 genes, and none of these genes have been strictly
associated with epilepsy. Among these, TGIF1 is expressed in the fetal and adult 
nervous system, and its deletion has been related to central nervous system
diseases. TGIF1 deletions have previously been reported in patients with a
comparable phenotype as seen in our case and in children whose neurological signs
and symptoms were considerable, but not epileptiform. Mutations and deletions
involving the TGIF1 gene have been described in patients with HPE in an autosomal
dominant model of inheritance. However, TGIF1 mutations have also been reported
in normal individuals and in patients with mental retardation or showing a very
mild phenotype, suggesting the characteristic of incomplete penetrance and
variable expressivity. Therefore, a TGIF1 deletion may not be always related to
HPE, and it may have a link to the development of epilepsy.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26278570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9303-10. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3676-8. Epub 2015
Jun 24.

TGIF1 promoted the growth and migration of cancer cells in nonsmall cell lung
cancer.

Xiang G(1), Yi Y(1), Weiwei H(1), Weiming W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, Shanghai, 200233, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai,
200233, China. Wuweiming0427@163.com.

Transforming growth factor beta-inducing factor 1 (TGIF1) was reported to be
dysregulated in several types of cancer. However, its expression pattern and
functions in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) remained unknown. In the present
study, the expression of TGIF1 was found to be elevated in the clinical NSCLC
tissues. TGIF1 promoted the growth and migration of NSCLC cells, while knocking
down the expression of TGIF1 inhibited the growth and migration of NSCLC cells.
Moreover, downregulation of TGIF1 impaired the metastasis of NSCLC cells. In the 
study for the molecular mechanisms, it was found that TGIF1 positively regulated 
beta-catenin/TCF signaling. In summary, our study demonstrated the oncogenic role
of TGIF1 in NSCLC, and TGIF1 might be a therapeutic target for NSCLC.

PMID: 26104768  [PubMed - in process]


9. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Oct;167A(10):2451-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37207. Epub 2015 
Jun 16.

Genotypic and phenotypic variation in six patients with solitary median maxillary
central incisor syndrome.

Poelmans S(1), Kawamoto T(2,)(3), Cristofoli F(4), Politis C(5), Vermeesch J(4), 
Bailleul-Forestier I(6,)(7), Hens G(8), Devriendt K(4), Verdonck A(1), Carels
C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Sciences-Orthodontics, KU Leuven and Dentistry,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (2)Department of Orthodontics and
Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Maxillofacial Reconstruction and Function,
Maxillofacial Orthognathics, Division of Maxillofacial/Neck Reconstruction,
Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department
of Human Genetics, KU Leuven and Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, KU
Leuven and University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (6)Department of Oral
Health Sciences-Paediatric Dentistry and Special Care, KU Leuven and Dentistry,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (7)Department of Paediatric
Dentistry, Paul Sabatier University, Hôpitaux de Toulouse, France. (8)Department 
of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, KU Leuven and University Hospitals
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Solitary Median Maxillary Central Incisor occurs in 1 of 50,000 live births. It
is the mildest manifestation of the holoprosencephaly spectrum and is genetically
heterogeneous. Here we report six patients with solitary median maxillary central
incisor, and a range of other phenotypic anomalies with different degrees of
severity, varying from mild signs of holoprosencephaly to associated intellectual
disability, and with different genetic background. Using array comparative
genomic hybridization, pathogenic copy number variants were found in three of the
six patients. Two patients had a deletion at the 18p11 chromosomal region that
includes TGIF1 while the other patient had a deletion at 7q36, including the SHH 
gene. In one patient, a mutation in SIX3 was detected with exome sequencing,
while in the two remaining patients all known holoprosencephaly genes were
excluded using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and sequencing,
and remain unsolved. One of the two latter patients had isolated solitary median 
maxillary central incisor without other visible dentofacial anomalies, while the 
other had clinical features not part of the known holoprosencephaly spectrum.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26080100  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2015 Sep;34(9):1154-62. doi:
10.1016/j.healun.2015.03.021. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

MicroRNA-144 dysregulates the transforming growth factor-ß signaling cascade and 
contributes to the development of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome after human
lung transplantation.

Xu Z(1), Ramachandran S(1), Gunasekaran M(1), Zhou F(1), Trulock E(2), Kreisel
D(1), Hachem R(2), Mohanakumar T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery. (2)Medicine. (3)Departments of Surgery; Pathology and 
Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
Electronic address: kumart@wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS), chronic lung allograft
rejection, remains an impediment for the function of the transplanted organ. In
this study, we defined the role of the microRNA (miRNA) miR-144 in
fibroproliferation leading to BOS.
METHODS: Biopsy specimens were obtained from 20 lung transplant recipients with
BOS((+)) and 19 without BOS((-)). Expression of miR-144 and its target,
transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)-induced factor homeobox 1(TGIF1), were
analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction and Western blot. Overexpression 
of miR-144 and luciferase reporter genes were performed to elucidate miRNA-target
interactions. The function of miR-144 was evaluated by transfecting fibroblasts
and determining the response to TGF-ß by analyzing Sma- and Mad-related family
(Smads), fibroblast growth factor, TGF-ß, and vascular endothelial growth
factor. Smooth muscle actin-a-positive stress fibers and F-actin filaments in
lung fibroblasts were analyzed by immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Analysis of miR-144 in the biopsy specimens demonstrated 4.1 ± 0.8-fold 
increases in BOS(+) compared with BOS(-) patients, with a significant reduction
in TGIF1 (3.6 ± 1.2-fold), a corepressor of Smads. In vitro transfection
confirmed that over-expression of miR-144 results in a reduction in TGIF1 and an 
increase in SMAD2, SMAD4, fibroblast growth factor-6, TGF-ß, and vascular
endothelial growth factor. Increasing miR-144 by transfecting, increased smooth
muscle actin-a and fibronectin, and knockdown of miR-144 diminished fibrogenesis 
in MRC-5 fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-144 is a critical regulator of the TGF-ß signaling cascade and
is over-expressed in lungs with BOS. Therefore, miR-144 is a potential target
toward preventing fibrosis leading to BOS after lung transplant.

Copyright © 2015 International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4536097 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25979625  [PubMed - in process]


11. BMC Bioinformatics. 2015 Mar 7;16:74. doi: 10.1186/s12859-015-0460-0.

Inferring dynamic gene regulatory networks in cardiac differentiation through the
integration of multi-dimensional data.

Gong W(1), Koyano-Nakagawa N(2), Li T(3), Garry DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165
CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114, USA. gongx030@umn.edu. (2)Lillehei Heart Institute,
University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165 CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114,
USA. koyano@umn.edu. (3)AccuraScience LLC, 5721 Merle Hay Road, Suite #16B,
Johnston, IA, 50131, USA. toli@us.accurascience.com. (4)Lillehei Heart Institute,
University of Minnesota, 2231 6th St S.E, 4-165 CCRB, Minneapolis, MN, 55114,
USA. garry@umn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Decoding the temporal control of gene expression patterns is key to
the understanding of the complex mechanisms that govern developmental decisions
during heart development. High-throughput methods have been employed to
systematically study the dynamic and coordinated nature of cardiac
differentiation at the global level with multiple dimensions. Therefore, there is
a pressing need to develop a systems approach to integrate these data from
individual studies and infer the dynamic regulatory networks in an unbiased
fashion.
RESULTS: We developed a two-step strategy to integrate data from (1) temporal
RNA-seq, (2) temporal histone modification ChIP-seq, (3) transcription factor
(TF) ChIP-seq and (4) gene perturbation experiments to reconstruct the dynamic
network during heart development. First, we trained a logistic regression model
to predict the probability (LR score) of any base being bound by 543 TFs with
known positional weight matrices. Second, four dimensions of data were combined
using a time-varying dynamic Bayesian network model to infer the dynamic networks
at four developmental stages in the mouse [mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs),
mesoderm (MES), cardiac progenitors (CP) and cardiomyocytes (CM)]. Our method not
only infers the time-varying networks between different stages of heart
development, but it also identifies the TF binding sites associated with promoter
or enhancers of downstream genes. The LR scores of experimentally verified ESCs
and heart enhancers were significantly higher than random regions (p <10(-100)), 
suggesting that a high LR score is a reliable indicator for functional TF binding
sites. Our network inference model identified a region with an elevated LR score 
approximately -9400 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site of Nkx2-5,
which overlapped with a previously reported enhancer region (-9435 to -8922 bp). 
TFs such as Tead1, Gata4, Msx2, and Tgif1 were predicted to bind to this region
and participate in the regulation of Nkx2-5 gene expression. Our model also
predicted the key regulatory networks for the ESC-MES, MES-CP and CP-CM
transitions.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel method to systematically integrate
multi-dimensional -omics data and reconstruct the gene regulatory networks. This 
method will allow one to rapidly determine the cis-modules that regulate key
genes during cardiac differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4359553
PMID: 25887857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cancer Cell. 2015 Apr 13;27(4):547-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.03.002.

TGIF governs a feed-forward network that empowers Wnt signaling to drive mammary 
tumorigenesis.

Zhang MZ(1), Ferrigno O(2), Wang Z(3), Ohnishi M(4), Prunier C(2), Levy L(2),
Razzaque M(4), Horne WC(4), Romero D(3), Tzivion G(3), Colland F(5), Baron R(4), 
Atfi A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental 
Medicine, 188 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Orthopaedics,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200065, China. (2)Laboratory of
Cell Signaling and Carcinogenesis, INSERM UMRS938, 184 Rue du Faubourg
St-Antoine, 75571 Paris, France. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University of
Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 North State Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.
(4)Department of Oral Medicine, Infection and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental 
Medicine, 188 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Hybrigenics, 3-5 impasse
Reille, 75014 Paris, France. (6)Laboratory of Cell Signaling and Carcinogenesis, 
INSERM UMRS938, 184 Rue du Faubourg St-Antoine, 75571 Paris, France; Department
of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 North State
Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. Electronic address: azeddine.atfi@inserm.fr.

Many types of human cancers having hyperactivated Wnt signaling display no
causative alterations in known effectors of this pathway. Here, we report a
function of TGIF in Wnt signaling. TGIF associates with and diverts Axin1 and
Axin2 from the ß-catenin destruction complex, therefore allowing ß-catenin
accrual. Intriguingly, activation of Wnt signaling induces the expression of
TGIF, which unveils a feed-forward loop that ensures effective integration of Wnt
signaling. In triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC), elevated levels of TGIF
correlate with high Wnt signaling and poor survival of patients. Moreover,
genetic experiments revealed that Tgif1 ablation impeded mammary tumor
development in MMTV-Wnt1 mice, further underscoring a requirement of TGIF for
oncogenic Wnt signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4398914 [Available on 2016-04-13]
PMID: 25873176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Free Radic Biol Med. 2015 Jul;84:54-64. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2015.03.028.
Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Transforming growth factor ß-interacting factor-induced malignant progression of 
hepatocellular carcinoma cells depends on superoxide production from Nox4.

Liu ZM(1), Tseng HY(1), Tsai HW(2), Su FC(1), Huang HS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Pathology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National
Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (3)Department of Medical Laboratory
Science and Biotechnology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan 701, Taiwan. Electronic address: huanghs@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most deadly malignancies worldwide
because of its high recurrence rate, high metastatic potential, and resistance to
drugs. Elucidation of the mechanisms underlying malignancy in HCC is needed to
improve diagnosis, therapy, and prognosis. Previously, we showed that
transforming growth factor ß-interacting factor (TGIF) antagonizes arsenic
trioxide-induced apoptosis of HepG2 cells and is associated with poor prognosis
and progression of urothelial carcinoma in patients after radical
nephroureterectomy. To determine whether TGIF plays a role in HCC tumorigenesis, 
we compared the expression of TGIF, its downstream targets, and reactive oxygen
species levels between HCC HepG2 cells and the more invasive SK-Hep1 cells.
Superoxide production, phosphorylation of c-Src(Y416) and AKT(S473), and
expression of TGIF and NADPH oxidase (Nox) were higher in invasive SK-Hep1 cells 
than in HepG2 cells. TGIF-overexpressing HepG2 xenograft tumors markedly promoted
tumor growth and metastasis to the lungs. Overexpression of TGIF in HepG2 cells
increased superoxide production from Nox4, matrix metalloproteinase expression,
invadopodia formation, and cellular migration/invasion ability. Conversely,
knockdown of TGIF in SK-Hep1 cells attenuated these processes. Using gene
knockdown and pharmacological inhibitors, we demonstrate that c-Src/AKT is the
upstream signaling that regulates TGIF-induced Nox4 activation and subsequent
superoxide production. Taken together, our results implicate TGIF as a potential 
biomarker for prognosis and target for clinical therapy in patients with advanced
HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25841779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2015 May 15;285(1):41-50. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2015.03.007. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

TG-interacting factor transcriptionally induced by AKT/FOXO3A is a negative
regulator that antagonizes arsenic trioxide-induced cancer cell apoptosis.

Liu ZM(1), Tseng HY(1), Cheng YL(1), Yeh BW(2), Wu WJ(3), Huang HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan; Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department 
of Urology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Department of Urology, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan; Department 
of Urology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and
Biotechnology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701,
Taiwan. Electronic address: huanghs@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is a multi-target drug approved by the Food and Drug
Administration as the first-line chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of
acute promyelocytic leukemia. In addition, several clinical trials are being
conducted with arsenic-based drugs for the treatment of other hematological
malignancies and solid tumors. However, ATO's modest clinical efficacy on some
cancers, and potential toxic effects on humans have been reported. Determining
how best to reduce these adverse effects while increasing its therapeutic
efficacy is obviously a critical issue. Previously, we demonstrated that the
JNK-induced complex formation of phosphorylated c-Jun and TG-interacting factor
(TGIF) antagonizes ERK-induced cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKN1A
(p21(WAF1/CIP1)) expression and resultant apoptosis in response to ATO in A431
cells. Surprisingly, at low-concentrations (0.1-0.2 µM), ATO increased cellular
proliferation, migration and invasion, involving TGIF expression, however, at
high-concentrations (5-20 µM), ATO induced cell apoptosis. Using a promoter
analysis, TGIF was transcriptionally regulated by ATO at the FOXO3A binding site 
(-1486 to -1479bp) via the c-Src/EGFR/AKT pathway. Stable overexpression of TGIF 
promoted advancing the cell cycle into the S phase, and attenuated 20 µM
ATO-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, blockage of the AKT pathway enhanced
ATO-induced CDKN1A expression and resultant apoptosis in cancer cells, but
overexpression of AKT1 inhibited CDKN1A expression. Therefore, we suggest that
TGIF is transcriptionally regulated by the c-Src/EGFR/AKT pathway, which plays a 
role as a negative regulator in antagonizing ATO-induced CDKN1A expression and
resultant apoptosis. Suppression of these antagonistic effects might be a
promising therapeutic strategy toward improving clinical efficacy of ATO.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25791921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Mol Histol. 2015 Jun;46(3):241-9. doi: 10.1007/s10735-015-9615-6. Epub 2015 Mar
18.

Silencing of TGIF1 in bone mesenchymal stem cells applied to the post-operative
rotator cuff improves both functional and histologic outcomes.

Li J(1), Chen L, Sun L, Chen H, Sun Y, Jiang C, Cheng B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji
University, No. 301, Yanchang Road, Shanghai, 200072, People's Republic of China.

Stem cells have long been hypothesized to improve outcomes following rotator cuff
repair. However, these cells must be signaled in order to do so. TGIF1 is a
transcription factor that has been found to be down-regulated in cells involved
in chondrogenesis. We therefore wished to examine whether stem cells expressing
lower levels of TGIF1 could better improve outcomes following rotator cuff repair
than stem cells expressing normal levels of TGIF1. Bone mesenchymal stem cells
(BMSCs) were transduced with TGIF1 siRNA to suppress native TGIF1. Nontransduced 
BMSCs were also obtained for the control group. Following suprapinatus tendon
repair, rats were either treated with transduced BMSCs or nontransduced BMSCs.
Histologic and functional testing were performed on both groups. Rats treated
with transduced TGIF1 siRNA BMSCs following suprapinatus repair expressed
significantly higher levels of chondrogenic proteins at 4 weeks than rats treated
with nontransduced BMSCs. Further, rats treated with BMSCs transduced with TGIF1 
siRNA had both a significantly greater maximum load at failure and stiffness.
Rats treated with transduced TGIF1 siRNA BMSCs following supraspinatus repair
perform better both histologically and functionally at 4 weeks.

PMID: 25782868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Leukemia. 2015 May;29(5):1018-31. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.307. Epub 2014 Oct 28.

TGIF1 is a negative regulator of MLL-rearranged acute myeloid leukemia.

Willer A(1), Jakobsen JS(1), Ohlsson E(1), Rapin N(2), Waage J(2), Billing M(3), 
Bullinger L(4), Karlsson S(3), Porse BT(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark [2] Biotech Research and Innovation
Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark [3] Danish Stem Cell
Centre (DanStem) Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)1] The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark [2] Biotech
Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark [3] Danish Stem Cell Centre (DanStem) Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark [4] The Bioinformatic Centre,
Department of Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell
Centre, Lund, Sweden. (4)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital
of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Members of the TALE (three-amino-acid loop extension) family of atypical
homeodomain-containing transcription factors are important downstream effectors
of oncogenic fusion proteins involving the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene. A
well-characterized member of this protein family is MEIS1, which orchestrates a
transcriptional program required for the maintenance of MLL-rearranged acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). TGIF1/TGIF2 are relatively uncharacterized TALE
transcription factors, which, in contrast to the remaining family, have been
shown to act as transcriptional repressors. Given the general importance of this 
family in malignant hematopoiesis, we therefore tested the potential function of 
TGIF1 in the maintenance of MLL-rearranged AML. Gene expression analysis of
MLL-rearranged patient blasts demonstrated reduced TGIF1 levels, and, in
accordance, we find that forced expression of TGIF1 in MLL-AF9-transformed cells 
promoted differentiation and cell cycle exit in vitro, and delayed leukemic onset
in vivo. Mechanistically, we show that TGIF1 interferes with a MEIS1-dependent
transcriptional program by associating with MEIS1-bound regions in a competitive 
manner and that the MEIS1:TGIF1 ratio influence the clinical outcome.
Collectively, these findings demonstrate that TALE family members can act both
positively and negatively on transcriptional programs responsible for leukemic
maintenance and provide novel insights into the regulatory gene expression
circuitries in MLL-rearranged AML.

PMID: 25349154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1851(1):9-12. doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2014.07.019.
Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Role of TG-interacting factor (Tgif) in lipid metabolism.

Pramfalk C(1), Eriksson M(2), Parini P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Centre for 
Nutrition and Toxicology, NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, Sweden; Molecular Nutrition Unit, Department of Biosciences
and Nutrition, Centre for Nutrition and Toxicology, NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet 
at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Sweden. (2)Molecular Nutrition Unit, 
Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Centre for Nutrition and Toxicology,
NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Sweden; 
Metabolism Unit, Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, and
Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital, 
Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Division of Clinical Chemistry,
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Centre for Nutrition and Toxicology, NOVUM,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Sweden;
Molecular Nutrition Unit, Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Centre for
Nutrition and Toxicology, NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University
Hospital Huddinge, Sweden. Electronic address: paolo.parini@ki.se.

TG interacting factors (Tgifs) 1 and 2 are members of the TALE (three-amino-acid 
loop extension) superfamily of homeodomain proteins. These two proteins bind to
the same DNA sequence and share a conserved C-terminal repression domain.
Mutations in TGIF1 have been linked to holoprosencephaly, which is a human
genetic disease that affects craniofacial development. As these proteins can
interact with the ligand binding domain of retinoid X receptor a, a common
heterodimeric partner of several nuclear receptors [e.g., liver X receptors
(LXRs) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs)], Tgif1 and Tgif2 
might repress other transcriptional pathways activated by lipids. In line with
this, Tgif1 interacts with LXRa and Tgif1 null mice have increased expression of 
the two Lxra target genes apolipoproteins (Apo) c2 and a4. Also, we have recently
identified Tgif1 to function as a transcriptional repressor of the cholesterol
esterifying enzyme acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase 2 (gene name
SOAT2). As no studies yet have shown involvement of Tgif2 in the lipid
metabolism, this review will focus on the role of Tgif1 in lipid and cholesterol 
metabolism. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Linking
transcription to physiology in lipodomics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25088698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Neuron. 2014 Jul 2;83(1):51-68. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.05.013.

CORTECON: a temporal transcriptome analysis of in vitro human cerebral cortex
development from human embryonic stem cells.

van de Leemput J(1), Boles NC(1), Kiehl TR(2), Corneo B(1), Lederman P(1), Menon 
V(3), Lee C(3), Martinez RA(3), Levi BP(3), Thompson CL(3), Yao S(3), Kaykas
A(3), Temple S(4), Fasano CA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Neural Stem Cell Institute, Rensselaer, NY 12144, USA. (2)Neural Stem Cell
Institute, Rensselaer, NY 12144, USA; Department of Computer Science, College of 
Computing and Information, State University of New York, Albany, NY 12144, USA.
(3)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA 98103, USA. (4)Neural Stem Cell
Institute, Rensselaer, NY 12144, USA. Electronic address:
sallytemple@neuralsci.org. (5)Neural Stem Cell Institute, Rensselaer, NY 12144,
USA. Electronic address: chrisfasano@neuralsci.org.

Many neurological and psychiatric disorders affect the cerebral cortex, and a
clearer understanding of the molecular processes underlying human corticogenesis 
will provide greater insight into such pathologies. To date, knowledge of gene
expression changes accompanying corticogenesis is largely based on murine data.
Here we present a searchable, comprehensive, temporal gene expression data set
encompassing cerebral cortical development from human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs). Using a modified differentiation protocol that yields neurons suggestive
of prefrontal cortex, we identified sets of genes and long noncoding RNAs that
significantly change during corticogenesis and those enriched for
disease-associations. Numerous alternatively spliced genes with varying temporal 
patterns of expression are revealed, including TGIF1, involved in
holoprosencephaly, and MARK1, involved in autism. We have created a database
(http://cortecon.neuralsci.org/) that provides online, query-based access to
changes in RNA expression and alternatively spliced transcripts during human
cortical development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24991954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cell Signal. 2014 Oct;26(10):2276-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.05.018. Epub
2014 Jun 3.

Epidermal growth factor inhibits transforming growth factor-ß-induced fibrogenic 
differentiation marker expression through ERK activation.

Liu X(1), Hubchak SC(2), Browne JA(2), Schnaper HW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Kidney Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
xiaoying-liu@northwestern.edu. (2)Division of Kidney Diseases, Department of
Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling plays an important and complex
role in renal fibrogenesis. The seemingly simple TGF-ß/Smad cascade is
intensively regulated at several levels, including crosstalk with other signaling
pathways. Epidermal growth factor (EGF) is a potent mitogen for epithelial cells 
and is elevated in diseased kidneys. In this study, we examined its effect on
TGF-ß-induced fibrotic changes in human proximal tubular epithelial cells.
Simultaneous treatment with EGF specifically inhibited basal and TGF-ß-induced
type-I collagen and a-smooth muscle actin (aSMA) expression at both mRNA and
protein levels. These effects were prevented by inhibition of either the EGF
receptor kinase or its downstream MEK kinase but not by blockade of either the
JNK or PI3K pathway. Overexpression of a constitutively active MEK1 construct
mimicked the inhibitory effect of EGF. Further, EGF suppressed Smad
transcriptional activities, as shown by reduced activation of ARE-luc and
SBE-luc. Both reductions were prevented by MEK inhibition. However, EGF did not
block Smad2 or Smad3 phosphorylation by TGF-ß, or Smad2/3 nuclear import. Finally
EGF induced the phosphorylation and expression of TGIF, a known TGF-ß/Smad
repressor. Both the phosphorylation and the induction were blocked by a MEK
inhibitor. Overexpression of TGIF abolished TGF-ß-induced aSMA promoter activity.
Together these results suggest that EGF inhibits two TGF-ß-stimulated markers of 
EMT through EGF receptor tyrosine kinase and downstream ERK activation, but not
through PI3K or JNK. The inhibition results from effector mechanisms downstream
of Smads, and most likely involves the transcriptional repressor, TGIF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4130781
PMID: 24905473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. JAMA Dermatol. 2014 Aug;150(8):836-43. doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2014.27.

Intrinsic and extrinsic risk factors for sagging eyelids.

Jacobs LC(1), Liu F(2), Bleyen I(3), Gunn DA(4), Hofman A(5), Klaver CC(6),
Uitterlinden AG(7), Neumann HA(1), Bataille V(8), Spector TD(9), Kayser M(2),
Nijsten T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Forensic Molecular Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Unilever Research and Development, Colworth
Science Park, Sharnbrook, England. (5)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical
Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (6)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands5Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (7)Department of Epidemiology,
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands6Department of Internal
Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (8)Department of
Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, London,
England8Department of Dermatology, West Hertfordshire Hospitals National Health
Service Trust, Hertfordshire, England. (9)Department of Twin Research and Genetic
Epidemiology, King's College London, London, England.

IMPORTANCE: Sagging eyelids, or dermatochalasis, are a frequent concern in older 
adults. It is considered a feature of skin aging, but risk factors other than
aging are largely unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To study nongenetic and genetic risk factors for sagging eyelids.
DESIGN: Upper eyelid sagging was graded in 4 categories of severity using digital
photographs. Dermatochalasis was defined as the eyelid hanging over the
eyelashes. Age, sex, skin color, tanning ability, hormonal status in women,
current smoking, body mass index, and sun protection behavior were analyzed in a 
multivariable multinomial logistic regression model. Genetic predisposition was
assessed using heritability analysis and a genome-wide association study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: The study was performed in 2 independent
population-based cohorts. The Rotterdam Study included older adults from one
district in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, and the UK Adult Twin Registry (TwinsUK) 
included twins from all over the United Kingdom. Participants were 5578 unrelated
Dutch Europeans (mean age, 67.1 years; 44.0% male) from the Rotterdam Study and
2186 twins (mean age, 53.1 years; 10.4% male) from the TwinsUK.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Sagging eyelid severity levels, ranging from 1
(normal control) to 4 (severe sagging).
RESULTS: Among 5578 individuals from the Rotterdam Study, 17.8% showed
dermatochalasis (moderate and severe sagging eyelids). Significant and
independent risk factors for sagging eyelids included age, male sex, lighter skin
color, and higher body mass index. In addition, current smoking was borderline
significantly associated. Heritability of sagging eyelids was estimated to be 61%
among 1052 twin pairs from the TwinsUK (15.6% showed dermatochalasis). A
meta-analysis of genome-wide association study results from 5578 Rotterdam Study 
and 1053 TwinsUK participants showed a genome-wide significant recessive
protective effect of the C allele of rs11876749 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.7<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)). This variant 
is located close to TGIF1 (an inducer of transforming growth factor ß), which is 
a known gene associated with skin aging.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This is the first observational study to date
demonstrating that other risk factors (male sex, genetic variants, lighter skin
color, high body mass index, and possibly current smoking) in addition to aging
are involved in the origin of sagging eyelids.

PMID: 24869959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Pharmacogenomics J. 2014 Aug;14(4):356-64. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2014.3. Epub 2014 Apr
8.

Genome-wide data reveal novel genes for methotrexate response in a large cohort
of juvenile idiopathic arthritis cases.

Cobb J(1), Cule E(2), Moncrieffe H(3), Hinks A(4), Ursu S(3), Patrick F(3),
Kassoumeri L(3), Flynn E(4), Bulatovic M(5), Wulffraat N(5), van Zelst B(6), de
Jonge R(6), Bohm M(7), Dolezalova P(7), Hirani S(8), Newman S(8), Whitworth P(9),
Southwood TR(9), De Iorio M(10); Childhood Arthritis Response to Medication Study
(CHARMS); Childhood Arthritis Prospective Study (CAPS); BSPAR study group,
Wedderburn LR(11), Thomson W(1).

Collaborators: Baildam E, Bishop N, Brown L, Buckley J, Chieng A, Carrasco R,
Cobb J, Cook L, Davidson J, Duggan A, Eltringham M, Foster H, Friel E, Friswell
M, Gardner-Medwin J, Gilbert P, Gould V, Hadfield K, Hyrich K, Jones J, Lal S,
Lay M, Lloyd G, Lloyd O, Lydon C, Makengo N, McGovern A, Meijer A, Mills-Wierda
N, Moorcroft T, Price V, Qiao L, Riding K, Sim J, Southwood T, Thomson W, Todd M,
Tremble S, Venter K, Wade D, Ward P, Watson S, Webster G, Wedderburn LR,
Zelenovic J, Buerkle K, Cobb J, Cotter C, Etheridge A, Gilbert P, Hinks A, Hirani
S, Kassoumeri L, Lal S, Melville L, Moncrieffe H, Mulligan K, Newman S, Patrick
F, Southwood T, Thomson W, Ursu S, Wedderburn LR, Whitworth P, Woo P, Abinum M,
Bell A, Craft AW, Crawley E, David J, Foster H, Gardener-Medwin J, Griffin J,
Hall A, Hal M, Herrick AL, Hollingworth P, Holt L, Jones S, Pountain G, Ryder C, 
Southwood T, Stewart I, Venning H, Wedderburn LR, Woo P, Wyatt S.

Clinical response to methotrexate (MTX) treatment for children with juvenile
idiopathic arthritis (JIA) displays considerable heterogeneity. Currently, there 
are no reliable predictors to identify non-responders: earlier identification
could lead to a targeted treatment. We genotyped 759 JIA cases from the UK, the
Netherlands and Czech Republic. Clinical variables were measured at baseline and 
6 months after start of the treatment. In Phase I analysis, samples were analysed
for the association with MTX response using ordinal regression of ACR-pedi
categories and linear regression of change in clinical variables, and identified 
31 genetic regions (P<0.001). Phase II analysis increased SNP density in the most
strongly associated regions, identifying 14 regions (P<1 × 10(-5)): three contain
genes of particular biological interest (ZMIZ1, TGIF1 and CFTR). These data
suggest a role for novel pathways in MTX response and further investigations
within associated regions will help to reach our goal of predicting response to
MTX in JIA.

PMCID: PMC4091986
PMID: 24709693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Reprod Sci. 2014 Nov;21(11):1382-94. doi: 10.1177/1933719114526471. Epub 2014 Apr
1.

A novel combination of homeobox genes is expressed in mesenchymal chorionic
stem/stromal cells in first trimester and term pregnancies.

Liu H(1), Murthi P(2), Qin S(2), Kusuma GD(2), Borg AJ(3), Knöfler M(4),
Haslinger P(4), Manuelpillai U(5), Pertile MD(6), Abumaree M(7), Kalionis B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, QiLu Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong, P.R. China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia Department of Perinatal Medicine, Pregnancy Research Centre, 
The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (3)Department of
Perinatal Medicine, Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal
Medicine, Reproductive Biology Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. (5)Centre for Genetic Diseases, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton, Victoria. (6)VCGS, Murdoch Children's Research
Institute, Royal Childrens Hospital, Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia. (7)College of Medicine, King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health 
Sciences/ King Abdulla International Medical Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, The
Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia Department of Perinatal
Medicine, Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville,
Victoria, Australia bill.kalionis@thewomens.org.au.

Human chorionic mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (CMSCs) derived from the placenta 
are similar to adult tissue-derived MSCs. The aim of this study was to
investigate the role of these cells in normal placental development.
Transcription factors, particularly members of the homeobox gene family, play
crucial roles in maintaining stem cell proliferation and lineage specification in
embryonic tissues. In adult tissues and organs, stem cells proliferate at low
levels in their niche until they receive cues from the microenvironment to
differentiate. The homeobox genes that are expressed in the CMSC niche in
placental tissues have not been identified. We used the novel strategy of laser
capture microdissection to isolate the stromal component of first trimester villi
and excluded the cytotrophoblast and syncytiotrophoblast layers that comprise the
outer layer of the chorionic villi. Microarray analysis was then used to screen
for homeobox genes in the microdissected tissue. Candidate homeobox genes were
selected for further RNA analysis. Immunohistochemistry of candidate genes in
first trimester placental villous stromal tissue revealed homeobox genes Meis1,
myeloid ectropic viral integration site 1 homolog 2 (MEIS2), H2.0-like Drosophila
(HLX), transforming growth factor ß-induced factor (TGIF), and distal-less
homeobox 5 (DLX5) were expressed in the vascular niche where CMSCs have been
shown to reside. Expression of MEIS2, HLX, TGIF, and DLX5 was also detected in
scattered stromal cells. Real-time polymerase chain reaction and
immunocytochemistry verified expression of MEIS2, HLX, TGIF, and DLX5 homeobox
genes in first trimester and term CMSCs. These data suggest a combination of
regulatory homeobox genes is expressed in CMSCs from early placental development 
to term, which may be required for stem cell proliferation and differentiation.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4212331
PMID: 24692208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Jun;71:427-36. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.02.015. Epub 2014 Feb 20.

4-Hydroxynonenal impairs transforming growth factor-ß1-induced elastin synthesis 
via epidermal growth factor receptor activation in human and murine fibroblasts.

Larroque-Cardoso P(1), Mucher E(1), Grazide MH(2), Josse G(3), Schmitt AM(3),
Nadal-Wolbold F(3), Zarkovic K(4), Salvayre R(1), Nègre-Salvayre A(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-1048, 31432 Toulouse Cedex 4, France; University of Toulouse,
Toulouse, France. (2)University of Toulouse, Toulouse, France. (3)Centre Européen
de Recherche sur la Peau, Pierre Fabre Dermocosmetique, Toulouse, France.
(4)Division of Pathology, Clinical Hospital Centre, Zagreb, Croatia. (5)INSERM
UMR-1048, 31432 Toulouse Cedex 4, France; University of Toulouse, Toulouse,
France. Electronic address: anne.negre-salvayre@inserm.fr.

Comment in
    Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Jun;71:437-8.

Elastin is a long-lived protein and a key component of connective tissues. The
tissular elastin content decreases during chronological aging, and the mechanisms
underlying its slow repair are not known. Lipid oxidation products that
accumulate in aged tissues may generate protein dysfunction. We hypothesized that
4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE), a highly reactive a,ß-aldehydic product generated from 
polyunsaturated fatty acid peroxidation, could contribute to inhibiting elastin
repair by antagonizing the elastogenic signaling of transforming growth factor-ß1
(TGF-ß1) in skin fibroblasts. We report that a low 4-HNE concentration (2µmol/L) 
inhibits the upregulation of tropoelastin expression stimulated by TGF-ß1 in
human and murine fibroblasts. The study of signaling pathways potentially
involved in the regulation of elastin expression showed that 4-HNE did not block 
the phosphorylation of Smad3, an early step of TGF-ß1 signaling, but inhibited
the nuclear translocation of Smad2. Concomitantly, 4-HNE modified and stimulated 
the phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and
subsequently ERK1/2 activation, leading to the phosphorylation/stabilization of
the Smad transcriptional corepressor TGIF, which antagonizes TGF-ß1 signaling.
Inhibitors of EGFR (AG1478) and MEK/ERK (PD98059), and EGFR-specific siRNAs,
reversed the inhibitory effect of 4-HNE on TGF-ß1-induced nuclear translocation
of Smad2 and tropoelastin synthesis. In vivo studies on aortas from aged C57BL/6 
mice showed that EGFR is modified by 4-HNE, in correlation with an increased
4-HNE-adduct accumulation and decreased elastin content. Altogether, these data
suggest that 4-HNE inhibits the elastogenic activity of TGF-ß1, by modifying and 
activating the EGFR/ERK/TGIF pathway, which may contribute to altering elastin
repair in chronological aging and oxidative stress-associated aging processes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24561579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Lipid Res. 2014 Apr;55(4):709-17. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M045922. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

TG-interacting factor 1 acts as a transcriptional repressor of sterol
O-acyltransferase 2.

Pramfalk C(1), Melhuish TA, Wotton D, Jiang ZY, Eriksson M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, and Centre 
for Nutrition and Toxicology, NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska
University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Acat2 [gene name: sterol O-acyltransferase 2 (SOAT2)] esterifies cholesterol in
enterocytes and hepatocytes. This study aims to identify repressor elements in
the human SOAT2 promoter and evaluate their in vivo relevance. We identified
TG-interacting factor 1 (Tgif1) to function as an important repressor of SOAT2.
Tgif1 could also block the induction of the SOAT2 promoter activity by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1a and 4a. Women have ~ 30% higher hepatic TGIF1 mRNA compared
with men. Depletion of Tgif1 in mice increased the hepatic Soat2 expression and
resulted in higher hepatic lipid accumulation and plasma cholesterol levels.
Tgif1 is a new player in human cholesterol metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3966704
PMID: 24478032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Curr Eye Res. 2014 Mar;39(3):282-90. doi: 10.3109/02713683.2013.841950. Epub 2013
Nov 11.

TGIF1 is a potential candidate gene for high myopia in ethnic Kashmiri
population.

Ahmed I(1), Rasool S, Jan T, Qureshi T, Naykoo NA, Andrabi KI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology .

PURPOSE: High myopia is a complex disorder that imposes serious consequences on
ocular health. Linkage analysis has identified several genetic loci with a series
of potential candidate genes that reveal an ambiguous pattern of association with
high myopia due to population heterogeneity. We have accordingly chosen to
examine the prospect of association of one such gene [transforming growth
ß-induced factor 1 (TGIF1)] in population that is purely ethnic (Kashmiri) and
represents a homogeneous cohort from Northern India.
METHODS: Cases with high myopia with a spherical equivalent of =-6 diopters (D)
and emmetropic controls with spherical equivalent within ±0.5<U+2009>D in one or both
eyes represented by a sample size of 212 ethnic Kashmiri subjects and 239 matched
controls. Genomic DNA was genotyped for sequence variations in TGIF1 gene and
allele frequencies tested for Hardy-Weinberg disequilibrium. Potential
association was evaluated using <U+03C7>(2) or Fisher's exact test.
RESULTS: Two previously reported missense variations C<U+2009>><U+2009>T, rs4468717 (first base
of codon 143) changing proline to serine and rs2229333 (second base of codon 143)
changing proline to leucine were identified in exon 10 of TGIF1. Both variations 
exhibited possibly significant (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) association with the disease phenotype.
Since the variant allele frequency of both the single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
cases is higher than controls with odds ratio greater than 1.Therefore, variant
allele of both the single-nucleotide polymorphisms represents the possible risk
factor for myopia in the Kashmiri population. In silico predictions show that
substitutions are likely to have an impact on the structure and functional
properties of the protein, making it imperative to understand their functional
consequences in relation to high myopia.
CONCLUSIONS: TGIF1 is a relevant candidate gene with potential to contribute in
the genesis of high myopia.

PMID: 24215395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol. 2013 Nov;116(5):614-25. doi:
10.1016/j.oooo.2013.07.014.

TGIF1 splicing variant 8 is overexpressed in oral squamous cell carcinoma and is 
related to pathologic and clinical behavior.

Libório TN(1), Ferreira EN, Aquino Xavier FC, Carraro DM, Kowalski LP, Soares FA,
Nunes FD.

Author information: 
(1)Professor of Oral Pathology, Pathology and Legal Medicine Department, Federal 
University of Amazonas, Manaus, Amazonas; Associate Professor of Oral Pathology, 
School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, São Paulo. Electronic
address: tliborio@ufam.edu.br.

OBJECTIVE: Possible differences in splicing variants of TGIF1 in oral squamous
cell carcinoma (OSCC) have not yet been reported. This study analyzed the
expression levels of different splicing variants of the TGIF1 gene in OSCC
compared with nontumoral epithelium (NT) and the relationship with
clinical-pathologic features of tumors.
STUDY DESIGN: Forty-eight frozen samples of OSCC and 17 of NT were analyzed using
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: TGIF1v2 and v8 are overexpressed in OSCC, whereas TGIF1v5 is
underexpressed when compared with NT. Low TGIF1v8 expression was correlated with 
lower cellular differentiation, positive blood vascular invasion, advanced
pathologic stage, and positive vascular lymphatic invasion of OSCC. TGIF1v8 is
also related to overall survival over time, with lower values associated with an 
increased risk of cancer-related death.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that alternative splicing of TGIF1 is deregulated
in OSCC, with overexpression of some splicing variants, especially TGIF1v8, which
is associated with advanced stages of OSCC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24119525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;33(24):4824-33. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01076-13. Epub 2013 Oct 
7.

Tgif1 regulates quiescence and self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells.

Yan L(1), Womack B, Wotton D, Guo Y, Shyr Y, Davé U, Li C, Hiebert S, Brandt S,
Hamid R.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics.

TG-interacting factor 1 (TGIF1) is a transcriptional repressor that can modulate 
retinoic acid and transforming growth factor ß signaling pathways. It is required
for myeloid progenitor cell differentiation and survival, and mutations in the
TGIF1 gene cause holoprosencephaly. Furthermore, we have previously observed that
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) patients with low TGIF1 levels had worse
prognoses. Here, we explored the role of Tgif1 in murine hematopoietic stem cell 
(HSC) function. CFU assays showed that Tgif1(-/-) bone marrow cells produced more
total colonies and had higher serial CFU potential. These effects were also
observed in vivo, where Tgif1(-/-) bone marrow cells had higher repopulation
potential in short- and long-term competitive repopulation assays than wild-type 
cells. Serial transplantation and replating studies showed that Tgif1(-/-) HSCs
exhibited greater self-renewal and were less proliferative and more quiescent
than wild-type cells, suggesting that Tgif1 is required for stem cells to enter
the cell cycle. Furthermore, HSCs from Tgif1(+/-) mice had a phenotype similar to
that of HSCs from Tgif1(-/-) mice, while bone marrow cells with overexpressing
Tgif1 showed increased proliferation and lower survival in long-term transplant
studies. Taken together, our data suggest that Tgif1 suppresses stem cell
self-renewal and provide clues as to how reduced expression of TGIF1 may
contribute to poor long-term survival in patients with AML.

PMCID: PMC3889555
PMID: 24100014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Glia. 2013 Oct;61(10):1687-97. doi: 10.1002/glia.22549. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Retinal regeneration in adult zebrafish requires regulation of TGFß signaling.

Lenkowski JR(1), Qin Z, Sifuentes CJ, Thummel R, Soto CM, Moens CB, Raymond PA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, 830 N 
University, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. jenny.lenkowski@alumni.brown.edu

Müller glia are the resident radial glia in the vertebrate retina. The response
of mammalian Müller glia to retinal damage often results in a glial scar and no
functional replacement of lost neurons. Adult zebrafish Müller glia, in contrast,
are considered tissue-specific stem cells that can self-renew and generate
neurogenic progenitors to regenerate all retinal neurons after damage. Here, we
demonstrate that regulation of TGFß signaling by the corepressors Tgif1 and Six3b
is critical for the proliferative response to photoreceptor destruction in the
adult zebrafish retina. When function of these corepressors is disrupted, Müller 
glia and their progeny proliferate less, leading to a significant reduction in
photoreceptor regeneration. Tgif1 expression and regulation of TGFß signaling are
implicated in the function of several types of stem cells, but this is the first 
demonstration that this regulatory network is necessary for regeneration of
neurons.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4127981
PMID: 23918319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell Rep. 2013 Aug 15;4(3):530-41. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.009. Epub 2013
Aug 1.

Identification of PHRF1 as a tumor suppressor that promotes the TGF-ß cytostatic 
program through selective release of TGIF-driven PML inactivation.

Ettahar A(1), Ferrigno O, Zhang MZ, Ohnishi M, Ferrand N, Prunier C, Levy L,
Bourgeade MF, Bieche I, Romero DG, Colland F, Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling and Carcinogenesis, INSERM UMRS938, 184 Rue du
Faubourg St-Antoine, 75571 Paris, France.

The homeodomain protein TGIF (TG-interacting factor) restricts TGF-ß/Smad
cytostatic signaling by interfering with the nucleocytoplasmic transit of the
tumor suppressor cPML. Here, we identify PHRF1 as a ubiquitin ligase that
enforces TGIF decay by driving its ubiquitination at lysine 130. In so doing,
PHRF1 ensures redistribution of cPML into the cytoplasm, where it associates with
SARA and coordinates activation of Smad2 by the TGF-ß receptor. The PHRF1 gene
resides within the tumor suppressor locus 11p15.5, which displays frequent loss
in a wide variety of malignancies, including breast cancer. Remarkably, we found 
that the PHRF1 gene is deleted or silenced in a high proportion of human breast
cancer samples and cancer cell lines. Reconstitution of PHRF1 into deficient
cells impeded their propensity to form tumors in vivo, most likely because of the
reemergence of TGF-ß responsiveness. These findings unveil a paradigm behind
inactivation of the cPML tumor suppressor network in human malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2013 Jul;17(14):1909-15.

Pathway analysis detect potential mechanism for familial combined hyperlipidemia.

Wang YL(1), Xue F, Liu LZ, He ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Feng Xian Center Hospital, Shanghai, China.
xuefengdr01@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) is the most commonly
inherited hyperlipidemia in men. It constitutes a substantial risk factor for
atherosclerosis patients.
AIM: To delineating the potential mechanism of FCHL by bioinformatics tools.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network
was constructed to identify the potential functional proteins and their
interactive relationships in familial combined hyperlipidemia.
RESULTS: Our results showed that androgen receptor (AR) might play an important
role in familial combined hyperlipidemia by interaction with TGIF1, NR3C1, KLK2, 
etc. Some pathways were also identified, such as Hedgehog signaling pathway,
Phosphatidylinositol signaling system, and Long-term depression, which were all
demonstrated participating in lipid metabolism in previous experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: Although lack of direct evidence, by PPI network construction it
proved AR is a key factor in FCHL, and also demonstrated that PPI network
construction is an alternative avenue for FCHL analysis.

PMID: 23877856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mol Hum Reprod. 2013 Oct;19(10):665-75. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gat042. Epub 2013 Jun
11.

Homeobox gene transforming growth factor ß-induced factor-1 (TGIF-1) is a
regulator of villous trophoblast differentiation and its expression is increased 
in human idiopathic fetal growth restriction.

Pathirage NA(1), Cocquebert M, Sadovsky Y, Abumaree M, Manuelpillai U, Borg A,
Keogh RJ, Brennecke SP, Evain-Brion D, Fournier T, Kalionis B, Murthi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, and University of 
Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Royal Women's Hospital,
Locked Bag 300, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.

Abnormal trophoblast function is associated with human fetal growth restriction
(FGR). Targeted disruption of homeobox gene transforming growth ß-induced factor 
(TGIF-1) results in placental dysfunction in the mouse. The role of human TGIF-1 
in placental cell function is unknown. The aims of this study were to determine
the expression of TGIF-1 in human idiopathic FGR-affected placentae compared with
gestation-matched controls (GMC), to elucidate the functional role of TGIF-1 in
trophoblasts and to identify its downstream targets. Real-time PCR and
immunoblotting revealed that TGIF-1 mRNA and protein expression was significantly
increased in FGR-affected placentae compared with GMC (n = 25 in each group P <
0.05). Immunoreactive TGIF-1 was localized to the villous cytotrophoblasts,
syncytiotrophoblast, microvascular endothelial cells and in scattered stromal
cells in both FGR and GMC. TGIF-1 inactivation in BeWo cells using two
independent siRNA resulted in significantly decreased mRNA and protein of
trophoblast differentiation markers, human chorionic gonadotrophin (CGB/hCG),
syncytin and 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/3ß-honest significant difference
expression. Our data demonstrate that homeobox gene TGIF-1 is a potential
up-stream regulator of trophoblast differentiation and the altered TGIF-1
expression may contribute to aberrant villous trophoblast differentiation in FGR.

PMID: 23761267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Med Hypotheses. 2013 Aug;81(2):163-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.05.017. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

Tgif1 and SnoN modified chondrocytes or stem cells for tendon-bone insertion
regeneration.

Zhang Q(1), Zhou J, Ge H, Cheng B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University
School of Medcine, Shanghai, China.

Tendon-bone insertion injuries are a common occurrence but rarely heal, despite
the many strategies that have been employed. The tendon-bone insertion consists
of four types of tissues: tendon, fibrocartilage, mineral fibrocartilage and
bone, making it hard to regenerate. The key to reconstructing the tendon enthesis
is to rebuild the gradations of cell type, collagen type, mineral content and
collagen fiber orientation. Chondrocytes were found to be able to differentiate
into tendon and bone tissues upon special stimulation, which offers promise for
tendon enthesis regeneration. Tgif1 is a key factor that represses the expression
of the cartilage master gene Sox9, which is induced by TGFßs, and changes the
expression rate of Sox9 versus Scx, eventually promoting fibrogenesis. SnoN is a 
key factor that is induced by TGFßs to inhibit the hypertrophy of chondrocytes
and therefore bone formation. It appears that the induction of Tgif1 and the
repression of SnoN can cause chondrocytes to differentiate into tendon and bone
tissues. Moreover, a gradation of the expression levels of Tgif1 and SnoN in
chondrocytes may create a gradation of the tissue from tendon to fibrocartilage
to bone. Consequently, we propose that a gradation of gene-modified chondrocytes 
(Tgif1-inducing cells, primary cells, SnoN-repressing cells) or stem cells that
arise from a gradation of stimulation (Tgif1 induction and SnoN repression) will 
aid in the regeneration of the tendon-bone insertion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Gut. 2014 May;63(5):792-9. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-304719. Epub 2013 May 15.

Investigation of the atypical FBXW7 mutation spectrum in human tumours by
conditional expression of a heterozygous propellor tip missense allele in the
mouse intestines.

Davis H(1), Lewis A, Behrens A, Tomlinson I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, Oxford University, , Oxford, UK.

Comment in
    Gut. 2014 May;63(5):707-9.

OBJECTIVE: FBXW7 encodes the substrate recognition component of a ubiquitin
ligase that degrades targets such as Notch1, c-Jun, c-Myc and cyclin E. FBXW7
mutations occur in several tumour types, including colorectal cancers. The FBXW7 
mutation spectrum in cancers is unusual. Some tumours have biallelic loss of
function mutations but most have monoallelic missense mutations involving
specific arginine residues at ß-propellor tips involved in substrate recognition.
DESIGN: FBXW7 functional studies have generally used null systems. In order to
analyse the most common mutations in human tumours, we created a
Fbxw7(fl(R482Q))(/+) mouse and conditionally expressed this mutation in the
intestines using Vill-Cre. We compared these mice with heterozygous null
(Fbxw7(+/-)) mutants.
RESULTS: A few sizeable intestinal adenomas occurred in approximately 30% of
R482Q/+ and Fbxw7(+/-) mice at age >300 days. Breeding the R482Q allele onto Apc 
mutant backgrounds led to accelerated morbidity and increased polyp numbers and
size. Within the small bowel, polyp distribution was shifted proximally. Elevated
levels of two particular Fbxw7 substrates, Klf5 and Tgif1, were found in normal
intestine and adenomas of R482Q/+, R482Q/R482Q and Fbxw7(-/-) mice, but not
Fbxw7(+/-) animals. On the Apc mutant background, Fbxw7(+/-) mutants had a
phenotype intermediate between Fbxw7 wild-type and R482Q/+ mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Heterozygous Fbxw7 propellor tip (R482Q) mutations promote
intestinal tumorigenesis on an Apc mutant background. Klf5 and Tgif1 are strong
candidates for mediating this effect. Although heterozygous null Fbxw7 mutations 
also promote tumour growth, these have a weaker effect than R482Q. These findings
explain the FBXW7 mutation spectrum found in human cancers, and emphasise the
need for animal models faithfully to reflect human disease.

PMCID: PMC3995284
PMID: 23676439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Apr;98(4):E779-84. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-3982. Epub 
2013 Mar 8.

Pituitary stalk interruption syndrome and isolated pituitary hypoplasia may be
caused by mutations in holoprosencephaly-related genes.

Tatsi C(1), Sertedaki A, Voutetakis A, Valavani E, Magiakou MA, Kanaka-Gantenbein
C, Chrousos GP, Dacou-Voutetakis C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Diabetes, First Department of
Pediatrics, Athens University Medical School, 11527 Athens, Greece.

CONTEXT: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a developmental defect characterized by wide 
phenotypic variability, ranging from minor midline malformations (eg, single
central incisor) to severe deformities. In 10-15% of HPE patients, mutations in
specific genes have been identified (eg, SHH, TGIF, SIX3). Pituitary stalk
interruption syndrome (PSIS) constitutes a distinct abnormality of unknown
pathogenesis, whereas isolated pituitary hypoplasia (IPH) has been linked to
various developmental genes.
OBJECTIVE: Three of our patients with PSIS had a single central incisor, a
malformation encountered in some HPE cases. Based on this observation, we
initiated a search for mutations in HPE-associated genes in 30 patients with PSIS
or IPH.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: The entire coding region of the TGIF, SHH, and SIX3
genes was sequenced in patients with combined pituitary hormone deficiency
associated with either PSIS or IPH and in healthy controls.
RESULTS: Two novel mutations in the HPE-related genes were detected (ie, c.799
C>T, p.Q267X in the TGIF gene, and c.1279G>A, p.G427R in the SHH gene) in 2 of
our patients. The overall incidence of HPE-related gene mutations in our
nonsyndromic and nonchromosomal patients was 6.6%. No molecular defect in the
SIX3 gene was detected in our cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest that HPE-related gene mutations are implicated in
the etiology of isolated pituitary defects (PSIS or IPH). Alternatively, PSIS or 
IPH may constitute mild forms of an expanded HPE spectrum.

PMID: 23476075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 1;22(13):2553-65. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt103. Epub 2013 Mar 
3.

Otitis media in the Tgif knockout mouse implicates TGFß signalling in chronic
middle ear inflammatory disease.

Tateossian H(1), Morse S, Parker A, Mburu P, Warr N, Acevedo-Arozena A, Cheeseman
M, Wells S, Brown SD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell, UK

Otitis media with effusion (OME) is the most common cause of hearing loss in
children and tympanostomy to alleviate the condition remains the commonest
surgical intervention in children in the developed world. Chronic and recurrent
forms of OM are known to have a very significant genetic component, however,
until recently little was known of the underlying genes involved. The
identification of mouse models of chronic OM has indicated a role of transforming
growth factor beta (TGFß) signalling and its impact on responses to hypoxia in
the inflamed middle ear. We have, therefore, investigated the role of TGFß
signalling and identified and characterized a new model of chronic OM carrying a 
mutation in the gene for transforming growth interacting factor 1 (Tgif1). Tgif1 
homozygous mutant mice have significantly raised auditory thresholds due to a
conductive deafness arising from a chronic effusion starting at around 3 weeks of
age. The OM is accompanied by a significant thickening of the middle ear mucosa
lining, expansion of mucin-secreting goblet cell populations and raised levels of
vascular endothelial growth factor, TNF-a and IL-1ß in ear fluids. We also
identified downstream effects on TGFß signalling in middle ear epithelia at the
time of development of chronic OM. Both phosphorylated SMAD2 and p21 levels were 
lowered in the homozygous mutant, demonstrating a suppression of the TGFß
pathway. The identification and characterization of the Tgif mutant supports the 
role of TGFß signalling in the development of chronic OM and provides an
important candidate gene for genetic studies in the human population.

PMCID: PMC3674796
PMID: 23459932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Syst Biol. 2012 Nov 29;6:147. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-6-147.

The extended TILAR approach: a novel tool for dynamic modeling of the
transcription factor network regulating the adaption to in vitro cultivation of
murine hepatocytes.

Vlaic S(1), Schmidt-Heck W, Matz-Soja M, Marbach E, Linde J, Meyer-Baese A,
Zellmer S, Guthke R, Gebhardt R.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology -
Hans-Knöll-Institute, Beutenbergstr. 11a, D-07745 Jena, Germany.
Sebastian.Vlaic@hki-jena.de

BACKGROUND: Network inference is an important tool to reveal the underlying
interactions of biological systems. In the liver, a complex system of
transcription factors is active to distribute signals and induce the cellular
response following extracellular stimuli. Plenty of information is available
about single transcription factors important for the different functions of the
liver, but little is known about their causal relations to each other.
RESULTS: Given a DNA microarray time series dataset of collagen monolayers
cultured murine hepatocytes, we identified 22 differentially expressed genes for 
which the corresponding protein is known to exhibit transcription factor
activity. We developed the Extended TILAR (ExTILAR) network inference algorithm
based on the modeling concept of the previously published TILAR algorithm. Using 
ExTILAR, we inferred a transcription factor network based on gene expression data
which puts these important genes into a functional context. This way, we
identified a previously unknown relationship between Tgif1 and Atf3 which we
validated experimentally. Beside its known role in metabolic processes, this
extends the knowledge about Tgif1 in hepatocytes towards a possible influence of 
processes such as proliferation and cell cycle. Moreover, two positive (i.e.
double negative) regulatory loops were predicted that could give rise to bistable
behavior. We further evaluated the performance of ExTILAR by systematic inference
of an in silico network.
CONCLUSIONS: We present the ExTILAR algorithm, which combines the advantages of
the regression based inference algorithm TILAR, like large network sizes
processable and low computational costs, with the advantages of dynamic network
models based on ordinary differential equation (i.e. in silico knock-down
simulations). Like TILAR, ExTILAR makes use of various prior-knowledge types such
as transcription factor binding site information and gene interaction knowledge
to infer biologically meaningful gene regulatory networks. Therefore, ExTILAR is 
especially useful when a large number of genes is modeled using a small number of
experimental data points.

PMCID: PMC3573979
PMID: 23190768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):38427-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C112.408864. Epub 2012
Sep 26.

Overcoming transcription activator-like effector (TALE) DNA binding domain
sensitivity to cytosine methylation.

Valton J(1), Dupuy A, Daboussi F, Thomas S, Maréchal A, Macmaster R, Melliand K, 
Juillerat A, Duchateau P.

Author information: 
(1)Cellectis S.A., 8 rue de la croix Jarry, 75013 Paris, France.
julien.valton@cellectis.com

Within the past 2 years, transcription activator-like effector (TALE) DNA binding
domains have emerged as the new generation of engineerable platform for
production of custom DNA binding domains. However, their recently described
sensitivity to cytosine methylation represents a major bottleneck for genome
engineering applications. Using a combination of biochemical, structural, and
cellular approaches, we were able to identify the molecular basis of such
sensitivity and propose a simple, drug-free, and universal method to overcome it.

PMCID: PMC3493886
PMID: 23019344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):38913-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.388389. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

The TG-interacting factor TGIF1 regulates stress-induced proinflammatory
phenotype of endothelial cells.

Hneino M(1), Blirando K, Buard V, Tarlet G, Benderitter M, Hoodless P, François
A, Milliat F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiopathology and Experimental Therapeutics, Institute for
Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety, 92262 Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

The endothelium contributes to the control of the tissue inflammatory response
following stress and in particular after exposure to ionizing radiation. We
previously showed that the TG-interacting factor 1 (TGIF1) plays a role in
radiation-induced normal tissue injury. In this study we hypothesized that this
protein could play a role in inflammation. The role of TGIF1 in the
stress-induced proinflammatory phenotype was investigated in human endothelial
cells. In HUVECs ionizing radiation induces TGIF1 expression as well as a
proinflammatory phenotype associated with up-regulation of IL-6, IL-8, CXCL1,
MIP-2, and MCP-1. TGIF1 overexpression enhances the radiation-induced
proinflammatory phenotype whereas TGIF1 silencing limits both the TNF-a- and
radiation-induced overexpression of proinflammatory cytokines. Interestingly, in 
vivo, in radiation-induced intestinal inflammation in mice, TGIF1 genetic
deficiency is associated with a reduced radiation-induced overexpression of
proinflammatory molecules. In HUVECs, TNF-a- and radiation-induced NF-<U+03BA>B pathway 
activation is not influenced by TGIF1 expression, whereas TGIF1 knockdown
inhibits both TNF-a- and radiation-induced p38 MAPK pathway activation. This
study demonstrates that TGIF1 plays a role in TNF-a- and radiation-induced
inflammation and suggests that it could be a target in limiting this event in the
vascular compartment.

PMCID: PMC3493932
PMID: 22995913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Jun;3(1):1-5. Epub 2012 May 16.

Genetic Overlap between Holoprosencephaly and Kallmann Syndrome.

Vaaralahti K(1), Raivio T, Koivu R, Valanne L, Laitinen EM, Tommiska J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Patients with Kallmann syndrome (KS; congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
decreased/absent sense of smell), septo-optic dysplasia (SOD), or
holoprosencephaly (HPE) reportedly have midline defects. In this study, we
investigate a genetic overlap between KS, SOD, and HPE. Nineteen subjects (18
males, 1 female) with KS and without mutations in the known KS genes were
screened for mutations in SOX2, SHH, SIX3,TGIF1,TDGF1,FOXH1,GLI2, and GLI3. One
male carried 2 heterozygous missense changes, one in SIX3 (c.428G>A, p.G143D) and
the other in GLI2 (c.2509G>A, p.E837K). Both of these genes have been implicated 
in the etiology of HPE and neither of these changes were present in 200 control
subjects. Other variants found among the subjects were known polymorphisms. KS
and HPE may display a genetic overlap. The involvement of genes implicated in the
etiology of midline defects in patients with KS warrants further studies.

PMCID: PMC3398826
PMID: 22855648  [PubMed]


40. Am J Pathol. 2012 Sep;181(3):1044-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.05.024. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Overexpression of TG-interacting factor is associated with worse prognosis in
upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma.

Yeh BW(1), Wu WJ, Li WM, Li CC, Huang CN, Kang WY, Liu ZM, Huang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Prognostic outcome prediction would be useful for the treatment of patients with 
upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma (UC). However, its prognostic biomarkers
are not well established so far. According to the results of analysis of 168
human upper urinary tract UC specimens, overexpressed TG-interacting factor
(TGIF) in nuclei of tumor tissues is significantly correlated with poor
progression-free survival and higher cancer-related death. When both TGIF and p21
expression are altered, these patients had an even worse prognosis than those
with one or no marker altered. Furthermore, to elucidate the role of TGIF in the 
progression of UC, overexpression of TGIF in RT4 or TSGH8301 cells was performed,
and the results revealed that TGIF can significantly increase migration/invasion 
ability, matrix metalloproteinase expression, and invadopodia formation via the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT pathway. In contrast, knockdown of TGIF with
its specific short hairpin RNA inhibited the invasion ability of T24 cells.
Besides, TGIF could inhibit p21(WAF/CIP1) expression, up-regulate cyclin D1
expression, and phosphorylate retinoblastoma to promote G1-S transition and
cellular proliferation. In conclusion, we demonstrated that TGIF contributes to
the progression of urothelial carcinoma via the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-AKT
pathway. It may serve as an attractive therapeutic or prognostic target for
selected patients with upper urinary tract UC.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22771156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Free Radic Biol Med. 2012 Aug 15;53(4):769-78. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2012.06.014. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

TG-interacting factor-induced superoxide production from NADPH oxidase
contributes to the migration/invasion of urothelial carcinoma.

Huang HS(1), Liu ZM, Chen PC, Tseng HY, Yeh BW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.
huanghs@mail.ncku.edu.tw

Urothelial carcinoma (UC) of the bladder is the fourth most common cancer and the
ninth leading cause of death from cancer among men in the United States. However,
higher recurrence, resistance to therapy, and poor diagnostic/prognostic
biomarkers of UC prompt us to identify novel targets to improve the clinical
applications. TG-interacting factor (TGIF), a transcriptional corepressor to
modulate the TGF-ß signaling, is associated with various types of human cancer.
In the present study, we found that cellular migration activity, reactive oxygen 
species production, AKT(S473) phosphorylation, TGIF, and p67(phox) expression
were higher in invasive T24 cells than in noninvasive RT4 cells. In addition,
overexpression of TGIF in RT4 cells enhanced cellular migration/invasion ability;
it involved NADPH oxidase 2 (Nox2)/p67(phox) complex activation, reactive oxygen 
species production, and AKT(S473) phosphorylation. In contrast, the
migration/invasion ability of T24 cells was suppressed by the knockdown of TGIF
or p67(phox), respectively. Overexpression of AKT1 could increase cellular
superoxide production and invasion. Moreover, by using the PI3K/AKT inhibitor
wortmannin or shRNA of AKT1, the TGIF-induced Nox activation and superoxide
production were significantly inhibited. Accordingly, we suggest that PI3K/AKT
signaling mediates TGIF-induced Nox2/p67(phox) complex activation and the
resultant superoxide production which reinforces the PI3K/AKT signaling to
promote the cellular migration/invasion ability of UC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22728270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e35672. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035672. Epub 2012 May 2.

The TGF-ß/Smad repressor TG-interacting factor 1 (TGIF1) plays a role in
radiation-induced intestinal injury independently of a Smad signaling pathway.

Hneino M(1), François A, Buard V, Tarlet G, Abderrahmani R, Blirando K, Hoodless 
PA, Benderitter M, Milliat F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Radiopathology and Experimental Therapies, Institute for
Radiological Protection and Nuclear Safety (IRSN), Fontenay-aux-Roses, France.

Despite advances in radiation delivery protocols, exposure of normal tissues
during the course of radiation therapy remains a limiting factor of cancer
treatment. If the canonical TGF-ß/Smad pathway has been extensively studied and
implicated in the development of radiation damage in various organs, the precise 
modalities of its activation following radiation exposure remain elusive. In the 
present study, we hypothesized that TGF-ß1 signaling and target genes expression 
may depend on radiation-induced modifications in Smad transcriptional
co-repressors/inhibitors expressions (TGIF1, SnoN, Ski and Smad7). In endothelial
cells (HUVECs) and in a model of experimental radiation enteropathy in mice,
radiation exposure increases expression of TGF-ß/Smad pathway and of its target
gene PAI-1, together with the overexpression of Smad co-repressor TGIF1. In mice,
TGIF1 deficiency is not associated with changes in the expression of
radiation-induced TGF-ß pathway-related transcripts following localized small
intestinal irradiation. In HUVECs, TGIF1 overexpression or silencing has no
influence either on the radiation-induced Smad activation or the Smad3-dependent 
PAI-1 overexpression. However, TGIF1 genetic deficiency sensitizes mice to
radiation-induced intestinal damage after total body or localized small
intestinal radiation exposure, demonstrating that TGIF1 plays a role in
radiation-induced intestinal injury. In conclusion, the TGF-ß/Smad co-repressor
TGIF1 plays a role in radiation-induced normal tissue damage by a
Smad-independent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3342305
PMID: 22567107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35460. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035460. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Premature senescence and increased TGFß signaling in the absence of Tgif1.

Zerlanko BJ(1), Bartholin L, Melhuish TA, Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Center for Cell
Signaling, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of
America.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) signaling regulates cell cycle progression in
several cell types, primarily by inducing a G1 cell cycle arrest. Tgif1 is a
transcriptional corepressor that limits TGFß responsive gene expression. Here we 
demonstrate that primary mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking Tgif1
proliferate slowly, accumulate increased levels of DNA damage, and senesce
prematurely. We also provide evidence that the effects of loss of Tgif1 on
proliferation and senescence are not limited to primary cells. The increased DNA 
damage in Tgif1 null MEFs can be partially reversed by culturing cells at
physiological oxygen levels, and growth in normoxic conditions also partially
rescues the proliferation defect, suggesting that in the absence of Tgif1 primary
MEFs are less able to cope with elevated levels of oxidative stress.
Additionally, we show that Tgif1 null MEFs are more sensitive to TGFß-mediated
growth inhibition, and that treatment with a TGFß receptor kinase inhibitor
increases proliferation of Tgif1 null MEFs. Conversely, persistent treatment of
wild type cells with low levels of TGFß slows proliferation and induces
senescence, suggesting that TGFß signaling also contributes to cellular
senescence. We suggest that in the absence of Tgif1, a persistent increase in
TGFß responsive transcription and a reduced ability to deal with hyperoxic stress
result in premature senescence in primary MEFs.

PMCID: PMC3325954
PMID: 22514746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 May;158A(5):1233-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35305. Epub 2012
Apr 11.

Exclusion of mutations in TGIF, ALX3, and ALX4 genes in patients with the
syndrome of frontonasal dysgenesis, callosal agenesis, basal encephalocele, and
eye anomalies.

Ribeiro-Bicudo LA(1), Quiezi RG, Guion-Almeida ML, Legnaro C, Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital of Rehabilitation of Craniofacial
Anomalies, University of São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

PMID: 22496059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(2):e1002524. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002524. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

Loss of Tgif function causes holoprosencephaly by disrupting the SHH signaling
pathway.

Taniguchi K(1), Anderson AE, Sutherland AE, Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Center for Cell
Signaling, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, United States of
America.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a severe human genetic disease affecting craniofacial 
development, with an incidence of up to 1/250 human conceptions and 1.3 per
10,000 live births. Mutations in the Sonic Hedgehog (SHH) gene result in HPE in
humans and mice, and the Shh pathway is targeted by other mutations that cause
HPE. However, at least 12 loci are associated with HPE in humans, suggesting that
defects in other pathways contribute to this disease. Although the TGIF1
(TG-interacting factor) gene maps to the HPE4 locus, and heterozygous loss of
function TGIF1 mutations are associated with HPE, mouse models have not yet
explained how loss of Tgif1 causes HPE. Using a conditional Tgif1 allele, we show
that mouse embryos lacking both Tgif1 and the related Tgif2 have HPE-like
phenotypes reminiscent of Shh null embryos. Eye and nasal field separation is
defective, and forebrain patterning is disrupted in embryos lacking both Tgifs.
Early anterior patterning is relatively normal, but expression of Shh is reduced 
in the forebrain, and Gli3 expression is up-regulated throughout the neural tube.
Gli3 acts primarily as an antagonist of Shh function, and the introduction of a
heterozygous Gli3 mutation into embryos lacking both Tgif genes partially rescues
Shh signaling, nasal field separation, and HPE. Tgif1 and Tgif2 are
transcriptional repressors that limit Transforming Growth Factor ß/Nodal
signaling, and we show that reducing Nodal signaling in embryos lacking both
Tgifs reduces the severity of HPE and partially restores the output of Shh
signaling. Together, these results support a model in which Tgif function limits 
Nodal signaling to maintain the appropriate output of the Shh pathway in the
forebrain. These data show for the first time that Tgif1 mutation in mouse
contributes to HPE pathogenesis and provide evidence that this is due to
disruption of the Shh pathway.

PMCID: PMC3285584
PMID: 22383895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Genet Metab. 2012 Apr;105(4):658-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2012.01.005. Epub
2012 Jan 12.

Utilizing prospective sequence analysis of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF in
holoprosencephaly probands to describe the parameters limiting the observed
frequency of mutant gene×gene interactions.

Roessler E(1), Vélez JI, Zhou N, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Clinical molecular diagnostic centers routinely screen SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF
for mutations that can help to explain holoprosencephaly and related brain
malformations. Here we report a prospective Sanger sequence analysis of 189
unrelated probands referred to our diagnostic lab for genetic testing. We
identified 28 novel unique mutations in this group (15%) and no instances of
deleterious mutations in two genes in the same subject. Our result extends that
of other diagnostic centers and suggests that among the aggregate 475
prospectively sequenced holoprosencephaly probands there is negligible evidence
for direct gene-gene interactions among these tested genes. We model the
predictions of the observed mutation frequency in the context of the hypothesis
that gene×gene interactions are a prerequisite for forebrain malformations, i.e. 
the "multiple-hit" hypothesis. We conclude that such a direct interaction would
be expected to be rare and that more subtle genetic and environmental
interactions are a better explanation for the clinically observed inter- and
intra-familial variability.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3309119
PMID: 22310223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Genet Genomics. 2012 Jan;39(1):19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2011.11.006. Epub 2011
Dec 24.

TG-interacting factor (TGIF) downregulates SOX3 gene expression in the NT2/D1
cell line.

Mojsin M(1), Popovic J, Kovacevic Grujicic N, Stevanovic M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Human Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Genetics and
Genetic Engineering, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. mojsin@eunet.rs

SOX3 is a member of the Sox gene family implicated in brain formation and
cognitive function. It is considered to be one of the earliest neural markers in 
vertebrates, playing a role in specifying neuronal fate. Recently, we have
established the first link between TALE (three-amino-acid loop extension)
proteins, PBX1 (pre-B-cell leukemia homeobox 1) and MEIS1 (myeloid ecotropic
viral integration site 1 homologue), and the expression of the human SOX3 gene.
Here we present the evidence that TGIF (TG-interacting factor) is an additional
TALE superfamily member involved in the regulation of human SOX3 gene expression 
in NT2/D1 cells by direct interaction with the consensus binding site that is
conserved in primate orthologue promoters. Functional analysis demonstrated that 
mutation of the TGIF binding site resulted in the activation of SOX3 promoter.
TGIF overexpression downregulates SOX3 promoter activity and decreases endogenous
SOX3 protein expression in both uninduced and retinoic acid (RA)-induced NT2/D1
cells. Up to now, this is the first transcription factor identified as a negative
regulator of SOX3 gene expression. The obtained results further underscore the
significance of TALE proteins as important transcriptional regulators of SOX3
gene expression.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22293114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 29;11:58. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-58.

Differential roles of TGIF family genes in mammalian reproduction.

Hu Y(1), Yu H, Shaw G, Renfree MB, Pask AJ.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence for Kangaroo Genomics, Department of Zoology, The
University of Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia.

BACKGROUND: TG-interacting factors (TGIFs) belong to a family of TALE-homeodomain
proteins including TGIF1, TGIF2 and TGIFLX/Y in human. Both TGIF1 and TGIF2 act
as transcription factors repressing TGF-ß signalling. Human TGIFLX and its
orthologue, Tex1 in the mouse, are X-linked genes that are only expressed in the 
adult testis. TGIF2 arose from TGIF1 by duplication, whereas TGIFLX arose by
retrotransposition to the X-chromosome. These genes have not been characterised
in any non-eutherian mammals. We therefore studied the TGIF family in the tammar 
wallaby (a marsupial mammal) to investigate their roles in reproduction and how
and when these genes may have evolved their functions and chromosomal locations.
RESULTS: Both TGIF1 and TGIF2 were present in the tammar genome on autosomes but 
TGIFLX was absent. Tammar TGIF1 shared a similar expression pattern during
embryogenesis, sexual differentiation and in adult tissues to that of TGIF1 in
eutherian mammals, suggesting it has been functionally conserved. Tammar TGIF2
was ubiquitously expressed throughout early development as in the human and
mouse, but in the adult, it was expressed only in the gonads and spleen, more
like the expression pattern of human TGIFLX and mouse Tex1. Tammar TGIF2 mRNA was
specifically detected in round and elongated spermatids. There was no mRNA
detected in mature spermatozoa. TGIF2 protein was specifically located in the
cytoplasm of spermatids, and in the residual body and the mid-piece of the mature
sperm tail. These data suggest that tammar TGIF2 may participate in
spermiogenesis, like TGIFLX does in eutherians. TGIF2 was detected for the first 
time in the ovary with mRNA produced in the granulosa and theca cells, suggesting
it may also play a role in folliculogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: The restricted and very similar expression of tammar TGIF2 to
X-linked paralogues in eutherians suggests that the evolution of TGIF1, TGIF2 and
TGIFLX in eutherians was accompanied by a change from ubiquitous to
tissue-specific expression. The distribution and localization of TGIF2 in tammar 
adult gonads suggest that there has been an ultra-conserved function for the TGIF
family in fertility and that TGIF2 already functioned in spermatogenesis and
potentially folliculogenesis long before its retrotransposition to the
X-chromosome of eutherian mammals. These results also provide further evidence
that the eutherian X-chromosome has actively recruited sex and
reproductive-related genes during mammalian evolution.

PMCID: PMC3204290
PMID: 21958027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Med Genet. 2011 Nov;48(11):752-60. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100339. Epub
2011 Sep 22.

New findings for phenotype-genotype correlations in a large European series of
holoprosencephaly cases.

Mercier S(1), Dubourg C, Garcelon N, Campillo-Gimenez B, Gicquel I, Belleguic M, 
Ratié L, Pasquier L, Loget P, Bendavid C, Jaillard S, Rochard L, Quélin C, Dupé
V, David V, Odent S.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Clinique, CLAD Ouest, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.

BACKGROUND: Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common forebrain defect in
humans. It results from incomplete midline cleavage of the prosencephalon.
METHODS: A large European series of 645 HPE probands (and 699 relatives),
consisting of 51% fetuses and 49% liveborn children, is reported.
RESULTS: Mutations in the four main genes involved in HPE (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, TGIF)
were identified in 25% of cases. The SHH, SIX3, and TGIF mutations were inherited
in more than 70% of these cases, whereas 70% of the mutations in ZIC2 occurred de
novo. Moreover, rearrangements were detected in 22% of the 260 patients screened 
by array comparative genomic hybridisation. 15 probands had two mutations
providing additional support for the 'multiple-hit process' in HPE. There was a
positive correlation between the severity of the brain malformation and facial
features for SHH, SIX3, and TGIF, but no such correlation was found for ZIC2
mutations. The most severe HPE types were associated with SIX3 and ZIC2
mutations, whereas microforms were associated with SHH mutations. The study
focused on the associated brain malformations, including neuronal migration
defects, which predominated in individuals with ZIC2 mutations, and neural tube
defects, which were frequently associated with ZIC2 (rachischisis) and TGIF
mutations. Extracraniofacial features were observed in 27% of the individuals in 
this series (up to 40% of those with ZIC2 mutations) and a significant
correlation was found between renal/urinary defects and mutations of SHH and
ZIC2.
CONCLUSIONS: An algorithm is proposed based on these new phenotype-genotype
correlations, to facilitate molecular analysis and genetic counselling for HPE.

PMCID: PMC3386902
PMID: 21940735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 12;411(4):821-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.07.044. Epub 2011 Jul 21.

Curcumin suppresses TGF-ß signaling by inhibition of TGIF degradation in
scleroderma fibroblasts.

Song K(1), Peng S, Sun Z, Li H, Yang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venerology, Beijing Military Command General
Hospital of PLA, China.

The transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathway plays a key role in
the fibrotic process in systemic scleroderma (SSc). Curcumin, a Turmeric root
extract, has been demonstrated to exert antifibrotic activity. In the present
study, we carefully investigated the effect of curcumin on TGF-ß signaling and
its potential mechanism in SSc fibroblasts. We demonstrated a potent inhibitory
effect of curcumin on TGF-ß signaling. Curcumin counteracted TGF-ß-induced
phosphorylation of Smad2 but not Smad3. Further study revealed curcumin induced
upregulation of TGF-ß-induced factor (TGIF), a negative regulator of TGF-ß
signaling. The TGIF silencing results evidenced the essential role of TGIF in
curcumin-mediated TGF-ß/Smad2 suppression. Moreover, our data indicated that the 
upregulation of TGIF by curcumin might result from decreased ubiquitination of
TGIF, which blocks its proteasome-mediated degradation. Collectively, our data
provide a novel mechanism of curcumin-mediated suppression of fibrotic process in
scleroderma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21798239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;25(8):1387-403. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0032. Epub 2011 Jun
9.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone pulse sensitivity of follicle-stimulating
hormone-beta gene is mediated by differential expression of positive regulatory
activator protein 1 factors and corepressors SKIL and TGIF1.

Mistry DS(1), Tsutsumi R, Fernandez M, Sharma S, Cardenas SA, Lawson MA, Webster 
NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Service, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San
Diego, California 92161, USA.

Gonadotropin synthesis and release is dependent on pulsatile stimulation by the
hypothalamic neuropeptide GnRH. Generally, slow GnRH pulses promote FSH
production, whereas rapid pulses favor LH, but the molecular mechanism underlying
this pulse sensitivity is poorly understood. In this study, we developed and
tested a model for FSHß regulation in mouse LßT2 gonadotropes. By mining a
previous microarray data set, we found that mRNA for positive regulators of Fshb 
expression, such as Fos and Jun, were up-regulated at slower pulse frequencies
than a number of potential negative regulators, such as the corepressors Skil,
Crem, and Tgif1. These latter corepressors reduced Fshb promoter activity whether
driven by transfection of individual transcription factors or by treatment with
GnRH and activin. Overexpression of binding or phosphorylation-defective
ski-oncogene-like protein (SKIL) and TG interacting factor (TGIF1) mutants,
however, failed to repress Fshb promoter activity. Knockdown of the endogenous
repressors SKIL and TGIF1, but not cAMP response element-modulator, increased
Fshb promoter activity driven by constant GnRH or activin. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that FOS, SKIL, and TGIF1 occupy the FSHß
promoter in a cyclical manner after GnRH stimulation. Overexpression of
corepressors SKIL or TGIF1 repressed induction of the Fshb promoter at the slow
GnRH pulse frequency but had little effect at the fast pulse frequency. In
contrast, knockdown of endogenous SKIL or TGIF1 selectively increased Fshb mRNA
at the fast GnRH pulse frequency. Therefore, we propose a potential mechanism by 
which production of gonadotropin Fshb is modulated by positive transcription
factors and negative corepressors with different pulse sensitivities.

PMCID: PMC3146254
PMID: 21659477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem J. 2011 Sep 1;438(2):349-58. doi: 10.1042/BJ20101653.

Suppression of TG-interacting factor sensitizes arsenic trioxide-induced
apoptosis in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Liu ZM(1), Tseng JT, Hong DY, Huang HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) is among the most common and lethal cancers
worldwide with a poor prognosis mainly due to a high recurrence rate and
chemotherapy resistance. ATO (arsenic trioxide) is a multi-target drug that has
been effectively used as an anticancer drug in acute promyelocytic leukaemia.
However, a Phase II trial involving patients with HCC indicates that the use of
arsenic as a single agent is not effective against HCC. TGIF (TG-interacting
factor) is a transcriptional co-repressor that interferes with TGF-ß
(transforming growth factor-ß) signalling which plays a growth-inhibitory role in
HCC. In the present study, we demonstrated that ATO induced hepatocellular
apoptosis via TGF-ß/Smad signalling and led to downstream induction of
p21(WAF1/CIP1) (p21). However, ATO could also induce TGIF expression via a
post-transcriptional regulation mechanism to antagonize this effect. Using a
biotin-labelled RNA probe pull-down assay and in vivo RNA immunoprecipitation
analysis, we identified that HuR (human antigen R) bound to the TGIF mRNA 3'-UTR 
(3'-untranslated region) and prevented it from degradation. ATO treatment
increased the interaction between HuR and TGIF mRNA, and reduction of HuR
expression inhibited ATO-induced TGIF expression. Moreover, the EGFR (epidermal
growth factor receptor)/PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)/Akt pathway was shown to
mediate the post-transcriptional regulation of TGIF in response to ATO. Finally, 
we also demonstrated that the down-regulation of TGIF could sensitize ATO-induced
HepG2 cell apoptosis. Collectively, we propose that the EGFR/PI3K/Akt pathway may
regulate the post-transcriptional regulation of TGIF expression to antagonize
ATO-induced apoptosis in HCC. Blockage of the PI3K/Akt pathway or TGIF expression
combined with ATO treatment may be a promising strategy for HCC therapy.

PMID: 21649584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Aug;34(4):355-67. doi: 10.1007/s13402-011-0036-6. Epub
2011 May 31.

Gene expression in oligodendroglial tumors.

Shaw EJ(1), Haylock B, Husband D, du Plessis D, Sibson DR, Warnke PC, Walker C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Studies, University of Liverpool, UK.
e.j.shaw@liverpool.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Oligodendroglial tumors with 1p/19q loss are more likely to be
chemosensitive and have longer survival than those with intact 1p/19q, but not
all respond to chemotherapy, warranting investigation of the biological basis of 
chemosensitivity.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was performed using amplified antisense RNA
from 28 oligodendroglial tumors treated with chemotherapy [26 serial stereotactic
biopsy, 2 resection]. Expression of differentially expressed genes was validated 
by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering showed clustering of multiple
samples from the same case in 14/17 cases and identified subgroups associated
with tumor grade and 1p/19q status. 176 genes were differentially expressed, 164 
being associated with 1p/19q loss (86% not on 1p or 19q). 94 genes differed
between responders and non-responders to chemotherapy; 12 were not associated
with 1p/19q loss. Significant differential expression was confirmed in 11/13
selected genes. Novel genes associated with response to therapy included SSBP2,
GFRA1, FAP and RASD1. IQGAP1, INA, TGIF1, NR2F2 and MYCBP were differentially
expressed in oligodendroglial tumors with 1p/19q loss.
CONCLUSION: Gene expression profiling using serial stereotactic biopsies
indicated greater homogeneity within tumors than between tumors. Genes associated
with 1p/19q status or response were identified warranting further elucidation of 
their role in oligodendroglial tumors.

PMID: 21625997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Pathol. 2011 Jun;224(2):180-9. doi: 10.1002/path.2874. Epub 2011 Apr 18.

FBXW7 mutations typically found in human cancers are distinct from null alleles
and disrupt lung development.

Davis H(1), Lewis A, Spencer-Dene B, Tateossian H, Stamp G, Behrens A, Tomlinson 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human 
Genetics, Oxford University, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Erratum in
    J Pathol. 2012 Jan;226(1):144.

FBXW7 is the substrate recognition component of a SCF-type E3 ubiquitin ligase.
It has multiple targets such as Notch1, c-Jun, and cyclin E that function in
critical developmental and signalling pathways. Mutations in FBXW7 are often
found in many types of cancer. In most cases, these mutations do not inactivate
the protein, but are mono-allelic missense changes at specific arginine resides
involved in substrate binding. We have hypothesized that FBXW7 mutations are
selected in cancers for reasons other than haploinsufficiency or full
loss-of-function. Given that the existing mutant Fbxw7 mice carry null alleles,
we created a mouse model carrying one of the commonly occurring point mutations
(Fbxw7(R482Q)) in the WD40 substrate recognition domain of Fbxw7. Mice
heterozygous for this mutation apparently developed normally in utero, died
perinatally due to a defect in lung development, and in some cases showed cleft
palate and eyelid fusion defects. By comparison, Fbxw7(+/-) mice were viable and 
developed normally. Fbxw7(-/-) animals died of vascular abnormalities at E10.5.
We screened known FBXW7 targets for changes in the lungs of the Fbxw7(R482Q/+)
mice and found Tgif1 and Klf5 to be up-regulated. Fbxw7(R482Q) alleles are not
functionally equivalent to heterozygous or homozygous null alleles, and we
propose that they are selected in tumourigenesis because they cause a selective
or partial loss of FBXW7 function.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3757315
PMID: 21503901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):H98-H107. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00668.2010. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Flow-dependent Smad2 phosphorylation and TGIF nuclear localization in human
aortic endothelial cells.

Shepherd RD(1), Kos SM, Rinker KD.

Author information: 
(1)Univ. of Calgary, 2500 Univ. Dr. N.W., Centre for Bioengineering Research and 
Education, CCIT 208, Calgary AB, Canada T2N 1N4.

Endothelial cells respond to fluid flow stimulation through transient and
sustained signal pathway activation. Smad2 is a signaling molecule and
transcription factor in the Smad signaling pathway, traditionally associated with
TGF-ß. Although phosphorylation of Smad2 in the receptor-dependent COOH-terminal 
region is the most appreciated way Smad2 is activated to affect gene expression, 
phosphorylation may also occur in the MH1-MH2 linker region (L-psmad2). Here, we 
show that in human aortic endothelial cells (HAEC), Smad2 was both preferentially
phosphorylated in the linker region and localized to the nucleus in a
flow-dependent manner. The Smad corepressor transforming growth interacting
factor (TGIF) was also found to have flow-dependent nuclear localization. Tissue 
studies confirmed this L-psmad2 generation trend in rat aorta, indicating likely 
importance in arterial tissue. HAEC-based inhibitor studies demonstrated that
L-psmad2 levels were not related to MAPK phosphorylation, but instead followed
the pattern of pAkt(473), both with and without the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
inhibitor PI-103. Akt and Smad species were also shown to directly interact under
flow relative to static controls. To further evaluate impacts of PI-103
treatment, expression profiles for two TGF-ß and shear stress-dependent genes
were determined and showed that mRNAs were lower from untreated 10 dyn/cm(2) than
2 dyn/cm(2) average shear stress cultures. However, upon exposure to PI-103, this
trend was reversed, with a stronger response observed at 10 dyn/cm(2). Taken
together, the results of this work suggest that fluid flow exposure may influence
endothelial gene expression by a novel mechanism involving Akt, L-psmad2, and
TGIF.

PMCID: PMC3129916
PMID: 21490324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2011 Feb;111(2):218-24. doi:
10.1016/j.tripleo.2010.10.003.

Detection of TGIF1 homeobox gene in oral squamous cell carcinoma according to
histologic grading.

Matizonkas-Antonio LF(1), Libório TN, Aquino Xavier FC, Silva-Valenzuela Md,
Michaluarte-Júnior P, Nunes FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo,
Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: TGIF1 homeobox gene involvement in oral cancer has not yet been
investigated. This study analyzed the expression of TGIF1 transcripts and protein
in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
STUDY DESIGN: Snap-frozen samples from 16 patients were taken from both OSCC and 
nontumoral adjacent epithelium (NT) for in situ hybridization (ISH). Forty-six
paraffin-embedded samples of OSCC were submitted to immunohistochemistry (IHC). A
descriptive analysis of the transcript signal detection was accomplished, and
TGIF1 immunoexpression was carried out considering protein levels, localization, 
and cellular differentiation.
RESULTS: ISH reactions showed TGIF1 transcripts with a signal that was frequently
intense in NT, and generally weak in OSCC, and that had stronger transcript
signal in well-differentiated areas of OSCC when compared with poorly
differentiated ones. IHC reactions had poorly differentiated cases associated
with TGIF1 protein expression in both the nucleus and cytoplasm (P = .05, Fisher 
test).
CONCLUSIONS: TGIF1 gain or loss of function might possibly play a role in oral
cancer cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Anal Cell Pathol (Amst). 2010;33(2):81-94. doi: 10.3233/ACP-CLO-2010-0533.

Gene expression in oligodendroglial tumors.

Shaw EJ(1), Haylock B, Husband D, du Plessis D, Sibson DR, Warnke PC, Walker C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Studies, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
e.j.shaw@liverpool.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2011 Aug;34(4):407-8.

BACKGROUND: Oligodendroglial tumors with 1p/19q loss are more likely to be
chemosensitive and have longer survival than those with intact 1p/19q, but not
all respond to chemotherapy, warranting investigation of the biological basis of 
chemosensitivity.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was performed using amplified antisense RNA
from 28 oligodendroglial tumors treated with chemotherapy (26 serial stereotactic
biopsy, 2 resection). Expression of differentially expressed genes was validated 
by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Unsupervised hierarchical clustering showed clustering of multiple
samples from the same case in 14/17 cases and identified subgroups associated
with tumor grade and 1p/19q status. 176 genes were differentially expressed, 164 
being associated with 1p/19q loss (86% not on 1p or 19q). 94 genes differed
between responders and non-responders to chemotherapy; 12 were not associated
with 1p/19q loss. Significant differential expression was confirmed in 11/13
selected genes. Novel genes associated with response to therapy included SSBP2,
GFRA1, FAP and RASD1. IQGAP1, INA, TGIF1, NR2F2 and MYCBP were differentially
expressed in oligodendroglial tumors with 1p/19q loss.
CONCLUSION: Gene expression profiling using serial stereotactic biopsies
indicated greater homogeneity within tumors than between tumors. Genes associated
with 1p/19q status or response were identified warranting further elucidation of 
their role in oligodendroglial tumors.

PMCID: PMC4605574
PMID: 20966545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncogene. 2010 Sep 23;29(38):5322-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.278. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Tumor suppressor Fbxw7 regulates TGFß signaling by targeting TGIF1 for
degradation.

Bengoechea-Alonso MT(1), Ericsson J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, UCD Conway Institute, University
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Transforming growth factor-ß (TGFß) signaling regulates multiple cellular
processes, including extracellular matrix production, cell growth, apoptosis and 
differentiation. Dysfunction of TGFß signaling has been implicated in various
human disorders ranging from vascular diseases to cancer. TGFß signaling is
negatively regulated by the transcriptional repressor TGFß-induced factor 1
(TGIF1). The tumor suppressor Fbxw7 is the substrate-recognition factor of a
ubiquitin ligase that targets multiple proteins for degradation, including c-Myc,
cyclin E, c-Jun and Notch. Here, we describe that TGIF1 is targeted for
degradation by Fbxw7 in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Inactivation of Fbxw7
results in the accumulation of phosphorylated TGIF1 molecules and repression of
TGFß-dependent transcription. Cancer cell lines with inactivating mutations in
Fbxw7 show enhanced levels of TGIF1 and attenuated TGFß-dependent signaling.
Importantly, inactivation of Fbxw7 attenuates TGFß-dependent regulation of cell
growth and migration. Taken together, our results suggest that Fbxw7 is a novel
regulator of TGFß signaling.

PMID: 20622901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Jul 31;42(7):484-502.

Integrative epigenomic and genomic analysis of malignant pheochromocytoma.

Sandgren J(1), Andersson R, Rada-Iglesias A, Enroth S, Akerstrom G, Dumanski JP, 
Komorowski J, Westin G, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Epigenomic and genomic changes affect gene expression and contribute to tumor
development. The histone modifications trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4me3) and lysine 27 (H3K27me3) are epigenetic regulators associated to active
and silenced genes, respectively and alterations of these modifications have been
observed in cancer. Furthermore, genomic aberrations such as DNA copy number
changes are common events in tumors. Pheochromocytoma is a rare endocrine tumor
of the adrenal gland that mostly occurs sporadic with unknown epigenetic/genetic 
cause. The majority of cases are benign. Here we aimed to combine the genome-wide
profiling of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, obtained by the ChIP-chip methodology, and DNA
copy number data with global gene expression examination in a malignant
pheochromocytoma sample. The integrated analysis of the tumor expression levels, 
in relation to normal adrenal medulla, indicated that either histone
modifications or chromosomal alterations, or both, have great impact on the
expression of a substantial fraction of the genes in the investigated sample.
Candidate tumor suppressor genes identified with decreased expression, a H3K27me3
mark and/or in regions of deletion were for instance TGIF1, DSC3, TNFRSF10B,
RASSF2, HOXA9, PTPRE and CDH11. More genes were found with increased expression, 
a H3K4me3 mark, and/or in regions of gain. Potential oncogenes detected among
those were GNAS, INSM1, DOK5, ETV1, RET, NTRK1, IGF2, and the H3K27 trimethylase 
gene EZH2. Our approach to associate histone methylations and DNA copy number
changes to gene expression revealed apparent impact on global gene transcription,
and enabled the identification of candidate tumor genes for further exploration.

PMCID: PMC2912476
PMID: 20534969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Sep;18(9):999-1005. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.70. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

The unfolding clinical spectrum of holoprosencephaly due to mutations in SHH,
ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes.

Paulussen AD(1), Schrander-Stumpel CT, Tserpelis DC, Spee MK, Stegmann AP,
Mancini GM, Brooks AS, Collée M, Maat-Kievit A, Simon ME, van Bever Y,
Stolte-Dijkstra I, Kerstjens-Frederikse WS, Herkert JC, van Essen AJ, Lichtenbelt
KD, van Haeringen A, Kwee ML, Lachmeijer AM, Tan-Sindhunata GM, van Maarle MC,
Arens YH, Smeets EE, de Die-Smulders CE, Engelen JJ, Smeets HJ, Herbergs J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, School for Oncology & Developmental Biology
(GROW), Maastricht UMC, The Netherlands. aimee.paulussen@gen.unimaas.nl

Holoprosencephaly is a severe malformation of the brain characterized by abnormal
formation and separation of the developing central nervous system. The prevalence
is 1:250 during early embryogenesis, the live-born prevalence is 1:16 000. The
etiology of HPE is extremely heterogeneous and can be teratogenic or genetic. We 
screened four known HPE genes in a Dutch cohort of 86 non-syndromic HPE index
cases, including 53 family members. We detected 21 mutations (24.4%), 3 in SHH, 9
in ZIC2 and 9 in SIX3. Eight mutations involved amino-acid substitutions, 7
ins/del mutations, 1 frame-shift, 3 identical poly-alanine tract expansions and 2
gene deletions. Pathogenicity of mutations was presumed based on de novo
character, predicted non-functionality of mutated proteins, segregation of
mutations with affected family-members or combinations of these features. Two
mutations were reported previously. SNP array confirmed detected deletions; one
spanning the ZIC2/ZIC5 genes (approx. 100 kb) the other a 1.45 Mb deletion
including SIX2/SIX3 genes. The mutation percentage (24%) is comparable with
previous reports, but we detected significantly less mutations in SHH: 3.5 vs
10.7% (P=0.043) and significantly more in SIX3: 10.5 vs 4.3% (P=0.018). For TGIF1
and ZIC2 mutation the rate was in conformity with earlier reports. About half of 
the mutations were de novo, one was a germ line mosaic. The familial mutations
displayed extensive heterogeneity in clinical manifestation. Of seven familial
index patients only two parental carriers showed minor HPE signs, five were
completely asymptomatic. Therefore, each novel mutation should be considered as a
risk factor for clinically manifest HPE, with the caveat of reduced clinical
penetrance.

PMCID: PMC2987413
PMID: 20531442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct 1;111(2):380-90. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22713.

Tgif1 represses apolipoprotein gene expression in liver.

Melhuish TA(1), Chung DD, Bjerke GA, Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Center for Cell Signaling, 
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

TG-interacting factor (Tgif1) represses gene expression by interaction with
general corepressors, and can be recruited to target genes by transforming growth
factor beta (TGFß) activated Smads, or by the retinoid X receptor (RXR). Here we 
show that Tgif1 interacts with the LXRa nuclear receptor and can repress
transcription from a synthetic reporter activated by LXRa. In cultured cells
reducing endogenous Tgif1 levels resulted in increased expression of LXRa target 
genes. To test the in vivo role of Tgif1, we analyzed LXRa-dependent gene
expression in mice lacking Tgif1. In the livers of Tgif1 null mice, we observed
significant derepression of the apolipoprotein genes, Apoa4 and Apoc2, suggesting
that Tgif1 is an important in vivo regulator of apolipoprotein gene expression.
In contrast, we observed relatively minimal effects on expression of other LXR
target genes. This work suggests that Tgif1 can regulate nuclear receptor
complexes, in addition to those containing retinoic acid receptors, but also
indicates that there is some specificity to which NR target genes are repressed
by Tgif1.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2939915
PMID: 20506222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene. 2010 Aug 15;462(1-2):8-17. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2010.04.006. Epub 2010 Apr
28.

Gene expression profiling of primary human articular chondrocytes in high-density
micromasses reveals patterns of recovery, maintenance, re- and dedifferentiation.

Dehne T(1), Schenk R, Perka C, Morawietz L, Pruss A, Sittinger M, Kaps C, Ringe
J.

Author information: 
(1)Tissue Engineering Laboratory and Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative
Therapies, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Tucholskystrasse 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
tilo.dehne@charite.de

The high-density micromass culture has been widely applied to study chondrocyte
cell physiology and pathophysiological mechanisms. Since an integrated image has 
not been established so far, we analyzed the phenotypic alterations of human
articular chondrocytes in this model on the broad molecular level. Freshly
isolated chondrocytes were assembled as micromasses and maintained up to 6 weeks 
in medium containing human serum. Formation of cartilaginous extracellular matrix
(ECM) was evaluated by histological and immunohistochemical staining. At 0, 3 and
6 weeks, chondrocyte micromasses were subjected to gene expression analysis using
oligonucleotide microarrays and real-time RT-PCR. Micromasses developed a
cartilaginous ECM rich in proteoglycans and type II collagen. On gene expression 
level, time-dependent expression patterns was observed. The induction of genes
associated with cartilage-specific ECM (COL2A1 and COL11A1) and developmental
signaling (GDF5, GDF10, ID1, ID4 and FGFR1-3) indicated redifferentiation within 
the first 3 weeks. The repression of genes related to stress response (HSPA1A and
HSPA4), apoptotic events (HYOU1, NFKBIA and TRAF1), and degradation (MMP1, MMP10 
and MMP12) suggested a recovery of chondrocytes. Constant expression of other
chondrogenic (ACAN, FN1 and MGP) and hypertrophic markers (COL10A1, ALPL, PTHR1
and PTHR2) indicated a pattern of phenotypic maintenance. Simultaneously, the
expression of chondrogenic growth (BMP6, TGFA, FGF1 and FGF2) and transcription
factors (SOX9, EGR1, HES1 and TGIF1), and other cartilage ECM-related genes (COMP
and PRG4) was consistently repressed and expression of collagens related to
dedifferentiation (COL1A1 and COL3A1) was steadily induced indicating a
progressing loss of cartilage phenotype. Likewise, a steady increase of genes
associated with proliferation (GAS6, SERPINF1, VEGFB and VEGFC) and apoptosis
(DRAM, DPAK1, HSPB, GPX1, NGFRAP1 and TIA1) was observed. Sequence and interplay 
of identified expression patterns suggest that chondrocyte micromass cultures
maintain a differentiated phenotype up to 3 weeks in vitro and might be useful
for studying chondrocyte biology, pathophysiology and differentiation.
Cultivation longer than 6 weeks leads to progressing dedifferentiation of
chondrocytes that should be considered on long-term evaluations.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Genet. 2010 Apr;127(4):421-40. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0778-7.

Clinical characterization of individuals with deletions of genes in
holoprosencephaly pathways by aCGH refines the phenotypic spectrum of HPE.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Ballif BC, Martin DM, Aylsworth AS, Bejjani BA, Torchia BS,
Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA 99207, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental forebrain anomaly in
humans. Both environmental and genetic factors have been identified to play a
role in the HPE phenotype. Previous studies of the genetic bases of HPE have
taken a phenotype-first approach by examining groups of patients with HPE for
specific mutations or deletions in known or candidate HPE genes. In this study,
we characterized the presence or absence of HPE or a microform in 136 individuals
in which microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) identified a
deletion of one of 35 HPE loci. Frank holoprosencephaly was present in 11
individuals with deletions of one of the common HPE genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and
TGIF1, in one individual with a deletion of the HPE8 locus at 14q13, and in one
individual with a deletion of FGF8, whereas deletions of other HPE loci and
candidate genes (FOXA2 and LRP2) expressed microforms of HPE. Although
individuals with deletions of other HPE candidates (DISP1, LSS, HHIP, SMO, BMP4, 
CDON, CDC42, ACVR2A, OTX2, and WIF1) had clinically significant features, none
had frank HPE or a microform. A search for significant aCGH findings in
individuals referred for testing for HPE revealed a novel association of a
duplication involving GSK3B at 3q13.33 with HPE or a microform, seen in two
unrelated individuals.

PMID: 20066439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell. 2009 Dec 25;36(6):1073-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.12.009.

A model of partnership co-opted by the homeodomain protein TGIF and the Itch/AIP4
ubiquitin ligase for effective execution of TNF-alpha cytotoxicity.

Demange C(1), Ferrand N, Prunier C, Bourgeade MF, Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U, Paris, France.

The homeodomain protein TGIF functions as a negative regulator of multiple
classes of transcription factors. Here we report on the characterization of TGIF 
as an essential component of the tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)
cytotoxic program. This proapoptotic role of TGIF does not appear to rely on
transcriptional modulation but instead is executed in conjunction with Itch/AIP4,
an E3 ubiquitin ligase operating in TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis through its
ability to target the caspase antagonist cFlip(L) for degradation. Notably, we
found that activation of TNF-alpha signaling induced the association of TGIF with
Itch/AIP4, resulting in increased accessibility of cFlip(L) for association and
ubiquitination by Itch/AIP4. Moreover, we show that Itch/AIP4 can also stabilize 
the TGIF protein in response to TNF-alpha by triggering its monoubiquitination at
lysine 259, thereby revealing the existence of a functional network that can
evolve into a positive feedback loop for ensuring effective execution of the
TNF-alpha apoptotic signaling.

2009 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 20064471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2010 Jan;137(2):249-59. doi: 10.1242/dev.040782.

Tgif1 and Tgif2 regulate Nodal signaling and are required for gastrulation.

Powers SE(1), Taniguchi K, Yen W, Melhuish TA, Shen J, Walsh CA, Sutherland AE,
Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, and Center for Cell
Signaling, University of Virginia, Box 800577, HSC, Charlottesville VA 22908,
USA.

Tgif1 and Tgif2 are transcriptional co-repressors that limit the response to
TGFbeta signaling and play a role in regulating retinoic-acid-mediated gene
expression. Mutations in human TGIF1 are associated with holoprosencephaly, but
it is unclear whether this is a result of deregulation of TGFbeta/Nodal
signaling, or of effects on other pathways. Surprisingly, mutation of Tgif1 in
mice results in only relatively mild developmental phenotypes in most strain
backgrounds. Here, we show that loss-of-function mutations in both Tgif1 and
Tgif2 result in a failure of gastrulation. By conditionally deleting Tgif1 in the
epiblast, we demonstrate that a single wild-type allele of Tgif1 in the
extra-embryonic tissue allows the double null embryos to gastrulate and begin
organogenesis, suggesting that extra-embryonic Tgif function is required for
patterning the epiblast. Genetically reducing the dose of Nodal in embryos
lacking all Tgif function results in partial rescue of the gastrulation defects. 
Conditional double null embryos have defects in left-right asymmetry, which are
also alleviated by reducing the dose of Nodal. Together, these data show that
Tgif function is required for gastrulation, and provide the first clear evidence 
that Tgifs limit the transcriptional response to Nodal signaling during early
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2799159
PMID: 20040491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 23;284(43):29988-96. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014811. Epub
2009 Aug 28.

Transforming growth factors beta coordinate cartilage and tendon differentiation 
in the developing limb mesenchyme.

Lorda-Diez CI(1), Montero JA, Martinez-Cue C, Garcia-Porrero JA, Hurle JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Universidad de Cantabria,
Santander 39011, Spain.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) signaling has an increasing interest in
regenerative medicine as a potential tool to repair cartilages, however the
chondrogenic effect of this pathway in developing systems is controversial. Here 
we have analyzed the function of TGFbeta signaling in the differentiation of the 
developing limb mesoderm in vivo and in high density micromass cultures. In these
systems highest signaling activity corresponded with cells at stages preceding
overt chondrocyte differentiation. Interestingly treatments with TGFbetas shifted
the differentiation outcome of the cultures from chondrogenesis to fibrogenesis. 
This phenotypic reprogramming involved down-regulation of Sox9 and Aggrecan and
up-regulation of Scleraxis, and Tenomodulin through the Smad pathway. We further 
show that TGFbeta signaling up-regulates Sox9 in the in vivo experimental model
system in which TGFbeta treatments induce ectopic chondrogenesis. Looking for
clues explaining the dual role of TGFbeta signaling, we found that TGFbetas
appear to be direct inducers of the chondrogenic gene Sox9, but the existence of 
transcriptional repressors of TGFbeta signaling modulates this role. We
identified TGF-interacting factor Tgif1 and SKI-like oncogene SnoN as potential
candidates for this inhibitory function. Tgif1 gene regulation by TGFbeta
signaling correlated with the differential chondrogenic and fibrogenic effects of
this pathway, and its expression pattern in the limb marks the developing
tendons. In functional experiments we found that Tgif1 reproduces the
profibrogenic effect of TGFbeta treatments.

PMCID: PMC2785627
PMID: 19717568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Oncol. 2009 Dec;3(5-6):451-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2009.07.004. Epub 2009
Jul 29.

Transforming growth-interacting factor (TGIF) regulates proliferation and
differentiation of human myeloid leukemia cells.

Hamid R(1), Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, United States. rizwan.hamid@vanderbilt.edu

Transforming growth-interacting factor (TGIF) is a homeobox transcriptional
repressor that has been implicated in holoprosencephaly and various types of
cancer. TGIF is expressed in hematopoietic stem cells and modulates TGF-beta and 
retinoic acid (RA) signaling, both of which play an important role in
hematopoiesis. We recently reported that TGIF's levels correlate inversely with
survival in patients with acute myelogenous leukemia. Here we present the first
direct evidence of a role for TGIF in myelopoiesis. We used short hairpin RNA
interference to define the effects of TGIF knockdown on proliferation and
differentiation of myeloid leukemia-derived cell lines. Decreased TGIF expression
resulted in reduced proliferation and differentiation and lower expression of
CEBPbeta, CEBPepsilon, PU.1 and RUNX1, key myeloid transcription factors.
Furthermore, TGF-beta signaling was increased and RA signaling was decreased.
Further insights into the molecular basis of TGIF's effects were provided by a
genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation-based elucidation of TGIF target genes.
Together, these data suggest that TGIF has an important role myelopoiesis and may
regulate the balance between proliferation and differentiation. Reduced TGIF
expression could tip the balance toward quiescence thus providing progenitor as
well as hematopoietic stem cells protection from anti-cycle agents.

PMID: 19699159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Fertil Steril. 2010 Aug;94(3):1078-83. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.05.001.
Epub 2009 Jun 13.

Transforming growth interacting factor expression in leiomyoma compared with
myometrium.

Yen-Ping Ho J(1), Man WC, Wen Y, Polan ML, Shih-Chu Ho E, Chen B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5317, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of transforming growth interacting
factor (TGIF), a Smad transcriptional corepressor, in leiomyoma and matched
myometrial tissue samples and the effect of TGIF overexpression in myometrial
cells.
DESIGN: Experimental study.
SETTING: Tertiary university hospital.
PATIENT(S): Uterine leiomyoma and myometrial tissues from 16 patients.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): The distribution of TGIF in leiomyoma and myometrial
tissues by immunohistochemistry stain, mRNA, and protein expression levels by
real-time quantitative polymerase chain-reaction (QPCR) and Western blot.
Transcriptional regulation of TGIF in myometrial cells with overexpressed TGIF.
RESULT(S): Although TGIF is present in the smooth muscle cells of the leiomyoma
and the myometrium, it is not found in the extracellular matrix. The TGIF mRNA
and protein expressions were statistically significantly higher in the leiomyoma 
compared with the matched, unaffected myometrial tissues in both phases of the
menstrual cycle. There were no differences in mRNA or protein expression
throughout the menstrual cycle. Overexpression of TGIF protein in myometrial
cells statistically significantly suppressed up-regulation of plasminogen
activator inhibitor (PAI-1) induced by TGF-beta1 treatment.
CONCLUSION(S): Expression of TGIF is increased in leiomyoma compared with
myometrium. This increase in TGIF expression is not affected by endogenous
ovarian hormones. Thus, TGIF is a potential repressor of TGF-beta pathways in
myometrial cells.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2888713
PMID: 19524896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Jun;149A(6):1277-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32844.

Holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly, and bilateral cleft of lip and palate: exclusion
of SHH, TGIF, SIX3, GLI2, TP73L, and DHCR7 as candidate genes.

Zechi-Ceide RM(1), Ribeiro LA, Raskin S, Bertolacini CD, Guion-Almeida ML,
Richieri-Costa A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital of Rehabilitation of Craniofacial
Anomalies (HRAC), University of São Paulo, Bauru, SP, Brazil.

We describe a Brazilian boy with semilobar holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly,
bilateral cleft of lip and palate, and severe mental retardation. The karyotype
was normal and the screening for mutations in the genes SHH, TGIF, SIX3, GLI2,
TP73L, and DHCR7 did not show any change. This rare condition was described
previously in seven male patients. Clinical and genetic aspects are discussed.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19449411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Apr;50(4):1546-51. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2537.
Epub 2008 Dec 5.

High myopia is not associated with the SNPs in the TGIF, lumican, TGFB1, and HGF 
genes.

Wang P(1), Li S, Xiao X, Jia X, Jiao X, Guo X, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.

PURPOSE: Four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TGIF, lumican, TGFB1,
and HGF genes have been declared to be associated with high myopia in Chinese
living in southeast China, but none of them has been confirmed by additional
studies. This study was conducted to verify the reported positive association
results by analysis of subjects from the same region.
METHODS: DNA was prepared from venous leukocytes of 288 patients with high myopia
and 208 control subjects. The four SNPs (rs2229336, rs3759223, rs1982073, and
rs3735520) in the four genes were genotyped by restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. The allele and genotype frequencies of these SNPs
from patients and control subjects were compared by chi(2) test.
RESULTS: Polymorphism at rs2229336 was not detected in all 496 subjects. There
were no statistically significant differences between patients and control
subjects for the other three SNPs: rs3759223, rs1982073, and rs3735520.
CONCLUSIONS: The study does not support the association of high myopia with
alleles of rs2229336 in TGIF, rs3759223 in lumican, rs1982073 in TGFB1, and
rs3735520 in HGF. These results provide a view contrary to those in previous
reports. Reasonable criteria as well as replication should be the first priority 
for genetic association studies to avoid excessive expansion of false-positive
results, especially for high myopia.

PMID: 19060265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Sci Signal. 2008 Nov 18;1(46):pe49. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.146pe49.

PCTA: a new player in TGF-beta signaling.

Liu F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers, The State University 
of New Jersey, 679 Hoes Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. fangliu@cabm.rutgers.edu

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) regulates a wide variety of biological
activities by binding to cell surface serine/threonine kinase receptors.
Canonical TGF-beta signaling is mediated by Smad proteins, which transduce the
TGF-beta signal from the cell surface into the nucleus to regulate transcription.
Upon TGF-beta binding and receptor activation, the TGF-beta receptor
phosphorylates Smad2 and Smad3. SARA (Smad anchor for receptor activation) and
cPML (cytoplasmic promyelocytic leukemia protein) recruit Smad2 and Smad3 for
phosphorylation by the TGF-beta receptor. cPML is sequestered in the nucleus by
the homeodomain protein TGIF (TG-interacting factor), a negative regulator of
TGF-beta signaling. Recently, PCTA (PML competitor for TGIF association) has been
shown to compete with cPML for binding to TGIF, resulting in the accumulation of 
cPML in the cytoplasm, where it mediates the interaction between Smad2/3 and SARA
and coordinates the phosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3 by the TGF-beta receptor. 
Accordingly, PCTA promotes TGF-beta-mediated transcriptional regulation and
growth inhibition. Thus, PCTA defines a new regulator in TGF-beta signaling.

PMID: 19018012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):2862-73. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21707.

Maternal Tgif1 regulates nodal gene expression in Xenopus.

Kerr TC(1), Cuykendall TN, Luettjohann LC, Houston DW.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Biology, Iowa City, Iowa 52246-1324, USA.

In Xenopus, the maternal transcription factor VegT is necessary and sufficient to
initiate the expression of nodal-related genes, which are central to many aspects
of early development. However, little is known about regulation of VegT activity.
Using maternal loss-of-function experiments, we show that the maternal
homeoprotein, Tgif1, antagonizes VegT and plays a central role in anteroposterior
patterning by negatively regulating a subset of nodal-related genes. Depletion of
Tgif1 causes the anteriorization of embryos and the up-regulation of nodal
paralogues nr5 and nr6. Furthermore, Tgif1 inhibits activation of nr5 by VegT in 
a manner that requires a C-terminal Sin3 corepressor-interacting domain. Tgif1
has been implicated in the transcriptional corepression of transforming growth
factor-beta (TGFbeta) and retinoid signaling. However, we show that Tgif1 does
not inhibit these pathways in early development. These results identify an
essential role for Tgif1 in the control of nodal expression and provide insight
into Tgif1 function and mechanisms controlling VegT activity.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18816846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. EMBO J. 2008 Jul 9;27(13):1804-15. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.109. Epub 2008 May 29.

Identification of PCTA, a TGIF antagonist that promotes PML function in TGF-beta 
signalling.

Faresse N(1), Colland F, Ferrand N, Prunier C, Bourgeade MF, Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling and Carcinogenesis, INSERM U673, Paris, France.

The TGIF homoeodomain protein functions as an important negative regulator in the
TGF-beta signalling pathway. The inhibitory function of TGIF is executed in part 
through its ability to sequester the tumour suppressor cytoplasmic promyelocytic 
leukaemia (cPML) in the nucleus, thereby preventing the phosphorylation of Smad2 
by the activated TGF-beta type I receptor. Here, we report on the identification 
of PCTA (PML competitor for TGIF association), a TGIF antagonist that promotes
TGF-beta-induced transcriptional and cytostatic responses. We provide evidence
that PCTA functions in TGF-beta signalling by relieving the suppression of Smad2 
phosphorylation by TGIF. Furthermore, we demonstrate that PCTA selectively
competes with cPML for TGIF association, resulting in the accumulation of cPML in
the cytoplasm, where it associates with SARA and coordinates the access of Smad2 
for phosphorylation by the activated TGF-beta type I receptor. Thus, our findings
on the mode of action of PCTA provide new and important insights into the
molecular mechanism underlying the antagonistic interplay between TGIF and cPML
in the TGF-beta signalling network.

PMCID: PMC2486419
PMID: 18511908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 May;1779(5):347-55. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.04.003.
Epub 2008 Apr 13.

Genomic structure, alternative splicing and expression of TG-interacting factor, 
in human myeloid leukemia blasts and cell lines.

Hamid R(1), Patterson J, Brandt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA. rizwan.hamid@vanderbilt.edu

TG-interacting factor (TGIF) is a homeobox transcriptional repressor that has
been implicated in holoprosencephaly and various types of cancer, including
leukemias. In this study, we provide the first detailed description of the TGIF
locus characterizing 12 TGIF splice isoforms. These isoforms have similar open
reading frames but different 5' untranslated regions. TGIF expression data are
presented from multiple tissues, cell lines and primary leukemia cells.
Isoform-specific real-time PCR analysis showed that even though these isoforms
were broadly expressed all except isoform 4, had very low level of expression. In
fact, isoform 4 was the predominant TGIF isoform expressed in all tissues
analyzed. Since TGIF, levels have recently implicated to play a role in acute
myelogenous leukemia we proceeded to characterize the minimal promoter region of 
isoform 4 as a first step in understanding mechanisms of TGIF expression. As
expected for homeobox genes, the minimal promoter region for isoform 4 has
multiple Sp1 binding sites and a CpG island raising the possibility that the low 
TGIF expression seen in some AML patients and leukemia cell lines may be
secondary to methylation. Further characterization of expression from this
promoter using 5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment and transient expression assays
showed that decreased TGIF expression is likely secondary to active repression
and not because of promoter methylation. A detailed characterization of this
complex locus is important as it may help to clarify the functions of this gene
in brain development and leukemia biology.

PMID: 18455519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2008 Jul;295(1):L143-51. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00289.2007. Epub 2008 Apr 25.

EGF antagonizes TGF-beta-induced tropoelastin expression in lung fibroblasts via 
stabilization of Smad corepressor TGIF.

Yang S(1), Nugent MA, Panchenko MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, 715 Albany
St, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

We previously reported that neutrophil elastase (NE) downregulates transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)-maintained tropoelastin mRNA levels in lung
fibroblasts through transactivation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor
(EGFR)/Mek/Erk pathway, which is dependent on the NE-initiated release of soluble
EGFR ligands. In the present study, we investigated the mechanism by which EGF
downregulates tropoelastin expression. We found that EGF downregulates
tropoelastin expression through inhibition of TGF-beta signaling. We show that
EGF does not prevent the TGF-beta-induced nuclear accumulation of Smad2/3;
rather, EGF stabilizes the short-lived Smad transcriptional corepressor
TG-interacting factor (TGIF) via EGFR/Mek/Erk-mediated phosphorylation of TGIF.
Elevation of TGIF levels, either by TGIF overexpression or prevention of TGIF
degradation, is sufficient to inhibit TGF-beta-induced tropoelastin expression.
Moreover, TGIF is essential for EGF-mediated downregulation of tropoelastin
expression, inasmuch as small interfering RNA knockdown of TGIF blocked
EGF-induced downregulation of tropoelastin. Finally, we demonstrated that NE
treatment, which releases EGF-like growth factors, causes stabilization of TGIF
through the EGFR/Mek/Erk pathway. These results suggest that EGFR/Mek/Erk
signaling specifically antagonizes the proelastogenic action of TGF-beta in lung 
fibroblasts by stabilizing the Smad transcriptional corepressor TGIF.

PMCID: PMC2494790
PMID: 18441095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Mar 21;4(3):e1000021. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000021.

Uncovering a macrophage transcriptional program by integrating evidence from
motif scanning and expression dynamics.

Ramsey SA(1), Klemm SL, Zak DE, Kennedy KA, Thorsson V, Li B, Gilchrist M, Gold
ES, Johnson CD, Litvak V, Navarro G, Roach JC, Rosenberger CM, Rust AG, Yudkovsky
N, Aderem A, Shmulevich I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, Washington, United States of America. 
sramsey@systemsbiology.org

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Mar;4(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/e14ad837-e5ff-4bd5-a5f2-f32e784d75a2.
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 Mar;4(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/1c55be5f-ecd7-49be-91c1-91881be60297.

Macrophages are versatile immune cells that can detect a variety of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns through their Toll-like receptors (TLRs). 
In response to microbial challenge, the TLR-stimulated macrophage undergoes an
activation program controlled by a dynamically inducible transcriptional
regulatory network. Mapping a complex mammalian transcriptional network poses
significant challenges and requires the integration of multiple experimental data
types. In this work, we inferred a transcriptional network underlying
TLR-stimulated murine macrophage activation. Microarray-based expression
profiling and transcription factor binding site motif scanning were used to infer
a network of associations between transcription factor genes and clusters of
co-expressed target genes. The time-lagged correlation was used to analyze
temporal expression data in order to identify potential causal influences in the 
network. A novel statistical test was developed to assess the significance of the
time-lagged correlation. Several associations in the resulting inferred network
were validated using targeted ChIP-on-chip experiments. The network incorporates 
known regulators and gives insight into the transcriptional control of macrophage
activation. Our analysis identified a novel regulator (TGIF1) that may have a
role in macrophage activation.

PMCID: PMC2265556
PMID: 18369420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Mar-Apr;51(2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.08.004. Epub
2007 Sep 15.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly syndrome: in search of an etiology.

Cordero DR(1), Bendavid C, Shanske AL, Haddad BR, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly (HPS) or Pseudotrisomy 13 syndrome are names
conferred to clinically categorize patients whose phenotype is congruent with
Trisomy 13 in the context of a normal karyotype. The literature suggests that
this entity may be secondary to submicroscopic deletions in holoprosencephaly
(HPE) genes; however, a limited number of investigations have been undertaken to 
evaluate this hypothesis. To test this hypothesis we studied a patient with HPE, 
polydactyly, and craniofacial dysmorphologies consistent with the diagnosis of
Trisomy 13 whose karyotype was normal. We performed mutational analysis in the
four main HPE causing genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and ZIC2) and GLI3, a gene
associated with polydactyly as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
to search for microdeletions in these genes and two candidate HPE genes (DISP1
and FOXA2). No mutations or deletions were detected. A whole genome approach
utilizing array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) to screen for copy
number abnormalities was then taken. No loss or gain of DNA was noted. Although a
single case, our results suggest that coding mutations in these HPE genes and
copy number anomalies may not be causative in this disorder. Instead, HPS likely 
involves mutations in other genes integral in embryonic development of the
forebrain, face and limbs. Our systematic analysis sets the framework to study
other affected children and delineate the molecular etiology of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC2441840
PMID: 18178536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Jan;49(1):49-54. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-0896.

Assessment of TGIF as a candidate gene for myopia.

Pertile KK(1), Schäche M, Islam FM, Chen CY, Dirani M, Mitchell P, Baird PN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Eye Research Australia, Department of Ophthalmology University of
Melbourne, 32 Gisborne Street, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
kpertile@unimelb.edu.au

PURPOSE: Transforming growth beta-induced factor (TGIF) has been identified as a 
candidate gene for high myopia through genetic linkage studies and through its
role in ocular growth in animal studies. However, the association of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), based solely on myopia refraction, has so far
been inconclusive. This is the first study conducted to investigate the
association of TGIF with refraction and ocular biometric measurements.
METHODS: Twelve tag SNPs (tSNPs) encompassing the TGIF gene and 2 kb upstream of 
its promoter region were used to evaluate the association between TGIF variants
with both ocular biometric measures and refraction. A total of 257 cases of
myopia (spherical equivalent [SE] worse than -0.50 D) and 294 control subjects
(no myopia) were genotyped. Genotype frequencies were analyzed by chi(2) test and
one-way ANOVA.
RESULTS: Two tSNPs showed significant association with biometric measures, with
the SNP rs8082866 being associated with both axial length (P = 0.013) and corneal
curvature (P = 0.007) and the SNP rs2020436 being associated with corneal
curvature (P = 0.022). However, these associations became nonsignificant after
multiple testing (Bonferroni correction).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings of this study suggest that the TGIF gene is unlikely to
play a major role in either ocular biometric measures or refraction in a
Caucasian population. Future studies should focus on other genes in the MYP2
linkage region or other linked regions to identify myopia-causing genes.

PMID: 18172074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Brain Dev. 2008 Mar;30(3):203-5. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Variable phenotypic manifestations of a K44N mutation in the TGIF gene.

Richieri-Costa A(1), Ribeiro LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias Craniofaciais,
Universidade de São Paulo, Rua Silvio Marchioni 320, CEP 17012-900, Bauru, SP,
Brazil. richieri@usp.br

The etiologies and clinical spectra of HPE are extremely heterogeneous. Here, we 
report a Brazilian boy with lobar holoprosencephaly who was ascertained in a
sample of 60 patients with HPE and HPE-like phenotypes and screened for molecular
analysis of the major HPE causative genes: SHH, PTCH, SIX3, GLI2, and TGIF. This 
boy presented a p.K44N (c.132G>T) mutation in exon 2 of the TGIF gene which was
inherited from his phenotypically normal mother. This mutation leads to lysine to
arginine amino acid change and is predicted to be a damaging mutation. Clinical
aspects involving variable phenotypical manifestations in different mutations of 
TGIF are discussed.

PMID: 17825514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Aug;48(8):3506-15.

Linkage mapping of ovine microphthalmia to chromosome 23, the sheep orthologue of
human chromosome 18.

Tetens J(1), Ganter M, Müller G, Drögemüller C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine
Hannover, Germany.

PURPOSE: To characterize the phenotype and map the locus responsible for
autosomal recessive inherited ovine microphthalmia (OMO) in sheep.
METHODS: Microphthalmia-affected lambs and their available relatives were
collected in a field, and experimental matings were performed to obtain affected 
and normal lambs for detailed necropsy and histologic examinations. The matings
resulted in 18 sheep families with 48 cases of microphthalmia. A comparative
candidate gene approach was used to map the disease locus within the sheep
genome. Initially, 27 loci responsible for the microphthalmia-anophthalmia
phenotypes in humans or mice were selected to test for comparative linkage. Fifty
flanking markers that were predicted from comparative genomic analysis to be
closely linked to these genes were tested for linkage to the disease locus. After
observation of statistical evidence for linkage, a confirmatory fine mapping
strategy was applied by further genotyping of 43 microsatellites.
RESULTS: The clinical and pathologic examinations showed slightly variable
expressivity of isolated bilateral microphthalmia. The anterior eye chamber was
small or absent, and a white mass admixed with cystic spaces extended from the
papilla to the anterior eye chamber, while no recognizable vitreous body or lens 
was found within the affected eyes. Significant linkage to a single candidate
region was identified at sheep chromosome 23. Fine mapping and haplotype analysis
assigned the candidate region to a critical interval of 12.4 cM. This ovine
chromosome segment encompasses an ancestral chromosomal breakpoint corresponding 
to two orthologue segments of human chromosomes 18, short and long arms. For the 
examined animals, we excluded the complete coding region and adjacent intronic
regions of ovine TGIF1 to harbor disease-causing mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first genetic localization for hereditary ovine isolated
microphthalmia. It seems unlikely that a mutation in the TGIF1 gene is
responsible for this disorder. The studied sheep represent a valuable large
animal model for similar human ocular phenotypes.

PMID: 17652717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Oct;1773(10):1572-82. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Histone deacetylase 4 is required for TGFbeta1-induced myofibroblastic
differentiation.

Glenisson W(1), Castronovo V, Waltregny D.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

Transforming Growth Factor beta1 (TGFbeta1) is a crucial cytokine triggering
myofibroblastic (MF) differentiation, a process involved in tissue healing as
well as in pathologic conditions such as fibrosis and cancer. Together with cell 
shape modifications, TGFbeta1-mediated differentiation of fibroblasts into
myofibroblasts is characteristically associated with the neo-expression of smooth
muscle alpha-actin (alpha-SMA), a cytoskeletal protein that enhances their
contractile activity. Several cellular differentiation programs have been linked 
to epigenetic regulation of gene expression, including gene methylation and
histone acetylation. Herein, we sought to investigate the role of histone
deacetylases (HDAC) in TGFbeta1-induced MF differentiation. We found that TSA, a 
global inhibitor of class I and class II HDACs, prevented alpha-SMA transcript
and protein expression and morphological changes mediated by TGFbeta1 in cultured
human skin fibroblasts. In order to identify the HDAC(s) participating in MF
differentiation, the impact of specific HDAC silencing (HDAC1 through HDAC8)
using RNA interference was investigated in fibroblasts exposed to TGFbeta1. Among
the eight HDACs tested, silencing of HDAC4, HDAC6, and HDAC8 expression impaired 
TGFbeta1-induced alpha-SMA expression. HDAC4 silencing most efficiently abrogated
alpha-SMA expression and also prevented TGFss1-mediated morphological changes.
Forced down-regulation of HDAC4 stimulated the expression of 5'-TG-3'-Interacting
Factor (TGIF) and TGIF2 homeoproteins, two known endogenous repressors of the
TGFbeta signaling pathway, but not of the inhibitory Smad7. Collectively, these
data suggest that HDAC4 is an essential epigenetic regulator of MF
differentiation and unveil HDAC4 as a potential target for treating MF-related
disorders.

PMID: 17610967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Psychiatry. 2007 Nov;12(11):1033-41. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

TGFB-induced factor (TGIF): a candidate gene for psychosis on chromosome 18p.

Chavarría-Siles I(1), Walss-Bass C, Quezada P, Dassori A, Contreras S, Medina R, 
Ramírez M, Armas R, Salazar R, Leach RJ, Raventos H, Escamilla MA.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Genetics Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.

Schizophrenia (SC) and bipolar disorder (BP) share many clinical features, among 
them psychosis. We previously identified a putative gene locus for psychosis on
chromosome 18p in a sample from the Central Valley of Costa Rica (CVCR)
population. The present study replicated the association to a specific allele of 
microsatellite marker D18S63 on 18p11.3, using a newly collected sample from the 
CVCR. A combined analysis of both samples, plus additional subjects, showed that 
this specific allele on D18S63, which lies within an intron on the TGFB-induced
factor (TGIF) gene, is strongly associated (P-value=0.0005) with psychosis.
Eleven additional SNP markers, spanning five genes in the region, were analyzed
in the combined sample from the CVCR. Only the four SNPs within the TGIF gene
were in strong linkage disequilibrium with D18S63 (D'=1.00). A specific haplotype
for all five markers within the TGIF gene showed evidence of association
(P-value=0.011) to psychosis. A second, distinct haplotype, containing a newly
identified nonsynonymous polymorphism in exon 5 of the TGIF gene, showed a
nonsignificant trend towards association to psychosis (P-value=0.077). TGIF is
involved in neurodevelopment, neuron survival and controls the expression of
dopamine receptors. Altogether, our results point to the possible involvement of 
TGIF in the pathophysiology of psychotic disorders in the CVCR population.

PMID: 17440433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gastroenterology. 2007 Mar;132(3):994-1008. Epub 2006 Dec 16.

Inhibition of TGF-beta signaling by IL-15: a new role for IL-15 in the loss of
immune homeostasis in celiac disease.

Benahmed M(1), Meresse B, Arnulf B, Barbe U, Mention JJ, Verkarre V, Allez M,
Cellier C, Hermine O, Cerf-Bensussan N.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U793, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2007 Mar;132(3):1174-6.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Interleukin (IL)-15 delivers signals that drive chronic
inflammation in several diseases, including celiac disease. Smad3-transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling is instrumental to counteract
proinflammatory signals and maintain immune homeostasis. Our goal has been to
investigate why the proinflammatory effects of IL-15 cannot be efficiently
controlled by TGF-beta in celiac disease.
METHODS: The impact of IL-15 on TGF-beta signaling in T cells and in the
intestinal mucosa of celiac disease patients was analyzed by combining cell and
organ cultures, immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, real-time polymerase chain 
reaction, electromobility gel shift, and Western blot.
RESULTS: IL-15 impaired Smad3-dependent TGF-beta signaling in human T lymphocytes
downstream from Smad3 nuclear translocation. IL-15-mediated inhibition was
associated with a long-lasting activation of c-jun-N-terminal kinase and reversed
by c-jun antisense oligonucleotides, consistent with the demonstrated inhibitory 
effect of phospho-c-jun on the formation of Smad3-DNA complexes. In active celiac
disease, intestinal lymphocytes showed impaired TGF-beta-Smad3-dependent
transcriptional responses and up-regulation of phospho-c-jun. Anti-IL-15 antibody
and c-jun antisense both downmodulated phospho-c-jun expression and restored
TGF-beta-Smad-dependent transcription in biopsies of active celiac disease. c-jun
antisense decreased interferon gamma transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Impairment of TGF-beta-mediated signaling by IL-15 might promote and
sustain intestinal inflammation in celiac disease. More generally, our data
provide a new rationale for the potent proinflammatory effects of IL-15, and
further support the concept that IL-15 is a meaningful therapeutic target in
inflammatory diseases associated with irreducible elevation of IL-15.

PMID: 17324400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FASEB J. 2007 Feb;21(2):488-96. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

A mechanism for mutational inactivation of the homeodomain protein TGIF in
holoprosencephaly.

Ferrand N(1), Demange C, Prunier C, Seo SR, Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 673, Hôpital St-Antoine, 184 Rue du Faubourg St-Antoine, 75571, Paris
Cedex 12, France.

The homeodomain protein TGIF functions as a negative modulator for multiple
classes of transcription factors. Loss of function mutations in a single copy of 
TGIF result in holoprosencephaly, a developmental anomaly leading to severe
forebrain and craniofacial malformations. However, the mechanisms by which these 
mutations disrupt the functions of TGIF remain to be elucidated. Here we show
that a holoprosencephaly mutation (P63R) interferes with the ability of TGIF to
act as a corepressor for c-Jun and Smad2, suggesting that this holoprosencephaly 
mutation may lead to a general defect in the TGIF protein. In fact, we observed
that the P63R mutation affects folding of the TGIF protein, resulting in the
disruption of the diffuse nuclear staining pattern characteristic of wild-type
(WT) TGIF and the accumulation of TGIF in nuclear aggregates. We also show that
the mutant TGIF.P63R is degraded more rapidly when compared with WT TGIF and that
this degradation occurs through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Furthermore, we
observed that TGIF.P63R homodimerizes with WT TGIF to sequester it into nuclear
aggregates and to enhance its ubiquitin-dependent degradation. These results
reveal an important mechanism for the degradation of TGIF through the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, whose deregulation might contribute to the
development of human holoprosencephaly.

PMID: 17158784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2006 Sep;76(9):658-73.

Holoprosencephaly: clinical, anatomic, and molecular dimensions.

Cohen MM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
michael.cohen@dal.ca

Holoprosencephaly is addressed under the following headings: alobar, semilobar,
and lobar holoprosencephaly; arrhinencephaly; agenesis of the corpus callosum;
pituitary abnormalities; hindbrain abnormalities; syntelencephaly;
aprosencephaly/atelencephaly; neural tube defects; facial anomalies; median cleft
lip; minor facial anomalies; single maxillary central incisor;
holoprosencephaly-like phenotype; epidemiology; genetic causes of
holoprosencephaly; teratogenic causes of holoprosencephaly; SHH mutations; ZIC2
mutations; SIX3 mutations; TGIF mutations; PTCH mutations; GLI2 mutations; FAST1 
mutations; TDGF1 mutations; and DHCR7 mutations.

PMID: 17001700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Dec 1;140(23):2598-602.

Contiguous gene syndrome of holoprosencephaly and hypotrichosis simplex:
association with an 18p11.3 deletion.

Kantaputra PN(1), Limwongse C, Tochareontanaphol C, Mutirangura A, Mevatee U,
Praphanphoj V.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Chiang Mai
University, Chiang Mai, Bangkok, Thailand. dnpdi001@chiangmai.ac.th

We report a patient with a unique combination of features, including
microcephaly; mental retardation; poorly developed frontal lobes; hypoplastic
pituitary gland; hypothyroidism; alopecia universalis; single maxillary central
incisor; taurodontism; median palatal ridge; longitudinally grooved nails; and
scoliosis. His unbalanced karyotype was found to be 45,XY,der(15;18)(q10;q10).
The constellation of anomalies appears to represent a contiguous gene syndrome
caused, at least in part, by deletion of TGIF and the gene responsible for
hereditary hypotrichosis simplex. The phenotype of our patient differs other
reported patients with del(18p). Possible explanations include (1) the effects of
a different deleted region, (2) a positional effect caused by a gene close by, or
(3) by interruption of a different gene resulting from chromosomal translocation.

PMID: 17001671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Jan;90(1):97-111. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Functional analysis of mutations in TGIF associated with holoprosencephaly.

El-Jaick KB(1), Powers SE, Bartholin L, Myers KR, Hahn J, Orioli IM, Ouspenskaia 
M, Lacbawan F, Roessler E, Wotton D, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural malformation of the
forebrain and face in humans. Our current understanding of the pathogenesis of
HPE attempts to integrate genetic susceptibility, evidenced by mutations in the
known HPE genes, with the epigenetic influence of environmental factors.
Mutations or deletions of the human TGIF gene have been associated with HPE in
multiple population cohorts. Here we examine the functional effects of all
previously reported mutations, and describe four additional variants. Of the
eleven sequence variations in TGIF, all but four can be demonstrated to be
functionally abnormal. In contrast, no potentially pathogenic sequence
alterations were detected in the related gene TGIF2. These results provide
further evidence of a role for TGIF in HPE and demonstrate the importance of
functional analysis of putative disease-associated alleles.

PMCID: PMC1820763
PMID: 16962354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell. 2006 Aug;23(4):547-59.

Nuclear retention of the tumor suppressor cPML by the homeodomain protein TGIF
restricts TGF-beta signaling.

Seo SR(1), Ferrand N, Faresse N, Prunier C, Abécassis L, Pessah M, Bourgeade MF, 
Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U673, Hôpital St-Antoine, 184 Rue du Faubourg St-Antoine, 75571 Paris.

The homeodomain protein TGIF has been implicated in the negative regulation of
TGF-beta signaling. In this study, we report an unexpected role of TGIF in the
inhibition of Smad2 phosphorylation, which occurs by a mechanism independent of
its association with Smad2. This inhibitory function of TGIF is executed in
concert with c-Jun, which facilitates the interaction of TGIF with cPML,
resulting in the nuclear sequestration of cPML and the disruption of the
cPML-SARA complex. Notably, knockdown of TGIF by siRNA caused increased
association of cPML with SARA and cytoplasmic accumulation of cPML. Furthermore, 
c-Jun(-/-) fibroblasts exhibit enhanced association of cPML with SARA. c-Jun(-/-)
fibroblasts also lose their sensitivity to TGIF-mediated disruption of the
cPML-SARA complex and of nuclear sequestration of cPML. We suggest that the
interaction of TGIF with cPML through c-Jun may negatively regulate TGF-beta
signaling through controlling the localization of cPML and, consequently, the
assembly of the cPML-SARA complex.

PMID: 16916642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 Feb;31(1):70-4.

[Expressions of TGIF, MMP9 and VEGF proteins and their clinicopathological
relationship in gastric cancer].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu ZL(1), Wen JF, Shen M, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South University,
Changsha 410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the expressions of TG-interacting factor (TGIF), matrix
metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
proteins, and to analyze their clinicopathological relationship in gastric
cancer.
METHODS: Vascular invasion and remote metastasis were examined in nude mice
inoculated with SGC-7901 cells, vector control cells or TGIF transfected cells
via serial sections, and sequentially the expressions of MMP2, MMP9 and VEGF
proteins in tumor tissues from nude mice were detected by immunohistochemical
staining. At the same time, TGIF, MMP9 and VEGF proteins were examined in 76
patients with gastric carcinoma, and the relationships between the expressions of
the three proteins and clinicopathological features were analyzed.
RESULTS: Metastasis was not observed in nude mice inoculated with any cells.
There were cancerous embolisms in nude mice tumor tissue inoculated with SGC-7901
cells and vector control cells, but not in TGIF transfected cells. The
expressions of MMP9 and VEGF proteins were higher in the tumor tissues originated
from SGC-7901 cells and vector control cells than that from TGIF transfected
cells. The expression of MMP2 had no distinct difference among the tumor tissues 
originated from the three cells. The positive rate of TGIF protein in gastric
carcinoma was 46.1% (35/76), obviously lower than that in surgical marginal
mucosa (78.1%) (P < 0.05). Low expression of TGIF protein correlated
significantly with the metastasis of lymph node. The positive rates of MMP9 and
VEGF proteins in gastric carcinoma were 59.2% and 56.6%, respectively, obviously 
higher than that in surgical marginal mucosa (31.3%) (P < 0.05). High expressions
of both MMP9 and VEGF also correlated significantly with the metastasis of lymph 
node. The expression level of VEGF protein was also associated with the invasion 
of gastric carcinoma (P < 0.05). The expression of TGIF protein reversely
correlated with that of MMP9 and VEGF proteins (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: TGIF may inhibit the invasion and metastasis of gastric carcinoma via
the downregulation of MMP9 and VEGF proteins.

PMID: 16562680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jun;235(6):1482-90.

TGIF, a gene associated with human brain defects, regulates neuronal development.

Knepper JL(1), James AC, Ming JE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia and the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

5'-TG-3'-interacting factor (TGIF) is an atypical homeo-domain protein. In vitro 
studies have shown that TGIF can repress transcription mediated by either of two 
signaling pathways: TGF-beta and retinoic acid signaling. Mutations in TGIF have 
been detected in patients with holoprosencephaly (HPE), a severe brain
malformation associated with mental retardation. Thus, TGIF must play an
essential role in nervous system development. However, the precise function of
TGIF during vertebrate neural development is unknown. To investigate the in vivo 
role of TGIF, we overexpressed TGIF in the developing chick neural tube.
Overexpressed TGIF decreased expression of specific genes expressed in dorsally
restricted domains of the neural tube, including Cath1, Ms x 2, Pa x 6, and Wnt1.
In contrast, the expression of other transcription factors, including those
necessary for ventral fate such as Nk x 2.2, was not affected. Furthermore, a
missense mutation in TGIF identified in an HPE patient disrupted the activity of 
TGIF. In addition, the related protein TGIF2 did not demonstrate the same
activity as TGIF. Our data suggest that TGIF plays an important role in
regulating the expression of genes expressed in specific dorsal-ventral domains
during neural development.

Developmental Dynamics 235:1482-1490, 2006. (c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16534781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Prenat Diagn. 2006 Mar;26(3):226-30.

A novel heterozygous missense mutation 377T > C (V126A) of TGIF gene in a family 
segregated with holoprosencephaly and moyamoya disease.

Chen M(1), Kuo SJ, Liu CS, Chen WL, Ko TM, Chen TH, Chang SP, Huang CH, Chang YY,
Wang BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Changhua Christian Hospital,
Changhua, Taiwan, Republic of China. mchen_cch@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: To identify whether any mutations of candidate genes including SHH,
ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF exist in a Taiwanese family segregated with
holoprosencephaly (HPE) and moyamoya disease.
METHODS: Genotypes of the candidate genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF were
determined in the family members who were available for analysis by sequencing.
In addition, genomic regions of another 50 unrelated Taiwanese (100 chromosomes) 
were studied to verify whether the nucleotide changes we found were mutations or 
polymorphisms.
RESULTS: A novel missense mutation 377T > C and two polymorphisms (420A > G and
487C > T) in the TGIF gene were identified. No mutations in SHH, ZIC2 and SIX3
were found. The mother of the three HPE fetuses was found to be afflicted with
moyamoya disease. A brief review of the mutations as well as polymorphisms
reported in the TGIF gene up to 2005 is given.
CONCLUSION: Molecular diagnosis can help genetic counseling in HPE, which is a
heterogeneous disorder with its phenotypic and genotypic spectrum highly widened 
and variable. The possible association between TGIF mutation and moyamoya disease
noted in our study also appeared to be novel.

2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 16475235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Hum Genet. 2006 Mar;119(1-2):1-8. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Molecular evaluation of foetuses with holoprosencephaly shows high incidence of
microdeletions in the HPE genes.

Bendavid C(1), Dubourg C, Gicquel I, Pasquier L, Saugier-Veber P, Durou MR,
Jaillard S, Frébourg T, Haddad BR, Henry C, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe Génétique Humaine, IFR140 GFAS, CNRS UMR 6061, Université de Rennes1, 2
avenue du Pr Léon Bernard, CS 34317, 35043 Rennes Cedex, France.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE), the most common structural malformation of the forebrain
in humans, can be detected early during pregnancy using prenatal ultrasonography 
. Among foetuses with a normal karyotype, 14% have mutations in the four main HPE
genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF). Genomic rearrangements have now been implicated
in many genetic diseases, so we hypothesized that microdeletions in the major HPE
genes may also be common in HPE foetuses with severe phenotype or other
associated malformations. We screened the DNA obtained from 94 HPE foetuses with 
a normal karyotype for the presence of microdeletions involving the four major
HPE genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF). Thirteen of the foetuses had a point
mutation in one of the 4 genes and 81 had no known mutations. Quantitative
multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF) analysis was used for rapid 
determination of HPE genes copy numbers and the identified microdeletions were
confirmed by real time quantitative PCR, or fluorescent in situ hybridization
(FISH) (if a cell line was available). Microdeletions were detected in 8 of 94
foetuses (8.5%) (2 in SHH, 2 in SIX3, 3 in ZIC2 and 1 in TGIF genes), and only
among the 81 foetuses with a normal karyotype and no point mutations. These data 
suggest that microdeletions in the four main HPE genes are a common cause of
prenatal HPE, as well as point mutations, and increase the total diagnosis rate
close to approximately 22.3% of foetuses with normal karyotype. Detection can be 
achieved by the QMPSF testing method that proved to be efficient for testing
several genes in a single assay.

PMID: 16323008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Med Genet. 2006 Jun;43(6):496-500. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Multicolour FISH and quantitative PCR can detect submicroscopic deletions in
holoprosencephaly patients with a normal karyotype.

Bendavid C(1), Haddad BR, Griffin A, Huizing M, Dubourg C, Gicquel I, Cavalli LR,
Pasquier L, Shanske AL, Long R, Ouspenskaia M, Odent S, Lacbawan F, David V,
Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 35 Convent Drive, MSC 3717, Building 35, Room 1B-203,
Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural malformation of the
developing forebrain. At birth, nearly 50% of children with HPE have cytogenetic 
anomalies. Approximately 20% of infants with normal chromosomes have sequence
mutations in one of the four main HPE genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF). The
other non-syndromic forms of HPE may be due to environmental factors or mutations
in other genes, or potentially due to submicroscopic deletions of HPE genes. We
used two complementary assays to test for HPE associated submicroscopic
deletions. Firstly, we developed a multicolour fluorescent in situ hybridisation 
(FISH) assay using probes for the four major HPE genes and for two candidate
genes (DISP1 and FOXA2). We analysed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) from 103
patients who had CNS findings of HPE, normal karyotypes, and no point mutations, 
and found seven microdeletions. We subsequently applied quantitative PCR to 424
HPE DNA samples, including the 103 samples studied by FISH: 339 with CNS findings
of HPE, and 85 with normal CNS and characteristic HPE facial findings.
Microdeletions for either SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, or TGIF were found in 16 of the 339
severe HPE cases (that is, with CNS findings; 4.7%). In contrast, no
microdeletion was found in the 85 patients at the mildest end of the HPE
spectrum. Based on our data, microdeletion testing should be considered as part
of an evaluation of holoprosencephaly, especially in severe HPE cases.

PMCID: PMC2564532
PMID: 16199538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 May;25(9):3639-47.

Targeted disruption of Tgif, the mouse ortholog of a human holoprosencephaly
gene, does not result in holoprosencephaly in mice.

Shen J(1), Walsh CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, NRB 266, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

5'-TG-3'-interacting factor or transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)-induced
factor (TGIF) belongs to a family of evolutionarily conserved proteins that are
characterized by an atypical three-amino-acid loop extension homeodomain. In
vitro studies have implicated TGIF as a transcriptional repressor and corepressor
in retinoid and TGF-beta signaling pathways that regulate several important
biological processes. Heterozygous nonsense and missense mutations of the human
TGIF gene have been associated with holoprosencephaly, the most common congenital
malformation of the forebrain. In mice, Tgif mRNA is expressed ubiquitously in
the ventricular neuroepithelium at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) but displays a
medial to lateral gradient in the developing cerebral cortex at E12.5. The
expression quickly declines by E14.5. The spatiotemporal expression profile of
Tgif is consistent with its involvement in midline forebrain development. To
better understand the function of Tgif in forebrain patterning and proliferation 
in vivo, we generated mice lacking Tgif by targeted deletion of exons 2 and 3,
which encode 98% of the amino acids. Tgif(-)(/)(-) mice had no detectable Tgif
protein by Western blotting. Surprisingly, however, these mice were viable and
fertile. In addition, there were no discernible derangements in any of the major 
organ systems, including the forebrain. Overall our results point to a possible
functional redundancy of Tgif, potentially provided by the closely related Tgif2.

PMCID: PMC1084278
PMID: 15831469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 2004;102:423-45.

Dissecting the genetics of human high myopia: a molecular biologic approach.

Young TL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pennsylvania, and the Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE: Despite the plethora of experimental myopia animal studies that
demonstrate biochemical factor changes in various eye tissues, and limited human 
studies utilizing pharmacologic agents to thwart axial elongation, we have little
knowledge of the basic physiology that drives myopic development. Identifying the
implicated genes for myopia susceptibility will provide a fundamental molecular
understanding of how myopia occurs and may lead to directed physiologic (ie,
pharmacologic, gene therapy) interventions. The purpose of this proposal is to
describe the results of positional candidate gene screening of selected genes
within the autosomal dominant high-grade myopia-2 locus (MYP2) on chromosome
18p11.31.
METHODS: A physical map of a contracted MYP2 interval was compiled, and gene
expression studies in ocular tissues using complementary DNA library screens,
microarray matches, and reverse-transcription techniques aided in prioritizing
gene selection for screening. The TGIF, EMLIN-2, MLCB, and CLUL1 genes were
screened in DNA samples from unrelated controls and in high-myopia affected and
unaffected family members from the original seven MYP2 pedigrees. All candidate
genes were screened by direct base pair sequence analysis.
RESULTS: Consistent segregation of a gene sequence alteration (polymorphism) with
myopia was not demonstrated in any of the seven families. Novel single nucleotide
polymorphisms were found.
CONCLUSION: The positional candidate genes TGIF, EMLIN-2, MLCB, and CLUL1 are not
associated with MYP2-linked high-grade myopia. Base change polymorphisms
discovered with base sequence screening of these genes were submitted to an
Internet database. Other genes that also map within the interval are currently
undergoing mutation screening.

PMCID: PMC1280112
PMID: 15747770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. EMBO J. 2004 Oct 1;23(19):3780-92. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

The novel E3 ubiquitin ligase Tiul1 associates with TGIF to target Smad2 for
degradation.

Seo SR(1), Lallemand F, Ferrand N, Pessah M, L'Hoste S, Camonis J, Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 482, Hôpital St-Antoine, Paris, France.

Ubiquitin-dependent degradation plays an important role in the negative
regulation of TGF-beta signaling. Here, we identify Tiul1 (for TGIF interacting
ubiquitin ligase 1), a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase that inhibits TGF-beta signaling
by targeting both the activated receptor and Smad2 for degradation. Tiul1
associates constitutively with Smad7 and induces degradation of the activated
type I receptor without affecting the expression levels of Smad7. Tiul1 can also 
interact with Smad2 and the nuclear corepressor TGIF upon activation of TGF-beta 
signaling. Like Smad7, the steady-state levels of TGIF are not affected by Tiul1,
but the interaction of Tiul1 with TGIF allows this ubiquitin ligase to target
Smad2 for degradation. Consistent with this, overexpression of Tiul1 suppressed
TGF-beta-induced growth arrest and transcriptional responses. In addition,
silencing of Tiul1 or TGIF genes by siRNA resulted in suppression of the
TGF-beta-dependent degradation of Smad2 and an enhancement of TGF-beta-mediated
gene expression. These results reveal a new role for TGIF as a component of a
ubiquitin ligase complex that mediates the degradation of Smad2 in response to
TGF-beta signaling.

PMCID: PMC522797
PMID: 15359284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Aug 15;129A(1):21-4.

Phenotypic and molecular variability of the holoprosencephalic spectrum.

Lazaro L(1), Dubourg C, Pasquier L, Le Duff F, Blayau M, Durou MR, de la Pintière
AT, Aguilella C, David V, Odent S.

Author information: 
(1)Génétique médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Rennes, France.

Since 1996, a European network has been organized from Rennes, France and
holoprosencephalic files were collected for clinical and molecular study.
Familial instances of typical and atypical holoprosencephaly (HPE) were found in 
30% of cases. All affected children had psychomotor delay with microcephaly,
often associated with endocrine, digestive, and respiratory abnormalities, and
thermal dysregulation. Among 173 subjects in the molecular study, 28 heterozygous
mutations were identified (16%): 15 SHH mutations, 6 ZIC2 mutations, 5 SIX3
mutations, and 2 TGIF mutations.

PMID: 15266610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Jul;45(7):2091-7.

Sequence variants in the transforming growth beta-induced factor (TGIF) gene are 
not associated with high myopia.

Scavello GS(1), Paluru PC, Ganter WR, Young TL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Ophthalmology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of 
Pennsylvania Medical School, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

PURPOSE: High myopia is a common complex-trait eye disorder, with implications
for blindness due to increased risk of retinal detachment, macular degeneration, 
premature cataracts, and glaucoma. Mapping studies have identified at least four 
loci for nonsyndromic autosomal dominant high myopia at 18p11.31, 12q22-q23,
17q21-q23, and 7q36. The smallest haplotyped interval for these loci is that of
the MYP2 locus on 18p11.31. Recently, the transforming growth beta-induced factor
(TGIF) gene was reported to be a candidate gene for MYP2-associated high myopia
in single-nucleotide polymorphism studies. The purpose of this study was to
determine whether DNA sequence variants in the human TGIF gene are causally
related to MYP2-associated high myopia.
METHODS: The protein coding regions and intron-exon boundaries of the human TGIF 
gene were sequenced using genomic DNA samples from MYP2 individuals (affected,
unaffected) and external control subjects. The TGIF model used was the April 20, 
2003, human genome National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) build 33,
which has 10 exons and encodes eight transcript variants. Polymorphic sequence
changes were compared to those in the previous report. Reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed to validate TGIF gene expression
in ocular tissues.
RESULTS: A total of 21 polymorphisms of TGIF were found by direct sequencing: 3
were missense, 2 were silent, 10 were not translated, 4 were intronic, and 2 were
homozygous deletions. The 3 missense allelic variants were localized to exon 10
at positions 236C-->T(Pro-->Leu), 244C-->T(Pro-->Ser), and 245C-->T(Pro-->Leu).
Silent mutations were observed in exon 10 at positions 177A-->G, 333C-->T. Ten
polymorphisms were novel. No sequence alterations were exclusively associated
with the affected disease phenotype. RT-PCR results confirmed expression of TGIF 
in RNA samples derived from human sclera, cornea, optic nerve, and retina.
CONCLUSIONS: TGIF is a known candidate gene for MYP2-associated high myopia,
based on its mapped location within the MYP2 interval. Mutation analysis of the
encoded TGIF gene for MYP2 autosomal dominant high myopia did not identify
sequence alterations associated with the disease phenotype. Further studies of
MYP2 candidate genes are needed to determine the gene that causes of this
potentially blinding disorder.

PMID: 15223781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Hum Mutat. 2004 Jul;24(1):43-51.

Molecular screening of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF genes in patients with features 
of holoprosencephaly spectrum: Mutation review and genotype-phenotype
correlations.

Dubourg C(1), Lazaro L, Pasquier L, Bendavid C, Blayau M, Le Duff F, Durou MR,
Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.
christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

Holoprosencephaly (HPE; 1 out of 16,000 live births; 1 out of 250 conceptuses) is
a complex brain malformation resulting from incomplete cleavage of the
prosencephalon, affecting both the forebrain and the face. Clinical expressivity 
is variable, ranging from a single cerebral ventricle and cyclopia to clinically 
unaffected carriers in familial dominant autosomic HPE. The disease is
genetically heterogeneous, but additional environmental agents also contribute to
the etiology of HPE. In our cohort of 200 patients, 34 heterozygous mutations
were identified, 24 of them being novel ones: 13 out of 17 in the Sonic hedgehog 
gene (SHH); 4 out of 7 in ZIC2; and 7 out of 8 in SIX3. The two mutations
identified in TGIF have already been reported. Novel phenotypes associated with a
mutation have been described, such as abnormalities of the pituitary gland and
corpus callosum, colobomatous microphthalmia, choanal aperture stenosis, and
isolated cleft lip. This study confirms the great genetic heterogeneity of the
disease, the important phenotypic variability in HPE families, and the difficulty
to establish genotype-phenotype correlations.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15221788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2004 Jun;15(6):1402-12.

Hepatocyte growth factor antagonizes the profibrotic action of TGF-beta1 in
mesangial cells by stabilizing Smad transcriptional corepressor TGIF.

Dai C(1), Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 200 Lothrop Sttreet, Pittsburgh, PA 
15261, USA.

Mesangial cell activation is a predominant pathologic feature of diabetic
nephropathy that precedes the accumulation of extracellular matrix leading to
glomerulosclerosis. For understanding the potential mechanism by which hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) ameliorates diabetic nephropathy, the effects of HGF on
mesangial cell activation induced by TGF-beta1 were investigated. Western blot
analysis and immunostaining revealed that HGF suppressed alpha-smooth muscle
actin expression induced by TGF-beta1 in cultured rat and human mesangial cells. 
HGF also inhibited TGF-beta1-mediated fibronectin and type I collagen expression.
Such action of HGF was dependent on the activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase-1 and -2 but not on Akt and p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase. HGF did not affect TGF-beta1-mediated Smad2 phosphorylation and its
nuclear translocation. However, it rapidly upregulated Smad transcriptional
corepressor TG-interacting factor (TGIF) abundance in mesangial cells, which was 
primarily mediated by stabilizing its protein from degradation. Ectopic
expression of TGIF markedly suppressed Smad-mediated activation of
TGF-beta1-responsive promoter activity and completely blocked TGF-beta1-induced
alpha-smooth muscle actin expression. In vivo, TGIF expression was dramatically
downregulated in the glomeruli of diabetic kidneys, and delivery of exogenous HGF
induced TGIF expression. These results suggest that HGF specifically antagonizes 
the profibrotic action of TGF-beta1 in mesangial cells by stabilizing Smad
transcriptional corepressor TGIF.

PMID: 15153551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2003 Nov-Dec;61(6):679-87.

[Genetic study of holoprosencephaly].

[Article in French]

Dubourg C(1), Lazaro L, Blayau M, Pasquier L, Durou MR, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, 35033 Rennes.
christele.dubourg@chu-rennes.fr

Holoprosencephaly (1/16,000 live births; 1/250 conceptuses) is a complex brain
malformation resulting from incomplete cleavage of the prosencephalon, affecting 
both the forebrain and the face. Clinical expressivity is variable, ranging from 
a single cerebral ventricule and cyclopia to clinically unaffected carriers in
familial dominant autosomic holoprosencephaly. The disease is genetically
heterogeneous but additional environmental agents also contribute to the
aetiology of holoprosencephaly. In our cohort of 143 patients, 28 heterozygous
mutations were identified: 15 in the Sonic hedgehog gene (SHH), 6 in ZIC2, 5 in
SIX3, and 2 in TGIF. Functional tests have been set up to validate the
significance of SHH amino acids replacements. Novel phenotypes associated with a 
mutation have been described such as abnormalities of the pituitary gland and
corpus callosum, colobomatous microphthalmia, choanal aperture stenosis and
isolated cleft lip. This study confirms the great genetic heterogeneity of the
disease, the important phenotypic variability in holoprosencephalic families, and
the absence of evident genotype-phenotype correlations.

Copyright John Libbey Eurotext 2003

PMID: 14711609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2003 Oct;20(5):454-6.

[The SNPs analysis of encoding sequence of interacting factor gene in Chinese
population].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhang QJ, Xiao XS, Li JZ, Zhang FS, Li SQ, Li W, Li T, Jia XY, Guo L,
Guo XM.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology Center Sun Yat-sen University of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, 510060 PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the variations of TG interacting factor(TGIF) gene in
encoding sequence in Chinese high myopia patients and normal controls and to
analyze the SNPs of TGIF gene encoding sequence in Chinese population.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was collected from 204 probands with high myopia and 112
unrelated persons without high myopia. The coding sequences of TGIF gene in 316
subjects were analyzed by using exon-by-exon PCR heteroduplex-SSCP analysis and
sequencing.
RESULTS: There were 3 types of SNP and one single nucleotide mutation in the
coding sequence of TGIF gene: IVS-2 nt350 G --> T(36/204), codon140 CCA --> CCG; 
Pro140Pro codon163 CCG --> CTG;Pro163Leu and codon126 GTG --> GCG;
Val126Ala(1/204). The SNPs of codon140 CCA --> CCG and codon163 CCG --> CTG were 
composed of 3 alleles and 5 genotypes in Chinese population which abide by
Hardy-Weinberg law.
CONCLUSION: There was no evidence to prove that mutations in the TGIF gene are
responsible for the high myopia in Chinese. Three SNPs of coding sequence TGIF
gene in Chinese population abide by Hardy-Weinberg law.

PMID: 14556208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Mar;44(3):1012-5.

TGFbeta-induced factor: a candidate gene for high myopia.

Lam DS(1), Lee WS, Leung YF, Tam PO, Fan DS, Fan BJ, Pang CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong.

PURPOSE: To investigate the coding exons of transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta-induced factor (TGIF) for mutations in Chinese patients with high
myopia.
METHODS: Seventy-one individuals with high myopia of -6.00 D or less and 105
control subjects were screened by DNA sequencing for sequence alterations.
Univariate analysis and logistic regression were performed to identify
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and their interactions in TGIF that may be
associated with myopia.
RESULTS: Six SNPs showed a significant difference (P < 0.05) between patient and 
control subject in univariate analysis. Four of them cause codon changes: G223R, 
G231S, P241T, and A262G. Among all the SNPs that entered multivariate analysis,
only 657(T-->G) showed statistical significance in the logistic regression model 
(odds ratio 0.133; 95% confidence interval 0.037-0.488; P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: TGIF is a probable candidate gene for high myopia. Further studies
are needed to identify the underlying mechanism.

PMID: 12601022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biochem J. 2003 Apr 15;371(Pt 2):257-63.

Regulation of TG-interacting factor by transforming growth factor-beta.

Chen F(1), Ogawa K, Nagarajan RP, Zhang M, Kuang C, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Molecular Genetics, the Walther Oncology Center, Indiana
University School of Medicine, the Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

TG-interacting factor (TGIF) is a transcriptional co-repressor that directly
associates with Smad (Sma- and Mad-related protein) proteins and inhibits
Smad-mediated transcriptional activation. By using Affymetrix (Santa Clara, CA,
U.S.A.) oligonucleotide microarray analysis, we found that TGIF mRNA level was
elevated by transforming-growth-factor-beta (TGF-beta) treatment in a human
T-cell line, HuT78. Subsequent reverse-transcription PCR assays indicated that
TGF-beta1 and activin were able to induce a rapid and transient increase in the
level of TGIF in both HuT78 and HepG2 hepatoma cells. To analyse whether or not
the regulation of TGIF mRNA occurs at the transcriptional level, a 2.4 kb human
TGIF promoter was isolated. A primer extension assay was performed to localize
the putative transcription initiation site of the promoter. When transiently
expressed in HepG2 cells, this promoter was stimulated by TGF-beta1 and activin
treatment in a time-dependent manner. A series of deletion mutants of the TGIF
promoter were also generated to further characterize the TGF-beta responsive
region of the promoter. In addition, expression of TGIF was able to cause a
dose-dependent inhibition of TGF-beta and activin signalling. Taken together,
these experiments indicated that TGIF is a novel transcriptional target of
TGF-beta and activin signalling and is likely involved in a negative feedback
loop to desensitize TGF-beta/activin action.

PMCID: PMC1223316
PMID: 12593671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;112(2):131-4. Epub 2002 Nov 21.

Molecular screening of the TGIF gene in holoprosencephaly: identification of two 
novel mutations.

Aguilella C(1), Dubourg C, Attia-Sobol J, Vigneron J, Blayau M, Pasquier L,
Lazaro L, Odent S, David V.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common severe brain anomaly in humans, which 
results from incomplete cleavage of the forebrain during early embryogenesis. The
aetiology of HPE is very heterogeneous. Among the genetic factors, TGIF (
TG-interacting factor), which codes for a transcription factor modulating the
signalling pathway of TGF-beta, was previously implicated. We investigated 127
HPE probands by sequencing their TGIF gene and identified the first nonsense
mutation reported so far and also a novel missense mutation, in two families that
presented a large range of disease severity. The low number of mutations in TGIF 
suggests that this gene has no major contribution to the aetiology of HPE and our
study confirms the wide clinical heterogeneity of the disease.

PMID: 12522553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mamm Genome. 2002 Aug;13(8):463-8.

The human-specific Yp11.2/Xq21.3 homology block encodes a potentially functional 
testis-specific TGIF-like retroposon.

Blanco-Arias P(1), Sargent CA, Affara NA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Group, Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, 
Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge
CB2 1QP, UK.

Yp11.2/Xq21.3 is a human-specific homology block that constitutes the largest
shared region among the sex chromosomes, spanning some 3.5 Mb. Only two
transcribed sequences have been mapped to this segment: the protocadherin genes
PCDHX/Y, and the X-linked poly(A)-binding protein PABPC5 gene, whose Y-homolog
has been lost during human evolution. This paper reports the genomic structure,
expression, and evolutionary conservation of a third (X-Y homologous) transcribed
sequence, TGIFLX/Y (TGIF-like X/Y), mapping to this region. TGIFLX/Y has a
2666-bp mRNA encoded by two exons separated by a 96-bp intron. TGIFLX/Y are
homeodomain-containing genes related to the TALE superclass gene family.
Comparative DNA analysis indicates that TGIFLX originated from retrotransposition
of TGIF2, located on 20q11.2-12, onto the X Chromosome. RT-PCR analysis reveals
that both X- and Y-linked genes are specifically expressed in adult testis.
Cloning and sequencing of TGIFLX homologs in hominoids and Old World monkeys
provides evidence for an open reading frame in the eight species studied.
Interestingly, a single base pair deletion in the human TGIFLY (as compared with 
TGIFLX) creates a different reading frame where the C-terminal residues shared by
TGIFLX and other TGIF proteins are missing. The conservation, similarity to
protein-encoding transcription factors, and specific expression in testis points 
to a transcriptional role for TGIFLX/Y in this tissue.

PMID: 12226713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Prenat Diagn. 2002 Jan;22(1):5-7.

Molecular diagnosis of a novel heterozygous 268C-->T (R90C) mutation in TGIF gene
in a fetus with holoprosencephaly and premaxillary agenesis.

Chen CP(1), Chern SR, Du SH, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan, Republic of China. cpc_mmh@yahoo.com

We report the sonographic diagnosis and molecular analysis of holoprosencephaly
(HPE) and premaxillary agenesis in a second-trimester fetus with a 46,XY
karyotype. Mutational sequence analyses for the entire coding region and
exon-intron boundaries of SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes identified a novel
heterozygous missense TGIF mutation 268C-->T (CGC-->TGC change) that predicts an 
Arg90Cys substitution in the homeodomain region of TGIF. The proband's parents
did not carry the mutation. The present case is an example of the heterogeneous
entity of the HPE spectrum and demonstrates that adjunctive molecular analyses of
distinct human genes for HPE can reassure genetic counselling by elucidating the 
genetic pathogenesis, especially in cytogenetically normal fetuses affected with 
HPE.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 11810641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Nov;15(11):1918-28.

5'TG3' interacting factor interacts with Sin3A and represses AR-mediated
transcription.

Sharma M(1), Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

Like other nuclear receptors, the AR exerts its transcriptional function by
binding to cis elements upstream of promoters and interacting with other
transcriptional factors (e.g. activators, repressors, and modulators). Among
them, histone acetyltransferases (HATs) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) play
critical roles in altering the acetylation state of core histones, thereby
regulating nuclear hormone receptor-mediated transcription. The nuclear receptor 
corepressor can repress the TR and RAR in the absence of ligand through either a 
Sin3A-dependent or -independent manner by recruiting HDACs. AR and some other
steroid hormone receptors cannot silence transcription through a similar
mechanism in that they are located in the cytoplasm as complexes with heat-shock 
proteins before exposure to ligand. It has been shown that AR can bind to
p160/SRC, cAMP response element-binding protein-binding protein (CBP)/P300 and
other coactivators to increase the AR-mediated transcription. However, the
molecular mechanism for turning AR from transcriptionally active into silent
states is unknown. In this study, we demonstrated that the transcription
repressor, 5'TG3' interacting factor (TGIF), selectively represses AR-mediated
transcription from several AR-responsive promoters. The repression is mediated
through binding of TGIF to the DNA binding domain of AR and is trichostatin
sensitive. We also identified a direct protein-protein interaction between TGIF
and a transcription corepressor, Sin3A, which suggests a novel pathway for TGIF
recruiting HDAC1 to the repression complex. These results provide fresh insight
into understanding the mechanism for repressing AR-, and perhaps other steroid
hormone receptor-, mediated transcriptions.

PMID: 11682623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cell Growth Differ. 2001 Sep;12(9):457-63.

The Smad transcriptional corepressor TGIF recruits mSin3.

Wotton D(1), Knoepfler PS, Laherty CD, Eisenman RN, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Center for Cell
Signaling, 800577 HSC, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908,
USA. dw2p@virginia.edu

The homeodomain protein TG-interacting factor (TGIF) represses transcription by
histone deacetylase-dependent and -independent means. Heterozygous mutations in
human TGIF result in holoprosencephaly, a severe genetic disorder affecting
craniofacial development, suggesting that TGIF is critical for normal
development. After transforming growth factorbeta (TGFbeta) stimulation, Smad
proteins enter the nucleus and form transcriptional activation complexes or
interact with TGIF, which functions as a corepressor. The relative levels of Smad
corepressors and coactivators present within the cell may determine the outcome
of a TGFbeta response. We show that TGIF interacts directly with the paired
amphipathic alpha-helix 2 domain of the mSin3 corepressor, and TGIF recruits
mSin3 to a TGFbeta-activated Smad complex. The mSin3 interaction domain of TGIF
has been shown to be essential for repression of a TGFbeta transcriptional
response. Thus, TGIF represents a targeting component of the mSin3 corepressor
complex.

PMID: 11571228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 22;98(11):6198-203.

c-Jun interacts with the corepressor TG-interacting factor (TGIF) to suppress
Smad2 transcriptional activity.

Pessah M(1), Prunier C, Marais J, Ferrand N, Mazars A, Lallemand F, Gauthier JM, 
Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U 482, Hôpital
Saint-Antoine, 184 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 75571, Paris Cedex 12, France.

The Sma and Mad related (Smad) family proteins are critical mediators of the
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily signaling. After
TGF-beta-mediated phosphorylation and association with Smad4, Smad2 moves to the 
nucleus and activates expression of specific genes through cooperative
interactions with DNA-binding proteins, including members of the winged-helix
family of transcription factors, forkhead activin signal transducer (FAST)-1 and 
FAST2. TGF-beta has also been described to activate other signaling pathways,
such as the c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) pathway. Here, we show that activation 
of JNK cascade blocked the ability of Smad2 to mediate TGF-beta-dependent
activation of the FAST proteins. This inhibitory activity is mediated through the
transcriptional factor c-Jun, which enhances the association of Smad2 with the
nuclear transcriptional corepressor TG-interacting factor (TGIF), thereby
interfering with the assembly of Smad2 and the coactivator p300 in response to
TGF-beta signaling. Interestingly, c-Jun directly binds to the nuclear
transcriptional corepressor TGIF and is required for TGIF-mediated repression of 
Smad2 transcriptional activity. These studies thus reveal a mechanism for
suppression of Smad2 signaling pathway by JNK cascade through transcriptional
repression.

PMCID: PMC33445
PMID: 11371641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Apr;59(4):716-24.

Cell-specific regulation of human aryl hydrocarbon receptor expression by
transforming growth factor-beta(1).

Wolff S(1), Harper PA, Wong JM, Mostert V, Wang Y, Abel J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Toxicology, Medical Institute of Environmental
Hygiene at the Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Previous studies showed that TGF-beta down-regulates aryl hydrocarbon (AhR)
expression in human lung carcinoma cells A549. Here we analyzed the molecular
mechanisms by which TGF-beta modulates AhR expression. A 5799-nucleotide
5'-flanking region of human AhR gene was isolated. Transient transfection studies
of full-length (hAhRP) and deletion promoter constructs indicate the requirement 
of a cis-regulatory element encompassing -1980 to -1892 for full constitutive
activity. Basal hAhRP activity occurs in a cell-specific manner; human hepatoma
HepG2 cells possess a 10-fold higher activity compared with A549 cells. TGF-beta 
exerts cell-specific effects on hAhRP activity. Treatment of cells with 100 pM
TGF-beta leads to a 50% inhibition in A549 and a 3-fold induction in HepG2 cells.
Deletion mutagenesis identified a TGF-beta-responsive sequence containing a
functional conserved Smad-binding element. Transient overexpression of Smad 2, 3,
and 4 indicates that these signal transducers modulate hAhRP activity. The
down-regulation of AhR by TGF-beta is modulated by 5'-TG-3'-interacting factor
(TGIF). Transient overexpression of TGIF in MDA-MB231 and HepG2 cells led to
inhibition of hAhRP activity and a similar decrease of AhR mRNA expression. Our
findings indicate that Smad proteins are involved in the cell-specific regulation
of AhR expression by TGF-beta.

PMID: 11259615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. EMBO J. 2001 Jan 15;20(1-2):128-36.

Epidermal growth factor signaling via Ras controls the Smad transcriptional
co-repressor TGIF.

Lo RS(1), Wotton D, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Smad transcription factors mediate the actions of transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) cytokines during development and tissue homeostasis. TGF-beta
receptor-activated Smad2 regulates gene expression by associating with
transcriptional co-activators or co-repressors. The Smad co-repressor TGIF
competes with the co-activator p300 for Smad2 association, such that TGIF
abundance helps determine the outcome of a TGF-beta response. Small alterations
in the physiological levels of TGIF can have profound effects on human
development, as shown by the devastating brain and craniofacial developmental
defects in heterozygotes carrying a hypomorphic TGIF mutant allele. Here we show 
that TGIF levels modulate sensitivity to TGF-beta-mediated growth inhibition,
that TGIF is a short-lived protein and that epidermal growth factor (EGF)
signaling via the Ras-Mek pathway causes the phosphorylation of TGIF at two Erk
MAP kinase sites, leading to TGIF stabilization and favoring the formation of
Smad2-TGIF co-repressor complexes in response to TGF-beta. These results identify
the first mechanism for regulating TGIF levels and suggest a potential link for
Smad and Ras pathway convergence at the transcriptional level.

PMCID: PMC140192
PMID: 11226163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):39762-6.

The interaction of the carboxyl terminus-binding protein with the Smad
corepressor TGIF is disrupted by a holoprosencephaly mutation in TGIF.

Melhuish TA(1), Wotton D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Center for Cell
Signaling, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

The homeodomain protein TGIF represses transcription in part by recruiting
histone deacetylases. TGIF binds directly to DNA to repress transcription or
interacts with TGF-beta-activated Smads, thereby repressing genes normally
activated by TGF-beta. Loss of function mutations in TGIF result in
holoprosencephaly (HPE) in humans. One HPE mutation in TGIF results in a single
amino acid substitution in a conserved PLDLS motif within the amino-terminal
repression domain. We demonstrate that TGIF interacts with the corepressor
carboxyl terminus-binding protein (CtBP) via this motif. CtBP, which was first
identified by its ability to bind the adenovirus E1A protein, interacts both with
gene-specific transcriptional repressors and with a subset of polycomb proteins. 
Efficient repression of TGF-beta-activated gene responses by TGIF is dependent on
interaction with CtBP, and we show that TGIF is able to recruit CtBP to a
TGF-beta-activated Smad complex. Disruption of the PLDLS motif in TGIF abolishes 
the interaction of CtBP with TGIF and compromises the ability of TGIF to repress 
transcription. Thus, at least one HPE mutation in TGIF appears to prevent
CtBP-dependent transcriptional repression by TGIF, suggesting an important
developmental role for the recruitment of CtBP by TGIF.

PMID: 10995736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Nat Genet. 2000 Jun;25(2):205-8.

Mutations in TGIF cause holoprosencephaly and link NODAL signalling to human
neural axis determination.

Gripp KW(1), Wotton D, Edwards MC, Roessler E, Ades L, Meinecke P, Richieri-Costa
A, Zackai EH, Massagué J, Muenke M, Elledge SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Departments of Pediatrics, Genetics
and Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural defect of the developing
forebrain in humans (1 in 250 conceptuses, 1 in 16,000 live-born infants). HPE is
aetiologically heterogeneous, with both environmental and genetic causes. So far,
three human HPE genes are known: SHH at chromosome region 7q36 (ref. 6); ZIC2 at 
13q32 (ref. 7); and SIX3 at 2p21 (ref. 8). In animal models, genes in the Nodal
signalling pathway, such as those mutated in the zebrafish mutants cyclops (refs 
9,10), squint (ref. 11) and one-eyed pinhead (oep; ref. 12), cause HPE. Mice
heterozygous for null alleles of both Nodal and Smad2 have cyclopia. Here we
describe the involvement of the TG-interacting factor (TGIF), a homeodomain
protein, in human HPE. We mapped TGIF to the HPE minimal critical region in
18p11.3. Heterozygous mutations in individuals with HPE affect the
transcriptional repression domain of TGIF, the DNA-binding domain or the domain
that interacts with SMAD2. (The latter is an effector in the signalling pathway
of the neural axis developmental factor NODAL, a member of the transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family.) Several of these mutations cause a loss of
TGIF function. Thus, TGIF links the NODAL signalling pathway to the bifurcation
of the human forebrain and the establishment of ventral midline structures.

PMID: 10835638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jul 7;275(27):20734-41.

Three-amino acid extension loop homeodomain proteins Meis2 and TGIF
differentially regulate transcription.

Yang Y(1), Hwang CK, D'Souza UM, Lee SH, Junn E, Mouradian MM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pharmacology Unit, Experimental Therapeutics Branch, NINDS, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Three-amino acid extension loop (TALE) homeobox proteins are highly conserved
transcription regulators. We report that two members of this family, Meis2 and
TGIF, which frequently have overlapping consensus binding sites on complementary 
DNA strands in opposite orientations, can function competitively. For example, in
the D(1A) gene, which encodes the predominant dopamine receptor in the striatum, 
Meis2 and TGIF bind to the activator sequence ACT (-1174 to -1154) and regulate
transcription differentially in a cell type-specific manner. Among the five
cloned splice variants of Meis2, isoforms Meis2a-d activate the D(1A) promoter in
most cell types tested, whereas TGIF competes with Meis2 binding to DNA and
represses Meis2-induced transcription activation. Consequently, Meis2 cannot
activate the D(1A) promoter in a cell that has abundant TGIF expression. The
Meis2 message is highly co-localized with the D(1A) message in adult striatal
neurons, whereas TGIF is barely detectable in the adult brain. Our observations
provide in vitro and in vivo evidence that Meis2 and TGIF differentially regulate
their target genes. Thus, the delicate ratio between Meis2 and TGIF expression in
a given cell type determines the cell-specific expression of the D(1A) gene. We
also found that splice variant Meis2e, which has a truncated homeodomain, cannot 
bind to the D(1A) ACT sequence or activate transcription. However, Meis2e is an
effective dominant negative regulator by blocking Meis2d-induced transcription
activation. Thus, truncated homeoproteins with no DNA binding domains can have
important regulatory functions.

PMID: 10764806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Am J Med Genet. 2000 Feb 14;90(4):315-9.

Holoprosencephaly: molecular study of a California population.

Nanni L(1), Croen LA, Lammer EJ, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a common developmental anomaly of the forebrain and
midface in which the cerebral hemispheres fail to separate into distinct left and
right halves. HPE is extremely heterogeneous. In addition to teratogenic agents, 
several genes are implicated in the cause of HPE. Using samples from a
population-based birth defects registry in California, we performed a mutational 
analysis of the known HPE genes Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), ZIC2, and SIX3, in addition
to two HPE candidate genes, TG-interacting factor (TGIF), and Patched (PTC), on a
group of sporadic HPE patients. This is the first molecular study of HPE in a
population-based sample of patients. Among these patients, a deletion in the
homeodomain of SIX3 and several polymorphisms in SIX3 and TGIF were identified.
No sequence changes were detected in SHH, ZIC2, and PTC. Our results suggest that
mutations in the currently recognized HPE genes may explain <5% of all sporadic
HPE cases.

PMID: 10710230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 24;274(52):37105-10.

Multiple modes of repression by the Smad transcriptional corepressor TGIF.

Wotton D(1), Lo RS, Swaby LA, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

TGIF is a DNA-binding homeodomain protein that has been demonstrated to play a
role in transforming growth factor beta-regulated transcription and implicated in
the control of retinoid-responsive transcription. We investigated the intrinsic
transcriptional activity of TGIF fused to a heterologous DNA-binding domain. Our 
results demonstrate that TGIF is a transcriptional repressor able to repress
transcription from several different promoters. Repression by TGIF is insensitive
to the distance at which it is bound from the promoter. Moreover, the wild type
TGIF effectively represses transcription when bound to its cognate DNA-binding
site via its homeodomain. Deletion analysis revealed the presence of at least two
separable repression domains within TGIF. Repression by one of these is dependent
on the activity of histone deacetylases (HDACs), whereas the other appears not to
require HDAC activity. Finally, we demonstrate that TGIF interacts with HDACs via
its carboxyl-terminal repression domain. Together, these results suggest that
TGIF is a multifunctional transcriptional repressor, which acts in part by
recruiting HDAC activity.

PMID: 10601270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genome Res. 1997 Feb;7(2):142-56.

Identification of a conserved family of Meis1-related homeobox genes.

Steelman S, Moskow JJ, Muzynski K, North C, Druck T, Montgomery JC, Huebner K,
Daar IO, Buchberg AM.

Meis1 locus was isolated as a common site of viral integration involved in
myeloid leukemia in BXH-2 mice. Meis1 encodes a novel homeobox protein belonging 
to the TALE (three amino acid loop extension) family of homeodomain-containing
proteins. The homeodomain of Meis1 is the only known motif within the entire
390-amino-acid protein. Southern blot analyses using the Meis1 homeodomain as a
probe revealed the existence family of Meis1-related genes (Mrgs) in several
diverged species. In addition, the 3' untranslated region (UTR) Meis1 was
remarkably conserved in evolution. To gain a further understanding of the role
Meis1 plays in leukemia and development, as well as to identify conserved regions
of the protein that might reveal function, we cloned and characterized Mrgs from 
the mouse and human genomes. We report the sequence of Mrg1 and MRG2 as well as
their chromosomal locations in murine and human genomes. Both Mrgs share a high
degree of sequence identity with the protein coding region of Meis1. We have also
cloned the Xenopus laevis ortholog of (XMeis1). Sequence comparison of the murine
and Xenopus clones reveals that Meis1 is highly conserved throughout its coding
sequence as well as the 3' UTR. Finally, comparison of Meis1 and the closely
related Mrgs to known homeoproteins suggests that Meis1 represents a new
subfamily of TALE homeobox genes.

PMID: 9049632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 1995 Dec 29;270(52):31178-88.

A novel homeobox protein which recognizes a TGT core and functionally interferes 
with a retinoid-responsive motif.

Bertolino E(1), Reimund B, Wildt-Perinic D, Clerc RG.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Ltd., Research Laboratories, Basel, Switzerland.

We describe here a novel homeobox gene, denoted TGIF (5"TG3' interacting factor),
which belongs to an expanding TALE (three amino acid loop extension) superclass
of atypical homeodomains. The TGIF homeodomain binds to a previously
characterized retinoid X receptor (RXR) responsive element from the cellular
retinol-binding protein II promoter (CRBPII-RXRE), which contains an unusual DNA 
target for a homeobox. The interactions of both the homeprotein TGIF and receptor
RXR alpha with the CREBPII-RXRE DNA motif occur on overlapping areas and generate
a mutually exclusive binding in vitro. Transient cellular transfections
demonstrate that TGIF inhibits the 9-cis-retinoic acid-dependent RXR alpha
transcription activation of the retinoic acid responsive element. TGIF
transcripts were detected in a restricted number of tissues. The canonical
binding site of TGIF is conserved and is an integral part of several responsive
elements which are organized like the CRBPII-RXRE. Hence, a novel auxiliary
factor to the steroid receptor superfamily may participate in the transmission of
nuclear signals during development and in the adult, as illustrated by the
down-modulation of the RXR alpha activities.

PMID: 8537382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


