
1. FEBS Lett. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12129. [Epub ahead of print]

Temperature homeostasis in mice lacking the p43 mitochondrial T3 receptor.

Bertrand-Gaday C(1), Pessemesse L(1), Cabello G(1), Wrutniak-Cabello C(1), Casas 
F(1).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR866 Dynamique Musculaire et Métabolisme, 2 place Viala, Université
Montpellier, F-34060, Montpellier, France.

Thyroid hormones and Thra gene play a key role in energy expenditure regulation, 
temperature homeostasis and mitochondrial function. To decipher the function of
the mitochondrial TRa receptor in these phenomenons, we used mice lacking
specifically the p43 mitochondrial T3 receptor. We found that these animals were 
hypermetabolic, hyperphagic and displayed a down setting of the core body
temperature. However, p43-/- animals do not present cold intolerance or defect of
facultative thermogenesis. In addition, the mitochondrial function of BAT is
slightly affected in absence of p43. Our study therefore suggests a
complementarity of action between the mitochondrial receptor and other proteins
encoded by the Thra gene in the control of basal metabolism, facultative
thermogenesis, and determination of the set point of temperature regulation. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26970082  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Metab Eng. 2016 Mar 9;36:10-18. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.02.013. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Pathway construction and metabolic engineering for fermentative production of
ectoine in Escherichia coli.

Ning Y(1), Wu X(1), Zhang C(1), Xu Q(1), Chen N(2), Xie X(3).

Author information: 
(1)National and Local United Engineering Lab of Metabolic Control Fermentation
Technology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR
China; Tianjin Engineering Lab of Efficient and Green Amino Acid Manufacture,
Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR China; College
of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457,
PR China. (2)National and Local United Engineering Lab of Metabolic Control
Fermentation Technology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin
300457, PR China; Tianjin Engineering Lab of Efficient and Green Amino Acid
Manufacture, Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR
China; College of Biotechnology, Tianjin University of Science and Technology,
Tianjin 300457, PR China. Electronic address: ningch@tust.edu.cn. (3)National and
Local United Engineering Lab of Metabolic Control Fermentation Technology,
Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR China; Tianjin
Engineering Lab of Efficient and Green Amino Acid Manufacture, Tianjin University
of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR China; College of Biotechnology,
Tianjin University of Science and Technology, Tianjin 300457, PR China.
Electronic address: xixianxie@tust.edu.cn.

Ectoine is a protective agent and stabilizer whose synthesis pathway exclusively 
exists in select moderate halophiles. A novel established process called
"bacterial milking" efficiently synthesized ectoine in moderate halophiles,
however, this method places high demands on equipment and is cost prohibitive. In
this study, we constructed an ectoine producing strain by introducing the ectoine
synthesis pathway into Escherichia coli and improved its production capacity.
Firstly, the ectABC gene cluster from Halomonas elongata was introduced into E.
coli W3110 and the resultant strain synthesized 4.9g/L ectoine without high
osmolarity. Subsequently, thrA encoding the bifunctional aspartokinase/homoserine
dehydrogenase was deleted to weaken the competitive l-threonine branch, resulting
in an increase of ectoine titer by 109%. Furthermore, a feedback resistant lysC
from Corynebacterium glutamicum encoding the aspartate kinase was introduced to
complement the enzymatic activity deficiency caused by thrA deletion and a 9%
increase of ectoine titer was obtained. Finally, the promoter of ppc that encodes
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase was replaced by a trc promoter, and iclR, a
glyoxylate shunt transcriptional repressor gene, was deleted. The oxaloacetate
pool, was thus reinforced and ectoine titer increased by 21%. The final
engineered strain ECT05 (pTrcECT, pSTVLysC-CG) produced 25.1g/L ectoine by
fed-batch fermentation in low salt concentration with glucose as a carbon source.
The specific ectoine production and productivity was 0.8g/g DCW and
0.84gL(-)(1)h(-)(1) respectively. The overall ectoine yield was 0.11g/g of
glucose.

Copyright © 2016 International Metabolic Engineering Society. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969253  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Jan 14. pii:
/j/jpem.ahead-of-print/jpem-2015-0286/jpem-2015-0286.xml. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2015-0286. [Epub ahead of print]

Resistance to thyroid hormone a, revelation of basic study to clinical
consequences.

Tang Y, Yu M, Lian X.

In the past 3 years, 15 patients with resistance to thyroid hormone a (RTHa),
nine THRA gene mutations have been reported, reforming classification of RTH.
RTHa exhibits distinguished clinical manifestations from RTHß, including growth
retardation, skeletal dysplasia, impaired neurodevelopment, cardiovascular
dysfunction, constipation and specific thyroid axis type. This review focuses on 
possible pathogenesis by revelatory basic science of RTHa animal models in vivo, 
and patients' mutant thyroid hormone receptor a (TRa) in vitro. Clinical
manifestations and L-T4 effects are summarized, showing strong correlation to the
severity of mutation mostly within the domain which dominated TR interaction with
T3 and its corepressors/coactivators. In particular, we propose the diagnosis
clues and promising treatment for clinicians.

PMID: 26812777  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2016 Jan 26. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene signature of the post-Chernobyl papillary thyroid cancer.

Handkiewicz-Junak D(1), Swierniak M(1,)(2), Rusinek D(1), Oczko-Wojciechowska
M(1), Dom G(3), Maenhaut C(3), Unger K(4,)(5), Detours V(3), Bogdanova T(6),
Thomas G(4), Likhtarov I(7), Jaksik R(8), Kowalska M(1), Chmielik E(9), Jarzab
M(10), Swierniak A(11), Jarzab B(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Endocrine Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie 
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii 
Krajowej 15, 44-101, Gliwice, Poland. (2)Genomic Medicine, Department of General,
Transplant and Liver Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Institute of Interdisciplinary Research, Université libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 
Bruxelles, Belgium. (4)Human Cancer Studies Group, Division of Surgery and
Cancer, Imperial College London Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK. (5)Research
Unit Radiation Cytogenetics, Helmholtz-Zentrum, Munich, Germany. (6)Institute of 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Kiev, Ukraine. (7)Radiation Protection Institute,
Academy of Technological Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine. (8)Systems
Engineering Group, Faculty of Automatic Control, Electronics and Informatics,
Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland. (9)Department of Tumour
Pathology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of
Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland. (10)IIIrd Department of Radiation
Therapy, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology,
Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland. (11)Department of Automatic Control, Silesian
University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland. (12)Department of Nuclear Medicine and
Endocrine Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute
of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Wybrzeze Armii Krajowej 15, 44-101, Gliwice, Poland.
Barbara.Jarzab@io.gliwice.pl.

PURPOSE: Following the nuclear accidents in Chernobyl and later in Fukushima, the
nuclear community has been faced with important issues concerning how to search
for and diagnose biological consequences of low-dose internal radiation
contamination. Although after the Chernobyl accident an increase in childhood
papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) was observed, it is still not clear whether the
molecular biology of PTCs associated with low-dose radiation exposure differs
from that of sporadic PTC.
METHODS: We investigated tissue samples from 65 children/young adults with PTC
using DNA microarray (Affymetrix, Human Genome U133 2.0 Plus) with the aim of
identifying molecular differences between radiation-induced (exposed to Chernobyl
radiation, ECR) and sporadic PTC. All participants were resident in the same
region so that confounding factors related to genetics or environment were
minimized.
RESULTS: There were small but significant differences in the gene expression
profiles between ECR and non-ECR PTC (global test, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01), with 300
differently expressed probe sets (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) corresponding to 239 genes.
Multifactorial analysis of variance showed that besides radiation exposure
history, the BRAF mutation exhibited independent effects on the PTC expression
profile; the histological subset and patient age at diagnosis had negligible
effects. Ten genes (PPME1, HDAC11, SOCS7, CIC, THRA, ERBB2, PPP1R9A, HDGF,
RAD51AP1, and CDK1) from the 19 investigated with quantitative RT-PCR were
confirmed as being associated with radiation exposure in an independent,
validation set of samples.
CONCLUSION: Significant, but subtle, differences in gene expression in the
post-Chernobyl PTC are associated with previous low-dose radiation exposure.

PMID: 26810418  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 15;424:102-17. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2016.01.020. Epub
2016 Jan 21.

Patterns of thyroid hormone receptor expression in zebrafish and generation of a 
novel model of resistance to thyroid hormone action.

Marelli F(1), Carra S(2), Agostini M(3), Cotelli F(2), Peeters R(4), Chatterjee
K(3), Persani L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Sperimentale di Ricerche Endocrino-Metaboliche, Istituto
Auxologico Italiano, 20149 Milan, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze,
Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milano, Italy. (3)Wellcome Trust-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Erasmus University, Rotterdam, NL, Netherlands. (5)Laboratorio Sperimentale di
Ricerche Endocrino-Metaboliche, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 20149 Milan, Italy;
Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università degli Studi di Milano,
20122 Milan, Italy. Electronic address: luca.persani@unimi.it.

Resistance to thyroid hormone can be due to heterozygous, dominant negative (DN) 
THRA (RTHa) or THRB (RTHß) mutations, but the underlying mechanisms are
incompletely understood. Here, we delineate the spatiotemporal expression of TH
receptors (TRs) in zebrafish and generated morphants expressing equivalent
amounts of wild-type and DN TRas (thraa_MOs) and TRßs (thrb_MOs) in vivo. Both
morphants show severe developmental abnormalities. The phenotype of thraa_MOs
includes brain and cardiac defects, but normal thyroid volume and tshba
expression. A combined modification of dio2 and dio3 expression can explain the
high T3/T4 ratio seen in thraa_MOs, as in RTHa. Thrb_MOs show abnormal eyes and
otoliths, with a typical RTHß pattern of thyroid axis. The coexpression of
wild-type, but not mutant, human TRs can rescue the phenotype in both morphants. 
High T3 doses can partially revert the dominant negative action of mutant TRs in 
morphant fish. Therefore, our morphants recapitulate the RTHa and RTHß key
manifestations representing new models in which the functional consequences of
human TR mutations can be rapidly and faithfully evaluated.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26802880  [PubMed - in process]


6. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2016 Mar;17:58-65. doi:
10.1016/j.cbd.2016.01.002. Epub 2016 Jan 7.

Identification of organ-autonomous constituents of the molecular memory conferred
by thyroid hormone exposure in cold temperature-arrested metamorphosing Rana
(Lithobates) catesbeiana tadpoles.

Austin Hammond S(1), Jackman KW(1), Partovi SH(1), Veldhoen N(1), Helbing CC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 
1700, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, V8W 2Y2, Canada. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Microbiology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 1700, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, V8W
2Y2, Canada. Electronic address: chelbing@uvic.ca.

Environmental temperature modulates thyroid hormone (TH)-dependent metamorphosis 
in some amphibian species. The North American bullfrog - Rana (Lithobates)
catesbeiana - tadpole is naturally adapted to a wide range of temperatures over
multiple seasons. Cold temperatures delay while warmer temperatures accelerate
metamorphosis. Exogenous TH exposure of premetamorphic tadpoles results in a
rapid precocious induction of metamorphosis at warm temperatures (20-25°C). The
same exposure at cold temperatures (4-5°C) does not elicit an overt metamorphic
response. However, a molecular memory of TH exposure is established such that
cold, TH-exposed tadpoles returned to permissive warm temperatures will rapidly
execute TH-induced genetic programs. Previous mRNA profiling has identified
TH-regulated transcription factors encoded by thra, thrb, thibz, klf9, and cebp1 
as components of the molecular memory after one week post-exposure. However, a
further hierarchy may exist within the initiation phase since many gene
transcripts demonstrated tissue-specific patterns. Whether the molecular memory
is organ autonomous or requires additional modulating factors is unknown. Herein 
we examine tail fin and back skin and determine that thibz is the only transcript
that is TH-responsive after 2 days post-exposure at low temperature in both
tissues in the intact animal. In back skin, cebp1 is also TH-responsive under
these conditions. Serum-free tail fin organ culture (C-Fin) reveals that the
thibz response is organ autonomous whereas cultured back skin (C-Skin) results
suggest that thibz and cebp1 require an additional factor for induction from
elsewhere within the intact animal. Subsequent investigations are now possible to
identify endogenous factors that modulate the molecular memory in intact animals.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26795672  [PubMed - in process]


7. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2016 Apr;27(3):340-6. doi:
10.1097/MBC.0000000000000428.

FIBTEM provides prediction of massive bleeding in total hip replacement
arthroplasty.

Na HS(1), Shin HJ, Do SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Seoul National University
Bundang Hospital, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.

This retrospective study evaluated the association between maximum clot firmness 
of FIBTEM (MCFFIB) and blood loss, and determined a cutoff value of MCFFIB that
may predict massive bleeding in total hip replacement arthroplasty (THRA).
Seventy-two adult patients undergoing THRA for avascular necrosis of the femoral 
head or degenerative arthritis of the hip were included. Patients' medical
records were reviewed to collect pre and postoperative laboratory data, as well
as the amount of intra and postoperative blood loss (IBL and PBL). Each pre and
postoperative fibrinogen level had a significant correlation with the pre and
postoperative MCFFIB, respectively (<U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>0.289, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.014 and <U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>0.286,
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.015). IBL had significant correlations with pre and postoperative MCFFIB
(<U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.305, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.010 and <U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.297, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.013, respectively), and PBL also
showed significant correlations with the pre and postoperative MCFFIB
(<U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.471, P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001 and <U+03C1><U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.475, P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001, respectively). A respective pre
or postoperative MCFFI cutoff value of 16<U+200A>mm or less or 10<U+200A>mm or less showed the 
highest sensitivity and specificity for predicting IBL 1000<U+200A>ml or above or PBL
400<U+200A>ml or above. Postoperative transfusion was performed more frequently in
patients showing postoperative MCFFIB 10<U+200A>mm or less (31 vs. 3.3%, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.005).
MCFFIB correlated well with the amount of IBL or PBL. In addition, a particular
value of pre or postoperative MCFFIB could offer the predictive standard for
massive bleeding in THRA.

PMID: 26588448  [PubMed - in process]


8. Presse Med. 2015 Nov;44(11):1103-12. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2015.07.022. Epub 2015
Nov 12.

TRa receptor mutations extend the spectrum of syndromes of reduced sensitivity to
thyroid hormone.

Vlaeminck-Guillem V(1), Espiard S(2), Flamant F(3), Wémeau JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hospices civils de Lyon, centre hospitalier Lyon Sud, service de biochimie
biologie moléculaire Sud, chemin du Grand-Revoyet, 69495 Pierre-Bénite, France;
Université Lyon 1, faculté de médecine Lyon Est, centre Léon-Bérard, centre de
recherche en cancérologie de Lyon, Inserm 1052 CNRS 5286, 69373 Lyon cedex 08,
France. Electronic address: virginie.vlaeminck-guillem@univ-lyon1.fr. (2)CHRU de 
Lille, hôpital Huriez, service d'endocrinologie et métabolisme, 59000 Lille,
France. (3)Université de Lyon, CNRS, Inra, université Claude-Bernard Lyon 1,
École normale supérieure de Lyon, Institut de génomique fonctionnelle de Lyon,
69007 Lyon, France.

Comment in
    Presse Med. 2015 Nov;44(11):1093-5.

Since 2012, eight different abnormalities have been described in the THRA gene
(encoding the TRa1 thyroid hormone receptor) of 14 patients from 9 families.
These mutations induce a clinical phenotype (resistance to thyroid hormone type
a) associating symptoms of untreated mild congenital hypothyroidism and a
near-normal range of free and total thyroid hormones and TSH (the T4/T3 ratio is 
nevertheless usually low). The phenotype can diversely include short stature (due
to growth retardation), dysmorphic syndrome (face and limb extremities),
psychoneuromotor disorders, constipation and bradycardia. The identified genetic 
abnormalities are located within the ligand-binding domain and result in
defective T3 binding, an abnormally strong interaction with corepressors and a
dominant negative activity against still functional receptors. The identification
of patients with consistent phenotypes and the underlying mutations are warranted
to better delineate the spectrum of the syndromes of reduced sensitivity to
thyroid hormone.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26585273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2015 Dec;195:31-9. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2015.09.003. Epub 2015 Sep 30.

The expression of thyroid hormone receptors (THR) is regulated by the
progesterone receptor system in first trimester placental tissue and in BeWo
cells in vitro.

Vattai A(1), Ziegelmüller B(2), Kost B(1), Kuhn C(1), Hofmann S(1), Bayer B(3),
Anslinger K(3), Jeschke U(4), Ditsch N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Munich, Germany. (2)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Munich, Germany;
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Urology, Munich, Germany. 
(3)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Legal Medicine, Munich,
Germany. (4)Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, Munich, Germany. Electronic address:
udo.jeschke@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormones are essential for the maintenance of pregnancy and a
deficiency in maternal thyroid hormones has been associated with early pregnancy 
losses. The aim of this study was a systematic investigation of the influence of 
mifepristone (RU 486) on the expression of the thyroid hormone receptor (THR)
isoforms THRa1, THRa2, THRß1 and THRß2 on protein and mRNA-level.
METHODS: Samples of placental tissue were obtained from patients with
mifepristone induced termination of pregnancy (n=13) or mechanical induced
termination of normal pregnancy (n=20), each from the 4th to 13th week of
pregnancy. Expression of THRa1, THRa2, THRß1 and THRß2 was analysed on protein
level by immunohistochemistry and on mRNA level by real time RT-PCR (TaqMan). The
influence of progesterone on THR gene expression was analysed in the trophoblast 
tumour cell line BeWo by real time RT-PCR (TaqMan).
RESULTS: Nuclear expression of THRa1, THRa2 and THRß1 is downregulated on protein
level in mifepristone (RU 486) treated villous trophoblast tissue. In decidual
tissue, we found a significant downregulation only for THRa1 in mifepristone
treated tissue. On mRNA level, we also found a significantly reduced expression
of THRA but no significant downregulation for THRB in placental tissue. The gene 
THRA encodes the isoform THRa and the gene THRB encodes the isoform THRß. The
majority of cells expressing the thyroid hormone receptors in the decidua are
decidual stromal cells. In addition, in vitro experiments with trophoblast tumour
cells showed that progesterone significantly induced THRA but not THRB
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Termination of pregnancy with mifepristone (RU 486) leads to a
downregulation of THRa1, THRa2 and THRß1 in villous trophoblasts and in addition 
to a decreased expression of THRA in placental tissue. Decreased expression of
THRa1 induced by RU486 could also be found in the decidua. Therefore inhibition
of the progesterone receptor may be responsible for this downregulation. This
assumption is supported by the finding, that stimulation of the progesterone
receptor by progesterone itself up-regulated THRA in trophoblast cells in vitro.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26476797  [PubMed - in process]


10. Endokrynol Pol. 2015;66(5):444-59. doi: 10.5603/EP.2015.0055.

Thyroid hormones in the central nervous system (CNS) and their effect on neoplasm
formation, particularly on the development and course of glioblastoma multiforme 
- research hypothesis.

Nauman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw,
Poland. pnauman@ipin.edu.pl.

The present study is aimed to present the potential role of thyroid hormones (TH)
in the pathogenesis of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). In first part of this
presentation the effect of general homeostasis of TH on GBM formation and course 
was shown. Then the evidence concerning present state of the knowledge about
active transport of TH to the brain, the role of iodothyronine deiodinase type 2 
and 3 in the setting concentration of T3 in the brain and GBM cells, and finally 
knowledge about the role of genomic (TH nuclear receptors THRA and THRB) and
non-genomic modes (membrane integrin receptor avß3) of action of TH and its
importance for GBM was outlined. The last part of this presentation was devoted
to generally approved signalling pathways leading to the formation and the
clinical course of GBM, showing at the same time evidence that each of the
pathways is affected by particular TH actions. In conclusion it is suggested that
TH is one of the pathogenetic factors for GBM and as such can have practical
implications for the formation and course and treatment of this tumour.

PMID: 26457500  [PubMed - in process]


11. Anesth Analg. 2015 Oct 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Postoperative Anemia Is Associated with Acute Kidney Injury in Patients
Undergoing Total Hip Replacement Arthroplasty: A Retrospective Study.

Choi YJ(1), Kim SO, Sim JH, Hahm KD.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Department of Dental Anesthesiology, Seoul National University
Dental Hospital, Seoul, Korea; and Departments of Clinical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics and Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Asan Medical Center,
University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Chronic and acute anemia are both correlated with an increased risk
of injury to major organs, such as the brain, heart, and kidney. We evaluated the
association between postoperative anemia (hemoglobin [Hb] < 10 g/dL) and acute
kidney injury (AKI) in patients undergoing total hip replacement arthroplasty
(THRA).
METHODS: Patients who underwent THRA between January 2005 and February 2013 were 
retrospectively reviewed. We divided patients into 2 groups: Hb < 10 (n = 938)
and Hb = 10 (n = 1529). They were then categorized according to changes in plasma
creatinine concentration within 48 hours of THRA using Acute Kidney Injury
Network criteria. To evaluate the association between postoperative anemia and
postoperative AKI, an inverse-probability-of-treatment weighted method was used
and both univariate and multivariable analyses were performed.
RESULTS: Postoperative anemia was significantly associated with postoperative AKI
(multivariate odds ratio, 2.036; 95% confidence interval, 1.369-3.028; P < 0.001;
inverse probability-of-treatment weighted odds ratio, 1.817; 95% confidence
interval, 1.169-2.826; P = 0.011). In patients with a normal glomerular
filtration rate, postoperative AKI was also related to postoperative anemia (P = 
0.010).
CONCLUSIONS: Postoperative anemia was associated with postoperative AKI after
THRA. Although our study was limited by its retrospective design, our observation
suggests that postoperative anemia may play a role in postoperative AKI.

PMID: 26451518  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Development. 2015 Aug 15;142(16):2764-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.121962.

The thyroid hormone nuclear receptor TRa1 controls the Notch signaling pathway
and cell fate in murine intestine.

Sirakov M(1), Boussouar A(1), Kress E(1), Frau C(1), Lone IN(2), Nadjar J(1),
Angelov D(2), Plateroti M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Génétique et de Physiologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université
Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 16 Rue Raphael Dubois, Villeurbanne 69622, France.
(2)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire de la cellule, Ecole Normale Supérieure de
Lyon, 46 Allée d'Italie, Lyon 69007, France. (3)Centre de Génétique et de
Physiologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 16 Rue
Raphael Dubois, Villeurbanne 69622, France michelina.plateroti@univ-lyon1.fr.

Thyroid hormones control various aspects of gut development and homeostasis. The 
best-known example is in gastrointestinal tract remodeling during amphibian
metamorphosis. It is well documented that these hormones act via the TR nuclear
receptors, which are hormone-modulated transcription factors. Several studies
have shown that thyroid hormones regulate the expression of several genes in the 
Notch signaling pathway, indicating a possible means by which they participate in
the control of gut physiology. However, the mechanisms and biological
significance of this control have remained unexplored. Using multiple in vivo and
in vitro approaches, we show that thyroid hormones positively regulate Notch
activity through the TRa1 receptor. From a molecular point of view, TRa1
indirectly controls Notch1, Dll1, Dll4 and Hes1 expression but acts as a direct
transcriptional regulator of the Jag1 gene by binding to a responsive element in 
the Jag1 promoter. Our findings show that the TRa1 nuclear receptor plays a key
role in intestinal crypt progenitor/stem cell biology by controlling the Notch
pathway and hence the balance between cell proliferation and cell
differentiation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26286942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e1-2. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467353.66660.d4.

1A.03: TRANSCRIPTIONAL NETWORK ASSOCIATED WITH THE CONTRACTILE PHENOTYPE OF
SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS IN HUMAN CAROTID ATHEROSCLEROSIS.

Cerutti C(1), Paultre CZ, Gustin MP, Lohez O, Feugier P, Li JY, Bricca G.

Author information: 
(1)EA4173 Functional Genomics of Arterial Hypertension, Claude Bernard University
Lyon 1 and Hôpital Nord-Ouest, Lyon, FRANCE.

OBJECTIVE: During atherogenesis, vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) undergo a
phenotypic modulation leading to migration and loss of contractility. Here we
propose a gene regulatory network specific of the contractile phenotype of the
carotid VSMCs from transcriptomic data.
DESIGN AND METHOD: Human carotid atheroma plaque (ATH, Stary>4) and nearby
macroscopically intact tissue (MIT, Stary<3) of 32 patients were analysed by
microarrays (Affymetrix HuGene-1.0ST). Histological analysis ensured the large
predominance of VSMCs in MIT. Vascular smooth muscle contraction (VSMcontr)
involved 119 genes (KEGG database). Transcriptional regulators (TRs) were
obtained from Genomatix© and KEGG. Co-expression of TRs and VSMcontr genes was
assessed by significant pairwise correlations (p<U+200A><<U+200A>10-3) between expression
levels across the 32 patients. For each TR, its connecting index (CI) with
VSMcontr was obtained from its connectivity, number of its significant
(p<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001) correlations with the VSMcontr genes, weighted by its expression
centile rank.
RESULTS: Forty VSMcontr genes were under-expressed (localFDR< 5%) in ATH vs MIT: 
11 genes encoding contractile proteins and their kinases/phosphatases, 11 genes
encoding receptors and Ca2+/K+ channels, and 18 genes involved in Ca2+ or
G-protein signalling. They were taken as the core-VSMcontr gene set. TRs showing 
the highest CI with core-VSMcontr in MIT that strongly decreased in ATH were
taken as representative of the contractile phenotype of VSMCs. Conversely, TRs
whose CI with core-VSMContr strongly increased reaching the highest levels in ATH
were taken as representative of the synthetic phenotype of VSMCs in ATH.
Ninety-one TRs had high positive (CI+) or negative (CI-) connecting index with
core-VSMcontr specifically in MIT or ATH: 49 TRs with high CI+ (including NRF1,
SRF and THRA) and 16 with high CI- (including HIF1A and STAT1) were MIT-specific,
whereas 17 (including ERCC6, PRRX1 and ARID5B) and 9 (including RNF4 and USF1)
other TRs had respectively high CI+ and high CI- and were ATH-specific.
CONCLUSIONS: The regulatory network around core-VSMcontr genes showed clear
changes in ATH compared to MIT by reducing the involvement of TRs related to cell
contractility and energy metabolism, and increasing that of TRs related to cell
dedifferentiation, proliferation and migration or with yet unknown function.

PMID: 26102644  [PubMed]


14. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;100(8):2841-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1120. Epub 
2015 Jun 2.

A Novel Mutation in THRA Gene Associated With an Atypical Phenotype of Resistance
to Thyroid Hormone.

Espiard S(1), Savagner F(1), Flamant F(1), Vlaeminck-Guillem V(1), Guyot R(1),
Munier M(1), d'Herbomez M(1), Bourguet W(1), Pinto G(1), Rose C(1), Rodien P(1), 
Wémeau JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Lille (S.E., J.-L.W.), Hôpital
Huriez, Service d'endocrinologie et métabolisme, 59000 Lille, France; Unité Mixte
de Recherche (UMR) Institut national de la santé et de la recherche médicale
(Inserm) 1048 (F.S.), Institut des Maladies Métaboliques et Cardiovasculaires
31000 Toulouse, France; Equipe d'accueil 3143 (F.S.), Laboratoire de
neurobiologie et transgenèse, Université d'Angers, France; Université de Lyon
(F.F., R.G.), Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Institut
National Recherche Agronomique, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, École Normale
Supérieure de Lyon, Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, 69008 Lyon
France; Centre de recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon (V.V.-G.), UMR Inserm 1052
CNRS 5286, Centre Léon Bérard, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Université de
Lyon, 69008 Lyon, France; Service de Biochimie Sud (V.V.-G.), Centre de Biologie 
Sud, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, 69495 Pierre Bénite, France; Inserm (M.M.,
P.R.), CNRS, UMR Inserm 1083 CNRS 6214, Université d'Angers, 49100 Angers,
France; Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de Lille (M.H.), Centre de
Biopathologie, Service de médecine nucléaire, 59000 Lille, France; UMR Inserm
1054 CNRS 5048 (W.B.), Centre de Biochimie Structurale, Universités Montpellier 1
& 2, 34000 Montpellier, France; Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades (G.P.), service
d'endocrinologie pédiatrique, 75015 Paris, France; Hôpital St-Vincent de Paul
(C.R.), Institut Catholique de Lille Service d'oncologie et d'hématologie, 59000 
Lille, France; and Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers (P.R.), centre de
référence des maladies rares de la réceptivité hormonale, 49100 Angers, France.

CONTEXT: RTHa is a recently discovered resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) due to
mutation of THRA, the gene encoding TRa1, the thyroid hormone receptor. It has
been described in a few patients with growth retardation, short stature, and a
low free T4/free T3 (FT4/FT3) ratio.
OBJECTIVE: A 27-year-old patient presenting with dwarfism and a low FT4/FT3 ratio
was investigated.
DESIGN: Clinical, biochemical, and radiological data were collected. Whole exome 
sequencing was performed in the patient and her relatives.
RESULTS: The patient exhibited congenital macrocytic anemia and severe bone
malformation with growth retardation, dwarfism, clavicular agenesis, and
abnormalities of the fingers, toes, and elbow joints. In adulthood, she presented
with active behavior, chronic motor diarrhea, and hypercalcemia. Treatment with
T3 led to heart rate acceleration, worsening of diarrhea, and TSH suppression.
Low resting energy expenditure normalized on T3. rT3, SHBG, and IGF-1 remained
normal. A de novo monoallelic missense mutation in THRA was discovered, the N359Y
amino acid substitution (c.1075A>T), which affected both the TRa1 and the
non-receptor isoform TRa2. The mutant TRa1 had a decrease in transcriptional
activity related to decreased T3 binding and a dominant-negative effect on the
wild-type receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: This patient presents a new phenotype including more significant
bone abnormalities, lower TSH, and higher FT3 levels, without certainty of all
her symptoms with the TRa1(N359Y) mutation. This case suggests that patients with
a low FT4/FT3 ratio should be screened for THRA mutations, even if clinical and
biological features differ from previous reported cases of RTHa.

PMID: 26037512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Thyroid Res. 2015 Apr 11;8:5. doi: 10.1186/s13044-015-0017-3. eCollection 2015.

Rare thyroid non-neoplastic diseases.

Lacka K(1), Maciejewski A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Internal Medicine, University of
Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

Rare diseases are usually defined as entities affecting less than 1 person per
2,000. About 7,000 different rare entities are distinguished and, among them,
rare diseases of the thyroid gland. Although not frequent, they can be found in
the everyday practice of endocrinologists and should be considered in
differential diagnosis. Rare non-neoplastic thyroid diseases will be discussed.
Congenital hypothyroidism's frequency is relatively high and its early treatment 
is of vital importance for neonatal psychomotor development; CH is caused
primarily by thyroid dysgenesis (85%) or dyshormonogenesis (10-15%), although
secondary defects - hypothalamic and pituitary - can also be found; up to 40% of 
cases diagnosed on neonatal screening are transient. Inherited abnormalities of
thyroid hormone binding proteins (TBG, TBP and albumin) include alterations in
their concentration or affinity for iodothyronines, this leads to laboratory test
abnormalities, although usually with normal free hormones and clinical
euthyroidism. Thyroid hormone resistance is most commonly found in THRB gene
mutations and more rarely in THRA mutations; in some cases both genes are
unchanged (non-TR RTH). Recently the term 'reduced sensitivity to thyroid
hormones' was introduced, which encompass not only iodothyronine receptor defects
but also their defective transmembrane transport or metabolism. Rare causes of
hyperthyroidism are: activating mutations in TSHR or GNAS genes, pituitary
adenomas, differentiated thyroid cancer or gestational trophoblastic disease;
congenital hyperthyroidism cases are also seen, although less frequently than CH.
Like other organs and tissues, the thyroid can be affected by different
inflammatory and infectious processes, including tuberculosis and sarcoidosis. In
most of the rare thyroid diseases genetic factors play a key role, many of them
can be classified as monogenic disorders. Although there are still some
limitations, progress has been made in our understanding of rare thyroid diseases
etiopathogenesis, and, thanks to these studies, also in our understanding of how 
normal thyroid gland functions.

PMCID: PMC4407423
PMID: 25908941  [PubMed]


16. Impaired Sensitivity to Thyroid Hormone: Defects of Transport, Metabolism and
Action.

Dumitrescu AM, Refetoff S.
In: De Groot LJ, Beck-Peccoz P, Chrousos G, Dungan K, Grossman A, Hershman JM,
Koch C, McLachlan R, New M, Rebar R, Singer F, Vinik A, Weickert MO, editors.
Endotext [Internet]. South Dartmouth (MA): MDText.com, Inc.; 2000-.
2015 Aug 20.

Defects along the pathways leading to TH action can manifest as impaired
sensitivity to TH. Six steps are presumed to be required for the circulating
thyroid hormone (TH) to exert its action on target tissues. For three of these
steps four distinct phenotypes have been identified in humans. The clinical,
laboratory, genetic and molecular characteristics of these defects are the
subject of this chapter. The first defect, recognized almost 50 years ago,
produces reduced sensitivity to TH and was given the acronym RTH, for resistance 
to thyroid hormone. Its major cause, found in more than 3,000 individuals, is
mutations in the TH receptor ß(THRB) gene. More recently mutations in the THRA
gene were found to produce a different phenotype owing to the distinct tissue
distribution of this TH receptor. Two other gene mutations, affecting TH action, 
but acting at different sites were identified in the last 10 years. One of them, 
caused by mutations in the TH cell-membrane transporter MCT8, produces severe
psychomotor defects. It has been identified in more than 320 males. A defect of
the intracellular metabolism of TH, identified in 11 members from 9 families, is 
caused by mutations in the SECISBP2 gene required for the synthesis of
selenoproteins, including TH deiodinases. Knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
involved in mediation of TH action allows the recognition of the phenotypes
caused by genetic defects in the involved pathways. While these defects have
opened the avenue for novel insights into thyroid physiology, they continue to
pose therapeutic challenges. For complete coverage of this and related areas in
Endocrinology, visit the free online web-textbook, www.endotext.org. Resistance
to thyroid hormone (RTH), a syndrome of reduced responsiveness of target tissues 
to thyroid hormone (TH) was identified in 1967 (1). An early report proposed
various mechanisms including defects in TH transport, metabolism and action (2). 
However, with the identification of TH receptor beta (THRB) gene mutations 22
years later (3,4), the term RTH become synonymous with defects of this gene (5). 
Subsequent discoveries of genetic defects that reduce the effectiveness of TH
through altered cell membrane transport (6,7) and metabolism (8) have broadened
the definition of TH hyposensitivity to encompass all defects that could
interfere with the biological activity of a chemically intact hormone secreted in
normal or even excess amounts. In this revised chapter, we cover all syndromes
resulting from impaired sensitivity to TH, using the recently proposed
nomenclature (9) (see Table 1).

PMID: 25905294  [PubMed]


17. J Med Genet. 2015 May;52(5):312-6. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102936. Epub 2015 
Feb 10.

Thyroid hormone resistance syndrome due to mutations in the thyroid hormone
receptor a gene (THRA).

Tylki-Szymanska A(1), Acuna-Hidalgo R(2), Krajewska-Walasek M(3), Lecka-Ambroziak
A(4), Steehouwer M(2), Gilissen C(2), Brunner HG(2), Jurecka A(1),
Rózdzynska-Swiatkowska A(5), Hoischen A(2), Chrzanowska KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Human Genetics,
Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. (4)Department of Endocrinology and
Diabetology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Anthropology Laboratory, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw,
Poland.

BACKGROUND: Resistance to thyroid hormone is characterised by a lack of response 
of peripheral tissues to the active form of thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine,
T3). In about 85% of cases, a mutation in THRB, the gene coding for thyroid
receptor ß (TRß), is the cause of this disorder. Recently, individual reports
described the first patients with thyroid hormone receptor a gene (THRA) defects.
METHODS: We used longitudinal clinical assessments over a period of 18 years at
one hospital setting combined with biochemical and molecular studies to
characterise a novel thyroid hormone resistance syndrome in a cohort of six
patients from five families.
FINDINGS: Using whole exome sequencing and subsequent Sanger sequencing, we
identified truncating and missense mutations in the THRA gene in five of six
individuals and describe a distinct and consistent phenotype of mild
hypothyroidism (growth retardation, relatively high birth length and weight,
mild-to-moderate mental retardation, mild skeletal dysplasia and constipation),
specific facial features (round, somewhat coarse and flat face) and macrocephaly.
Laboratory investigations revealed anaemia and slightly elevated cholesterol,
while the thyroid profile showed low free thyroxine (fT4) levels coupled with
high free T3 (fT3), leading to an altered T4 : T3 ratio, along with normal
thyroid-stimulating hormone levels. We observed a genotype-phenotype correlation,
with milder outcomes for missense mutations and more severe phenotypical effects 
for truncating mutations.
INTERPRETATION: THRA mutations may be more common than expected. In patients with
clinical symptoms of mild hypothyreosis without confirmation in endocrine
studies, a molecular study of THRA defects is strongly recommended.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25670821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Food Microbiol. 2015 Apr 16;199:72-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2015.01.010. Epub 2015 Jan 17.

Salmonella surveillance on fresh produce in retail in Turkey.

Gunel E(1), Polat Kilic G(1), Bulut E(1), Durul B(1), Acar S(1), Alpas H(1),
Soyer Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering, Middle East Technical University, 06800
Ankara, Turkey. (2)Department of Food Engineering, Middle East Technical
University, 06800 Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: ysoyer@metu.edu.tr.

Although Turkey is one of the major producers of fruits and vegetables in the
world, there has been no information available on the prevalence of pathogens in 
fresh produce. To fill this gap, we collected 503 fresh produce samples including
tomato, parsley, iceberg lettuce, green-leaf lettuce and five different fresh
pepper varieties (i.e., green, kapya, bell, mazamort and Charleston) from 3 major
districts within 9 supermarkets and 3 bazaars in Ankara, Turkey to investigate
the presence of Salmonella. Salmonella was detected in 0.8% (4/503) of samples by
conventional culturing method with molecular confirmation conducted through
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). For further characterization of isolates,
serotyping, antimicrobial susceptibility testing, multi-locus sequence typing
(MLST; aroC, thrA, purE, sucA, hisD, hemD and dnaN) and pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) were performed. Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica
serotypes Anatum, Charity, Enteritidis and Mikawasima were isolated from two
parsley, one pepper and one lettuce samples, respectively. MLST resulted in 4
sequence types (STs) for each serotype, including one novel ST for serotype
Mikawasima. Similarly, PFGE revealed four different XbaI PFGE patterns. The
results of this survey, obtained by the most common subtyping methods (i.e.
serotyping, MLST and PFGE) worldwide, contributes to the development of a
national database in Turkey, which is essential for investigating the
evolutionary pathways, geographical distribution and genetic diversity of
Salmonella strains.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25643853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Transl Med. 2015 Jan 27;13:31. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0395-2.

Obesity is associated with a decrease in expression but not with the
hypermethylation of thermogenesis-related genes in adipose tissues.

Kurylowicz A(1), Jonas M(2), Lisik W(3), Jonas M(4), Wicik ZA(5), Wierzbicki
Z(6), Chmura A(7), Puzianowska-Kuznicka M(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish
Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland.
akurylowicz@imdik.pan.pl. (2)Department of Human Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical
Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5 Pawinskiego Street, 02-106,
Warsaw, Poland. martajonas@imdik.pan.pl. (3)Department of General and
Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka Street,
02-005, Warsaw, Poland. wojciech.lisik@wum.edu.pl. (4)Department of General and
Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka Street,
02-005, Warsaw, Poland. morjon@poczta.onet.pl. (5)Department of Human
Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5
Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland. zwicik@imdik.pan.pl. (6)Department of
General and Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka
Street, 02-005, Warsaw, Poland. zbigniew-wierzbicki@wp.pl. (7)Department of
General and Transplantation Surgery, Medical University of Warsaw, 59 Nowogrodzka
Street, 02-005, Warsaw, Poland. andrzejchmura@geil.pl. (8)Department of Human
Epigenetics, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 5
Pawinskiego Street, 02-106, Warsaw, Poland. mpuzianowska@wum.edu.pl.
(9)Department of Geriatrics and Gerontology, Medical Centre of Postgraduate
Education, 99 Marymoncka Street, 01-813, Warsaw, Poland. mpuzianowska@wum.edu.pl.

BACKGROUND: Impaired thermogenesis can promote obesity. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to investigate whether the expression of thermogenesis-related
genes is altered in adipose tissues of obese individuals and whether excessive
methylation of their promoters is involved in this phenomenon.
METHODS: The expression of genes encoding ß adrenergic receptors (ADRBs), thyroid
hormone receptors (THRs), 5'-iodothyronine deiodinases (DIOs), and uncoupling
proteins (UCPs) was measured by real-time PCR in visceral and in subcutaneous
adipose tissues of 58 obese (BMI >40 kg/m(2)) and 50 slim (BMI 20-24.9 kg/m(2))
individuals. The methylation status of these genes was studied by the
methylation-sensitive digestion/real-time PCR method.
RESULTS: The expression of ADRB2, ADRB3, THRA, THRB, DIO2, UCP2 was significantly
lower in the adipose tissues of obese patients than in tissues of normal-weight
individuals (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.00001). In the obese, the expression of ADRB2, ADRB3, DIO2 was
lower in visceral adipose tissue than in subcutaneous adipose tissue (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.008, 
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001, respectively). However, the mean methylation of CpG islands
of these genes was similar in tissues with their high and low expression, and
there was no correlation between the level of expression and the level of
methylation.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased expression of thermogenesis-related genes in adipose
tissues of obese patients might result in the reduced reactivity to both hormonal
and adrenergic stimuli and therefore in a lower potential to activate
thermogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4314800
PMID: 25622596  [PubMed - in process]


20. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2015 Apr;182:64-72. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2014.12.003. Epub 2014 Dec 26.

Transcripts involved in steroid biosynthesis and steroid receptor signaling are
expressed early in development in the fathead minnow (Pimephales promelas).

Wood RK(1), Seidel JS(1), Martyniuk CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick E2L 4L5, Canada. (2)Canadian Rivers
Institute and Department of Biology, University of New Brunswick, Saint John, New
Brunswick E2L 4L5, Canada. Electronic address: cmartyn@ufl.edu.

Sex differentiation in organisms is correlated to sex steroid production and
receptor signaling pathways involving androgens and estrogens. Timing of
expression is critical, and characterization of sensitive windows is needed to
determine how environmental stressors may perturb sex differentiation. The
objectives of this study were to determine whether genes related to steroid
biosynthesis, steroid receptor signaling, and those related to sex
differentiation were expressed in pre-differentiated fathead minnow (FHM)
embryos, an ecotoxicological model. Transcripts were measured over two weeks (1
day post fertilization (dpf) to 14 days), prior to sex differentiation. The first
three time points investigated (1, 3, and 5 dpf) corresponded to the neurula
stage, dorsal swim bladder pigmentation, and pre-hatch. The fourth time point (6 
dpf) was collected immediately post-hatch and the fifth time point investigated
was after 8 days of larval growth (14 dpf). The majority of transcripts
investigated, for example estrogen, androgen, and thyroid receptors as well as
steroid biosynthesis transcripts, were expressed within the first 72 hours of
development; exceptions were star (steroidogenic acute regulatory protein) and
cyp19a, which did not have detectable expression until 5 dpf (pre-hatch).
Transcripts that increased in relative mRNA abundance over the first two weeks of
development included ar, dax1, hsd11b2, hsd17b, cyp19a and thra. This study
demonstrates that there is early expression of transcripts related to steroid
biosynthesis, steroid receptor signaling, and sex differentiation in pre-hatch
FHM embryos. Additional studies are required to determine their relative roles in
male and female differentiation during these early developmental periods.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25546055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Mar;14(3):510-8. doi: 10.1074/mcp.M114.045930. Epub
2014 Dec 24.

Antibody profiling of bipolar disorder using Escherichia coli proteome
microarrays.

Chen PC(1), Syu GD(1), Chung KH(2), Ho YH(1), Chung FH(1), Chen PH(2), Lin JM(1),
Chen YW(1), Tsai SY(2), Chen CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Graduate Institute of Systems Biology and Bioinformatics, National
Central University, Taiwan; (2)§Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine,
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; ¶Department of
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Research Center, Taipei Medical University Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)From the Graduate Institute of Systems Biology and
Bioinformatics, National Central University, Taiwan; cchen103@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Proteomics. 2015 Aug;14(8):2299.

To profile plasma antibodies of patients with bipolar disorder (BD), an E. coli
proteome microarray comprising ca. 4200 proteins was used to analyze antibody
differences between BD patients and mentally healthy controls (HCs). The plasmas 
of HCs and patients aged 18-45 years with bipolar I disorder (DSM-IV) in acute
mania (BD-A) along with remission (BD-R) were collected. The initial samples
consisting of 19 BD-A, 20 BD-R, and 20 HCs were probed with the microarrays.
After selecting protein hits that recognized the antibody differences between BD 
and HC, the proteins were purified to construct BD focus arrays for training
diagnosis committees and validation. Additional six BD-A, six BD-R, six HCs, and 
nine schizophrenic disorder (SZ, as another psychiatric control) samples were
individually probed with the BD focus arrays. The trained diagnosis committee in 
BD-A versus HC combined top six proteins, including rpoA, thrA, flhB, yfcI, ycdU,
and ydjL. However, the optimized committees in BD-R versus HC and BD-A versus
BD-R were of low accuracy (< 0.6). In the single blind test using another four
BD-A, four HC, and four SZ samples, the committee of BD-A versus HC was able to
classify BD-A versus HC and SZ with 75% sensitivity and 80% specificity that both
HC and SZ were regarded as negative controls. The consensus motif of the six
proteins, which form the committee of BD-A versus HC, is
[KE]DIL[AG]L[LV]I[NL][IC][SVKH]G[LV][VN][LV] by Gapped Local Alignment of Motifs.
We demonstrated that the E. coli proteome microarray is capable of screening BD
plasma antibody differences and the selected proteins committee was successfully 
used for BD diagnosis with 79% accuracy.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4349973
PMID: 25540388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 5;9(12):e114487. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114487.
eCollection 2014.

Early postnatal exposure to a low dose of decabromodiphenyl ether affects
expression of androgen and thyroid hormone receptor-alpha and its splicing
variants in mouse Sertoli cells.

Miyaso H(1), Nakamura N(2), Naito M(3), Hirai S(4), Matsuno Y(1), Itoh M(4), Mori
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Preventive Medical Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan;
Department of Bioenvironmental Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chiba, Japan. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and
Toxicology, Marshall University, Joan C. Edwards School of Medicine, Huntington, 
United States of America. (3)Department of Anatomy, Aichi Medical University,
Aichi, Japan. (4)Department of Anatomy, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Decabromodiphenyl ether (decaBDE) adversely affects reproduction and development.
Our previous study showed that postnatal exposure to a low dose of decaBDE (0.025
mg/kg body weight/day) by subcutaneous injection on postnatal days (PNDs) 1
through 5 leads to reductions in testicular size and number of Sertoli cells and 
sperm, while higher dose of decaBDE (2.5 mg/kg body weight/day) had no
significant differences about these. In the present study, we examined the
molecular mechanism of these effects on mouse testes following postnatal exposure
to a low decaBDE dose. We hypothesized that postnatal exposure to decaBDE may
alter levels of serum thyroid hormones (THs) and testosterone, or the level of TH
receptor alpha (Thra) transcripts and its splicing variants and androgen receptor
(Ar) in Sertoli cells, adversely affecting spermatogenesis. To test this
hypothesis, we examined serum TH and testosterone levels and the levels of
transcripts of the Ar, Thra and its splicing variants, and Thra splicing factors 
(Hnrnpa1, Srsf1, and Hnrnph1) with qPCR in isolated mouse Sertoli cells exposed
postnatally to decaBDE (0.025, 0.25, and 2.5 mg/kg). Levels of serum testosterone
and transcripts encoding Ar, Thra, and its variant, Thra1, declined significantly
in Sertoli cells of mice exposed to 0.025 mg decaBDE/kg. No significant
differences in serum TH level or Thra2, Hnrnph1, or Srsf1 transcript levels were 
observed between control and decaBDE-exposed mice. However, the Thra1:Thra2 and
Hnrnpa1:Srsf1 ratios were altered in Sertoli cells of mice exposed to 0.025 mg
decaBDE/kg but not in cells exposed to 0.25 or 2.5 mg decaBDE/kg. These results
indicate that postnatal exposure to a low dose of decaBDE on PNDs 1 through 5
lowers the testosterone level and the levels of Ar and Thra transcripts in
Sertoli cells, accompanied by an imbalance in the ratios of Thra splicing
variants, resulting in smaller testicular size and impaired spermatogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4257688
PMID: 25479311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2014 Dec;37(8):553-9.

Evaluation of seven housekeeping genes for multilocus sequence analysis of the
genus Mesorhizobium: Resolving the taxonomic affiliation of the Cicer canariense 
rhizobia.

Pérez-Yépez J, Armas-Capote N, Velázquez E, Pérez-Galdona R, Rivas R,
León-Barrios M.

Cicer canariense is a wild chickpea that can be nodulated by Mesorhizobium
strains belonging to nine different genomic groups or genospecies. In this study,
multilocus sequence analysis (MLSA) of seven protein-coding genes, recA, glnII,
dnaK, rpoB, gyrB, truA and thrA, was used to resolve the phylogenetic
relationships and taxonomic affiliation of 27 representative strains from all the
genotypes. Individual phylogenies were mostly congruent, although there were a
few discrepancies. Some genes were more discriminative than others, but
concatenation of the seven genes produced a robust phylogeny of the genus
Mesorhizobium. MLSA gave good support for the taxonomic affiliations of most of
the genomic groups to previously recognized species and delineated several
potential new species. Five genospecies found in C. canariense nodules showed
average nucleotide identity values for seven genes (ANIg7) of >96% and they could
be assigned to previously described Mesorhizobium species. Two large closely
related genomic groups had M. caraganae as the closest species and they shared
ANIg7 values in the 9495% range, suggesting that they could be different
subspecies or sister species. The predominant genospecies represented a novel
monophyletic lineage that was well resolved from all currently recognized species
of Mesorhizobium, with the highest ANIg7 below 92%. Other single strains
represented potential new species.

PMID: 25467554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Fish Dis. 2016 Jan;39(1):69-85. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12324. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

The expression of selected genes linked to metabolic homeostasis in obese
pansteatitis-suffering Mozambique tilapia, Oreochromis mossambicus (Peters).

Truter JC(1), van Wyk JH(1), Oberholster PJ(2,)(3), Botha AM(4), Luus-Powell
WJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Botany and Zoology, Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South
Africa. (2)CSIR Natural Resources and the Environment, Stellenbosch, South
Africa. (3)Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science,
University of Pretoria, Onderstepoort, South Africa. (4)Department of Genetics,
Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch, South Africa. (5)Department of
Biodiversity, University of Limpopo, Sovenga, South Africa.

The Oreochromis mossambicus (Peters) population inhabiting Lake Loskop, South
Africa, is characterized by a high incidence of obesity and pansteatitis. We
investigated potential links between the impaired health of Lake Loskop
O. mossambicus and the endocrine system by assessing the expression of selected
genes associated with the thyroid and adrenal endocrine axes as well as
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (pparg). Moreover,
contaminant-induced thyroid and/or metabolic modulation in Lake Loskop water was 
evaluated using juvenile O. mossambicus in laboratory exposures. The expression
of thyroid hormone receptor alpha (thra) and type 2 deiodinase (dio2) was higher 
in Lake Loskop O. mossambicus than fish from another population, suggesting a
degree of thyroid disruption. The altered gene expression may be a consequence,
rather than cause of obesity. Expression of dio2 and pparg was higher in juvenile
O. mossambicus exposed to unfiltered compared to filtered lake water, and our
data suggest fasting as causative factor. Micro-organism abundance can therefore 
be a confounding factor in studies applying molecular markers to test for thyroid
modulation by environmental waters. Pansteatitis was not a significant source of 
variance in the expression of any of the genes investigated, suggesting that the 
disease is not associated with disrupted endocrine signalling.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25413848  [PubMed - in process]


25. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e113145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113145.
eCollection 2014.

The molecular epidemiological characteristics and genetic diversity of salmonella
typhimurium in Guangdong, China, 2007-2011.

Sun J(1), Ke B(2), Huang Y(3), He D(2), Li X(2), Liang Z(2), Ke C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Institute of Public Health, Guangdong Provincial Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, China. (2)Institute of
Microbiology, Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention,
Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health and
Tropical Medicine, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is the most important serovar
associated with human salmonellosis worldwide. Here we aimed to explore the
molecular epidemiology and genetic characteristics of this serovar in Guangdong, 
China.
METHODOLOGY: We evaluated the molecular epidemiology and genetic characteristics 
of 294 endemic Salmonella Typhimurium clinical isolates which were collected from
1977 to 2011 in Guangdong, China, and compared them with a global set of isolates
of this serovar using epidemiological data and Multilocus Sequence Typing (MLST) 
analysis.
PRINCIPAL FINDING: The 294 isolates were assigned to 13 Sequencing types (STs) by
MLST, of which ST34 and ST19 were the most common in Guangdong. All the STs were 
further assigned to two eBurst Groups, eBG1 and eBG138. The eBG1 was the major
group endemic in Guangdong. Nucleotide and amino acid variability were comparable
for all seven MLST loci. Tajima's D test suggested positive selection in hisD and
thrA genes (p<0.01), but positive selection was rejected for the five other genes
(p>0.05). In addition, The Tajima's D test within each eBG using the global set
of isolates showed positive selection in eBG1 and eBG138 (p<0.05), but was
rejected in eBG243 (p>0.05). We also analyzed the phylogenetic structure of
Salmonella Typhimurium from worldwide sources and found that certain STs are
geographically restricted. ACSSuT was the predominant multidrug resistance
pattern for this serovar. The resistant profiles ACSSuTTmNaG, ACSSuTTmNa and
ACSuTTmNaG seem to be specific for ST34, and ASSuTNa for ST19.
CONCLUSION: Here we presented a genotypic characterization of Salmonella
Typhimurium isolates using MLST and found two major STs are endemic in Guangdong.
Our analyses indicate that genetic selection may have shaped the Salmonella
Typhimurium populations. However, further evaluation with additional isolates
from various sources will be essential to reveal the scope of the epidemiological
characteristics of Salmonella Typhimurium in Guangdong, China.

PMCID: PMC4224511
PMID: 25380053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;167:101-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2014.09.007. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Progesterone and norgestrel alter transcriptional expression of genes along the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in zebrafish embryos-larvae.

Liang YQ(1), Huang GY(1), Ying GG(2), Liu SS(1), Jiang YX(1), Liu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of
Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. (2)State Key 
Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry, Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510640, China. Electronic address:
guangguo.ying@gmail.com. (3)State Key Laboratory of Organic Geochemistry,
Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510640, China; Key Laboratory of Marine Bio-Resources Sustainable Utilization,
South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou
510301, China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of progestins on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis in the early stage of zebrafish.
Zebrafish embryos were exposed to progesterone (P4) or norgestrel (NGT) at 5, 50 
and 100 ng L(-1) for 144 h post fertilization (hpf), and the transcriptional
levels of target genes along the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis were
determined daily. The results showed that P4 had only minor effects on the mRNA
expression of thyroglobulin (Tg), iodothyronine deiodinase type <U+0399> (Dio1) and
thyroid hormone receptor ß (Thrb) genes. Similarly, the effects of NGT on
transcripts of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (Trh), Dio1, iodothyronine
deiodinase type II (Dio2) and thyroid hormone receptor a (Thra) genes were
generally low. In addition, NGT resulted in some alterations of Tg and Thrb
transcripts at different time points. However, a strong induction of Nis mRNA by 
P4 and NGT was observed in zebrafish embryos-larvae. The overall results showed
that besides Nis no effects on the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis are 
observed following exposure to P4 and NGT, which imply that both P4 and NGT have 
potential effects on the thyroid endocrine system by inducing transcript of Nis
gene during the early stage of zebrafish.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25277675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Endocr Dev. 2014;26:118-29. doi: 10.1159/000363159. Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Resistance to thyroid hormone.

Onigata K(1), Szinnai G.

Author information: 
(1)Postgraduate Clinical Practice Center and Department of Pediatrics, Shimane
Faculty of Medicine, Izumo, Japan.

Resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH) or thyroid hormone action defect (THAD) is
the most frequent form of syndromes of reduced sensitivity to thyroid hormone. It
is characterized by variable tissue hyposensitivity to thyroid hormone. RTHß
(formerly only RTH) is caused by mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor ß gene
(THRB). The clinical phenotype reflects the dysbalance between resistance of
tissues predominantly expressing the thyroid hormone receptor ß-isoforms 1 and 2 
and the overstimulation of tissues mainly expressing the thyroid hormone receptor
a-isoform to thyroid hormones. The hallmark of RTHß is goiter, sinus tachycardia,
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in the context of increased levels of
triiodothyronine/free thyroxine and nonsuppressed thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Only recently have mutations in the thyroid hormone receptor a gene (THRA) been
identified causing a new form of RTH, RTHa. The few patients described so far
suffered from mental retardation of variable degree, short stature with decreased
subischial leg length, chronic constipation and bradycardia. This review provides
an overview of clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects of RTHa and RTHß
relevant for diagnosis, treatment and counseling of affected patients and
families.

PMID: 25231448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;10(10):582-91. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.143. Epub
2014 Aug 19.

Thyroid hormone receptors and resistance to thyroid hormone disorders.

Ortiga-Carvalho TM(1), Sidhaye AR(2), Wondisford FE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Av. Carlos Chagas Filho, S/N, Cidade Universitária, 21941-902, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Departments of Paediatrics and Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, 600 N. Wolfe Street, CMSC 10-113, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

Thyroid hormone action is predominantly mediated by thyroid hormone receptors
(THRs), which are encoded by the thyroid hormone receptor a (THRA) and thyroid
hormone receptor ß (THRB) genes. Patients with mutations in THRB present with
resistance to thyroid hormone ß (RTHß), which is a disorder characterized by
elevated levels of thyroid hormone, normal or elevated levels of TSH and goitre. 
Mechanistic insights about the contributions of THRß to various processes,
including colour vision, development of the cochlea and the cerebellum, and
normal functioning of the adult liver and heart, have been obtained by either
introducing human THRB mutations into mice or by deletion of the mouse Thrb gene.
The introduction of the same mutations that mimic human THRß alterations into the
mouse Thra and Thrb genes resulted in distinct phenotypes, which suggests that
THRA and THRB might have non-overlapping functions in human physiology. These
studies also suggested that THRA mutations might not be lethal. Seven patients
with mutations in THRa have since been described. These patients have RTHa and
presented with major abnormalities in growth and gastrointestinal function. The
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in these individuals is minimally affected,
which suggests that the central T3 feedback loop is not impaired in patients with
RTHa, in stark contrast to patients with RTHß.

PMCID: PMC4578869
PMID: 25135573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014 Aug;2(8):619-26. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(14)70111-1. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

Resistance to thyroid hormone caused by a mutation in thyroid hormone receptor
(TR)a1 and TRa2: clinical, biochemical, and genetic analyses of three related
patients.

Moran C(1), Agostini M(1), Visser WE(1), Schoenmakers E(1), Schoenmakers N(1),
Offiah AC(2), Poole K(3), Rajanayagam O(1), Lyons G(1), Halsall D(4), Gurnell
M(1), Chrysis D(5), Efthymiadou A(5), Buchanan C(6), Aylwin S(7), Chatterjee
KK(8).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories, Wellcome Trust-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Academic Unit of Child Health, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Medical School
University of Patras, Patras, Greece. (6)Department of Child Health, King's
College Hospital, London, UK. (7)Department of Endocrinology, King's College
Hospital, London, UK. (8)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories,
Wellcome Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, UK. Electronic address: kkc1@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014 Aug;2(8):e14.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;10(9):511.

BACKGROUND: The thyroid hormone receptor a gene (THRA) transcript is
alternatively spliced to generate either thyroid hormone receptor (TR)a1 or a
non-hormone-binding variant protein, TRa2, the function of which is unknown.
Here, we describe the first patients identified with a mutation in THRA that
affects both TRa1 and TRa2, and compare them with patients who have resistance to
thyroid hormone owing to a mutation affecting only TRa1, to delineate the
relative roles of TRa1 and TRa2.
METHODS: We did clinical, biochemical, and genetic analyses of an index case and 
her two sons. We assessed physical and radiological features, thyroid function,
physiological and biochemical markers of thyroid hormone action, and THRA
sequence.
FINDINGS: The patients presented in childhood with growth failure, developmental 
delay, and constipation, which improved after treatment with thyroxine, despite
normal concentrations of circulating thyroid hormones. They had similar clinical 
(macrocephaly, broad faces, skin tags, motor dyspraxia, slow speech), biochemical
(subnormal ratio of free thyroxine:free tri-iodothyronine [T3], low concentration
of total reverse T3, high concentration of creatine kinase, mild anaemia), and
radiological (thickened calvarium) features to patients with TRa1-mediated
resistance to thyroid hormone, although our patients had a heterozygous mis-sense
mutation (Ala263Val) in both TRa1 and TRa2 proteins. The Ala263Val mutant TRa1
inhibited the transcriptional function of normal receptor in a dominant-negative 
fashion. By contrast, function of Ala263Val mutant TRa2 matched its normal
counterpart. In vitro, high concentrations of T3 restored transcriptional
activity of Ala263Val mutant TRa1, and reversed the dominant-negative inhibition 
of its normal counterpart. High concentrations of T3 restored expression of
thyroid hormone-responsive target genes in patient-derived blood cells.
INTERPRETATION: TRa1 seems to be the principal functional product of the THRA
gene. Thyroxine treatment alleviates hormone resistance in patients with
mutations affecting this gene, possibly ameliorating the phenotype. These
findings will help the diagnosis and treatment of other patients with resistance 
to thyroid hormone resulting from mutations in THRA.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust, NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Marie Curie
Actions, Foundation for Development of Internal Medicine in Europe.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24969835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ren Fail. 2014 Jul;36(6):899-903. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2014.900387.

Role of total hip replacement arthroplasty between transplantation and acute
kidney injury.

Li X(1), Guo D, Shi G, Li R, Li X, Shen R, Wang H, Li Y, Yuan F, Han G.

Author information: 
(1)Traditional Chinese Medicine-Western Medicine Hospital of Cangzhou of Hebei,
Cangzhou City , Hebei Province , China.

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head is a severely disabling complication of steroid
immunosuppression in renal transplant patients. The increased number of patients 
undergoing transplantation has increased the number of transplant recipients
undergoing total hip replacement arthroplasty (THRA). In this study, we
retrospectively assessed patients who underwent THRA from May 2004 to February
2014, and evaluated their demographic and clinical characteristics, the results
of peri-operative laboratory tests, the amounts of fluids transfused during
surgery, and anesthesia time. Our results found that post-operative acute kidney 
injury (AKI) was significantly associated with transplantation, and
transplantation was an independent factor predictive of post-operative AKI, so
transplant recipients are at risk for AKI following THRA. Total hip replacement
is a safe and effective treatment for transplant recipients and, in view of their
limited life expectancy, should be considered at an early stage in their
treatment.

PMID: 24955625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Endocrinology. 2014 Sep;155(9):3699-712. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-2156. Epub 2014 Jun
10.

Thyroid hormone receptor a mutation causes a severe and thyroxine-resistant
skeletal dysplasia in female mice.

Bassett JH(1), Boyde A, Zikmund T, Evans H, Croucher PI, Zhu X, Park JW, Cheng
SY, Williams GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (J.H.D.B., G.R.W.), Imperial College London, London W12
0NN, United Kingdom; Dental Physical Sciences, Oral Growth and Development
(A.B.), Queen Mary University of London, London E1 4NS, United Kingdom;
Laboratory of X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography and Nano-Computed Tomography
(T.Z.), Central European Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology
CZ-61600 Brno, Czech Republic; Sheffield Myeloma Research Team (H.E.), University
of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2RX, United Kingdom; Bone Biology Program (P.I.C.),
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney NSW 2010, Australia; and Laboratory 
of Molecular Biology (X.Z., J.W.P., S-y.C.), National Cancer Institute, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

A new genetic disorder has been identified that results from mutation of THRA,
encoding thyroid hormone receptor a1 (TRa1). Affected children have a high serum 
T3:T4 ratio and variable degrees of intellectual deficit and constipation but
exhibit a consistently severe skeletal dysplasia. In an attempt to improve
developmental delay and alleviate symptoms of hypothyroidism, patients are
receiving varying doses and durations of T4 treatment, but responses have been
inconsistent so far. Thra1(PV/+) mice express a similar potent dominant-negative 
mutant TRa1 to affected individuals, and thus represent an excellent disease
model. We hypothesized that Thra1(PV/+) mice could be used to predict the
skeletal outcome of human THRA mutations and determine whether prolonged
treatment with a supraphysiological dose of T4 ameliorates the skeletal
abnormalities. Adult female Thra1(PV/+) mice had short stature, grossly abnormal 
bone morphology but normal bone strength despite high bone mass. Although T4
treatment suppressed TSH secretion, it had no effect on skeletal maturation,
linear growth, or bone mineralization, thus demonstrating profound tissue
resistance to thyroid hormone. Despite this, prolonged T4 treatment abnormally
increased bone stiffness and strength, suggesting the potential for detrimental
consequences in the long term. Our studies establish that TRa1 has an essential
role in the developing and adult skeleton and predict that patients with
different THRA mutations will display variable responses to T4 treatment, which
depend on the severity of the causative mutation.

PMCID: PMC4138578
PMID: 24914936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur Thyroid J. 2014 Mar;3(1):17-24. doi: 10.1159/000360637. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

Clinical Consequences of Mutations in Thyroid Hormone Receptor-a1.

van Mullem AA(1), Visser TJ(1), Peeters RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Thyroid hormone (TH) exerts its biological activity via the TH receptors TRa1 and
TRß1/2, which are encoded by the THRA and THRB genes. The first patients with
mutations in THRB were identified decades ago. These patients had a clinical
syndrome of resistance to TH associated with high serum TH and nonsuppressed
thyroid-stimulating hormone levels. Until recently, no patients with mutations in
THRA had been identified. In an attempt to predict the clinical phenotype of such
patients, different TRa1 mutant mouse models have been generated. These mice have
a variable phenotype depending on the location and severity of the mutation.
Recently, the first humans with mutations in THRA were identified. Their
phenotype consists of relatively low serum T4 and high serum T3 levels (and thus 
an elevated T3/T4 ratio), growth retardation, delayed mental and bone
development, and constipation. While, in retrospect, certain features present in 
humans can also be found in mouse models, the first humans carrying a defect in
TRa1 were not suspected of having a THRA gene mutation initially. The current
review focuses on the clinical consequences of TRa1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4005264
PMID: 24847461  [PubMed]


33. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2014 Mar-Apr;194(1-2):64-8. doi:
10.1016/j.molbiopara.2014.04.009. Epub 2014 May 4.

Identification of thyroid hormone receptor homologs in the fluke Opisthorchis
felineus (Platyhelminthes).

Pakharukova MY(1), Ershov NI(2), Vorontsova EV(2), Shilov AG(2), Merkulova TI(3),
Mordvinov VA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia; Novosibirsk
State University, Novosibirsk, Russia. Electronic address: pmaria@yandex.ru.
(2)Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia. (3)Institute
of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia; Novosibirsk State
University, Novosibirsk, Russia.

The liver fluke, Opisthorchis felineus of the Opisthorchiidae family, is a
well-known causative agent of opisthorchiasis in Russia and Europe. The aim of
this work was to identify genes encoding thyroid hormone receptors in O.
felineus, and to analyze the expression of possible target genes in response to
treatment with exogenous thyroid hormones. We identified two genes encoding
thyroid hormone receptors in the O. felineus genome, THRA and THRB. The genes
were differentially expressed through the life cycle. The maximal level of mRNA
expression of THRA1 and THRB was observed in adult worms. Treatment of the worms 
with triiodothyronine and thyroxine resulted in an increase in glucose
6-phosphatase mRNA expression and a decrease in malate dehydrogenase mRNA
expression, potential gene targets of thyroid hormones. These data indicate that 
thyroid hormone receptors may perform essential roles in physiological processes 
in adult O. felineus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24798031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. ISRN Endocrinol. 2014 Feb 20;2014:317398. doi: 10.1155/2014/317398. eCollection
2014.

Thyroid hormone status interferes with estrogen target gene expression in breast 
cancer samples in menopausal women.

Conde SJ(1), Luvizotto Rde A(2), de Síbio MT(2), Nogueira CR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, São Paulo Federal Institute (IFSP),
18136-540 São Roque, SP, Brazil ; Department of Internal Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, UNESP, 18618-000 Botucatu, SP, Brazil.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
UNESP, 18618-000 Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

We investigated thyroid hormone levels in menopausal BrC patients and verified
the action of triiodothyronine on genes regulated by estrogen and by
triiodothyronine itself in BrC tissues. We selected 15 postmenopausal BrC
patients and a control group of 18 postmenopausal women without BrC. We measured 
serum TPO-AB, TSH, FT4, and estradiol, before and after surgery, and used
immunohistochemistry to examine estrogen and progesterone receptors. BrC primary 
tissue cultures received the following treatments: ethanol, triiodothyronine,
triiodothyronine plus 4-hydroxytamoxifen, 4-hydroxytamoxifen, estrogen, or
estrogen plus 4-hydroxytamoxifen. Genes regulated by estrogen (TGFA, TGFB1, and
PGR) and by triiodothyronine (TNFRSF9, BMP-6, and THRA) in vitro were evaluated. 
TSH levels in BrC patients did not differ from those of the control group (1.34 ±
0.60 versus 2.41 ± 1.10<U+2009> µ U/mL), but FT4 levels of BrC patients were
statistically higher than controls (1.78 ± 0.20 versus 0.95 ± 0.16<U+2009>ng/dL). TGFA
was upregulated and downregulated after estrogen and triiodothyronine treatment, 
respectively. Triiodothyronine increased PGR expression; however
4-hydroxytamoxifen did not block triiodothyronine action on PGR expression.
4-Hydroxytamoxifen, alone or associated with triiodothyronine, modulated gene
expression of TNFRSF9, BMP-6, and THRA, similar to triiodothyronine treatment.
Thus, our work highlights the importance of thyroid hormone status evaluation and
its ability to interfere with estrogen target gene expression in BrC samples in
menopausal women.

PMCID: PMC3950583
PMID: 24701358  [PubMed]


35. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 May;38(1):166-74. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.03.016.
Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Thyroid signaling in immune organs and cells of the teleost fish rainbow trout
(Oncorhynchus mykiss).

Quesada-García A(1), Valdehita A(1), Kropf C(2), Casanova-Nakayama A(2), Segner
H(2), Navas JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y Alimentaria (INIA),
Madrid, Spain. (2)Centre for Fish and Wildlife Health, University of Bern,
Switzerland. (3)Instituto Nacional de Investigación y Tecnología Agraria y
Alimentaria (INIA), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jmnavas@inia.es.

Thyroid hormones are involved in modulating the immune system in mammals. In
contrast, there is no information on the role played by these hormones in the
immune system of teleost fish. Here we provide initial evidence for the presence 
of active thyroid signaling in immune organs and cells of teleosts. We
demonstrate that immune organs (head kidney and spleen) and isolated leukocytes
(from head kidney and peripheral blood) of the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus
mykiss) express both thyroid receptor a (THRA) and ß (THRB). Absolute mRNA levels
of THRA were significantly higher than those of THRB. THRA showed higher
expression in immune organs and isolated immune cells compared to the reference
organ, liver, while THRB showed the opposite. In vivo exposure of trout to
triiodothryronine (T3) or the anti-thyroid agent propylthiouracil (PTU) altered
THR expression in immune organs and cells. Effect of T3 and PTU over the relative
expression of selected marker genes of immune cell subpopulations was also
studied. Treatments changed the relative expression of markers of cytotoxic,
helper and total T cells (cd4, cd8a, trb), B lymphocytes (mIgM) and macrophages
(csf1r). These findings suggest that the immune system of rainbow trout is
responsive to thyroid hormones.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24657316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 May;80(10):3181-90. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00044-14. Epub 
2014 Mar 14.

Genetic divergence of bradyrhizobium strains nodulating soybeans as revealed by
multilocus sequence analysis of genes inside and outside the symbiosis island.

Zhang XX(1), Guo HJ, Wang R, Sui XH, Zhang YM, Wang ET, Tian CF, Chen WX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

The genus Bradyrhizobium has been considered to be a taxonomically difficult
group. In this study, phylogenetics and evolutionary genetics analyses were used 
to investigate divergence levels among Bradyrhizobium strains nodulating soybeans
in China. Eleven genospecies were identified by sequence analysis of three
phylogenetic and taxonomic markers (SMc00019, thrA, and truA). This was also
supported by analyses of eight genes outside the symbiosis island ("off-island"
genes; SMc00019, thrA, truA, fabB, glyA, phyR, exoN, and hsfA). However, seven
genes inside the symbiosis island ("island" genes; nifA, nifH, nodC, nodV, fixA, 
trpD, and rhcC2) showed contrasting lower levels of nucleotide diversity and
recombination rates than did off-island genes. Island genes had significantly
incongruent gene phylogenies compared to the species tree. Four phylogenetic
clusters were observed in island genes, and the epidemic cluster IV (harbored by 
Bradyrhizobium japonicum, Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens, Bradyrhizobium
huanghuaihaiense, Bradyrhizobium liaoningense, Bradyrhizobium daqingense,
Bradyrhizobium sp. I, Bradyrhizobium sp. III, and Bradyrhizobium sp. IV) was not 
found in Bradyrhizobium yuanmingense, Bradyrhizobium sp. II, or Bradyrhizobium
elkanii. The gene flow level of island genes among genospecies is discussed in
the context of the divergence level of off-island genes.

PMCID: PMC4018923
PMID: 24632260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Aquat Toxicol. 2014 Mar;148:162-73. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.01.008. Epub 2014
Jan 22.

Enabling comparative gene expression studies of thyroid hormone action through
the development of a flexible real-time quantitative PCR assay for use across
multiple anuran indicator and sentinel species.

Veldhoen N(1), Propper CR(2), Helbing CC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box
3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 2Y2. (2)Department of Biological
Sciences, Northern Arizona University, S. Beaver St., Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, PO Box
3055, STN CSC, Victoria, BC, Canada V8W 2Y2. Electronic address:
chelbing@uvic.ca.

Studies performed across diverse frog species have made substantial contributions
to our understanding of basic vertebrate development and the natural or
anthropogenic environmental factors impacting sensitive life stages. Because,
anurans are developmental models, provide ecosystems services, and act as
sentinels for the identification of environmental chemical contaminants that
interfere with thyroid hormone (TH) action during postembryonic development,
there is demand for flexible assessment techniques that can be applied to
multiple species. As part of the "thyroid assays across indicator and sentinel
species" (TAXISS) initiative, we have designed and validated a series of
cross-species real time quantitative PCR (qPCR) primer sets that provide
information on transcriptome components in evolutionarily distant anurans.
Validation for fifteen gene transcripts involved a rigorous three-tiered quality 
control within tissue/development-specific contexts. Assay performance was
confirmed on multiple tissues (tail fin, liver, brain, and intestine) of Rana
catesbeiana and Xenopus laevis tadpoles enabling comparisons between tissues and 
generation of response profiles to exogenous TH. This revealed notable
differences in TH-responsive gene transcripts including thra, thrb, thibz, klf9, 
col1a2, fn1, plp1, mmp2, timm50, otc, and dio2, suggesting differential
regulation and susceptibility to contaminant effects. Evidence for the
applicability of the TAXISS anuran qPCR assay across seven other species is also 
provided with five frog families represented and its utility in defining genome
structure was demonstrated. This novel validated approach will enable meaningful 
comparative studies between frog species and aid in extending knowledge of
developmental regulatory pathways and the impact of environmental factors on TH
signaling in frog species for which little or no genetic information is currently
available.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24503578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Eur J Endocrinol. 2014 Mar 13;170(4):637-44. doi: 10.1530/EJE-13-1009. Print 2014
Apr.

THRA and DIO2 mutations are unlikely to be a common cause of increased bone
mineral density in euthyroid post-menopausal women.

Gogakos A(1), Logan JG, Waung JA, Bassett JH, Glüer CC, Reid DM, Felsenberg D,
Roux C, Eastell R, Williams GR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Group, Department of Medicine, Imperial College
London, 10th Floor Commonwealth Building, Hammersmith Campus, Du Cane Road,
London W12 0NN, UK.

OBJECTIVE: A new autosomal dominant disorder due to mutation of THRA, which
encodes thyroid hormone receptor a, is characterised by severely delayed skeletal
development but only slightly abnormal thyroid status. Adult mice with disrupted 
thyroid hormone action in bone due to a mutation of Thra or deletion of Dio2,
encoding the type 2 deiodinase, have high bone mass and mineralisation despite
essentially euthyroid status. No individuals with DIO2 mutations have been
described and the adult phenotype of patients with THRA mutations is largely
unknown. We hypothesised that screening euthyroid adults with high bone mineral
density (BMD) could be used to identify individuals with mutations of THRA or
DIO2.
DESIGN: The Osteoporosis and Ultrasound Study (OPUS) is a 6-year prospective
study of fracture-related factors from five European centres.
METHODS: A cohort of 100 healthy euthyroid post-menopausal women with the highest
BMD was selected from the OPUS population. We sequenced the intron-exon
boundaries and critical exons of THRA and DIO2 in these subjects. TSH, free
3,5,3'-l-triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, vitamin D, parathyroid hormone and
bone turnover marker concentrations, and BMD measurements were available in all
OPUS participants.
RESULTS: No coding sequence or splice site mutations affecting THRA or DIO2 were 
identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations affecting THRA or DIO2 are not a common cause of high BMD 
in healthy euthyroid post-menopausal women.

PMID: 24480136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 May 15;23(10):2651-64. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt660. Epub 2013 Dec
30.

A histone deacetylase inhibitor improves hypothyroidism caused by a TRa1 mutant.

Kim DW(1), Park JW, Willingham MC, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mutations of the thyroid hormone receptor a gene (THRA) cause hypothyroidism in
patients with growth and developmental retardation, and skeletal dysplasia.
Genetic evidence indicates that the dominant negative activity of TRa1 mutants
underlies pathological manifestations. Using a mouse model of hypothyroidism
caused by a dominant negative TRa1PV mutant and its derived mouse model harboring
a mutated nuclear receptor corepressor (NCOR1<U+0394>ID) (Thra1(PV/+)Ncor1(<U+0394>ID/<U+0394>ID)
mice), we recently showed that aberrant release of TRa1 mutants from the NCOR1
repressor complex mediates dominant negative actions of TRa1 mutants in vivo. We 
tested the hypothesis that deacetylation of nucleosomal histones associated with 
aberrant recruitment of corepressors by TRa1 mutants underlies pathological
phenotypic expression. We treated Thra1(PV/+)and Thra1(PV/+)Ncor1(<U+0394>ID/<U+0394>ID) mice
with a histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor, suberoylanilide hydroxyamic acid
(SAHA). SAHA significantly ameliorated the impaired growth, bone development and 
adipogenesis of Thra1(PV/+) mice. In Thra1(PV/+)Ncor1(<U+0394>ID/<U+0394>ID) mice, SAHA
improved these abnormalities even further. We focused our molecular analyses on
how SAHA improved the impaired adipogenesis leading to the lean phenotype. We
found that SAHA reverted the impaired adipogenesis by de-repressing the
expression of the two master regulators of adipogenesis, C/ebpa and Ppar<U+03B3>, as
well as other adipogenic genes at both the mRNA and protein levels. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analyses indicated SAHA increased the extent of acetylation
of nucleosomal H4K5 and H3 to re-activate adipogenic genes to reverting
adipogenesis. Thus, HDAC confers in vivo aberrant actions of TRa1 mutants.
Importantly, for the first time, the present studies show that HDAC inhibitors
are clearly beneficial for hypothyroidism and could be therapeutics for
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3990165
PMID: 24381310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):166-75. doi: 10.1242/dev.103226.

Purkinje cells and Bergmann glia are primary targets of the TRa1 thyroid hormone 
receptor during mouse cerebellum postnatal development.

Fauquier T(1), Chatonnet F, Picou F, Richard S, Fossat N, Aguilera N, Lamonerie
T, Flamant F.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, CNRS, INRA, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, École
Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, F-69364 
Lyon, Cedex 07, France.

Thyroid hormone is necessary for normal development of the central nervous
system, as shown by the severe mental retardation syndrome affecting hypothyroid 
patients with low levels of active thyroid hormone. The postnatal defects
observed in hypothyroid mouse cerebellum are recapitulated in mice heterozygous
for a dominant-negative mutation of Thra, the gene encoding the ubiquitous TRa1
receptor. Using CRE/loxP-mediated conditional expression approach, we found that 
this mutation primarily alters the differentiation of Purkinje cells and Bergmann
glia, two cerebellum-specific cell types. These primary defects indirectly affect
cerebellum development in a global manner. Notably, the inward migration and
terminal differentiation of granule cell precursors is impaired. Therefore,
despite the broad distribution of its receptors, thyroid hormone targets few cell
types that exert a predominant role in the network of cellular interactions that 
govern normal cerebellum maturation.

PMID: 24346699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2014 Feb;80(4):1245-55. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03037-13. Epub
2013 Dec 6.

Replicon-dependent differentiation of symbiosis-related genes in Sinorhizobium
strains nodulating Glycine max.

Guo HJ(1), Wang ET, Zhang XX, Li QQ, Zhang YM, Tian CF, Chen WX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

In order to investigate the genetic differentiation of Sinorhizobium strains
nodulating Glycine max and related microevolutionary mechanisms, three
housekeeping genes (SMc00019, truA, and thrA) and 16 symbiosis-related genes on
the chromosome (7 genes), pSymA (6 genes), and pSymB (3 genes) were analyzed.
Five distinct species were identified among the test strains by calculating the
average nucleotide identity (ANI) of SMc00019-truA-thrA: Sinorhizobium fredii,
Sinorhizobium sojae, Sinorhizobium sp. I, Sinorhizobium sp. II, and Sinorhizobium
sp. III. These species assignments were also supported by population genetics and
phylogenetic analyses of housekeeping genes and symbiosis-related genes on the
chromosome and pSymB. Different levels of genetic differentiation were observed
among these species or different replicons. S. sojae was the most divergent from 
the other test species and was characterized by its low intraspecies diversity
and limited geographic distribution. Intergenic recombination dominated the
evolution of 19 genes from different replicons. Intraspecies recombination
happened frequently in housekeeping genes and symbiosis-related genes on the
chromosome and pSymB, whereas pSymA genes showed a clear pattern of
lateral-transfer events between different species. Moreover, pSymA genes were
characterized by a lower level of polymorphism and recombination than those on
the chromosome and pSymB. Taken together, genes from different replicons of
rhizobia might be involved in the establishment of symbiosis with legumes, but
these symbiosis-related genes might have evolved differently according to their
corresponding replicons.

PMCID: PMC3911071
PMID: 24317084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Front Genet. 2013 Nov 21;4:251. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00251. eCollection 2013.

Evaluation of the effects of titanium dioxide nanoparticles on cultured Rana
catesbeiana tailfin tissue.

Hammond SA(1), Carew AC, Helbing CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria Victoria, 
BC, Canada.

Nanoparticles (NPs), materials that have one dimension less than 100 nm, are used
in manufacturing, health, and food products, and consumer products including
cosmetics, clothing, and household appliances. Their utility to industry is
derived from their high surface-area-to-volume ratios and physico-chemical
properties distinct from their bulk counterparts, but the near-certainty that NPs
will be released into the environment raises the possibility that they could
present health risks to humans and wildlife. The thyroid hormones (THs),
thyroxine, and 3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T3), are involved in development and
metabolism in vertebrates including humans and frogs. Many of the processes of
anuran metamorphosis are analogous to human post-embryonic development and
disruption of TH action can have drastic effects. These shared features make the 
metamorphosis of anurans an excellent model for screening for endocrine
disrupting chemicals (EDCs). We used the cultured tailfin (C-fin) assay to
examine the exposure effects of 0.1-10 nM (~8-800 ng/L) of three types of ~20 nm 
TiO2 NPs (P25, M212, M262) and micron-sized TiO2 (µ TiO2) ±10 nM T3. The actual
Ti levels were 40.9-64.7% of the nominal value. Real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (QPCR) was used to measure the relative amounts of mRNA
transcripts encoding TH-responsive THs receptors (thra and thrb) and Rana larval 
keratin type I (rlk1), as well as the cellular stress-responsive heat shock
protein 30 kDa (hsp30), superoxide dismutase (sod), and catalase (cat). The
levels of the TH-responsive transcripts were largely unaffected by any form of
TiO2. Some significant effects on stress-related transcripts were observed upon
exposure to micron-sized TiO2, P25, and M212 while no effect was observed with
M262 exposure. Therefore, the risk of adversely affecting amphibian tissue by
disrupting TH-signaling or inducing cellular stress is low for these compounds
relative to other previously-tested NPs.

PMCID: PMC3836013
PMID: 24312126  [PubMed]


43. Environ Sci Technol. 2013 Dec 3;47(23):13840-7. doi: 10.1021/es403767y. Epub 2013
Nov 15.

Impact of wastewater treatment configuration and seasonal conditions on thyroid
hormone disruption and stress effects in Rana catesbeiana tailfin.

Wojnarowicz P(1), Ogunlaja OO, Xia C, Parker WJ, Helbing CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Microbiology, University of Victoria , P.O. Box
3055, Victoria, British Columbia, V8W 2Y2, Canada.

Improved endocrine disrupting compound (EDC) removal is desirable in municipal
wastewater treatment plants (MWWTPs) although increased removal does not always
translate into reduced biological activity. Suitable methods for determining
reduction in biological activity of effluents are needed. In order to determine
which MWWTPs are the most effective at removing EDC activities, we operated three
configurations of pilot sized biological reactors (conventional activated sludge,
CAS; nitrifying activated sludge, NAS; and biological nutrient removal, BNR)
receiving the same influent under simulated winter and summer conditions. As
frogs are model organisms for the study of thyroid hormone (TH) action, we used
the North American species Rana catesbeiana in a cultured tadpole tailfin (C-fin)
assay to compare the effluents. TH-responsive (thyroid hormone receptors alpha
(thra) and beta (thrb)) and stress-responsive (superoxide dismutase, catalase,
and heat shock protein 30) mRNA transcript levels were examined. Effluents
infrequently perturbed stress-responsive transcript abundance but thra/thrb
levels were significantly altered. In winter conditions, CAS caused frequent TH
perturbations while BNR caused none. In summer conditions, however, BNR caused
substantial TH perturbations while CAS caused few. Our findings contrast other
studies of seasonal variations of EDC removal and accentuate the importance of
utilizing appropriate biological readouts for assessing EDC activities.

PMID: 24180706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 19;8(9):e76034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076034. eCollection
2013.

A TNF variant that associates with susceptibility to musculoskeletal disease
modulates thyroid hormone receptor binding to control promoter activation.

Kiss-Toth E(1), Harlock E, Lath D, Quertermous T, Wilkinson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) is a powerful pro-inflammatory cytokine and
immuno-regulatory molecule, and modulates susceptibility to musculoskeletal
diseases. Several meta-analyses and replicated association studies have
implicated the minor 'A' variant within the TNF promoter single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) rs361525 (-238A/G) as a risk allele in joint related
disorders, including psoriatic and juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and osteolysis 
after joint arthroplasty. Here we characterized the effect of this variant on TNF
promoter function. A transcriptional reporter, encoding the -238A variant of the 
TNF promoter, resulted in 2.2 to 2.8 times greater transcriptional activation
versus the 'G' variant in murine macrophages when stimulated with
pro-inflammatory stimuli. Bioinformatic analysis predicted a putative binding
site for thyroid hormone receptor (TR) for the -238A but not the -238G allele.
Overexpression of TR-a induced promoter expression 1.8-fold in the presence of
the 'A' allele only. TR-a expression both potentiated and sensitized the -238A
response to LPS or a titanium particulate stimulus, whilst siRNA knockdown of
either THRA or THRB impaired transcriptional activation for the -238A variant
only. This effect was independent of receptor-ligand binding of triiodothyronine.
Immunohistochemical analysis of osteolysis interface membranes from patients
undergoing revision surgery confirmed expression of TR-a within osteoclast nuclei
at the resorption surface. The 'A' allele at rs361525 confers increased
transcriptional activation of the TNF promoter and influences susceptibility to
several arthritic conditions. This effect is modulated, at least in part, by
binding of TR, which both sensitizes and potentiates transcriptional activation
of the 'A' variant independent of its endogenous ligand.

PMCID: PMC3777919
PMID: 24069456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Transplant Proc. 2013 Jul-Aug;45(6):2220-5. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.03.021.

Transplantation is a risk factor for acute kidney injury in patients undergoing
total hip replacement arthroplasty for avascular necrosis: an observational
study.

Choi YJ(1), Lee EH, Hahm KD, Kwon K, Ro YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, Inje University Seoul Paik
Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The increased number of patients undergoing transplantation has
increased the number of transplant recipients undergoing total hip replacement
arthroplasty (THRA). We have evaluated the association between transplantation
and acute kidney injury (AKI) in patients undergoing THRA.
METHODS: Patients who underwent THRA from May 2004 to February 2012 were
retrospectively assessed. Their demographic and clinical characteristics, the
results of perioperative laboratory tests, the amounts of fluids transfused
during surgery, and anesthesia time were evaluated. Patients were divided into 2 
groups: transplant (n = 222) and nontransplant (n = 2,044) patients. With use of 
the maximal Acute Kidney Injury Network criteria, AKI was evaluated by changes in
creatinine concentration within 48 hours of THRA. Propensity analyses and
logistic regression were performed to evaluate the association between
transplantation and postoperative AKI.
RESULTS: Postoperative AKI was significantly associated with transplantation (P <
.0001), and transplantation was an independent factor predictive of postoperative
AKI (P < .0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Transplant recipients are at risk for AKI following THRA. The
mechanism by which organ transplantation enhances postoperative AKI warrants
further evaluation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23953532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Nov;98(11):4254-61. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2215. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

An adult female with resistance to thyroid hormone mediated by defective thyroid 
hormone receptor a.

Moran C(1), Schoenmakers N, Agostini M, Schoenmakers E, Offiah A, Kydd A, Kahaly 
G, Mohr-Kahaly S, Rajanayagam O, Lyons G, Wareham N, Halsall D, Dattani M, Hughes
S, Gurnell M, Park SM, Chatterjee K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of
Metabolic Science, Level 4, Box 289, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, 
United Kingdom. kkc1@medschl.cam.ac.uk.

CONTEXT: The first human cases (female, age 6 y; father and daughter, ages 47 and
11 y, respectively) with growth retardation/short stature, skeletal dysplasia,
constipation, and defective thyroid receptor a (TRa) have been recently
described.
OBJECTIVE: A 45-year-old, short, overweight female with cognitive impairment,
epilepsy, and constipation was investigated.
DESIGN AND INTERVENTION: Clinical, biochemical, and radiological assessment and
THRA sequencing were undertaken. The patient's thyroid status and her biochemical
and physiological parameters were evaluated at baseline and after T4 therapy.
RESULTS: The patient exhibits disproportionate short stature, macrocephaly, low
free T4/free T3 ratio and rT3 levels, together with subnormal heart and basal
metabolic rate. She is heterozygous for a novel frameshift/premature stop
(Ala382ProfsX7) THRA mutation, generating a mutant TRa with constitutive
corepressor binding and negligible coactivator recruitment, which inhibits its
wild-type counterpart in a dominant-negative manner-both in vitro and in
mutation-containing patient blood mononuclear cells studied ex vivo. Her
alertness and constipation responded to T4 therapy, which readily suppressed TSH 
levels, raised basal metabolic rate, and normalized elevated muscle creatine
kinase, but cardiac parameters (heart rate, contractility) remained relatively
refractory. The patient and a previous childhood case showed reduced red cell
mass with macrocytosis unresponsive to T4 therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical (short stature, macrocephaly, constipation) and biochemical
(low free T4/free T3 ratio, subnormal rT3) findings that are congruent with
previous cases and newly recognized features (epilepsy) in this adult female with
defective TRa define a shared phenotype in TRa-mediated resistance to thyroid
hormone, with differential tissue responses to T4 treatment.

PMID: 23940126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Endocrinol. 2013 Sep 9;219(1):69-78. doi: 10.1530/JOE-13-0127. Print 2013 Oct.

Triiodothyronine induces lipid oxidation and mitochondrial biogenesis in rat
Harderian gland.

Santillo A(1), Burrone L, Falvo S, Senese R, Lanni A, Chieffi Baccari G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Ambientali, Biologiche e Farmaceutiche,
Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, via Vivaldi, 43, 81100 Caserta, Italy.

The rat Harderian gland (HG) is an orbital gland producing a copious lipid
secretion. Recent studies indicate that its secretory activity is regulated by
thyroid hormones. In this study, we found that both isoforms of the thyroid
hormone receptor (Tra (Thra) and Trß (Thrb)) are expressed in rat HGs. Although
Thra is expressed at a higher level, only Thrb is regulated by triiodothyronine
(T3). Because T3 induces an increase in lipid metabolism in rat HGs, we
investigated the effects of an animal's thyroid state on the expression levels of
carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1A (Cpt1a) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1B
(Cpt1b) and acyl-CoA oxidase (Acox1) (rate-limiting enzymes in mitochondrial and 
peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation respectively), as well as on the mitochondrial
compartment, thereby correlating mitochondrial activity and biogenesis with
morphological analysis. We found that hypothyroidism decreased the expression of 
Cpt1b and Acox1 mRNA, whereas the administration of T3 to hypothyroid rats
increased transcript levels. Respiratory parameters and catalase protein levels
provided further evidence that T3 modulates mitochondrial and peroxisomal
activities. Furthermore, in hypothyroid rat HGs, the mitochondrial number and
their total area decreased with respect to the controls, whereas the average area
of the individual mitochondrion did not change. However, the average area of the 
individual mitochondrion was reduced by ~50% in hypothyroid T3-treated HGs, and
the mitochondrial number and the total area of the mitochondrial compartment
increased. The mitochondrial morphometric data correlated well with the molecular
results. Indeed, hypothyroid status did not modify the expression of
mitochondrial biogenesis genes such as Ppargc1a, Nrf1 and Tfam, whereas T3
treatment increased the expression level of these genes.

PMID: 23873539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jul;98(7):2684-6. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-2475.

RTHa, a newly recognized phenotype of the resistance to thyroid hormone (RTH)
syndrome in patients with THRA gene mutations.

Zavacki AM, Larsen PR.

Comment on
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jul;98(7):3029-38.

PMCID: PMC3701265
PMID: 23837191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2013 Mar-Apr;47(2):331-7.

[The C-terminus of transcription factor TnrA from Bacillus subtilis controls
DNA-binding domain activity but is not required for dimerization].

[Article in Russian]

Fedorova KP, Sharafutdinov IS, Turbina EIu, Bogachev MI, Il'inskaia ON, Kaiumov
AR.

The transcription factor ThrA, which belongs to the MerR transcription
regulators, in Bacillus subtilis cells controls genes of nitrogen metabolism
under conditions of nitrogen limitation. As all the DNA-binding proteins, it is
present as a dimer in cells, but the dimerization site is still unknown. The
multiple alignment of TnrA homologs from the other Bacilli allowed to identify
the putative dimerization sites. Using the C-terminal truncated TnrA proteins it 
is established, that, in contrast to other MerR-proteins, the TnrA C-terminus
does not participate in dimerization. The surface plasmon resonance has revealed 
that C-terminus truncations of TnrA do not inactivate its DNA-binding activity.
By contrary, it increased an affinity to DNA, confirming that C-terminus controls
the DNA-binding activity in a full-length TnrA.

PMID: 23808168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Endocr Connect. 2012 Oct 10;1(2):68-77. doi: 10.1530/EC-12-0017. Print 2012 Nov
1.

Common genetic variants in pituitary-thyroid axis genes and the risk of
differentiated thyroid cancer.

Pastor S(1), Akdi A, González ER, Castell J, Biarnés J, Marcos R, Velázquez A.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Mutagènesi, Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de
Biociències Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 08193, Cerdanyola del Vallès
Barcelona Spain ; CIBER Epidemiología y Salud Pública, ISCIII Barcelona Spain.

Thyroid hormone receptors, THRA and THRB, together with the TSH receptor, TSHR,
are key regulators of thyroid function. Alterations in the genes of these
receptors (THRA, THRB and TSHR) have been related to thyroid diseases, including 
thyroid cancer. Moreover, there is evidence suggesting that predisposition to
differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) is related to common genetic variants with
low penetrance that interact with each other and with environmental factors. In
this study, we investigated the association of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the THRA (one SNP), THRB (three SNPs) and TSHR (two SNPs) genes with
DTC risk. A case-control association study was conducted with 398 patients with
sporadic DTC and 479 healthy controls from a Spanish population. Among the
polymorphisms studied, only THRA-rs939348 was found to be associated with an
increased risk of DTC (recessive model, odds ratio=1.80, 95% confidence
interval=1.03-3.14, P=0.037). Gene-gene interaction analysis using the genotype
data of this study together with our previous genotype data on TG and TRHR
indicated a combined effect of the pairwises: THRB-TG (P interaction=0.014,
THRB-rs3752874 with TG-rs2076740; P interaction=0.099, THRB-rs844107 with
TG-rs2076740) and THRB-TRHR (P interaction=0.0024, THRB-rs3752874 with
TRHR-rs4129682) for DTC risk in a Spanish population. Our results confirm that
THRA is a risk factor for DTC, and we show for the first time the combined effect
of THRB and TG or TRHR on DTC susceptibility, supporting the importance of
gene-gene interaction in thyroid cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3682231
PMID: 23781307  [PubMed]


51. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1836(1):146-57. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004. 
Epub 2013 Apr 26.

The HER2 amplicon in breast cancer: Topoisomerase IIA and beyond.

Jacot W(1), Fiche M, Zaman K, Wolfer A, Lamy PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Oncologie Médicale, CRLC Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, Montpellier,
F-34298, France. William.Jacot@montpellier.unicancer.fr

HER2 gene amplification is observed in about 15% of breast cancers. The subgroup 
of HER2-positive breast cancers appears to be heterogeneous and presents complex 
patterns of gene amplification at the locus on chromosome 17q12-21. The molecular
variations within the chromosome 17q amplicon and their clinical implications
remain largely unknown. Besides the well-known TOP2A gene encoding Topoisomerase 
IIA, other genes might also be amplified and could play functional roles in
breast cancer development and progression. This review will focus on the current 
knowledge concerning the HER2 amplicon heterogeneity, its clinical and biological
impact and the pitfalls associated with the evaluation of gene amplifications at 
this locus, with particular attention to TOP2A and the link between TOP2A and
anthracycline benefit. In addition it will discuss the clinical and biological
implications of the amplification of ten other genes at this locus (MED1, STARD3,
GRB7, THRA, RARA, IGFPB4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAST) in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23628726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7850-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1222334110. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Nuclear receptor corepressor (NCOR1) regulates in vivo actions of a mutated
thyroid hormone receptor a.

Fozzatti L(1), Kim DW, Park JW, Willingham MC, Hollenberg AN, Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Genetic evidence from patients with mutations of the thyroid hormone receptor a
gene (THRA) indicates that the dominant negative activity of mutants underlies
the pathological manifestations. However, the molecular mechanisms by which TRa1 
mutants exert dominant negative activity in vivo are not clear. We tested the
hypothesis that the severe hypothyroidism in patients with THRA mutations is due 
to an inability of TRa1 mutants to properly release the nuclear corepressors
(NCORs), thereby inhibiting thyroid hormone-mediated transcription activity. We
crossed Thra1(PV) mice, expressing a dominant negative TRa1 mutant (TRa1PV), with
mice expressing a mutant Ncor1 allele (Ncor1(<U+0394>ID) mice) that cannot recruit the
TR or PV mutant. TRa1PV shares the same C-terminal mutated sequences as those of 
patients with frameshift mutations of the THRA gene. Remarkably, NCOR1<U+0394>ID
ameliorated abnormalities in the thyroid-pituitary axis of Thra1(PV/+) mice. The 
severe retarded growth, infertility, and delayed bone development were partially 
reverted in Thra1(PV/+) mice expressing NCOR1<U+0394>ID. The impaired adipogenesis was
partially corrected by de-repression of peroxisome-proliferator activated
receptor <U+03B3> and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a gene, due to the inability of
TRa1PV to recruit NCOR1<U+0394>ID to form a repressor complex. Thus, the aberrant
recruitment of NCOR1 by TRa1 mutants could lead to clinical hypothyroidism in
humans. Therefore, therapies aimed at the TRa1-NCOR1 interaction or its
downstream actions could be tested as potential targets in treating TRa1
mutant-mediated hypothyroidism in patients.

PMCID: PMC3651436
PMID: 23610395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jul;1830(7):4004-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.03.018.
Epub 2013 Mar 23.

Resistance to thyroid hormone mediated by defective thyroid hormone receptor
alpha.

Schoenmakers N(1), Moran C, Peeters RP, Visser T, Gurnell M, Chatterjee K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone acts via receptor subtypes (TRa1, TRß1, TRß2) with
differing tissue distributions, encoded by distinct genes (THRA, THRB). THRB
mutations cause a disorder with central (hypothalamic-pituitary) resistance to
thyroid hormone action with markedly elevated thyroid hormone and normal TSH
levels.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: This review describes the clinical features, genetic and
molecular pathogenesis of a homologous human disorder mediated by defective THRA.
Clinical features include growth retardation, skeletal dysplasia and constipation
associated with low-normal T4 and high-normal T3 levels and a low T4/T3 ratio,
together with subnormal reverse T3 levels. Heterozygous TRa1 mutations in
affected individuals generate defective mutant receptors which inhibit wild-type 
receptor action in a dominant negative manner.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in human TRa1 mediate RTH with features of
hypothyroidism in particular tissues (e.g. skeleton, gastrointestinal tract), but
are not associated with a markedly dysregulated pituitary-thyroid axis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Human THRA mutations could be more common but may have
eluded discovery due to the absence of overt thyroid dysfunction. Nevertheless,
in the appropriate clinical context, a thyroid biochemical signature (low T4/T3
ratio, subnormal reverse T3 levels), may enable future identification of cases.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Thyroid hormone signalling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23528896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013 Nov;37(11):1499-505. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2013.11. Epub 2013 
Feb 12.

Thyroid hormone receptor alpha gene variants increase the risk of developing
obesity and show gene-diet interactions.

Fernández-Real JM(1), Corella D, Goumidi L, Mercader JM, Valdés S, Rojo Martínez 
G, Ortega F, Martinez-Larrad MT, Gómez-Zumaquero JM, Salas-Salvadó J, Martinez
González MA, Covas MI, Botas P, Delgado E, Cottel D, Ferrieres J, Amouyel P,
Ricart W, Ros E, Meirhaeghe A, Serrano-Rios M, Soriguer F, Estruch R.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Nutrition. Institut
d'Investigació Biomédica de Girona, Girona, Spain [2] CIBER Fisiopatologia de la 
Obesidad y la Nutrición, CIBEROBN (CB06/03), Instituto de Salud Carlos III,
Girona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Thyroid hormone receptor-beta resistance has been associated with
metabolic traits. THRA gene sequencing of an obese woman (index case) who
presented as empirical thyroid hormone receptor-a (THRA) resistance, disclosed a 
polymorphism (rs12939700) in a critical region involved in TRa alternative
processing.
DESIGN AND SUBJECTS: THRA gene variants were evaluated in three independent
europid populations (i) in two population cohorts at baseline (n=3417 and
n=2265), 6 years later (n=2139) and (ii) in 4734 high cardiovascular risk
subjects (HCVR, PREDIMED trial).
RESULTS: The minor allele of the index case polymorphism (rs12939700), despite
having a very low frequency (4%), was significantly associated with higher body
mass index (BMI) (P=0.042) in HCVR subjects. A more frequent THRA polymorphism
(rs1568400) was associated with higher BMI in subjects from the population
(P=0.00008 and P=0.05) after adjusting for several confounders. Rs1568400 was
also strongly associated with fasting triglycerides (P dominant=3.99 × 10(-5)).
In the same sample, 6 years later, age and sex-adjusted risk of developing
obesity was significantly increased in GG homozygotes (odds ratio 2.93 (95%
confidence interval, 1.05-6.95)). In contrast, no association between rs1568400
and BMI was observed in HCVR subjects, in whom obesity was highly prevalent. This
might be explained by the presence of an interaction (P <0.001) among the
rs1568400 variant, BMI and saturated fat intake. Only when saturated fat intake
was high (>24.5<U+2009>g<U+2009>d(-1)), GG carriers showed a significantly higher BMI than A
carriers after controlling for energy intake and physical activity.
CONCLUSIONS: THRA gene polymorphisms are associated with obesity development.
This is a novel observation linking the THRA locus to metabolic phenotypes.

PMID: 23399772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 25;216(3):389-402. doi: 10.1530/JOE-12-0389. Print 2013
Mar.

Prenatal undernutrition and postnatal overnutrition alter thyroid hormone axis
function in sheep.

Johnsen L(1), Kongsted AH, Nielsen MO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Groennegaardsvej 7, DK-1870
Frederiksberg, Denmark.

Mounting evidence led us to hypothesize that i) function of the thyroid hormone
(TH) axis can be programed by late gestation undernutrition (LG-UN) and ii)
early-postnatal-life overnutrition (EL-ON) exacerbates the fetal impacts on TH
axis function. In a 2 × 2 factorial experiment, 21 twin-bearing sheep were fed
one of two diets during late gestation: NORM (fulfilling energy and protein
requirements) or LOW (50% of NORM). From day 3 to 6 months after birth (around
puberty), the twin lambs were assigned to each their diet: conventional (CONV) or
high-carbohydrate, high-fat, where after half the lambs were killed. Remaining
sheep (exclusively females) were fed the same moderate diet until 2 years of age 
(young adults). At 6 months and 2 years of age, fasting challenges were conducted
and target tissues were collected at autopsy. LG-UN caused adult hyperthyroidism 
associated with increased thyroid expression of genes regulating TH synthesis and
deiodination. In one or more of the target tissues, liver, cardiac muscle, and
longissimus dorsi muscle, gene expressions were increased by LG-UN for TH
receptors (THRA and THRB) and deiodinases but were decreased in visceral and
subcutaneous adipose tissues. EL-ON increased TH levels in adolescent lambs, but 
this was reversed after diet correction and not evident in adulthood. We conclude
that LG-UN programed TH axis function at the secretory level and differentially
in target tissues, which was increasingly manifested with age. Differential TH
signaling in adipose vs other tissues may be part of a mechanism whereby fetal
malnutrition can predispose for obesity and other metabolic disorders.

PMID: 23287634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Microbiol. 2012 Dec;50(6):962-9. doi: 10.1007/s12275-012-2547-x. Epub 2012 Dec 
30.

Molecular serotyping of Salmonella enterica by complete rpoB gene sequencing.

Seong WJ(1), Kwon HJ, Kim TE, Lee DY, Park MS, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Avian Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine and BK21 for
Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Republic of Korea.

Serotyping has been the gold standard for identifying Salmonella, but it requires
large amounts of standard antisera. Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) has been
applied to identify Salmonella serovars, but the recombination of 4-7
housekeeping genes and multiple analytic steps diminish its applicability. In the
present study, we determined the complete sequences of the RNA polymerase beta
subunit gene (rpoB) and 7 housekeeping genes (aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE, sucA,
and thrA) for 76 strains of 33 Salmonella enterica serovars and conducted
phylogenetic analyses together with the corresponding gene sequences of 24
reference strains registered in the GenBank database. Based on the phylogenetic
analyses, 100 strains from 40 serovars and 91 strains from 37 serovars were
classified into 60 rpoB (RST) and 49 multilocus sequence types (ST),
respectively. The nucleotide similarities were 98.8-100% and 96.9-100% for the
complete rpoB gene and the seven concatenated housekeeping genes, respectively.
The strains of 35 and 30 serovars formed serovar-specific branches or clusters in
the rpoB and housekeeping gene phylogenetic trees, respectively. Therefore,
complete rpoB gene sequencing and phylogenetic analysis may be a useful method
for identifying Salmonella serovars that is a simpler, more cost-effective, and
less time-consuming alternative or complementary method to MLST and conventional 
serotyping.

PMID: 23274983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Minerva Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;37(4):291-304.

Thyroid hormone receptors in health and disease.

Boelen A(1), Kwakkel J, Fliers E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. a.boelen@amc.uva.nl

Thyroid hormones (TH) play a key role in energy homeostasis throughout life.
Thyroid hormone production and secretion by the thyroid gland is regulated via
the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid (HPT)-axis. Thyroid hormone has to be
transported into the cell, where it can bind to the thyroid hormone receptor (TR)
in the nucleus to exert its effect on cellular gene-transcription. Mutations in
both the THRA and THRB gene have been described, each inducing a characteristic
phenotype clearly showing the selective effect of an excess or shortage of
thyroid hormone in specific TRa and TRß regulated organs. Profound changes in
thyroid hormone metabolism occur during a variety of non-thyroidal illnesses,
each associated with reduced TR expression in a tissue-specific manner. However, 
thyroid hormone action at the tissue level during illness is not a simple
reflection of the extent of TR expression as illness has additional differential 
effects on local thyroid hormone availability in various organs.

PMID: 23235186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 30;31:100. doi: 10.1186/1756-9966-31-100.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization for genomic-wide screening of DNA
copy number alterations in aggressive bone tumors.

Kanamori M(1), Sano A, Yasuda T, Hori T, Suzuki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Science, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama city,
Toyama 930-0194, Japan. kanamori@med.u-toyama.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: The genetic pathways of aggressive changes of bone tumors are still
poorly understood. It is very important to analyze DNA copy number alterations
(DCNAs), to identify the molecular events in the step of progression to the
aggressive change of bone tissue.
METHODS: Genome-wide array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH)
was used to investigate DCNAs of 14 samples from 13 aggressive bone tumors, such 
as giant cell tumors (GCTs) and osteosarcoma (OS), etc.
RESULTS: Primary aggressive bone tumors had copy number gains of 17.8±12.7% in
the genome, and losses of 17.3±11.4% in 287 target clones (threshold for each
DCNA: <U+2266>085, 1.15<U+2266>). Genetic unstable cases, which were defined by the total DCNAs
aberration <U+2267>30%, were identified in 9 of 13 patients (3 of 7 GCTs and all
malignant tumors). High-level amplification of TGFß2, CCND3, WI-6509, SHGC-5557, 
TCL1A, CREBBP, HIC1, THRA, AFM217YD10, LAMA3, RUNX1 and D22S543, were commonly
observed in aggressive bone tumors. On the other hand, NRAS, D2S447, RAF1, ROBO1,
MYB, MOS, FGFR2, HRAS, D13S319, D13S327, D18S552, YES1 and DCC, were commonly
low. We compared genetic instability between a primary OS and its metastatic site
in Case #13. Metastatic lesion showed increased 9 DCNAs of remarkable change (m/p
ratio <U+2267>1.3 folds), compared to a primary lesion. D1S214, D1S1635, EXT1,
AFM137XA11, 8 M16/SP6, CCND2, IGH, 282 M15/SP6, HIC1 and LAMA3, were
overexpressed. We gave attention to HIC1 (17p13.3), which was common high
amplification in this series.
CONCLUSION: Our results may provide several entry points for the identification
of candidate genes associated with aggressive change of bone tumors. Especially, 
the locus 17p11-13 including HIC1 close to p53 was common high amplification in
this series and review of the literature.

PMCID: PMC3576288
PMID: 23199169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044936. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Robust markers reflecting phylogeny and taxonomy of rhizobia.

Zhang YM(1), Tian CF, Sui XH, Chen WF, Chen WX.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

Genomic ANI (Average Nucleotide Identity) has been found to be able to replace
DNA-DNA hybridization in prokaryote taxonomy. The ANI of each of the core genes
that has a phylogeny congruent with the reference species tree of rhizobia was
compared to the genomic ANI. This allowed us to identify three housekeeping genes
(SMc00019-truA-thrA) whose ANI reflected the intraspecies and interspecies
genomic ANI among rhizobial strains, revealing an ANI gap (=2%) between the
inter- and intra-species comparisons. The intraspecies (96%) and interspecies
(94%) ANI boundaries calculated from three genes (SMc00019-truA-thrA) provided a 
criterion for bacterial species definition and confirmed 621/629 of known
interspecies relationships within Bradyrhizobium, Mesorhizobium, Sinorhizobium
and Rhizobium. Some widely studied strains should be renamed. The
SMc00019-truA-thrA ANI also correlates well with the genomic ANI of strains in
Agrobacterium, Methylobacterium, Ralstonia, Rhodopseudomonas, Cupriavidus and
Burkholderia, suggesting their wide applicability in other bacteria.

PMCID: PMC3444505
PMID: 23028691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. BMC Microbiol. 2012 Sep 17;12:208. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-12-208.

Clinical isolates of Yersinia enterocolitica biotype 1A represent two
phylogenetic lineages with differing pathogenicity-related properties.

Sihvonen LM(1), Jalkanen K, Huovinen E, Toivonen S, Corander J, Kuusi M, Skurnik 
M, Siitonen A, Haukka K.

Author information: 
(1)Bacteriology Unit, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Finland.

BACKGROUND: Y. enterocolitica biotype (BT) 1A strains are often isolated from
human clinical samples but their contribution to disease has remained a
controversial topic. Variation and the population structure among the clinical Y.
enterocolitica BT 1A isolates have been poorly characterized. We used multi-locus
sequence typing (MLST), 16S rRNA gene sequencing, PCR for ystA and ystB,
lipopolysaccharide analysis, phage typing, human serum complement killing assay
and analysis of the symptoms of the patients to characterize 298 clinical Y.
enterocolitica BT 1A isolates in order to evaluate their relatedness and
pathogenic potential.
RESULTS: A subset of 71 BT 1A strains, selected based on their varying LPS
patterns, were subjected to detailed genetic analyses. The MLST on seven
house-keeping genes (adk, argA, aroA, glnA, gyrB, thrA, trpE) conducted on 43 of 
the strains discriminated them into 39 MLST-types. By Bayesian analysis of the
population structure (BAPS) the strains clustered conclusively into two distinct 
lineages, i.e. Genetic groups 1 and 2. The strains of Genetic group 1 were more
closely related (97% similarity) to the pathogenic bio/serotype 4/O:3 strains
than Genetic group 2 strains (95% similarity). Further comparison of the 16S rRNA
genes of the BT 1A strains indicated that altogether 17 of the 71 strains belong 
to Genetic group 2. On the 16S rRNA analysis, these 17 strains were only 98%
similar to the previously identified subspecies of Y. enterocolitica. The strains
of Genetic group 2 were uniform in their pathogenecity-related properties: they
lacked the ystB gene, belonged to the same LPS subtype or were of rough type,
were all resistant to the five tested yersiniophages, were largely resistant to
serum complement and did not ferment fucose. The 54 strains in Genetic group 1
showed much more variation in these properties. The most commonly detected LPS
types were similar to the LPS types of reference strains with serotypes O:6,30
and O:6,31 (37%), O:7,8 (19%) and O:5 (15%).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study strengthen the assertion that
strains classified as Y. enterocolitica BT 1A represent more than one subspecies.
Especially the BT 1A strains in our Genetic group 2 commonly showed resistance to
human serum complement killing, which may indicate pathogenic potential for these
strains. However, their virulence mechanisms remain unknown.

PMCID: PMC3512526
PMID: 22985268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e40960. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040960. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Cancer association study of aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase signaling network in
glioblastoma.

Kim YW(1), Kwon C, Liu JL, Kim SH, Kim S.

Author information: 
(1)Catholic Research Institutes of Medical Science, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) and ARS-interacting multifunctional proteins
(AIMPs) exhibit remarkable functional versatility beyond their catalytic
activities in protein synthesis. Their non-canonical functions have been
pathologically linked to cancers. Here we described our integrative genome-wide
analysis of ARSs to show cancer-associated activities in glioblastoma multiforme 
(GBM), the most aggressive malignant primary brain tumor. We first selected 23
ARS/AIMPs (together referred to as ARSN), 124 cancer-associated druggable target 
genes (DTGs) and 404 protein-protein interactors (PPIs) of ARSs using NCI's
cancer gene index. 254 GBM affymetrix microarray data in The Cancer Genome Atlas 
(TCGA) were used to identify the probe sets whose expression were most strongly
correlated with survival (Kaplan-Meier plots versus survival times, log-rank
t-test <0.05). The analysis identified 122 probe sets as survival signatures,
including 5 of ARSN (VARS, QARS, CARS, NARS, FARS), and 115 of DTGs and PPIs
(PARD3, RXRB, ATP5C1, HSP90AA1, CD44, THRA, TRAF2, KRT10, MED12, etc). Of note,
61 survival-related probes were differentially expressed in three different
prognosis subgroups in GBM patients and showed correlation with established
prognosis markers such as age and phenotypic molecular signatures. CARS and FARS 
also showed significantly higher association with different molecular networks in
GBM patients. Taken together, our findings demonstrate evidence for an ARSN
biology-dominant contribution in the biology of GBM.

PMCID: PMC3432027
PMID: 22952576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043082. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Suppressor analyses identify threonine as a modulator of ridA mutant phenotypes
in Salmonella enterica.

Christopherson MR(1), Lambrecht JA, Downs D, Downs DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, United States of America.

The RidA (YjgF/YER057c/UK114) family of proteins is broadly conserved in the
three domains of life yet the functional understanding of these proteins is at an
early stage. Physiological studies of ridA mutant strains of Salmonella enterica 
provided a framework to inform in vitro studies and led to the description of a
conserved biochemical activity for this family. ridA mutant strains of S.
enterica have characteristic phenotypes including new synthesis of thiamine
biosynthetic intermediate phosphoribosylamine (PRA), inability to grow on
pyruvate as a sole carbon and energy source or when serine is present in the
minimal growth medium, and a decreased specific activity of transaminase B
(IlvE). Secondary mutations restoring growth to a ridA mutant in the presence of 
serine were in dapA (encoding dihydrodipicolinate synthase) and thrA (encoding
homoserine dehydrogenase). These mutations suppressed multiple ridA mutant
phenotypes by increasing the synthesis of threonine. The ability of threonine to 
suppress the metabolic defects of a ridA mutant is discussed in the context of
recent biochemical data and in vivo results presented here.

PMCID: PMC3416771
PMID: 22900093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jun;26(6):926-39. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1290. Epub 2012 May
8.

Fundamentally distinct roles of thyroid hormone receptor isoforms in a thyrotroph
cell line are due to differential DNA binding.

Chiamolera MI(1), Sidhaye AR, Matsumoto S, He Q, Hashimoto K, Ortiga-Carvalho TM,
Wondisford FE.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo, 05508-900 Sao Paulo, Brazil.

Thyroid hormones have a profound influence on human development and disease. The 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis involves finely tuned feedback mechanisms to 
maintain thyroid hormone (TH) levels. Despite the important role of TH-negative
feedback in regulating this axis, the mechanism by which this occurs is not
clearly defined. Previous in vivo studies suggest separate roles for the two
thyroid hormone receptor isoforms, THRA and THRB, in this axis. We performed
studies using a unique pituitary thyrotroph cell line (TaT1.1) to determine the
relative roles of THRA and THRB in the regulation of Tshb. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we found that THRB, not THRA, bound to the Tshb
promoter. By selectively depleting THRB, THRA, or both THRA and THRB in TaT1.1
cells, we found that simultaneous knockdown of both THRB and THRA abolished
T(3)-mediated down-regulation of Tshb at concentrations as high as 100 nm T(3).
In contrast, THRA knockdown alone had no effect on T(3)-negative regulation,
whereas THRB knockdown alone abolished T(3)-mediated down-regulation of Tshb mRNA
levels at 10 nm but not 100 nm T(3) concentrations. Interestingly, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that THRA becomes enriched on the Tshb promoter
after knockdown of THRB. Thus, a likely mechanism for the differential effects of
THR isoforms on Tshb may be based on their differential DNA-binding affinity to
the promoter.

PMCID: PMC3355539
PMID: 22570333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Jul;1830(7):3928-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2012.04.002. Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Thyroid hormone receptors and cancer.

Kim WG(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are ligand-dependent transcription
factors that mediate the actions of the thyroid hormone (T3) in development,
growth, and differentiation. The THRA and THRB genes encode several TR isoforms
that express in a tissue- and development-dependent manner. In the past decades, 
a significant advance has been made in the understanding of TR actions in
maintaining normal cellular functions. However, the roles of TRs in human cancer 
are less well understood. The reduced expression of TRs because of
hypermethylation, or deletion of TR genes found in human cancers suggests that
TRs could function as tumor suppressors. A close association of somatic mutations
of TRs with human cancers further supports the notion that the loss of normal
functions of TR could lead to uncontrolled growth and loss of cell
differentiation.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: In line with the findings from association studies in human
cancers, mice deficient in total functional TRs (Thra1(-/-)Thrb(-/-) mice) or
with a targeted homozygous mutation of the Thrb gene (denoted PV; Thrb(PV/PV)
mice) spontaneously develop metastatic thyroid carcinoma. This review will
examine the evidence learned from these genetically engineered mice that provided
strong evidence to support the critical role of TRs in human cancer.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Loss of normal functions of TR by deletion or by mutations
could contribute to cancer development, progression and metastasis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Novel mechanistic insights are revealed in how aberrant TR 
activities lead to carcinogenesis. Mouse models of thyroid cancer provide
opportunities to identify molecular targets as potential treatment modalities.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Thyroid hormone signalling.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3406244
PMID: 22507269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Aquat Toxicol. 2012 Apr;110-111:114-22. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.12.016. Epub 
2011 Dec 31.

Triiodothyronine-induced changes in the zebrafish transcriptome during the
eleutheroembryonic stage: implications for bisphenol A developmental toxicity.

Pelayo S(1), Oliveira E, Thienpont B, Babin PJ, Raldúa D, André M, Piña B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Assessment and Water Research (IDAEA-CSIC), Jordi
Girona, 18, 08034 Barcelona, Spain.

Thyroid disruption during early development is a current matter of concern due to
its significant human health implications. We present here a transcriptome
analysis of thyroid hormone-regulated genes in zebrafish during the
eleutheroembryonic stage (days 2-5 post fertilization) to detect potential
markers of thyroid disruption. Exposure to 3,5,3'-triiodo-l-thyroxine (T3, 50 nM)
induced changes in a minor portion (less than 2%) of the zebrafish transcriptome,
with a significant fraction of genes involved in the haematopoietic system, eye
formation, and ossification/skeletal system, including the thyroid receptor thra 
gene. Some of the transcriptomic changes were reflected macroscopically, as an
allometric decrease of eye size and an increase on thra hybridization signal in
the skeletal tissue. Using this information, changes on transcription of three
genes (adult alpha globin gene si:ch211-5 k11.6, embryonic globin gene hbae3, and
long wavelength cone opsin gene opn1/w1) were analyzed to monitor the effect of
the suspected thyroid disrupter bisphenol A (BPA) on the thyroid system during
this period of development of zebrafish. BPA acted as a weak T3 agonist when
tested alone, but it strongly enhanced the effect of subsaturating concentrations
of T3. In thyroxine immunofluorescence quantitative disruption tests (TIQDT), BPA
did not prevent the ability of thyroid follicles to synthesize thyroxine, a
landmark for direct goitrogens. Our results suggest that BPA potentiates the
effect of endogenous T3 in early development and demonstrate the requirement for 
the use of in vivo, multi-endpoint methods to evaluate thyroid disruption hazards
on early developmental processes in vertebrates.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22281776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1548-60. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1834. Epub 2012 Jan 
17.

Thyroid hormone receptors control developmental maturation of the middle ear and 
the size of the ossicular bones.

Cordas EA(1), Ng L, Hernandez A, Kaneshige M, Cheng SY, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrinology and Receptor Biology, National Institutes of
Health, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, 10
Center Drive, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1772, USA.

Thyroid hormone is critical for auditory development and has well-known actions
in the inner ear. However, less is known of thyroid hormone functions in the
middle ear, which contains the ossicles (malleus, incus, stapes) that relay
mechanical sound vibrations from the outer ear to the inner ear. During the later
stages of middle ear development, prior to the onset of hearing, middle ear
cavitation occurs, involving clearance of mesenchyme from the middle ear cavity
while the immature cartilaginous ossicles attain appropriate size and ossify.
Using in situ hybridization, we detected expression of Thra and Thrb genes
encoding thyroid hormone receptors a1 and ß (TRa1 and TRß, respectively) in the
immature ossicles, surrounding mesenchyme and tympanic membrane in the mouse.
Thra(+/PV) mice that express a dominant-negative TRa1 protein exhibited deafness 
with elevated auditory thresholds and a range of middle ear abnormalities
including chronic persistence of mesenchyme in the middle ear into adulthood,
markedly enlarged ossicles, and delayed ossification of the ossicles.
Congenitally hypothyroid Tshr(-/-) mice and TR-deficient Thra1(-/-);Thrb(-/-)
mice displayed similar abnormalities. These findings demonstrate that middle ear 
maturation is TR dependent and suggest that the middle ear is a sensitive target 
for thyroid hormone in development.

PMCID: PMC3281545
PMID: 22253431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. N Engl J Med. 2012 Jan 19;366(3):243-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1110296. Epub 2011 Dec
14.

A mutation in the thyroid hormone receptor alpha gene.

Bochukova E(1), Schoenmakers N, Agostini M, Schoenmakers E, Rajanayagam O, Keogh 
JM, Henning E, Reinemund J, Gevers E, Sarri M, Downes K, Offiah A, Albanese A,
Halsall D, Schwabe JW, Bain M, Lindley K, Muntoni F, Vargha-Khadem F, Dattani M, 
Farooqi IS, Gurnell M, Chatterjee K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories and National Institute
for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Institute of Metabolic 
Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    N Engl J Med. 2012 Oct 11;367(15):1474. Khadem, Faraneh Vargha [corrected to
Vargha-Khadem, Faraneh].

Comment in
    Rev Clin Esp. 2012 Jun;212(6):310.

Thyroid hormones exert their effects through alpha (TRa1) and beta (TRß1 and
TRß2) receptors. Here we describe a child with classic features of hypothyroidism
(growth retardation, developmental retardation, skeletal dysplasia, and severe
constipation) but only borderline-abnormal thyroid hormone levels. Using
whole-exome sequencing, we identified a de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation in
a gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor alpha (THRA) and generating a mutant
protein that inhibits wild-type receptor action in a dominant negative manner.
Our observations are consistent with defective human TRa-mediated thyroid hormone
resistance and substantiate the concept of hormone action through distinct
receptor subtypes in different target tissues.

PMID: 22168587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Endocrinology. 2012 Feb;153(2):583-91. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1793. Epub 2011 Dec
6.

Thyroid hormone receptor-a gene knockout mice are protected from diet-induced
hepatic insulin resistance.

Jornayvaz FR(1), Lee HY, Jurczak MJ, Alves TC, Guebre-Egziabher F, Guigni BA,
Zhang D, Samuel VT, Silva JE, Shulman GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06536, USA.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most frequent chronic liver
disease in the United States and is strongly associated with hepatic insulin
resistance. We examined whether the thyroid hormone receptor-a (Thra) would be a 
potential therapeutic target to prevent diet-induced NAFLD and insulin
resistance. For that purpose, we assessed insulin action in high-fat diet-fed
Thra gene knockout (Thra-0/0) and wild-type mice using
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps combined with (3)H/(14)C-labeled glucose to
assess basal and insulin-stimulated rates of glucose and fat metabolism. Body
composition was assessed by (1)H magnetic resonance spectroscopy and energy
expenditure by indirect calorimetry. Relative rates of hepatic glucose and fat
oxidation were assessed in vivo using a novel proton-observed carbon-edited
nuclear magnetic resonance technique. Thra-0/0 were lighter, leaner, and
manifested greater whole-body insulin sensitivity than wild-type mice during the 
clamp, which could be attributed to increased insulin sensitivity both in liver
and peripheral tissues. Increased hepatic insulin sensitivity could be attributed
to decreased hepatic diacylglycerol content, resulting in decreased activation of
protein kinase Ce and increased insulin signaling. In conclusion, loss of Thra
protects mice from high-fat diet-induced hepatic steatosis and hepatic and
peripheral insulin resistance. Therefore, thyroid receptor-a inhibition
represents a novel pharmacologic target for the treatment of NAFLD, obesity, and 
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3384074
PMID: 22147010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. BMC Microbiol. 2011 Jun 27;11:153. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-11-153.

Molecular and comparative analysis of Salmonella enterica Senftenberg from humans
and animals using PFGE, MLST and NARMS.

Stepan RM(1), Sherwood JS, Petermann SR, Logue CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Microbiological Sciences, North Dakota State
University, Fargo, ND 58108, USA.

BACKGROUND: Salmonella species are recognized worldwide as a significant cause of
human and animal disease. In this study the molecular profiles and
characteristics of Salmonella enterica Senftenberg isolated from human cases of
illness and those recovered from healthy or diagnostic cases in animals were
assessed. Included in the study was a comparison with our own sequenced strain of
S. Senfteberg recovered from production turkeys in North Dakota. Isolates
examined in this study were subjected to antimicrobial susceptibility profiling
using the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) panel which
tested susceptibility to 15 different antimicrobial agents. The molecular
profiles of all isolates were determined using Pulsed Field Gel Electrophoresis
(PFGE) and the sequence types of the strains were obtained using Multi-Locus
Sequence Type (MLST) analysis based on amplification and sequence interrogation
of seven housekeeping genes (aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE, sucA, and thrA). PFGE 
data was input into BioNumerics analysis software to generate a dendrogram of
relatedness among the strains.
RESULTS: The study found 93 profiles among 98 S. Senftenberg isolates tested and 
there were primarily two sequence types associated with humans and animals (ST185
and ST14) with overlap observed in all host types suggesting that the
distribution of S. Senftenberg sequence types is not host dependent.
Antimicrobial resistance was observed among the animal strains, however no
resistance was detected in human isolates suggesting that animal husbandry has a 
significant influence on the selection and promotion of antimicrobial resistance.
CONCLUSION: The data demonstrates the circulation of at least two strain types in
both animal and human health suggesting that S. Senftenberg is relatively
homogeneous in its distribution. The data generated in this study could be used
towards defining a pathotype for this serovar.

PMCID: PMC3224216
PMID: 21708021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Hypertens. 2011 Sep;24(9):1027-34. doi: 10.1038/ajh.2011.94. Epub 2011 Jun
9.

Association between a thyroid hormone receptor-a gene polymorphism and blood
pressure but not with coronary heart disease risk.

Goumidi L(1), Gauthier K, Legry V, Mayi TH, Houzet A, Cottel D, Montaye M, Proust
C, Kee F, Ferrières J, Arveiler D, Ducimetière P, Staels B, Dallongeville J,
Chinetti G, Flamant F, Amouyel P, Meirhaeghe A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U744, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Univ Lille Nord de France, Lille,
France.

BACKGROUND: Thyroid hormones (THs) exert multiple biological roles including
effects on the cardiovascular system (lipid profile, blood pressure (BP) and
cardiac output). The lipid-lowering actions of TH are mediated by the TH
receptor-ß whereas the mechanisms explaining the BP variations concomitant with
the thyroid disorders are less understood. As the TH receptor-a (TR-a) has been
associated with many of TH actions on the cardiovascular system in mice models,
we hypothesized that it could be involved in the latter. We thus tested whether
polymorphisms in TR-a (THRA gene) could be associated with BP level variation.
Secondarily, we tested for association with coronary heart disease (CHD) risk.
METHODS: We analyzed the associations between five THRA polymorphisms and (i) BP 
level in two population-based studies (MONICA Lille n = 1,155; MONICA Toulouse n 
= 1,170) and (ii) the risk of CHD in two case-control studies (Lille CHD n = 558 
cases/568 controls; PRIME n = 527 cases/584 controls).
RESULTS: Individuals carrying the rs939348 T allele had higher systolic BP (~+1.3
mm Hg) than CC individuals in both the MONICA Lille (P = 0.02) and Toulouse (P = 
0.03) studies. The odds ratio (OR) for hypertension was 1.25 (P = 0.02) in the
combined sample. Concerning the CHD risk, no significant association could be
detected.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, our study showed associations between the THRA
rs939348 polymorphism and systolic BP and the risk of hypertension but not with
CHD, although we admit that the statistical power available to study any
relationship with CHD was very limited. Further larger association studies are
needed to confirm our findings.

PMID: 21654857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Endocrinology. 2011 Aug;152(8):3093-102. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-0139. Epub 2011 Jun
7.

Type-2 iodothyronine 5'deiodinase (D2) in skeletal muscle of C57Bl/6 mice. II.
Evidence for a role of D2 in the hypermetabolism of thyroid hormone receptor
alpha-deficient mice.

Ramadan W(1), Marsili A, Larsen PR, Zavacki AM, Silva JE.

Author information: 
(1)Baystate Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Springfield,
Massachusetts 01199, USA.

Mice with ablation of the Thra gene have cold intolerance due to an as yet
undefined defect in the activation of brown adipose tissue (BAT) uncoupling
protein (UCP). They develop an alternate form of facultative thermogenesis,
activated at temperatures below thermoneutrality and associated with
hypermetabolism and reduced sensitivity to diet-induced obesity. A consistent
finding in Thra-0/0 mice is increased type-2 iodothyronine deiodinase (D2) mRNA
in skeletal muscle and other tissues. With an improved assay to measure D2
activity, we show here that this enzyme activity is increased in proportion to
the mRNA and as a function of the ambient cold. The activation is mediated by the
sympathetic nervous system in Thra-0/0, as it is in wild-type genotype mice, but 
the sympathetic nervous system effect is greater in Thra-0/0 mice. Using
D2-ablated mice (Dio2-/-), we reported elsewhere and show here that, in spite of 
sharing a severe deficiency in BAT thermogenesis with Thra-0/0 and UCP1-knockout 
mice, they do not have an increase in oxygen consumption, and they gain more
weight than wild-type controls when fed a high-fat diet. UCP3 mRNA is highly
responsive to thyroid hormone, and it is increased in Thra-0/0 mice, particularly
when fed high-fat diets. We show here that muscle UCP3 mRNA in hypothyroid
Thra-0/0 mice is responsive to small dose-short regimens of T(4), indicating a
role for locally, D2-generated T(3). Lastly, we show that bile acids stimulate
not only BAT but also muscle D2 activity, and this is associated with stimulation
of muscle UCP3 mRNA expression provided T(4) is present. These observations
strongly support the concept that enhanced D2 activity in Thra-0/0 plays a
critical role in their alternate form of facultative thermogenesis, stimulating
increased fat oxidation by increasing local T(3) generation in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC3138235
PMID: 21652727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Sep;19(9):981-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.61. Epub 2011 Apr
13.

Founder effect and estimation of the age of the French Gypsy mutation associated 
with Glanzmann thrombasthenia in Manouche families.

Fiore M(1), Pillois X, Nurden P, Nurden AT, Austerlitz F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Référence des Pathologies Plaquettaires, Plateforme Technologique
d'Innovation Biomédicale, Hôpital Xavier Arnozan, Pessac, France.
mathieu.fiore@chu-bordeaux.fr

The c.1544+1G>A substitution at the 5' splice donor site of intron 15 of the
ITGA2B gene, called the French Gypsy mutation, causes Glanzmann thrombasthenia,
an inherited hemorrhagic disorder transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait and
characterized by an altered synthesis of the platelet aIIbß3 integrin. So far,
this mutation has only been found in affected individuals originating from French
Manouche families, strongly suggesting a founder effect. Our goal was to
investigate the origin of the French Gypsy mutation. We estimated the age of the 
mutation by a likelihood-based method that uses the length of the shared
haplotypes among a set of patients. For this, we genotyped 23 individuals of
Manouche origin; consisting of 9 Glanzmann thrombasthenia patients homozygous for
the French Gypsy mutation, 6 heterozygous carriers and 8 homozygous wild-type
individuals. They were genotyped for four single-nucleotide polymorphisms using
high-resolution melting curve analysis, and for two CA repeats in the BRCA1 and
THRA genes at chromosome 17, using fragment analysis gels. We found that a
haplotype of five polymorphic loci covering a 4-cM region was strongly associated
with the French Gypsy mutation, suggesting a founder effect. The estimated age of
this founder mutation was 300-400 years (range 255-552 years). Thus, all carriers
of the French Gypsy mutation c.1544+1G>A at intron 15 descended from a common
ancestor 300-400 years ago.

PMCID: PMC3179361
PMID: 21487445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2012 Jan-Mar;26(1):1-7. doi:
10.1097/WAD.0b013e318214b7d0.

Psychotropic drug effects on gene transcriptomics relevant to Alzheimer disease.

Lauterbach EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Mercer University School of 
Medicine, Macon, GA 31201, USA. eclbgnp@earthlink.net

Psychotropics are widely prescribed in Alzheimer disease (AD) without regard to
their pathobiological effects. Results summarize a comprehensive survey of
psychotropic effects on messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression for 52 genes
linked to AD. Pending future investigations, current data indicate that atypical 
antipsychotics, lithium, and fluoxetine reduce AD risk, whereas other drug
classes promote risk. Risk may be attenuated by antipsychotics and lithium
(down-regulate TNF), atypical antipsychotics (down-regulate TF), risperidone
(down-regulates IL1B), olanzapine (up-regulates TFAM, down-regulates PRNP),
fluoxetine (up-regulates CLU, SORCS1, NEDD9, GRN, and ECE1), and lithium
coadministered with antipsychotics (down-regulates IL1B). Risk may be enhanced by
neuroleptics (up-regulate TF), haloperidol (up-regulates IL1B and PION),
olanzapine (down-regulates THRA and PRNP, up-regulates IL1A), and chlorpromazine,
imipramine, maprotiline, fluvoxamine, and diazepam (up-regulate IL1B). There were
no results for dextromethorphan-plus-quinidine. Fluoxetine effects on CLU, NEDD9,
and GRN were statistically robust. Drug effects on specific variants,
polymorphisms, genotypes, and other genes (CCR2, TF, and PRNP) are detailed.
Translational AD risk applications and their limitations related to specific
genes, mutations, variants, polymorphisms, genotypes, brain site, sex, clinical
population, AD stage, and other factors are discussed. This report provides an
initial summary and framework to understand the potential impact of psychotropic 
drugs on AD-relevant genes.

PMID: 21399480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 2;13(1):R15. doi: 10.1186/bcr2824.

Quantification and clinical relevance of gene amplification at chromosome
17q12-q21 in human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-amplified breast cancers.

Lamy PJ(1), Fina F, Bascoul-Mollevi C, Laberenne AC, Martin PM, Ouafik L, Jacot
W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Spécialisée et d'Oncogénétique, Centre Régional de
Lutte contre le Cancer Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, 208, rue des Apothicaires,
Montpellier F-34298, France. pjlamy@valdorel.fnclcc.fr

INTRODUCTION: Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-amplified breast
cancers represent a tumor subtype with chromosome 17q rearrangements that lead to
frequent gene amplifications. The aim of this study was to quantify the
amplification of genes located on chromosome 17q and to analyze the relations
between the pattern of gene amplifications and the patients' characteristics and 
survival.
METHODS: Patients with HER2-positive breast tumors (HER2 score of 3+ by
immunohistochemistry or positive for HER2 amplification by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH)) (n = 86) and with HER2-negative breast tumors (n = 40)
(negative controls) were included in this study. Using a quantitative polymerase 
chain reaction method and DNA extracted from frozen tumor specimens, 11 genes
(MED1, STARD3, HER2, GRB7, THRA, RARA, TOP2A, IGFBP4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and
GAS), which are localized within Chr17q12-q21 and have a putative role in breast 
cancer development, were quantified. Relapse-free and overall survival rates were
estimated from the date of surgery to the date of the event of interest
(recurrence or death) using the Kaplan-Meier method.
RESULTS: Gene amplification was observed only in HER2-positive tumors, and the
frequency of amplification decreased with the distance of the gene from HER2.
HER2 presented the highest level of amplification. TOP2A was not included in the 
smallest region of amplification involving HER2. Amplification of RARA, KRT20 and
KRT19 was significantly associated with node-positive breast cancer (P = 0.030, P
= 0.002 and P = 0.033, respectively). During a median follow-up period of 55
months (range, 6 to 81 months), the subgroup of patients with hormone
receptor-negative cancer and without TOP2A amplification showed the worst
survival (relapse-free survival: hazard ratio (HR) = 0.29, 95% confidence
interval (95% CI), 0.13 to 0.65, P = 0.001; and overall survival: HR = 0.28, 95% 
CI, 0.10 to 0.76, P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: HER2 amplification seems to drive genomic instability along
chromosome 17q, leading to different patterns of gene amplification. This study
confirms the clinical importance of identifying, among patients with
HER2-positive breast tumors, the subgroup of patients with hormone
receptor-negative and nonamplified TOP2A cancers as they have the worst
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3109584
PMID: 21288332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Aug;1812(8):929-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.12.019.
Epub 2010 Dec 29.

Role of thyroid receptor ß in lipid metabolism.

Pramfalk C(1), Pedrelli M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm,
Sweden.

Thyroid hormones (THs) exert their actions by binding to thyroid hormone
receptors (TRs) and thereby affect tissue differentiation, development, and
metabolism in most tissues. TH-deficiency creates a less favorable lipid profile 
(e.g. increased plasma cholesterol levels), whereas TH-excess is associated with 
both positive (e.g. reduced plasma cholesterol levels) and negative (e.g.
increased heart rate) effects. TRs are encoded by two genes, THRA and THRB,
which, by alternative splicing, generate several isoforms (e.g. TRa1, TRa2, TRß1,
and TRß2). TRa, the major TR in the heart, is crucial for heart rate and for
cardiac contractility and relaxation, whereas TRß1, the major TR in the liver, is
important for lipid metabolism. Selective modulation of TRß1 is thus considered
as a potential therapeutic target to treat dyslipidemia without cardiac side
effects. Several selective TH analogs have been tested in preclinical studies
with promising results, but only a few of these compounds have so far been tested
in clinical studies. This review focuses on the role of THs, TRs, and selective
and non-selective TH analogs in lipid metabolism. This article is part of a
Special Issue entitled: Translating nuclear receptors from health to disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21194564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Sep;44(9):810-4.

[Multilocus sequence typing and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis analysis of
Salmonella Paratyphi A isolates from 2000 to 2008, China].

[Article in Chinese]

Han H(1), Zhou HJ, Cui ZG, DU PC, Kan B.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze molecular and evolution characteristics of Salmonella
Paratyphi A isolates from 2000 to 2008, China.
METHODS: Using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) method with SpeI
restriction enzyme, and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) method based on
housekeeping genes (aroC, thrA, hisD, purE, sucA, dnaN, hemD, adk, and purA), the
genomic variations of 118 Salmonella Paratyphi A isolates from 10 regions during 
2000 to 2008 were analyzed.
RESULTS: Using PFGE method, 118 Salmonella Paratyphi A isolates were clustered
into 32 PFGE patterns, and 5 patterns were predominant (5 isolates or above).
However, only 2 MLST types were identified for all isolates with MLST method.
Among all Salmonella Paratyphi A isolates, the sequences of housekeeping genes
were highly conservative and showed a high degree of cloning.
CONCLUSION: For Chinese epidemic Salmonella Paratyphi A isolates during 2000 -
2008, MLST method showed low discrimination power and the MLST method should not 
be applied to outbreak and epidemiological surveillance of Salmonella Paratyphi
A. Currently, nationwide paratyphoid fever epidemics is caused by highly clonal
isolates in China. As the time changes, these isolates also accumulate sporadic
mutations.

PMID: 21092625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Infect Genet Evol. 2011 Jan;11(1):83-91. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2010.10.005. Epub 
2010 Oct 21.

Phylogenetic evaluation of the 'Typhimurium' complex of Salmonella strains using 
a seven-gene multi-locus sequence analysis.

Bell RL(1), González-Escalona N, Stones R, Brown EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Office of Regulatory Science, Center for Food Safety
and Applied Nutrition, US Food and Drug Administration, College Park, MD 20740,
USA. rebecca.bell@fda.hhs.gov

Salmonella enterica comprises over 2500 serovars, many of which are significant
foodborne pathogens in humans. The ability to subtype these microbes is difficult
due to the highly clonal nature of many Salmonella strains and a lack of
congruence among traditional typing approaches. This work examines the
phylogenetic utility of a multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) approach to
discriminate between members of a closely related collection of salmonellae, the 
Salmonella reference collection A (SARA). This 72 strain collection, referred to 
as the 'Typhimurium' complex, consists of S. Typhimurium and its four closest
serological relatives. In this analysis, nucleotide sequences from seven
housekeeping genes (aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE, sucA, and thrA) were PCR
amplified, sequenced, and combined into a single concatenated character matrix
providing 3360bp for cladistic analysis. The resultant most parsimonious tree
yielded seven clades of Salmonella strains that partitioned largely along serovar
divisions within the collection except for five 'Paratyphi B' strains, two
'Saintpaul' strains, and two 'Typhimurium' strains. Convergence in the SARA tree 
was approximately 20% indicating that the vast majority of sequence changes were 
phylogenetically informative. Despite a high consistency among nucleotide
substitutions, analysis of congruence identified several SARA strains with
recombinant alleles in the concatenated matrix. These findings point to important
differences among phylogenetic contributions made by the individual genes
comprising this MLST dataset.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 20970525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;24(10):1904-16. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0175. Epub 2010 Aug
25.

The thyroid hormone receptor alpha1 protein is expressed in embryonic postmitotic
neurons and persists in most adult neurons.

Wallis K(1), Dudazy S, van Hogerlinden M, Nordström K, Mittag J, Vennström B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Thyroid hormone is essential for brain development where it acts mainly through
the thyroid hormone receptor a1 (TRa1) isoform. However, the potential for the
hormone to act in adult neurons has remained undefined due to difficulties in
reliably determining the expression pattern of TR proteins in vivo. We therefore 
created a mouse strain that expresses TRa1 and green fluorescent protein as a
chimeric protein from the Thra locus, allowing examination of TRa1 expression
during fetal and postnatal development and in the adult. Furthermore, the use of 
antibodies against other markers enabled identification of TRa1 expression in
subtypes of neurons and during specific stages of their maturation. TRa1
expression was first detected in postmitotic cells of the cortical plate in the
embryonic telencephalon and preceded the expression of the mature neuronal
protein NeuN. In the cerebellum, TRa1 expression was absent in proliferating
cells of the external granular layer, but switched on as the cells migrated
towards the internal granular layer. In addition, TRa1 was expressed transiently 
in developing Purkinje cells, but not in mature cells. Glial expression was found
in tanycytes in the hypothalamus and in the cerebellum. In the adult brain, TRa1 
expression was detected in essentially all neurons. Our data demonstrate that
thyroid hormone, unexpectedly, has the capacity to play an important role in
virtually all developing and adult neurons. Because the role of TRa1 in most
neuronal cell types in vivo is largely unknown, our findings suggest that novel
functions for thyroid hormone remain to be identified in the brain.

PMID: 20739404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Nov;163(5):765-73. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0376. Epub 2010 Aug
24.

Thyroid hormone receptors are down-regulated in skeletal muscle of patients with 
non-thyroidal illness syndrome secondary to non-septic shock.

Lado-Abeal J(1), Romero A, Castro-Piedras I, Rodriguez-Perez A, Alvarez-Escudero 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of
Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, 3601 4th Street, STOP
9410, Lubbock, Texas 79430-9410, USA. joaquin.lado@ttuhsc.edu

AIM: Non-thyroidal illness syndrome (NTIS) is related to changes in thyroid
hormone (TH) physiology. Skeletal muscle (SM) plays a major role in metabolism,
and TH regulates SM phenotype and metabolism. We aimed to characterize the SM of 
non-septic shock NTIS patients in terms of: i) expression of genes and proteins
involved in TH metabolism and actions; and ii) NFKB's pathway activation, a
responsible factor for some of the phenotypic changes in NTIS. We also
investigated whether the patient's serum can induce in vitro the effects observed
in vivo.
METHODS: Serum samples and SM biopsies from 14 patients with non-septic shock
NTIS and 11 controls. Gene and protein expression and NFKB1 activation were
analyzed by quantitative PCR and immunoblotting. Human SM cell (HSkMC) cultures
to investigate the effects of patient's serum on TH action mediators.
RESULTS: Patients with non-septic shock NTIS showed higher levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines than controls. Expression of TRß (THRB), TRa1 (THRA), 
and retinoid X receptor <U+03B3> (RXRG) was decreased in NTIS patients. RXRA gene
expression was higher, but its protein was lower in NTIS than controls,
suggesting the existence of a post-transcriptional mechanism that down-regulates 
protein levels. NFKB1 pathway activation was not different between NTIS and
control patients. HSkMC incubated with patient's serum increased TH receptor and 
RXRG gene expression after 48<U+200A> h.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with non-septic shock NTIS showed decreased expression of
TH receptors and RXRs, which were not related to increased activation of the
NFKB1 pathway. These findings could not be replicated in cultures of HSkMCs
incubated in the patient's serum.

PMID: 20736347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010 Oct;17(5):408-13. doi:
10.1097/MED.0b013e32833d6d46.

New insights into regulation of lipid metabolism by thyroid hormone.

Zhu X(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4264, USA.

Comment in
    Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2010 Oct;17(5):395.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Thyroid hormone (3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine) plays an
important role in thermogenesis and maintenance of lipid homeostasis. The present
article reviews the evidence that 3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine regulates lipid
metabolism via thyroid hormone receptors, focusing particularly on in-vivo
findings using genetically engineered mice.
RECENT FINDINGS: That lipid metabolism is regulated via thyroid hormone receptor 
isoforms in a tissue-dependent manner was recently uncovered by using knockin
mutant mice harboring an identical mutation in the Thra gene (Thra1(PV) mouse) or
the Thrb gene (Thrb(PV) mouse). The mutation in the Thra gene dramatically
decreases the mass of both white adipose tissue and liver. In contrast, the
mutation in the Thrb gene markedly increases the mass of liver with an excess
depot of lipids, but no significant abnormality is observed in white adipose
tissue. Molecular studies show that the expression of lipogenic genes is
decreased in white adipose tissue of Thra1(PV) mice, but not in Thrb(PV) mice.
Markedly increased lipogenic enzyme expression, and decreased fatty acid
beta-oxidation activity contribute to the adipogenic steatosis and lipid
accumulation in the liver of Thrb(PV) mice. In contrast, reduced expression of
genes critical for lipogenesis mediates decreased liver mass with lipid scarcity 
in Thra1(PV) mice.
SUMMARY: Studies using Thra1(PV) and Thrb(PV) mice indicate that apo-thyroid
hormone receptor-beta and apo-thyroid hormone receptor-alpha-1 mediate distinct
deleterious effects on lipid metabolism. Thus, both thyroid hormone receptor
isoforms contribute to the pathogenesis of lipid abnormalities in hypothyroidism,
but in a target tissue-dependent manner. These studies suggest that thyroid
hormone receptor isoform-specific ligands could be designed as therapeutic
targets for lipid abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC3457777
PMID: 20644471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2010 Jan-Feb;44(1):140-51.

[Attenuation regulation of amino acid and amino acyl-tRNA biosynthetic operons in
bacteria: comparative genomics analysis].

[Article in Russian]

Lopatovskaia KV, Seliverstov AV, Liubetskii VA.

We performed a large-scale search for attenuation regulation in bacteria based on
two original computer programs modeling attenuation regulation and multiple
alignment along a phylogenetic tree. The programs are available from
http://lab6.iitp.ru. Candidate attenuations are predicted in many bacteria from
alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta-proteobacteria, Actinobacteria,
Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi, Firmicutes and Thermotogae; in Cloroflexi--upstream genes
hisG, hisZ, hisS, pheA, pheST, trpEG, trpA, trpB, trpE, trpS, thrA, thrS, leuA,
leuS, ilvB, ilvI, ilvA, ilvC, ilvD, ilvG. Other bacterial taxa were not predicted
to have attenuation; searches were conducted across all bacterial genomes
contained in GenBank, NCBI. Evolution of attenuation is discussed.

PMID: 20198868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Clin Microbiol. 2010 Apr;48(4):1055-60. doi: 10.1128/JCM.01566-09. Epub 2010
Feb 17.

Development of a multiplex primer extension assay for rapid detection of
Salmonella isolates of diverse serotypes.

Ben-Darif E(1), Jury F, De Pinna E, Threlfall EJ, Bolton FJ, Fox AJ, Upton M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of
Manchester, Clinical Sciences Building, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Oxford Road, 
Manchester M13 9WL, United Kingdom.

Food-borne salmonellosis is a major manifestation of gastrointestinal disease in 
humans across the globe. Accurate and rapid identification methods could
positively impact the identification of isolates, enhance outbreak investigation,
and aid infection control. The SNaPshot multiplex system is a primer
extension-based method that enables multiplexing of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). Here the method has been developed for the identification
of five Salmonella serotypes, commonly detected in the United Kingdom, based on
serotype-specific SNPs identified in the multilocus sequence typing (MLST)
database of Salmonella enterica. The SNPs, in genes hemD, thrA, purE, and sucA,
acted as surrogate markers for S. enterica serovars Typhimurium, Enteritidis,
Virchow, Infantis, and Braenderup. The multiplex primer extension assay (MPEA)
was conducted in two separate panels and evaluated using 152 Salmonella enterica 
isolates that were characterized by MLST. The MPEA was shown to be 100% specific 
and sensitive, within this collection of isolates. The MPEA is a sensitive and
specific method for the identification and detection of Salmonella serotypes
based upon SNPs seen in MLST data. The method can be applied in less than 6 h and
has the potential to improve patient care and source tracing. The utility of the 
assay for identification of Salmonella serotypes directly from clinical specimens
and food samples warrants further investigation.

PMCID: PMC2849547
PMID: 20164272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Acta Bioeng Biomech. 2009;11(2):65-70.

Prototype of minimally invasive hip resurfacing endoprosthesis - bioengineering
design and manufacturing.

Uklejewski R(1), Rogala P, Winiecki M, Mielniczuk J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Bioengineering Fundamentals, Institute of Technology,
Kazimierz Wielki University, Bydgoszcz, Poland. uklejew@ukw.edu.pl

The resurfacing arthroplasty (RA) has become at present the most developed
minimally invasive kind of all total arthroplasties, which is a result of the
progress in biomaterials engineering, biomechanical design and surgical fixation 
methods achieved over the past decade. Despite the raising popularity of RA,
which undergoes at present its renaissance, it still causes several clinical
complications. In this paper, we present the most important result our research
project (4T07C05629), finished in February 2008, which is the prototype of
original minimally invasive endoprosthesis for total hip resurfacing arthroplasty
(THRA). We propose the essential innovation in fixation technique of the RA
endoprosthesis components in trabecular bone by means of the multi-spiked
connecting scaffold, offering the possibility of totally cementless fixation and 
the physiological blood supply in trabecular bone of femoral head, which is not
possible in contemporary used cemented RA endoprostheses. Moreover, the femoral
component is designed to preserve the femoral neck and head blood vessels. The
prototype of the new kind of hip resurfacing endoprosthesis was CAD-designed in
the frames of the Rogala's international patent general assumptions [1]-[3],
optimized on the basis of the preliminary biomechanical tests on the
pre-prototypes, and manufactured in the Selective Laser Melting (SLM) of both
CoCrMo powder and Ti6Al7Nb powder.

PMID: 19839559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2009 Oct;14(4):366-74. doi:
10.1111/j.1542-474X.2009.00326.x.

Assessment of physiological amplitude, duration, and magnitude of ECG T-wave
alternans.

Burattini L(1), Zareba W, Burattini R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical, Electronics, and Telecommunication Engineering,
Polytechnic University of Marche, 60131 Ancona, Italy. r.burattini@univpm.it

Comment in
    Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2010 Apr;15(2):184; author reply 185-6.

BACKGROUND: An association between T-wave alternans (TWA) and malignant
ventricular arrhythmias is generally recognized. Because relatively low levels of
TWA have also been observed in healthy (H) subjects, the question arises as to
whether these are ascribable to noise and artifacts, or can be given the
relevance of a physiological phenomenon characterizing a preclinical condition.
METHODS: To answer this question, in the present study 20-minute not noisy, sinus
ECG recordings, from 138 H-subjects and 148 coronary artery diseased (CAD)
patients, were submitted to our adaptive match filter (AMF) procedure to identify
and parameterize TWA in terms of duration (TWAD), amplitude (TWAA), and magnitude
(TWAM, defined as the product of TWAD times TWAA). The 99.5th percentiles of mean
values of TWAA, TWAD, and TWAM over 20-minute ECGs were used to define three
threshold levels (THRD, THRA, and THRM), which allow discrimination of abnormal
TWA levels.
RESULTS: Nonstationary TWA was found in all our H-subjects and CAD-patients.
TWAD, TWAA, and TWAM levels were classified as being physiological in 99% of
H-subjects and 87% of CAD-patients. A linear correlation (r =-0.52, P < 0.001)
was found between TWAA and RR interval in the H-population.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the hypothesis of the existence of physiological
TWA levels, which are to be considered in the effort to improve reliability of
nonphysiological TWA levels discrimination.

PMID: 19804514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Dec;1790(12):1624-35. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2009.08.004. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Localized expression of genes related to carbohydrate and lipid absorption along 
the crypt-villus axis of rat jejunum.

Suzuki T(1), Mochizuki K, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, The University of Shizuoka Graduate
School of Nutritional and Environmental Sciences and Global COE, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enterocytes of the jejunum express several genes related to
digestion/absorption of nutrients and ions when these cells rapidly differentiate
from crypt to villus cells. However, it is unknown whether the distribution of
extensive gene expression along the villus-crypt axis of the jejunum is altered
during differentiation.
METHODS: We investigated the changes in jejunal gene expression during
differentiation from crypt to villus cells in rats using DNA microarray analysis 
on cryostat sections of the villus-crypt columns.
RESULTS: During differentiation, the expression of many genes related to cell
growth rapidly decreased, while expression of genes related to digestion and
absorption of nutrients and ions increased. Expression of a subset of genes
related to the digestion and absorption of starch and sucrose was highest at the 
middle of the villi, whereas expression of genes related to dietary fat
absorption was highest at the top of the villi. Several transcriptional factors
such as Pdx1, Foxa2 and Thra were expressed in the crypt, whereas Klf15 was
highly expressed during the crypt-villus transition. Expression of Klf4 and Pparg
was highest at the top of the villi.
CONCLUSIONS: Subsets of genes related to the digestion and absorption of
starch/sucrose and dietary fat as well as their transcriptional
factors/co-factors are expressed in the specific locations along the crypt-villus
axis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The jejunum may absorb nutrients effectively by
simultaneously expressing subsets of genes along the villus-crypt axis.

PMID: 19715743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Wei Sheng Wu Xue Bao. 2009 May;49(5):591-6.

[Construction of recombinant plasmids containing threonine operon and their
effects on L-threonine accumulation].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Yan J, Yu L, Zhang G, Zhang Y, Chen N, Wen T.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biological Engineering, Tianjin University of Science & Technology,
Tianjin 300457, China. meixiabe@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: We reconstructed two recombinant plasmids and studied their effects on
L-threonine accumulation of Escherichia coli W3110.
METHODS: We amplified the threonine operon containing ThrLp promoter, lead
peptide thrL, thrA, thrB and thrC genes by PCR from E. coli W3110 chromosome and 
ligated it into the pMD19 T-vector. Site-directed mutation were carried out by
gene splicing by overlap extension PCR to release the feedback inhibition of
aspartokinase I (thrA). Two recombinant plasmids pWYE112 and pWYE134 were
transformed into E. coli W3110 by electroporation. Fed-batch cultures of E. coli 
W3110 were carried out in 5-Liter fermentors and the L-threonine concentration
was measured by HPLC.
RESULTS: Fed-batch fermentation results showed that E. coli W3110 could
accumulate little L-threonine (0.036 +/- 0.004 g/L) but recombinant E. coli W3110
harboring the plasmid pWYE112 containing a threonine operon exhibited a
L-threonine production of 2.590 +/- 0.115 g/L. Furthermore, L-threonine
production reached 9.223 +/- 1.279 g/L when the feedback inhibition of thrA was
released.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of threonine operon can lead to the accumulation of
L-threonine. Further release of feedback inhibition of aspartokinase I can
enhance its accumulation.

PMID: 19637565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Sep 24;308(1-2):63-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.01.007.
Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Novel non-genomic signaling of thyroid hormone receptors in thyroid
carcinogenesis.

Guigon CJ(1), Cheng SY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.

The thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are transcription factors that mediate the
pleiotropic activities of the thyroid hormone, T3. Four T3-binding isoforms,
TRalpha1, TRbeta1, TRbeta2, and TRbeta3, are encoded by two genes, THRA and THRB.
Mutations and altered expression of TRs have been reported in human cancers. A
targeted germ-line mutation of the Thrbeta gene in the mouse leads to spontaneous
development of follicular thyroid carcinoma (TRbeta(PV/PV) mouse). The TRbetaPV
mutant has lost T3-binding activity and displays potent dominant negative
activity. The striking phenotype of thyroid cancer exhibited by TRbeta(PV/PV)
mice has recently led to the discovery of novel non-genomic actions of TRbetaPV
that contribute to thyroid carcinogenesis. These actions involve direct physical 
interaction of TRbetaPV with cellular proteins, namely the regulatory subunit of 
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (p85alpha), the pituitary tumor transforming
gene (PTTG) and beta-catenin, that are critically involved in cell proliferation,
motility, migration, and metastasis. Thus, a TRbeta mutant (TRbetaPV), via a
novel mode of non-genomic action, acts as an oncogene in thyroid carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2744088
PMID: 19549593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2009;29(2):113-8. doi: 10.1080/10799890902845682.

Association of polymorphisms in estrogen and thyroid hormone receptors with
thyroid cancer risk.

Rebaï M(1), Kallel I, Charfeddine S, Hamza F, Guermazi F, Rebaï A.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Bioinformatics, Biostatistics and Signalling, Centre de Biotechnologie
de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia.

The receptors for thyroid hormone (THR) and oestrogen (ESR) are prototypes of
nuclear transcription factors that regulate the expression of target genes.
Genetic alterations in the genes of these receptors were found to be involved in 
cancer development. In this study we investigated the association of one SNP
(rs2228480, T594T) and one microsatellite marker (D6S440) within the ESR1 gene
and a dinucleotide repeat (D17S2189) within the THRA gene, with thyroid cancer
risk. A case-control association study was conducted with 299 healthy individuals
and 106 patients with thyroid cancer. Genotypic and allelic frequencies for the
dinucleotide repeat in the ESR1 gene were similar between thyroid cancer patients
and controls. For the AC repeat in the THRA gene, a slightly significant
difference was found for the genotype 18/20 between the two groups (P = 0.034),
which suggests that alleles with less than 20 repeats might have a protective
effect in thyroid cancer risk. For the SNP T594T, the A allele was much more
prevalent in patients than in controls and was highly associated with the risk of
thyroid cancer (OR: 4,56; IC: 3.23-6.44; P < 10(-18)) and seems to have an
additive mode of action. In conclusion, our data suggest that the SNP T594T but
not the D6S440 and D17S189 is associated with thyroid cancer risk.

PMID: 19519176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cancer Lett. 2009 Nov 1;284(2):149-56. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2009.04.017. Epub
2009 May 19.

Cancer-related transcriptional targets of the circadian gene NPAS2 identified by 
genome-wide ChIP-on-chip analysis.

Yi CH(1), Zheng T, Leaderer D, Hoffman A, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, United States.

The transcription factor NPAS2 is one of nine human core circadian genes that
influence a variety of biological processes by regulating the 24-h circadian
rhythm. Recently, it has been shown that NPAS2 is a risk biomarker in human
cancers and plays a role in tumorigenesis by affecting cancer-related gene
expression, and relevant biological pathways. However, it is difficult to study
the biological involvement of NPAS2 in cancer development, as little is known
about its direct transcriptional targets. The aim of the current study is to
create a transcriptional profile of genes regulated by NPAS2, using a human
binding ChIP-on-chip analysis of NPAS2 in MCF-7 cells. This genome-wide mapping
approach identified 26 genes that contain potential NPAS2 binding regions.
Subsequent real-time PCR assays confirmed 16 of these targets, and 9 of these
genes (ARHGAP29, CDC25A, CDKN2AIP, CX3CL1, ELF4, GNAL, KDELR1, POU4F2, and THRA) 
have a known role in tumorigenesis. In addition, a networking analysis of these
validated NPAS2 targets revealed that all nine genes, together with REN, are
involved in a "Cancer, Cell cycle, Neurological Disease" network. These results
report the first list of direct transcriptional targets of NPAS2 and will shed
light on the role of circadian genes in tumorigenesis.

2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3182267
PMID: 19457610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Apr;32(4):624-30. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.04.007. Epub 2009 May 7.

Study of thyroid hormone receptor alpha gene polymorphisms on Alzheimer's
disease.

Goumidi L(1), Flamant F, Lendon C, Galimberti D, Pasquier F, Scarpini E,
Hannequin D, Campion D, Amouyel P, Lambert JC, Meirhaeghe A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U744, Lille, France.

Because the action of thyroid hormone (T3) is involved in adult cognitive
functions, we wanted to assess the association between THRA gene polymorphisms,
which encodes the T3 nuclear receptor TRa1, and Alzheimer's disease (AD) risk. We
analysed 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of THRA, covering the known
common genetic variability of the gene, in the Lille AD case-control study (710
cases/597 controls). We observed that subjects bearing the rs939348 TT genotype
had a tendency to have a higher risk of developing AD (adjusted OR [95%CI]=1.71
[0.99-2.95] p=0.06). We extended our finding to three other independent AD
case-control studies and observed similar trends. When combining the 4 studies
(1749 cases/1339 controls), we observed an overall significant higher risk of AD 
in TT subjects (adjusted OR [95%CI]=1.42 [1.03-1.96], p=0.03) compared with C
allele bearers. However, when combining our data with the available data coming
from 2 American genome wide association studies on AD, we observed a weak and not
significant association (OR=1.19 [0.97-1.45], p=0.10). The relationship between
the genetic variability of the THRA gene and AD risk remains uncertain but cannot
be entirely excluded.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19427062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Heart Fail Rev. 2010 Mar;15(2):117-20. doi: 10.1007/s10741-008-9121-y. Epub 2009 
Jan 10.

Use of a new model of transgenic mice to clarify the respective functions of
thyroid hormone receptors in vivo.

Flamant F(1), Quignodon L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, 
Université de Lyon UMR INRA CNRS 5242, IFR128 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon CEDEX
07, France. Frederic.flamant@ens-lyon.fr

3,5,3'-Triido-L: -thyronine (T3) exerts pleiotropic actions on development and
homeostasis mostly via its nuclear receptors, TRalpha1, TRbeta1, and TRbeta2,
encoded by the THRA and THRB genes. Muouse genetics data outline the contrasting 
functions of THRA and THRB, and suggest that these are dictated by both the
respective abundance of the receptor isoforms in a given cell type and the
differences in the intrinsic properties of the receptors. The diversity of
consequences of either hypothyroidism or THRA/THRB mutation is astonishing,
suggesting that TR controls a large number of genes and that the repertoire of
target gene differs from one tissue to another. In order to distinguish between
the direct and indirect actions of TH in vivo, we use the CRE/LoxP recombination 
system to control the expression of a mutant TRalpha1 receptor with dominant
negative properties. Ubiquitous expression of this mutation in heterozygous mice 
recapitulates many consequences of TH deficiency, except in tissues where TRbeta 
is highly expressed.

PMID: 19137427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Microb Cell Fact. 2009 Jan 7;8:2. doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-8-2.

Metabolic engineering of a reduced-genome strain of Escherichia coli for
L-threonine production.

Lee JH(1), Sung BH, Kim MS, Blattner FR, Yoon BH, Kim JH, Kim SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Korea. sunkim@kaist.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Deletion of large blocks of nonessential genes that are not needed
for metabolic pathways of interest can reduce the production of unwanted
by-products, increase genome stability, and streamline metabolism without
physiological compromise. Researchers have recently constructed a reduced-genome 
Escherichia coli strain MDS42 that lacks 14.3% of its chromosome.
RESULTS: Here we describe the reengineering of the MDS42 genome to increase the
production of the essential amino acid L-threonine. To this end, we
over-expressed a feedback-resistant threonine operon (thrA*BC), deleted the genes
that encode threonine dehydrogenase (tdh) and threonine transporters (tdcC and
sstT), and introduced a mutant threonine exporter (rhtA23) in MDS42. The
resulting strain, MDS-205, shows an ~83% increase in L-threonine production when 
cells are grown by flask fermentation, compared to a wild-type E. coli strain
MG1655 engineered with the same threonine-specific modifications described above.
And transcriptional analysis revealed the effect of the deletion of non-essential
genes on the central metabolism and threonine pathways in MDS-205.
CONCLUSION: This result demonstrates that the elimination of genes unnecessary
for cell growth can increase the productivity of an industrial strain, most
likely by reducing the metabolic burden and improving the metabolic efficiency of
cells.

PMCID: PMC2634754
PMID: 19128451  [PubMed]


93. Thyroid. 2008 Oct;18(10):1087-94. doi: 10.1089/thy.2008.0236.

Identification and consequences of polymorphisms in the thyroid hormone receptor 
alpha and beta genes.

Sørensen HG(1), van der Deure WM, Hansen PS, Peeters RP, Breteler MM, Kyvik KO,
Sørensen TI, Hegedüs L, Visser TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Odense University Hospital,
Odense, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic factors exert considerable influence on thyroid function
variables. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in thyroid hormone pathway
genes have been associated with serum thyroid parameters implying small
alterations in the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis. However, little is known 
about SNPs in the THRA (17q11.2) and THRB (3p24.2) genes. The aim of this study
was to map THRA and THRB for the occurrence and frequencies of SNPs and relate
these to thyroid parameters.
DESIGN AND METHODS: SNPs were identified by sequencing all THRA and THRB exons
and flanking regions in 52 randomly selected subjects. SNPs were genotyped in
1116 healthy Danish twins by TaqMan assays and related to thyroid parameters. One
SNP in THRB was additionally genotyped in the elderly population of the Rotterdam
Scan Study (n = 940).
MAIN OUTCOME: 15 SNPs (7 novel) in THRA and THRB were identified. Two SNPs in the
3' untranslated region of THRA were genotyped: a novel SNP (2390A/G) and 1895C/A 
(rs12939700). In THRB, a synonymous (735C/T; rs3752874) and an intronic SNP
(in9-G/A; rs13063628) were genotyped. No associations between SNPs and thyroid
hormone levels (total and free 3,3',5-triiodo-L-thyronine [T3] and thyroxine,
reverse T3) were found. THRB-in9-G/A was significantly associated with higher
serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (p(lnTSH) = 0.01) in the Danish twins,
but not in subjects of the Rotterdam Scan Study, although it showed a similar
trend.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of the T3 receptor genes revealed 15 SNPs, including 7
novel. Only THRB-in9-G/A was associated with higher serum TSH in a large
population of Danish twins.

PMID: 18844476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2008 Aug;28(8):1438-41.

[MLST typing of Streptococcus suis isolated from clinical patients in Guangdong
Province in 2005].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang HM(1), Ke CW, Pan WB, Ke BX, Chen JD, Deng XL, Liu MZ, Chen GR, Yang XF, Zhu
ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China. melkom@163.com

OBJECTIVE: Intensive surveillance of human S.suis infection was carried out in
July and August of 2005 in Guangdong Province, which coincided with the Sichuan
outbreak. Five isolated cases of human infections were identified during this
period, from which 5 S. suis serotype 2 isolates were recovered. MLST analysis
showed that these 5 isolates shared identical sequences of 6 MLST housekeeping
genes except for one point mutation found within the thrA gene fragment, a
neutral mutation (TTA to TTG) in the third nucleotide (360 nt) of the codon for
leucine. MLST analysis identified 2 sequence types in the Guangdong sporadic
infection. Three Guangdong isolates L-SS002, L-SS003 and L-SS005 belonged to ST7,
while the other two isolates L-SS004 and L-SS006 belonged to ST1, but they all
belonged to ST1 clonal complex. This finding represents a striking feature that
differs from the Sichuan outbreak caused by a single ST7 SS2 clone. The 3
isolates of ST7 were probably imported from Sichuan Province, while the origin of
the other 2 isolates of ST1 still remain to be clarified.

PMID: 18753081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Endocrinology. 2008 Dec;149(12):6471-86. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0718. Epub 2008 Aug
21.

Mice lacking the thyroid hormone receptor-alpha gene spend more energy in
thermogenesis, burn more fat, and are less sensitive to high-fat diet-induced
obesity.

Pelletier P(1), Gauthier K, Sideleva O, Samarut J, Silva JE.

Author information: 
(1)Baystate Medical Center, Division of Endocrinology, Room S2620, 759 Chestnut
Street, Springfield, Massachusetts 01199, USA.

Unable to activate brown adipose tissue (BAT) thermogenesis,
alphaT3-receptor-deficient mice (Thra-0/0) are cold intolerant. Our objective was
to investigate the impact on energy economy and mechanisms of the alternate
facultative thermogenesis developed. Energy expenditure (oxygen and food
consumption) is elevated in Thra-0/0 mice reared at room temperature. Such
difference disappears at thermoneutrality (30 C) and expands as ambient
temperature becomes colder (P < 0.001). Despite eating more, Thra-0/0 are leaner 
than wild-type (WT) mice (P < 0.01), whereas these, whether on chow or high-fat
diet, gained more weight (g/d: 0.12 +/- 0.002 vs. 0.08 +/- 0.002 and 0.25 +/-
0.005 vs. 0.17 +/- 0.005, respectively) and adiposity than Thra-0/0 mice (P <
0.001). The respiratory quotient was lower in Thra-0/0 than WT mice (P < 0.001), 
after feeding or fasted, on chow or high-fat diet, indicating a preference for
fat as fuel, which was associated with increased lipoprotein lipase (LPL)
expression in skeletal muscle of Thra-0/0 mice but with no differences in gene
expression in white adipose tissue. Type-2 deiodinase (D2) was increased in BAT
and aerobic muscle of Thra-0/0 mice. This and liver D1 were increased by a
high-fat diet in both genotypes, as also were serum T3 and T3/T4 ratio, but more 
in Thra-0/0 than WT mice (P < 0.001). Remarkably, when studied at
thermoneutrality, genotype differences in weight and adiposity gain, respiratory 
quotient, D2, and LPL disappeared. Thus, disruption of BAT thermogenesis in
Thra-0/0 mice activates an alternate facultative thermogenesis that is more
energy demanding and associated with reduced fuel efficiency, leanness, increased
capacity to oxidize fat, and relative resistance to diet-induced obesity, in all 
of which muscle LPL and deiodinases play a key role.

PMID: 18719022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Xue Bao. 2008 Aug;6(8):843-51. doi: 10.3736/jcim20080814.

[Differentially expressed genes in adrenal gland of H22 liver cancer mice with
different syndromes and in different stages].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan ZQ(1), Fang ZQ, Lu WL, Liang C, Wu ZH, Liu XM, Hou L, Zhang H, Zhuo SY, Liao 
MJ, Gao BF.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai 201203, China.

OBJECTIVE: To reveal the characteristics of gene expression in adrenal gland of
H22 tumor mice with typical syndromes and in different liver cancer stages.
METHODS: By the quantitative four diagnosis and syndrome differentiation methods 
and GeneChip Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Array, we observed adrenal gland gene expression
in H22 tumor mice with pathogenic factor-toxin predominance syndrome and qi
deficiency syndrome in the earlier stage, yang-qi deficiency syndrome in the
intermediate stage, and qi-yin-yang deficiency syndrome in the advanced stage.
Genes highly expressed and remarkably different were analyzed in this study.
RESULTS: A total of seventy-three up-regulated coincident genes and twenty-six
down-regulated coincident genes in different stages were investigated in the
study. Up-regulated coincident genes included Hp, C3, Anxa1, Procr, C2, Il4ra,
Cd14, Ptprc, Cd52, C4b, Eno3, Xdh, Gpx3, and so on. Down-regulated coincident
genes included nervous system function-related genes such as Plp1, Mbp, Aldh1a1, 
Cck, Atn1, genes associated with electrolyte metabolism such as Aldh1a1 and
Slc22a17, genes related to signal transduction such as Cxcr4, Spag5 and Stmn3,
etc, and genes related to transcriptional control and protein biosynthesis such
as Hspa1a, Dnajb1, Thra, Hhex and so on.
CONCLUSION: With the development of the tumorigenesis, the symptoms and signs and
differentially expressed genes in adrenal gland of H22 tumor mice can be
measured. Up-regulated and down-regulated coincident genes may be the features of
H22 tumor mice different from those of normal mice.

PMID: 18664355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Soc Biol. 2008;202(2):67-71. doi: 10.1051/jbio:2008008. Epub 2008 Jun 13.

[Thyroid hormone and its receptors: have mouse genetics clarified the
situation?].

[Article in French]

Flamant F(1), Quignodon L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle de Lyon, Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon,
Université de Lyon, UMR INRA CNRS, 5242 IFR128, 46 allée d'Italie, 69364 Lyon
Cedex 07, France. frédéric.flamant@ens-lyon.fr

In vertebrates, the active form of thyroid hormone (T3) acts directly on
transcription by changing the conformation of the TR nuclear receptors (TR alpha 
1, TR beta 1 et TR beta 2) which are encoded by the THRA and THRB genes. These
receptors are bound to DNA at specific response elements in a ligand independent 
manner. Mouse genetics have clarified the respective function of each receptor
isoform, mainly reflecting THRA and THRB expression patterns. It also revealed
the importance of negative regulation by unliganded receptors not only in
pathological but also in physiological situations.

PMID: 18547502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Wei Sheng Yan Jiu. 2008 Jan;37(1):46-9.

[Technic study on multilocus sequence typing system of Salmonella enteritidis].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Y(1), Ji R, Wang Y, Jiang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Safety, China CDC, Beijing 100021, China.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize different Salmonella enterica Enteritidis isolates
through multilocus sequence typing (MLST) system, a molecular epidemiologic
analysis method was established.
METHODS: Internal fragments of six housekeeping genes, thrA, purE, sucA, aroC,
hemD and dnaN and a unique gene of S. Enteritidis were amplified and sequenced to
develop the MLST method. Eighteen S. Enteritidis food isolates with unique
serotype were studied and the data were analyzed by the Sequener 4.0 software.
The genetic relationship of the isolates was estimated, and the DNA sequence
diversity was also studied between S. Enteritidis and S. Typhimurium LT2.
RESULTS: A poor DNA sequence diversity among S. Enteritidis 50041 and 18 S.
Enteritidis isolates in all six housekeeping genes were found. The number of
variable sites per gene ranged from 1 to 6 nucleotides between S. Typhimurium LT2
and S. Enteritidis. Furthermore, S. Enteritidis 50041 and 18 S. Enteritidis
isolates contained a mutation at C182T in SdfI in comparison with to the sequence
in the GenBank. Our study showed that the MLST had poor discrimination power
among S. Enteritidis isolates.
CONCLUSION: The MLST techniques should only be used to differentiate Salmonella
isolates with different serotypes, it could not study the molecular
epidemiological relationship of the isolates with the same serotype.

PMID: 18421863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2008 May;14(5):429-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2008.01953.x. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

Characterisation of Yersinia pestis isolates from natural foci of plague in the
Republic of Georgia, and their relationship to Y. pestis isolates from other
countries.

Revazishvili T(1), Rajanna C, Bakanidze L, Tsertsvadze N, Imnadze P, O'Connell K,
Kreger A, Stine OC, Morris JG Jr, Sulakvelidze A.

Author information: 
(1)Emerging Pathogens Institute and Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610,
USA.

Forty Yersinia pestis isolates from endemic foci of plague in the Republic of
Georgia, and six Y. pestis isolates from neighbouring former Soviet Union
countries, were analysed for their biochemical and phenotypic properties, and
their genetic relatedness was compared with Y. pestis strains KIM and CO92 by
pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). In addition, 11 Y. pestis isolates from 
the USA, together with published nucleotide sequences from Y. pestis strains KIM,
CO92 and 91001, were compared with the 46 isolates in the present collection
using multilocus sequence typing (MLST), based on sequence data for the 16S rRNA,
hsp60, glnA, gyrB, recA, manB, thrA and tmk loci. Four virulence gene loci (caf1,
lcrV, psaA and pla) were also sequenced and analysed. Two sequence types (ST1 and
ST2), which differed by a single nucleotide, were identified by MLST. With the
exception of a single isolate (771G), all of the Georgian Y. pestis isolates
belonged to ST2. PFGE also grouped the Georgian Y. pestis isolates separately
from the non-Georgian isolates. Overall, PFGE discriminated the Y. pestis
isolates more effectively than MLST. The sequences of three of the four virulence
genes (lcrV, psaA and pla) were identical in all Georgian and non-Georgian
isolates, but the caf1 locus was represented by two allele types, with caf1 NT1
being associated with the non-Georgian isolates and caf1 NT2 being associated
with the Georgian isolates. These results suggest that Georgian Y. pestis
isolates are of clonal origin.

PMID: 18294239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mol Syst Biol. 2007;3:149. Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Systems metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for L-threonine production.

Lee KH(1), Park JH, Kim TY, Kim HU, Lee SY.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic and Biomolecular Engineering National Research Laboratory,
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (BK21 program), BioProcess
Engineering Research Center, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), Daejeon, Korea.

Amino-acid producers have traditionally been developed by repeated random
mutagenesis owing to the difficulty in rationally engineering the complex and
highly regulated metabolic network. Here, we report the development of the
genetically defined L-threonine overproducing Escherichia coli strain by systems 
metabolic engineering. Feedback inhibitions of aspartokinase I and III (encoded
by thrA and lysC, respectively) and transcriptional attenuation regulations
(located in thrL) were removed. Pathways for Thr degradation were removed by
deleting tdh and mutating ilvA. The metA and lysA genes were deleted to make more
precursors available for Thr biosynthesis. Further target genes to be engineered 
were identified by transcriptome profiling combined with in silico flux response 
analysis, and their expression levels were manipulated accordingly. The final
engineered E. coli strain was able to produce Thr with a high yield of 0.393 g
per gram of glucose, and 82.4 g/l Thr by fed-batch culture. The systems metabolic
engineering strategy reported here may be broadly employed for developing
genetically defined organisms for the efficient production of various
bioproducts.

PMCID: PMC2174629
PMID: 18059444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Orthop Res. 2008 Apr;26(4):453-9.

Changes of the bone mineral density in proximal femur following total hip
resurfacing arthroplasty in osteonecrosis of femoral head.

Lian YY(1), Pei FX, Yoo MC, Cheng JQ, Fatou CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No.
37 Guo-xue Lane, Wuhou District, Chengdu, Sichuan Province 610041, China.

Total hip resurfacing arthroplasty (THRA) is being performed with increasing
frequency for osteonecrosis of femoral head (ONFH). To evaluate femoral bone
remodeling in ONFH after THRA and determine the impact of stem-neck angle (SNA)
of inserted femoral component on bone remodeling, we monitored the changes in BMD
in proximal femur in 23 patients with ONFH after surgery. Patients were divided
into group A (SNA >or= 5 degrees ) and group B (SNA < 5 degrees ). The BMD was
measured in seven Gruen zones and two neck zones using dual-energy X-ray
absorptiometry preoperatively, then at 3, 6, 12, and 24 months after surgery. At 
all ROIs, the BMD decreased significantly by 3 months postoperatively. The BMD
ceased to decrease and reversed by 6 months. The BMD in neck increased
significantly in group A, compared with group B at 24 months. The BMD increased
2% at ROI1 at 24 months in both groups, and at ROI7, the BMD in group A reversed 
to baseline value by 6 months and increased 5.81% at 24 months. These findings
implied that the bone stock of proximal femur in ONFH can be well reserved after 
total hip resurfacing arthroplasty with valgus positioning of the femoral
component.

PMID: 17972335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Med Microbiol. 2007 Nov;56(Pt 11):1479-84.

Molecular epidemiology of community-acquired invasive non-typhoidal Salmonella
among children aged 2 29 months in rural Gambia and discovery of a new serovar,
Salmonella enterica Dingiri.

Ikumapayi UN(1), Antonio M, Sonne-Hansen J, Biney E, Enwere G, Okoko B, Oluwalana
C, Vaughan A, Zaman SM, Greenwood BM, Cutts FT, Adegbola RA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Banjul, The Gambia, West Africa.

Sixty-two invasive non-typhoidal Salmonella (NTS) isolates from children aged
2-29 months in rural Gambia were examined for serovar prevalence and
antimicrobial susceptibility, and characterized using multilocus sequence typing 
(MLST) of seven genes, aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE, sucA and thrA. Salmonella
enterica serovar Enteritidis was the most common serovar (80.6 %), followed by S.
enterica serovar Typhimurium (8.0 %). Thirty-three per cent of the isolates were 
resistant to all eight antimicrobials tested, including ampicillin (74.2 %),
cotrimoxazole (64.5 %) and tetracycline (63 %). A total of 40.3 % of the NTS
cases had an initial clinical diagnosis of malaria, whilst 27.3 % had a diagnosis
of clinical pneumonia and 18 % had a diagnosis of septicaemia. MLST of NTS
resulted in ten different sequence types (STs), of which five were novel,
representing five different NTS serovars. In general, STs were restricted to the 
same serovar. One type (ST11) encompassed 80.6 % of the NTSs. A new NTS serovar
named S. enterica serovar Dingiri was discovered. S. Dingiri was isolated from a 
6-month-old male with an initial clinical diagnosis of malaria but a final
clinical diagnosis of anaemia and septicaemia. S. Dingiri, which possesses an
antigenic formula of 17:z:1,6, was sensitive to ampicillin, cefotaxime,
chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, cotrimoxazole and tetracycline but resistant to
gentamicin, and was ST338.

PMID: 17965348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Exp Oncol. 2007 Jun;29(2):152-5.

Identification of new DNA markers of endometrial cancer in patients from the
Ukrainian population.

Domenyuk VP(1), Litovkin KV, Verbitskaya TG, Dubinina VG, Bubnov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Medicine, Odessa State Medical University,
Odessa, Ukraine.

AIM: To identify clinically significant molecular markers of endometrial cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cancer and normal endometrial tissue samples from 20
patients of the Gynecology Clinic of Odessa State Medical University (Odessa,
Ukraine) with confirmed endometrial cancer were compared for SSR and ISSR
polymorphisms. Identified polymorphic fragments from anonymous genome regions
situated between microsatellite repeats underwent direct DNA sequencing; analysis
of their homology to sequences from human genome database has been performed.
RESULTS: No significant variability for the microsatellite loci adjacent to the
E2F1, BAX, TCF7L2, C-MYC, WNT1, FES, DCC, P27, THRA, APC, CYP19 and P53 genes was
detected. Search for new molecular markers of endometrial cancer within anonymous
DNA sequences located between microsatellite repeats revealed 100 bp and 174 bp
polymorphic fragments. These fragments were detected correspondingly in 60% and
35% of patients. 100 bp fragment appeared to be homologous to a region within the
NFKB gene, 174 bp fragment - to a sequence within the DDR1 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: NFKB1 and DDR1 genes may be regarded as potential markers for some
types of endometrial cancer. This is a first report about possible association of
these genes with endometrial cancer.

PMID: 17704737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biochem. 2007 Oct;304(1-2):235-41. Epub 2007 May 30.

cDNA microarray analysis of cyclosporin A (CsA)-treated human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells reveal modulation of genes associated with apoptosis,
cell-cycle regulation and DNA repair.

Baião AM(1), Wowk PF, Sandrin-Garcia P, Junta CM, Fachin AL, Mello SS,
Sakamoto-Hojo ET, Donadi EA, Passos GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Federal University of São Carlos
(UFSCar), Sao Carlos, SP 13565-905, Brazil.

Cyclosporin A (CsA) is a potent immunosuppressant that has been extensively used 
to attenuate patient immune response following organ transplantation. The
molecular biological mechanism of CsA has been extensively investigated in human 
T cells, and it has been shown to involve modulation of the intracellular
calcineurin pathway. However, it is plausible that this chemical
immunosuppressant certainly up- or down-regulate many other biochemical pathways 
of immune cells. In the present study, we used the cDNA microarray method to
characterize the gene expression profile of human peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMC) treated in vitro with CsA and controls. The CsA treated PBMC
displayed statistically significant induction of genes involved in the control of
cell-cycle regulation (TRRAP), apoptosis/DNA repair (PRKDC, MAEA, TIA1), DNA
metabolism/response to DNA damage stimulus (PRKDC, FEN1), transcription (NR4A2,
THRA) and cell proliferation (FEN1, BIN1), whose data have permitted
identification of target genes involved in CsA immunosuppression.

PMID: 17534698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007 Mar 8;8 Suppl 1:S12.

On the origin and evolution of biosynthetic pathways: integrating microarray data
with structure and organization of the Common Pathway genes.

Fondi M(1), Brilli M, Fani R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia Animale e Genetica, Università di Firenze, Via Romana
17\19, Firenze, Italy. marco.fondi@unifi.it

BACKGROUND: The lysine, threonine, and methionine biosynthetic pathways share the
three initial enzymatic steps, which are referred to as the Common Pathway (CP). 
In Escherichia coli three different aspartokinases (AKI, AKII, AKIII, the
products of thrA, metL and lysC, respectively) can perform the first step of the 
CP. Moreover, two of them (AKI and AKII) are bifunctional, carrying also
homoserine dehydrogenasic activity (hom product). The second step of the CP is
catalyzed by a single aspartate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (ASDH, the product of 
asd). Thus, in the CP of E. coli while a single copy of ASDH performs the same
reaction for three different metabolic routes, three different AKs perfom a
unique step. Why and how such a situation did emerge and maintain? How is it
correlated to the different regulatory mechanisms acting on these genes? The aim 
of this work was to trace the evolutionary pathway leading to the extant scenario
in proteobacteria.
RESULTS: The analysis of the structure, organization, phylogeny, and distribution
of ask and hom genes revealed that the presence of multiple copies of these genes
and their fusion events are restricted to the gamma-subdivision of
proteobacteria. This allowed us to depict a model to explain the evolution of ask
and hom according to which the fused genes are the outcome of a cascade of gene
duplication and fusion events that can be traced in the ancestor of
gamma-proteobacteria. Moreover, the appearance of fused genes paralleled the
assembly of operons of different sizes, suggesting a strong correlation between
the structure and organization of these genes. A statistic analysis of microarray
data retrieved from experiments carried out on E. coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
was also performed.
CONCLUSION: The integration of data concerning gene structure, organization,
phylogeny, distribution, and microarray experiments allowed us to depict a model 
for the evolution of ask and hom genes in proteobacteria and to suggest a
biological significance for the extant scenario.

PMCID: PMC1885841
PMID: 17430556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Dec;27(12):1065-8.

[Comparison of multilocus sequence typing system and pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis in typing of Salmonella enteritidis].

[Article in Chinese]

Ji R(1), Li YJ, Wang YP, Cui SH, Jiang T.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Nutrition and Food Safety, Chinese Center for Disease
Control and Prevention, Beijing 100021, China. jirong36@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the discriminatory ability between multilocus sequence
typing system (MLST) and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE).
METHODS: Salmonella enteritidis strains, isolated from food in China were
identified by MLST, under PCR products of thrA, purE, sucA, aroC, hemD, dnaN and 
Sdf I. The same set of strains was typed by PFGE using Xba I, Spe I as the
restriction enzyme in order to compare the discriminatory power of the methods.
RESULTS: Data from MLST revealed the lack of diversity among the strains of the
same serotype and the number of variable nucleotide sites per locus ranged from 1
to 23 between Salmonella typhi LT2 and other serotypes of Salmonella. However, 50
Salmonella enteritidis strains were identified as 11 patterns and more
sub-patterns by PFGE.
CONCLUSION: In strain typing, PFGE was the highly discriminatory method comparing
to the MLST system.

PMID: 17415987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Thyroid. 2007 Feb;17(2):105-12.

Thyroid hormone receptor isoform expression in livers of critically ill patients.

Thijssen-Timmer DC(1), Peeters RP, Wouters P, Weekers F, Visser TJ, Fliers E,
Wiersinga WM, Bakker O, Van Den Berghe G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, F5-171, Academic Medical Centre,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: The THRA gene encodes two isoforms of the thyroid hormone receptor
(TR), TRalpha1 and TRalpha2. The ratio of these splice variants could have a
marked influence on T3-regulated gene expression, especially during illness.
DESIGN: We studied the expression of the isoforms TRbeta1, TRalpha1, and TRalpha2
and 5'-deiodinase in postmortem liver biopsies of 58 patients who were critically
ill and died in the intensive care unit (ICU). All mRNA levels were determined
using real-time PCR.
MAIN OUTCOME: All ratios of the biopsies were higher than those found in three
normal liver biopsies due to an increased TRalpha1 level. The TRalpha1/TRalpha2
ratio increased with age and severity of illness following the equation:
TRalpha1/TRalpha2 ratio = - 1.854 + (0.0323 x age) + (0.0431 x Therapeutic
Intervention Scoring System score) indicating that 28% of the changed
TRalpha1/TRalpha2 ratio can be predicted by these clinical variables. There was
no effect of randomization to intensive insulin therapy or glucocorticoid or
thyroid hormone treatment on the TRalpha1/TRalpha2 ratio or TRbeta1. Furthermore,
no relation was seen between the expression levels of the 5'-deiodinase mRNA and 
TR isoforms or the triiodothyronine T3 levels.
CONCLUSION: It appears that in critically ill patients the ratio of
TRalpha1/TRalpha2 expression increases with age and severity of illness, possibly
indicating a mechanism to enhance sensitivity to T3 in the oldest and sickest
patients.

PMID: 17316111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Mar;3(3):249-59.

Thyroid hormone receptors in brain development and function.

Bernal J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas and Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain. jbernal@iib.uam.es

Thyroid hormones are important during development of the mammalian brain, acting 
on migration and differentiation of neural cells, synaptogenesis, and
myelination. The actions of thyroid hormones are mediated through nuclear thyroid
hormone receptors (TRs) and regulation of gene expression. The purpose of this
article is to review the role of TRs in brain maturation. In developing humans
maternal and fetal thyroid glands provide thyroid hormones to the fetal brain,
but the timing of receptor ontogeny agrees with clinical data on the importance
of the maternal thyroid gland before midgestation. Several TR isoforms, which are
encoded by the THRA and THRB genes, are expressed in the brain, with the most
common being TRalpha1. Deletion of TRalpha1 in rodents is not, however,
equivalent to hormone deprivation and, paradoxically, even prevents the effects
of hypothyroidism. Unliganded receptor activity is, therefore, probably an
important factor in causing the harmful effects of hypothyroidism. Accordingly,
expression of a mutant receptor with impaired triiodothyronine (T(3)) binding and
dominant negative activity affected cerebellar development and motor performance.
TRs are also involved in adult brain function. TRalpha1 deletion, or expression
of a dominant negative mutant receptor, induces consistent behavioral changes in 
adult mice, leading to severe anxiety and morphological changes in the
hippocampus.

PMID: 17315033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biol Reprod. 2007 May;76(5):804-12. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Proliferation of adult sertoli cells following conditional knockout of the Gap
junctional protein GJA1 (connexin 43) in mice.

Sridharan S(1), Simon L, Meling DD, Cyr DG, Gutstein DE, Fishman GI, Guillou F,
Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61802, USA.

GJA1 (also known and referred to here as connexin 43 and abbreviated CX43) is the
predominant testicular gap junction protein, and CX43 may regulate Sertoli cell
maturation and spermatogenesis. We hypothesized that lack of CX43 would inhibit
Sertoli cell differentiation and extend proliferation. To test this, a Sertoli
cell-specific Cx43 knockout (SC-Cx43 KO) mouse was generated using Cre-lox
technology. Immunohistochemistry indicated that CX43 was not expressed in the
Sertoli cells of SC-Cx43 KO mice, but was normal in organs such as the heart.
Testicular weight was reduced by 41% and 76% in SC-Cx43 KO mice at 20 and 60
days, respectively, vs. wild-type (wt) mice. Seminiferous tubules of SC-Cx43 KO
mice contained only Sertoli cells and actively proliferating early spermatogonia.
Sertoli cells normally cease proliferation at 2 wk of age in mice and become
terminally differentiated. However, proliferating Sertoli cells were present in
SC-Cx43 KO but not wt mice at 20 and 60 days of age. Thyroid hormone receptor
alpha (THRA) is high in proliferating Sertoli cells, then declines sharply in
adulthood. Thra mRNA expression was increased in 20-day SC-Cx43 KO vs. wt mice,
and it showed a trend toward an increase in 60-day mice, indicating that loss of 
CX43 in Sertoli cells inhibited their maturation. In conclusion, we have
generated mice lacking CX43 in Sertoli cells but not other tissues. Our data
indicate that CX43 in Sertoli cells is essential for spermatogenesis but not
spermatogonial maintenance/proliferation. SC-Cx43 KO mice showed continued
Sertoli cell proliferation and delayed maturation in adulthood, indicating that
CX43 plays key roles in Sertoli cell development.

PMID: 17229929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Behav Genet. 2007 Jan;37(1):223-43. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

Genetic and structural analysis of the basolateral amygdala complex in BXD
recombinant inbred mice.

Mozhui K(1), Hamre KM, Holmes A, Lu L, Williams RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, 855 Monroe Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.

The amygdala integrates and coordinates emotional and autonomic responses. The
genetics that underlie variation in amygdala structure may be coupled to
variation in levels of aggression, fear, anxiety, and affiliated behaviors. We
systematically quantified the volume and cell populations of the basolateral
amygdala complex (BLAc) across 35 BXD recombinant inbred (RI) lines, the parental
strains--C57BL/6J (B6) and DBA/2J (D2)--and F1 hybrids (n cases=199, bilateral
analysis). Neuron number and volume vary 1.7- to 2-fold among strains (e.g.,
neuron number ranged from 88,000 to 170,000). Glial and endothelial populations
ranged more widely (5- to 8-fold), in part because of higher technical error. A
quantitative trait locus (QTL) for the BLAc size is located on chromosome (Chr) 8
near the Large gene. This locus may also influence volume of other regions
including hippocampus and cerebellum. Cell populations in the BLAc appear to be
modulated more weakly by loci on Chrs 11 and 13. Candidate genes were selected on
the basis of correlation with BLAc traits, chromosomal location, single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) density, and expression patterns in the Allen Brain
Atlas. Neurod2, a gene shown to be significant for the formation of the BLAc by
knockout studies, is among the candidates genes. Other candidates include Large, 
and Thra. Responses to drugs of abuse and locomotor activity were the most
notable behavioral correlates of the BLAc traits.

PMID: 17131200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Aug;37(1):121-34.

Multiple molecular effect pathways of an environmental oestrogen in fish.

Filby AL(1), Thorpe KL, Tyler CR.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental and Molecular Fish Biology Group, School of Biosciences,
Hatherly Laboratories, University of Exeter, Prince of Wales Road, Exeter, Devon 
EX4 4PS, UK. a.l.filby@exeter.ac.uk

Complex interrelationships in the signalling of oestrogenic effects mean that
environmental oestrogens present in the aquatic environment have the potential to
disrupt physiological function in fish in a more complex manner than portrayed in
the present literature. Taking a broader approach to investigate the possible
effect pathways and the likely consequences of environmental oestrogen exposure
in fish, the effects of 17beta-oestradiol (E(2)) were studied on the expression
of a suite of genes which interact to mediate growth, development and thyroid and
interrenal function (growth hormone GH (gh), GH receptor (ghr ), insulin-like
growth factor (IGF-I) (igf1), IGF-I receptor (igf1r ), thyroid hormone
receptors-alpha (thra) and -beta (thrb) and glucocorticoid receptor (gr ))
together with the expression analyses of sex-steroid receptors and ten other
genes centrally involved in sexual development and reproduction in fathead minnow
(fhm; Pimephales promelas). Exposure of adult fhm to 35 ng E(2)/l for 14 days
induced classic oestrogen biomarker responses (hepatic oestrogen receptor 1 and
plasma vitellogenin), and impacted on the reproductive axis, feminising "male"
steroidogenic enzyme expression profiles and suppressing genes involved in testis
differentiation. However, E(2) also triggered a cascade of responses for gh, ghr,
igf1, igf1r, thra, thrb and gr in the pituitary, brain, liver, gonad and gill,
with potential consequences for the functioning of many physiological processes, 
not just reproduction. Molecular responses to E(2) were complex, with most genes 
showing differential responses between tissues and sexes. For example, igf1
expression increased in brain but decreased in gill on exposure to E(2), and
responded in an opposite way in males compared with females in liver, gonad and
pituitary. These findings demonstrate the importance of developing a deeper
understanding of the endocrine interactions for unravelling the mechanisms of
environmental oestrogen action and predicting the likely health consequences.

PMID: 16901929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Clin Microbiol. 2006 Jul;44(7):2449-57.

Comparison of multilocus sequence typing, pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, and
antimicrobial susceptibility typing for characterization of Salmonella enterica
serotype Newport isolates.

Harbottle H(1), White DG, McDermott PF, Walker RD, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal and Food Microbiology, Office of Research, Center for
Veterinary Medicine, U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 8401 Muirkirk Rd.,
Laurel, MD 20708, USA. heather.harbottle@fda.hhs.gov

In the United States, multidrug-resistant phenotypes of Salmonella enterica
serotype Newport (commonly referred to as MDR-AmpC) have emerged in animals and
humans and have become a major public health problem. Although pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis (PFGE) is the current "gold standard" typing method for
Salmonella, multilocus sequence typing (MLST) may be more relevant to
investigations exploring evolutionary and population biology relationships. In
this study, 81 Salmonella enterica serotype Newport isolates from humans, food
animals, and retail foods were examined for antimicrobial susceptibility and
characterized using PFGE and MLST of seven genes, aroC, dnaN, hemD, hisD, purE,
sucA, and thrA. Forty-nine percent of the isolates were resistant to nine or more
of the tested antimicrobials. Salmonella isolates displayed resistance most often
to sulfamethoxazole (57%), streptomycin (56%), tetracycline (56%), ampicillin
(52%), and ceftiofur (49%) and, to a lesser extent, to kanamycin (19%),
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (17%), and gentamicin (11%). A total of 43 PFGE
patterns were generated using XbaI, indicating a genetically diverse population. 
The largest PFGE cluster contained isolates from clinically ill swine, cattle,
and humans. MLST resulted in 12 sequence types (STs), with one type encompassing 
62% of the strains. Ten new sequence types and one novel allele type were
identified. Furthermore, MLST typing showed that strains closely related by PFGE 
clustered in major STs, whereas more distantly related strains were separated
into two clusters by PFGE. The results of this study demonstrated that the MLST
scheme employed here clustered S. enterica serovar Newport isolates in distinct
molecular populations, and strain discrimination was enhanced by combining PFGE, 
antimicrobial susceptibility, and MLST results.

PMCID: PMC1489510
PMID: 16825363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Jan;47(1):120-32.

Thyroxine affects expression of KSPG-related genes, the carbonic anhydrase II
gene, and KS sulfation in the embryonic chicken cornea.

Conrad AH(1), Zhang Y, Walker AR, Olberding LA, Hanzlick A, Zimmer AJ, Morffi R, 
Conrad GW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506-4901,
USA. aconrad@ksu.edu

PURPOSE: Opaque chick corneas become thin and transparent from embryonic day (E)9
to E20 of incubation. Thyroxine (T4) injected in ovo on E9 induces precocious
transparency by E12. The present study was conducted to determine whether corneal
cells differentially express genes for T4 regulation, keratan sulfate
proteoglycan (KSPG) synthesis, crystallins, and endothelial cell ion transporters
during transparency development and whether these expressions are altered when E9
embryos are treated with T4.
METHODS: E9 eggs received T4 or buffer; corneas were dissected on E12. Corneal
transparency was measured digitally and thickness was determined from cryostat
cross sections. mRNA expressions were determined by real-time PCR using cDNA
synthesized from whole-cell RNA, cells expressing T4 receptor mRNAs assessed by
in situ hybridization, and KS disaccharide sulfation measured by electrospray
ionization tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-MS/MS).
RESULTS: All corneal layers expressed T4 receptor alpha (THRA) mRNA; keratocytes 
and endothelial cells expressed T4 receptor beta (THRB) mRNA. During normal
development, THRB expression increased 20-fold from E12 to E20; THRA expression
remained constant. Expressions of most genes involved in KS synthesis increased
from E9 to E16, and then decreased from E16 to E20. From E9 to E20, expressions
of crystallin genes increased; T4/3-deiodinase DIII (DIO3) increased 10-fold; and
sodium-potassium ATPase transporter (ATP1A1), sodium-bicarbonate transporter
(NBC), and carbonic anhydrase II (CA2) increased 5- to 10-fold. E9 T4
administration decreased corneal thickness by E12; increased DIO3, THRB, and CA2 
expressions 5- to 20-fold; decreased KSPG core protein genes and galactose
sulfotransferase CHST1 expressions 2-fold; and reduced KS disulfated/monosulfated
disaccharide (DSD/MSD) ratios.
CONCLUSIONS: Thyroxine modifies expressions of KSPG synthesis and carbonic
anhydrase genes.

PMID: 16384953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2005 May-Jun;16(4):176-82.

Thyroid hormone receptor mutations and disease: beyond thyroid hormone
resistance.

Cheng SY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4264, USA.
sycheng@helix.nih.gov

Thyroid hormone receptors (TRs) are ligand-dependent transcription factors that
mediate the biological activities of thyroid hormone (T3). Two THR genes (A and
B), located on different chromosomes, yield four T3-binding isoforms with highly 
conserved sequences in the DNA- and ligand-binding domains. Mutations of THRB
cause a human genetic disease, thyroid hormone resistance syndrome (RTH).
Comprehensive genomic profiling unveiled the contribution of novel
change-of-function mutations of TRbeta to the pathogenesis of RTH. In addition,
abnormalities associated with mutations of the THRA gene have been uncovered
recently. The phenotypic manifestations of mutated THRB and THRA genes are
distinct, indicating isoform-dependent actions of TR mutants in vivo. Therefore, 
mutant TRs provide a new paradigm to understand the molecular basis of receptor
disease.

PMID: 15860414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Biol Reprod. 2005 Sep;73(3):396-403. Epub 2005 Apr 27.

Regulation of neonatal Sertoli cell development by thyroid hormone receptor
alpha1.

Holsberger DR(1), Kiesewetter SE, Cooke PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois
61802, USA.

Neonatal hypothyroidism increases adult Sertoli cell populations by extending
Sertoli cell proliferation. Conversely, hyperthyroidism induces premature
cessation of Sertoli cell proliferation and stimulates maturational events like
seminiferous tubule canalization. Thyroid hormone receptors alpha1 and beta1,
which are commonly referred to as TRalpha1 and TRbeta1, respectively, are
expressed in neonatal Sertoli cells. We determined the relative roles of TRalpha1
and TRbeta1 in the thyroid hormone effect on testicular development and Sertoli
cell proliferation using Thra knockout (TRalphaKO), Thrb knockout (TRbetaKO), and
wild-type (WT) mice. Triiodothyronine (T3) treatment from birth until Postnatal
Day 10 reduced Sertoli cell proliferation to minimal levels in WT and TRbetaKO
mice versus that in their untreated controls, whereas T3 had a diminished effect 
on TRalphaKO Sertoli cell proliferation. Seminiferous tubule patency and luminal 
diameter were increased in T3-treated WT and TRbetaKO testes. In contrast, T3 had
no effect on these parameters in TRalphaKO mice. In untreated adult TRalphaKO
mice, Sertoli cell number, testis weight, and daily sperm production were
increased or trended toward an increase, but the increase in magnitude was
smaller than that seen in WT mice following neonatal hypothyroidism. Conversely, 
in TRbetaKO mice, Sertoli cell number, testis weight, and daily sperm production 
were similar to those in untreated WT mice. In addition, Sertoli cell number and 
testis weight in adult WT and TRbetaKO mice showed comparable increases following
hypothyroidism. Our results show that TRalphaKO mice have testicular effects
similar to those seen in WT mice following neonatal hypothyroidism and that
TRbetaKO mice, but not TRalphaKO mice, have normal Sertoli cell responsiveness to
T3. Thus, effects of exogenous manipulation of T3 on neonatal Sertoli cell
development are predominately mediated through TRalpha1.

PMID: 15858214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Jul;45(7):1413-7.

In multiple myeloma clonotypic CD38- /CD19+ / CD27+ memory B cells recirculate
through bone marrow, peripheral blood and lymph nodes.

Rasmussen T(1), Lodahl M, Hancke S, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L 54P4, University of Copenhagen, 2730 Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

It is believed that myeloma cells are derived from a germinal center (GC) or post
GC B cell. The GC B cell can differentiate into both a memory B cell and a plasma
cell (PC). In this study, we investigated the recirculating potential of memory B
cells clonally related to the myeloma PC (termed clonotypic). The V(H)DJ(H)
immunoglobulin gene rearrangement of the myeloma clone was identified for 10
myeloma patients and allele-specific oligonucleotides (ASO) IgH RT-PCR assays
were designed for each patient. Memory B cells (CD38- /CD19+ /CD27+) and their
subsets defined by the monoclonal antibodies CD62L, CCR6, CXCR4, CXCR5, CCR7 were
flow-sorted as single cells and analyzed by ASO RT-PCR analysis. In addition,
aspirated peripheral lymph nodes (PLN) of 7 myeloma patients in complete or
partial remission were analyzed for the presence of clonotypic cells. Circulating
clonotypic memory B cells were identified in PBMNC of 7/10 patients and both
CD62L positive and negative clonotypic memory B cells were identified.
Furthermore, comparable frequencies of clonotypic cells were found in the CCR6
+/- and CXCR4 +/- memory B cell subsets, whereas all clonotypic memory and later 
stage B cells were CXCR5 positive. In accordance with their immunophenotype,
clonotypic memory B-cells were identified in peripheral blood, bone marrow and
PLNs. Clonotypic memory B-cells were present in the majority of myeloma patients 
and seem to have the same diverse recirculating/homing capacity as normal memory 
B cells.

PMID: 15359642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Blood. 2005 Jan 1;105(1):317-23. Epub 2004 Aug 31.

Possible roles for activating RAS mutations in the MGUS to MM transition and in
the intramedullary to extramedullary transition in some plasma cell tumors.

Rasmussen T(1), Kuehl M, Lodahl M, Johnsen HE, Dahl IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L 54P4, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Herlev, Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

To assess a possible role in tumor progression, the occurrence and type of K- and
N-RAS mutations were determined in purified tumor cells, including samples from
patients with premalignant monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance
(MGUS), multiple myeloma (MM), and extramedullary plasma cell (PC) tumors
(ExPCTs). Immunophenotypic aberrant PCs were flow sorted from 20 MGUS, 58 MM, and
13 ExPCT patients. One RAS mutation was identified in 20 MGUS tumors (5%), in
contrast to a much higher prevalence of RAS mutations in all stages of MM (about 
31%). Further, oncogene analyses showed that RAS mutations are not evenly
distributed among different molecular subclasses of MM, with the prevalence being
increased in MM-expressing cyclin D1 (P = .015) and decreased in MM with t(4;14) 
(P = .055). We conclude that RAS mutations often provide a genetic marker if not 
a causal event in the evolution of MGUS to MM. Surprisingly, RAS mutations were
absent in bone marrow tumor cells from all patients with ExPCT, a result
significantly different from intramedullary MM (P = .001). From 3 of 6 patients
with paired intramedullary and extramedullary PCs and identical immunoglobulin
heavy chain gene (IgH) sequences, RAS mutations were identified only in
extramedullary PCs, suggesting a role for RAS mutations in the transition from
intramedullary to extramedullary tumor.

PMID: 15339850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Bioinformatics. 2004 Dec 12;20(18):3455-61. Epub 2004 Jul 22.

A probabilistic measure for alignment-free sequence comparison.

Pham TD(1), Zuegg J.

Author information: 
(1)School of Computing and Information Technology, Griffith University, Nathan
Campus, QLD 4111, Australia. t.pham@griffith.edu.au <t.pham@griffith.edu.au>

MOTIVATION: Alignment-free sequence comparison methods are still in the early
stages of development compared to those of alignment-based sequence analysis. In 
this paper, we introduce a probabilistic measure of similarity between two
biological sequences without alignment. The method is based on the concept of
comparing the similarity/dissimilarity between two constructed Markov models.
RESULTS: The method was tested against six DNA sequences, which are the thrA,
thrB and thrC genes of the threonine operons from Escherichia coli K-12 and from 
Shigella flexneri; and one random sequence having the same base composition as
thrA from E.coli. These results were compared with those obtained from CLUSTAL W 
algorithm (alignment-based) and the chaos game representation (alignment-free).
The method was further tested against a more complex set of 40 DNA sequences and 
compared with other existing sequence similarity measures (alignment-free).
AVAILABILITY: All datasets and computer codes written in MATLAB are available
upon request from the first author.

PMID: 15271780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Acta Haematol. 2004;112(1-2):105-10.

Molecular and clinical follow-up after treatment of multiple myeloma.

Rasmussen T(1), Knudsen LM, Huynh TK, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L 54P4, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Herlev, Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a B cell malignancy characterized by accumulation of
plasma cells (PCs) in the bone marrow. Traditional methods for the detection of
minimal residual disease (MRD) measure the presence of monoclonal immunoglobulin 
protein secreted by the malignant PCs. However, changes in the level of MRD in MM
may span 6 logs, and methods with a high sensitivity and dynamic range are
necessary for quantitating MRD in MM. The two main technologies used in MRD
detection are flow cytometry and patient-specific reverse transcription (RT) PCR.
Patient-specific RT-PCR has high sensitivity and may be beneficial in monitoring 
patients receiving allogeneic transplantation. However, for the MRD evaluation of
autotransplants, where few patients achieve molecular remission, flow cytometry
monitoring seems to be sufficient.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15179010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2004 May 15;234(2):357-70.

Attenuation regulation of amino acid biosynthetic operons in proteobacteria:
comparative genomics analysis.

Vitreschak AG(1), Lyubetskaya EV, Shirshin MA, Gelfand MS, Lyubetsky VA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Information Transmission Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Bolshoi Karetnyi per. 19, Moscow 127994, GSP-4, Russia. vitresch@loria.fr

Candidate attenuators were identified that regulate operons responsible for
biosynthesis of branched amino acids, histidine, threonine, tryptophan, and
phenylalanine in gamma- and alpha-proteobacteria, and in some cases in low-GC
Gram-positive bacteria, Thermotogales and Bacteroidetes/Chlorobi. This allowed us
not only to describe the evolutionary dynamics of regulation by attenuation of
transcription, but also to annotate a number of hypothetical genes. In
particular, orthologs of ygeA of Escherichia coli were assigned the branched
chain amino acid racemase function. Three new families of histidine transporters 
were predicted, orthologs of yuiF and yvsH of Bacillus subtilis, and lysQ of
Lactococcus lactis. In Pasteurellales, the single bifunctional aspartate
kinase/homoserine dehydrogenase gene thrA was predicted to be regulated not only 
by threonine and isoleucine, as in E. coli, but also by methionine. In
alpha-proteobacteria, the single acetolactate synthase operon ilvIH was predicted
to be regulated by branched amino acids-dependent attenuators. Histidine
biosynthetic operons his were predicted to be regulated by histidine-dependent
attenuators in Bacillus cereus and Clostridium difficile, and by histidine
T-boxes in L. lactis and Streptococcus mutans.

Copyright 2004 Federation of European Microbiological Societies

PMID: 15135544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Microbiology. 2004 May;150(Pt 5):1467-74.

Role of homoserine and threonine pathway intermediates as precursors for the
biosynthesis of aminoethoxyvinylglycine in Streptomyces sp. NRRL 5331.

Fernández M(1), Cuadrado Y, Aparicio JF, Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology INBIOTEC, Parque Científico de León, Avda. del
Real, no. 1, 24006 León, Spain.

The genes hom, thrB and thrC, encoding homoserine dehydrogenase, homoserine
kinase (HK) and threonine synthase, respectively, involved in the last steps of
threonine biosynthesis, have been studied in Streptomyces sp. NRRL 5331, the
producer of the ethylene synthetase inhibitor aminoethoxyvinylglycine (AVG), in
order to determine their role in the biosynthesis of AVG. Different null mutants 
were obtained by plasmid-mediated disruption of each of the three genes. thrC
gene disruption had no effect on AVG production, while the disruption of thrB
blocked HK activity and substantially reduced the yield of this metabolite,
probably due to the accumulation of homoserine and/or methionine which have a
negative effect on AVG biosynthesis. Disruption of hom (thrA) completely blocked 
AVG biosynthesis, indicating that homoserine lies at the branching point of the
aspartic-acid-derived biosynthetic route that leads to AVG. The four carbon atoms
of the vinylglycine moiety of AVG derive, therefore, from homoserine.

PMID: 15133108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jul;18(7):1631-42. Epub 2004 Apr 22.

Multiple messenger ribonucleic acid variants regulate cell-specific expression of
human thyroid hormone receptor beta1.

Frankton S(1), Harvey CB, Gleason LM, Fadel A, Williams GR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Endocrinology Group, Division of Medicine and Medical Research
Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London,
London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

Thyroid hormones are essential for development, growth, and metabolism and act
via T3 receptors (TR) alpha and beta. The THRA and THRB genes have discrete
physiological roles but their mRNAs are expressed widely in overlapping patterns.
There is poor correlation between TR mRNA and protein, indicating that expression
may be regulated by posttranscriptional mechanisms. Differences in the relative
levels of expressed TRalpha and beta proteins have been suggested to modulate
tissue T3 responsiveness. We determined the structure of the human THRB gene,
cloned seven alternately spliced 5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) TRbeta1 mRNAs,
and identified five polyadenylation position elements in the 3'-UTR. At least six
TRbeta1 mRNAs between 1.35 and 7.5 kb in length were expressed in discrete
temporospatial patterns in fetal and adult human tissues. The 5'-UTRs contained
up to seven upstream short open reading frames, which did not influence the
structure of the TRbeta1 protein. In transfection studies, 5'-UTRs exerted
cell-specific effects on mRNA expression but consistently reduced protein
expression. Furthermore, each 5'-UTR strongly inhibited translation in vitro.
Thus, developmental and tissue-specific expression of human thyroid hormone
receptor beta1 5'-UTR mRNAs may regulate T3-responsiveness in target tissues by
modulating TRbeta protein translation and thereby controlling the ratio of
expressed TRalpha and -beta proteins.

PMID: 15105435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Leuk Lymphoma. 2003 Oct;44(10):1761-6.

C-MAF oncogene dysregulation in multiple myeloma: frequency and biological
relevance.

Rasmussen T(1), Knudsen LM, Dahl IM, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology L 54P4, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

To investigate the frequency and possible biological consequences of c-maf
dysregulation, we designed c-maf and IL-4 real-time RT-PCR assays for
determination of c-maf and IL-4 mRNA levels. Using the c-maf real-time RT-PCR
assay, we tested a panel of 14 B-cell lines, 135 diagnostic bone marrow (BM)
samples from patients with multiple myeloma and 10 BM samples from normal donors.
In B cell lines and flowsorted CD38++/CD19-/CD56++ myeloma plasma cells (N = 14) 
the c-maf/GAPDH and IL-4/GAPDH ratios were determined simultaneously using real
time RT-PCR. All B cell lines used in the study were characterized by flow
cytometry and tested for the presence of Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV). B-cell lines, 
that were PCR negative for EBV and had a phenotype typical for primary myeloma
cells, expressed medium to high levels of c-maf mRNA. However, all EBV PCR
positive cell lines, showed a more immature phenotype, lacked expression of
aberrant surface markers and contained very low levels of c-maf mRNA. In 4.4%
(6/135) of MM patients tested, a c-maf mRNA level comparable to the cell line
RPMI 8226 containing at (16:22), translocation was found. In addition, all c-maf 
positive myeloma cell lines and CD38++/CD19-/CD56++ myeloma plasma cells tested
were IL-4 negative. In conclusion, high levels of c-maf mRNA were observed in
"true MM cell lines" and 4.4% of MM patients. Further, c-maf dysregulation in
myeloma plasma cells did not cause induction of IL-4 transcription.

PMID: 14692531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Br J Haematol. 2003 Oct;123(2):253-62.

Occurrence of dysregulated oncogenes in primary plasma cells representing
consecutive stages of myeloma pathogenesis: indications for different disease
entities.

Rasmussen T(1), Theilgaard-Mönch K, Hudlebusch HR, Lodahl M, Johnsen HE, Dahl IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

This study investigated the expression pattern in primary plasma cells (PCs) of
putative oncogenes suggested to be involved in multiple myeloma (MM) development.
cDNA archives were generated by global reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction from CD38++/CD19-/CD56-/++ aberrant PCs of a prospective cohort of 96
subjects, including healthy individuals, patients with monoclonal gammopathies of
undetermined significance (MGUS), MM and MM with extramedullary manifestations
(ExMM). The cDNA archives were analysed quantitatively for expression of the
cyclin D1, fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3), C-MYC, C-MAF and cyclin
D3 oncogenes. In addition, all patients were screened for IGH-MMSET hybrid
transcripts. None of the analysed oncogenes was randomly distributed. C-MYC and
cyclin D3 expression increased at the extramedullary transformation stage.
Furthermore, C-MYC and cyclin D3 expression in CD56+ MM was similar to MGUS,
whereas CD56- MM was similar to ExMM. FGFR3/IGH-MMSET was only observed among
CD56+ MM patients, whereas an increased frequency of C-MAF dysregulation was seen
among CD56- MM. High cyclin D1 expression levels were identified at similar
frequencies at all stages, whereas the frequency of patients with low cyclin D1
levels increased during MM development. These data support the stepwise
transformation model accumulating genetic alterations and proliferative capacity 
during MM initiation and development resulting in different clinical entities.

PMID: 14531906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Bacteriol. 2003 Sep;185(18):5442-51.

Global analyses of transcriptomes and proteomes of a parent strain and an
L-threonine-overproducing mutant strain.

Lee JH(1), Lee DE, Lee BU, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, 373-1, Kusung-dong, Yusung-gu, Taejon, 305-701, Korea.

We compared the transcriptome, proteome, and nucleotide sequences between the
parent strain Escherichia coli W3110 and the L-threonine-overproducing mutant E. 
coli TF5015. DNA macroarrays were used to measure mRNA levels for all of the
genes of E. coli, and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis was used to compare
protein levels. It was observed that only 54 of 4,290 genes (1.3%) exhibited
differential expression profiles. Typically, genes such as aceA, aceB, icdA,
gltA, glnA, leu operon, proA, thrA, thrC, and yigJ, which are involved in the
glyoxylate shunt, the tricarboxylic acid cycle, and amino acid biosynthesis
(L-glutamine, L-leucine, proline, and L-threonine), were significantly
upregulated, whereas the genes dadAX, hdeA, hdeB, ompF, oppA, oppB, oppF, yfiD,
and many ribosomal protein genes were downregulated in TF5015 compared to W3110. 
The differential expression such as upregulation of thr operon and expression of 
yigJ would result in an accumulation of L-threonine in TF5015. Furthermore, two
significant mutations, thrA345 and ilvA97, which are essential for overproduction
of L-threonine, were identified in TF5015 by the sequence analysis. In
particular, expression of the mutated thrABC (pATF92) in W3110 resulted in a
significant incremental effect on L-threonine production. Upregulation of aceBA
and downregulation of b1795, hdeAB, oppA, and yfiD seem to be linked to a low
accumulation of acetate in TF5015. Such comprehensive analyses provide
information regarding the regulatory mechanism of L-threonine production and the 
physiological consequences in the mutant stain.

PMCID: PMC193774
PMID: 12949096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. EMBO Rep. 2003 Jun;4(6):581-7.

Effects of ligand and thyroid hormone receptor isoforms on hepatic gene
expression profiles of thyroid hormone receptor knockout mice.

Yen PM(1), Feng X, Flamant F, Chen Y, Walker RL, Weiss RE, Chassande O, Samarut
J, Refetoff S, Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Regulation and Neuroendocrinology Section, Clinical Endocrinology
Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases/NIH,
Room 8D12, Building 10, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. pauly@intra.niddk.nih.gov

Little is known about the overall patterns of thyroid hormone (Th)-mediated gene 
regulation by the main Th receptor (Tr) isoforms, Tr-alpha and Tr-beta, in vivo. 
We used 48 complementary DNA microarrays to examine hepatic gene expression
profiles of wild-type and Thra and Thrb knockout mice under different Th
conditions: no treatment, treatment with 3,3',5-triiodothyronine (T(3)),
Th-deprivation using propylthiouracil (PTU), and treatment with a combination of 
PTU and T(3). Hierarchical clustering analyses showed that positively regulated
genes fit into three main expression patterns. In addition, only a subpopulation 
of target genes repressed basal transcription in the absence of ligand.
Interestingly, Thra and Thrb knockout mice showed similar gene expression
patterns to wild-type mice, suggesting that these isoforms co-regulate most
hepatic target genes. Differences in the gene expression patterns of Thra/Thrb
double-knockout mice and Th-deprived wild-type mice show that absence of receptor
and of hormone can have different effects. This large-scale study of hormonal
regulation reveals the functions of Th and of Tr isoforms in the regulation of
gene expression patterns.

PMCID: PMC1319202
PMID: 12776178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Lett. 2003 Mar 31;192(2):121-32.

Thyroid hormone receptors/THR genes in human cancer.

González-Sancho JM(1), García V, Bonilla F, Muñoz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cornell University Medical
College, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Thyroid hormone (triiodothyronine, T3) is a pleiotropic regulator of growth,
differentiation and tissue homeostasis in higher organisms that acts through the 
control of target gene expression. Most, if not all, major T3 actions are
mediated by specific high affinity nuclear receptors (TR) which are encoded by
two genes, THRA and THRB. Several TRalpha and TRbeta receptor isoforms are
expressed. Abundant and contradictory literature exists on the relationship
between circulating thyroid hormone levels, thyroid diseases and human cancer. In
1986, a connection between TR and cancer became evident when the chicken TRalpha1
was characterized as the c-erbA proto-oncogene, the cellular counterpart of the
retroviral v-erbA oncogene. V-erbA causes erythroleukemias and sarcomas in birds,
and hepatocellular carcinomas in transgenic mice. In recent years, many studies
have analyzed the presence of quantitative (abnormal levels) or qualitative
(mutations) alterations in the expression of THR genes in different types of
human neoplasias. While their role in tumor generation or progression is
currently unclear, both gross chromosomal and minor mutations (deletions,
aberrant splicing, point mutations) and changes in the level of expression of
THRA and THRB genes have been found. Together with other in vitro data indicating
connections between TR and p53, Rb, cyclin D and other cell cycle regulators and 
oncogenes, these results suggest that THRA and THRB may be involved in human
cancer.

PMID: 12668276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Leuk Lymphoma. 2002 May;43(5):1075-7.

The CD19 compartment in myeloma includes a population of clonal cells persistent 
after high-dose treatment.

Rasmussen T(1), Jensen L, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

Peripheral blood-localized clonal cells in patients with multiple myeloma (MM)
have been reported to be insensitive to chemotherapy and it has been suggested
that these cells may include the proliferative compartment in myeloma. In this
study, circulating clonal CD19+ cells levels were determined in 10 patients with 
MM by performing patient-specific RT-PCR on single flow-sorted CD19+ cells. A
variable proportion of CD+ cells being clonal were identified (0.101-6.130%, mean
1.019%). In 10/10 MM patients clonal CD19+ cells were found after high-dose
treatment and peripheral blood stem cell transplantation. In conclusion, CD19+
clonal cells include a population of cells persistent after high dose
chemotherapy that may be responsible for relapse.

PMID: 12148889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Anim Genet. 2002 Jun;33(3):240-2.

Linkage mapping of microsatellites associated with the glycosylation dependent
cell adhesion molecule (GLYCAM1) and thyroid hormone receptor alpha chain (THRA) 
genes to ovine chromosomes 3 and 11.

Maddox JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science, Centre for Animal Biotechnology, The
University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia.
jillm@rubens.its.unimelb.edu.au

PMID: 12030938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Br J Haematol. 2002 Jun;117(3):626-8.

FGFR3 dysregulation in multiple myeloma: frequency and prognostic relevance.

Rasmussen T(1), Hudlebusch HR, Knudsen LM, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology L 54P4, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
DK-2730 Herlev, Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 2003 Jan;120(1):170-1.

The t(4:14) translocation affects two potential oncogenes, FGFR3 and MMSET, in
multiple myeloma (MM). We investigated the frequency of FGFR3 dysregulation and
its prognostic value in MM. FGFR3 mRNA levels were determined in 110 diagnostic
bone marrow (BM) samples from MM patients. In addition, selected BM samples were 
screened for elevated MMSET mRNA levels. 14.5% (16/110) of MM BM samples showed
dysregulated FGFR3 expression. Follow-up of 76 MM patients showed no significant 
difference between FGFR3 dysfunction and survival (P = 0.3) or correlation with
known prognostic factors. Further, no linear relation was observed between FGFR3 
and MMSET levels.

PMID: 12028033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Leuk Lymphoma. 2001 Nov-Dec;42(6):1359-66.

The presence of circulating clonal CD19+ cells in multiple myeloma.

Rasmussen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a B-cell malignancy characterized by the expansion of
mature plasma cells (PC) localized in the bone marrow (BM). Several studies have 
identified circulating clonotypic CD19+ cells at a differentiation stage
preceding the PC. The level of circulating clonotypic CD19+ cells is highly
variable but generally low. Circulating clonotypic cells respond well to
induction therapy, although a small subset within the CD19 compartment is
resistant even to high-dose chemotherapy. The clonal CD19+ cells represent an
ongoing differentiating population ranging from memory B-cells to plasmablasts.
However, a clonal relationship gives no proof of malignant potential, and whether
or not clonotypic precursor cells are involved in the disease process is a
subject of intense debate. Translocations involving the immunoglobulin locus
(14q32) are an early non-transforming event common to both monoclonal gammopathy 
of undetermined significance (MGUS) and MM introduced at the memory B-cell level.
At the plasmablast stage, a phenotypic transformation occurs with downregulation 
of CD19 and upregulation of myeloma specific markers such as CD56, CD117 and
CD28. Translocations involving the isotype-switch machinery and the introduction 
of tumor-specific markers at the plasmablast stage suggest that the clonal CD19+ 
memory B-cells and CD19+ plasmablasts are non-malignant, but immortalized
relatives that gave rise to myeloma. A final proof of the malignant potential of 
CD19+ clonotypic cells might await the identification of the molecular events
causing the transformation in myeloma.

PMID: 11911420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Eur J Haematol. 2001 Nov-Dec;67(5-6):296-301.

Frequency and prognostic relevance of cyclin D1 dysregulation in multiple
myeloma.

Rasmussen T(1), Knudsen LM, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

OBJECTIVE: Cyclin D1 dysregulation has been found with varying frequencies in
multiple myeloma (MM) and has been suggested to be associated with a poor
prognosis. The aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of cyclin D1
dysregulation in patients being treated for MM and to test whether cyclin D1
dysregulation is a prognostic factor for MM patients.
METHODS: To achieve the above aims we designed a highly sensitive and
reproducible real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
assay for quantitation of cyclin D1 mRNA. Using this assay, 110 diagnostic bone
marrow (BM) samples from patients with MM were screened for cyclin D1
dysfunction.
RESULTS: The real-time assay was able to detect the presence of 0.01% cyclin D1
positive cells allowing a safe detection in MM BM samples. In 42% (46/110) of MM 
BM samples a greater-than-or-equals 3-fold increase in cyclin D1 mRNA was
observed compared to the cyclin D1 level in normal BM. In the remaining group of 
MM patients the cyclin D1 mRNA levels were comparable to normal donors. Follow-up
of 76 MM patients showed no significant (P = 0.35) difference in survival between
cyclin D1 positive and negative MM patients. In addition, cyclin D1 dysregulation
did not correlate with known prognostic factors.
CONCLUSION: The developed real-time RT-PCR assay for detection of cyclin D1 mRNA 
levels offers a fast and safe screening for cyclin D1 dysfunction. When a large
cohort of MM patients was screened, the cyclin D1 gene was found to be frequently
dysregulated, but there was no significant correlation to survival or known
prognostic parameters.

PMID: 11872077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Neurosci. 2001 Dec 15;21(24):9792-800.

Retardation of cochlear maturation and impaired hair cell function caused by
deletion of all known thyroid hormone receptors.

Rusch A(1), Ng L, Goodyear R, Oliver D, Lisoukov I, Vennstrom B, Richardson G,
Kelley MW, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Physiologisches Institut and Sektion Sensorische Biophysik, Hals-Nasen-Ohren
Klinik, Röntgenweg 11, Universität Tübingen, D-72076 Tübingen, Germany.

The deafness caused by early onset hypothyroidism indicates that thyroid hormone 
is essential for the development of hearing. We investigated the underlying roles
of the TRalpha1 and TRbeta thyroid hormone receptors in the auditory system using
receptor-deficient mice. TRalpha1 and TRbeta, which act as hormone-activated
transcription factors, are encoded by the Thra and Thrb genes, respectively, and 
both are expressed in the developing cochlea. TRbeta is required for hearing
because TRbeta-deficient (Thrb(tm1/tm1)) mice have a defective auditory-evoked
brainstem response and retarded expression of a potassium current (I(K,f)) in the
cochlear inner hair cells. Here, we show that although TRalpha1 is individually
dispensable, TRalpha1 and TRbeta synergistically control an extended array of
functions in postnatal cochlear development. Compared with Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice,
the deletion of all TRs in Thra(tm1/tm1)Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice produces exacerbated
and novel phenotypes, including delayed differentiation of the sensory
epithelium, malformation of the tectorial membrane, impairment of
electromechanical transduction in outer hair cells, and a low endocochlear
potential. The induction of I(K,f) in inner hair cells was not markedly more
retarded than in Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice, suggesting that this feature of hair cell
maturation is primarily TRbeta-dependent. These results indicate that distinct
pathways mediated by TRbeta alone or by TRbeta and TRalpha1 together facilitate
control over an extended range of functions during the maturation of the cochlea.

PMID: 11739587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Nov 1;10(23):2701-8.

Suppression of the deafness and thyroid dysfunction in Thrb-null mice by an
independent mutation in the Thra thyroid hormone receptor alpha gene.

Ng L(1), Rüsch A, Amma LL, Nordström K, Erway LC, Vennström B, Forrest D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Box 1498, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425
Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Deletion of thyroid hormone receptor beta (TR beta), a ligand-dependent
transcription factor encoded by the Thrb gene, causes deafness and thyroid
hyperactivity in Thrb-null (Thrb(tm1/tm1)) mice and in a recessive form of the
human syndrome of resistance to thyroid hormone. Here, we have determined that a 
targeted mutation (Thra(tm2)) in the related Thra gene, encoding thyroid hormone 
receptor alpha suppresses these phenotypes in mice. Thra encodes a TR alpha 1
receptor which is non-essential for hearing and a TR alpha 2 splice variant of
unknown function that neither binds thyroid hormone nor transactivates. The
Thra(tm2) mutation deletes TR alpha 2 and concomitantly causes overexpression of 
TR alpha 1 as a consequence of the exon structure of the gene. Thra(tm2/tm2) mice
have normal auditory thresholds indicating that TR alpha 2 is dispensable for
hearing, and have only marginally reduced thyroid activity. However, a potent
function for the Thra(tm2) allele is revealed upon its introduction into
Thrb(tm1/tm1) mice, where it suppresses the auditory and thyroid phenotypes
caused by loss of TR beta. These findings reveal a novel modifying function for a
Thra allele and suggest that increased expression of TR alpha 1 may substitute
for the absence of TR beta. The TR isotypes generated by the distinct Thrb and
Thra genes represent a small family of receptors that have diverged to mediate
different physiological roles; however, the ability of changes in Thra expression
to compensate for loss of Thrb indicates that many functions of these genes
remain closely related.

PMID: 11726557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Ugeskr Laeger. 2001 Sep 3;163(36):4851-2.

[Gene expression analysis of myelomatosis].

[Article in Danish]

Rasmussen T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Amtssygehuset i Herlev, haematologisk afdeling L. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

PMID: 11571858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genetika. 2001 Mar;37(3):358-64.

[Use of PCR markers for mapping swine chromosome 12].

[Article in Russian]

Larkin DM(1), Kuznetsov SB, Astakhova NM, Zhdanova NS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 
630090 Russia. lark@bionet.nsc.ru

Using PCR analysis of pig-mink and pig-Chinese hamster hybrid cell lines and
heterologous and homologous primers of various types, chromosomal and
subchromosomal mapping of genes TOP2A, THRA, BRCA1, GAS, HLR1, MYL4, LIS1, MCP1, 
ENO3, CRYB1, P4HB, STAT5B, and H3F3B to pig chromosome 12 was carried out. The
efficiency of using different types of heterologous primers for pig chromosome
mapping was compared.

PMID: 11357369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Bioinformatics. 2001 May;17(5):429-37.

Analysis of genomic sequences by Chaos Game Representation.

Almeida JS(1), Carriço JA, Maretzek A, Noble PA, Fletcher M.

Author information: 
(1)ITQB/Universidade Nova Lisboa, PO Box 127, 2780 Oeiras, Portugal.
almeidaj@musc.edu

MOTIVATION: Chaos Game Representation (CGR) is an iterative mapping technique
that processes sequences of units, such as nucleotides in a DNA sequence or amino
acids in a protein, in order to find the coordinates for their position in a
continuous space. This distribution of positions has two properties: it is
unique, and the source sequence can be recovered from the coordinates such that
distance between positions measures similarity between the corresponding
sequences. The possibility of using the latter property to identify succession
schemes have been entirely overlooked in previous studies which raises the
possibility that CGR may be upgraded from a mere representation technique to a
sequence modeling tool.
RESULTS: The distribution of positions in the CGR plane were shown to be a
generalization of Markov chain probability tables that accommodates non-integer
orders. Therefore, Markov models are particular cases of CGR models rather than
the reverse, as currently accepted. In addition, the CGR generalization has both 
practical (computational efficiency) and fundamental (scale independence)
advantages. These results are illustrated by using Escherichia coli K-12 as a
test data-set, in particular, the genes thrA, thrB and thrC of the threonine
operon.

PMID: 11331237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Acta Oncol. 2000;39(7):765-70.

The clonal hierachy in multiple myeloma.

Rasmussen T(1), Jensen L, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

In this report we evaluated the number and phenotype of blood circulating B-cell 
subsets at different stages of differentiation in 26 patients with newly
diagnosed multiple myeloma (MM). In all patients, plasma cells and/or plasma
blasts could be identified by flow cytometry with a mean frequency of 1.20% and
0.07%, respectively. In 76.9% of the patients these cells showed aberrant
expression mainly of CD56, CD28 and CD117, none of these markers were found on
the earlier B-lymphocytes. Clonal B-cells preceding the plasma blast stage were
identified by patient specific IgH RT-PCR on sorted B-cell subsets. The clonal
cells included the less differentiated CD38+ CD19+ and CD38-/CD19+ subsets.
illustrating that the clonal cells are part of an ongoing differentiation
process. Further, the presence of CD38-/CD19+ cells with somatically mutated
Cgamma transcripts identical to the tumor-specific Calpha transcript, shows that 
the clonal hierarchy in myeloma may include memory B-cells.

PMID: 11145430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Blood. 2000 Dec 15;96(13):4357-9.

Frequency and kinetics of polyclonal and clonal B cells in the peripheral blood
of patients being treated for multiple myeloma.

Rasmussen T(1), Jensen L, Honoré L, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

Comment in
    Blood. 2001 May 1;97(9):2913-4.

Recent studies concerning the numbers of circulating clonal B cells in patients
with multiple myeloma (MM) have reported conflicting data regarding the exact
level and phenotype of clonal B cells and their response to treatment. In this
report we document that the peripheral blood tumor burden at presentation was
reduced by induction therapy to a low level, regardless of the initial tumor
burden. However, the residual clonal compartment persisted before and after
transplant. The level of clonal cells showed no correlation with CD19(+) cell
levels. In a single patient with MM, high numbers of phenotypically aberrant
clonal cells with altered CD19 expression were identified. (Blood.
2000;96:4357-4359)

PMID: 11110713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Exp Hematol. 2000 Sep;28(9):1039-45.

Quantitation of minimal residual disease in multiple myeloma using an
allele-specific real-time PCR assay.

Rasmussen T(1), Poulsen TS, Honoré L, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology L, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

OBJECTIVE: To develop a real-time PCR method, based on the 5'nuclease TaqMan
technology, for quantitation of clonal cells in multiple myeloma (MM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The real-time quantitative PCR method incorporates both an
allele-specific oligonucleotides (ASO) primer and an ASO dual-labeled fluorogenic
probe (ASO TaqMan probe). The ASO primer and probe corresponded to the
complementary determining region 3 (CDR3) of the rearranged immunoglobulin heavy 
chain gene (IgH). With the use of a sequence detector, PCR product accumulation
was measured through the ASO TaqMan probe. The real-time PCR method was compared 
with flow cytometric quantitation of myeloma plasma cells.
RESULTS: The application of the real-time quantitative ASO IgH PCR method is
illustrated by a sequential analysis of minimal residual disease (MRD) in bone
marrow (BM) samples from myeloma patients undergoing peripheral blood stem cell
(PBSC) transplantation. The real-time PCR method was able to quantitate residual 
malignant cells in BM samples from patients who were considered to be in complete
remission. Further, it was illustrated that a potential problem in determining
tumor cell content in myeloma BM samples is the heterogeneous infiltration of the
marrow.
CONCLUSION: The application of the real-time PCR method provides a sensitive,
highly specific, and reproducible quantitation of myeloma cells.

PMID: 11008016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Med Oncol. 2000 Aug;17(3):189-94.

CD68+/CD83+/CD1a- dendritic cell subsets from patients with multiple myeloma are 
not infected with human herpesvirus 8.

Rasmussen T(1), Dahl IM, Jensen L, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology L, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Herlev, Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

Recently, a subset of dendritic cells with the phenotype CD68+/CD83+/CD1a-,
present in patients with multiple myeloma (MM), was reported to be infected with 
human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8). Therefore we wished to clarify whether HHV-8
infection might be related to the pathogenesis of MM. In an attempt to identify
HHV-8 infected cells in patients with MM, long-term bone marrow cultures from 8
MM patients and dendritic cell cultures from 11 MM patients were established. In 
addition, fresh bone marrow aspirates from 10 MM and 10 patients with monoclonal 
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) were included in the study. All
samples were analysed by a sensitive semi-nested PCR assay and were found to be
consistently PCR negative. Phenotyping of day 7 dendritic cell cultures
demonstrated the presence of a sufficient number of CD68+/CD1a- and CD83+/CD1a-
cells. However, to exclude the presence of infrequent HHV-8 infected cells, the
CD68+/CD1a- subset from 3 dendritic cell cultures was sorted in numbers of 105
for each PCR test, and again a negative PCR result was observed. This study
documents that the CD68+/CD83+/CD1a- dendritic cells in patients with MM are not 
generally infected with HHV-8 and, as a consequence, it is unlikely that HHV-8
plays a role in the pathogenesis of MM.

PMID: 10962529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Br J Haematol. 1999 Dec;107(4):818-24.

Circulating clonal cells in multiple myeloma do not express CD34 mRNA, as
measured by single-cell and real-time RT-PCR assays.

Rasmussen T(1), Jensen L, Honoré L, Andersen H, Johnsen HE.

Author information: 
(1)The Stem Cell Laboratory, Department of Haematology L, Herlev Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark. thra@herlevhosp.kbhamt.dk

The peripheral blood (PB) mononuclear cells in patients with multiple myeloma
(MM) have been reported to include CD34-expressing cells that are clonally
related to the myeloma cells. To determine whether there were elevated levels of 
CD34 mRNA or whether CD34+ cells in the PB include myeloma-related cells, we
developed a quantitative real-time and a competitive CD34 RT-PCR assay working on
single flow-sorted cells. Myeloma-specific cells were detected with
allele-specific oligonucleotides (ASO) IgH PCR. PBSC products and mononuclear
cell fractions in blood from normal donors, untreated and treated myeloma
patients were analysed. When measured by flow cytometry, the numbers of
CD34+/CD19+ cells were consistently < 0.1% of the mononuclear cells. In addition,
no significant difference was found in the levels of CD34 mRNA between normal
subjects and untreated MM patients (P = 0.935). In the treated group of MM
patients the CD34 mRNA levels were significantly reduced (P = 0.052) because of
the stem cell toxicity of melphalan. Further, no cells clonally related to the MM
clone were found within the CD34 compartment, defined by a sort-gate that
included all cells expressing CD34 mRNA, as no cells outside the used CD34
sort-gate had a detectable level of CD34 mRNA. We conclude that in myeloma
patients, the myeloma clone is not found within the CD34 compartment.

PMID: 10606890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Thyroid. 1999 Oct;9(10):979-88.

Immunoglobulins of untreated Graves' patients with or without thyrotropin
receptor antibody (determined by porcine thyrocytes) universally elicit potent
thyroid hormone-releasing activity in cultured human thyroid follicles.

Sato K(1), Yamazaki K, Yamada E, Kanaji Y, Miura M, Obara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Endocrinology, Tokyo Women's
Medical University, Japan. satokan@ibm.net

Thyrotropin receptor antibody (TRAb), comprising thyrotropin binding inhibitor
immunoglobulin (TBII) and thyroid-stimulating antibody (TSAb), both of which are 
conventionally determined using porcine thyrocytes in Japan, is not always
positive in patients with untreated Graves' disease. To elucidate whether
immunoglobulin G (IgG) obtained from TBII/TSAb-positive (+) or negative (-)
Graves' disease patients are responsible for hyperthyroidism, we investigated the
thyroid hormone-releasing activity (THRA) of these IgGs in human thyroid
follicles in suspension culture, in which bovine thyrotropin (bTSH) is detectable
even at 0.1 microU/mL. Human thyroid follicles, obtained from Graves' disease
patients by subtotal thyroidectomy, were cultured in serum-free F-12/RPMI-1640
medium supplemented with bTSH or purified Graves' IgGs. After preculturing for 3 
days, 125I was added, and after an additional 3 days of culture, 1251
incorporated into the thyroid follicles and organic 125I released into the
culture medium (mainly 1251 -T4 + 125I-T3) were counted. Seventy TBII(+)/TSAb( + 
)-, 3 TBII( + )/TSAb( - )-, and 3 TBII( - )/TSAb( + )- patients with untreated
Graves' disease were all positive for THRA, which became undetectable in
spontaneous remission obtained after several years of medical treatment. The THRA
was equivalent to 0.8-230 microU/mL bTSH. Furthermore, 2 TBII(-)/TSAb(-) patients
were significantly positive for THRA. This TBII(-)/TSAb(-)IgG stimulated human
thyrocytes to produce cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), and this was
partially inhibited by antihuman IgG antibody. The THRA induced by
TBII(+)/TSAb(+) IgGs as well as TBII(-)/TSAb(-) IgG was inhibited by
blocking-type TRAb obtained from TBII(+) patients with myxedema. There was a
significant correlation between THRA and TSAb. These in vitro findings suggest
that all IgGs obtained from untreated Graves' patients (n = 78) elicit potent
THRA in human thyroid follicles in suspension culture. Because the
TBII(-)/TSAb(-) IgGs can stimulate cAMP production in human but not in porcine
thyrocytes, they probably recognize epitope(s) of TSH-binding sites specific to
the human thyrotropin (hTSH) receptor. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that the
thyroid gland of hyperthyroid Graves' patients is stimulated by IgG(s) equivalent
to at least 0.8 microU/mL bTSH (about 5 microU/mL hTSH) in vitro.

PMID: 10560951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1999 Apr 1;173(1):211-5.

Mutational analysis of the feedback sites of lysine-sensitive aspartokinase of
Escherichia coli.

Kikuchi Y(1), Kojima H, Tanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Laboratories, Ajinomoto Co., Inc., Kawasaki, Japan.
clx_kikuti@te10.ajinomoto.co.jp

In Escherichia coli, thrA, metLM, and lysC encode aspartokinase isozymes that
show feedback inhibition by threonine, methionine, and lysine, respectively. In
vitro chemical mutagenesis of the cloned lysC gene was used to identify residues 
and regions of the polypeptide essential for feedback inhibition by lysine. The
isolated lysine-insensitive mutants were demonstrated to have missense mutations 
in amino acid residues 323-352, and at position 250 of aspartokinase III.

PMID: 10220897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Genomics. 1999 Apr 15;57(2):289-92.

Linkage of the nuclear hormone receptor genes NR1D2, THRB, and RARB: evidence for
an ancient, large-scale duplication.

Koh YS(1), Moore DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The THRA gene encoding thyroid hormone receptor alpha shares an unusual partial
overlap with the NR1D1 gene encoding the orphan receptor Rev-ErbAalpha. Though
THRA and NR1D1 have close relatives in THRB and NR1D2, which encode TRbeta and
Rev-ErbAbeta, these beta isoforms do not share an analogous overlap. Here we
report that the human THRB and NR1D2 genes are separated by approximately 1 Mb on
chromosome 3 and that these two genes are also linked to the RARB gene, which
encodes retinoic acid receptor beta. Since previous results indicate that the
THRA/NR1D1 locus is also linked to the RARA gene, these results suggest that the 
two receptor gene clusters were generated by a single large-scale duplication.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Plant Mol Biol. 1998 Jan;36(2):307-14.

The sequence and structure of the 3'-untranslated regions of chloroplast
transcripts are important determinants of mRNA accumulation and stability.

Rott R(1), Liveanu V, Drager RG, Stern DB, Schuster G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.

A general characteristic of the 3'-untranslated regions (3' UTRs) of plastid
mRNAs is an inverted repeat (IR) sequence that can fold into a stem-loop
structure. These stem-loops are RNA 3'-end processing signals and determinants of
mRNA stability, not transcription terminators. Incubation of synthetic RNAs
corresponding to the 3' UTRs of Chlamydomonas chloroplast genes atpB and petD
with a chloroplast protein extract resulted in the accumulation of stable
processing products. Synthetic RNAs of the petA 3' UTR and the antisense strand
of atpB 3' UTR were degraded in the extract. To examine 3' UTR function in vivo, 
the atpB 3' UTR was replaced with the 3' UTR sequences of the Chlamydomonas
chloroplast genes petD, petD plus trnR plus trnR, rbcL, petA and E. coli thrA by 
biolistic transformation of Chlamydomonas chloroplasts. Each 3' UTR was inserted 
in both the sense and antisense orientations. The accumulation of both total atpB
mRNA and ATPase beta-subunit protein in all transformants was increased compared 
to a strain in which the atpB 3' UTR had been deleted. However, the level of
discrete atpB transcripts in transformants containing the antisense 3' UTR
sequences was reduced to approximately one-half that of transformants containing 
the 3' UTRs in the sense orientation. These results imply that both the
nucleotide sequences and the stem-loop structures of the 3' UTRs are important
for transcript 3'-end processing, and for accumulation of the mature mRNAs.

PMID: 9484442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Neurosci. 1998 Jan 1;18(1):138-46.

Natural variation in neuron number in mice is linked to a major quantitative
trait locus on Chr 11.

Williams RW(1), Strom RC, Goldowitz D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of
Tennessee, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

Common genetic polymorphisms-as opposed to rare mutations-generate almost all
heritable differences in the size and structure of the CNS. Surprisingly, these
normal variants have not previously been mapped or cloned in any vertebrate
species. In a recent paper (), we suggested that much of the variation in retinal
ganglion cell number in mice, and the striking bimodality of strain averages, are
caused by one or two quantitative trait loci (QTLs). To test this idea, and to
map genes linked to this variable and highly heritable quantitative trait, we
have counted ganglion cells in 38 recombinant inbred strains (BXD and BXH)
derived from parental strains that have high and low cell numbers. A genome-wide 
search using simple and composite interval-mapping techniques revealed a major
QTL on chromosome (Chr) 11 in a 3 cM interval between Hoxb and Krt1 (LOD = 6.8;
genome-wide p = 0.001) and possible subsidiary QTLs on Chr 2 and Chr 8. The Chr
11 locus, neuron number control 1 (Nnc1), accounts for one third of the genetic
variance among BXH strains and more than half of that among BXD strains, but Nnc1
has no known effects on brain weight, eye weight, or total retinal cell number.
Three strong candidate genes have been mapped previously to the same region as
Nnc1. These genes-Rara, Thra, and Erbb2- encode receptors for retinoic acid,
thyroxine, and neuregulin, respectively. Each receptor is expressed in the retina
during development, and their ligands affect the proliferation or survival of
retinal cells.

PMID: 9412494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Plant Mol Biol. 1997 May;34(2):287-93.

Cloning and expression of an Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA encoding a monofunctional 
aspartate kinase homologous to the lysine-sensitive enzyme of Escherichia coli.

Tang G(1), Zhu-Shimoni JX, Amir R, Zchori IB, Galili G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.

As in many bacterial species, the first enzymatic reaction of the
aspartate-family pathway in plants is mediated by several isozymes of aspartate
kinase (AK) that are subject to feedback inhibition by the end-product amino
acids lysine or threonine. So far, only cDNAs and genes encoding
threonine-sensitive AKs have been cloned from plants. These were all shown to
encode polypeptides containing two linked activities, namely AK and homoserine
dehydrogenase (HSD), similar to the Escherichia coli thrA gene encoding a
threonine-sensitive bifunctional AK/HSD isozyme. In the present report, we
describe the cloning of a new Arabidopsis thaliana cDNA that is relatively highly
homologous to the E. coli lysC gene encoding the lysine-sensitive AK isozyme.
Moreover, similar to the bacterial lysine-sensitive AK, the polypeptide encoded
by the present cDNA is monofunctional and does not contain and HSD domain. These 
observations imply that our cloned cDNA encodes a lysine-sensitive AK. Southern
blot hybridization detected a single gene highly homologous to the present cDNA, 
plus an additional much less homologous gene. This was confirmed by the
independent cloning of an additional Arabidopsis cDNA encoding a lysine-sensitive
AK (see accompanying paper). Northern blot analysis suggested that the gene
encoding this monofunctional AK cDNA is abundantly expressed in most if not all
tissues of Arabidopsis.

PMID: 9207844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Tumour Biol. 1997;18(3):157-66.

Microsatellite instability and loss of heterozygosity in primary breast tumours.

Sourvinos G(1), Kiaris H, Tsikkinis A, Vassilaros S, Spandidos DA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.

Allelic imbalance or loss of heterozygosity (LOH) studies have been used
extensively to identify regions on chromosomes that may contain putative tumour
suppressor genes. We looked for evidence of microsatellite instability (MI) and
LOH on chromosome 7q, 10q, 11p and 17q using seven polymorphic microsatellite
markers. In 42 paired breast cancer-peripheral blood DNA samples we identified 24
tumours (57%) exhibiting genetic alterations. Twenty-one specimens exhibited LOH 
(50%), while 11 specimens exhibited MI (26%) in at least one microsatellite
marker. The most frequent incidence of LOH was found for the marker THRA1 (8/33, 
24%) indicating that thra I gene becomes a strong candidate tumour suppressor
gene, whereas of MI it was D10S109 (3/26, 12%). These MI and LOH data were
analysed using a range of clinicopathological parameters. Tumours displaying MI
with no evidence of LOH and tumours exhibiting MI and LOH belonging to stage II
or III were found, however none were at stage I. These data suggest that MI may
be an early event in mammary tumorigenesis whereas LOH occurs at a late stage. A 
significant association between the absence of oestrogen receptors (p < 0.01) and
the absence of both oestrogen and progesterone receptors (p < 0.001) at 17q21
were observed, indicating a possible relationship between specific genetic
changes at this region and hormonal deregulation in the progression of breast
cancer.

PMID: 9143412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Nov 25;23(22):4690-7.

Transcription termination at the Escherichia coli thra terminator by spinach
chloroplast RNA polymerase in vitro is influenced by downstream DNA sequences.

Chen LJ(1), Liang YJ, Jeng ST, Orozco EM, Gumport RI, Lin CH, Yang MT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung,
Taiwan, Republic of China.

We have investigated the mechanism of transcription termination in vitro by
spinach chloroplast RNA polymerase using templates encoding variants of the
transcription-termination structure (attenuator) of the regulatory region of the 
threonine (thr) operon of Escherichia coli. Fourteen sequence variants located
within its d(G+C) stem-loop and d(A+T)-rich regions were studied. We found that
the helix integrity in the stem-loop structure is necessary for termination but
that its stability is not directly correlated with termination efficiency. The
sequence of the G+C stem-loop itself also influences termination. Moreover, the
dA template stretch at the 3' end of the terminator plays a major role in
termination efficiency, but base pairing between the A and U tract of the
transcript does not. From the studies using deletion variants and a series of
mutants that alter the sequences immediately downstream from the transcription
termination site, we found that termination of transcription by spinach
chloroplast RNA polymerase was also modulated by downstream DNA sequences in a
sequence-specific manner. The second base immediately following the poly(T) tract
is crucial for determining the termination efficiency by chloroplast RNA
polymerase, but not of the T7 or E.coli enzymes.

PMCID: PMC307445
PMID: 8524662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochem J. 1995 Aug 1;309 ( Pt 3):999-1007.

The biosynthesis of threonine by mammalian cells: expression of a complete
bacterial biosynthetic pathway in an animal cell.

Rees WD(1), Hay SM.

Author information: 
(1)Rowett Research Institute, Bucksburn, Aberdeen, Scotland, U.K.

The coding regions for the Escherichia coli gene for aspartokinase I/homoserine
dehydrogenase I (thrA) and the Corynebacterium glutamicum gene for aspartic
semialdehyde dehydrogenase (asd) have been subcloned into a Simian Virus 40
(SV40)-based mammalian expression vector. Both enzyme activities are expressed in
mouse 3T3 cells after transfer of the corresponding chimaeric gene. The kinetic
parameters are similar to those of the native bacterial enzymes, and
aspartokinase I/homoserine dehydrogenase I retains its allosteric regulation by
threonine. An extract of the cells expressing aspartokinase I/homoserine
dehydrogenase I, mixed with one from cells expressing aspartic semialdehyde
dehydrogenase, produced homoserine when the mixture was incubated with aspartic
acid, ATP and NADPH. The thrA and asd expression cassettes were combined into a
single plasmid which, when transfected into 3T3 cells, enabled them to produce
homoserine from aspartic acid. Homoserine-producing 3T3 cells were transfected
with the plasmid pSVthrB/C (homoserine kinase and threonine synthase) and
selected for growth on homoserine. Cell lines isolated from these cells expressed
the complete bacterial threonine pathway, were independent of threonine for
growth and could be maintained in medium which contained no free threonine. The
threonine in the proteins of these cells became enriched in 15N when the culture 
medium contained [15N]aspartic acid. The production of homoserine and the growth 
of cells was at a maximum when there was more than 2.5 mM aspartate in the
medium. Below this concentration the high Km of aspartokinase limited the flux
through the pathway. In the presence of additional aspartic acid the new pathway 
could sustain a cell cycle time close to that of the same cells cultured in
threonine-containing medium.

PMCID: PMC1135730
PMID: 7639721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Int J Oncol. 1995 Mar;6(3):693-7.

Analyses of linkage to 17q11-q23 in 3 French hereditary nonpolyposis colon-cancer
families.

Bernardgallon D(1), Gosse S, Essioux L, Laurentpuig P, Ralliere C, Cure H, Bay J,
Schraub S, Bonaitipellie C, Sobol H, Bignon Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM,U155,F-75016 PARIS,FRANCE. INST CURIE,F-75005 PARIS,FRANCE. HOP JEAN
MINJOZ,F-25030 BESANCON,FRANCE. INST J PAOLI I CALMETTES,F-13273 MARSEILLE
9,FRANCE. CTR LEON BERARD,UNITE ONCOL GENET,F-69373 LYON,FRANCE. LAB
IMMUNOL,F-63170 CLERMONT FERRAND,FRANCE. CTR JEAN PERRIN,UNITE PREVENT &
DEPISTAGE CANC,ONCOL MOLEC LAB,F-63011 CLERMONT FERRAND,FRANCE.

Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) is an autosomal dominant
disease, accounting for approximately 6% of colorectal cancers. We performed
linkage analyses with the aim of proving or excluding the existence of a
susceptibility locus on 17q. Three HNPCC families (102 collected members, 25
colorectal cancers, 9 other cancers and 6 colorectal adenomas) were studied with 
7 polymorphic DNA markers Mfd15, THRA 1, D17S800, D17S855, Mfd 188, 42D6, 46E6
localized in the 17q11-q23 region. After in vitro enzymatic amplification, the
different alleles were separated by classic vertical poly-acrylamide gel
electrophoresis or analyzed with the automatic sequencing machine 373A (Applied
Biosystems). Results showed that none of the 7 studied markers of the chromosome 
17q were linked to the HNPCC disease.

PMID: 21556591  [PubMed]


153. Plant Mol Biol. 1994 Mar;24(6):835-51.

Molecular analysis of the aspartate kinase-homoserine dehydrogenase gene from
Arabidopsis thaliana.

Ghislain M(1), Frankard V, Vandenbossche D, Matthews BF, Jacobs M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Plant Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium.

The gene encoding Arabidopsis thaliana aspartate kinase (ATP:L-aspartate
4-phosphotransferase, EC 2.7.2.4) was isolated from genomic DNA libraries using
the carrot ak-hsdh gene as the hybridizing probe. Two genomic libraries from
different A. thaliana races were screened independently with the ak probe and the
hsdh probe. Nucleotide sequences of the A. thaliana overlapping clones were
determined and encompassed 2 kb upstream of the coding region and 300 bp
downstream. The corresponding cDNA was isolated from a cDNA library made from
poly(A)(+)-mRNA extracted from cell suspension cultures. Sequence comparison
between the Arabidopsis gene product and an AK-HSDH bifunctional enzyme from
carrot and from the Escherichia coli thrA and metL genes shows 80%, 37.5% and
31.4% amino acid sequence identity, respectively. The A. thaliana ak-hsdh gene is
proposed to be the plant thrA homologue coding for the AK isozyme feedback
inhibited by threonine. The gene is present in A. thaliana in single copy and
functional as evidenced by hybridization analyses. The apoprotein-coding region
is interrupted by 15 introns ranging from 78 to 134 bp. An upstream
chloroplast-targeting sequence with low sequence similarity with the carrot
transit peptide was identified. A signal sequence is proposed starting from a
functional ATG initiation codon to the first exon of the apoprotein. Two
additional introns were identified: one in the 5' non-coding leader sequence and 
the other in the putative chloroplast targeting sequence. 5' sequence analysis
revealed the presence of several possible promoter elements as well as conserved 
regulatory motifs. Among these, an Opaque2 and a yeast GCN4-like recognition
element might be relevant for such a gene coding for an enzyme limiting the
carbon-flux entry to the biosynthesis of several essential amino acids. 3'
sequence analysis showed the occurrence of two polyadenylation signals upstream
of the polyadenylation site. This work is the first report of the molecular
cloning of a plant ak-hsdh genomic sequence. It describes a promoter element that
may bring new insights to the regulation of the biosynthesis of the aspartate
family of amino acids.

PMID: 8204822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Rinsho Byori. 1993 May;41(5):527-32.

[Genetic analysis of hormone resistance].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakurai A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Matsumoto.

Thyroid hormone resistance is a syndrome defined as impaired tissue response to
thyroid hormone which would be excessive under normal circumstances. Although it 
has long been speculated that this defect was caused by an abnormality at the
site of the nuclear receptor for thyroid hormone, isolation of complementary DNA 
encoding thyroid hormone receptors has only recently enabled us to directly
examine this hypothesis. Thyroid hormone receptors are coded on two separate
genes, THRA and THRB. Both genes give rise to multiple receptor subtypes through 
alternative splicing or different usage of promoters. Tight linkage between THRB 
locus and resistant phenotype was demonstrated in one affected family, and
subsequently, more than 30 genetic abnormalities of the THRB gene were isolated. 
No abnormalities have been demonstrated on the THRA gene. Denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis was used to screen abnormalities on the THRB gene of affected
families, and the results also strongly supported the hypothesis that thyroid
hormone resistance is caused by an abnormal THRB gene. Molecular analysis of
thyroid hormone resistance will facilitate understanding of the pathophysiology
of this syndrome and the molecular mechanism of thyroid hormone action.

PMID: 8350516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncogene. 1993 Apr;8(4):975-82.

Characterization of a functional promoter for the human thyroid hormone receptor 
alpha (c-erbA-1) gene.

Laudet V(1), Vanacker JM, Adelmant G, Begue A, Stehelin D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS URA 1160, Institut Pasteur, Lille, France.

The thyroid hormone receptor alpha (THRA or c-erbA-1) gene belongs to a family of
genes that encode nuclear receptors for various hydrophobic ligands such as
steroids, retinoic acid and thyroid hormones. We have previously described the
genomic organization of the human THRA gene, which comprises 10 exons distributed
along 27 kbp of genomic DNA. We describe here a promoter that initiates THRA
transcription. This promoter contains no obvious TATA-like element but is very GC
rich and harbors numerous Sp1 sites. It also contains several sites similar to
previously described cis-acting sequences including hormone-responsive elements
(HREs). When transfected into cultured HeLa cells, it drives the expression of a 
CAT reporter gene. The activity of this human THRA promoter is enhanced by the
synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone but seems unaffected by thyroid hormones.

PMID: 8455948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Bacteriol. 1993 Feb;175(4):959-65.

Role of serine 352 in the allosteric response of Serratia marcescens
aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I analyzed by using site-directed
mutagenesis.

Omori K(1), Komatsubara S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory of Applied Biochemistry, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Osaka, 
Japan.

Aspartokinase I and homoserine dehydrogenase I (AKI-HDI) from Serratia marcescens
Sr41 are encoded by the thrA gene as a single polypeptide chain. Previously, a
single amino acid substitution of Ser-352 with Phe was shown to produce an
AKI-HDI enzyme that is not subject to threonine-mediated feedback inhibition. To 
determine the role of Ser-352 in the allosteric response, the thrA gene was
modified by using site-directed mutagenesis so that Ser-352 of the wild-type
AKI-HDI was replaced by Ala, Arg, Asn, Gln, Glu, His, Leu, Met, Pro, Thr, Trp,
Tyr, or Val. The Thr-352 and Pro-352 replacements rendered AKIs sensitive to
threonine. The Tyr-352 and Asn-352 substitutions led to activation, rather than
inhibition, of AKI by threonine. The other replacements conferred threonine
insensitivity on AKI. The threonine sensitivity of HDI was also changed by the
amino acid substitutions at Ser-352. The HDI carried by the Tyr-352 mutant
AKI-HDI was activated by threonine. Single amino acid replacements at Ser-352 by 
Ala, Asn, Gln, His, Phe, Pro, Thr, or Tyr were introduced into truncated AKI-HDIs
containing the AKI and the central regions. The AKI activity of the truncated
AKI-HDI containing the first 468 amino acid residues was sensitive to threonine, 
and introduction of the amino acid replacements did not alter the threonine
sensitivity of the AKI. Another truncated AKI-HDI containing the first 462 amino 
acid residues possessed threonine-resistant AKI, whereas the substitutions of
Ser-352 with Ala and Pro rendered AKI sensitive to threonine. The replacement of 
GIn-351 with Phe activated AK1 of the truncated AKI-HDI in the presence of
L-threonine. These findings suggest that Ser-352 of the central region of AKI-HDI
is possibly a key residue involved with the allosteric regulation of both AKI and
HDI activities.

PMCID: PMC193007
PMID: 8432719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Bacteriol. 1993 Feb;175(3):785-94.

Nucleotide sequence of the Serratia marcescens threonine operon and analysis of
the threonine operon mutations which alter feedback inhibition of both
aspartokinase I and homoserine dehydrogenase I.

Omori K(1), Imai Y, Suzuki S, Komatsubara S.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory of Applied Biochemistry, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Osaka, 
Japan.

The nucleotide sequence of the Serratia marcescens threonine operon (thrA1A2BC)
was determined. Three long open reading frames were identified; these open
reading frames code for aspartokinase I (AKI)-homoserine dehydrogenase I (HDI),
homoserine kinase, and threonine synthase, in that order. The predicted amino
acid sequences of these enzymes were similar to the amino acid sequences of the
corresponding enzymes in Escherichia coli. The AKI-HDI protein is apparently a
tetramer composed of monomer polypeptides that are 819 amino acids long. A
deletion analysis revealed that the central and C-terminal region was responsible
for threonine-resistant HDI activity, a monomeric fragment extending from the N
terminus to residue 306 was responsible for threonine-resistant AKI activity, and
an N-terminal portion containing 468 residues was responsible for
threonine-sensitive AKI activity. The thrA(1)1A(2)1 and thrA(1)5A(2)5 mutations
of threonine-excreting strains HNr21 and TLr156, which result in the loss of
threonine-mediated feedback inhibition of both AKI activity and HDI activity,
cause single amino acid substitutions (Gly to Asp at position 330 and Ser to Phe 
at position 352, respectively) in the central region of the AKI-HDI protein. The 
thrA1+A(2)2 mutation of strain HNr59, which results in a threonine-sensitive AKI 
and a threonine-resistant HDI, also causes a single amino acid substitution (Ala 
to Thr at position 479).

PMCID: PMC196218
PMID: 8423151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Folia Microbiol (Praha). 1993;38(5):355-9.

Production of threonine by Brevibacterium flavum containing threonine
biosynthesis genes from Escherichia coli.

Pátek M(1), Hochmannová J, Nesvera J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague.

Genes of the threonine operon of Escherichia coli were used for the construction 
of a Brevibacterium flavum strain excreting threonine. Using the shuttle vector
pCEM300 and a newly constructed shuttle vector pEC71 (7.1 kb, Kmr/Nmr), various
plasmids carrying E. coli thr genes were prepared. Mutants resistant to the
threonine analog 2-amino-3-hydroxyvaleric acid (AHV) were isolated after the
ethyl methanesulfonate treatment of B. flavum carrying these recombinant
plasmids. A mutant of B. flavum CCM 351 carrying the cloned genes thrA and thrB
accumulated 12 g/L of threonine after 48 h of cultivation.

PMID: 8262444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 1992 Dec 15;100(1-3):147-53.

Possible function of tRNA(Thr)ACG in regulation of solvent formation in
Clostridium acetobutylicum.

Sauer U(1), Dürre P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Mikrobiologie, Universität Göttingen, FRG.

The mutation of Clostridium acetobutylicum mutant AA2, defective in the formation
of acetone and butanol, was shown to be caused by a single insertion of Tn916
close to the structural gene thrA, encoding the tRNA(Thr)ACG. The DNA region
containing the thrA gene was cloned and sequenced. Start and end points of the
transcript were determined by primer extension and S1-mapping analysis. The
results obtained were identical to predictions derived from the DNA sequence by
various RNA-analysing computer programs. The rarely used ACG codon seems to be
confined to genes expressed at the end of the exponential growth phase or
involved in uptake or turnover of minor C or N substrates. Evolutionary aspects
of this codon selection and a possible translational regulation mechanism are
discussed.

PMID: 1335943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Plant Physiol. 1991 Dec;97(4):1323-8.

Bifunctional protein in carrot contains both aspartokinase and homoserine
dehydrogenase activities.

Wilson BJ(1), Gray AC, Matthews BF.

Author information: 
(1)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville,
Maryland 20705.

We have purified homoserine dehydrogenase to homogeneity and subjected
polypeptide fragments derived from digests of the protein to amino acid
sequencing. The amino acid sequence of homoserine dehydrogenase from carrot
(Daucus carota) indicates that in carrot both aspartokinase and homoserine
dehydrogenase activities reside on the same protein. Additional evidence that
aspartokinase and homoserine dehydrogenase reside on a bifunctional protein is
provided by coelution of activities during purification steps and by
enzyme-specific gel staining techniques. Highly purified fractions containing
aspartokinase activity were stained for aspartokinase activity, homoserine
dehydrogenase activity, and protein. These gels confirmed that aspartokinase
activity and homoserine dehydrogenase activity were present on the same protein. 
This arrangement of aspartokinase and homoserine dehydrogenase activities
residing on the same protein is also found in Escherichia coli, which has two
bifunctional enzymes, aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I and
aspartokinase II-homoserine dehydrogenase II. The amino acid sequence of the
major form of homoserine dehydrogenase from carrot cell suspension cultures most 
closely resembles that of the E. coli ThrA gene product aspartokinase
I-homoserine dehydrogenase I.

PMCID: PMC1081165
PMID: 16668550  [PubMed]


161. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Mar 11;19(5):1105-12.

Genomic organization of the human thyroid hormone receptor alpha (c-erbA-1) gene.

Laudet V(1), Begue A, Henry-Duthoit C, Joubel A, Martin P, Stehelin D, Saule S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 186/ CNRS UA 04 1160, Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

The thyroid hormone receptor alpha (THRA or c-erbA-1) gene belongs to a family of
genes which encode nuclear receptors for various hydrophobic ligands such as
steroids, vitamin D, retinoic acid and thyroid hormones. These receptors are
composed of several domains important for hormone-binding, DNA-binding,
dimerization and activation of transcription. We show here that the human THRA
gene is organized in 10 exons distributed along 27 kbp of genomic DNA on
chromosome 17. The position of the introns in human THRA is highly conserved when
compared to the chicken gene despite their differing lengths. The N-terminal A/B 
domain as well as the 5' untranslated region is encoded by two exons.
Interestingly, each of the putative zinc fingers of the receptor DNA-binding
domain is encoded by one exon and the hormone-binding domain is assembled from
three exons. The two last exons of the gene are alternatively spliced to generate
two different messenger RNAs. In addition, we confirm that another gene,
belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily, ear-1, overlaps with the 3' region
of THRA in an opposite transcriptional orientation.

PMCID: PMC333788
PMID: 1850510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Plant Mol Biol. 1990 Sep;15(3):421-35.

Analysis of chloroplast promoters using bidirectional transcription vectors.

Rogers SA(1), Chen LJ, Orozco EM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plant Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana.

Spinach chloroplast RNA polymerase has been shown to efficiently terminate
transcription at the threonine attenuator (thra) from Escherichia coli. In this
study, efficient transcription termination by the chloroplast RNA polymerase was 
observed at a second prokaryotic terminator, the histidine attenuator (hisa) from
Salmonella typhimurium. Termination occurred regardless of the orientation of
either attenuator. In higher-plant chloroplast DNA, the genes for the beta
subunit of the ATPase (atpB) and the large subunit of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase (rbcL) are adjacent and divergently transcribed.
Bidirectional transcription vectors, containing the histidine and threonine
terminators, were constructed to analyze the divergently oriented atpB and rbcL
promotors. One plasmid construction, pRTT7, contained two tandem copies of the
threonine attenuator (pRTT7). Two additional constructs, pRHT1 and pRHT2, each
contained oppositely oriented copies of thra and hisa. A DNA fragment containing 
the rbcL and atpB promoters was inserted between the two terminators present in
the pRTT7, pRHT1, and pRHT2 plasmids. Transcription of these recombinant DNAs by 
spinach chloroplast RNA polymerase resulted in discretely sized rbcL and atpB
transcripts. In addition, these bidirectional transcription vectors were used to 
identify previously uncharacterized chloroplast promoters.

PMID: 2151732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Bacteriol. 1990 Jan;172(1):488-90.

Isolation and characterization of mutations in the gene encoding an endogenous
Bacillus subtilis beta-galactosidase and its regulator.

Errington J(1), Vogt CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

We have isolated mutations that appear to inactivate the gene (lacA) encoding an 
endogenous beta-galactosidase activity in Bacillus subtilis and in a closely
linked negative regulatory element (lacR). Both genes map to the hisA-thrA
region. The lacA mutations may help to avoid some of the problems arising from
the use of the Escherichia coli lacZ gene as a reporter gene in B. subtilis.

PMCID: PMC208459
PMID: 2104611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Gen Genet. 1989 Aug;218(2):183-9.

Involvement of DnaK protein in mini-F plasmid replication: temperature-sensitive 
seg mutations are located in the dnaK gene.

Ezaki B(1), Ogura T, Mori H, Niki H, Hiraga S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kumamoto University Medical School, Japan.

The seg mutants (seg-1 and seg-2) of Escherichia coli cannot support the
replication of the F factor and mini-F plasmids at 42 degrees C. We cloned the
wild-type E. coli chromosomal DNA fragment complementing the seg-1 and seg-2
mutations and found that both mutations were complemented by the wild-type dnaK
gene coding for a heat shock protein. Transduction with phage P1 indicated that
the seg-2 mutation is located at about 0.3 min in the region containing the dnaK 
gene in the order trpR--thrA--seg-2--leuB, consistent with the locus of the dnaK 
gene. Cloning and sequencing of the dnaK gene of the seg mutants showed that
there was one base substitution within the dnaK gene in each mutant causing an
amino acid substitution. These results indicate that the seg gene in which the
seg-1 and seg-2 mutations occurred is identical to the dnaK gene. The mini-F
plasmid pXX325 did not transform a dnaK null mutant to ampicillin resistance at
30 degrees C in contrast to plasmids pBR322, pACYC184 and pSC101, which did. The 
active dnaK (seg) gene product is therefore essential for replication of the
mini-F plasmid at both 30 degrees and 42 degrees C.

PMID: 2674651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Bacteriol. 1989 Jun;171(6):3518-22.

Translational coupling in the threonine operon of Escherichia coli K-12.

Little S(1), Hyde S, Campbell CJ, Lilley RJ, Robinson MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbial Systems, Celltech Gp Ltd., Berkshire, United Kingdom.

In an attempt to express the two distal genes of the Escherichia coli threonine
operon, the majority of the first gene in the operon, thrA, was removed and a
series of transcriptional fusions were constructed placing the thrB and thrC
genes downstream of either the trp or hybrid tac promoter. Analysis of the
proteins produced by cells containing these fusions revealed that although the
distal gene, thrC, was efficiently expressed, the proximal gene, thrB, was not
expressed at a detectable level. A translational fusion was constructed which
fused the cat gene in phase to the last 800 base pairs of thrA followed by thrB
and thrC. Cells containing this fusion produced high levels of both the thrB and 
thrC gene products, showing that translation of thrB requires translation through
thrA; thus, thrA and thrB are translationally coupled. In addition, it was found 
that a sequence between 220 and 57 base pairs before the start of thrB was
necessary to allow translational coupling to occur.

PMCID: PMC210079
PMID: 2542227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988 Sep 12;16(17):8411-31.

Recognition of prokaryotic transcription terminators by spinach chloroplast RNA
polymerase.

Chen LJ(1), Orozco EM Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801.

To determine whether chloroplast RNA polymerase will accurately terminate
transcription in vitro, we have fused the spinach chloroplast rbcL promoter to
the 3' end of the rbcL gene as well as to various factor independent
transcription terminators from E. coli. Transcription of the rbcL minigene did
not result in production of the expected 265 nucleotide RNA. However, the spinach
chloroplast RNA polymerase did terminate transcription with varying efficiency at
the thra, rrnB, rrnC and gene 32 terminators. The most efficient transcription
termination was observed for the threonine attenuator. For each of the
prokaryotic terminators, the chloroplast enzyme ceased transcription at
essentially the same position as the E. coli RNA polymerase. These data indicate 
that the transcription termination process in chloroplasts has some features in
common with the mechanism used in prokaryotes.

PMCID: PMC338567
PMID: 2843817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Gen Genet. 1987 Mar;206(3):361-7.

Cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of the homoserine kinase (thrB) gene
from Brevibacterium lactofermentum.

Mateos LM, del Real G, Aguilar A, Martín JF.

Five DNA fragments carrying the thrB gene (homoserine kinase E.C. 2.7.1.39) of
Brevibacterium lactofermentum were cloned by complementation of Escherichia coli 
thrB mutants using pBR322 as vector. All the cloned fragments contained a common 
3.1 kb DNA sequence. The cloned fragments hybridized among themselves and with a 
9 kb BamHI fragment of the chromosomal DNA of B. lactofermentum but not with the 
DNA of E. coli. None of the cloned fragments were able to complement thrA and
thrC mutations of E. coli. Plasmids pULTH2, pULTH8 and pULTH11 had the cloned DNA
fragments in the same orientation and were very stable. On the contrary, plasmid 
pULTH18 was very unstable and showed the DNA inserted in the opposite direction. 
E. coli minicells transformed with plasmids pULTH8 or pULTH11 (both carrying the 
common 3.1 kb fragment) synthesize a protein with an Mr of 30,000 that is similar
in size to the homoserine kinase of E. coli.

PMID: 3035340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Gene. 1987;57(2-3):151-8.

Cloning and characterization of the mutated threonine operon (thrA(1)5A(2)5BC) of
Serratia marcescens.

Sugita T(1), Komatsubara S, Kisumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory of Applied Biochemistry, Tanabe Seiyaku Co., Ltd., Osaka, 
Japan.

The entire threonine operon (thrA(1)5A(2)5BC) of Serratia marcescens TLr156,
which lacks threonine-mediated feedback inhibition of both aspartokinase I (AK I)
and homoserine dehydrogenase I (HD I), was cloned on a multicopy plasmid pLG339. 
Hybrid plasmid pSK301 carried a 6.5-kb chromosomal DNA. Several derivatives of
pSK301 with Tn1000 insertions were obtained. By examining the phenotypes and the 
physical maps of these plasmids, we could define the loci of the thrA(1)5A(2)5,
thrB, and thrC genes. The thrA(1)5A(2)5 and thrC gene products were identified by
the maxicell method as proteins with Mrs of 85,000 and 43,000, respectively. The 
thrA(1)5A(2)5 genes encode a single polypeptide similar to the thrA1A2 genes of
Escherichia coli. Plasmid pSK301 was introduced into S. marcescens T-1112, in
which both AK I and HD I are produced constitutively. The resulting transformant 
carried five to six copies of pSK301 per chromosome and produced the AK I and HD 
I enzymes at three to four times higher level than control strain T-1112[pLG339].
Strain T-1112[pSK301] produced four times higher levels of threonine than strain 
T-1112[pLG339], yielding about 35 mg of threonine per ml of a medium containing
sucrose and urea.

PMID: 3121445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Bacteriol. 1986 Mar;165(3):994-1001.

Genetic analysis of Bacillus stearothermophilus by protoplast fusion.

Chen ZF, Wojcik SF, Welker NE.

Efficient and reliable protoplasting, regeneration, and fusion techniques were
established for the prototrophic strain Bacillus stearothermophilus NUB36.
Auxotrophic mutants were isolated, and protoplast fusion was used to construct
isogenic mutant strains and for chromosomal mapping. Markers were mapped using
two-, three-, and four-factor crosses. The order of the markers was
hom-1-thr-1-his-1-(gly-1 or gly-2)-pur-1-pur-2. These markers may be analogous to
hom, thrA, hisA, glyC, and purA markers on the Bacillus subtilis chromosome. No
analogous pur-1 marker has been reported in B. subtilis. The relative order of
three of the markers (hom-1-thr-1-gly-1) was independently confirmed by
transduction.

PMCID: PMC214527
PMID: 3512533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Mol Biol. 1985 Jun 25;183(4):529-41.

Identification and characterization of mutants affecting transcription
termination at the threonine operon attenuator.

Lynn SP, Bauer CE, Chapman K, Gardner JF.

Mutations that map in or delete the attenuator of the threonine (thr) operon of
Escherichia coli were isolated and characterized. These mutations disrupt or
delete the transcription termination structure encoded by the attenuator leading 
to increased transcriptional readthrough into the thr operon structural genes.
Most of the base substitutions and single base-pair insertions and deletions map 
in the G + C-rich region of dyad symmetry in the attenuator and decrease the
calculated stabilities of the attenuator RNA secondary structures to similar
extents (from -30.8 kcal/mol to approximately -21 kcal/mol). Most of the mutants 
showed a three- to fourfold increase in homoserine dehydrogenase (thrA gene
product) synthesis relative to the wild-type parent strain. The mutation in one
mutant (thrL153 + G) lowered the calculated stability of the RNA secondary
structure only slightly (from -30.8 to 27.8 kcal/mol) but the mutant still
exhibited high levels of homoserine dehydrogenase synthesis. In addition, three
base substitution mutants (thrL135U, thrL139A and thrL156U) showed only slightly 
(1.5 to 2-fold) elevated levels of homoserine dehydrogenase activity, even though
the calculated stabilities of the attenuator RNA secondary structures were
reduced as much as most of the other mutants. Two of the mutations (thrL135U and 
thrL156U) mapped in the G + C-rich-A + T-rich junction of the attenuator. The
third mutation (thrL139A) creates an A X C pair in the center of the G + C-rich
region of the attenuator stem. The results obtained for these mutants show that
the stability of the RNA secondary structure does not always correlate with the
efficiency of transcription termination. Finally, analysis of the base changes in
the substitution mutations showed that the mutational changes do not appear to be
random.

PMID: 2410621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Bacteriol. 1985 Jan;161(1):461-2.

Evidence for an internal promoter in the Escherichia coli threonine operon.

Saint Girons I, Margarita D.

We constructed plasmids carrying the two first genes of the threonine operon from
which the major promoter was deleted in vitro by digestion with BAL 31 nuclease. 
These plasmids continued to express the second gene (thrB) of the operon as
judged by their ability to complement a threonine auxotroph. These data indicate 
that, in addition to the major promoter thrP, there was an internal promoter,
thrBp, which could be used for the transcription of the thrB, the second gene of 
the operon. Additional evidence was given by subcloning a 230-base-pair segment
of the operon in a plasmid suitable for detection of translation initiation
signals and promoters. The thrBp promoter was thus shown to lie within a
61-base-pair fragment at the 3' end of the first gene, thrA, of the threonine
operon.

PMCID: PMC214898
PMID: 3918011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Gen Genet. 1984;193(2):299-305.

Molecular cloning with bifunctional plasmid vectors in Bacillus subtilis. I.
Construction and analysis of B. subtilis clone banks in Escherichia coli.

Ostroff GR, Pène JJ.

Cloning in Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis was carried out using the
bifunctional plasmid pDH5060. B. subtilis chromosomal DNA and pDH5060 DNA were
digested with either BamHI or SalI, then annealed, ligated, and transformed into 
E. coli SK2267. Transformants containing sequences ligated into the BamHI or SalI
sites in the Tcr gene of pDH5060 were selected directly using a modification of
the fusaric acid technique. The BamHI and SalI clone banks contain about 250 and 
140 B. subtilis fragments, respectively, with an average insert size of 8-9 Kbp
in the BamHI and 4-5 Kbp in the SalI bank. The inserts ranged in size from 0.3
Kbp to greater than 20 Kbp. The vector used here therefore accepts inserts which 
are significantly larger than previously reported for other B. subtilis cloning
systems. All individual cloned B. subtilis sequences examined were stably
propagated in E. coli SK2267. Eight of eighteen B. subtilis auxotrophic markers
tested (aroG, gltA, glyB, ilvA, metC, purA, pyrD, and thrA) were transformed to
prototrophy with BamHI or SalI clone bank DNA. All or part of the hybrid plasmid 
DNA recombined at the sites of homology in the chromosome of these Rec+
recipients. Loss of sequences from hybrid plasmids was not prevented in a r- m-
recE4 recipient strain of B. subtilis. Although the recE4 background prevented
recombination between homologous chromosomal DNA, a variety of cloned fragments
were shown to be unstable and undergo deletions of both insert and plasmid
sequences. In addition, B. subtilis sequences propagated in E. coli transformed
B. subtilis recE4 recipients with a 500-1,000-fold reduced efficiency.

PMID: 6319967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 1983 Mar 10;258(5):3028-31.

Nucleotide sequence of the metL gene of Escherichia coli. Its product, the
bifunctional aspartokinase ii-homoserine dehydrogenase II, and the bifunctional
product of the thrA gene, aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I, derive from
a common ancestor.

Zakin MM, Duchange N, Ferrara P, Cohen GN.

PMID: 6298218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Genetics. 1982 Jun;101(2):189-210.

Genetic structure and internal rearrangements of stable merodiploids from
Bacillus subtilis strains carrying the trpE26 mutation.

Schneider AM, Gaisne M, Anagnostopoulos C.

Transformation and transduction to tryptophan independence of strains of Bacillus
subtilis carrying the "trpE26" chromosomal aberrations (a translocation and an
inversion) with a "normal" 168 type strain as donor induce a tandem duplication
of the thrA-ilvA region of the chromosome. The clones possessing this unstable
duplication segregate besides the Trp- some stable Trp+ cells which retain only
part of the duplication (the trpE-ilvA region) in nontandem configuration. Such
clones may also be produced directly during the crosses. The genetic map of these
clones (designated as class I stable merodiploids) was constructed: they possess 
the translocation and the inversion of the trpE26 parental strain. Another type
of stable Trp+ clones (class II) also appears, although more rarely, in similar
crosses. Studies on their genetic structure revealed that they are haploid for
the trpE-ilvA region and carry a nontandem duplication of the thrA-trpE region.
In these clones the cysB-tre region has the orientation of the 168 type strain.
The duplications in both classes are stable, that of class I being more stable
than that of class II where loss of one copy of the thrA-trpE region leads to
about 1% haploid cells. Detailed genetic studies on heterozygous clones from both
classes have shown exchange of alleles between copies of the nontandem
duplications. Models are proposed for the formation of each class of merodiploids
and for recombination events taking place in them. These models imply
recombination at sequences of intrachromosomal homology and (or) introduction of 
heterologous junctions ("novel joints") by transformation or transduction.

PMCID: PMC1201856
PMID: 6816664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nucleic Acids Res. 1981 Jan 24;9(2):339-47.

Nucleotide sequence of the thrB gene of E. coli, and its two adjacent regions;
the thrAB and thrBC junctions.

Cossart P, Katinka M, Yaniv M.

We have sequenced a DNA fragment containing the Escherichia coli thrA-thrB
junction, the complete thrB gene and the thrB-thrC junction. The intergenic
sequence thrA and thrB is only one base pair. The coding region for homoserine
kinase is 927 base pairs long. It is followed by 114 base pair segment in an open
reading frame predicting that thrC begins just after non-sense codon of thrB. The
presence at the end of thrA and of thrB of sequences that can pair with the 3'
end of the 16 S ribosomal RNA suggests that reinitiation of translation occurs at
the end of the two genes. The deduced aminoacid sequence for homoserine kinase
shows no striking homology with aspartokinase I homoserine dehydrogenase I.

PMCID: PMC326696
PMID: 6259626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Bacteriol. 1981 Jan;145(1):479-88.

Distribution of Tn551 insertion sites responsible for auxotrophy on the
Staphylococcus aureus chromosome.

Pattee PA.

A method was devised to efficiently select isolates of Staphylococcus aureus 8325
in which Tn551, a transposon originating on the pI258 plasmid responsible for
erythromycin resistance (Emr), had translocated to the host chromosome. This
method consisted of selecting for Emr at 43 degrees C with a strain in which the 
pI258 plasmid was unable to replicate at 43 degrees C because of a
temperature-sensitive plasmid mutation. By selecting isolates that were Emr at 43
degrees C and auxotrophic for nutrients not required by the parent strain.
Tn551-induced auxotrophic mutants were readily isolated. The incidence of
auxotrophic classes was not random; 80% of the isolates in one experiment were
Trp-, whereas only a single example of each of some of the other classes was
isolated. Among the Trp- mutants, the distribution of trp genes affected and the 
frequency of precise excision of Tn551 from individual sites varied. When
analyzed by transformation, the Tn551-induced ala, his, ilv, lys, rib, thrA,
thrB, and trp mutations were shown to occupy sites previously defined by
nitrosoguanidine-induced mutations. Tn551-induced mutagenesis provided three
previously unrecognized classes of auxotrophs (tyr, met, and thrC), and the Tn551
integration sites resulting in these mutations have been identified. In addition,
a chromosomal region (uraB) was identified by Tn551 mutagenesis that is distinct 
from uraA (previously defined by chemical mutagenesis). Some Tn551-induced
mutations (most notably pur) could not be linked to the known linkage groups of
the chromosome by transformation. With the exception of two pur mutations, all of
the Tn551-induced auxotrophic mutational sites cotransformed at unity with Tn551 
and, in cases in which they were selected, prototrophic transformants were always
Ems. Thus, the Tn551 and auxotrophic sites are identical.

PMCID: PMC217297
PMID: 6257640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1980 Oct;77(10):5730-3.

Nucleotide sequence of the thrA gene of Escherichia coli.

Katinka M, Cossart P, Sibilli L, Saint-Girons I, Chalvignac MA, Le Bras G, Cohen 
GN, Yaniv M.

The thrA gene of Escherichia coli codes for a single polypeptide chain having two
enzymatic activities required for the biosynthesis of threonine, aspartokinase I 
and homoserine dehydrogenase I. This gene was cloned in a bacterial plasmid and
its complete nucleotide sequence was established. It contains 2460 base pairs
that encode for a polypeptide chain of 820 amino acids. The previously determined
partial amino acid sequence of this protein is in good agreement with that
predicted from the nucleotide sequence. The gene contains an internal sequence
that resembles the structure of bacterial ribosome-binding sites, with an AUG
preceded by four triplets, each of which can be converted to a nonsense codon by 
a single mutation. This suggests that the single polypeptide chain was formed by 
the fusion of two genes and that initiation of translation may occur inside the
gene to give a protein fragment having only the homoserine dehydrogenase
activity.

PMCID: PMC350143
PMID: 7003595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Genetika. 1980;16(1):66-77.

[Cloning of threonine operon genes in Escherichia coli cells].

[Article in Russian]

Kozlov IuI, Kochetova LP, Livshits VA, Mashko SV, Moshentseva VN.

A set of hybrid plasmids carrying Escherichia coli threonine genes was obtained
and cloned. The plasmid pBR322 was used as a vehicle. The genetic and restriction
analyses showed that genes thrA and thrB were placed between SalGI and EcoRI
sites on the 2.6 megadaltons DNA region. The transcription of threonine operon
genes inserted in the hybrid plasmids is under the control of its own promoter.
The copy number of hybrid plasmids was reverse proportional to their molecular
weight and did not depend on the replicon number. Amplification of genes of
threonine operon by hybrid plasmids led to 20-25-fold increase of homoserine
dehydrogenase activity, encoded by thrA gene. The expression of this gene,
incorporated in hybrid plasmids, was repressed by the addition of threonine and
isoleucine in the culture medium.

PMID: 6777249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Gen Genet. 1979 Aug;175(1):39-44.

Construction and expression of a hybrid plasmid containing the Escherichia coli
thrA and thrB genes.

Cossart P, Katinka M, Yaniv M, Saint Girons I, Cohen GN.

In vitro recombination techniques were used to clone the Escherichia coli thrA
and thrB structural genes in the plasmid vector pBR322. The chimeric plasmid was 
analyzed and characterized genetically, by restriction mapping and DNA
sequencing. The limited expression of the threonine biosynthetic enzymes in the
strain carrying the recombinant plasmid is discussed.

PMID: 390305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Genetika. 1978 Jun;14(6):957-68.

[Gene relA function in the expression of amino acid operons. II. Effect of the
allelic state of gene relA on the overproduction of threonine by an Escherichia
coli K-12 mutant resistant to beta-hydroxynorvaline].

[Article in Russian]

Gusiatiner MM, Zhdanova NI, Livshits VA, Zaigraeva GG, Shakulov RS.

Mutants, resistant to threonine analogue, DL-alpha-amino-beta-hydroxyvaleric
acid, were obtained after the treatment of Escherichia coli K-12 RelA- cells with
nitrosoguanidine, and among them the strain with maximal threonine production
(about 3g/l) was selected. Genetic and biochemical analysis of the producer has
revealed the dependency of the threonine production on at least three mutations. 
The mutation in the thrA gene disturbs retroinhibition of homoserine
dehydrogenase by threonine. The mutation in the ilvA gene decreases the activity 
of threonine deaminase, and thus results in partial isoleucine auxotrophy, and
finally, the reversion in the relA gene restores the stringent amino acid control
of RNA synthesis in threonine producer cells. The role of relA gene in threonine 
production was demonstrated by comparing pairs of strains differing from one
another in the allelic state of the relA gene. The level of threonine synthesis
(its intra- and extracellular concentrations) during moderate isoleucine
starvation in RelA+ cells 2-3 times as high as in RelA- cells. The presence of
relA+ allele is found to result in the increase of the cell resistance to
DL-alpha-amino-beta-hydroxyvaleric acid.

PMID: 355057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Gen Genet. 1978 Jun 1;162(1):101-7.

Fine structure analysis of the threonine operon in Escherichia coli K-12.

Saint-Girons I, Margarita D.

A fine structure analysis of the threonine operon in Escherichia coli K-12 was
performed by deletion mapping. Lambda transducing bacteriophages carrying various
parts of the threonine operon were isolated from strains in which the lacZ gene
was fused to a thr gene. We tested for recombination between deletions of the
threonine promotor extending into the threonine operon, carried by the phage, and
bacterial thr auxotrophs. The relative order of thrO (operator) mutations was
established. We propose that an operator region is located between a promoter
region and the structural genes. Mutations leading to the desensitization of the 
aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I towards threonine were localized in
two different regions of the thrA gene.

PMID: 353521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Genetics. 1976 Aug;83(4):619-32.

Thialysine-resistant mutant of Salmonella typhimurium with a lesion in the thrA
gene.

Jegede VA, Spencer F, Brenchley JE.

A mutant of Salmonella typhimurium was selected for its spontaneous resistance to
the lysine analog, thialysine (S-2-aminoethyl cysteine). This strain, JB585,
exhibits a number of pleiotropic properties including a partial growth
requirement for threonine, resistance to thiaisoleucine and azaleucine, excretion
of lysine and valine, and inhibition of growth by methionine. Genetic studies
show that these properties are caused by a single mutation in the thrA gene which
encodes the threonine-controlled aspartokinase-homoserine dehydrogenase
activities. Enzyme assays demonstrated that the aspartokinase activity is
unstable and the threonine-controlled homoserine dehydrogenase activity absent in
extracts prepared from the mutant. These results explain the growth inhibition by
methionine because the remaining homoserine dehydrogenase isoenzyme would be
repressed by methionine, causing a limitation for threonine. The partial growth
requirement for threonine during growth in glucose minimal medium may also, by
producing an isoleucine limitation, cause derepression of the isoleucine-valine
enzymes and provide an explanation for both the valine excretion, and azaleucine 
and thiaisoleucine resistance. The overproduction of lysine may confer the
thialysine resistance.

PMCID: PMC1213538
PMID: 786777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Bacteriol. 1974 Jun;118(3):990-8.

Threonine locus of Escherichia coli K-12: genetic structure and evidence for an
operon.

Thèze J, Saint-Girons I.

Three genes, thrA, thrB, and thrC, were previously defined and localized in the
threonine locus of Escherichia coli K-12. thrA, thrB, and thrC specify the
enzymes aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I, homoserine kinase, and
threonine synthetase, respectively. A complementation analysis of the threonine
cluster using derivatives of a lambda phage carrying the threonine genes
(lambdadthr(c)) demonstrates that: (i) thrB and thrC each consist of a single
cistron; and (ii) thrA is composed of two cistrons, thrA(1) and thrA(2), although
it specifies a single polypeptide chain. thrA(1) and thrA(2) correspond to
aspartokinase I and homoserine dehydrogenase I, respectively. Their relative
order is established. The demonstration of polar effects of mutations (nonsense
or induced by phage Mu) in thrA and thrB is taken as evidence for the existence
of a thrA thrB thrC operon, transcribed in this order.

PMCID: PMC246849
PMID: 4364333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Bacteriol. 1974 Jan;117(1):133-43.

Mapping of the structural genes of the three aspartokinases and of the two
homoserine dehydrogenases of Escherichia coli K-12.

Thèze J, Margarita D, Cohen GN, Borne F, Patte JC.

Mutants requiring threonine plus methionine (or homoserine), or threonine plus
methionine plus diaminopimelate (or homoserine plus diaminopimelate) have been
isolated from strains possessing only one of the three isofunctional
aspartokinases. They have been classified in several groups according to their
enzymatic defects. Their mapping is described. Several regions of the chromosome 
are concerned: thrA (aspartokinase I-homoserine dehydrogenase I) is mapped in the
same region as thrB and thrC (0 min). lysC (aspartokinase III) is mapped at 80
min, far from the other genes coding for diaminopimelate synthesis. metLM
(aspartokinase II-homoserine dehydrogenase II) lies at 78 min closely linked to
metB, metJ, and metF.

PMCID: PMC246534
PMID: 4148765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Bacteriol. 1973 Oct;116(1):1-11.

Genetic analysis of thr mutations in Salmonella typhimurium.

Stuttard C.

Previous workers divided threonine-requiring (Thr(-)) strains of Salmonella into 
three phenotypes with mutations in four complementation groups. The mutations
were deemed to define four genes in the order thrD-C-A-B at minute zero on the
Salmonella linkage map. In the present study 12 of these mutants were reexamined 
together with eight new Thr(-) strains. The three phenotypes were:
homoserine-requiring (Hom(-)); Thr(-), feeders of Hom(-) strains; Thr(-),
nonfeeders. Exact correlation between these phenotypic groups and three
complementation groups was confirmed by abortive transduction. No evidence was
found for intergenic complementation between mutations in Hom(-) strains. It is
proposed that thr mutations define three genes rather than four and that these be
renamed thrA (Hom(-)), thrB (Thr(-) feeders), and thrC (Thr(-) nonfeeders) to
correspond with the sequence of reactions in threonine biosynthesis. Double
mutant trpRthr strains were used in reciprocal three-point transduction tests to 
establish the order of thr mutation sites. Although revisions were made in the
classification or location of several mutations, there was an overall correlation
of complementation group, phenotype, and map position. The present data provide a
basis for further correlation of threonine genes and biosynthetic enzymes, and
analysis of cross regulation in aspartate amino acid biosynthesis in Salmonella.

PMCID: PMC246383
PMID: 4583208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Bacteriol. 1972 Aug;111(2):368-74.

Location of trpR mutations in the serB-thr region of Salmonella typhimurium.

Stuttard C.

Tryptophan biosynthesis in Salmonella is controlled by at least one regulatory
gene, trpR, which is cotransducible with thr genes and not with the trp operon.
Mutations in trpR cause derepression of tryptophan enzyme synthesis and confer
resistance to growth inhibition by 5-methyltryptophan. Nineteen trpR mutations
were mapped with respect to thrA and serB markers by two-point (ratio) and
three-point transduction tests. The results are all consistent with the site
order serB80-trpR-thrA59 on the Salmonella chromosome. Very low or undetectable
levels of recombination between different trpR mutations have so far prevented
the determination of fine structure in the trpR gene. Thirteen other
5-methyltryptophan-resistant mutants previously found not to be cotransducible
with either the trp operon or thrA, and designated trpT, were also used in these 
experiments. Lack of cotransducibility with thrA was confirmed, and no linkage
with serB was detected. The nature and location of trpT mutations remain obscure.

PMCID: PMC251292
PMID: 4559729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


